"Bruce and Baliol received handsome presents for thus tamely
yielding the rights of Scotland. All present at once agreed that
the castles and strongholds of Scotland should be surrendered into
the hands of English commanders and garrisons. This was immediately
done; and thus it is, Archie, that you see an English officer
lording it over the Scotch town of Lanark.

"Then every Scotchman was called upon to do homage to the English
king as his lord paramount, and all who refused to do so were
seized and arrested. Finally, on the 17th of November last, 1292--the
date will long be remembered in Scotland--Edward's judgment
was given at Berwick, and by it John Baliol was declared King of
Scotland.

"Thus for eighteen months Scotland was kept in doubt; and this was
done, no doubt, to enable the English to rivet their yoke upon our
shoulders, and to intimidate and coerce all who might oppose it."

"There were some that did oppose it, mother, were there not?--some
true Scotchmen who refused to own the supremacy of the King of
England?"

"Very few, Archie. One Sir Malcolm Wallace, a knight of but small
estate, refused to do so, and was, together with his eldest son,
slain in an encounter with an English detachment under a leader
named Fenwick at Loudon Hill."

"And was he the father of that William Wallace of whom the talk was
lately that he had slain young Selbye, son of the English governor
of Dundee?"

"The same, Archie."

"Men say, mother, that although but eighteen years of age he is of
great stature and strength, of very handsome presence, and courteous
and gentle; and that he was going quietly through the streets when
insulted by young Selbye, and that he and his companions being set
upon by the English soldiers, slew several and made their escape."

"So they say, Archie. He appears from all description of him
to be a remarkable young man, and I trust that he will escape the
vengeance of the English, and that some day he may again strike
some blows for our poor Scotland, which, though nominally under
the rule of Baliol, is now but a province of England."

"But surely, mother, Scotchmen will never remain in such a state
of shameful servitude!"

"I trust not, my son; but I fear that it will be long before we
shake off the English yoke. Our nobles are for the most part of
Norman blood; very many are barons of England; and so great are the
jealousies among them that no general effort against England will
be possible. No, if Scotland is ever to be freed, it will be by
a mighty rising of the common people, and even then the struggle
between the commons of Scotland and the whole force of England aided
by the feudal power of all the great Scotch nobles, would be well
nigh hopeless."

This conversation sank deeply into Archie's mind; day and night
he thought of nothing but the lost freedom of Scotland, and vowed
that even the hope of regaining his father's lands should be
secondary to that of freeing his country. All sorts of wild dreams
did the boy turn over in his mind; he was no longer gay and light
hearted, but walked about moody and thoughtful. He redoubled his
assiduity in the practice of arms; and sometimes when fighting with
Sandy, he would think that he had an English man-at-arms before him,
and would strike so hotly and fiercely that Sandy had the greatest
difficulty in parrying his blows, and was forced to shout lustily
to recall him from the clouds. He no longer played at ball with the
village lads; but, taking the elder of them aside, he swore them
to secrecy, and then formed them into a band, which he called the
Scottish Avengers. With them he would retire into valleys far away
from the village, where none would mark what they were doing, and
there they practised with club and stake instead of broadsword
and pike, defended narrow passes against an imaginary enemy, and,
divided into two parties, did battle with each other.

The lads entered into the new diversion with spirit.  Among the
lower class throughout Scotland the feeling of indignation at the
manner in which their nobles had sold their country to England was
deep and passionate. They knew the woes which English domination
had brought upon Wales and Ireland; and though as yet without a
leader, and at present hopeless of a successful rising, every true
Scotchman was looking forward to the time when an attempt might be
made to throw off the English yoke.

Therefore the lads of Glen Cairn entered heart and soul into
the projects of their "young chief," for so they regarded Archie,
and strove their best to acquire some of the knowledge of the use
of sword and pike which he possessed. The younger lads were not
permitted to know what was going on--none younger than Archie
himself being admitted into the band, while some of the elders were
youths approaching man's estate. Even to his mother Archie did not
breathe a word of what he was doing, for he feared that she might
forbid his proceedings. The good lady was often surprised at the
cuts and bruises with which he returned home; but he always turned
off her questions by muttering something about rough play or a
heavy fall, and so for some months the existence of the Scottish
Avengers remained unsuspected.



Chapter II

Leaving Home


One day when "the Avengers" were engaged in mimic battle in a glen
some two miles from the village they were startled with a loud
shout of "How now, what is this uproar?" Bows were lowered and
hedge stakes dropped; on the hillside stood Red Roy, the henchman
of Sir John Kerr, with another of the retainers. They had been
crossing the hills, and had been attracted by the sound of shouting.
All the lads were aware of the necessity for Archie's avoiding the
notice of the Kerrs, and Andrew Macpherson, one of the eldest of
the lads, at once stepped forward:  "We are playing," he said, "at
fighting Picts against Scots."

This was the case, for the English were so hated that Archie had
found that none would even in sport take that name, and the sides
were accordingly dubbed Scots and Picts, the latter title not being
so repugnant, and the companies changing sides each day.

"It looks as if you were fighting in earnest," Roy said grimly,
"for the blood is streaming down your face."

"Oh, we don't mind a hard knock now and again," Andrew said
carelessly. "I suppose, one of these days, we shall have to go out
under Sir John's banner, and the more hard knocks we have now, the
less we shall care for them then."

"That is so," Roy said; "and some of you will soon be able to handle
arms in earnest. Who are your leaders?" he asked sharply, as his
eye fixed on Archie, who had seated himself carelessly upon a rock
at some little distance.

"William Orr generally heads one side, and I the other."

"And what does that young Forbes do?" Red Roy asked.

"Well, he generally looks on," Andrew replied in a confidential
tone; "he is not much good with the bow, and his lady mother does
not like it if he goes home with a crack across the face, and I
don't think he likes it himself; he is but a poor creature when it
comes to a tussle."

"And it is well for him that he is," Red Roy muttered to himself;
"for if he had been likely to turn out a lad of spirit, Sir John
would have said the word to me before now; but, seeing what he is,
he may as well be left alone for the present.  He will never cause
trouble." So saying, Red Roy strolled away with his companion, and
left the lads to continue their mimic fight.

News travelled slowly to Glen Cairn; indeed, it was only when
a travelling chapman or pedlar passed through, or when one of the
villagers went over to Lanark or Glasgow, carrying the fowls and
other produce of the community to market, that the news came from
without.

Baliol was not long before he discovered that his monarchy was but
a nominal one. The first quarrel which arose between him and his
imperious master was concerning the action of the courts. King Edward
directed that there should be an appeal to the courts at Westminster
from all judgments in the Scottish courts. Baliol protested that it
was specifically agreed by the Treaty of Brigham that no Scotchman
was liable to be called upon to plead outside the kingdom; but
Edward openly declared, "Notwithstanding any concessions made before
Baliol became king, he considered himself at liberty to judge in
any case brought before him from Scotland, and would, if necessary,
summon the King of Scots himself to appear in his presence." He
then compelled Baliol formally to renounce and cancel not only the
Treaty of Brigham, but every stipulation of the kind "known to
exist, or which might be thereafter discovered." Another appeal
followed, and Baliol was cited to appear personally, but refused;
he was thereupon declared contumacious by the English parliament,
and a resolution was passed that three of the principal towns of
Scotland should be "seized," until he gave satisfaction. All this
was a manifest usurpation, even allowing Edward's claims to supremacy
to be well founded.

At this moment Edward became involved in a quarrel with his own
lord superior Phillip, king of France, by whom he was in turned
summoned to appear under the pain of contumacy. Edward met this
demand by a renunciation of allegiance to Phillip and a declaration
of war, and called upon Baliol for aid as his vassal; but Baliol
was also a vassal of the French king, and had estates in France
liable to seizure. He therefore hesitated. Edward further ordered
him to lay an embargo upon all vessels in the ports of Scotland,
and required the attendance of many of the Scottish barons in his
expedition to France. Finding his orders disobeyed, on the 16th
of October Edward issued a writ to the sheriff of Northampton,
"to seize all lands, goods, and chattels of John Baliol and other
Scots."

The Scotch held a parliament at Scone. All Englishmen holding office
were summarily dismissed. A committee of the estates was appointed
to act as guardian of the kingdom, and Baliol himself was deprived
of all active power; but an instrument was prepared in his name,
reciting the injuries that he and his subjects had sustained at the
hands of the English king, and renouncing all further allegiance.
Following this up, a league was concluded, offensive and defensive,
between the French king and Scotland, represented by the prelates,
nobles, and community. Edward Baliol, the king's son, was contracted
to marry the French king's niece. Phillip bound himself to assist
Scotland against any invasion of England, and the Scotch agreed to
cross the Border in case Edward invaded France.

In making this alliance the Scots took the only step possible; for
they had no choice between fighting England with France as their
ally, or fighting France as the subjects of King Edward. The contest
which was approaching seemed all but hopeless. The population
of England was six times as large as that of Scotland, and Edward
could draw from Ireland and Wales great numbers of troops. The
English were trained to war by constant fighting in France, Ireland,
and Wales; while the Scots had, for a very long period, enjoyed
a profound peace, and were for the most part wholly ignorant of
warfare.

Edward at once prepared to invade Scotland; in January he seized
the lands owned by Comyn in Northumberland and sold them, directing
the money to be applied to the raising and maintenance of 1000
men-at-arms and 60,000 foot soldiers, and in February issued a writ
for the preparation of a fleet of 100 vessels.

On the 25th of March he crossed the Tweed with 5000 horse and 30,000
foot. The Scotch leaders were, of course, aware of the gathering
storm, and, collecting their forces, attempted a diversion by
crossing the Border to the west and making a raid into Cumberland.
King Edward, however, marched north and besieged Berwick, the richest
and most flourishing of the towns of Scotland. With the exception
of the castle, it was weakly fortified. The attack was commenced
by the fleet, who were, however, repulsed and driven off. A land
assault, led by the king in person, was then made; the walls were
captured, and the town completely sacked. The inhabitants were
butchered without distinction of age, sex, or condition, and even
those who fled to the churches were slain within the sanctuary.
Contemporary accounts differ as to the numbers who perished on this
occasion. Langtoff says 4000; Hemingford, 8000; Knighton, another
English writer, says 17,000; and Matthew of Westminster, 60,000.
Whichever of these writers is correct, it is certain that almost
the whole of the men, women, and children of the largest and most
populous Scottish town were butchered by the orders of the English
king, who issued direct orders that none should be spared.  From
this terrible visitation Berwick, which was before called the
Alexandria of the West, never recovered.  The castle, which was held
by Sir William Douglas, surrendered immediately; and Sir William,
having sworn fealty to the English king, was permitted to depart.

The English army now marched north. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar,
was with King Edward; but his wife, a noble and patriotic woman,
surrendered the castle to the Scots. The Earl of Surrey, with
a powerful army, sat down before it. The Scotch nobles and people
marched in great numbers, but with little order and discipline,
to raise the siege. They were met by Surrey, whose force, inured
to arms, easily routed the Scotch gathering, no fewer than 10,000
being killed in the conflict and retreat. The English army was
joined by 15,000 Welsh and 30,000 from Ireland, and marched through
Scotland, the castles and towns opening their gates to Edward as
he came, and the nobles, headed by James the Stewart, coming in and
doing homage to him. Baliol was forced to appear in the churchyard
of Strath-Cathro, near Montrose, arrayed in regal robes, and to
resign his kingdom to the Bishop of Durham as Edward's representative,
and to repeat the act a few days afterwards at Brechin in presence
of the king himself. He was then, with his son, sent a prisoner to
London, where they were confined in the Tower for several years.
From Brechin Edward marched through the whole of Scotland, visiting
all the principal towns. He had now dropped the title of Lord
Paramount of Scotland, the country being considered as virtually
part of England. Garrisons were placed in every stronghold in the
country, and many new castles were raised to dominate the people.
The public documents were all carried away to England, the great
seal broken in pieces, and the stone of Scone--upon which, for
five hundred years, every Scotch monarch had been crowned--was
carried away to Westminster, where it has ever since formed the
seat of the thrones upon which English monarchs have been crowned.

The tide of war had not passed near Glen Cairn; but the excitement,
as from time to time the news came of stirring events, was very
great. The tidings of the massacre of Berwick filled all with
consternation and grief. Some of the men quitted their homes and
fought at Dunbar, and fully half of these never returned; but great
as was the humiliation and grief at the reverses which had befallen
the Scotch arms, the feeling was even deeper and more bitter at the
readiness with which the whole of the Scotch nobles flocked in to
make their peace with King Edward.

It seemed so incredible that Scotland, which had so long successfully
resisted all invaders, should now tamely yield without a struggle,
that the people could scarce believe it possible that their boasted
freedom was gone, that the kingdom of Scotland was no more, and the
country become a mere portion of England.  Thus, while the nobles
with their Norman blood and connections accepted the new state of
things contentedly enough, well satisfied to have retained rank and
land, a deep and sullen discontent reigned among the people; they
had been betrayed rather than conquered, and were determined that
some day there should be an uprising, and that Scotland would make
a great effort yet for freedom.  But for this a leader was needed,
and until such a one appeared the people rested quiet and bided
their time.

From time to time there came to Glen Cairn tales of the doings of
that William Wallace who had, when the English first garrisoned the
Scottish castles, while Edward was choosing between the competitors
for her throne, killed young Selbye at Dundee, and had been outlawed
for the deed. After that he went and resided with his uncle, Sir
Ronald Crawford, and then with another uncle, Sir Richard Wallace
of Riccarton. Here he gathered a party of young men, eager spirits
like himself, and swore perpetual hostility to the English.

One day Wallace was fishing in the Irvine when Earl Percy, the
governor of Ayr, rode past with a numerous train.  Five of them
remained behind and asked Wallace for the fish he had taken. He
replied that they were welcome to half of them. Not satisfied with
this, they seized the basket and prepared to carry it off. Wallace
resisted, and one of them drew his sword. Wallace seized the staff
of his net and struck his opponent's sword from his hand; this he
snatched up and stood on guard, while the other four rushed upon
him.  Wallace smote the first so terrible a blow that his head was
cloven from skull to collarbone; with the next blow he severed the
right arm of another, and then disabled a third.  The other two
fled, and overtaking the earl, called on him for help; "for," they
said, "three of our number who stayed behind with us to take some
fish from the Scot who was fishing are killed or disabled."

"How many were your assailants?" asked the earl.

"But the man himself," they answered; "a desperate fellow whom we
could not withstand."

"I have a brave company of followers!" the earl said with scorn.
"You allow one Scot to overmatch five of you! I shall not return
to seek for your adversary; for were I to find him I should respect
him too much to do him harm."

Fearing that after this adventure he could no longer remain in
safety with his uncle, Wallace left him and took up his abode in
Lag Lane Wood, where his friends joining him, they lived a wild
life together, hunting game and making many expeditions through the
country. On one occasion he entered Ayr in disguise; in the middle
of a crowd he saw some English soldiers, who were boasting that they
were superior to the Scots in strength and feats of arms. One of
them, a strong fellow, was declaring that he could lift a greater
weight than any two Scots. He carried a pole, with which he offered,
for a groat, to let any Scotchman strike him on the back as hard
as he pleased, saying that no Scotchman could strike hard enough
to hurt him.

Wallace offered him three groats for a blow. The soldier eagerly
accepted the money, and Wallace struck him so mighty a blow that
his back was broken and he fell dead on the ground. His comrades
drew their swords and rushed at Wallace, who slew two with the
pole, and when it broke drew the long sword which was hidden in
his garments, and cut his way through them.

On another occasion he again had a fracas with the English in Ayr,
and after killing many was taken prisoner.  Earl Percy was away,
and his lieutenant did not venture to execute him until his return.
A messenger was sent to the Earl, but returned with strict orders
that nothing should be done to the prisoner until he came back.
The bad diet and foul air of the dungeon suited him so ill, after
his free life in the woods, that he fell ill, and was reduced
to so weak a state that he lay like one dead--the jailer indeed
thought that he was so, and he was carried out to be cast into the
prison burial ground, when a woman, who had been his nurse, begged
his body. She had it carried to her house, and then discovered that
life yet remained, and by great care and good nursing succeeded
in restoring him. In order to prevent suspicion that he was still
alive a fictitious funeral was performed.  On recovering, Wallace
had other frays with the English, all of which greatly increased
his reputation throughout that part of the country, so that more
adherents came to him, and his band began to be formidable. He
gradually introduced an organization among those who were found to
be friendly to the cause, and by bugle notes taken up and repeated
from spot to spot orders could be despatched over a wide extent of
country, by which the members of his band knew whether to assemble
or disperse, to prepare to attack an enemy, or to retire to their
fastnesses.

The first enterprise of real importance performed by the band was
an attack by Wallace and fifty of his associates on a party of
soldiers, 200 strong, conveying provisions from Carlisle to the
garrison of Ayr.  They were under the command of John Fenwick,
the same officer who had been at the head of the troop by which
Wallace's father had been killed.  Fenwick left twenty of his men
to defend the wagons, and with the rest rode forward against the
Scots. A stone wall checked their progress, and the Scotch, taking
advantage of the momentary confusion, made a furious charge upon
them with their spears, cutting their way into the midst of them
and making a great slaughter of men and horses. The English rode
round and round them, but the Scots, defending themselves with spear
and sword, stood so staunchly together that the English could not
break through.

The battle was long and desperate, but Wallace killed Fenwick with
his own hand, and after losing nigh a hundred of their number the
English fled in confusion. The whole convoy fell into the hands of
the victors, who became possessed of several wagons, 200 carriage
horses, flour, wine, and other stores in great abundance; with
these they retired into the forest of Clydesdale.

The fame of this exploit greatly increased the number of Wallace's
followers. So formidable did the gathering become that convoys by
land to Ayr were entirely interrupted, and Earl Percy held a council
of the nobility at Glasgow, and consulted them as to what had best
be done. Finally, Sir Ronald Crawford was summoned and told that
unless he induced his nephew to desist from hostilities they should
hold him responsible and waste his lands. Sir Ronald visited the
band in Clydesdale forest, and rather than harm should come upon
him, Wallace and his friends agreed to a truce for two months. Their
plunder was stowed away in places of safety, and a portion of the
band being left to guard it the rest dispersed to their homes.

Wallace returned to his uncle's, but was unable long to remain
inactive, and taking fifteen followers he went with them in disguise
to Ayr.  Wallace, as usual, was not long before he got into a
