middleweight or a light heavyweight; you will be a heavyweight yourself
by the time you have filled out. Let me think; what is your height--six
feet one, if I remember rightly?"

"Yes, that is about it."

"Well, with your shoulders and long reach and activity, you ought to be
something out of the way if you take pains, Mark. You see, I am barely
five feet ten, and am something like two stone lighter than you are. I
suppose you are not much under twelve stone and a half."

"That is just about my weight; I weighed at the miller's only a
fortnight ago."

"Good. I will make some inquiries, and see who would be the best man to
take you in hand to begin with. And now about lodgings. Well, I should
say Essex Street, or any of those streets running down from the Strand,
would suit you. The rooms in Essex Street are bigger than those in
Buckingham Street, and you will find anything between the two in some of
the others. I may as well saunter round there with you. Of course money
is no object to you?"

"No," Mark agreed, "but I don't want big rooms. I think a small one,
when you are sitting by yourself, is more cozy and comfortable."

Finally two rooms were taken in Villiers Street; they were of moderate
size and handsomely furnished: the last tenant had fitted them out for
himself, but had lived to enjoy them only three months, having at the
end of that time been killed in a duel over a quarrel at cards.

"Well, I think you are in luck, Mark; you might look through a good many
streets before you would find rooms so fashionably furnished as these. I
see he went in for driving; that is evident from these engravings on the
walls."

"They are common, gaudy looking things," Mark said, "and quite out of
character with the furniture."

"Not at all, as times go, Mark; it is quite the thing for a man to have
prints showing his tastes, riding or driving, shooting or coaching, or
the ring. If you don't like them you can take them down, or, what will
be better, take them out of their frames and put some of the champions
past and present up there instead."

"I will see about it," Mark said with a laugh. "I may turn out a
complete failure."

"There is no fear of that, Mark; and as the ring is all the fashion now,
I can assure you it would be considered in good taste, though I own that
in point of art most of these things leave a good deal to be desired.
Now that that important thing is settled, suppose you come and lunch
with me in Covent Garden? I don't belong to a club yet, though I have
got my name down at a couple of them, but as far as I can see they are
slow sort of places unless you know a lot of people. The coffee houses
are much more amusing; you see people of all sorts there--fellows like
myself, who have no clubs to go to; country gentlemen up for a week;
a few writers, who, by the way, are not the best customers of these
places; men whom nobody knows, and men whom everybody knows. Of course,
the best time to see them is of an evening."

"Yes, I have generally been in of an evening when I have been up in
towns Dick, and I have always been amused. However, I am quite ready to
lunch there now, for I breakfasted early."

"I have to make some calls this afternoon, Mark. At seven this evening
I will look in at your lodgings, and you shall go along with me to
Ingleston's in St. Giles'. It is one of the headquarters of the fancy,
and Jack Needham, who taught me, is safe to be there, and he will tell
me who he thinks is best for you to begin with."

Accordingly, after taking luncheon, they separated, and Mark went to his
inn.

Ingleston's was at that time regarded as the headquarters of the fancy.
At the back of the house was a large room, with benches rising behind
each other to accommodate the spectators. Here, on the evenings when it
was known that leading men would put on the gloves, peers of the realm
would sit side by side with sporting butchers, and men of fashion back
their opinion on a coming prize fight with ex-pugilists and publicans. A
number of men were assembled in the bar; among these was Jack Needham.

"Good evening, Mr. Chetwynd," the man said as they came up to him. "It's
going to be a good night. Tring and Bob Pratt are going to have a round
or two together, and Gibbons will put on the gloves with anyone who
likes to take him on."

"This gentleman is Mr. Thorndyke, a squire, Jack, whose place is near
mine at Reigate. He has come up to town for a few months, and wants to
learn how to use his mauleys. I told him that you would advise him as to
who would be the best man for him to go to."

"I can tell you better when I have seen him strip, sir. There is no one
in the big room at present. It won't be open for half an hour. Ingleston
keeps it shut as long as he can so as to give everyone a fair chance of
a good place. If the gentleman will come in there with me I will have a
look at him."

Mark expressed his willingness to be looked at, and the man having gone
and got the key of the room from Ingleston, went in with them and locked
the door behind.

"Now, sir, if you will strip to the waist I shall be better able to say
who you should have as your teacher than I can now."

Mark stripped, and the man walked round and round him, examining him
critically.

"He's a big 'un," he said to Dick when he had completed his examination.
"He has got plenty of muscle and frame, and ought to be a tremendous
hitter; he is about the figure of Gibbons, and if he goes in for it
really, ought to make well nigh as good a man, if not quite. I don't
think Bill would care about taking him up till he knows a bit about it.
I tell you what, sir; you will be too big altogether for me by the time
you get to be quick on your legs, and to use your strength, but if you
like I will take you on for a month or so--say, two months; by that time
I think you will be good enough to go to Gibbons. I will just call him
in if you don't mind; he came in just before you."

In a couple of minutes he came in with a man of similar height and
somewhat similar figure to Mark.

"This is Gibbons, sir, ex-champion, and like enough he might be champion
now if he chose; as fine a boxer as ever stripped, but he is ring maker
now to the P. C. and it suits him better to do that and to teach, than
to have a chance of getting a battle once a year or so."

"Have you a great many pupils, Gibbons?"

The man shook his head.

"I am too big, sir; gentlemen like to learn from someone about their
own weight, or perhaps a bit lighter, and there are not many of them
who would care to stand up against a man who has been champion, and so I
have plenty of time on my hands. I am a hard hitter, too, even with the
gloves; that is one reason why Jack had best take you on until you get
a little handy with your fists. I do more in the dog fancier line than
I do with boxing, but there is nothing I like better than getting the
gloves on with an amateur who is likely to be a credit to me. That is my
card, sir; you will find me in pretty nearly any time of the day, and
I have got a place behind the house where I do teaching when I get
a chance. It is handy in one way, because you can drop in and take a
lesson any time you like."

"That would suit me exceedingly well," Mark said; "and when I have had a
couple of months with Needham I will come to you."

Mark now put on his clothes again, and they went out together, and
re-entered a few minutes later, when the door was open. The benches were
soon crowded. Mark had been to several prize fights with Dick Chetwynd,
had often boxed with him and other lads, and had had lessons from an
ex-prize fighter at Reigate, and was therefore able to appreciate the
science shown by the various men who confronted each other. The event of
the evening was the contest between Tring and Bob Pratt; both were very
powerful men, who were about to go into strict training for matches that
had been made for them against two west countrymen, who were thought
very highly of by their friends, and who were regarded as possible
candidates for the championship.

Bob Pratt was a stone heavier than his opponent, but far less active,
and owed his position more to his ability to take punishment, and to
hard hitting powers, than to his science. In the two rounds that were
fought, Tring had the advantage, but the general opinion was that in the
long run the other would wear him down. Both fought with good temper,
and were warmly applauded as they shook hands at the finish.

"I think I should back Tring in a fight," Mark said, as the meeting
broke up, "but it is difficult to say, for he is in better condition
than the other, and it may be that when both are thoroughly fit the
heavy man might show more improvement than he would do."

The hat was passed round at the conclusion: Every man dropped in his
guinea, some more, it being understood that the collection was divided
between the two men to pay the expenses of their training.




CHAPTER XII.


The next morning Mark commenced work in earnest, and for two months
visited all the worst slums of London in company with one of the Bow
Street men. Both were generally in disguise, but Mark's companion
sometimes went openly to some of the houses inhabited by men well known
as criminals. On such occasions Mark remained within call, ready to go
in if assistance should be required; but there was small fear of this,
the men who were visited were all personally known to the officer, and
generally greeted him with "You aint wanting me, are you?"

"Not at all; what I am wanting is a little information for which I shall
be quite willing to pay the first man who enables us to lay hands on the
gentleman I want to find." Then he would describe Bastow's appearance.

"He has taken to the road, I fancy, and has given us a good deal of
trouble; if it is the man I think it is, he has been away from London
for some years, and came back eight or ten months ago."

The reply was always to the same effect:

"I don't know of such a man, and never heard of him. For my part,
I would not split on a pal, not for anything; but I should not mind
earning five guineas to put you on a cove who is not one of us. Besides,
it aint only the money; you know, you might do me a good turn some day."

"Quite so; well, I can tell you it is a good deal more than five guineas
that would be earned if you could put me in the way of laying my hand on
his shoulder. I don't think that he is living in town. I expect he is
in some quiet neighborhood; still, if he is on the road, he must have a
horse somewhere. You might ask among the stables, and find out whether
anyone keeps a horse there who is in the habit of going out in the
afternoon and not coming back until the next day. You have plenty of
time upon your hands, and it would pay you well if you could bring me
the information I want."

The officer said to Mark at the end of two months: "These knights of the
road don't often mix themselves up with the London housebreakers. The
most likely men to be able to tell you about the doings of such a
fellow would be receivers of stolen goods, but it would be dangerous to
question any of them--they would be sure to put him on his guard. I will
give you a list of some of them, and I should say that your best way
would be to watch their places of an evening, from the time it gets dark
till ten or eleven. Of course, it is just a chance. You may watch one
place for a month and he may happen to go there the very day you have
gone off to watch another crib. Still, there is just the chance, and I
don't see that there is one any other way."

During this time Mark had been taking a lesson every evening with
Needham, and had surprised his teacher with the rapidity of his
progress; he had said, the very evening before, when Mark had countered
him with a blow that knocked him for two or three minutes senseless:

"We have had enough of this, governor; you have got beyond me
altogether, and I don't want another blow like that. You had better take
on Gibbons now. You are too big altogether for me, and yet you don't
fight like a heavyweight, for you are as quick on your pins as I am."

Well pleased at having the day to himself and of having got clear of his
work in the thieves' rookeries, Mark went the next morning to Gibbons'
shop. His entry was hailed by a chorus of barking from dogs of all sorts
and sizes, from the bulldog down to the ratting terrier.

"Glad to see you, Mr. Thorndyke," Gibbons said, when he had silenced the
barking. "I saw Jack last week, and he told me that he should hand you
over to me pretty soon, for that you were getting beyond him altogether,
and he thought that if you stuck to it you would give me all my work to
do in another six months."

"I finished with him last night, Gibbons, and I shall be ready to come
for a lesson to you every morning, somewhere about this hour. I have
brought my bag with my togs."

"All right, sir, I am ready at once; the place is clear now behind. I
have just been making it tidy, for we had a little ratting last night,
one of my dogs against Sir James Collette's, fifty rats each; my dog
beat him by three quarters of a minute."

"You will never see me here at one of those businesses. I have no
objection to stand up to a man my own size and give and take until we
have had enough, but to see rats slaughtered when they have not a chance
of making a fight of it is altogether out of my line."

"Well, sir, I do not care about it myself; there are lots who do like
it, and are ready to wager their money on it, and as it helps to sell my
dogs, besides what I can win out of the event--it was a wager of twenty
guineas last night--it aint for me to set myself up against it."

Calling a boy to look after the shop, Gibbons went away into a wooden
building in the back yard; it was about twenty-five feet square, and
there were holes in the floor for the stakes, when a regular ring was
made. The floor was strewn with clean sawdust; a number of boxing gloves
hung by the wall.

"There is the dressing room," Gibbons said, pointing to a door at the
other end. When both were ready he looked Mark over. "Your muscles have
thickened out a good bit, sir, since I saw you strip. Before another
four years, if you keep on at it, you will be as big a man as I am. I
am about eight years too old, and you are four years too young. You will
improve every day, and I shan't. Now, sir, let us see what you can do.
Jack tells me that you are wonderfully quick on your feet; there is the
advantage you have of me. I am as strong as ever I was, I think, but I
find that I cannot get about as I used to."

He stood somewhat carelessly at first, but as they sparred for an
opening he became more careful, and presently hit out sharply. Mark
leaped back, and then, springing forward, struck out with his left;
Gibbons only just stopped it and then countered, but Mark was out of
reach again.

"That is good enough," Gibbons said; "I can see Jack has taught you
pretty nearly all there is to know. We will just take those hits again.
You were right to get away from the first, but the second time you
should have guarded with your left, and hit at my chin with your right.
That jumping back game is first rate for avoiding punishment, but you
have got to come in again to hit. You took me by surprise that time, and
nearly got home, but you would not do it twice," and so the lesson went
on for three quarters of an hour.

"That will do for today, sir; I am getting blown, if you are not. Well,
I can tell you I have never had a more promising pupil, and I have
brought forward two or three of the best men in the ring; no wonder that
Jack cannot do much with you. Give me six months, every day, and you
should have a turn occasionally with other men, and I would back you for
a hundred pounds against any man now in the ring."

Three or four days later Mark received a message that the chief wanted
to speak with him that afternoon, and he accordingly went down.

"I've got a job for you, Mr. Thorndyke; it is just the sort of thing
that will suit you. There is a house in Buckingham Street that we have
had our eye on for some time; it is a gambling house, but with that we
have nothing to do unless complaints are made, but we have had several
complaints of late. It is a well got up place, and there are a good many
men of title frequent it, but men of title are not always more honest
than other people; anyhow, there are some rooks there, and several
young fellows of means have been pigeoned and ruined. They are mighty
particular who they let in, and there would be very little chance of
getting my regular men in there. Now, you are a stranger in London, but
you have friends here, and no doubt you could get introduced. We want
to know if the play is fair; if it isn't, we would break the place up
altogether. We know enough to do it now; but none of the poor beggars
who have been ruined will come forward, and, indeed, haven't any idea,
I think, that they have lost their money in anything but a run of bad
luck.

"One young fellow blew his brains out last week, and his father came
here with a list of what are called debts of honor, which he found in
his room. There they are, and the names of the men they are owed to; of
course some of them have been fairly won, but I have a strong suspicion
that those I have marked with a cross have not been. For instance, there
is Sir James Flash, a fellow who was turned out of White's two years
ago for sharp practice with cards; there is John Emerson, he is a man of
good family, but all his friends have given him up long ago, and he has
been living by his wits for the last five years. The others marked
are all of the same sort. Now, what I want you to do is to become a
frequenter of the place; of course you will have to play a little, and
as you are a stranger I expect that they will let you win for a bit;
but if not the old gentleman has placed 200 pounds in my hands for the
expenses."

"I could play with my own money," Mark said rather warmly.

"You forget, Mr. Thorndyke," the chief said firmly, "that at the present
moment you are a member of my force, and that you go to this place in
that capacity, and not as Squire of Crowswood; therefore you must, if
you please, do as I instruct you. The gentleman will be ready to pay
that sum. As you see, the amounts entered here total up to nearly 10,000
pounds. He said that it will ruin him to pay that sum, but that he
must do so rather than his son should be branded as a defaulter. I have
advised him to write to all these people saying that it will take him
some time to raise the money, but that he will see that nobody shall be
a loser by his son's debts. I have told him in the meantime that I will
endeavor to get proof that the play was not fair, and in that case he
would, of course, refuse to pay any of the claims on that ground; and
you may be sure that if unfair play was proved none of those concerned
would dare to press their claims."

"Then my function would be simply to watch?"

"Yes, to watch, and to bring me word of anything you may observe. You
see, without making a public scandal, if it could be found that a man
was discovered cheating, and the way in which he was doing it, one would
be able to put so strong a pressure on him, that not only might he be
forced to abstain from going to any club, but would be frightened into
giving up any IOUs he might hold."

"I shall be glad to do the best I can, sir; but frankly I know next
to nothing of cards, and should have but little chance of detecting
anything that might be going on, when it must be done so cleverly that
experienced gamblers, watching a man closely, fail to see anything
wrong."

"I quite understand that; but one of my men has made a study of the
various methods employed by gamblers to cheat, and although it would
take you years to learn how to do it yourself, a few hours' instruction
from him would at least put you up to some of their methods, and enable
you to know where to look for cheating. The man is now waiting in the
next room, and if you will take two or three hours daily with him, say
for a week, you ought to be able to detect the doings of these fellows
when to others everything seems right and above board. You may have no
inclination for cards, but knowledge of that sort is useful to anyone
in society, here or anywhere else, and may enable him either to save his
own pocket or to do a service to a friend."

Mark was greatly interested in the tricks the man showed him. At first
it seemed to him almost magical, after he himself had shuffled the cards
and cut them the dealer invariably turned up a king. Even admitting he
might have various places of concealment, pockets in the lining of the
sleeve, in the inside of the coat, and in various other parts of
the dress, in which cards could be concealed and drawn out by silken
threads, it did not seem possible that this could be done with such
quickness as to be unobserved. It was only when his teacher showed him,
at first in the slowest manner, and then gradually increasing his speed,
that he perceived that what seemed impossible was easy enough when the
necessary practice and skill had been attained. The man was indeed an
adept at a great variety of tricks by which the unsuspecting could be
taken in.

"I ought to know," he said. "I was for three years in a gambling house
in Paris, where every other man was a sharper. I have been in places of
the same sort in Belgium, Holland, Germany, and Italy. At first I was
only a boy waiter, and as until evening there was nothing doing at these
places, men would sometimes amuse themselves by teaching me tricks, easy
ones to begin with, and when they saw I was sharp and quick handed they
went on. After a time I began to work as a confederate, and at last on
my own account; but I got disgusted with it at last. A young fellow shot
himself at the table of the gambling house at Rome, and at another place
I was nearly killed by a man who had lost heavily--do you see, it has
left a broad scar right across my forehead?--so I gave it up.

"I was in the French police for a time, and used to watch some of the
lower hells. I was nearly killed there once or twice, and at last I
came back here. My French chief gave me a letter to the chief, and I was
taken on at once, for, talking as I do half a dozen languages, and being
acquainted with most of the swell mobsmen of Paris, I was just the man
who happened to be wanted here at the time. Since I came over I have
done a good deal in the way of breaking up hells where sailors and
others are plundered. But, you see, I cannot be used for the higher
class of work; my nose has been broken, and I have half a dozen scars on
my face. I hate the sight of cards now. I have seen so much of the ruin
they do, and have, I am sorry to say, taken a hand so often in doing it,
that save showing someone who would use the knowledge in the right way
how the tricks are done, nothing would persuade me to touch them again.
However, as a protection, the knowledge is as useful as it is dangerous
when used the other way. It would take you ten years to learn to do
these tricks yourself so well as to defy detection; but in a very short
time, by learning where to keep your eyes, you would get to detect
almost any of them.

"You see, there are three methods of cheating: the first by hidden
cards, the second by marked cards, the third simply by sleight of hand,
this being generally used in connection with marked cards. These tricks
require great skill and extreme delicacy of touch, for the marks,
which are generally at the edge of the cards, are so slight as to be
altogether imperceptible save to a trained hand. There are also marks on
the back of the cards; these are done in the printing, and are so slight
that, unless attention were attracted to them, no one would dream of
their existence."

In the course of a week's practice Mark learned where to look for
cheating; he could not indeed follow the fingers of his instructor, for
even when he knew what was going to be done, the movements were so rapid
that his eye could not follow them, and in nine cases out of ten he
was unable to say whether the coup had been accomplished or not; but
he could see that there was a slight movement of the fingers that could
