"That certainly is most desirable," Wulf agreed. "The question is, who are
we to send? It would be a terribly dangerous enterprise. Even now there are
a score of men from the village watching our movements from the wood above.
At any rate we must wait until nightfall."

Four sentries were posted on the wall by which they had ascended, as after
making a circuit of the place, this was they agreed the only point at which
a surprise was possible, unless there existed some secret passage into the
castle. They had just finished their inspection of the walls, when there
was a shout from their look-out at the top of the castle.

"A great number of men are coming down the valley," he cried to the thanes
in the courtyard below, and they at once mounted to the battlements. A mile
away great numbers of men could be seen running at the top of their speed.
There was neither order nor formation. Among them were a few horsemen
riding in a knot together, and round these a number of the footmen were
running in a close mass; but by far the greater proportion straggled across
the valley, some being a considerable distance behind the rest.

"They are like a swarm of bees," Beorn said.

"Yes, and are just as angry. Of course, the news of what has happened here
was sent off to them at once, and has brought them back again. I trust that
it reached them before they came upon Oswald's party."

"They must have been on their return," Beorn said. "It was but two hours
ago that we won the castle. Had a swift messenger started the moment the
news reached the village, and had he known exactly the position where he
would find Llewellyn, he could not have taken the news to him and brought
them back here had they been some eight miles away. It must be farther than
that to the spot where we lost Oswald, and as the thanes would surely be
making their way either back to camp or eastward to the border, they must
have been many miles from here an hour since. We know that the Welsh levies
were summoned in the evening, and probably reached the spot where we were
deserted by the guide, before daybreak, and took up the search at once.
Therefore I think, Wulf, there can be no doubt that the messenger from here
must have met them as they were returning; but whether they had overtaken
and destroyed Oswald's command, or had failed in their search for them, we
cannot tell."

Wulf shook his head. "I fear the former is most likely. The Welsh here must
know every foot of their mountains, so that by scattering through the
valleys they could scarcely fail to come upon the traces of Oswald's
passage, and they would pursue him as hotly as wolves chase a deer. My only
hope is that Oswald may have established himself at daybreak this morning
in some strong position, and fortified himself there, in hopes that we
might rejoin him, and that Llewellyn had not begun the attack upon it when
the news reached him of the capture of his castle. How many, think you, are
there in that approaching throng?"

"Some four or five thousand I should say."

"Yes, quite five thousand, Beorn."

At the call of the watchmen the men had, of their own accord, all mounted
to the walls.

"We had better divide our commands," Beorn said. "Your force is double
mine. For the present I will undertake the defence of the rear walls if you
will take the front. Of course till an attack actually commences it will
not be necessary to keep more than a strong guard on duty."

"Certainly not," Wulf agreed. "The danger will be far greater at night than
by day, and we must give the men as much rest as possible. But I think that
you with your men and half of mine ought to take the command in front,
while I with the rest defend the rear."

"Not at all, Wulf, this is your affair altogether. I should never have
thought of trying to take the castle. It was your idea, and has been
carried out by you altogether. You are much fuller of plans than I am. I
will do my best to second you, but you must continue to be the head in the
matter."

"Very well, Beorn. I refuse to be considered in command, but we will
apportion our forces as you suggest. We will take care that at any rate the
Welsh shall not capture the castle as rapidly as we did, and so will put
four men always on duty at each of the gates in the interior walls, so that
if by any chance they manage to effect an entrance into one of the yards
they will be able to get no farther until our whole force can assemble to
oppose them."




CHAPTER XI.


THE SECRET PASSAGE.

Beorn called his men together and distributed them along the rear wall,
while Wulf made a fresh examination of the front. He had before noticed
that great piles of stone in blocks from fifty to a hundred pounds in
weight were piled along by the parapet, in readiness to hurl down upon any
foe attempting to ascend the road, while in the courtyard below was an
immense reserve of these missiles. He placed twenty of his men here, and
posted the other ten as sentries on the side walls, and then went down
through the passage to Osgod. The bridge was entirely demolished as he had
directed, with the exception of a single plank, which could be thrown over
in a moment. Osgod had closed the gate, and had fastened a rope from the
top of the turret to the plank, so that this could be hauled up, without
those engaged in the operation being exposed to missiles from the other
side of the chasm.

"One feels almost ashamed at being so safe," Osgod said, as Wulf joined him
on the turret. "It does not give one the chance of a fight."

"You have had one good fight to-day, Osgod, and can do without another. I
should be glad if we did not have to strike a blow till we see Gurth's
banner coming down the valley."

"We have done very well," Osgod agreed; "and I should be quite contented if
I had but come across that rascal who nearly smothered me in the bog."

"You need not bear malice against him, Osgod; for if he had not deserted us
and led Llewellyn's force away to the spot where he left us, we should not
be masters of the place as at present, and it would have been a terrible
business had we been obliged to take this stronghold by storm."

"That is true enough, master; except by hunger or by a surprise, such as we
carried out, I don't see how the place is to be taken if stoutly defended.
There is no reason why the Welsh should have been in such a hurry to
return, for they must know as well as we do that there is but little chance
of their getting in again. They have come to a halt now down there, and
half of them have thrown themselves on the ground like a pack of tired
hounds."

"I have no fear whatever of an open attack, Osgod. They can see for
themselves that the bridge is destroyed, and I do not think they will dream
of coming up that road, which, as they know, we can sweep with stones from
above. If they attack openly at all, it will be by the wall we scaled. If
they make twenty ladders such as we had they may think they might gain a
footing, especially as their archers high among the trees would be able to
fire down on the defenders of the wall. But what I am really afraid of is
that there may be some secret passage."

"Do you think so?" Osgod said, startled. "Where could it come from?"

"Well, Osgod, you see they have cut this winding road up the rock and have
made the tunnel hence to the courtyard, so the chiefs have had abundance of
labour at their disposal. They would naturally wish to provide a means of
escape if the castle were besieged, and like to fall by force or famine;
moreover it would enable them to send out messengers or receive messages
from without. A passage four feet high and two feet wide would suffice.
They may have driven such a passage from some place in the wood behind and
it may come up somewhere in the courtyard, perhaps in one of the little
huts along the side. Of course the entrance would be covered here by a
stone, and would be hidden among the bushes at the other end. Still I do
not think that this is likely, for a hostile force would almost certainly
take up its post in that wood, and attack the place in the rear. If there
is such a passage I think that it must open somewhere on the face of the
rock, on one side or the other. It looks to us almost perpendicular, but
there may be inequalities by which active men might ascend at some point or
other. For a considerable distance we could see there were tufts of shrubs
growing here and there, and one of these may conceal a small opening. From
this point a staircase may have been driven up into the castle."

"That would be very awkward, master, if it were so."

"It would indeed. To-night all the force except the sentries shall gather
in the castle, where ten men by turns shall keep guard, one or two being
placed in the lower chambers. In this way we shall be safe; for before more
than three or four can enter we should be all on foot, and as they can but
come up in single file, could repulse them without difficulty. Tomorrow we
will lower men down with ropes from the walls, and examine every clump of
bushes growing on the face of the rock If we find any signs of a path or
entrance we shall have no difficulty in discovering where it enters into
the castle, and can effectually block it up. I shall then feel much more
comfortable than I do at present."

"I was looking forward to a good night's sleep," Osgod grumbled, "but your
idea, master, has quite done away with that. If I went off I should dream
that I had one of those Welsh wolves at my throat. However, it is a good
thing that you thought of it."

"I think, my lord," one of the soldiers said, "there are a number of our
men among the Welsh. I can make out helmets and shields, and I think many
are clad in leather jerkins."

Wulf looked attentively.

"Yes, there are certainly shields and helmets," he said. "I fear there is
no doubt they have overtaken Oswald's levies."

"And have made them prisoners?"

Wulf shook his head. "They never take prisoners, you know. I fear they have
slain them all and possessed themselves of their arms and clothes. In no
other way can there be Saxon shields and helmets among them."

"By St. Nicholas!" Osgod exclaimed, "it is too bad that we should be
standing here doing nothing. Why doesn't Llewellyn attack us instead of
keeping his men gaping there at the castle?"

"Because at present he can do nothing, and is not fool enough to throw away
hundreds of lives; besides, he must know that his mother and children are
in our hands."

Presently a white flag was raised among the Welsh. Wulf had expected this,
and had ordered a white cloth to be held in readiness to raise in reply. As
soon as this flew out to the wind three men were seen to advance with the
flag towards the foot of the road up to the castle. Wulf at once sent for
the two interpreters to join him.

"Shall you let them come up, master?" Osgod asked. "They are as treacherous
as snakes. See how that boy led us astray in the bog."

"You cannot get that boy out of your head, Osgod," Wulf laughed. "There is
no conceivable way by which three men could recapture this castle. There is
nothing for them to learn. They know its strength and everything connected
with it, and they can see for themselves that we have destroyed the bridge.
I shall be glad to hear what they have to say. Llewellyn himself is, most
likely, one of the number."

The little party mounted the road until they stood on the platform from
which the bridge started. One of them was a tall figure, dressed in armour,
and with long black hair flowing down from under his helmet over his
shoulders. Wulf at once, from the descriptions he had heard of the chief's
appearance, recognized him as Llewellyn ap Rhys.

"I would speak with the commander of the Saxons who have, in my absence,
taken my castle by treachery."

"I am the commander," Wulf said.

The Welshman's fingers clenched, and he glanced furiously at the young
Saxon. By a great effort, however, he restrained his passion, and said
courteously: "I am Llewellyn ap Rhys. To whom have I the pleasure of
speaking?"

"I am Wulf of Steyning, prince. I don't know altogether that I have taken
your castle by treachery, indeed I claim to have won it by fair fighting.
You went out with your force to attack me among the hills, and during your
absence I attacked and captured your castle. I will do your garrison credit
to say they fought bravely in spite of the surprise. I would gladly have
given them quarter, but they refused my offers, and, save a few wounded,
whom I allowed the women to carry off, died to a man fighting bravely. No
women were hurt or insulted, save those who took up arms and fought among
the men, and it was no fault of ours that they were killed. Methinks that
in your incursions into England you have not always shown the same mercy."

Llewellyn was silent for a minute. He had indeed never shown any pity in
his forays, but had never expected that his castle and family would be in
the hands of the Saxons.

"I learn," he said at last, "from the women, that my mother and my children
are alive in your hands, and I thank you for the honorable treatment I hear
that they have received."

"They are safe and well," Wulf replied. "We Saxons do not massacre women
and children in cold blood. They will be honourably treated until I can
hand them over to the care of Earl Gurth, who will doubtless send them to
England as hostages."

"I shall try to win back my castle," Llewellyn said. "May I be sure that
whatever happens they will be safe?"

"You may. Even were you forcing your way into the castle I will guarantee
that no hair of their heads shall be injured. And now, prince, it is my
turn to question. I see Saxon helmets and shields among your followers.
Whence come they?"

A cloud passed over Llewellyn's face. He had not reckoned on their being
observed from the castle. Concealment was now out of question, and he said
boldly: "I defeated a party of your countrymen this morning. They came with
hostile intent into my territory, and they have been destroyed." Although
he had expected the answer, Wulf was shocked at the confirmation of his
fears. Llewellyn, indeed, had fallen on Oswald's levies and annihilated
them soon after daybreak. Having no idea that a party had separated from
them during the night, he was returning exulting in the idea that he had
destroyed the whole of the invaders, when the news had reached him of the
capture of his castle. Wulf was silent. "It is the fortune of war," he
said gravely. "It is not to me that you have to reckon for the deed, but
with Earl Gurth, for whom I hold this castle."

Llewellyn made no reply, but with a wave of his hand turned and went down
the hill again.

"I am even more than before convinced, Osgod, that there is a secret
passage. I was watching him closely when the interpreter told him that I
should hand his mother and children over to Gurth. He pressed his lips
together, and his face lighted up with exultation for a moment."

"What do you think he came here for, master?"

"He came here to assure himself if possible that their lives would not be
sacrificed in the event of his attacking."

"It is a pity you told him they would be safe," Osgod said.

"But they will be safe, and even if we are surprised and slain I would not
that Llewellyn should say that it was only the suddenness of his attack
that saved their lives. I will place two of our best men at their door with
orders that come what may they are to prevent anyone from entering. But I
don't think it will come to that. Should the passage enter into the castle,
as, if it exists, I have no doubt it does, we shall be prepared to deal
with them, if it opens elsewhere we shall have all our force save a few
sentries assembled, and though all the walls fall into their hands, we
ought to be able to hold it successfully till Gurth arrives to our rescue."

Wulf returned to the castle, and then joined Beorn at his post on the wall
facing the wood. He communicated to him his ideas as to the probable
existence of a secret passage.

"We must provide a mode of retreat for your men on guard here, Beorn, in
case the Welsh enter by either of these yards instead of by the castle.
These flanking towers at the angles of the walls cut off all passage. We
will construct bridges with two or three planks across these towers, so
that your sentries can retreat from the rear wall to the next, and again on
to the inner wall. The doors between the courtyards shall be closed, so
that should they enter either of these outer courts they will be delayed,
and your men will have plenty of time to join us in the defence of the last
wall. However, I am convinced the castle itself will be the scene of
action. Five sentries will be enough to place on this wall. I will put two
on each of the cross walls, so that if your men give the alarm it will be
passed along speedily. I shall remove the last plank of the bridge at
nightfall, and have Osgod and four men in the turret and two on the wall
above them. We shall therefore have fifty-five men in the castle, and that
should be ample. They can keep watch and watch, so there will be over
twenty-five men under arms, and ready to throw themselves upon the Welsh
wherever they may enter."

These arrangements were carried out. At ten o'clock all lights were
extinguished, save a torch burning in each room on the ground floor. The
floors and walls had been carefully examined and sounded, but nothing
suspicious had been discovered. Four men were told off to each room except
the great hall, where twenty were gathered in reserve. Half were to keep
watch, but all were to lie down. The orders to those who were to keep awake
were strict If they heard a noise or saw a stone move they were to keep
silent, until two or three men had stepped out, then they were to give the
alarm, leap up, and throw themselves upon them.

"Were the alarm given," he said, "before they fairly issued out the stone
might be moved back again, and it would give us immense trouble before we
could demolish it or find the secret of the spring. Therefore, let them get
a footing first."

From time to time either Beorn or Wulf got up and went noiselessly round to
the different rooms to see that the watch was vigilant. As had been
arranged, each of those on guard raised a hand as they entered a room, so
as to show that they were awake. Wulf did not expect that any attempt would
be made before midnight. After that hour he sat in a corner of the dais,
leaning as if asleep, but with his eyes wandering round the room watching
every stone, and his ears listening for the faintest sound. He had no
feeling of sleepiness whatever, his senses being all strung up to the
highest pitch.

From time to time he held up a hand, and ten others were at once elevated,
showing that the watchers were as vigilant as himself. It was, he thought,
about one o'clock when he heard a faint creaking sound. It did not seem to
him to be in the hall itself, but in a room adjoining it, the doors having
all been left open. He rose to his feet, touched Beorn, who lay a pace or
two away, and stole noiselessly out, grasping his sword in his hand. He
stopped before he got to the open door of the next room and listened. All
seemed perfectly quiet. He stood motionless, until a minute later there was
a sudden shout, followed almost instantly by a clash of arms.

With a shout to his followers Wulf ran into the room. The four Saxons were
on their feet, and were attacking three men, who, as he entered, were
joined by a fourth from behind. He and Beorn threw themselves into the fray
just as one of the Saxons fell with his head cloven by a sweeping blow from
the tall figure opposed to him. One after another in rapid succession the
Welsh poured in from a narrow opening, but the Saxons rushed up in
overwhelming numbers. There was a brief fierce fight, and the Welsh were
slain or overpowered. The men who last emerged turned to fly, but meeting
those crowding up from behind were unable to do so. Others ran in only to
be cut down as soon as they appeared; a sound of fierce shouting and angry
struggle came through the opening. When no more showed themselves, Wulf
called for torches, and a dozen were soon at hand. Seizing one he passed
through the narrow opening. A winding staircase met his view. With Beorn
and some Saxons following close behind him, he descended for a considerable
distance, then he found himself in a low and narrow passage, and following
this for twenty yards stepped out into the open air.

"We need do no more to-night, Beorn," he said. "We will see where this
comes out and block it up in the morning, though they are not likely to try
again. We can sleep now without fear of interruption."

His first step was to examine the bodies of the fallen Welshmen. He had
recognized in the tall man with whom he had crossed swords Llewellyn ap
Rhys, and found him lying beneath four of his followers, who had stood over
him and defended him to the last. He was glad to find that the Welsh prince
still lived, and directed that he should be at once carried to a room and
that every attention should be shown him. None of the other fourteen
Welshmen who had fallen showed any signs of life.

Ordering their bodies to be carried out into the courtyard, Wulf placed
four men on guard at the upper opening of the secret passage. They were to
be relieved every hour. He then went out and saw to the relief of the
sentries on the walls, and called down to Osgod that the attack had been
made and repulsed. He then went back and slept soundly till daybreak. On
going to the walls he learned that there had been a great commotion down in
the valley. Fierce shouts, loud wailing cries, and a confused sound of
running and talking had been heard. At daybreak the Welsh were still there,
and their fires had been lighted: one party were seen to march away as soon
as it was light, but others arrived, and their numbers appeared about the
same as on the previous evening. There was no general movement, but it
could be seen that they gathered in clusters, and listened to men who
addressed them with animated gestures.

"They don't know what to do," Wulf said to Osgod, whom he had joined in the
turret. "They believe their chief to be dead; they know that his mother and
children are prisoners in our hands; they can have little hope of capturing
this place, which they believe to be impregnable to open attack. At present
they must be without a leader, and yet they must be so animated by a spirit
of hate and revenge, and by the desire to wipe out their humiliation by
retaking this place, that they will not stir from in front of it."

As he spoke a messenger came from Beorn, saying that the Welsh were pouring
arrows and javelins from the hill upon his sentries on the walls, and that
these were unable to show a head above the parapet. In one of the sheds a
large quantity of hides had been found, and taking a party laden with them
Wulf proceeded to the wall at the rear. Here he directed the ladders that
were still lying there to be cut up into lengths of eight feet. These were
fixed at intervals upon the parapet, and a cord fastened along the top, the
men engaged in the operations being protected by the shields of their
comrades from the rain of missiles from the trees. Hides were thrown over
the ropes, and these hid those on the wall from the view of the enemy,
while they themselves could peep out from time to time between the hides to
see that no preparations were being made for an attack.

The secret passage was next investigated; it was found that the opening was
about half-way down the rock, and that the assailants must have climbed up
by a path that a goat could scarce traverse. Wulf set a party to work to
carry down stones from the courtyard, and to block up the passage solidly
for ten feet from the opening, a sentry being posted on the wall above.
After the erection of the shelter of hides the Welsh only sent an
occasional javelin from the trees, but by the loud yells that were from
time to time raised, there was no doubt they were still there in force.

"It is evident that they are going to besiege us, Beorn," Wulf said when
