were such a beautiful brown, but they haunted me. There is something so
familiar about them."

"Why, that's just what I thought, too!" cried Grace. "Who is it she
resembles?"

"Give it up," said Nora. "Although I noticed it, too."

Jessica alone made no remark. Her face wore a puzzled frown, as though
she were searching her memory for something.

"Oh, well, what's the use of worrying over a resemblance," said Nora. "I
wonder what days visitors are allowed at the hospital."

"By the way, Jessica," said Anne, "where is Mabel! She usually waits for
you."

"Mabel is--" began Jessica. Then she stopped, her eyes filling with
wonder, almost alarm. "Girls," she cried, her voice rising to an excited
scream. "I know who that woman resembles! She looks like Mabel Allison."




CHAPTER II

WHAT THE DAY BROUGHT FORTH


For a second the three girls fairly gasped at Jessica's discovery. Grace
was the first to speak.

"You have hit the nail on the head, Jessica. That's why her face seemed
so familiar. The resemblance is striking."

The four girls glanced from one to another, the same thought in mind.
Perhaps the mystery of Mabel Allison's parentage was to be solved at
last.

Those who have read "Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High
School" will recall how the Phi Sigma Tau became interested in
Mabel Allison, a young girl taken from an orphanage by Miss Brant, a
woman devoid of either gentleness or sympathy, who treated her young
charge with great cruelty.

It will be remembered that through the efforts of Grace and Jessica,
aided by Jessica's father, Miss Brant was forced to give Mabel up, and
she became a member of the Bright household, and the especial protegee
of the Phi Sigma Tau.

Grace and her friends had always believed Mabel to be a child of good
family. She had been picked up in the streets of New York when a baby,
and taken to the police station, where she had been held for some time,
but on remaining unclaimed, had been sent to an orphanage outside New
York City, where she had spent her life until she had been brought to
Oakdale by Miss Brant.

Although Mabel had been in the Bright household but a few months,
Jessica, who was motherless, had become deeply attached to her, while
Jessica's father was equally fond of the young girl.

She had spent her vacation with the Phi Sigma Tau, who were the guests
of Judge Putnam, a prominent Oakdale citizen, and his sister at their
camp in the Adirondacks. The judge had conceived a great affection for
her, and on hearing her story had offered to adopt her.

This proved a cross to Jessica, who was torn between her desire to keep
Mabel with her, and the feeling that the opportunity was too great for
Mabel to refuse. Mabel had left the decision to Jessica, and the judge
was still awaiting his answer.

"I might have known something would happen to take her away," almost
wailed Jessica. "First, the judge, and now--"

"Don't be a goose, Jessica," said Nora stoutly, "and don't jump at the
conclusion that this strange woman is a relative of Mabel's. There are
lots of chance resemblances."

"Of course there are," consoled Grace. "When we go to the hospital
to-morrow we'll find no doubt that our stranger is named 'Smith' or
'Brown' or anything except 'Allison.'"

"Don't worry, dear," said Anne, slipping her hand into Jessica's. "No
one will take your one chicken from you."

"I don't know about that," responded Jessica gloomily. "I feel in my
bones that something terrible is going to happen. I suppose you girls
think me foolish about Mabel, but I've no mother or sister, and you know
yourselves what a dear Mabel is."

"Forget it," advised Nora wisely. "We've had enough to harrow our young
feelings to-day. Let's go and drown our sorrows in sundaes. I'll treat
until my money gives out, and then the rest of you can take up the good
work."

"Who will go to the hospital with me to-morrow!" asked Grace when they
were seated around a table at Stillman's.

"Let me see. To-morrow is Sunday," said Jessica. "I'm afraid I can't go.
Papa is going to take Mabel and me for a drive."

"I'll go with, you," volunteered Nora.

"And I," said Anne.

"Good girls," commended Grace. "Meet me here at three o'clock. I am
fairly sure that visitors are allowed on Sunday, but if I am mistaken we
can at least go to the office and inquire for our stranger."

The three girls met in front of Stillman's at exactly three o'clock the
following afternoon, and set out for the hospital.

"Visitors are allowed on Sunday from three until five," remarked Grace
as they strolled down Main Street. "I telephoned last night to the
hospital. Our stranger is not seriously hurt. She is badly shaken up,
and awfully nervous. If she feels more calm to-day we may be allowed to
see her."

"What is her name?" asked Anne.

Grace looked blank, then exclaimed: "Why, girls, how stupid of me! I
forgot to ask. I was so interested in hearing about her condition that I
never thought of that."

"Well, our curiosity will soon be satisfied in that respect," said Nora,
"for here we are at the hospital."

"We should like to see the woman who was thrown from the automobile
yesterday afternoon," said Grace to the matron. "Is she able to receive
visitors?"

"Oh, yes," replied the matron. "She is sitting in a wheeled chair on the
second-story veranda. Miss Elton," she called to a nurse who had just
entered, "take these young women up to the veranda, they wish to see the
patient who has 47."

"What is her--" began Grace. But at that moment a nurse hurried in with
a communication for the matron. Grace waited a moment, bent on repeating
her question, but the nurse said rather impatiently, "This way, please,"
and the opportunity was lost.

The three girls began to feel a trifle diffident as they approached the
stranger who was seated in a wheeled chair in a corner of the veranda.

"Visitors to see you, madam," said the nurse curtly, halting before the
patient. "Be careful not to over-exert yourself," and was gone.

The woman in the chair turned quickly at the nurse's words, her eyes
resting upon the three girls.

Grace felt a queer little shiver creep up and down her spine. The
resemblance between the stranger and Mabel Allison was even more
remarkable to-day.

"How do you do, my dears," said the woman with a sweet smile, extending
her hand in turn to the three girls. "Under the circumstances I am sure
you will pardon me for not rising."

Her voice was clear and well modulated.

"Please don't think of it," cried Grace. "We saw the accident yesterday.
We were afraid you were seriously injured, and we couldn't resist coming
to see you. I am Grace Harlowe, and these are my friends Nora O'Malley
and Anne Pierson."

"I am very pleased to know you," responded the stranger. "It is so sweet
to know that you thought of me."

"Miss Harlowe was the first to reach you, after your accident," said
Anne, knowing that Grace herself would avoid mentioning it. "She held
your head in her lap until the doctor came."

"Then I am deeply indebted to you," returned the patient, again taking
Grace's hand in hers, "and I hope to know you better. I dearly love
young girls."

She motioned them to a broad settee near her chair.

"There!" she exclaimed. "Now I can look at all of you at the same time.
I am far more able to appreciate you to-day than I was at this time
yesterday. It was all so dreadful," she shuddered slightly, then
continued.

"I have never before been in an accident. I had been spending a week
with some friends of mine who have a place a few miles from here called
'Hawk's Nest.' Perhaps you know of it?"

The three girls exchanged glances. "Hawk's Nest" was one of the finest
estates in that part of the state, and the Gibsons who owned it had
unlimited wealth.

"I was summoned to New York on business and had barely time to make my
train. Mrs. Gibson's chauffeur had been running the car at a high rate
of speed, and just as we reached the little incline above the station,
the machine skidded, and we crashed into that tree. I felt a frightful
jar that seemed to loosen every bone in my body, and remembered nothing
further until I came back to earth again, here in the hospital."

"You opened your eyes, once, before the ambulance came," said Grace.

"Did I!" smiled the stranger. "I do not remember it. But, really, I am
very rude! I have not told you my name."

"It's coming," thought Grace, unconsciously bracing herself. Nora and
Anne had also straightened up, their eyes fastened on the speaker.

"My name is Allison," said the woman, wholly unaware of the bombshell
she had exploded. "I am a widow and quite alone in the world. My husband
died a number of years ago."

"I knew it, I knew it," muttered Grace.

"What did you say, my dear?" asked Mrs. Allison.

But Grace was silent. The woman was too nervous as yet to hear the news.
Perhaps after all the name was a mere coincidence.

Anne, understanding Grace's silence, hurriedly took up the conversation.

"Are you familiar with this part of the country?" she asked.

"I have not been here for a number of years," replied Mrs. Allison,
"although my friends, the Gibsons, have sent me repeated invitations.
Mrs. Gibson and I went through Vassar together."

"We expect to go to college next year," said Grace. "We are seniors in
Oakdale High School."

"The years a young girl spends in college are usually the happiest of
her whole life," said Mrs. Allison, with a sigh. "Everything is rose
colored. She forms high ideals that help to sweeten life for her long
after her college career is over. The friendships she forms are usually
worth while, too. Mrs. Gibson and I have kept track of one another even
since graduation. We have shared our joys and sorrows, and in my darkest
hours her loyal friendship and ready sympathy have been a heaven-sent
blessing to me."

"We three girls are sworn friends," said Grace, "and we have another
chum, too. She was very sorry that she could not come to-day. She will
be glad to know that you are so much better. Her name is Jessica Bright.
She was with us at the station yesterday."

"I should like to meet her," said Mrs. Allison, "and I thank her for her
interest in me. I really feel as though I had known you three girls for
a long time. I wish you would tell me more of yourselves and your school
life."

"There isn't much to tell," laughed Grace. "The life of a school-girl is
not crowded with many stirring events."

"You have no idea of how much has happened to Grace, Mrs. Allison, since
we began High School," interposed Nora. "She never will talk about the
splendid things she has done for other people. She is the president of
her class, the captain of the senior basketball team, too, and the most
popular girl in Oakdale High School."

"I refuse to plead guilty to the last statement!" exclaimed Grace.
"Believe me, Mrs. Allison, there are a dozen girls in High School who
are far more popular than I."

"There is only one Grace Harlowe," said Anne, with conviction.

"It is a case of two against one, Miss Grace," laughed Mrs. Allison. "I
insist upon hearing about some of your good works."

"It's really time for us to go, girls," said Grace, laughing a little.
She rose and held out her hand to the older woman.

"You are very cruel," smiled Mrs. Allison. "You arouse my curiosity and
then refuse to satisfy it. But you cannot escape so easily. You must
come to see me again before I leave here. I shall not try to return to
the Gibsons before Wednesday. I expect Mr. Gibson here to-morrow and he
will attend to my New York business for me. If I had accepted his offer
in the first place, I might have spared myself this accident. However, I
am glad, now. It has brought me charming friends. For I feel that we
shall become friends," she added, stretching out both hands. "When will
you come again?"

"On Tuesday afternoon after school," replied Grace promptly. "And we
will bring Miss Bright, too, unless she and Mabel have some other
engagement."

There was purpose in Grace's last remark. She wished to see if the name
"Mabel" made any impression upon her listener, and therefore kept her
eyes fixed upon Mrs. Allison.

As Grace carelessly mentioned the name she saw an expression of pain
flit across Mrs. Allison's fine face.

"I shall be glad to see Miss Bright," she said quietly. "Is the 'Mabel'
you speak of her sister?"

"No," replied Grace hastily, "she is a girl friend. May we bring her
with us?"

"Do so by all means," rejoined Mrs. Allison. "She bears the name I love
best in all the world." An expression of deep sadness crept into her
face as she uttered these words, and she looked past her callers with
unseeing eyes. "Good-bye, Mrs. Allison," said Grace, and the older woman
roused herself with a start.

"Good-bye, my dears," she responded. "Be sure to come to me on Tuesday."

"We'll be here," chorused the three girls. "Take good care of yourself."

Not a word was spoken until they reached the street.

"Well!" exclaimed Grace. "What do you think of the whole thing?"

"I think there are several people due to get a shock," said Nora
emphatically.

"I am sorry for Jessica," said Anne. "It will be very hard for her to
give Mabel up."

"Then you think--" said Grace, looking at Anne.

"I am reasonably sure," replied Anne quietly, "from what I have heard
and seen to-day that Mabel is no longer motherless."




CHAPTER III

WHAT HAPPENED IN ROOM FORTY-SEVEN


As the last period of study drew to an end on Tuesday afternoon, the
hearts of the four girl chums beat a trifle faster than usual. What if
after all their conjectures were to prove erroneous, and Mabel Allison
was not the long-lost daughter of the woman in the hospital? All they
had to go by was the remarkable resemblance between the two, and the
slight emotion displayed by Mrs. Allison at the mention of Mabel's name.

When Grace had repeated the details of their call at the hospital to
Jessica, the latter had turned very white, but had said bravely, "I
