
As soon as Kitty had left the room, Alice turned to her mother.

"Are you going to encourage her in all her follies?" she asked.

"My dear Alice, I don't encourage her in her follies; but there is no
use in pulling the poor child up short every moment. She expresses
herself quite correctly when she says that she is wild; she is not
broken in. But to break in Kitty Malone too thoroughly might also break
her heart, and that would never do."

"Break her heart! I don't believe she has got one," said Alice. "But,
there, I can't talk any longer on the subject."

It occurred to her that if she started immediately for school she might
call for Bessie Challoner, and tell her what had occurred. Bessie's
sympathy would be very sweet, and Alice determined to secure it if
possible. Accordingly she left the house, and at about a quarter to nine
found herself at Bessie's house. Bessie was standing on the steps
drawing on her gloves.

"Why, Alice, what has brought you?" she cried; "and where is Kitty?"

"Oh, don't mention Kitty, if you don't want to rile me beyond
endurance," said Alice.

"I always do rile you when I mention her," answered Bessie; "but where
is she all the same?"

"With mother--she is coming to school with mother."

"With your mother--to Middleton School! What do you mean?"

"Only that mother has to bring her. She has got into no end of a row."

"Has she? Oh, I am sorry," said Bessie.

"Come out, Bessie," said Alice. "It is a little early to get to school,
but we may as well walk slowly, and I will tell you all about it as we
go along."

This Alice did, enlarging much upon Kitty's dress, her crimson blouse,
her bare arms, the college cap on her head, and her little shoes with
the buckles and rosettes.

"She must have looked very pretty," said Bessie.

"Bessie! you really are enough to distract any one. Don't you see the
impropriety of it? Don't you see that this will get all over the place?
People will say that a Middleton girl dressed so unsuitably, so loudly,
that--Oh, don't you see it?"

"I don't see anything in it except a silly, foolish, girlish act,
uncommonly like Kitty Malone," said Bessie. "You are determined to make
mountains out of molehills, Alice."

"No, I am not," said Alice. "Anyhow," she added in a tone of triumph,
"Miss Sherrard thinks it disgraceful, and so does Miss Worrick. I
suppose you will not go against the opinions of your own mistresses,
will you, Bessie?"

"No, no; only I am sorry," said Bessie.

At that moment the two girls reached the school. Gwin Harley was just
driving up in her pony-chaise, and Elma, as usual, was hovering near.

"Come here, Elma," said Bessie. "We have something to tell you."

"What is it?" asked Elma eagerly.

"It is this," cried Alice. "Kitty Malone has got into the most awful
scrape. She went out last night with Fred in her red blouse--you know
that silk blouse she is so fond of wearing?"

"I know; it is sweetly pretty," said Elma.

"Oh, there you are, praising everything she does! Well, anyhow, she wore
it, and her arms were bare to the elbow, and she stuck one of the
college caps on her head. What will Dr. Butler say? She went with Fred
to see you, by the way, Elma. She seemed in an awful hurry to find you.
She was in trouble about her brother, and she said you could help her."

"Oh, nonsense!" said Elma. But she had an uncomfortable feeling as the
words were said. Her thoughts naturally flew to the eight pounds which
Kitty had lent her. Was it possible that Kitty wanted that lovely, that
beautiful money back again? Elma had felt almost as if she were living
in fairyland from the time that money had been in her possession. She
would part with it whenever the day came with extreme reluctance.

"Well," she said, "I cannot imagine what she wanted with me; but what
happened?"

"Some rough boys outside the 'Spotted Leopard' were rude to her, and she
knocked one of them down; then Miss Worrick came up and took her back to
our house; and Miss Sherrard has written this morning to say that mother
is to bring Kitty up to school, and that she must have the whole thing
explained. There's a nice state of things!"

At that moment the great gong was heard, and the girls were obliged to
troop into the school. Prayers were conducted as usual in the great
hall, and Elma, Gwin, Alice, and Bessie looked in every imaginable
corner for a sight of Kitty Malone. She was not present, however, and
they were obliged afterward to go to their class-rooms without having
caught sight of her beaming and brilliant face.

Meanwhile Mrs. Denvers and Kitty were waiting for Miss Sherrard in the
head-mistress' private sitting-room. Kitty went to the window and looked
out.

"I like Miss Sherrard," she said, turning to Mrs. Denvers as she spoke.
"I am really sorry to annoy her. It is about a fortnight ago since she
spoke to me in this very room; she spoke so kindly, and told me that I
had got talents. I was astonished, for I thought she meant cleverness,
and I have always been told that I am a dunce; she said that she knew I
had good abilities, and that besides I had plenty of other
talents--nice dress, and good looks." Kitty colored and flashed a
half-defiant, half-roguish glance at Mrs. Denvers. "She also spoke about
my money as a talent. Oh, dear, I felt half-conceited, half-delighted
when I left her, and I made up my mind that I would be good; but it
seems useless, more than useless. Oh, my poor money, my poor money! I
have got none of it left now, or at least scarcely any."

"My dear child, no money!" exclaimed Mrs. Denvers. "Impossible. When
you spoke to me last you had about fifteen pounds. Kitty, my dear, it is
wrong for you to squander money in that fashion."

"But I haven't squandered it, Mrs. Denvers, not really. I have not got
it with me, it is true; but most of it is safe, only I must not talk
about that. There's another secret for you. What an awful place England
is! Oh, dear, dear! I am in a muddle about everything. I can't bear to
stand in this room and remember Miss Sherrard's talk. Fancy her saying
that even my dress was a talent! Now there's something in favor of my
nice red cotton and my dear red silk blouse; and fancy her saying still
more that my looks, my pretty face, was a talent! Mrs. Denvers, do you
think me pretty, very, very, very pretty?"

"No, Kitty dear, not so wonderfully pretty as that; but you have an
attractive face. Miss Sherrard is quite right; beauty is a gift,
although it used to be my old-fashioned idea that the less girls were
told about their looks the better."

"Oh, but that's all exploded, love," cried Kitty. "In these days girls
are told when they are pretty just as much as they are told when they
are clever. Now, I'm not clever, not a bit. I'm a dunce, an out and out
dunce; but at any rate I've got a pretty face, and I promised that I
would use my talents for--for the best--" Here she lowered her face and
a thoughtful and beautiful expression came into the great big eyes. "But
it's no use," she added. "I am bothered entirely every day of my life,
and I am just going from bad to worse."

"Hush, Kitty, you must not talk in that way Hark! I think I hear Miss
Sherrard's step." As Mrs. Denvers spoke the door was slowly opened and
Miss Sherrard, accompanied by Miss Worrick, came in. Miss Sherrard was
just about to speak; but before she could utter a word Kitty rushed to
her.

"I have failed, darling; I have failed entirely," she gasped out, "I
meant to do right, but I did wrong; I have become worse and worse,
although I cannot see the wrong myself. But Miss Worrick has found it
out. I want to give up the school, darling, and to go back to Old
Ireland. They don't think so badly of me in Old Ireland, and they'll let
me dress as I like and go out when I like; and--and, I am not fit for
England, dear. Please write to dad and tell him so--tell him I am a
failure as far as England is concerned. He'll understand, dear old man.
He'll be sorry, but he'll understand. Let me go home again, please, Miss
Sherrard--let me go home!"

"No, Kitty, I shall do nothing of the kind," answered Miss Sherrard.
"You must not kiss me just now, my dear; no, I am not pleased at all.
You did very wrong to go out as late as you did last night. You broke
one of the strictest rules of the school, and have brought discredit
upon us all. Miss Worrick, will you please relate exactly what
occurred?"

Miss Worrick now stood up and made as much as she possibly could of poor
Kitty's little escapade in front of the "Spotted Leopard." The story so
described made anything but a pleasant picture. Miss Sherrard who was
tenacious with regard to the school, and most anxious that each and all
of her girls should bear the highest character for quiet and orderly
behavior, was deeply annoyed.

"Kitty," she said, "I have always been strangely unwilling to punish
you. I have never ceased to remember that you have not been brought up
like most of the girls here--that you have enjoyed a freer, wilder life.
On that account I have tried to be very patient with you, my dear; but I
am sorry to say that I have no alternative now. I must punish you, and
severely. For the next week you are to stay in during the morning
recess, and after school is over will remain here day by day to learn
different tasks which will be set you. Further, my dear--and this, I am
sure, will be the most severe part of your punishment--your school
companions are absolutely forbidden to speak to you, and you must give
your word of honor that you will hold no communication with any of them
until the week has expired."

This very severe sentence made poor Kitty quite collapse. She sat down
on the nearest chair and her rosy face turned pale.

"Oh, I cannot give my word of honor," she gasped. "I must speak. I must
at least speak to Elma Lewis."

"You are not to speak to any of your companions, with the exception of
Alice Denvers, in whose house you live," said Miss Sherrard. "Kitty, if
you disobey me, I shall have to expel you, and then indeed you will be
disgraced for life. My dear you must bow to my authority--you are to
speak to no girl in the school. I trust to your honor to obey me in this
particular. If you are expelled--and it will certainly happen if I find
that you are not keeping your word--you will be branded for life."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE LOST PACKET.


After parting with Kitty, Miss Sherrard went back to the school. As she
did so, she said a few words to Miss Worrick. The result of this was
that all the girls were summoned to appear in the great central hall.
When there they were told very briefly--Miss Sherrard standing by her
desk as she spoke--that Miss Malone was in disgrace.

"Miss Malone has done something which obliges me to put her into
Coventry for a week," said the head-mistress. "Her schoolfellows are
forbidden to have any intercourse with her. If she attempts to speak to
any girl belonging to Middleton School, with the exception of Alice
Denvers, in whose house she is living, that girl holds communication
with her at her own peril. Such a girl stands a grave chance of being
expelled from the school."

Miss Sherrard then descended from her platform, and the usual work of
the morning went on.

It may easily be guessed that Kitty Malone, and Kitty Malone only, was
the subject of conversation during recess. What had she done? Why was
Miss Sherrard so very severe on her? It was not often that a Middleton
girl was given such a very terrible punishment. Alice who knew all about
it, and Bessie, who knew a little, were therefore in immense request.
Girls came up to these two in groups to find out what was the matter;
and when they heard from Alice the very glaring account of what Kitty
had really done on the previous night, they listened with open mouths,
giving vent to their feelings in different ways. The larger number
pronounced Kitty's conduct to be the height of all that was disgraceful.

"Is it true," said one, "that she really wore the college cap? Oh, what
will Dr. Butler say if he finds it out? Alice, you cannot mean that she
had bare arms, bare from the elbows? Oh, impossible!"

"But Alice," said another, "tell me, did she really, really, knock one
of those horrid boys down?"

"Yes; like a ninepin, so Fred says," replied Alice. "Oh, it was
disgraceful. Don't talk of it any more; my cheeks burn whenever I think
of it."

"But after all, Alice"--said Gwin, who came up at that moment. Gwin's
tone sounded quiet, stately, penetrating; it rose above the din which
the other girls were making. "After all, Alice, don't you think that you
were to blame too? Why did you not let Kitty get into your room and
hers? If she wanted to go for a walk it was surely natural enough to ask
for her hat and jacket; you refused to give them to her."

"Of course I refused," said Alice, who did not at all wish to share any
of poor Kitty's blame. "Kitty knew perfectly well that she was breaking
one of the school rules as well as one of our home rules by going out at
such an hour--it was between nine and ten o'clock. As to her going
without her hat and jacket, such an idea never entered my wildest
dreams. No; bad as I thought Kitty, I did not think her bad enough for
that. There is no excuse for her. She is well punished, and for my part
I cannot but rejoice."

"For my part," said Gwin gravely, "I am extremely sorry. I like Kitty; I
like her much. She has her faults of course; she is different from any
of the rest of us; she is wild and daring and eccentric; but she is also
the soul of honesty and candor. She is very affectionate and very
generous. She has not been brought up in the least as we have been.
Things we think wrong are not considered wrong by Kitty Malone. As she
herself expresses it, she is a little bit wild. Oh, I am sorry for her,
dreadfully sorry; and I think Miss Sherrard has been too severe. I
wonder at Miss Sherrard. I thought she understood Kitty. She spoke to
mother so kindly about her yesterday; she said there was a great deal of
good in the Irish girl, as she called her; and also said that she was
very glad that I was her friend. Although Miss Sherrard does not know
any of the rules of the Tug-of-war Society, she naturally knows that we
have formed it. She told me that she could not express how pleased she
was at our having asked Kitty to become a member. Girls, I wish I could
speak to Miss Sherrard. I think I will. It will break Kitty's heart to
be kept in Coventry for a week."

"I doubt if she has a heart," said Alice. "It is all very fine to talk
of her affectionate ways; for my part I call them nothing but impetuous.
She is vain, conceited, and selfish; and provided she gets her own way
does not care what prejudices she rides roughshod over. Oh, I have no
patience with her."

"But," said Bessie Challoner, who was standing stolidly by, looking
very determined and very quiet, "what did Kitty want out at that hour?
Kitty with all her faults, would not break the rules unless she had a
strong motive. What could have been the matter?"

"And why did she want to see you, Elma?" said Gwin. "Can you throw any
light on the subject?"

Elma colored first and then turned pale. Several pairs of eyes were
immediately fixed on her; one girl looked at the other, and a few nodded
significantly. Elma observed the looks and turned away in hot fear.

"I don't know what she wanted with me," she muttered.

The rest of the school hours passed as usual, and just before dinner,
when the great school broke up for the day, Kitty was still the subject
for conversation. Gwin lingered a little behind the others, and Bessie
stopped to ask why she was doing so.

"I have almost made up my mind," she said, "to plead with Miss Sherrard
for Kitty."

"Oh Gwin; how noble of you. I respect you, I do from my heart; but I
tell you what. Would it not be better for us to do something of this
sort? Why should not all the Tug-of-war girls plead for her? That would
seem more effective and stronger, would it not? Suppose we wrote a
letter, a sort of round-robin, and sent it to Miss Sherrard, begging of
her to forgive Kitty this time; and taking upon ourselves the
responsibility of her future conduct. Oh, I say, Gwin, could we not do
it?"

"It is a splendid thought," said Gwin; "much--much better than my
talking to Miss Sherrard alone. Look here, Bessie; could we not manage
to have a meeting of the Tug-of-war at my house this evening? Oh,
there's Elma; I'll ask her at once. Elma come here."

Elma who was just shouldering her books preparatory to leaving the
school, turned when she heard Gwin's voice.

"What is it, Gwin?" she asked; her manner was a little nervous.

Gwin hastily repeated Bessie's daring suggestion.

"Oh, I'll come of course," said Elma; but there was a certain amount of
apathy in her tone.

"And I will secure Alice; I am getting quite to dislike Alice, though,"
said Bessie.

Gwin promised to write to the other girls at once, and it was finally
arranged that a meeting should be held at Harley Grove that evening
between four and five o'clock.

Elma walked home alone, musing much over the aspect of affairs.

"I wonder what Kitty did want with me," she said to herself. "Doubtless
it had something to do with that money. Kitty was in despair, so it
seems. Oh, there's Fred Denvers; perhaps he can tell me something?
Hullo, Fred!"

