
But one night the Master came alone into the Forest. His Face was pale
and wet with tears. He fell upon His knees and prayed. The Tree heard
Him, and all the Forest was still. In the morning there was a sound of
rude voices and a clashing of swords.

[Illustration: _Hofmann._]

Strange men plied their axes with cruel vigor, and the Tree was hewn to
the ground. Its beautiful branches were cut away, and its soft, thick
foliage was strewn to the winds. The Trees of the Forest wept.

The cruel men dragged the hewn Tree away, and the Forest saw it no more.

But the Night Wind that swept down from the City of the Great King
stayed that night in the Forest awhile to say that it had seen that day
a Cross raised on Calvary,--the Tree on which was nailed the Body of the
dying Master.

_Eugene Field._

From "A Little Book of Profitable Tales." Published by Charles
Scribner's Sons.


[Footnote 004: Copyright, 1889, by Eugene Field.]


       *       *       *       *       *




_46_



THE HOLY CITY.


       Last night I lay a-sleeping; there came a dream so fair;--
       I stood in old Jerusalem, beside the Temple there;
       I heard the children singing, and ever as they sang
       Methought the voice of Angels
       From Heaven in answer rang;--
       Methought the voice of Angels
       From Heaven in answer rang.
       Jerusalem, Jerusalem, lift up your gates and sing
       Hosanna in the highest! Hosanna to your King!

       And then methought my dream was changed;--
       The streets no longer rang
       Hushed were the glad Hosannas the little children sang.
       The sun grew dark with mystery,
       The morn was cold and chill,
       As the shadow of a cross arose upon a lonely hill;--
       As the shadow of a cross arose upon a lonely hill.
       Jerusalem, Jerusalem, hark! how the Angels sing
       Hosanna in the highest! Hosanna to your King!

       And once again the scene was changed--
       New earth there seemed to be;
       I saw the Holy City beside the tideless sea;
       The light of God was on its streets,
       The gates were open wide,
       And all who would might enter,
       And no one was denied.
       No need of moon or stars by night,
       Nor sun to shine by day;
       It was the New Jerusalem, that would not pass away,--
       It was the New Jerusalem, that would not pass away.
       Jerusalem, Jerusalem, sing, for the night is o'er,
       Hosanna in the highest! Hosanna forevermore!



       *       *       *       *       *




_47_


trea' son
eu' lo gies
de bat' ed
phi los' o phy
in ge nu' i ty
ap pro' pri ate
con' sum ma ted



THE FEAST OF TONGUES.


Xanthus invited a large company to dinner, and Aesop was ordered to
furnish the choicest dainties that money could procure. The first course
consisted of tongues, cooked in different ways and served with
appropriate sauces. This gave rise to much mirth and many witty remarks
by the guests. The second course was also nothing but tongues, and so
with the third and fourth. This seemed to go beyond a joke, and Xanthus
demanded in an angry manner of Aesop, "Did I not tell you to provide the
choicest dainties that money could procure?" "And what excels the
tongue?" replied Aesop, "It is the channel of learning and philosophy.
By it addresses and eulogies are made, and commerce carried on,
contracts executed, and marriages consummated. Nothing is equal to the
tongue." The company applauded Aesop's wit, and good feeling was
restored.

"Well," said Xanthus to the guests, "pray do me the favor of dining with
me again to-morrow. I have a mind to change the feast; to-morrow," said
he, turning to Aesop, "provide us with the worst meat you can find." The
next day the guests assembled as before, and to their astonishment and
the anger of Xanthus nothing but tongues was provided. "How, sir," said
Xanthus, "should tongues be the best of meat one day and the worst
another?" "What," replied Aesop, "can be worse than the tongue? What
wickedness is there under the sun that it has not a part in? Treasons,
violence, injustice, fraud, are debated and resolved upon, and
communicated by the tongue. It is the ruin of empires, cities, and of
private friendships." The company were more than ever struck by Aesop's
ingenuity, and they interceded for him with his master.

_From "Aesop's Fables."_


       *       *       *       *       *


XANTHUS, a Greek poet and historian, who lived in the sixth century
before Christ.

Write the plurals of the following words, and tell how they are formed
in each case:

dainty, sauce, eulogy, feast, city, chief, calf, day, lily, copy, loaf,
roof, half, valley, donkey.

What words are made emphatic by contrast in the following sentence: "How
should tongues be the best of meat one day and the worst another?"

Memorize what Aesop said in praise of the tongue, and what he said in
dispraise of it.


Memory Gem:


"If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man. The tongue is
a fire, a world of iniquity. By it we bless God and the Father; and by
it we curse men who are made after the likeness of God."

_From "Epistle of St. James."_


       *       *       *       *       *




_48_


ap' pe tite
ha rangued'
sus pend' ed
min' strel sy



THE NIGHTINGALE AND THE GLOWWORM.


       A nightingale, that all day long
       Had cheered the village with his song,
       Nor yet at eve his note suspended,
       Nor yet when eventide was ended,
       Began to feel, as well he might,
       The keen demands of appetite;
       When, looking eagerly around,
       He spied far off, upon the ground,
       A something shining in the dark,
       And knew the glowworm by his spark;
       So, stooping down from hawthorn top,
       He thought to put him in his crop.

       The worm, aware of his intent,
       Harangued him thus, right eloquent:
       "Did you admire my lamp," quoth he,
       "As much as I your minstrelsy,
       You would abhor to do me wrong
       As much as I to spoil your song:
       For 'twas the self-same Power Divine
       Taught you to sing and me to shine;
       That you with music, I with light,
       Might beautify and cheer the night."
       The songster heard this short oration,
       And, warbling out his approbation,
       Released him, as my story tells,
       And found a supper somewhere else.

_William Cowper._


Why did the nightingale feel "The keen demands of appetite?"

Do you admire the eloquent speech that the worm made to the bird? Study
it by heart. Copy it from memory. Compare your copy with the printed
page as to spelling, capitals and punctuation.


Memory Gems:



       I would not enter on my list of friends
       (Though graced with polished manners and fine sense,
       Yet wanting sensibility) the man
       Who needlessly sets foot upon a worm.
       An inadvertent step may crush the snail
       That crawls at evening in the public path;
       But he that has humanity, forewarned,
       Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.


_William Cowper._



       Turn, turn thy hasty foot aside,
         Nor crush that helpless worm!
       The frame thy wayward looks deride
         Required a God to form.

       The common Lord of all that move.
         From whom thy being flowed,
       A portion of His boundless love
         On that poor worm bestowed.

       Let them enjoy their little day,
         Their humble bliss receive;
       Oh! do not lightly take away
         The life thou canst not give!


_Thomas Gisborne._


       *       *       *       *       *




_49_


mar' gin
pitch' er
cup' board
breathed
di' a mond
quiv' er ing



JACK FROST.


       Jack Frost looked forth one still, clear night,
       And whispered, "Now I shall be out of sight;
       So, through the valley, and over the height,
         In silence I'll take my way.
       I will not go on like that blustering train,
       The wind and the snow, the hail and the rain,
       Who make so much bustle and noise in vain;
         But I'll be as busy as they!"

       Then he flew to the mountain, and powdered its crest;
       He lit on the trees, and their boughs he dressed
       In diamond beads; and over the breast
         Of the quivering lake he spread
       A coat of mail, that it need not fear
       The glittering point of many a spear,
       Which he hung on its margin, far and near,
         Where a rock could rear its head.

       He went to the windows of those who slept,
       And over each pane, like a fairy, crept:
       Wherever he breathed, wherever he stepped,
         By the morning light were seen
       Most beautiful things!--there were flowers and trees;
       There were bevies of birds, and swarms of bees;
       There were cities with temples and towers; and these
         All pictured in silvery sheen!

       But he did one thing that was hardly fair;
       He peeped in the cupboard, and finding there
       That all had forgotten for him to prepare.--
         "Now, just to set them a-thinking,
       I'll bite this basket of fruit," said he;
       "This costly pitcher I'll burst in three;
       And the glass of water they've left for me,
       Shall '_tchick_,' to tell them I'm drinking."


_Hannah F. Gould._


       *       *       *       *       *


CREST, top or summit.

COAT OF MAIL, a garment of iron or steel worn by warriors in olden
times.

BEVIES, flocks or companies.

SHEEN, brightness.

TCHICK a combination of letters whose pronunciation is supposed to
resemble the sound of breaking glass.

What did Jack Frost do when he went to the mountain?

How did he dress the boughs of the trees? What did he spread over the
lake? Why?

What could be seen after he had worked on "the windows of those who
slept?"

What mischief did he do in the cupboard, and why?

Is Jack Frost an artist? In what kind of weather does he work? Why does
he work generally at night?


       *       *       *       *       *
