Smiling Pool. You know an oracle is one who is very wise.

Bobby Coon helped Grandfather Frog up on the Big Rock, and when he had
made himself comfortable, Mrs. Muskrat told him all about Farmer Brown's
boy and his traps, and how Jerry had been caught in one by the tail, and
she ended by asking for his advice, because they all knew that he was so
wise.

When she said this, Grandfather Frog puffed himself up until it seemed
as if his white and yellow waistcoat would surely burst. He sat very
still for a while and gazed straight at jolly, round, red Mr. Sun
without blinking once. Then he spoke in a very deep voice.

"To-morrow morning at sunrise I will tell you what to do," said he. And
not another word could they get out of him.



CHAPTER IV: Grandfather Frog's Plan

Just as Old Mother West Wind and her Merry Little Breezes came down from
the Purple Hills, and jolly, round, red Mr. Sun threw his nightcap off
and began his daily climb up in the blue sky, Great-Grandfather Frog
climbed up on the Big Rock in the Smiling Pool. Early as he was, all the
little people who live along the Laughing Brook and around the Smiling
Pool were waiting for him. Bobby Coon had found two traps set by Farmer
Brown's boy, and Billy Mink had almost stepped in a third. No one felt
safe any more, yet no one knew what to do. So they all waited for the
advice of Great-Grandfather Frog, who, you know, is accounted very, very
wise.

Grandfather Frog cleared his throat. "Chugarum!" said he. "You must find
all the traps that Farmer Brown's boy has set."

"How are we going to do it?" asked Bobby Coon.

"By looking for them," replied Grandfather Frog tartly.

Bobby Coon looked foolish and slipped out of sight behind his mother.

"All the Coons and all the Minks must search along the banks of the
Laughing Brook, and all the Muskrats and all the Otters must search
along the banks of the Smiling Pool. You must use your eyes and your
noses. When you find things good to eat where you have never found them
before, watch out! When you get the first whiff of the man-smell, watch
out! Billy Mink, you are small and quick, and your eyes are sharp. You
sit here on the Big Rock until you see Farmer Brown's boy coming. Then
go hide in the bulrushes where you can watch him, but where he cannot
see you. Follow him everywhere he goes around the Smiling Pool or along
the Laughing Brook. Without knowing it, he will show you where every
trap is hidden.

"When all the traps have been found, drop a stick or a stone in each.
That will spring them, and then they will be harmless. Then you can
bury them deep in the mud. But don't eat any of the food until you have
sprung all of the traps, for just as likely as not you will get caught.
When all the traps have been sprung, why not bring all the good things
to eat which you find around them to the Big Rock and have a grand
feast?"

"Hurrah for Grandfather Frog! That's a great idea!" shouted Little Joe
Otter, turning a somersault in the water.

Every one agreed with Little Joe Otter, and immediately they began to
plan a grand hunt for the traps of Farmer Brown's boy. The Muskrats
and the Otters started to search the banks of the Smiling Pool, and
the Coons and the Minks, all but Billy, started for the Laughing Brook.
Billy climbed up on the Big Rock to watch, and Grandfather Frog slowly
swam back to his big green lily-pad to wait for some foolish green flies
for his breakfast.



CHAPTER V: A Busy Day At The Smiling Pool

Everybody was excited. Yes, Sir, everybody in the Smiling Pool and along
the Laughing Brook was just bubbling over with excitement. Even Spotty
the Turtle, who usually takes everything so calmly that some people
think him stupid, climbed up on the highest point of an old log where he
could see what was going on. Only Grandfather Frog, sitting on his big
green lily-pad and watching for foolish green flies for his breakfast,
appeared not to know that something unusual was going on. Really, he
was just as much excited as the rest, but because he is very old and
accounted very, very wise, it would not do for him to show it.

What was it all about? Why, all the Minks and the Coons and the Otters
and the Muskrats, who live and play around the Smiling Pool and the
Laughing Brook, were hunting for traps. Yes, Sir, they were hunting for
traps set by Farmer Brown's boy, just as Grandfather Frog had advised
them to.

Jerry Muskrat and Little Joe Otter were hunting together. They were
swimming along close to shore just where the Laughing Brook leaves the
Smiling Pool, when Jerry wrinkled up his funny little nose and stopped
swimming. Sniff, sniff, sniff, went Jerry Muskrat. Then little cold
shivers ran down his backbone and way out to the tip of his tail.

"What is it?" asked Little Joe Otter.

"It's the man-smell," whispered Jerry.

Just then Little Joe Otter gave a long sniff. "My, I smell fish!" he
cried, his eyes sparkling, and started in the direction from which the
smell came. He swam faster than Jerry, and in a minute he shouted in
delight.

"Hi, Jerry! Some one's left a fish on the edge of the bank: What a
feast!"

Jerry hurried as fast as he could swim, his eyes popping out with
fright, for the nearer he got, the stronger grew that dreadful
man-smell. "Don't touch it," he panted. "Don't touch it, Joe Otter!"

Little Joe laughed. "What's the matter, Jerry? 'Fraid I'll eat it all up
before you get here?" he asked, as he reached out for the fish.

"Stop!" shrieked Jerry, and gave Little Joe a push, just as the latter
touched the fish.

Snap! A pair of wicked steel jaws flew together and caught Little Joe
Otter by a claw of one toe. If it hadn't been for Jerry's push, he would
have been caught by a foot.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" cried Little Joe Otter.

"Next time I guess you'll remember what Grandfather Frog said about
watching out when you find things to eat where they never were before,"
said Jerry, as he helped Little Joe pull himself free from the trap. But
he left the claw behind and had a dreadfully sore toe as a result.
Then they buried the trap deep down in the mud and started to look for
another.

All around the Smiling Pool and along the Laughing Brook their cousins
and uncles and aunts and friends were just as busy, and every once in a
while some one would have just as narrow an escape as Little Joe Otter.
And all the time up at the farmhouse Farmer Brown's boy was planning
what he would do with the skins of the little animals he was sure he
would catch in his traps.



CHAPTER VI: Farmer Brown's Boy Is Puzzled

Farmer Brown's boy was whistling merrily as he tramped down across the
Green Meadows. The Merry Little Breezes saw him coming, and they raced
over to the Smiling Pool to tell Billy Mink. Farmer Brown's boy was
coming to visit his traps. He was very sure that he would find Billy
Mink or Little Joe Otter, or Jerry Muskrat, or perhaps Bobby Coon.

Billy Mink was sitting on top of the Big Rock. He saw the Merry Little
Breezes racing across the Green Meadows, and behind them he saw Farmer
Brown's boy. Billy Mink dived head first into the Smiling Pool. Then
he swam over to Jerry Muskrat's house and warned Jerry. Together they
hunted up Little Joe Otter, and then the three little scamps in brown
hid in the bulrushes, where they could watch Farmer Brown's boy.

The first place Farmer Brown's boy visited was Jerry Muskrat's old log.
Very cautiously he peeped over the edge of the bank. The trap was gone!

"Hurrah!" shouted Farmer Brown's boy. He was very much excited, as he
caught hold of the end of the chain, which fastened it to the old log.
He was sure that at last he had caught Jerry Muskrat. When he pulled the
trap up, it was empty. Between the jaws were a few hairs and a little
bit of skin, which Jerry Muskrat had left there when he sprung the trap
with his tail.

Farmer Brown's boy was disappointed. "Well, I'll get him to-morrow,
anyway," said he to himself. Then he went on to his next trap; it was
nowhere to be seen. When he pulled the chain he was so excited that he
trembled. The trap did not come up at once. He pulled and pulled, and
then suddenly up it came, all covered with mud. In it was one little
claw from Little Joe Otter. Very carefully Farmer Brown's boy set the
trap again. If he could have looked over in the bulrushes and have
seen Little Joe Otter and Billy Mink and Jerry Muskrat watching him and
tickling and laughing, he would not have been so sure that next time he
would catch Little Joe Otter.

All around the Smiling Pool and then up and down the Laughing Brook
Farmer Brown's boy tramped, and each trap he found sprung and buried in
the mud. He had stopped whistling by this time, and there was a puzzled
frown on his freckled face. What did it mean? Could some other boy have
found all his traps and played a trick by springing all of them? The
more he thought about it, the more puzzled he became. You see, he did
not know anything about the busy day the Minks and the Otters and the
Muskrats and the Coons had spent the day before.

Old Grandfather Frog, sitting on his big green lily-pad, smoothed down
his white and yellow waistcoat and winked up at jolly, round, red Mr.
Sun as Farmer Brown's boy tramped off across the Green Meadows.

"Chugarum!" said Grandfather Frog, as he snapped up a foolish green fly.
"Much good it will do you to set those traps again!"

Then Grandfather Frog called to Billy Mink and sent him to tell all the
other little people of the Smiling Pool and the Laughing Brook that they
must hurry and spring all the traps again as they had before.

This time it was easy, because they knew just where the traps were, so
all day long they dropped sticks and stones into the traps and once more
sprung them. Then they prepared for a grand feast of the good things to
eat which Farmer Brown's boy had left, scattered around the traps.



CHAPTER VII: Jerry Muskrat Makes A Discovery

The beautiful springtime had brought a great deal of happiness to the
Smiling Pool, as it had to the Green Meadows and to the Green Forest.
Great-Grandfather Frog, who had slept the long winter away in his own
special bed way down in the mud, had waked up with an appetite so great
that for a while it seemed as if he could think of nothing but his
