"I am a respectable merchant from Portland. I was never so insulted in
my life," said Fairfax.

"If the charge proves groundless, I will make you an ample apology,"
said the officer.

Fairfax was compelled to submit to the search. He cursed his stupidity
in not throwing away the worthless pocketbook, but this he had
neglected to do, and, of course, it was very significant evidence
against him. Not only was this found, but the variety of keys already
referred to.

"You carry a great many keys," said the officer.

"It isn't a crime to carry keys, is it?" demanded Fairfax, sullenly.

"Not if no improper use is made of them. I suspect that one of them
will open the door into the next chamber."

The keys were tried, and one did open the door. As the light flashed
into the room, Andy got up.

"Come here, young man," said the officer. "Can you identify that
pocketbook?"

"I can," said Andy.

"Is it yours?"

"When I went to bed, it was in the pocket of my coat, lying on that
chair."

"It is certainly a wonderful pocketbook. I have just found it in that
gentleman's pocket."

Fairfax's eyes were bent malignantly upon Andy. A light flashed upon
him. Now, he recognized him.

"I know you," he said. "You are the man that stopped Colonel Preston,
and tried to rob him."

"You lie, curse you!" exclaimed Fairfax, springing forward, and trying
to throw himself upon Andy. But he was not quick enough. The officer
had interposed, and seized him by the collar.

"Not so fast, Mr. Marvin, or whatever your name is. We don't allow any
such games as that. Sit down till I want you."

The baffled adventurer was jerked into a chair, from which he
continued to eye Andy savagely.

"What's that affair you were talking about, young man?" asked the
officer.

Andy briefly related his adventure with Fairfax on a former occasion.

"I'll trouble you to come with me, Mr. Marvin, or Fairfax," said the
officer. "There's another hotel where lodgings are provided for such
as you."

Resistance was useless, and the detected thief, though his name was
registered at two hotels, was compelled to occupy a less agreeable
room at the station-house. How he was detected will be explained in
the next chapter.




CHAPTER XXIX
A STARTLING EVENT


Sometimes, the mere presence of a person in the room is sufficient to
interrupt even sound repose. At all events, whether it was the
entrance of Fairfax, acting in some mysterious way upon Andy, or the
light that streamed into the room, his slumber was disturbed, and his
eyes opened just as the adventurer was retiring, with his supposed
booty.

Our hero did not immediately take in the situation. He was naturally a
little bewildered, being just aroused from sleep, but in a short time
the real state of the case dawned upon him.

"By the powers!" he said to himself, "it's that man that went to the
museum with me! He saw my money, and he came in for it! I'll get up
and see."

Quietly and noiselessly he got out of bed, and, going to the chair,
felt in his pockets, and so discovered the loss of the stuffed
pocketbook.

Andy wanted to laugh, but forbore, lest the sound should be heard in
the next room.

"It's a good joke on the dirty thafe!" said Andy, to himself. "He's
welcome to all the money, he's got--it won't carry him far, I'm
thinkin'."

Prudence suggested another thought. When Fairfax found out the
worthlessness of his booty, would he not come back and search for the
real treasure?

"If he does, I'll fight him," thought Andy.

Still, he knew the conflict would be unequal, since the other was
considerably his superior in strength. However, Andy determined that,
come what might, he would defend his trust, "or perish in the
attempt." But, while he was coming to this determination, he heard the
door of the adjoining chamber open softly, and then he could hear
steps along the corridor. Evidently, the thief had not found out the
actual character of his booty, but was going off under the impression
that it was valuable.

"Maybe he'll come back," thought Andy. "I guess I'd better go down and
give notice at the desk. Then, if he comes back, he'll get into hot
water."

He hastily dressed himself, and, locking his door, went downstairs.
First, however, he removed the money from under his pillow, and put it
into his pocket. He found the clerk at the desk.

"Has the man that came in with me gone out?" asked Andy.

"Mr. Marvin?"

"Yes."

"He went out about five minutes ago."

"Did he say anything about coming back?"

"He said it would be late when he returned. He asked me if we kept
open after twelve. Did you want to find him?"

"I should like to have the police find him," said Andy.

"How is that?" asked the clerk, surprised.

"He has robbed me."

"Did you leave your door unlocked?"

"No; but there was a door between our rooms. He opened it, and stole a
pocketbook from the pocket of my coat."

"While you were asleep?"

"Yes; but I awoke just in time to see him go through the door."

"How much money was there in it?"

"That's the joke of it," said Andy, laughing; "there was no money at
all, only some folds of paper. He got hold of the wrong pocketbook."

Thereupon, he told the story of the "drop game," of which he came near
being a victim, and what a useful turn the bogus treasure had done
him.

"There's the right pocketbook," he said, in conclusion. "I wish you
would take care of it for me till to-morrow. The money isn't mine, and
I don't want to run any more risk with it."

"I'll lock it up in the safe for you," said the clerk. "Is there
much?"

"Several hundred dollars."

"You were very fortunate in escaping as you did," said the clerk.

"True for you," said Andy. "He may come back when he finds out how he
has been fooled."

"If he does, I'll call a policeman. We'll make short work with him."

The reader has already heard how Fairfax (or Marvin) did return, and
how he met with a reception he had not calculated upon. Andy was
informed in the morning that it would be necessary for him to appear
as a witness against him in order to secure his conviction. This he
did the next day, but the judge delayed sentence, on being informed
that the accused was charged with a more serious offense, that of
stopping a traveler on the highway. His trial on this count must come
before a higher court, and he was remanded to prison till his case was
called in the calendar. Andy was informed that he would be summoned as
a witness in that case also, as well as Colonel Preston, and answered
that he would be ready when called upon.

We will so far anticipate events as to say that the testimony of Andy
and the colonel was considered conclusive by the court, and, on the
strength of it, Mr. Fairfax, alias Marvin, was sentenced to several
years' imprisonment at hard labor.

Andy met with no further adventures in his present visit, but had the
satisfaction of delivering the money he had been sent to collect to
Miss Priscilla Grant.

Now, advancing our story some three months, we come to an afternoon
when Miss Sophia Grant, returning from a walk, with visible marks of
excitement, rushed, breathless and panting, into her sister's
presence.

"What's the matter, Sophia?" asked Priscilla.

"Such an awful thing!" she gasped.

"What is it?"

"You won't believe it."

"Tell me at once what it is!"

"It seems so sudden!"

"Good heavens! Sophia, why do you tantalize me so?"

"Just so!" gasped Sophia.

"If you don't tell me, I'll shake you!"

"Colonel Preston's dead--dropped dead in the store ten minutes ago. I
was there, and saw him."

This startling intelligence was only too true. Suddenly, without an
instant's warning, the colonel had been summoned from life--succumbing
to a fit of apoplexy. This event, of course, made a great sensation in
the village, but it is of most interest to us as it affects the
fortunes of our young hero.




CHAPTER XXX
COLONEL PRESTON'S WILL


Mrs. Preston was a cold woman, and was far from being a devoted wife.
She was too selfish for that supreme love which some women bestow upon
their husbands. Still, when Colonel Preston's lifeless form was
brought into the house, she did experience a violent shock. To have
the companion of nearly twenty years so unexpectedly taken away might
well touch the most callous, and so, for a few minutes, Mrs. Preston
forgot herself and thought of her husband.

But this was not for long. The thought of her own selfish interests
came back, and in the midst of her apparent grief the question forced
itself upon her consideration, "Did my husband make a will?"

Of course, she did not give utterance to this query. She knew what was
expected of her, and she was prudent enough to keep up appearances
before the neighbors, who poured into the house to offer their
sympathy. She received them with her cambric handkerchief pressed to
her eyes, from which, by dint of effort, she succeeded in squeezing a
few formal tears, and, while her bosom appeared to heave with emotion,
she was mentally calculating how much Colonel Preston had probably
left.

"Shan't I stay with you, my dear Mrs. Preston?" said worthy Mrs.
Cameron, in a tone full of warm interest and sympathy.

"Thank you," said Mrs. Preston, in a low voice; "you are very kind,
but I would rather be left alone."

"But it must be so sad for you to be alone in your sorrow," said her
neighbor.

"No. I can bear sorrow better alone," said the newly made widow.
"Perhaps I am peculiar, but I would prefer it."

"If you really wish it," said the other, reluctantly.

"Yes, I wish it. Thank you for your kind offer, but I know my own
feelings, and the presence of others would only increase my pain."

This was what she said to others who made the same offer. It did not
excite great surprise, for Mrs. Preston had never leaned upon anyone
for sympathy, nor was she ready with her sympathy when others were in
trouble. She was self-poised and self-contained, and, in fact, for
this reason was not popular with her neighbors. Still, in this her
distress they were ready to forget all this and extend the same
cordial sympathy which they would have done in other cases. There was
but one person whose company she did crave at this time and this was
her son, Godfrey. So, when Alfred Turner offered to go for him the
next morning, she accepted his offer with thanks.

At last she was left alone. The servant had gone to bed, and there was
no one but herself and her dead husband in the lower part of the
house. She no longer sat with her handkerchief pressed before her
eyes. Her face wore its usual look of calm composure. She was busily
thinking, not of her husband's fate, but of her own future.

"Did he leave a will? And, if so, how much did he leave me?" she
thought.

If there was a will, it was probably in the house, and Mrs. Preston
determined to find it, if possible.

"Of course, all ought to come to me and Godfrey," she soliloquized. "I
don't think it is right to leave money to charitable institutions as
long as a wife and child are living. Fortunately, my husband had no
brothers or sisters, or perhaps he would have divided the property. If
there is no will, I shall have my thirds, and shall have the control
of Godfrey's property till he comes of age. I think I will go to
Boston to live. My friend, Mrs. Boynton, has a very pleasant house on
Worcester Street. I should like to settle down somewhere near her. I
don't know how much Mr. Preston was worth, but I am sure we shall have
enough for that. I always wanted to live in the city. This village is
intolerably stupid, and so are the people. I shall be glad to get
away."

Could the good women, whose kind hearts had prompted them to proffer
their sympathy, have heard these words they would not have been likely
to obtrude any more on the hard, cold woman who held them in such low
estimation.

Mrs. Preston took the lamp in her hand, and began to explore her
husband's desk. She had often thought of doing so, but, as his death
was not supposed to be so near, she had not thought that there was any
immediate cause of doing so. Besides, it had almost been her belief
that he had made no will. Now she began to open drawers and untie
parcels of papers, but it was some time before she came to what she
sought. At length, however, her diligence was rewarded. In the middle
of a pile of papers, she found one labeled on the outside:


                            MY WILL.


Her heart beat as she opened it, and, though there was no need, for it
was now past ten o'clock, and there was not likely to be a caller at
that late hour, she looked cautiously about her, and even peered out
of the window into the darkness, but could find no one whose
observation she might fear.

I am not about to recite at length the items in the will, which
covered a page of foolscap. It is enough to quote two items, which
Mrs. Preston read with anger and dissatisfaction. They are as follows:


    "Item.--To my young friend, Andy Burke, son of the widow
    Burke, of this village, in consideration of a valuable
    service rendered to me on one occasion, and as a mark of my
    regard and interest, I give and bequeath the sum of five
    thousand dollars; and to his mother, as a token of gratitude
    for her faithful nursing when I was dangerously sick with the
    smallpox, I give and bequeath, free of all incumbrance, the
    cottage in which she at present resides.

    "Item.--To the town I give five thousand dollars, the
    interest to be annually appropriated to the purchase of books
    for a public library, for the benefit of all the citizens,
    provided the town will provide some suitable place in which
    to keep them."


All the balance of the property was left to his wife and son, in equal
proportions, his wife to be the guardian of Godfrey till he should
have attained his majority. As Colonel Preston was well known to be
rich, this seemed to be an adequate provision, but Mrs. Preston did
not look upon it in that light. On the contrary, she was deeply
incensed at the two legacies of which mention has been made above.

"Was ever anything more absurd than to waste five thousand dollars and
a house upon that Irish boy and his mother?" she said to herself. "I
don't suppose it was so much my husband's fault. That artful woman got
around him, and wheedled him into it. I know now why she was so
willing to come here and take care of him when he was sick. She wanted
to wheedle him into leaving money to her low-lived boy. She is an
artful and designing hussy, and I should like to tell her so to her
face."

The cold and usually impassible woman was deeply excited. Her selfish
nature made her grudge any of her husband's estate to others, except,
indeed, to Godfrey, who was the only person she cared for. As she
thought over the unjust disposition, as she regarded it, which her
husband had made of his property, a red spot glowed in her usually
pale cheek.

Then it was another grievance that money should have been left to the
town.

"What claim had the town on my husband," she thought, "that he should
give it five thousand dollars? In doing it, he was robbing Godfrey and
me. It was wrong. He had no right to do it. What do I care for these
people? They are a set of common farmers and mechanics, with whom I
condescend to associate because I have no one else here, except the
minister's and the doctor's family, to speak to. Soon I shall be in
the city, and then I don't care if I never set eyes on any of them
again. In Boston I can find suitable society."

The more Mrs. Preston thought of it, the more she felt aggravated by
the thought that so large a share of her husband's property was to go
to others. She fixed her eyes thoughtfully on the document which she
held in her hand, and a strong temptation came to her.

"If this should disappear," she said to herself, "the money would be
all mine and Godfrey's, and no one would be the wiser. That Irish boy
and his mother would stay where they belonged, and my Godfrey would
have his own. Why should I not burn it? It would only be just."

Deluding herself by this false view, she persuaded herself that it was
right to suppress the will. With steady hand she held it to the flame
of the lamp, and watched it as it was slowly consumed. Then, gathering
up the fragments, she threw them away.

"It is all ours now," she whispered, triumphantly, as she prepared to
go to bed. "It was lucky I found the will."




CHAPTER XXXI
MRS. PRESTON'S INTENTIONS


Godfrey returned home on the day after his father's death. He had
never witnessed death before, and it frightened him, for the time,
into propriety. He exhibited none of the stormy and impetuous grief
which a warm-hearted and affectionate boy would have been likely to
exhibit. It was not in his nature.

When he and his mother were left alone, he showed his resemblance to
her, by asking:

