"And how yours?"

"We--that is, the men--can fight much better when your presence causes
them no anxiety."

"But, tell me, do not Capt. Asbury and the rest feel hopeful of
beating off the rustlers?"

"Of course they will make a brave fight, and there is a chance of
their success, but I shudder when I think of what the cost will be to
both sides. How much better if all this can be averted."

"True, indeed! And if I could be assured that you would succeed in
reaching the camp of the cattlemen, I would bid you Godspeed."

"I certainly will never reach it by staying here, and I think if my
chances were doubly less they ought to be taken for the sake of the
good that will come to all."

At this juncture, Capt. Asbury, sitting near the window, called out:

"Here's a visitor!"

In the gloom he was not clearly visible, even though he was seen to
advance, and heard to knock on the door. But when the latter was
opened, Fred Whitney stepped inside.

Here the gathering darkness was more pronounced, for it was not deemed
prudent to have a light.

"Inman has sent me with his ultimatum," said the messenger; "he says
he has given you abundant time to think over the matter, and wants
your decision."

"What are his terms?" asked Capt. Asbury.

"The same as before."

"He promises to treat all of us as prisoners of war, with the
exception of Sterry and myself. We are guaranteed a trial, which is
another way of saying we shall be shot. I will allow my men to vote on
the question," added the leader.

The indignant protests, however, compelled the officer to recall his
harsh remark.

"Of course I knew that would be your reply," Fred hastened to say;
"and it is what Inman and Cadmus expect. I have been sent to bring my
mother and sister out of the house, for the rustlers intend to attack
you before morning. That means, too, that they intend to burn it."

The three defenders who were in the secret saw the danger in which
this placed Sterry's intended flight.

If the attack were made before 10 o'clock, there could be no possible
opportunity for his getting away. Some means, therefore, must be
found for deferring the assault until after that hour, if it could be
accomplished without arousing the suspicions of the rustlers.




CHAPTER XXIX.

A STRANGE OCCURRENCE.


"Do you know," inquired Sterry, "how soon it is contemplated making
the attack?"

"I have not heard Inman or Cadmus say, but from the talk of the men I
judge it will be quite soon."

"Probably within a couple of hours?" "Sooner than that--by 9 o'clock
at the latest."

It was the mother who now spoke: "Suppose Jennie and I decline to
leave the house?"

"That has been considered," replied the son, "and I am sorry to say
it will make no difference. The rustlers are in an uglier mood than
before--wrathful because they have been kept idle so long. They can
claim that they have given you ample notice, and if you refuse to come
out they cannot be held blamable for the consequences."

This would never do, and Hawkridge interposed:

"If the attack cannot be prevented, Fred, it must be delayed."

"On what grounds?"

"Any that you can think of; they must not disturb us until near
midnight."

"But I shall have to give a reason; I am as anxious as you to do my
utmost, but I do not see how I can do anything."

The quick wit of Jennie came to the rescue.

"Tell Capt. Inman and Larch Cadmus for me that we have a number of
articles we wish to save from destruction; ask them in the name of
mother and myself to give us time in which to gather them together."

Fred was silent for a moment.

"At least it will do no harm to try it, even though I do not believe
it will be of any use."

"Ask them to make it between 11 and 12; we will then have time to
collect all we want--in fact a good deal more time than is necessary."

"I do not see the need of this," replied the brother, who, it need not
be repeated, had no knowledge of what was in the minds of the few;
"I think I can say that if I do not return in the course of ten or
fifteen minutes, you may consider your prayer granted."

Bidding them good-by once more, he passed out of the door and
disappeared in the darkness, which had now fully descended and shut
from sight the impatient rustlers.

It was a peculiar situation in which the defenders, including the
mother and sister, dreaded the return of the head of the household,
but the front of the dwelling was watched with an intensity of
interest it would be hard to describe.

"By gracious! there he is!" exclaimed Dick Hawkridge, hardly ten
minutes after Fred's departure; "it's no use."

A shadowy figure was observed moving across the dark space in front,
but while they were waiting for him to enter the door, which was
unfastened to admit him, he passed on and vanished in the gloom
without checking his motion or speaking.

"That wasn't Fred," whispered Jennie; "I know his walk too well."

"It makes no difference," replied Sterry, "you can depend that he will
soon put in an appearance."

But the slow minutes dragged along and nothing was seen of him. By and
by a faint hope began to form that the urgent request of the ladies
had been conceded, for they insisted that they could see no reason why
it should not be.

A full hour passed, and, when it was after 9 o'clock, all doubt was
removed. The attack would not be made until close upon midnight.
Monteith Sterry would be given the chance, provided Duke Vesey showed
the way for him.

The crisis was so near that it was deemed best to let all know what
was in contemplation. Capt. Asbury, therefore, explained it to the
men, as the daughter had explained to the mother.

"Those fellows can't be trusted," the leader added; "they may seek to
give the impression that the delay has been granted, while preparing
to assail us when least expected. The night is dark, as you see, and
favourable to their plans. Keep the closest watch possible on all
sides of the house, for to set fire to it they must approach near
enough to touch the building."

"Suppose we catch sight of some one stealing up?" asked one of the
cattlemen.

"Challenge him, and if he does not give a satisfactory response,
fire."

"What will be a satisfactory response?"

"The voice of Fred Whitney, and I may say of Duke Vesey, or the
announcement that the individual is the bearer of a message for us. In
the latter case, of course, he will approach from the front. When you
shoot, too, boys, you mustn't throw away any shots, for this isn't
going to be child's play."

"We understand that," was the significant response of a couple of the
stockmen.

It was now growing so late that Sterry placed himself near the rear
door to watch for the expected signal from Vesey, feeling, as the
minutes passed, a nervousness greater than at any time before.

Since no light burned in the house, the only means of determining the
hour was by striking a match and holding it in front of a watch. Hope
became high when 10 o'clock was at hand.

Sterry half expected, in case everything promised well, that Vesey
would manage to give something in the nature of a preliminary signal,
but the closest scrutiny showed nothing of the kind.

Capt. Asbury, who maintained his place near one of the front windows,
close to the door, suddenly called:

"Come here a moment, Sterry."

The young man stepped hastily across the room.

"You have everything clear in your mind?" was the question which
struck the young man as slightly inopportune.

"Yes; as clear as I can have; why do you ask?"

"I wanted to be certain, for your task is a delicate one; we will
hold the door ajar a little while after you go, so that if anything
happens, such as their recognizing you, you will be able to dash back.
You know it won't do for you to be identified."

"I understand," replied Sterry, who felt that he ought to be at his
post.

He hastily stepped back, and as he did so was surprised to find the
door drawn open several inches.

"What does that mean?" he asked of the several gathered around in the
darkness, whose faces he could not see.

"Why," replied Hawkridge, "what does it mean, indeed? I thought you
passed out just now."

"You see I did not. Why do you make such a remark?"

"Some one went out," was the amazing declaration.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE MISSING ONE.


Monteith Sterry was astounded by the declaration of Dick Hawkridge
that some one had passed through the rear door while he was talking
with Capt. Asbury.

"Who was it?" demanded he.

"I told you we thought it was you," replied his friend.

"But you know it wasn't," he replied, impatiently.

"Then I have no idea who it was."

"Some one has taken advantage of the moment I spent with the
captain--I wonder if he had anything to do with it," he added, growing
unjustly suspicious in his resentment.

He strode across the room; and, knowing where the leader was,
demanded:

"What is the meaning of this, Capt. Asbury?"

"The meaning of what?"

"While I was talking a few seconds with you some person slipped out of
the back door; do you know anything of it?"

"It is beyond my comprehension," replied the leader in a voice which
removed all distrust of him.

And forgetful, in his excitement, of his duty at the front, he stepped
hastily to the rear, where most of the men had crowded, despite the
orders for them to maintain a strict watch.

"I heard you and the captain speaking," said Hawkridge, in
explanation, "but your voices were so low that I would not have
identified them anywhere. Supposing you to be where you really were,
I stepped to the rear window here and peered out in the gloom where I
knew the stable to be--"

"Did you see anything?" interrupted Sterry.

"Not a sign of the signal. While I was straining my eyes to pierce
the darkness the door was drawn inward slightly, and a figure moved
quickly across the space toward the stables."

"You could not identify it?"

"Of course not, for you see how dark it is, and there was no light; in
fact, I hardly saw it before it vanished."

"It is as I supposed," added Sterry, angrily. "Some one fancied he had
a better chance by slipping off than in remaining here, and has looked
after his own safety. I wish I knew who it was."

"We can soon find out," remarked Capt. Asbury; "our men are not too
numerous for me to forget their names and voices."

He raised his tones and summoned them.

"I don't believe they will attempt to fire the house as long as the
ladies are with us," he exclaimed; "some one of our party has been
cowardly enough to sneak off. As I call your names, answer."

He proved the truth of what he said. He had eight companions, not
counting Hawkridge and Sterry. With little hesitation, for his memory
was instantly prompted by others, he pronounced each name, and to
every one came the prompt, unmistakable response of the owner.

"One of those rustlers has managed to get in here undiscovered,"
was the next theory of Sterry, whose temper did not improve at the
unaccountable turn of affairs. "I don't see why Inman and the rest
delay their attack, when we are only children in their hands; they can
do with us as they please--"

All started, for at that moment a sharp rap sounded on the door.
Before opening it, Capt. Asbury called out:

"Who's there?"

"It is I--Fred Whitney--let me in, quick!"

He was admitted without an instant's delay, while all crowded around
in the darkness.

"Well, you can imagine what I have come for. I made known the request
of mother and Jennie, but Inman and Cadmus would not think of granting
it at first. I told Cadmus that it was your special request, Jennie,
adding a little ornamentation of my own, such as that you knew that
when he learned how much it could please you, he could not refuse. I
hope I did right, did I not, sister?"

In the slight laugh which followed this question, the reply of the
young lady was not heard, and her brother continued:

"Well, I put it so strong that Cadmus fell in with me and persuaded
Inman to do the same. They agreed to wait until 10 o'clock, but no
longer; so you see I did not accomplish all that I hoped, but it was
better than nothing. If I am not mistaken it is past 10 now."

"Not more than a few minutes."

"Well, at any rate, the time is up, and they have sent me to notify
you that they will wait no longer. I suppose that you, mother and
Jennie, have got together all that you can take away. As I have to
escort you back, I will carry the things, unless you smuggle in some
of the bedsteads."

"Then it is the intention to attack as soon as the ladies are fairly
out of the way?" was the inquiring remark of Capt. Asbury.

"You may depend that it won't be delayed ten minutes."

"Do you know whether they will begin by shooting or trying to set fire
to the building?"

"They haven't given me their confidence, but I don't see why they
should expect to accomplish as much with their guns as they could have
done during the day time. They will set fire to the place, no doubt."

"It may be well to impress upon those people that we are guarding
every side, and the first rustler of whom we catch a glimpse will be
riddled."

"They are prepared for that, of course; be careful, friends, and don't
expose yourselves more than you are obliged to, for there will be no
let-up after the ball opens. I wish I could stay with you and help you
out. I have been on the watch, ever since it grew dark, to steal off
and make a run to the stockmen's camp, but I couldn't gain the first
chance."

"I am afraid it is too late, anyway," said the captain, "for they are
so far away that it will be over before they could arrive."

"Well, mother," said Fred, fearing that he was staying too long, "you
and Jennie are ready, so let's go. Confound it! we must have a light
for a few minutes; I know where there's a candle."

He ignited a match and quickly found a candle. This was lit and held
above his head, so that he could look into the faces around him.

"There is no danger of their taking advantage of this until I leave,"
he explained, "and you can blow it out before that. I see you are
there, mother; call Jennie down and let her join us."

"Jennie is not in the house!" was the reply, which fairly took away
the breath of all.


