diameter and 5 in. long. A hole is filed or blown through one side
of the glass for the admission of air. The ends of the smaller
glass

[Illustration: FIG.1  FIG.2  Forcing Air Through Water]

tubes are passed through corks having a diameter to fit the ends
of this larger tube. The ends of these tubes should be so adjusted
that the continuous drops of water from the upper will fall into
the tube below. The succession of air bubbles thus imprisoned are
driven down the tube and into the tank below.

The regulator is placed in the tube or siphon above the air
receiver. Its purpose is to retard the flow of water from the
siphon above and make it drop rapidly. It consists of a rubber
connecting tube with two flat pieces of wood clamped over the
center and adjusted with screws. The apparatus is started by
clamping the rubber tube tightly and then exhausting the air in
the siphon tube, then placing the end in the upper reservoir and
releasing the clamp until the water begins to drop. If the
reservoir is kept filled from the tank, the device will work for
an indefinite time.
--Contributed by John T. Dunlop, Shettleston, Scotland.



** Imitation Arms and Armor-Part II [242]

Imitation swords, stilettos and battle-axes, put up as ornaments,
will look well if they are arranged on a shield which is hung high
up on a wall of a room or hall, says the English

[Illustration: FIG 1; FIG 2; FIG 3; Three Fifteenth Century
Swords]

Mechanic, London. The following described arms are authentic
designs of the original articles. A German sword of the fifteenth
century is shown in Fig. 1. This sword is 4 ft. long with the
crossguard and blade of steel. The imitation sword is made of wood
and covered with tinfoil to produce the steel color. The shape of
the sword is marked out on a piece of wood that is about 1/8 in.
thick with the aid of a straightedge and pencil, allowing a little
extra length on which to fasten the handle. Cut the sword out with
a saw and make both edges thin like a knife blade and smooth up
with sandpaper. The extra length for the handle is cut about 1 in.
in width and 2 in. long. The handle is next carved and a mortise
cut in one end to receive the handle end of the blade. As the
handle is to represent copper, the ornamentations can be built up
of wire, string, small rope and round-headed nails, the whole
finally having a thin coat of glue worked over it with a stiff
bristle brush and finished with bronze paint.

The crossbar is flat and about 1 in. in width. Cut this out of a
piece of wood and make a center hole to fit over the extra length
on the blade, glue and put it in place. Fill the hole in the
handle with glue and put it on the blade. When the glue is
thoroughly dry, remove all the surplus with a sharp knife. Sheets
of tinfoil are secured for covering the blade. Cut two strips of
tinfoil, one about 1/2 in. wider than the blade and the other 1/4
in. narrower. Quickly cover one side of the blade with a thin coat
of glue and evenly lay on and press down the narrow strip of
tinfoil. Stick the wider strip on the other side in the same way,
allowing equal margin of tinfoil to overlap the edges of the
blade. Glue the overlapping edges and press them around on the
surface of the narrow strip. The crossguard must be covered in the
same manner as the blade. When the whole is quite dry, wipe the
blade up and down several times with light strokes using a soft
rag.

The sword shown in Fig. 2 is a two-handed Swiss sword about 4 ft.
in length, sharp on both edges with a handle of dark wood around
which is wound spirally a heavy piece of brass or copper wire and
held in place with round-headed brass nails. The blade and
crossbar are in imitation steel. The projecting ornament in the
center of the crossguard may be cut from heavy pasteboard and bent
into shape, then glued on the blade as shown.

In Fig. 3 is shown a claymore, or Scottish sword of the fifteenth
century. This sword is about 4 ft. long and has a wood handle
bound closely around with heavy cord. The crossbar and blade are
steel, with both edges sharp. A German poniard is shown in Fig. 4.
This weapon is about 1 ft. long, very broad, with wire or string'
bound handle, sharp edges on both sides. Another poniard of the
fourteenth century is shown in Fig. 5. This weapon is also about 1
ft. long with wood handle and steel embossed blade. A sixteenth
century German poniard is shown in Fig. 6. The blade and
ornamental crossbar is of steel, with both edges of the blade
sharp. The handle is of wood. A German stiletto, sometimes called
cuirass breakers, is shown in Fig. 7. This stiletto has a wood
handle, steel crossbar and blade of steel with both edges sharp.

In Fig. 8 is shown a short-handled flail, which is about 2-1/2 ft.
long with a dark handle of wood, studded with brass or steel
nails. A steel band is placed around the handle near the top. The
imitation of the steel band is made by gluing a piece of tinfoil
on a strip of cardboard and tacking it to the handle. A large
screw-eye is screwed into the top of the handle. The spiked ball
may be made of wood or clay. Cover the ball with some pieces of
linen, firmly glued on. When dry, paint it a dark brown or black.
A large screw-eye must be inserted in this ball, the same as used
on the end of the handle, and both eyes connected with a small
piece of rope twisted into shape. The rope is finished by covering
with tinfoil. Some short and heavy spike-headed nails are driven
into the ball to give it the appearance shown in the illustration.

A Russian knout is shown in Fig. 9. The lower half of the handle
is of wood, the upper part iron or steel, which can be imitated by
covering a piece of wood that is properly shaped with tinfoil. The
whole handle can be made of wood in one piece, the lower part
painted black and the upper part covered with tinfoil. A screw-eye
is screwed into the upper end. A length of real iron or steel
chain is used to connect the handle with the ball. The ball is
made as described in Fig. 8. The spikes in the ball are about 1
in. in length. These must be cut from pieces of wood, leaving a
small peg at the end and in the center about the size of a No. 20
spike. The pegs are glued and inserted into holes drilled into the
ball.

In Fig. 10 is shown a Sclavonic horseman's battle-axe which has a
handle of wood painted dark gray or light brown; the axe is of
steel. The blade is cut from a piece of 1/4-in. wood with a
keyhole saw. The round part is made thin and sharp on the edge.
The thick hammer side of the axe is built up to the necessary
thickness to cover

[Illustration: Ancient Weapons]

the handle by gluing on pieces of wood the same thickness as used
for the blade, and gradually shaping off to the middle of the axe
by the use of a chisel, finishing with sandpaper and covering with
tinfoil. Three large, round-headed brass or iron nails fixed into
the front side of the handle will complete the axe.

At the beginning of the sixteenth century horseman's battle-axes
shaped as shown in Fig. 11 were used. Both handle and axe are of
steel. This axe is made similar to the one described in Fig. 10.
When the woodwork is finished the handle and axe are covered with
tinfoil.



** How to Make a Round Belt Without Ends [243]

A very good belt may be made by laying several strands of strong
cord, such as braided fishline, together as shown in Fig. 1 and
wrapping them as

[Illustration: Method of Forming the Belt]

shown in Fig. 2. When wrapped all the way around, the ends are
tied and cut off. This will make a very good flexible belt; will
pull where other belts slip, and as the tension members are all
protected from wear, will last until the wrapping member is worn
through without being weakened.
--Contributed by E. W. Davis, Chicago.



** Old-Time Magic - The Growing Flower [244]

This trick is performed with a wide-mouthed jar which is about 10
in. high. If an earthern jar of this kind is not at hand, use a
glass fruit jar and cover it with black cloth or paper, so the
contents cannot be seen.

[Illustration: Flower Grows Instantly]

Two pieces of wire are bent as shown in Fig. 1 and put together as
in Fig. 2. These wires are put in the jar, about one-third the way
down from the top, with the circle centrally located. The wires
can be held in place by carefully bending the ends, or using small
wedges of wood.

Cut a wire shorter in length than the height of the jar and tie a
rose or several flowers on one end. Put a cork in the bottom of
the jar and stick the opposite end of the wire from where the
flowers are tied through the circle of the two wires and into the
cork. The dotted lines in Fig. 3 show the position of the wires
and flowers.

To make the flowers grow in an instant, pour water into the jar at
one side of the wide mouth. The cork will float and carry the wire
with the flowers attached upward, causing the flowers to grow,
apparently, in a few seconds' time. Do not pour in too much water
to raise the flowers so far that the wire will be seen.
--Contributed by A. S. Macdonald, Oakland, Calif.



** Water and Wine Trick [244]

This is an interesting trick based on the chemical properties of
acids and alkalies. The materials needed are: One glass pitcher,
filled with water, four glass tumblers, an acid, an alkali and
some phenolphthalein solution which can be obtained from your
local druggist. Before the performance, add a few drops of the
phenolphthalein to the water in the pitcher and rub a small
quantity of the alkali solution on the sides of two of the
tumblers and repeat, only using as large a quantity of the acid as
will escape notice on the remaining tumblers. Set the tumblers so
you will know which is which and proceed as follows: Take hold of
a prepared tumbler with the left hand and pour from the pitcher,
held in the right hand, some of the liquid. The liquid turned into
the glass will become red like wine. Set this full tumbler aside
and take the pitcher in the left hand and pour some of the liquid
in one of the tumblers containing the acid as it is held in the
right hand. There will be no change in color. Repeat both parts in
the same order then begin to pour the liquids contained in the
tumblers back into the pitcher in the order reversed and the
excess of acid will neutralize the alkali and cause it to lose its
color and in the end the pitcher will contain a colorless liquid.
--Contributed by Kenneth Weeks, Bridgeton, N.J.



** Cheap Nails are Expensive [244]

The life of iron shingle nails is about 6 years. An iron nail
cannot be used again in putting on a new roof. Solid zinc nails
last forever and can be used as often as necessary. As zinc is
much lighter than iron, the cost of zinc nails is only about 2-1/2
times that of iron nails.



** Cutting Lantern Slide Masks [245]

It has long been a puzzle to me why round cornered masks are
almost invariably used for lantern slides, when most works of art
are included within rectangular spaces, says a correspondent of
Photo Era. Certainly the present commercial masks are in very poor
taste. The worker who wishes to make the most of every slide will
do well to cut his own masks, not only because of the fact just
mentioned, but also because he can suit the size of the opening to
the requirements of each slide. Slides can be works of art just as
much as prints; so that masking a slide becomes just as important
as trimming a print, and equally worthy of individual treatment.
It is folly to give each slide a mask opening of uniform size and
shape.

When many slides are to be masked, it becomes tedious work to
treat each one separately, unless some special device is used. The
accompanying drawing shows a way to mark masks which is simple,
practical and costs nothing. The drawing is exactly lantern slide
size.

Lay the slide over such a guide and note the size of the opening
best suited to the picture. This will be determined by the
intersection of the ruled lines, which are numbered for
convenience in working. If the size wanted is No. 4 for width and
No. 2 for height, place the guide over a piece of black mask paper
and prick through the proper intersections with the point of a
pin. This outlines the desired

[Illustration: Form for Marking Out Rectangular Lantern Slide
Masks]

opening, which may then be cut out easily with a knife and
straight edge.

The black paper from plate boxes and film rolls is excellent for
making masks. It should be cut up in pieces 3-1/4 by 4 in. and
kept ready for use at any time.



** Relieving the Weight of a Talking Machine Reproducer [245]

Too loud reproduction from a record, the scratching noise
sometimes heard and the forcing of the needle into a soft record,
because the extension arm and reproducer are too heavy, can be
remedied in the following manner: Attach a small ring to the under
side of the horn and use a rubber band to lift the extending arm
slightly.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond, Cal.



** How to Make a Thermometer Back in Etched Copper [246]

Etching copper is not a very difficult process. Secure a sheet of
No. 16 gauge copper of the width and length

[Illustration: Copper Thermometer Holder]

wanted for the back of the thermometer. In the design shown the
extreme width is 3-1/2 in. and the extreme length 7 in.

Draw a design. The one shown is merely suggestive. The worker may
change the outline or proportions as desired. The decoration, too,
may be changed. The essential thing is to keep a space upon which
to place the thermometer. This design is in what is known as
two-part symmetry. A line is drawn down the paper and one-half of
the outline and decoration worked out. This done, the paper is
folded along the center line, a piece of carbon paper is inserted
between the folds and the design transferred on the inner surfaces
by tracing with a pencil over the half of the outline previously
drawn. Trace the design and outline upon the metal, using the
carbon paper.

Cut out the outline with metal shears and file the edges smooth.

With a small brush and ordinary asphaltum or black varnish, paint
the design, the margin and the entire back of the metal. When this
coat has dried put on a second and then a third. The asphaltum is
to keep the acid into which the metal is to be immersed later from
eating any part of the metal but the background. Two coats or more
are needed to withstand the action of the acid.

The acid bath is composed of nitric acid and water, about half and
half, or, possibly, a little less acid than water, the mixture
being made by pouring the acid into the water, not the water into
the acid, which is dangerous. Keep this solution off the hands and
clothes, and do not inhale the fumes.

Put the asphalt-coated metal in the bath and allow it to remain
for four or five hours, depending upon the thickness of the metal
and the strength of the acid. With a stick, or a pair of old
tongs, take the metal out of the acid occasionally and examine it
to see how deep the acid has eaten it--1/32 in. is about right for
the No. 16 gauge.

When etched to the desired depth, remove the piece and with an old
knife' scrape off the asphaltum. Finish the cleaning by scrubbing
with turpentine and a brush having stiff bristles.

If the metal is first covered with turpentine and then heated over
a flame, all the colors of the rainbow will appear on its surface.
These colors fade away in the course of a long time, but they can
be easily revived. Another way to get these colors is to heat the
metal and then plunge it into the acid bath quickly.

A green finish is obtained by painting the background with an acid
stain composed as follows: 1 part ammonia muriate; 3 parts ammonia
carbonate; 24 parts water. If one coat does not give the depth of
color desired, repeat as many times as is necessary, allowing each
coat time to dry before applying the next.

To "fix" this color so that it will not rub off, and to keep the
metal from tarnishing, apply a coat of banana oil or lacquer.

Thermometers of suitable size can be bought in either brass or
nickel. They have holes through their top and bottom ends through
which metal paper fasteners can be inserted, and these in turn put
through holes punched in the copper back.



** To Make an Electric Piano [247]

Make or buy a table, about 3 ft. long and 1 ft. or more wide, and
about 2-1/2 ft. high. Nail a board, A, Fig. 1, about 8 in. wide
and of the same length as the table, to the table, as shown in the
illustration. Paint the table any color desired.

Purchase a dozen or so battery electric bells (they are cheaper if
bought by the dozen) and screw them to the board, as in Fig. 2.
Arrange the bells in the scale shown at B, Fig. 2. Bore two holes
near the posts of each bell for the wires to pass through.

Buttons for the bells may be purchased, but it is cheaper to make
them in the following way: Take a piece of

[Illustration: How the Electric Piano is Constructed]

wood and cut it round, about 2-1/2 in. in diameter and 1/4 in.
thick, Fig. 3, and bore two holes, C and D, through it. Then get
two posts, about 1 in. long, (battery posts will do) and put them
through the holes as in Fig. 4. Cut out a piece of tin, 3/8 in.
wide, punch a hole through it and put in under post E, so that
when it is pressed down, it will touch post F. It may be either
nailed or screwed down.

Make two holes in the table for each button and its wires, as at
H, Fig. 2. Nail or screw the buttons to the table, as shown in
Fig. 5, with the wires underneath. The connections are simple: I,
Fig. 5, is a wire running from one end of the table to the other
end, attached to a post at each end; J is another wire attached in
the same way; L is the carbon wire running from the batteries to
I; M is the zinc wire running from the batteries to wire J; 0
indicates the batteries; P is a wire running from J to one post of
a button; Q is another wire running from the other post of the
button to one of the posts of the bell; R is a wire running from I
to one post of the bell. When the button S is pressed, the bell
will ring. Each button should be connected with its bell in the
same way.
--Contributed by Vincent de Ybarrondo.



** Imitation Arms and Armor - PART III [248]

Maces and battle-axes patterned after and made in imitation of the
ancient weapons which were used from the

[Illustration: Ancient Weapons]

fourteenth to the sixteenth century produce fine ornaments for the
hall or den, says the English Mechanic. The imitation articles are
made of wood, the steel parts represented by tinfoil stuck on with
glue and the ornaments carved out with a carving tool.

An English mace used about the middle of the fifteenth century is
shown in Fig. 1. The entire length of this weapon is about 24 in.;
the handle is round with a four-sided sharp spike extending out
from the points of six triangular shaped wings. Cut the handle and
spike from one piece of wood and glue the wings on at equal
distances apart around the base of the spike. The two bands or
wings can be made by gluing two pieces of rope around the handle
and fastening it with tacks. These rings can be carved out, but
they are somewhat difficult to make. After the glue is dry, remove
all the surplus that has been pressed out from the joints with the
point of a sharp knife blade and then sandpaper the surface of the
wood to make it smooth. Secure some tinfoil to cover the parts in
imitation of steel. A thin coat of glue is quickly applied to the
surface of the wood and the tinfoil laid on evenly so there will
be no wrinkles and without making any more seams than is
necessary. The entire weapon, handle and all, is to appear as
steel.

An engraved iron mace of the fifteenth century is shown in Fig. 2.
This weapon is about 22 in. long, mounted with an eight-sided or
octagonal head. It will be easier to make this mace in three
pieces, the octagonal head in one piece and the handle in two
parts, so that the circular shield shown at the lower end of the
handle can be easily placed between the parts. The circular piece
or shield can be cut from a piece of wood about 1/4 in. thick. The
circle is marked out with a compass. A hole is made through the
center for the dowel of the two handle parts when they are put
together. A wood peg about 2 in. long serves as the dowel. A hole
is bored in the end of both handle pieces and these holes well
coated with glue, the wood peg inserted in one of them, the shield
put on in place and handle parts put together and left for the
glue to set. The head is fastened on the end of the handle with a
dowel in the same manner as putting the handle parts together.

The head must have a pattern sketched upon each side in pencil
marks, such as ornamental scrolls, leaves, flowers, etc. These
ornaments must be carved out to a depth of about 1/4 in. with a
sharp carving tool. If such a tool is not at hand, or the amateur
cannot use it well, an excellent substitute will be found in using
a sharp-pointed and red-hot poker, or pieces of heavy wire heated
to burn out the pattern to the desired depth. The handle also has
a scroll to be engraved. When the whole is finished and cleaned

[Illustration: Battle Axes of the Fourteenth, Fifteenth and
Sixteenth Centuries]

Up, it is covered with tinfoil in imitation of steel. The tinfoil
should be applied carefully, as before mentioned, and firmly
pressed into the engraved parts with the finger tips or thumb.

A French mace used in the sixteenth century is shown in Fig. 3.
This weapon is about 22 in. long and has a wood handle covered
with dark red cloth or velvet, the lower part to have a gold or
red silk cord wound around it, as shown, the whole handle finished
off with small brass-headed nails. The top has six ornamental
carved wings which are cut out, fastened on the handle and covered
with tinfoil, as described in Fig. 2.

Figure 4 shows a Morning Star which is about 26 in. long. The
spiked ball and the four-sided and sharp-pointed spike are of
steel. The ball may be made of clay or wood and covered with
tinfoil. The spikes are cut out of wood, sharp-pointed and
cone-shaped, the base having a brad to stick into the ball. The
wood spikes are also covered with tinfoil. The handle is of steel
imitation, covered in the middle with red cloth or velvet and
studded with large-headed steel nails.

A war hammer of the fifteenth century is shown in Fig. 5. Its
length is about 3 ft. The lower half of the handle is wood.
covered with red velvet, with a golden or yellow cord wound
spirally over the cloth. The upper half of the handle is steel,
also, the hammer and spike. The entire handle should be made of
one piece, then the hammer put on the base of the spike. The spike
made with a peg in its lower end and well glued, can be firmly
placed in position by the peg fitting in a hole made for its
reception in the top of the handle. Finish up the steel parts with
tinfoil.

The following described weapons can be constructed of the same
materials and built up in the same way as described in the
foregoing articles: A horseman's short-handled battle-axe, used at
the end of the fifteenth century, is shown in Fig. 6. The handle
is of wood and the axe in imitation steel. Figure 7 shows an
English horseman's battle-axe used at the beginning of the reign
of Queen Elizabeth. The handle and axe both are to be shown in
steel. A German foot soldier's poleaxe used, at the end of the
fourteenth century is shown in Fig. 8. The handle is made of dark
wood and the axe covered with tinfoil. Figure 9 shows an English
foot soldier's jedburgh axe of the sixteenth century. The handle
is of wood, studded with large brass or steel nails. The axe is
shown in steel. All of these axes are about the same length.



** Playing Baseball with a Pocket Knife [250]

An interesting game of baseball can be played by two persons with
a common pocket knife on a rainy day or in

[Illustration: Positions of the Knife Indicate the Plays]

the winter time when the regular game cannot be played outdoors.
The knife is opened and loosely stuck into a board, as in Fig. 1,
and with a quick upward movement of the forefinger it is thrown
into the air to fall and land in one of the positions shown. The
plays are determined by the position of the knife after the fall.

A foul ball is indicated by Fig. 2, the knife resting on its back.
The small blade sticking in the board which holds the handle in an
upright position, as shown in Fig. 3, calls for a home run. Both
blades sticking in the board (Fig. 4), a three-base hit. A
two-base hit is made when the large blade sticks in the board,
Fig. 5. A one-base hit is secured when the large blade and the end
of the handle touch the board as in Fig. 6. The knife falling on
its side (Fig. 7) calls for one out. Each person plays until three
outs have been made, then the other plays, and so on for nine
innings.
--Contributed by Herbert Hahn, Chicago.



** How to Remove Paper Stuck to a Negative [250]

When making photographic prints from a negative, sometimes a drop
of moisture will cause the print to stick to the gelatine film on
the glass. Remove as much of the paper as can be readily torn off
and soak the negative in a fresh hypo bath of 3 or 4 oz. hypo to 1
pt. of water for an hour or two. Then a little gentle rubbing with
the finger-not the finger nail will remove anything adhering to
the film. It may be found that the negative is not colored. If it
is spotted at all, the negative must be washed for a few minutes
and placed in a combined toning and fixing bath, which will remove
the spots in a couple of hours. The negative must be well washed
after going through the solutions to take away any trace of hypo.



** Old-Time Magic - A Sack Trick [251]

The magician appears accompanied by his assistant. He has a sack
similar to a meal bag only on a large scale. The upper end of this
bag is shown in Fig. 1, with the rope laced in the cloth. He then
selects several people from the audience as a committee to examine
the sack to see that there is absolutely no deception whatever in
its makeup. When they are satisfied that the bag or sack is all
right, the magician places his assistant inside and drawing the
bag around him he allows the committee to tie him up with as many
knots as they choose to make, as shown in Fig. 2.

The bag with its occupant is placed in a small cabinet which the
committee surround to see that there is no outside help. The
magician then takes his watch and shows the audience that in less
than 30 seconds his assistant will emerge from the cabinet with
the sack in his hand. This he does, the sack is again examined and
found to be the same as when it was first seen.

[Illustration: Sack Trick-Holding the Rope Inside the Bag]

The solution is when the assistant enters the bag he pulls in
about 15 in. of the rope and holds it, as shown in Fig. 3, while
the committee is tying him up. As soon as he is in the cabinet he
merely lets out the slack thus making enough room for his body to
pass through. When he is out of the bag he quickly unties the
knots and then steps from his cabinet.
--Contributed by J. F. Campbell, Somerville, Mass.



** The Invisible Light [251]

The magician places two common wax candles on a table, one of them
burning brightly, the other without a light. Members of the
audience are allowed to inspect both the table and the candles.

The magician walks over to the burning candle, shades the light
for a few seconds, turns to the audience with his hands a few
inches apart, showing that there is nothing between them, at the
same time saying that he has a light between his hands, invisible
to them (the audience), with which he is going to light the other
candle. He then walks over to the other candle, and, in plain
sight of the audience lights the candle apparently with nothing.

In reality the magician has a very fine wire in his hand which he
is heating while he bends over the lighted candle, and the
audience gaze on and see nothing. He turns to the other candle and
touches a grain of phosphorus that has been previously concealed
in the wick with the heated wire, thus causing it to light.
--Contributed by C. Brown, New York City.



** Using the Sun's Light in a Magic Lantern [251]

The light furnished with a small magic lantern does very well for
evening exhibitions, but the lantern can be used in the daytime
with good results by directing sunlight through the lens instead
of using the oil lamp. A window facing the sun is selected and the
shade is drawn almost down, the remaining space being covered by a
piece of heavy paper. A small hole is

[Illustration: Magic Lantern]

cut in the paper and the lantern placed on a table in front of the
hole, the lamp having been removed and the back opened. The
lantern must be arranged so that the lens will be on a horizontal
line with the hole in the paper. A mirror is then placed just
outside of the window and at such an angle that the beam of light
is thrown through the hole in the paper and the lens of the
lantern.

The shades of the remaining windows are then drawn and the lantern
is operated in the usual way.
--Contributed by L. B. Evans, Lebanon, Ky.



** A Handy Drill Gauge [252]

The accompanying sketch shows a simple drill gauge which will be
found very handy for amateurs. The gauge consists of a piece of
hard wood, 3/4 in. thick, with a width and length that will be
suitable for the size and number of drills you have on hand. Drill
a hole through the wood with each drill you have and place a screw
eye in one end to be used as a hanger. When you want to drill a
hole for a pipe, bolt,

[Illustration: Drill Gauge]

screw, etc., you take the gauge and find what size drill must be
used in drilling the hole.-Contributed by Andrew G. Thome,
Louisville, Ky.



** Stove Polish [252]

A good stove polish can be made by mixing together 1 lb. of
plumbago, 4 oz. of turpentine, 4 oz. of water and 1 oz. of sugar.
Mix well and apply with a cloth or brush.

A Home-Made Daniell Cell [252]

An effective Daniell galvanic cell may be constructed from
material costing very little money. A common tin tomato can with a
copper wire soldered to the top forms the jar and positive
electrode. A piece of discarded stove zinc rolled into an open
cylinder of about 1-1/2-in. diameter, 5 in. long, with a copper
wire soldered at one end forms the negative electrode.

To make the porous cell, roll a piece of heavy brown wrapping
paper, or blotting paper, into a tube of several thicknesses,
about 5 in. long with an internal diameter of 2 in. Tie the paper
firmly to prevent unrolling and close up one end with plaster of
paris 1/2 in. thick. It is well to slightly choke the tube to
better retain the plaster. The paper used must be unsized so that
the solution scan mingle through the pores.

Two liquids are necessary for the cell. Make a strong solution in
a glass or wooden vessel of blue vitriol in water. Dilute some oil
of vitriol (sulphuric acid) with about 12 times its measure of
water and keep in a bottle when not in use. In making up the
solution, add the acid to the water with constant stirring. Do not
add water to the acid.

The cell is charged by placing the zinc in the paper tube and both
placed into the tin can. Connect the two wires and pour the dilute
acid into the porous cell around the zinc, and then immediately
turn the blue vitriol solution into the can outside the paper cup.

A current generates at once and metallic copper begins to deposit
on the inside of the can. It is best to let the action continue
for a half hour or so before putting the cell into use.

[Illustration: Daniell Cell]

Several hours working will be required before the film of copper
becomes sufficiently thick to protect the tin from corrosion when
the cell stands idle. For this reason it will be necessary to pour
out the blue vitriol solution into another receptacle immediately
after through using, as otherwise the tin would be soon eaten full
of holes. The porous cup should always be emptied after using to
prevent the diffusion of the blue vitriol solution into the cup,
and the paper tube must be well rinsed before putting away to dry.

This makes one of the most satisfactory battery cells on account
of the constancy of its current, running for hours at a time
without materially losing strength, and the low cost of
maintenance makes it especially adapted for amateurs' use. Its
current strength is about one volt, but can be made up into any
required voltage in series. A battery of a dozen cells should cost
not to exceed 50 cts. for the material, which will give a strong,
steady current, amply sufficient for all ordinary experimental
work.

A strong solution of common salt may be used in place of the oil
of vitriol in the porous cup, but is not so good.
--Contributed by C. H. Denniston, Pulteney. N. Y.



** A Home-Made Equatorial [253]
By Harry Clark

The ordinary equatorial is designed and built for the latitude of
the observatory where it is to be used. This is necessary since
the hour axis must point to the north pole of the heavens whose
elevation above the horizon is equal to the latitude of the
observer's station. The final adjustment of an ordinary equatorial
is very tedious so that when once set up it is not to be moved.
This calls for a suitable house to protect the instrument. It has
been the aim of the writer to build a very simple instrument for
amateur work which would be adjustable to any latitude, so easily
set up ready for work and so portable that it need not be left out
of doors from one evening until the next.

[Illustration: Instrument for Locating Stars]

The instrument is mounted on a tripod or piece of iron pipe
carrying a short vertical rod of 3/8-in. steel. A rectangular
wooden frame with suitable bearings rotates about this shaft. The
frame has also two horizontal bearings carrying a short shaft to
the end of which the frame carrying the hour axis is firmly
clamped. By this arrangement of two perpendicular shafts the hour
axis may be directed to any point in the heavens without care as
to how the tripod or pipe is set up.

The frame for the hour axis is about 12 in. long with a bearing at
each end. The shaft which it carries is 1/4-in. steel, carrying
the hour circle at one end, and at the other the frame for the
declination axis which is similar to the other, but somewhat
lighter. The declination axis is also of 1/4-in. steel, carrying
at one end the declination circle and the pointer at the other.

The entire frame of the instrument is made of cherry and it will
save the builder much time if he will purchase cherry "furniture"
which is used by printers and can be obtained from any printers'
supply company. It is best quality wood free from imperfections in
straight strips one yard long and of a uniform width of about 5/8
in. As to thickness, any multiple of 12-point (about 1/8 in.) may
be obtained, thus saving much work in fitting up joints. Fifty
cents will buy enough wood for an entire instrument. All corners
are carefully mortised and braced with small brass angle-pieces.
The frame is held together by small brass machine screws. After
much experimentation with bearings, it was found best to make them
in halves as metal bearings are usually made. The loose half is
held in place by guides on all four sides and is tightened by two
screws with milled nuts. A great deal of trouble was experienced
in boring out the bearings until the following method was devised.
One hole was bored as well as possible. The bearing was then
loosened and a bit run through it to bore the other. Finally, a
piece of shafting was roughened by rolling it on a file placed in
both bearings and turned with a brace. The bearings were gradually
tightened until perfectly ground.

The declination axis must be perpendicular to both the hour axis
and the line of sight over the pointer. To insure this, a positive
adjustment was provided. The end of the shaft is clamped in a
short block of wood by means of a bearing like the ones described.
One end of the block is hinged to the axis frame, while the other
end is attached by two screws, one drawing them together, the
other holding them apart. The axis is adjusted by turning these
screws. Each shaft, save the one in the pipe, is provided with
this adjustment.

The pointer is of two very thin strips placed at right angles and
tapered slightly at each end. The clamp is attached as shown in
the illustration. The eye piece is a black iron washer supported
on a small strip of wood. The aperture should be 1/4 in., since
the pupil of the eye dilates very much in darkness. The error due
to large aperture is reduced by using a very long pointer which
also makes it possible to focus the eye upon the front sight and
the star simultaneously. The forward sight is a bright brass peg
illuminated by a tiny electric lamp with a reflector to shield the
eye. The pointer arranged in this way is a great improvement over
the hollow tube sometimes used, since it allows an unobstructed
view of the heavens while indicating the exact point in question.

The circles of the instrument are of aluminum, attached to the
shafts by means of wooden clamps. They were nicely graduated by a
home-made dividing engine of very simple construction, and the
figures were engraved with a pantograph. The reading is indicated
by a cut on a small aluminum plate attached to a pointer. The hour
circle is divided into 24 parts and subdivided to every four
minutes. The figures are arranged so that when the instrument is
set up, the number of hours increases while the pointer travels
oppositely to the stars. The declination circle is graduated from
zero to 90 deg. in each direction from two points 180 deg. apart.
It is, adjusted to read zero when the pointer and two axes are
mutually perpendicular as shown in the picture.

To adjust the instrument it is set up on the iron pipe and the
pointer directed to some distant object. All set screws, excepting
those on the declination axis, are tightened. Then the pointer is
carefully turned through 180 deg. and if it is not again directed
to the same point, it is not perpendicular to the declination
axis. When properly set it will describe a great circle. With the
declination axis in an approximately horizontal position the place
where the pointer cuts the horizon is noted. The declination axis
is then turned through 180 deg., when the pointer should again cut
at the same place. Proper adjustment will cause it to do so. It is
desirable that the hour circle should read approximately zero when
the declination axis is horizontal, but this is not necessary for
a reason soon to be explained. All these adjustments, once
carefully made, need not be changed.

In using the instrument the hour axis can be directed to the north
pole by the following method. Point it approximately to the north
star. The pole is 1 deg. and 15 min. from the star on a straight
line from the star to "Mizar," the star at the bend of the handle
in the Big Dipper. Turn the hour circle into a position where the
pointer can describe a circle through "Mizar." Only a rough
setting is necessary. Now turn the pointer so that a reading of 88
deg. 45 min. shows on the declination circle on that side of 90
which is toward "Mizar." When this is done, clamp both axes and
turn the shafts in the base until the pointer is directed
accurately to the north star. It is evident from a study of the
picture that the position of the small pointer which indicates the
reading on the hour circle is not independent of the way in which
the tripod or pipe is set up. It would then be useless to adjust
it carefully to zero when the pointer cuts the "zenith" as is done
with a large equatorial. Instead, the adjustment is made by
setting the clock or watch which is part of the outfit. The
pointer is directed to Alpha, Cassiopiae, and the hour reading
subtracted from 24 hours (the approximate right ascension of the
star) gives the time which the clock should be set to indicate.
All of these settings should require not more than five minutes.

To find a star in the heavens, look up its declination and right
ascension in an atlas. Set the declination circle to its reading.
Subtract the clock time from the right ascension (plus 24 if
necessary) and set the hour circle to the result. The star will
then be seen on the tip of the pointer.

To locate a known star on the map, turn the pointer to the star.
Declination is read directly. Add the clock time to the hour
reading to get right ascension. If the result is more than 24
hours, subtract 24.



** A Ground Glass Substitute [255]

Ordinary plain glass coated with the following mixture will make a
good ground glass substitute: Dissolve 18 gr. of gum sandarac and
4 gr. of gum mastic in 3-1/2 dr.. of ether, then add 1 2-3 dr.
benzole. If this will be too transparent, add a little more
benzole, taking care not to add too much. Cover one side of a
clear glass and after drying it will produce a perfect surface for
use as a ground glass in cameras.
--Contributed by Ray E. Strosnider, Plain City, Ohio.



** A Miniature War Dance [255]

A piece of paper, 3 or 4 in. long, is folded several times, as
shown in the sketch, and the first fold marked out to represent
one-half of an Indian. Cut out all the folds at one time on the
dotted line and you will have as many men joined together as there
were folds in the paper. Join the hands of the two end men with a
little paste so as to form a circle of Indians holding hands.

The next thing to do is to punch holes in heavy cardboard that is
large enough to cover a pot or stew pan, and

[Illustration: Indian War Dance]

partially fill the vessel with water. Set this covered vessel over
a heat and bring the water to a boiling point and then set the
miniature Indians on the perforated cover. The dance will begin.

If the Indians are decked out with small feathers to represent the
head gear and trailing plumes, a great effect will be produced.
--Contributed by Maurice Baudier, New Orleans, La.



** Saving an Engine [255]

Turning the water on before starting the gas engine may prevent
breaking a cylinder on a cold day.



** OLD-TIME MAGIC [256]

Removing 36 Cannon Balls from a Handbag

The magician produces a small handbag and informs the audience
that he has it filled with 20-lb. cannon balls. He opens up the
bag and takes out a ball which he passes to the audience

[Illustration: Balls Made of Spring Wire]

for examination. The ball is found to be the genuine article. He
makes a few passes with the wand and produces another ball, and so
on until 36 of them lie on the floor.

In reality the first ball, which is the one examined, is the real
cannon ball, the others are spiral-spherical springs covered with
black cloth (Fig. 1). These balls can be pressed together in flat
disks and put in the bag, Fig. 2. without taking up any great
amount of space. When the spring is released it will fill out the
black cloth to represent a cannon ball that cannot be
distinguished from the real article.
--Contributed by J. F. Campbell, Somerville, Mass.



** A Rising Card Trick [256]

A rising card trick can be accomplished with very little skill by
using the simple device illustrated. The only

[Illustration: Card Slips from the Pack]

things needed are four ordinary playing cards and a short rubber
band. Pass one end of the rubber band through one card and the
other end through the other card, as shown in the illustration,
drawing the cards close together and fastening the ends by putting
a pin through them. The remaining two cards are pasted to the
first two so as to conceal the pins and ends of the rubber band.

Put the cards with the rubber band in a pack of cards; take any
other card from the pack and show it to the audience in such a way
that you do not see and know the card shown. Return the card to
the pack, but be sure and place it between the cards tied together
with the rubber band. Grasp the pack between your thumb and finger
tightly at first, and by gradually loosening your hold the card
previously shown to the audience will slowly rise out of the pack.
--Contributed by Tomi O'Kawara, San Francisco, Cal.



** Sliding Box Cover Fastener [256]

[Illustration: Box with Fastener]

While traveling through the country as a watchmaker I found it
quite convenient to keep my small drills, taps, small brooches,
etc., In boxes having a sliding cover. To keep the contents from
spilling or getting mixed in my case I used a small fastener as
shown in the accompanying illustration, The fastener is made of
steel or brass and fastened by means of small screws or tacks on
the outside of the box. A hole is drilled on the upper part to
receive the pin that is driven into the sliding cover. This pin
should not stick out beyond the thickness of the spring, which is
bent up at the point so the pin will freely pass under it. The pin
can be driven through the cover to prevent it from being pulled
entirely out of the box.
--Contributed by Herm Grabemann, Milwaukee, Wis.



** How to Chain a Dog [257]

A good way to chain a dog and give him plenty of ground for
exercise is to stretch a clothesline or a galvanized

[Illustration: The Dog Has Plenty of Room for Exercise]

wire between the house and barn on which is placed a ring large
enough to slide freely. The chain from the dog's collar is
fastened to the ring. This method can also be used for tethering a
cow or horse, the advantage being the use of a short tie rope
eliminating the possibility of the animal becoming entangled.



** Water-Color Box [257]

There are many different trays in the market for the purpose of
holding water colors, but they are either too expensive for the
average person or too small to be convenient. I do a great deal of
water-color work and always felt the need of a suitable color
dish. At last I found something that filled my want and suited my
pocketbook. I bought 22 individual salt dishes and made a box to
hold them, as shown in the illustration. This box has done good
service.

Some of the advantages are: Each color is in a separate dish which
can be easily taken out and cleaned; the dishes are deep enough to
prevent spilling the colors into the adjoining ones, and the box
can be made as big or as small as individual needs require. The
tray containing the color dishes and brushes rests on 1/4-in.
round pieces 2-1/4 in. from the bottom of the box, thus giving
ample store room for colors, prints, slides and extra brushes.

[Illustration: Color Trays Made of Salt Dishes]

--Contributed by B. Beller, Hartford, Connecticut.



** Saving Ink Pens [257]

Ink usually corrodes pens in a short time. This can be prevented
by placing pieces of steel pens or steel wire in the ink, which
will absorb the acid and prevent it from corroding the pens.



** A Plant-Food Percolator [258]

Obtain two butter tubs and bore a large number of 1/4-in. holes in
the bottom of one, then cover the perforated part with a piece of
