was belabored with whips till he started off at the top of his speed,
which his old owner, on account of his reversed position, was unable
to regulate.  He was followed by shouts and jeers from the miners,
who enjoyed this act of retributive justice.

"Mr. Bickford, you are avenged," said Joe,

"So I am, Joe.  I'm glad I've got my hoss back; but I can't help
pityin' poor old Rip-tail, after all.  I don't believe he ever killed
a wildcat in his life."




CHAPTER XXXII

TAKING ACCOUNT OF STOCK

Three months passed.  They were not eventful.  The days were spent in
steady and monotonous work; the nights were passed around the
camp-fire, telling and hearing, stories and talking of home.  Most of
their companions gambled and drank, but Mr. Bickford and Joe kept
clear of these pitfalls.

"Come, man, drink with me," more than once one of his comrades said
to Joshua.

"No, thank you," said Joshua.

"Why not?  Ain't I good enough?" asked the other, half offended.

"You mean I'm puttin' on airs 'cause I won't drink with you?  No,
sir-ree.  There isn't a man I'd drink with sooner than with you."

"Come up, then, old fellow.  What'll you take?"

"I'll take a sandwich, if you insist on it."

"That's vittles.  What'll you drink?"

"Nothing but water.  That's strong enough for me."

"Danged if I don't believe you're a minister in disguise."

"I guess I'd make a cur'us preacher," said Joshua, with a comical
twist of his features.  "You wouldn't want to hear me preach more'n
once."

In this way our friend Mr. Bickford managed to evade the hospitable
invitations of his comrades and still retain their good-will--not
always an easy thing to achieve in those times.

Joe was equally positive in declining to drink, but it was easier for
him to escape.  Even the most confirmed drinkers felt it to be wrong
to coax a boy to drink against his will.

There was still another--Kellogg--who steadfastly adhered to cold
water, or tea and coffee, as a beverage.  These three were dubbed by
their companions the "Cold-Water Brigade," and accepted the
designation good-naturedly.

"Joshua," said Joe, some three months after their arrival, "have you
taken account of stock lately?"

"No," said Joshua, "but I'll do it now."

After a brief time he announced the result.

"I've got about five hundred dollars, or thereabouts," he said.

"You have done a little better than I have."

"How much have you?"

"About four hundred and fifty."

"I owe you twenty-five dollars, Joe.  That'll make us even."

Joshua was about to transfer twenty-five dollars to Joe, when the
latter stayed his hand.

"Don't be in a hurry, Mr. Bickford," he said.  "Wait till we get to
the city."

"Do you know, Joe," said Joshua, in a tone of satisfaction, "I am
richer than I was when I sot out from home?"

"I am glad to hear it, Mr. Bickford.  You have worked hard, and
deserve your luck."

"I had only three hundred dollars then; now I've got four hundred and
seventy-five, takin' out what I owe you."

"You needn't take it out at all."

"You've done enough for me, Joe.  I don't want you to give me that
debt."

"Remember, Joshua, I have got a business in the city paying me money
all the time.  I expect my share of the profits will be more than I
have earned out here."

"That's good.  I wish I'd got a business like you.  You'd be all
right even if you only get enough to pay expenses here."

"That's so."

"I am getting rather tired of this place, Mr. Bickford," said Joe,
after a little pause.

"You don't think of going back to the city?" asked Joshua
apprehensively.

"Not directly, but I think I should like to see a little more of
California.  These are not the only diggings."

"Where do you want to go?"

"I haven't considered yet.  The main thing is, will you go with me?"

"We won't part company, Joe."

"Good!  Then I'll inquire, and see what I can find out about other
places.  This pays fairly, but there is little chance of getting
nuggets of any size hereabouts."

"I'd just like to find one worth two thousand dollars.  I'd start for
home mighty quick, and give Sukey Smith a chance to become Mrs.
Bickford."

"Success to you!" said Joe, laughing.




CHAPTER XXXIII

A STARTLING TABLEAU

Joe finally decided on some mines a hundred miles distant in a
southwesterly direction.  They were reported to be rich and promising.

"At any rate," said he, "even if they are no better than here, we
shall get a little variety and change of scene."

"That'll be good for our appetite."

"I don't think, Mr. Bickford, that either of us need be concerned
about his appetite.   Mine is remarkably healthy."

"Nothing was ever the matter with mine," said Joshua, "as long as the
provisions held out."

They made some few preparations of a necessary character.  Their
clothing was in rags, and they got a new outfit at the mining store.
Each also provided himself with a rifle.  The expense of these made
some inroads upon their stock of money, but by the time they were
ready to start they had eight hundred dollars between them, besides
their outfit, and this they considered satisfactory.

Kellogg at first proposed to go with them, but finally he changed his
mind.

"I am in a hurry to get home," he said, "and these mines are a sure
thing.  If I were as young as you, I would take the risk.  As it is,
I had better not.  I've got a wife and child at home, and I want to
go back to them as soon as I can."

"You are right," said Joe.

"I've got a girl at home," said Joshua, "but I guess she'll wait for
me."

"Suppose she don't," suggested Joe.

"I shan't break my heart," said Mr. Bickford.  "There's more than one
girl in the world."

"I see you are a philosopher, Mr. Bickford," said his old
schoolmaster.

"I don't know about that, but I don't intend to make a fool of myself
for any gal.  I shall say, 'Sukey, here I am; I've got a little
money, and I'm your'n till death if you say so.  If you don't want
me, I won't commit susancide."

"That's a capital joke, Joshua," said Joe.  "Her name is Susan, isn't
it?"

"Have I made a joke?  Waal, I didn't go to do it."

"It is unconscious wit, Mr. Bickford," said Kellogg.

"Pooty good joke, ain't it?" said Joshua complacently.  "Susan-cide,
and her name is Susan.  Ho! ho!  I never thought on't."

And Joshua roared in appreciation of the joke which he had
unwittingly perpetrated, for it must be explained that he thought
susan-cide the proper form of the word expressing a voluntary
severing of the vital cord.

Years afterward, when Joshua found himself the center of a social
throng, he was wont to say, "Ever heard that joke I made about
Susan?" and then he would cite it amid the plaudits of his friends.

Mr. Bickford and Joe had not disposed of their horses.  They had
suffered them to forage in the neighborhood of the river, thinking it
possible that the time would come when they would require them.

One fine morning they set out from the camp near the banks of the
Yuba and set their faces in a southwesterly direction.  They had made
themselves popular among their comrades, and the miners gave them a
hearty cheer as they started.

"Good luck, Joe!  Good luck, old man!" they exclaimed heartily.

"The same to you, boy!"

So with mutual good feeling they parted company.

"We ain't leavin' like our friend from Pike County," said Mr.
Bickford.  "I often think of the poor critter trottin' off with face
to the rear."

"I hope we shan't meet him or any of his kind," said Joe.

"So do I.  He'd better go and live among the wildcats."

"He is some like them.  He lives upon others."

It would only be wearisome to give a detailed account of the journey
of the two friends.  One incident will suffice.

On the fourth day Joe suddenly exclaimed in excitement:

"Look, Joshua!"

"By gosh!"

The exclamation was a natural one.  At the distance of forty rods a
man was visible, his hat off, his face wild with fear, and in
dangerous proximity a grizzly bear of the largest size doggedly
pursuing him.

"It's Hogan!" exclaimed Joe in surprise.  "We must save him."

CHAPTER XXXIV

A GRIZZLY ON THE WAR-PATH

It may surprise some of my young friends to learn that the grizzly
bear is to be found in California.  Though as the State has increased
in population mostly all have been killed off, even now among the
mountains they may be found, and occasionally visit the lower slopes
and attack men and beasts.

Hogan had had the ill-luck to encounter one of these animals.

When he first saw the grizzly there was a considerable space between
them.  If he had concealed himself, he might have escaped the notice
of the beast, but when he commenced running the grizzly became aware
of his presence and started in pursuit.

Hogan was rather dilapidated in appearance.  Trusting to luck instead
of labor, he had had a hard time, as he might have expected.  His
flannel shirt was ragged and his nether garments showed the ravages
of time.  In the race his hat had dropped off and his rough, unkempt
hair was erect with fright.  He was running rapidly, but was already
showing signs of exhaustion.  The bear was getting over the ground
with clumsy speed, appearing to take it easily, but overhauling his
intended victim slowly, but surely.

Joe and Bickford were standing on one side, and had not yet attracted
the attention of either party in this unequal race.

"Poor chap!" said Joshua.  "He looks most tuckered out.  Shall I
shoot?"

"Wait till the bear gets a little nearer.  We can't afford to miss.
He will turn on us."

"I'm in a hurry to roll the beast over," said Joshua.  "It's a cruel
sight to see a grizzly hunting a man."

At this moment Hogan turned his head with the terror-stricken look of
a man who felt that he was lost.

The bear was little more than a hundred feet behind him and was
gaining steadily.  He was already terribly fatigued--his breathing
was reduced to a hoarse pant.  He was overcome by the terror of the
situation, and his remaining strength gave way.  With a shrill cry he
sank down upon the ground, and, shutting his eyes, awaited the attack.

The bear increased his speed.

"Now let him have it!" said Joe in a sharp, quick whisper.

Mr. Bickford fired, striking the grizzly in the face.

Bruin stood still and roared angrily.  He wagged his large head from
one side to the other, seeking by whom this attack was made.

He espied the two friends, and, abandoning his pursuit of Hogan,
rolled angrily toward them.

"Give it to him quick, Joe!" exclaimed Bickford.  "He's making for
us."

Joe held his rifle with steady hand and took deliberate aim.  It was
well he did, for had he failed both he and Bickford would have been
in great peril.

His faithful rifle did good service.

The bear tumbled to the earth with sudden awkwardness.  The bullet
had reached a vital part and the grizzly was destined to do no more
mischief.

"Is he dead, or only feigning?" asked Joe prudently.

"He's a gone coon," said Joshua.  "Let us go up and look at him."

They went up and stood over the huge beast.  He was not quite dead.
He opened his glazing eyes, made a convulsive movement with his paws
as if he would like to attack his foes, and then his head fell back
and he moved no more.

"He's gone, sure enough," said Bickford.  "Good-by, old grizzly.  You
meant well, but circumstances interfered with your good intentions."

"Now let us look up Hogan," said Joe.

The man had sunk to the ground utterly exhausted, and in his weakness
and terror had fainted.

Joe got some water and threw it in his face.

He opened his eyes and drew a deep breath.  A sudden recollection
blanched his face anew, and he cried:

"Don't let him get at me!"

"You're safe, Mr. Hogan," said Joe.  "The bear is dead."

"Dead!  Is he really dead?"

"If you don't believe it, get up and look at him," said Bickford.

"I can't get up--I'm so weak."

"Let me help you, then.  There--do you see the critter?"

Hogan shuddered as he caught sight of the huge beast only twenty-five
feet distant from him.

"Was he as near as that?" he gasped.

"He almost had you," said Bickford.  "If it hadn't been for Joe and
me, he'd have been munchin' you at this identical minute.  Things
have changed a little, and in place of the bear eatin' you you shall
help eat the bear."

By this time Hogan, realizing that he was safe, began to recover his
strength.  As he did so he became angry with the beast that had
driven him such a hard race for life.  He ran up to the grizzly and
kicked him.

"Take that!" he exclaimed with an oath.  "I wish you wasn't dead, so
that I could stick my knife into you."

"If he wasn't dead you'd keep your distance," said Joshua dryly.  "It
don't require much courage to tackle him now."

Hogan felt this to be a reflection upon his courage.

"I guess you'd have run, too, if he'd been after you," he said.

"I guess I should.  Bears are all very well in their place, but I'd
rather not mingle with 'em socially.  They're very affectionate and
fond of hugging, but if I'm going to be hugged I wouldn't choose a
bear."

"You seem to think I was a coward for runnin' from the bear."

"No, I don't.  How do I know you was runnin' from the bear?  Maybe
you was only takin' a little exercise to get up an appetite for
dinner."

"I am faint and weak," said Hogan.  "I haven't had anything to eat
for twelve hours."

"You shall have some food," said Joe.  "Joshua, where are the
provisions?  We may as well sit down and lunch."

"Jest as you say, Joe.  I most generally have an appetite."

There was a mountain spring within a stone's throw.  Joshua took a
tin pail and brought some of the sparkling beverage, which he offered
first to Hogan.

Hogan drank greedily.  His throat was parched and dry, and he needed
it.

He drew a deep breath of relief.
