"THREE CHEERS FOR THE GIRL THAT SAVED THE FLAG FROM THE HANDS OF THE
ENEMY!"

He was sore and bitter enough already; lonely, isolated enough; with
no lot nor share in the honest community life; no hand to shake, no
neighbor's meal to share; and this unexpected public arraignment smote
him between the eyes. With resentment newly kindled, pride wounded,
vanity bleeding, he flung a curse at the joyous throng and drove toward
home, the home where he would find his ragged children and meet the
timid eyes of a woman who had been the loyal partner of his poverty and
disgraces.

It is probable that even then his (extremely light) hand was already on
the "new leaf." The angels, doubtless, were not especially proud of the
matter and manner of his reformation, but I dare say they were glad to
count him theirs on any terms, so difficult is the reformation of this
blind and foolish world! They must have been; for they immediately
flung into his very lap a profitable, and what is more to the point, an
interesting and agreeable situation where money could be earned by doing
the very things his nature craved. There were feats of daring to be
performed in sight of admiring and applauding stable boys; the horses
he loved were his companions; he was OBLIGED to "swap," for Daly, his
employer, counted on him to get rid of all undesirable stock; power and
responsibility of a sort were given him freely, for Daly was no Puritan,
and felt himself amply capable of managing any number of Simpsons;
so here were numberless advantages within the man's grasp, and wages
besides!

Abner positively felt no temptation to steal; his soul expanded with
pride, and the admiration and astonishment with which he regarded
his virtuous present was only equaled by the disgust with which he
contemplated his past; not so much a vicious past, in his own generous
estimation of it, as a "thunderin' foolish" one.

Mrs. Simpson took the same view of Abner's new leaf as the angels.
She was thankful for even a brief season of honesty coupled with the
Saturday night remittance; and if she still washed and cried and cried
and washed, as Clara Belle had always seen her, it was either because of
some hidden sorrow, or because her poor strength seemed all at once to
have deserted her.

Just when employment and good fortune had come to the step-children, and
her own were better fed and clothed than ever before, the pain that had
always lurked, constant but dull, near her tired heart, grew fierce
and triumphantly strong; clutching her in its talons, biting, gnawing,
worrying, leaving her each week with slighter powers of resistance.
Still hope was in the air and a greater content than had ever been hers
was in her eyes; a content that came near to happiness when the doctor
ordered her to keep her bed and sent for Clara Belle. She could not wash
any longer, but there was the ever new miracle of the Saturday night
remittance for household expenses.

"Is your pain bad today, mother," asked Clara Belle, who, only lately
given away, was merely borrowed from Mrs. Fogg for what was thought to
be a brief emergency.

"Well, there, I can't hardly tell, Clara Belle," Mrs. Simpson replied,
with a faint smile. "I can't seem to remember the pain these days
without it's extra bad. The neighbors are so kind; Mrs. Little has sent
me canned mustard greens, and Mrs. Benson chocolate ice cream and mince
pie; there's the doctor's drops to make me sleep, and these blankets
and that great box of eatables from Mr. Ladd; and you here to keep me
comp'ny! I declare I'm kind o' dazed with comforts. I never expected to
see sherry wine in this house. I ain't never drawed the cork; it does
me good enough jest to look at Mr. Ladd's bottle settin' on the
mantel-piece with the fire shinin' on the brown glass."

Mr. Simpson had come to see his wife and had met the doctor just as he
was leaving the house.

"She looks awful bad to me. Is she goin' to pull through all right, same
as the last time?" he asked the doctor nervously.

"She's going to pull right through into the other world," the doctor
answered bluntly; "and as there don't seem to be anybody else to take
the bull by the horns, I'd advise you, having made the woman's life
about as hard and miserable as you could, to try and help her to die
easy!"

Abner, surprised and crushed by the weight of this verbal chastisement,
sat down on the doorstep, his head in his hands, and thought a while
solemnly. Thought was not an operation he was wont to indulge in, and
when he opened the gate a few minutes later and walked slowly toward
the barn for his horse, he looked pale and unnerved. It is uncommonly
startling, first to see yourself in another man's scornful eyes, and
then, clearly, in your own.

Two days later he came again, and this time it was decreed that he
should find Parson Carll tying his piebald mare at the post.

Clara Belle's quick eye had observed the minister as he alighted from
his buggy, and, warning her mother, she hastily smoothed the bedclothes,
arranged the medicine bottles, and swept the hearth.

"Oh! Don't let him in!" wailed Mrs. Simpson, all of a flutter at the
prospect of such a visitor. "Oh, dear! They must think over to the
village that I'm dreadful sick, or the minister wouldn't never think
of callin'! Don't let him in, Clara Belle! I'm afraid he will say hard
words to me, or pray to me; and I ain't never been prayed to since I was
a child! Is his wife with him?"

"No; he's alone; but father's just drove up and is hitching at the shed
door."

"That's worse than all!" and Mrs. Simpson raised herself feebly on her
pillows and clasped her hands in despair. "You mustn't let them two
meet, Clara Belle, and you must send Mr. Carll away; your father
wouldn't have a minister in the house, nor speak to one, for a thousand
dollars!"

"Be quiet, mother! Lie down! It'll be all right! You'll only fret
yourself into a spell! The minister's just a good man; he won't say
anything to frighten you. Father's talking with him real pleasant, and
pointing the way to the front door."

The parson knocked and was admitted by the excited Clara Belle, who
ushered him tremblingly into the sickroom, and then betook herself to
the kitchen with the children, as he gently requested her.

Abner Simpson, left alone in the shed, fumbled in his vest pocket and
took out an envelope which held a sheet of paper and a tiny packet
wrapped in tissue paper. The letter had been read once before and ran as
follows:

Dear Mr. Simpson:

This is a secret letter. I heard that the Acreville people weren't nice
to Mrs. Simpson because she didn't have any wedding ring like all the
others.

I know you've always been poor, dear Mr. Simpson, and troubled with a
large family like ours at the farm; but you really ought to have given
Mrs. Simpson a ring when you were married to her, right at the very
first; for then it would have been over and done with, as they are solid
gold and last forever. And probably she wouldn't feel like asking you
for one, because ladies are just like girls, only grown up, and I know
I'd be ashamed to beg for jewelry when just board and clothes cost
so much. So I send you a nice, new wedding ring to save your buying,
thinking you might get Mrs. Simpson a bracelet or eardrops for
Christmas. It did not cost me anything, as it was a secret present from
a friend.

I hear Mrs. Simpson is sick, and it would be a great comfort to her
while she is in bed and has so much time to look at it. When I had
the measles Emma Jane Perkins lent me her mother's garnet ring, and it
helped me very much to put my wasted hand outside the bedclothes and see
the ring sparkling.

Please don't be angry with me, dear Mr. Simpson, because I like you
so much and am so glad you are happy with the horses and colts; and I
believe now perhaps you DID think the flag was a bundle of washing
when you took it that day; so no more from your Trusted friend, Rebecca
Rowena Randall.

Simpson tore the letter slowly and quietly into fragments and scattered
the bits on the woodpile, took off his hat, and smoothed his hair;
pulled his mustaches thoughtfully, straightened his shoulders, and then,
holding the tiny packet in the palm of his hand, he went round to the
front door, and having entered the house stood outside the sickroom for
an instant, turned the knob and walked softly in.

Then at last the angels might have enjoyed a moment of unmixed joy, for
in that brief walk from shed to house Abner Simpson;'s conscience waked
to life and attained sufficient strength to prick and sting, to provoke
remorse, to incite penitence, to do all sorts of divine and beautiful
things it was meant for, but had never been allowed to do.

Clara Belle went about the kitchen quietly, making preparations for the
children's supper. She had left Riverboro in haste, as the change for
the worse in Mrs. Simpson had been very sudden, but since she had come
she had thought more than once of the wedding ring. She had wondered
whether Mr. Ladd had bought it for Rebecca, and whether Rebecca would
find means to send it to Acreville; but her cares had been so many and
varied that the subject had now finally retired to the background of her
mind.

The hands of the clock crept on and she kept hushing the strident tones
of Elijah and Elisha, opening and shutting the oven door to look at
the corn bread, advising Susan as to her dishes, and marveling that the
minister stayed so long.

At last she heard a door open and close and saw the old parson come
out, wiping his spectacles, and step into the buggy for his drive to the
village.

Then there was another period of suspense, during which the house was
as silent as the grave, and presently her father came into the kitchen,
greeted the twins and Susan, and said to Clara Belle: "Don't go in there
yet!" jerking his thumb towards Mrs. Simpson's room; "she's all beat out
and she's just droppin' off to sleep. I'll send some groceries up from
the store as I go along. Is the doctor makin' a second call tonight?"

"Yes; he'll be here pretty soon, now," Clara Belle answered, looking at
the clock.

"All right. I'll be here again tomorrow, soon as it's light, and if she
ain't picked up any I'll send word back to Daly, and stop here with you
for a spell till she's better."

It was true; Mrs. Simpson was "all beat out." It had been a time of
excitement and stress, and the poor, fluttered creature was dropping off
into the strangest sleep--a sleep made up of waking dreams. The pain,
that had encompassed her heart like a band of steel, lessened its cruel
pressure, and finally left her so completely that she seemed to see it
floating above her head; only that it looked no longer like a band of
steel, but a golden circle.

The frail bark in which she had sailed her life voyage had been rocking
on a rough and tossing ocean, and now it floated, floated slowly into
smoother waters.

As long as she could remember, her boat had been flung about in storm
and tempest, lashed by angry winds, borne against rocks, beaten, torn,
buffeted. Now the waves had subsided; the sky was clear; the sea was
warm and tranquil; the sunshine dried the tattered sails; the air was
soft and balmy.

And now, for sleep plays strange tricks, the bark disappeared from the
dream, and it was she, herself, who was floating, floating farther and
farther away; whither she neither knew nor cared; it was enough to be at
rest, lulled by the lapping of the cool waves.

Then there appeared a green isle rising from the sea; an isle so radiant
and fairy-like that her famished eyes could hardly believe its reality;
but it was real, for she sailed nearer and nearer to its shores, and at
last her feet skimmed the shining sands and she floated through the
air as disembodied spirits float, till she sank softly at the foot of a
spreading tree.

Then she saw the green isle was a flowering isle. Every shrub and bush
was blooming; the trees were hung with rosy garlands, and even the earth
was carpeted with tiny flowers. The rare fragrances, the bird songs,
soft and musical, the ravishment of color, all bore down upon her
swimming senses at once, taking them captive so completely that she
remembered no past, was conscious of no present, looked forward to no
future. She seemed to leave the body and the sad, heavy things of the
body. The humming in her ears ceased, the light faded, the birds songs
grew fainter and more distant, the golden circle of pain receded farther
and farther until it was lost to view; even the flowering island gently
drifted away, and all was peace and silence.

It was time for the doctor now, and Clara Belle, too anxious to wait
longer, softly turned the knob of her mother's door and entered the
room. The glow of the open fire illumined the darkest side of the poor
chamber. There were no trees near the house, and a full November moon
streamed in at the unblinded, uncurtained windows, lighting up the bare
interior--the unpainted floor, the gray plastered walls, and the white
counterpane.

Her mother lay quite still, her head turned and drooping a little on
the pillow. Her left hand was folded softly up against her breast, the
fingers of the right partly covering it, as if protecting something
precious.

Was it the moonlight that made the patient brow so white, and where were
the lines of anxiety and pain? The face of the mother who had washed
and cried and cried and washed was as radiant as if the closed eye were
beholding heavenly visions.

"Something must have cured her!" thought Clara Belle, awed and almost
frightened by the whiteness and the silence.

She tiptoed across the floor to look more closely at the still, smiling
shape, and bending over it saw, under the shadow of the caressing right
hand, a narrow gold band gleaming on the work-stained finger.

"Oh, the ring came, after all!" she said in a glad whisper, "and perhaps
it was that that made her better!"

She put her hand on her mother's gently. A terrified shiver, a warning
shudder, shook the girl from head to foot at the chilling touch. A dread
presence she had never met before suddenly took shape. It filled the
room; stifled the cry on her lips; froze her steps to the floor, stopped
the beating of her heart.

Just then the door opened.

"Oh, doctor! Come quick!" she sobbed, stretching out her hand for
help, and then covering her eyes. "Come close! Look at mother! Is she
better--or is she dead?"

The doctor put one hand on the shoulder of the shrinking child, and
touched the woman with the other.

"She is better!" he said gently, "and she is dead."




Tenth Chronicle. REBECCA'S REMINISCENCES


Rebecca was sitting by the window in her room at the Wareham Female
Seminary. She was alone, as her roommate, Emma Jane Perkins, was
reciting Latin down below in some academic vault of the old brick
building.

A new and most ardent passion for the classics had been born in Emma
Jane's hitherto unfertile brain, for Abijah Flagg, who was carrying off
all the prizes at Limerick Academy, had written her a letter in Latin, a
letter which she had been unable to translate for herself, even with the
aid of a dictionary, and which she had been apparently unwilling that
Rebecca, her bosom friend, confidant, and roommate, should render into
English.

An old-fashioned Female Seminary, with its allotment of one medium-sized
room to two medium sized young females, gave small opportunities for
privacy by night or day, for neither the double washstand, nor the thus
far unimagined bathroom, nor even indeed the humble and serviceable
screen, had been realized, in these dark ages of which I write.
Accordingly, like the irrational ostrich, which defends itself by the
simple process of not looking at its pursuers, Emma Jane had kept her
Latin letter in her closed hand, in her pocket, or in her open book,
flattering herself that no one had noticed her pleased bewilderment at
its only half-imagined contents.

All the fairies were not present at Rebecca's cradle. A goodly number of
them telegraphed that they were previously engaged or unavoidably absent
from town. The village of Temperance, Maine, where Rebecca first saw the
light, was hardly a place on its own merits to attract large throngs of
fairies. But one dear old personage who keeps her pocket full of Merry
Leaves from the Laughing Tree, took a fancy to come to the little
birthday party; and seeing so few of her sister-fairies present, she
dowered the sleeping baby more richly than was her wont, because of its
apparent lack of wealth in other directions. So the child grew, and the
Merry Leaves from the Laughing Tree rustled where they hung from the
hood of her cradle, and, being fairy leaves, when the cradle was
given up they festooned themselves on the cribside, and later on blew
themselves up to the ceilings at Sunnybook Farm and dangled there,
making fun for everybody. They never withered, even at the brick house
in Riverboro, where the air was particularly inimical to fairies,
for Miss Miranda Sawyer would have scared any ordinary elf out of her
seventeen senses. They followed Rebecca to Wareham, and during Abijah
Flagg's Latin correspondence with Emma Jane they fluttered about that
young person's head in such a manner that Rebecca was almost afraid that
she would discover them herself, although this is something, as a matter
of fact, that never does happen.

A week had gone by since the Latin missive had been taken from
the post-office by Emma Jane, and now, by means of much midnight
oil-burning, by much cautious questioning of Miss Maxwell, by such
scrutiny of the moods and tenses of Latin verbs as wellnigh destroyed
her brain tissue, she had mastered its romantic message. If it was
conventional in style, Emma Jane never suspected it. If some of the
similes seemed to have been culled from the Latin poets, and some of the
phrases built up from Latin exercises, Emma Jane was neither scholar
nor critic; the similes, the phrases, the sentiments, when finally
translated and written down in black-and-white English, made, in her
opinion, the most convincing and heart-melting document ever sent
through the mails:

Mea cara Emma:

Cur audeo scribere ad te epistulam? Es mihi dea! Semper es in mea anima.
Iterum et iterum es cum me in somnis. Saepe video tuas capillos auri,
tuos pulchros oculos similes caelo, tuas genas, quasi rubentes rosas
in nive. Tua vox est dulcior quam cantus avium aut murmur rivuli in
montibus.
