into a mortal fever."

"Methinks they were miserable men--these royal governors of
Massachusetts," observed Miss Joliffe. "Heavens! how dim the light
grows!"

It was certainly a fact that the large lamp which illuminated the
staircase now burned dim and duskily; so that several figures which
passed hastily down the stairs and went forth from the porch appeared
rather like shadows than persons of fleshly substance.

Sir William Howe and his guests stood at the doors of the contiguous
apartments watching the progress of this singular pageant with various
emotions of anger, contempt or half-acknowledged fear, but still with
an anxious curiosity. The shapes which now seemed hastening to join
the mysterious procession were recognized rather by striking
peculiarities of dress or broad characteristics of manner than by any
perceptible resemblance of features to their prototypes. Their faces,
indeed, were invariably kept in deep shadow, but Dr. Byles and other
gentlemen who had long been familiar with the successive rulers of the
province were heard to whisper the names of Shirley, of Pownall, of
Sir Francis Bernard and of the well-remembered Hutchinson, thereby
confessing that the actors, whoever they might be, in this spectral
march of governors had succeeded in putting on some distant
portraiture of the real personages. As they vanished from the door,
still did these shadows toss their arms into the gloom of night with a
dread expression of woe. Following the mimic representative of
Hutchinson came a military figure holding before his face the cocked
hat which he had taken from his powdered head, but his epaulettes and
other insignia of rank were those of a general officer, and something
in his mien reminded the beholders of one who had recently been master
of the province-house and chief of all the land.

"The shape of Gage, as true as in a looking-glass!" exclaimed Lord
Percy, turning pale.

"No, surely," cried Miss Joliffe, laughing hysterically; "it could not
be Gage, or Sir William would have greeted his old comrade in arms.
Perhaps he will not suffer the next to pass unchallenged."

"Of that be assured, young lady," answered Sir William Howe, fixing
his eyes with a very marked expression upon the immovable visage of
her grandfather. "I have long enough delayed to pay the ceremonies of
a host to these departing guests; the next that takes his leave shall
receive due courtesy."

A wild and dreary burst of music came through the open door. It seemed
as it the procession, which had been gradually filling up its ranks,
were now about to move, and that this loud peal of the wailing
trumpets and roll of the muffled drums were a call to some loiterer to
make haste. Many eyes, by an irresistible impulse, were turned upon
Sir William Howe, as if it were he whom the dreary music summoned to
the funeral of departed power.

"See! here comes the last," whispered Miss Joliffe, pointing her
tremulous finger to the staircase.

A figure had come into view as if descending the stairs, although so
dusky was the region whence it emerged some of the spectators fancied
that they had seen this human shape suddenly moulding itself amid the
gloom. Downward the figure came with a stately and martial tread, and,
reaching the lowest stair, was observed to be a tall man booted and
wrapped in a military cloak, which was drawn up around the face so as
to meet the napped brim of a laced hat; the features, therefore, were
completely hidden. But the British officers deemed that they had seen
that military cloak before, and even recognized the frayed embroidery
on the collar, as well as the gilded scabbard of a sword which
protruded from the folds of the cloak and glittered in a vivid gleam
of light. Apart from these trifling particulars there were
characteristics of gait and bearing which impelled the wondering
guests to glance from the shrouded figure to Sir William Howe, as if
to satisfy themselves that their host had not suddenly vanished from
the midst of them. With a dark flush of wrath upon his brow, they saw
the general draw his sword and advance to meet the figure in the cloak
before the latter had stepped one pace upon the floor.

"Villain, unmuffle yourself!" cried he. "You pass no farther."

The figure, without blenching a hair's-breadth from the sword which
was pointed at his breast, made a solemn pause and lowered the cape of
the cloak from about his face, yet not sufficiently for the spectators
to catch a glimpse of it. But Sir William Howe had evidently seen
enough. The sternness of his countenance gave place to a look of wild
amazement, if not horror, while he recoiled several steps from the
figure and let fall his sword upon the floor. The martial shape again
drew the cloak about his features and passed on, but, reaching the
threshold with his back toward the spectators, he was seen to stamp
his foot and shake his clenched hands in the air. It was afterward
affirmed that Sir William Howe had repeated that selfsame gesture of
rage and sorrow when for the last time, and as the last royal
governor, he passed through the portal of the province-house.

"Hark! The procession moves," said Miss Joliffe.

The music was dying away along the street, and its dismal strains were
mingled with the knell of midnight from the steeple of the Old South
and with the roar of artillery which announced that the beleaguered
army of Washington had intrenched itself upon a nearer height than
before. As the deep boom of the cannon smote upon his ear Colonel
Joliffe raised himself to the full height of his aged form and smiled
sternly on the British general.

"Would Your Excellency inquire further into the mystery of the
pageant?" said he.

"Take care of your gray head!" cried Sir William Howe, fiercely,
though with a quivering lip. "It has stood too long on a traitor's
shoulders."

"You must make haste to chop it off, then," calmly replied the
colonel, "for a few hours longer, and not all the power of Sir William
Howe, nor of his master, shall cause one of these gray hairs to fall.
The empire of Britain in this ancient province is at its last gasp
to-night; almost while I speak it is a dead corpse, and methinks the
shadows of the old governors are fit mourners at its funeral."

With these words Colonel Joliffe threw on his cloak, and, drawing his
granddaughter's arm within his own, retired from the last festival
that a British ruler ever held in the old province of Massachusetts
Bay. It was supposed that the colonel and the young lady possessed
some secret intelligence in regard to the mysterious pageant of that
night. However this might be, such knowledge has never become general.
The actors in the scene have vanished into deeper obscurity than even
that wild Indian hand who scattered the cargoes of the tea-ships on
the waves and gained a place in history, yet left no names. But
superstition, among other legends of this mansion, repeats the
wondrous tale that on the anniversary night of Britain's discomfiture
the ghosts of the ancient governors of Massachusetts still glide
through the portal of the Province House. And last of all comes a
figure shrouded in a military cloak, tossing his clenched hands into
the air and stamping his iron-shod boots upon the broad freestone
steps with a semblance of feverish despair, but without the sound of a
foot-tramp.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the truth-telling accents of the elderly gentleman were hushed, I
drew a long breath and looked round the room, striving with the best
energy of my imagination to throw a tinge of romance and historic
grandeur over the realities of the scene. But my nostrils snuffed up a
scent of cigar-smoke, clouds of which the narrator had emitted by way
of visible emblem, I suppose, of the nebulous obscurity of his tale.
Moreover, my gorgeous fantasies were woefully disturbed by the
rattling of the spoon in a tumbler of whiskey-punch which Mr. Thomas
Waite was mingling for a customer. Nor did it add to the picturesque
appearance of the panelled walls that the slate of the Brookline stage
was suspended against them, instead of the armorial escutcheon of some
far-descended governor. A stage-driver sat at one of the windows
reading a penny paper of the day--the Boston _Times_--and presenting a
figure which could nowise be brought into any picture of "Times in
Boston" seventy or a hundred years ago. On the window-seat lay a
bundle neatly done up in brown paper, the direction of which I had the
idle curiosity to read: "MISS SUSAN HUGGINS, at the PROVINCE HOUSE." A
pretty chambermaid, no doubt. In truth, it is desperately hard work
when we attempt to throw the spell of hoar antiquity over localities
with which the living world and the day that is passing over us have
aught to do. Yet, as I glanced at the stately staircase down which the
procession of the old governors had descended, and as I emerged
through the venerable portal whence their figures had preceded me, it
gladdened me to be conscious of a thrill of awe. Then, diving through
the narrow archway, a few strides transported me into the densest
throng of Washington street.




II.

EDWARD RANDOLPH'S PORTRAIT.


The old legendary guest of the Province House abode in my remembrance
from midsummer till January. One idle evening last winter, confident
that he would be found in the snuggest corner of the bar-room, I
resolved to pay him another visit, hoping to deserve well of my
country by snatching from oblivion some else unheard-of fact of
history. The night was chill and raw, and rendered boisterous by
almost a gale of wind which whistled along Washington street, causing
the gaslights to flare and flicker within the lamps.

As I hurried onward my fancy was busy with a comparison between the
present aspect of the street and that which it probably wore when the
British governors inhabited the mansion whither I was now going. Brick
edifices in those times were few till a succession of destructive
fires had swept, and swept again, the wooden dwellings and warehouses
from the most populous quarters of the town. The buildings stood
insulated and independent, not, as now, merging their separate
existences into connected ranges with a front of tiresome identity,
but each possessing features of its own, as if the owner's individual
taste had shaped it, and the whole presenting a picturesque
irregularity the absence of which is hardly compensated by any
beauties of our modern architecture. Such a scene, dimly vanishing
from the eye by the ray of here and there a tallow candle glimmering
through the small panes of scattered windows, would form a sombre
contrast to the street as I beheld it with the gaslights blazing from
corner to corner, flaming within the shops and throwing a noonday
brightness through the huge plates of glass. But the black, lowering
sky, as I turned my eyes upward, wore, doubtless, the same visage as
when it frowned upon the ante-Revolutionary New Englanders. The wintry
blast had the same shriek that was familiar to their ears. The Old
South Church, too, still pointed its antique spire into the darkness
and was lost between earth and heaven, and, as I passed, its clock,
which had warned so many generations how transitory was their
lifetime, spoke heavily and slow the same unregarded moral to myself.
"Only seven o'clock!" thought I. "My old friend's legends will
scarcely kill the hours 'twixt this and bedtime."

Passing through the narrow arch, I crossed the courtyard, the confined
precincts of which were made visible by a lantern over the portal of
the Province House. On entering the bar-room, I found, as I expected,
the old tradition-monger seated by a special good fire of anthracite,
compelling clouds of smoke from a corpulent cigar. He recognized me
with evident pleasure, for my rare properties as a patient listener
invariably make me a favorite with elderly gentlemen and ladies of
narrative propensites. Drawing a chair to the fire, I desired mine
host to favor us with a glass apiece of whiskey-punch, which was
speedily prepared, steaming hot, with a slice of lemon at the bottom,
a dark-red stratum of port wine upon the surface and a sprinkling of
nutmeg strewn over all. As we touched our glasses together, my
legendary friend made himself known to me as Mr. Bela Tiffany, and I
rejoiced at the oddity of the name, because it gave his image and
character a sort of individuality in my conception. The old
gentleman's draught acted as a solvent upon his memory, so that it
overflowed with tales, traditions, anecdotes of famous dead people and
traits of ancient manners, some of which were childish as a nurse's
lullaby, while others might have been worth the notice of the grave
historian. Nothing impressed me more than a story of a black
mysterious picture which used to hang in one of the chambers of the
Province House, directly above the room where we were now sitting. The
following is as correct a version of the fact as the reader would be
likely to obtain from any other source, although, assuredly, it has a
tinge of romance approaching to the marvellous.

       *       *       *       *       *

In one of the apartments of the province-house there was long
preserved an ancient picture the frame of which was as black as ebony,
and the canvas itself so dark with age, damp and smoke that not a
touch of the painter's art could be discerned. Time had thrown an
impenetrable veil over it and left to tradition and fable and
conjecture to say what had once been there portrayed. During the rule
of many successive governors it had hung, by prescriptive and
undisputed right, over the mantel piece of the same chamber, and it
still kept its place when Lieutenant-governor Hutchinson assumed the
administration of the province on the departure of Sir Francis
Bernard.

The lieutenant-governor sat one afternoon resting his head against the
carved back of his stately arm-chair and gazing up thoughtfully at the
void blackness of the picture. It was scarcely a time for such
inactive musing, when affairs of the deepest moment required the
ruler's decision; for within that very hour Hutchinson had received
intelligence of the arrival of a British fleet bringing three
regiments from Halifax to overawe the insubordination of the people.
These troops awaited his permission to occupy the fortress of Castle
William and the town itself, yet, instead of affixing his signature to
an official order, there sat the lieutenant-governor so carefully
scrutinizing the black waste of canvas that his demeanor attracted the
notice of two young persons who attended him. One, wearing a military
dress of buff, was his kinsman, Francis Lincoln, the provincial
captain of Castle William; the other, who sat on a low stool beside
his chair, was Alice Vane, his favorite niece. She was clad entirely
in white--a pale, ethereal creature who, though a native of New
England, had been educated abroad and seemed not merely a stranger
from another clime, but almost a being from another world. For several
years, until left an orphan, she had dwelt with her father in sunny
Italy, and there had acquired a taste and enthusiasm for sculpture and
painting which she found few opportunities of gratifying in the
undecorated dwellings of the colonial gentry. It was said that the
early productions of her own pencil exhibited no inferior genius,
though perhaps the rude atmosphere of New England had cramped her hand
and dimmed the glowing colors of her fancy. But, observing her uncle's
steadfast gaze, which appeared to search through the mist of years to
discover the subject of the picture, her curiosity was excited.

"Is it known, my dear uncle," inquired she, "what this old picture
once represented? Possibly, could it be made visible, it might prove a
masterpiece of some great artist; else why has it so long held such a
conspicuous place?"

As her uncle, contrary to his usual custom--for he was as attentive to
all the humors and caprices of Alice as if she had been his own
best-beloved child--did not immediately reply, the young captain of
Castle William took that office upon himself.

"This dark old square of canvas, my fair cousin," said he, "has been
an heirloom in the province-house from time immemorial. As to the
painter, I can tell you nothing; but if half the stories told of it be
true, not one of the great Italian masters has ever produced so
marvellous a piece of work as that before you."

Captain Lincoln proceeded to relate some of the strange fables and
fantasies which, as it was impossible to refute them by ocular
demonstration, had grown to be articles of popular belief in reference
to this old picture. One of the wildest, and at the same time the
best-accredited, accounts stated it to be an original and authentic
portrait of the evil one, taken at a witch-meeting near Salem, and
that its strong and terrible resemblance had been confirmed by several
of the confessing wizards and witches at their trial in open court. It
was likewise affirmed that a familiar spirit or demon abode behind the
blackness of the picture, and had shown himself at seasons of public
calamity to more than one of the royal governors. Shirley, for
instance, had beheld this ominous apparition on the eve of General
Abercrombie's shameful and bloody defeat under the walls of
Ticonderoga. Many of the servants of the province-house had caught
glimpses of a visage frowning down upon them at morning or evening
twilight, or in the depths of night while raking up the fire that
glimmered on the hearth beneath, although, if any were, bold enough to
hold a torch before the picture, it would appear as black and
undistinguishable as ever. The oldest inhabitant of Boston recollected
that his father--in whose days the portrait had not wholly faded out
of sight--had once looked upon it, but would never suffer himself to
be questioned as to the face which was there represented. In
connection with such stories, it was remarkable that over the top of
the frame there were some ragged remnants of black silk, indicating
that a veil had formerly hung down before the picture until the
duskiness of time had so effectually concealed it. But, after all, it
was the most singular part of the affair that so many of the pompous
governors of Massachusetts had allowed the obliterated picture to
remain in the state-chamber of the province-house.

"Some of these fables are really awful," observed Alice Vane, who had
occasionally shuddered as well as smiled while her cousin spoke. "It
would be almost worth while to wipe away the black surface of the
canvas, since the original picture can hardly be so formidable as
those which fancy paints instead of it."

"But would it be possible," inquired her cousin," to restore this dark
picture to its pristine hues?"

"Such arts are known in Italy," said Alice.

The lieutenant-governor had roused himself from his abstracted mood,
and listened with a smile to the conversation of his young relatives.
Yet his voice had something peculiar in its tones when he undertook
the explanation of the mystery.

"I am sorry, Alice, to destroy your faith in the legends of which you
are so fond," remarked he, "but my antiquarian researches have long
since made me acquainted with the subject of this picture--if picture
it can be called--which is no more visible, nor ever will be, than the
face of the long-buried man whom it once represented. It was the
portrait of Edward Randolph, the founder of this house, a person
famous in the history of New England."

"Of that Edward Randolph," exclaimed Captain Lincoln, "who obtained the
repeal of the first provincial charter, under which our forefathers
had enjoyed almost democratic privileges--he that was styled the
arch-enemy of New England, and whose memory is still held in detestation
as the destroyer of our liberties?"

"It was the same Randolph," answered Hutchinson, moving uneasily in
his chair. "It was his lot to taste the bitterness of popular odium."

"Our annals tell us," continued the captain of Castle William, "that
the curse of the people followed this Randolph where he went and
wrought evil in all the subsequent events of his life, and that its
effect was seen, likewise, in the manner of his death. They say, too,
that the inward misery of that curse worked itself outward and was
visible on the wretched man's countenance, making it too horrible to
be looked upon. If so, and if this picture truly represented his
aspect, it was in mercy that the cloud of blackness has gathered over
it."

"These traditions are folly to one who has proved, as I have, how little
of historic truth lies at the bottom," said the lieutenant-governor.
"As regards the life and character of Edward Randolph, too implicit
credence has been given to Dr. Cotton Mather, who--I must say it,
though some of his blood runs in my veins--has filled our early
history with old women's tales as fanciful and extravagant as those of
Greece or Rome."

"And yet," whispered Alice Vane, "may not such fables have a moral?
And methinks, if the visage of this portrait be so dreadful, it is not
without a cause that it has hung so long in a chamber of the
province-house. When the rulers feel themselves irresponsible, it were
well that they should be reminded of the awful weight of a people's
curse."

The lieutenant-governor started and gazed for a moment at his niece,
as if her girlish fantasies had struck upon some feeling in his own
breast which all his policy or principles could not entirely subdue.
He knew, indeed, that Alice, in spite of her foreign education,
retained the native sympathies of a New England girl.

"Peace, silly child!" cried he, at last, more harshly than he had ever
before addressed the gentle Alice. "The rebuke of a king; is more to
be dreaded than the clamor of a wild, misguided multitude.--Captain
Lincoln, it is decided: the fortress of Castle William must be
occupied by the royal troops. The two remaining regiments shall be
billeted in the town or encamped upon the Common. It is time, after
years of tumult, and almost rebellion, that His Majesty's government
should have a wall of strength about it."

"Trust, sir--trust yet a while to the loyalty of the people," said
Captain Lincoln, "nor teach them that they can ever be on other terms
with British soldiers than those of brotherhood, as when they fought
side by side through the French war. Do not convert the streets of
your native town into a camp. Think twice before you give up old
Castle William, the key of the province, into other keeping than that
of true-born New Englanders."

"Young man, it is decided," repeated Hutchinson, rising from his
chair. "A British officer will be in attendance this evening to
receive the necessary instructions for the disposal of the troops.
Your presence also will be required. Till then, farewell."

With these words the lieutenant-governor hastily left the room, while
Alice and her cousin more slowly followed, whispering together, and
once pausing to glance back at the mysterious picture. The captain of
Castle William fancied that the girl's air and mien were such as might
have belonged to one of those spirits of fable--fairies or creatures
of a more antique mythology--who sometimes mingled their agency with
mortal affairs, half in caprice, yet with a sensibility to human weal
or woe. As he held the door for her to pass Alice beckoned to the
picture and smiled.

"Come forth, dark and evil shape!" cried she. "It is thine hour."

In the evening Lieutenant-governor Hutchinson sat in the same chamber
where the foregoing scene had occurred, surrounded by several persons
whose various interests had summoned them together. There were the
selectmen of Boston--plain patriarchal fathers of the people,
excellent representatives of the old puritanical founders whose sombre
strength had stamped so deep an impress upon the New England
character. Contrasting with these were one or two members of council,
richly dressed in the white wigs, the embroidered waistcoats and other
magnificence of the time, and making a somewhat ostentatious display
of courtier-like ceremonial. In attendance, likewise, was a major of
the British army, awaiting the lieutenant-governor's orders for the
landing of the troops, which still remained on board the transports.
The captain of Castle William stood beside Hutchinson's chair, with
folded arms, glancing rather haughtily at the British officer by whom
he was soon to be superseded in his command. On a table in the centre
of the chamber stood a branched silver candlestick, throwing down the
glow of half a dozen waxlights upon a paper apparently ready for the
lieutenant-governor's signature.

Partly shrouded in the voluminous folds of one of the window-curtains,
which fell from the ceiling to the floor, was seen the white drapery
of a lady's robe. It may appear strange that Alice Vane should have
been there at such a time, but there was something so childlike, so
wayward, in her singular character, so apart from ordinary rules, that
her presence did not surprise the few who noticed it. Meantime, the
chairman of the selectmen was addressing to the lieutenant-governor a
long and solemn protest against the reception of the British troops
into the town.

"And if Your Honor," concluded this excellent but somewhat prosy old
gentleman, "shall see fit to persist in bringing these mercenary
sworders and musketeers into our quiet streets, not on our heads be
the responsibility. Think, sir, while there is yet time, that if one
drop of blood be shed, that blood shall be an eternal stain upon Your
Honor's memory. You, sir, have written with an able pen the deeds of
our forefathers; the more to be desired is it, therefore, that
yourself should deserve honorable mention as a true patriot and
upright ruler when your own doings shall be written down in history."

"I am not insensible, my good sir, to the natural desire to stand well
in the annals of my country," replied Hutchinson, controlling his
impatience into courtesy, "nor know I any better method of attaining
that end than by withstanding the merely temporary spirit of mischief
which, with your pardon, seems to have infected older men than myself.
Would you have me wait till the mob shall sack the province-house as
they did my private mansion? Trust me, sir, the time may come when you
will be glad to flee for protection to the king's banner, the raising
of which is now so distasteful to you."

"Yes," said the British major, who was impatiently expecting the
lieutenant-governor's orders. "The demagogues of this province have
raised the devil, and cannot lay him again. We will exorcise him in
God's name and the king's."

"If you meddle with the devil, take care of his claws," answered the
captain of Castle William, stirred by the taunt against his
countrymen.

"Craving your pardon, young sir," said the venerable selectman, "let
not an evil spirit enter into your words. We will strive against the
oppressor with prayer and fasting, as our forefathers would have done.
Like them, moreover, we will submit to whatever lot a wise Providence
may send us--always after our own best exertions to amend it."

"And there peep forth the devil's claws!" muttered Hutchinson, who
well understood the nature of Puritan submission. "This matter shall
be expedited forthwith. When there shall be a sentinel at every corner
and a court of guard before the town-house, a loyal gentleman may
venture to walk abroad. What to me is the outcry of a mob in this
remote province of the realm? The king is my master, and England is my
country; upheld by their armed strength, I set my foot upon the rabble
and defy them."

He snatched a pen and was about to affix his signature to the paper
that lay on the table, when the captain of Castle William placed his
hand upon his shoulder. The freedom of the action, so contrary to the
ceremonious respect which was then considered due to rank and dignity,
awakened general surprise, and in none more than in the
lieutenant-governor himself. Looking angrily up, he perceived that his
young relative was pointing his finger to the opposite wall.
Hutchinson's eye followed the signal, and he saw what had hitherto
