
"If you're still a poet at midsummer, I'm going to cut, and dig with
Rogers or Cherry. This den isn't big enough for you, me, and the
'original spirits' you wing every night. I'm off to the nets. Coming?
No? Jove! Grimmy, what nightmares you must take to bed with you every
night."

But the kindly Fates had the keeping of the chums' friendship in their
safe keeping, and I haven't observed yet, that Grim and Wilson are less
friendly than they used to be. This consummation is owing to Miss
Varley. This young lady, _aetat_ XIV, or thereabouts, was responsible for
the reclamation of Grim. What the whole posse of his acquaintances with
their blandishments and threats could not effect in the space of a
month, she did within four and twenty hours. I cannot account for this,
except on the supposition that little girls with long yellow hair and
pretty brown eyes, and a perambulating blush, create mighty earthquakes
in the breasts of rowdy fags. Miss Hilda Elsie Varley, being Biffen's
niece, had taken the house under her protection, was more rabidly
Biffenite than even Rogers, adored Acton, reverenced Worcester, and
appreciated Chalmers, but despised fags who weren't "training-on" for
one of her houses' various elevens. Her sentiments on these matters were
mysteriously but accurately known amongst Biffenite juniors.

Grim finally turned his poetical talents upon this young lady. I am not
quite certain why he delayed so long. Perhaps he had waited until his
gift of song had matured so that the offering might be worthy of the
shrine, or perhaps because he had exhausted all other exalted subjects
for his muse, but anyhow, he sent Miss Varley an ode on her birthday.
This day was pretty generally known amongst Biffen's fags.

When he had finished he read it to Wilson, who unbent from his
antagonistic attitude towards poetry when he heard the subject of the
verse.

"After all, Grimmy, it doesn't sound more rotten than Virgil, and it
_is_ rather swagger to say that Biffen's is to Hilda what Samnos was to
Juno. It's a jolly lot more, though."

Grim had cheerfully compared Miss Hilda to the queenly Juno, and said
that if she would give Biffen's her protection, the house would give the
other houses "fits" when the housers came round again; then he put in
something about her hair, unconsciously cribbed from Ovid; and something
about her walk--this I tracked to Horace; and wound up the whole farrago
by saying he was ready to be her door-mat and to shield her from the
furies, _etc_., which, I think, Grim genuinely evolved out of his own
effervescing breast. The ode was properly posted by the poet himself,
and even Wilson felt genuinely interested in the result. As for Grim, he
was so jolly anxious that he could not tackle any more poems, but
divided his time between ices at Hooper's and loafing round the
letter-rack for Hilda's answer.

A day or so later Wilson was busy translating for Merishall--carefully
putting "songs" whenever he spotted "_carmina_"--when he heard Grim
flying upstairs, and when the poet had smashed into the room, he held up
a letter.

"It's come," he gasped.

Wilson laid down his pen and said, "Wait till you're cool, and then read
it out."

This is the letter _in extenso:_--

                                      "Biffen's, Wednesday.

"DEAR GRIM,
  "I don't think you'll ever be a poet, at least not a great one. I
believe I could give you the Latin for most of the lines you have
written: they are so dreadfully like the translations of my
school-books, and it isn't very flattering when one has to put up with
second-hand compliments several thousand years old, is it? But I am very
glad that you think my good opinion of any value to Biffen's, for I
should dearly like to see our house top of the school this year, and how
can it be when one, who ought to be in the House Eleven, gives up all
his time to writing 'poetry' instead of playing cricket? I hope you will
not be very vexed with me for writing this, but I know you would prefer
me to be
  "Yours very sincerely,
  "HILDA E. VARLEY.

  "P.S.--If I see you admiring the sunsets or the rose-bushes when you
ought to be at the nets, I know I shall titter ... even if Miss Langton
be with me.
  "H.E.V."

Grim struggled through this to the bitter end. Wilson made the very roof
echo with his howls of unqualified delight, but Grim's face was
uncommonly like that sunset he admired so much.

"This is a sickener," he gasped.

"Jove! Grim, you've wanted one long enough," said Wilson, holding his
aching sides.

"Crumbs! One would think she was old enough to be my mother."

"That's a way they have, when they're not feeling quite the thing. No
wonder, poor girl."

"Look here, Wilson, keep this dark. I'm not going to write any more
poetry. I've been thinking that, ever since I sent Hilda the ode. I
don't think it's quite the real article."

"No," said Wilson, consolingly; "only original-spirit catching."

"A lot you know about it, old man," said Grim, hotly.

"Granted, Grimmy; but Hilda twigged the fraud, quick enough."

"Well, I'm going to burn it all, right off."

They did. I believe I am doing Grim no injustice when I say he looks
less a poet, and acts up to his looks, than any junior in St. Amory's.

Two nights after the receipt of this fateful letter Grim was
industriously practising Ranjitsinghi's famous glance at a snug, quiet
net, when Miss Varley, accompanied by Miss Cornelia Langton, her
governess, went past the nets. Miss Langton told Hilda afterwards that
she ought not to speak to hard-working cricketers and distract them in
their game. Hilda, I don't think, minded this little wigging, and Grim
never went without a friendly nod as he turned from cutting Wilson into
the nets, if Miss Hilda Elsie Varley went by.




CHAPTER XXVII

CONCERNING TODD AND COTTON


Knowing Acton's pride--his overwhelming pride--I never expected to see
him back at St. Amory's. I expected that he would almost have moved
heaven and earth and got himself taken off the school books and gone to
complete his education somewhere else rather than come back to the old
place where he had had such a signal thrashing. But, of course, he knew
jolly well that we four had our tongues tied, and that the knowledge of
his defeat was, so to speak, strictly private property; and that is why,
I am pretty sure, he turned up again.

He strolled up and down the High, arm-in-arm with Worcester, in high
good humour, on the day we returned; but when I turned the corner and
came upon him _vis-a-vis_ he gave me a long, level, steady look of
hatred, which told me that he had nursed his wrath to keep it warm. His
look made me thoughtful. Young Jack Bourne, too, came sailing along--a
breezy miniature copy of Phil, his brother--but when he caught sight of
his former patron he blushed like a girl and scuttled into the first
available yard.

[Illustration: HE GAVE ME A LONG, STEADY LOOK OF HATRED.]

He was not particularly anxious to meet Acton, for Phil, in the
holidays, had given Jack a pretty correct inkling of Acton's character,
and he began to see--in fact, he did see--that Raffles and the shooting
and the billiards, and the hocus pocus of "hedging on Grape Shot," and
the trip to London, etc., was only one involved, elaborate plot to
strike at Phil. Jack now fully realized that he had played a very
innocent fly to Acton's consummate spider, and he now, when there wasn't
any very pressing necessity, determined to give the spider's parlour a
very wide berth indeed. Acton saw Jack's little manoeuvre, and smiled
gently. He was genuinely fond of Jack, but young Bourne had served his
purpose; and now, thought Acton, philosophically, "Jack looks upon me as
a monster of iniquity, and he won't cultivate my acquaintance." And
Phil? Well, Phil regarded the incident as "closed," and paid no heed to
his enemy's bitter looks, but divided his attention between his books
and cricket, keeping, perhaps unnecessarily, a bright outlook upon
Master Jack.

Todd had come back to St. Amory's in a very different frame of mind from
that in which he had returned after the Perry fiasco. His three weeks'
holiday had been no end enjoyable; and now, besides a coin or two in his
pocket, he had a clean, crisp note in his purse. As he stepped out of
the train at the station, the burly figure of Jim Cotton hove in sight,
and an eleven-inch palm clapped Gus on the back.

"Hallo! old man. How goes it?"

"Oh!" said Gus, coughing; "I'm all right, Jim, and your biceps seem in
their usual working order."

"They are, Gus. I've got a cab out here; we'll go on together."

"Rather! I must find some one to see to the traps, though."

"I've commandeered young Grim," said Jim, "and he'll see to them."

"Provident beggar! Here you are, Grim. Put mine into Taylor's cart, and
here's a shilling for you."

Grim, who felt rather injured at being lagged by Cotton so early in the
term, just at the moment, too, when he had caught sight of Wilson
staggering along with a heavy hat-box, etc., seized Jim's and Gus's
effects. Todd's modest _douceur_, however, took off the rough edge of
his displeasure.

After tea, Cotton and Todd strolled about, and finally came to anchor
behind the nets, where some of the Sixth were already at practice.

"Phil Bourne's good for a hundred at Lord's," said Jim, critically,
watching Phil's clean, crisp cutting with interest.

"There's Acton out, too."

"Raw," said Jim. "Biffen's beauty has never been taught to hold his bat,
that is evident. Footer is more his line, I take it."

"Are you going to have a try for the eleven, Jim, this year?"

"I'll see how things shape. If Phil Bourne gives me the hint that I have
a chance, I'll take it, of course."

"Will he give Acton the hint, think you?"

"I shouldn't say so," said Jim, as Acton's stumps waltzed out of the
ground for the fourth time. "He can't play slows for toffee."

"Rum affair about the footer cap," said Gus.

"Rather so. But I believe Phil Bourne is as straight as a die. I'm not
so sure of Acton, though. I fancy there's something to be explained
about the cap. By the way, Gus, are you going to loaf about this term as
usual? Taylor's house side really does want bigger fellows than it's
got."

"No!" said Gus. "I'm no good at cricket, nor croquet, nor any other
game; nor do I really care a song about them. All the same, I'm not
going to loaf."

"What is the idea?" said Jim, curiously.

"I'm going to have a shot for the history medal, and I mean to crawl up
into the first three in the Fifth."

"And you'll do 'em, Toddy," said Jim, admiringly. "You're not quite such
an ass as you once were."

"Well, I'll work evenly and regularly, and, perhaps, pull off one or
other of them."

"I go, you know, at midsummer. Then I'm to cram somewhere for the Army.
Taylor's been advising a treble dose of mathematics, and I think I'll
oblige him this time."

"Taylor's not half a bad fellow," said Gus.

"Oh, you're a monomaniac on that subject, Gus! Once you felt ill if you
met Taylor or Corker on your pavement."

Jim Cotton was right. Gus was now a vastly different fellow from the
shiftless, lazy, elusive Gus of old; he worked evenly and steadily
onward, and, in consequence, his name danced delightfully near the top
of the weekly form-lists of the Fifth Form. He, however, did not sap
everlastingly, but on half holidays lounged luxuriantly on the school
benches, watching the cricket going on in the bright sunshine, or he
would take his rod and have an afternoon among the perch in the
Lodestone, that apology for a stream. Fishing was Gus's ideal of
athleticism; the exercise was gentle, and you sometimes had half a dozen
perch for your trouble. Gus argued there was nothing to show for an
eight hours' fag at cricket in a broiling sun.




CHAPTER XXVIII

ACTON'S LAST MOVE


Phil's unpopularity had somewhat abated, for his victory in the rackets
had given him a good leg up in the estimation of his fellows; but still
there was the uneasy feeling that in the matter of the "footer" cap his
conduct was shady, or at least dubious.

I was awfully sorry to see this, for I myself was leaving at midsummer,
and in my own mind I had always looked upon Phil to take up the
captaincy. He would have made, in my opinion, the _beau ideal_ of a
captain, for he was a gentleman, a scholar, and an athlete. But the
other monitors, or at least many of them, did not look upon Phil with
enthusiasm, and his election for the captaincy did not now seem the sure
thing it had done a few months before.

At St. Amory's the monitors elect a captain, and Corker confirms the
appointment if he thinks their choice suitable, but he insists that he
must be well up in the Sixth, and not a mere athlete.

Now, Phil's ambition was to be Captain of St. Amory's, as his father had
been before him, and when the home authorities finally decided that I
was to go to Cambridge in the Michaelmas term; Phil hoped and desired
to step into my shoes. He had one great lever to move the fellows in his
favour, he was much the best cricketer in the school and deservedly
Captain of the Eleven, and, besides that, was one of the best all-round
fellows in Sixth Form work. But Phil did not in the least hint that the
captaincy was his soul's desire; he determined to merit it, and then
leave the matter in the hands of the school. So, from the very beginning
of the term, he read hard and played hard, and he left his mark on the
class lists and the scoring-board in very unmistakable fashion.

And now Acton came like an evil genius on the scene. In a word, he had
determined that if he could in any way baulk poor Phil's ambition, he
would. If by his means he could put Phil out of the running for the
captaincy it should be done. If he could succeed, this success would
make up and to spare for his two former defeats. Therefore, warily and
cautiously, he set to work.

Acton himself was not much of a cricketer; the game was not, as it were,
second nature to him, as it was to Phil, but he was a very smart
field--cover was his position--and he could slog heavily, and often with
success. He threw himself heartily into the game, and crept rapidly up
the ladder of improvement, until Biffen's whispered that their shining
light stood a good chance of getting into the Eleven. "That is," said
Biffen's crowd, "if Bourne will run straight and give a good man his
flannels. But after the 'footer' fraud, what can one expect?" I heard
of this, and straightway told Phil.

"Oh, they need not fear. If Acton deserves his flannels, he will get
them. I've nothing whatever against his cricket."

Acton learned this, and instantly his new-found zeal for cricket
slackened considerably.

"Oh!" said he to himself, "I can't blister you there, Bourne, eh? I
can't pose as the deserving cricketer kept out of the Eleven by a
jealous cad of a captain, eh? So I'll try another tack to keep you in
evil odour, Mr. Bourne."

Acton did not turn up at the nets that night, and when Worcester noticed
this, Acton calmly sailed on his new tack.

"What's the good of sweating away at the nets, Dick? I'll not get my
flannels in any case."

"Oh yes, you will. Bourne has said he's got nothing against your
cricket."

"And you believe that, Dick?" said Acton, with a whistle of contemptuous
incredulity.

"I do," said Dick. "But you are not exactly quite the flier at cricket
that you are at 'footer,' so you can't afford to slack up now."

"I've got private knowledge," said Acton, with a filthy lie, "that I
won't get 'em in any case, so I shall not try."

Dick was considerably upset by this, and Acton's sudden stoppage of
practice after an intense beginning made his lie seem a good imitation
of truth, and gave Worcester food for bitter thoughts against Phil.
Acton worked "the-no-good-to-try" dodge carefully and artistically; he
never actually said his lie openly, or Phil would have nailed it to the
counter, but, like a second Iago, he dropped little barbed insinuations
here, little double-edged sayings there, until Biffenites to a man
believed there would be a repetition of the "footer" cap over again, and
the school generally drifted back to aloofness as far as Phil was
concerned.

Acton laid himself out to be excessively friendly with the monitors, and
just as he entered into their good graces, Phil drifted out of them--in
fact, to be friendly with Acton was the same thing as being cool towards
Bourne. Phil made splendid scores Saturday after Saturday, but the
enthusiasm which his fine play should have called out was wanting.

"Why don't you cheer your captain, Tom?" I overheard a father say to his
young hopeful.

"No fear!" said the frenzied Biffenite. "Bourne is a beast!"

In fact, the only one who seemed to derive any pleasure from Bourne's
prowess in the field was Acton himself. He used to sit near the
flag-staff, and when Phil made his splendid late cut, whose applause was
so generous as his? whose joy so great? Acton's manoeuvres were on the
highest artistic levels, I can assure you, and in the eyes of the
fellows generally, his was a case of persecuted forgiving virtue. Acton,
too, kept in old Corker's good books, and his achievements in the way of
classics made the old master beam upon him with his keen blue eye.

I saw with dismay how persistently unpopular Phil remained, and I heard
the charms of Acton sung daily by monitor after monitor, until I saw
that Acton had captured the whole body bar Phil's own staunch friends,
Baines, Roberts, and Vercoe. And then it dawned upon me that Acton was
making a bid for the captaincy himself, and when I had convinced myself
that this was his object, I felt angrier than I can remember. I
thereupon wrote to Aspinall, gave him a full, true, and particular
account of Acton's campaign against Phil, and asked him to release
me--and Phil--from our promise of secrecy regarding the football-match
accident. His reply comforted me, and I knew that, come what might, I
had a thunderbolt in my pocket in Aspinall's letter, which could knock
Acton off the Captain's chair if he tried for that blissful seat.

I told him so, to save trouble later on, and he heard me out with a far
from pretty sneer, which, however, did not quite conceal his chagrin.
But though I made sure of his being out of the hunt, I could not make
sure of Phil being elected, and in a short time Mivart was mentioned
casually as the likeliest fellow to take my place. I have nothing
whatever to say against Mivart; he was a good fellow, but he was not
quite up to Phil's level.

Phil knew of these subterranean workings of his enemy, but he was too
proud a fellow to try and make any headway against the mining.

"If they elect Mivart they will elect a good man, that is all, though
I'd give a lot, old man, to take your place."

Thus things went on until Lord's came and ended in the usual draw.
