came larger and deeper holes, the first of which was Wratislaw's, and
the last Swift's, a famous hole, ten or twelve feet deep in parts, and
thirty yards across, from which there was a fine swimming reach right
down to the mill. Swift's was reserved for the sixth and fifth forms,
and had a spring board and two sets of steps: the others had one set of
steps each, and were used indifferently by all the lower boys, though
each house addicted itself more to one hole than to another. The
School-house at this time affected Wratislaw's hole, and Tom and East,
who had learnt to swim like fishes, were to be found there as regular as
the clock through the summer, always twice, and often three times a day.

Now the boys either had, or fancied they had, a right also to fish at
their pleasure over the whole of this part of the river, and would not
understand that the right (if any) only extended to the Rugby side. As
ill-luck would have it, the gentleman who owned the opposite bank, after
allowing it for some time without interference, had ordered his keepers
not to let the boys fish on his side--the consequence of which had been
that there had been first wranglings and then fights between the keepers
and boys; and so keen had the quarrel become that the landlord and his
keepers, after a ducking had been inflicted on one of the latter, and
a fierce fight ensued thereon, had been up to the great school at
calling-over to identify the delinquents, and it was all the Doctor
himself and five or six masters could do to keep the peace. Not even his
authority could prevent the hissing; and so strong was the feeling that
the four prepostors of the week walked up the school with their canes,
shouting "S-s-s-s-i-lenc-c-c-c-e" at the top of their voices. However,
the chief offenders for the time were flogged and kept in bounds; but
the victorious party had brought a nice hornet's nest about their ears.
The landlord was hissed at the School-gates as he rode past, and when he
charged his horse at the mob of boys, and tried to thrash them with
his whip, was driven back by cricket-bats and wickets, and pursued with
pebbles and fives balls; while the wretched keepers' lives were a burden
to them, from having to watch the waters so closely.

The School-house boys of Tom's standing, one and all, as a protest
against this tyranny and cutting short of their lawful amusements, took
to fishing in all ways, and especially by means of night-lines. The
little tacklemaker at the bottom of the town would soon have made his
fortune had the rage lasted, and several of the barbers began to lay in
fishing-tackle. The boys had this great advantage over their enemies,
that they spent a large portion of the day in nature's garb by the
river-side, and so, when tired of swimming, would get out on the other
side and fish, or set night-lines, till the keepers hove in sight, and
then plunge in and swim back and mix with the other bathers, and the
keepers were too wise to follow across the stream.

While things were in this state, one day Tom and three or four others
were bathing at Wratislaw's, and had, as a matter of course, been taking
up and re-setting night-lines. They had all left the water, and were
sitting or standing about at their toilets, in all costumes, from
a shirt upwards, when they were aware of a man in a velveteen
shooting-coat approaching from the other side. He was a new keeper, so
they didn't recognize or notice him, till he pulled up right opposite,
and began:

"I see'd some of you young gentlemen over this side a-fishing just now."

"Hullo! who are you? What business is that of yours, old Velveteens?"

"I'm the new under-keeper, and master's told me to keep a sharp lookout
on all o' you young chaps. And I tells 'ee I means business, and you'd
better keep on your own side, or we shall fall out."

"Well, that's right, Velveteens; speak out, and let's know your mind at
once."

"Look here, old boy," cried East, holding up a miserable, coarse fish
or two and a small jack; "would you like to smell 'em and see which bank
they lived under?"

"I'll give you a bit of advice, keeper," shouted Tom, who was sitting
in his shirt paddling with his feet in the river: "you'd better go down
there to Swift's, where the big boys are; they're beggars at setting
lines, and'll put you up to a wrinkle or two for catching the
five-pounders." Tom was nearest to the keeper, and that officer, who was
getting angry at the chaff, fixed his eyes on our hero, as if to take a
note of him for future use. Tom returned his gaze with a steady stare,
and then broke into a laugh, and struck into the middle of a favourite
School-house song,--

     "As I and my companions
     Were setting of a snare
     The gamekeeper was watching us;
     For him we did not care:
     For we can wrestle and fight, my boys,
     And jump out anywhere.
     For it's my delight of a likely night,
     In the season of the year."

The chorus was taken up by the other boys with shouts of laughter, and
the keeper turned away with a grunt, but evidently bent on mischief. The
boys thought no more of the matter.

But now came on the May-fly season; the soft, hazy summer weather lay
sleepily along the rich meadows by Avon side, and the green and gray
flies flickered with their graceful, lazy up-and-down flight over
the reeds and the water and the meadows, in myriads upon myriads.
The May-flies must surely be the lotus-eaters of the ephemerae--the
happiest, laziest, carelessest fly that dances and dreams out his few
hours of sunshiny life by English rivers.

Every little pitiful, coarse fish in the Avon was on the alert for
the flies, and gorging his wretched carcass with hundreds daily, the
gluttonous rogues! and every lover of the gentle craft was out to avenge
the poor May-flies.

So one fine Thursday afternoon, Tom, having borrowed East's new rod,
started by himself to the river. He fished for some time with small
success--not a fish would rise at him; but as he prowled along the bank,
he was presently aware of mighty ones feeding in a pool on the opposite
side, under the shade of a huge willow-tree. The stream was deep
here, but some fifty yards below was a shallow, for which he made off
hot-foot; and forgetting landlords, keepers, solemn prohibitions of the
Doctor, and everything else, pulled up his trousers, plunged across, and
in three minutes was creeping along on all fours towards the clump of
willows.

It isn't often that great chub, or any other coarse fish, are in earnest
about anything; but just then they were thoroughly bent on feeding, and
in half an hour Master Tom had deposited three thumping fellows at the
foot of the giant willow. As he was baiting for a fourth pounder, and
just going to throw in again, he became aware of a man coming up the
bank not one hundred yards off. Another look told him that it was the
under-keeper. Could he reach the shallow before him? No, not carrying
his rod. Nothing for it but the tree. So Tom laid his bones to it,
shinning up as fast as he could, and dragging up his rod after him. He
had just time to reach and crouch along upon a huge branch some ten feet
up, which stretched out over the river, when the keeper arrived at the
clump. Tom's heart beat fast as he came under the tree; two steps more
and he would have passed, when, as ill-luck would have it, the gleam on
the scales of the dead fish caught his eye, and he made a dead point
at the foot of the tree. He picked up the fish one by one; his eye and
touch told him that they had been alive and feeding within the hour. Tom
crouched lower along the branch, and heard the keeper beating the clump.
"If I could only get the rod hidden," thought he, and began gently
shifting it to get it alongside of him; "willowtrees don't throw out
straight hickory shoots twelve feet long, with no leaves, worse luck."
Alas! the keeper catches the rustle, and then a sight of the rod, and
then of Tom's hand and arm.

"Oh, be up ther', be 'ee?" says he, running under the tree. "Now you
come down this minute."

"Tree'd at last," thinks Tom, making no answer, and keeping as close as
possible, but working away at the rod, which he takes to pieces. "I'm
in for it, unless I can starve him out." And then he begins to meditate
getting along the branch for a plunge, and scramble to the other side;
but the small branches are so thick, and the opposite bank so difficult,
that the keeper will have lots of time to get round by the ford before
he can get out, so he gives that up. And now he hears the keeper
beginning to scramble up the trunk. That will never do; so he scrambles
himself back to where his branch joins the trunk; and stands with lifted
rod.

"Hullo, Velveteens; mind your fingers if you come any higher."

The keeper stops and looks up, and then with a grin says, "Oh! be you,
be it, young measter? Well, here's luck. Now I tells 'ee to come down at
once, and 't'll be best for 'ee."

"Thank 'ee, Velveteens; I'm very comfortable," said Tom, shortening the
rod in his hand, and preparing for battle.

"Werry well; please yourself," says the keeper, descending, however,
to the ground again, and taking his seat on the bank. "I bean't in no
hurry, so you may take your time. I'll l'arn 'ee to gee honest folk
names afore I've done with 'ee."

"My luck as usual," thinks Tom; "what a fool I was to give him a black!
If I'd called him 'keeper,' now, I might get off. The return match is
all his way."

The keeper quietly proceeded to take out his pipe, fill, and light it,
keeping an eye on Tom, who now sat disconsolately across the branch,
looking at keeper--a pitiful sight for men and fishes. The more he
thought of it the less he liked it. "It must be getting near second
calling-over," thinks he. Keeper smokes on stolidly. "If he takes me up,
I shall be flogged safe enough. I can't sit here all night. Wonder if
he'll rise at silver."

"I say, keeper," said he meekly, "let me go for two bob?"

"Not for twenty neither," grunts his persecutor.

And so they sat on till long past second calling-over, and the sun came
slanting in through the willow-branches, and telling of locking-up near
at hand.

"I'm coming down, keeper," said Tom at last, with a sigh, fairly tired
out. "Now what are you going to do?"

"Walk 'ee up to School, and give 'ee over to the Doctor; them's my
orders," says Velveteens, knocking the ashes out of his fourth pipe, and
standing up and shaking himself.

"Very good," said Tom; "but hands off, you know. I'll go with you
quietly, so no collaring or that sort of thing."

Keeper looked at him a minute. "Werry good," said he at last. And so Tom
descended, and wended his way drearily by the side of the keeper, up to
the Schoolhouse, where they arrived just at locking-up. As they passed
the School-gates, the Tadpole and several others who were standing there
caught the state of things, and rushed out, crying, "Rescue!" But Tom
shook his head; so they only followed to the Doctor's gate, and went
back sorely puzzled.

How changed and stern the Doctor seemed from the last time that Tom was
up there, as the keeper told the story, not omitting to state how Tom
had called him blackguard names. "Indeed, sir," broke in the culprit,
"it was only Velveteens." The Doctor only asked one question.

"You know the rule about the banks, Brown?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then wait for me to-morrow, after first lesson."

"I thought so," muttered Tom.

"And about the rod, sir?" went on the keeper. "Master's told we as we
might have all the rods--"

"Oh, please, sir," broke in Tom, "the rod isn't mine."

The Doctor looked puzzled; but the keeper, who was a good-hearted
fellow, and melted at Tom's evident distress, gave up his claim. Tom
was flogged next morning, and a few days afterwards met Velveteens, and
presented him with half a crown for giving up the rod claim, and they
became sworn friends; and I regret to say that Tom had many more fish
from under the willow that May-fly season, and was never caught again by
Velveteens.

It wasn't three weeks before Tom, and now East by his side, were
again in the awful presence. This time, however, the Doctor was not so
terrible. A few days before, they had been fagged at fives to fetch the
balls that went off the court. While standing watching the game, they
saw five or six nearly new balls hit on the top of the School. "I say,
Tom," said East, when they were dismissed, "couldn't we get those balls
somehow?"

"Let's try, anyhow."

So they reconnoitred the walls carefully, borrowed a coal-hammer from
old Stumps, bought some big nails, and after one or two attempts, scaled
the Schools, and possessed themselves of huge quantities of fives balls.
The place pleased them so much that they spent all their spare time
there, scratching and cutting their names on the top of every tower; and
at last, having exhausted all other places, finished up with inscribing
H.EAST, T.BROWN, on the minute-hand of the great clock; in the doing of
which they held the minute-hand, and disturbed the clock's economy. So
next morning, when masters and boys came trooping down to prayers, and
entered the quadrangle, the injured minute-hand was indicating three
minutes to the hour. They all pulled up, and took their time. When the
hour struck, doors were closed, and half the school late. Thomas being
set to make inquiry, discovers their names on the minute-hand, and
reports accordingly; and they are sent for, a knot of their friends
making derisive and pantomimic allusions to what their fate will be as
they walk off.

But the Doctor, after hearing their story, doesn't make much of it, and
only gives them thirty lines of Homer to learn by heart, and a lecture
on the likelihood of such exploits ending in broken bones.

Alas! almost the next day was one of the great fairs in the town; and as
several rows and other disagreeable accidents had of late taken place
on these occasions, the Doctor gives out, after prayers in the morning,
that no boy is to go down into the town. Wherefore East and Tom, for
no earthly pleasure except that of doing what they are told not to do,
start away, after second lesson, and making a short circuit through the
fields, strike a back lane which leads into the town, go down it, and
run plump upon one of the masters as they emerge into the High Street.
The master in question, though a very clever, is not a righteous man.
He has already caught several of his own pupils, and gives them lines
to learn, while he sends East and Tom, who are not his pupils, up to the
Doctor, who, on learning that they had been at prayers in the morning,
flogs them soundly.

The flogging did them no good at the time, for the injustice of their
captor was rankling in their minds; but it was just the end of the half,
and on the next evening but one Thomas knocks at their door, and says
the Doctor wants to see them. They look at one another in silent dismay.
What can it be now? Which of their countless wrong-doings can he have
heard of officially? However, it's no use delaying, so up they go to the
study. There they find the Doctor, not angry, but very graver. "He has
sent for them to speak to very seriously before they go home. They have
each been flogged several times in the half-year for direct and
wilful breaches of rules. This cannot go on. They are doing no good to
themselves or others, and now they are getting up in the School, and
have influence. They seem to think that rules are made capriciously, and
for the pleasure of the masters; but this is not so. They are made for
the good of the whole School, and must and shall be obeyed. Those who
thoughtlessly or wilfully break them will not be allowed to stay at the
School. He should be sorry if they had to leave, as the School might
do them both much good, and wishes them to think very seriously in the
holidays over what he has said. Good-night."

And so the two hurry off horribly scared; the idea of having to leave
has never crossed their minds, and is quite unbearable.

As they go out, they meet at the door old Holmes, a sturdy, cheery
prepostor of another house, who goes in to the Doctor; and they hear
his genial, hearty greeting of the newcomer, so different to their own
reception, as the door closes, and return to their study with heavy
hearts, and tremendous resolves to break no more rules.

Five minutes afterwards the master of their form--a late arrival and a
model young master--knocks at the Doctor's study-door. "Come in!" And
as he enters, the Doctor goes on, to Holmes--"You see, I do not know
anything of the case officially, and if I take any notice of it at all,
I must publicly expel the boy. I don't wish to do that, for I think
there is some good in him. There's nothing for it but a good sound
thrashing." He paused to shake hands with the master, which Holmes does
also, and then prepares to leave.

"I understand. Good-night, sir."

"Good-night, Holmes. And remember," added the Doctor, emphasizing the
words, "a good sound thrashing before the whole house."

The door closed on Holmes; and the Doctor, in answer to the puzzled
look of his lieutenant, explained shortly. "A gross case of bullying.
Wharton, the head of the house, is a very good fellow, but slight and
weak, and severe physical pain is the only way to deal with such a
case; so I have asked Holmes to take it up. He is very careful and
trustworthy, and has plenty of strength. I wish all the sixth had as
much. We must have it here, if we are to keep order at all."

Now I don't want any wiseacres to read this book, but if they should, of
course they will prick up their long ears, and howl, or rather bray, at
the above story. Very good--I don't object; but what I have to add for
you boys is this, that Holmes called a levy of his house after breakfast
next morning, made them a speech on the case of bullying in question,
and then gave the bully a "good sound thrashing;" and that years
afterwards, that boy sought out Holmes, and thanked him, saying it
had been the kindest act which had ever been done upon him, and the
turning-point in his character; and a very good fellow he became, and a
credit to his School.

After some other talk between them, the Doctor said, "I want to speak
to you about two boys in your form, East and Brown. I have just been
speaking to them. What do you think of them?"

"Well, they are not hard workers, and very thoughtless and full of
spirits; but I can't help liking them. I think they are sound, good
fellows at the bottom."

"I'm glad of it. I think so too: But they make me very uneasy. They are
taking the lead a good deal amongst the fags in my house, for they are
very active, bold fellows. I should be sorry to lose them, but I shan't
let them stay if I don't see them gaining character and manliness. In
another year they may do great harm to all the younger boys."

"Oh, I hope you won't send them away," pleaded their master.

"Not if I can help it. But now I never feel sure, after any
half-holiday, that I shan't have to flog one of them next morning, for
some foolish, thoughtless scrape. I quite dread seeing either of them."
