    Thaisa (tha-is'-&#229;)
    Thaliard (th&#226;'-li-&#229;rd)
    Thurio (th&#251;'-ri-&#244;)
    Timon (t&#238;'-mon)
    Titania (t&#238;-tan'-i-&#229;)
    Tybalt (tib'-&#229;lt)

    Ursula (ur'-s&#251;-l&#229;)

    Venetian (ve-n&#234;'-sh&#229;n)
    Venice (ven'-is)
    Ventidius (ven-tid'-i-us)
    Verona (v&#226;-r&#244;'-n&#229;)
    Vicentio (v&#234;-sen'-shi-&#244;)





QUOTATIONS FROM SHAKESPEARE



ACTION.

    Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
    More learned than their ears.

        Coriolanus -- III. 2.




ADVERSITY.

    Sweet are the uses of adversity,
    Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
    Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.

        As You Like It -- II. 1.


    That, Sir, which serves and seeks for gain,
       And follows but for form,
    Will pack, when it begins to rain,
       And leave thee in the storm.

        King Lear -- II. 4.


    Ah! when the means are gone, that buy this praise,
    The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:
    Feast won--fast lost; one cloud of winter showers,
    These flies are couched.

        Timon of Athens -- II. 2.





ADVICE TO A SON LEAVING HOME.

    Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Nor any unproportioned thought his act
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
    The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried
    Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel;
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    Of each new-hatched, unfledged comrade. Beware
    Of entrance to a quarrel: but, being in,
    Bear it, that the opposer may beware of thee.
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice:
    Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment,
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
    But not expressed in fancy: rich, not gaudy:
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man;
    And they in France, of the best rank and station,
    Are most select and generous, chief in that.
    Neither a borrower, nor a lender be:
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend;
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    This above all.--To thine ownself be true;
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.

        Hamlet -- I. 3.




AGE.

    My May of life Is
    fallen into the sear, the yellow leaf:
    And that which should accompany old age,
    As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
    I must not look to have; but, in their stead,
    Curses not loud, but deep, mouth-honor, breath,
    Which the poor heart would feign deny, but dare not.

        Macbeth -- V. 3.




AMBITION.

    Dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very substance of
    the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream. And I
    hold ambition of so airy and light a quality, that it is but
    a shadow's shadow.

        Hamlet -- II 2.


    I charge thee fling away ambition;
    By that sin fell the angels, how can man then,
    The image of his Maker, hope to win by 't?
    Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;
    Corruption wins not more than honesty.
    Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
    To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not!
    Let all the ends, thou aim'st at, be thy country's,
    Thy God's, and truth's.

        King Henry VIII. -- III. 2.




ANGER.

    Anger is like
    A full-hot horse, who being allowed his way,
    Self-mettle tires him.

        King Henry VIII. -- I. 1.




ARROGANCE.

    There are a sort of men, whose visages
    Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
    And do a willful stillness entertain,
    With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
    Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
    As who should say, "I am Sir Oracle,
    And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark!"
    O! my Antonio, I do know of these
    That therefore are reputed wise
    For saying nothing, when, I am sure,
    If they should speak, would almost dam those ears,
    Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.

        The Merchant of Venice -- I. 1.




AUTHORITY.

    Thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
    And the creature run from the cur?
    There thou might'st behold the great image of authority
    a dog's obeyed in office.

        King Lear -- IV. 6.


    Could great men thunder
    As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet,
    For every pelting, petty officer
    Would use his heaven for thunder: nothing but thunder--
    Merciful heaven!
    Thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    Splitt'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak,
    Than the soft myrtle!--O, but man, proud man!
    Drest in a little brief authority --
    Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
    His glassy essence,--like an angry ape,
    Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
    As make the angels weep.

        Measure for Measure -- II. 2.



BEAUTY.

    The hand, that hath made you fair, hath made you good: the
    goodness, that is cheap in beauty, makes beauty brief in goodness;
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, should keep the body
    of it ever fair.

        Measure for Measure -- III. 1.




BLESSINGS UNDERVALUED.

    It so falls out
    That what we have we prize not to the worth,
    Whiles we enjoy it; but being lacked and lost,
    Why, then we rack the value; then we find
    The virtue, that possession would not show us
    Whiles it was ours.

        Much Ado About Nothing -- IV. 1.




BRAGGARTS.

    It will come to pass,
    That every braggart shall be found an ass.

        All's Well that Ends Well -- IV. 3.


    They that have the voice of lions, and the act of bares,
    are they not monsters?

        Troilus and Cressida -- III. 2.




CALUMNY.

    Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,
    thou shalt not escape calumny.

        Hamlet -- III. 1.


    No might nor greatness in mortality
    Can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny
    The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong,
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?

        Measure for Measure -- III. 2.




CEREMONY.

    Ceremony
    Was but devised at first, to set a gloss
    On faint deeds, hollow welcomes.
    Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
    But where there is true friendship, there needs none.

        Timon of Athens -- I. 2.




COMFORT.

    Men
    Can counsel, and speak comfort to that grief
    Which they themselves not feel; but tasting it,
    Their counsel turns to passion, which before
    Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
    Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
    Charm ache with air, and agony with words:
    No, no; 'tis all men's office to speak patience
    To those that wring under the load of sorrow;
    But no man's virtue, nor sufficiency,
    To be so moral, when he shall endure
    The like himself.

        Much Ado About Nothing -- V. 1.


    Well, every one can master a grief, but he that has it.

        Idem -- II.




COMPARISON.

    When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
    So doth the greater glory dim the less;
    A substitute shines brightly as a king,
    Until a king be by; and then his state
    Empties itself, as does an inland brook
    Into the main of waters.

        Merchant of Venice -- V. 1.




CONSCIENCE.

    Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought;
    And enterprises of great pith and moment,
    With this regard, their currents turn awry,
    And lose the name of action.

        Hamlet -- III. 1.




CONTENT.

    My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
    Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
    Nor to be seen; my crown is called "content;"
    A crown it is, that seldom kings enjoy.

        King Henry VI., Part 3d - III. 1.




CONTENTION.

    How, in one house,
    Should many people, under two commands,
    Hold amity?

        King Lear -- II. 4.


    When two authorities are set up,
    Neither supreme, how soon confusion
    May enter twixt the gap of both, and take
    The one by the other.

        Coriolanus -- III. 1.




CONTENTMENT.

    'Tis better to be lowly born,
    And range with humble livers in content,
    Than to be perked up in a glistering grief,
    And wear a golden sorrow.

        King Henry VIII. -- II. 3.




COWARDS.

    Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    The valiant never taste of death but once.

        Julius Caesar -- II. 2.




CUSTOM.

