having breakfast we heard a most ecstatic song. Creeping close to the
place where the sound came from, we discovered the songster to be a
song-sparrow. Focussing our "gun" upon the bird we made note of its
coloring and marking, making sure that if we heard or saw another we would
recognize it at once. While we were eating our breakfast, there was a dash
of white, yellow, and grayish-brown, a whirring sound and, as the bird
lighted upon the low bushes nearby, a clear, piercing whistle came from
its throat. Our "gun" revealed to us a meadow lark. By this time the boys
were as much excited over the bird hunt as over a game of ball.

Walks Afield

A "flower walk," observing the wild flowers; a "fern walk," discerning the
delicate tracery of the fern in its cool haunts; a "tree walk", noting the
different trees--all are natural ways of interesting boys in nature study.

Night Sounds

G. B. Affleck in the April, 1910, number of Physical Training tells his
experience in studying nature with several groups of boys.

"The night sounds surrounding a camp in northern Minnesota were a puzzle
to boys and to the counsellor of the tent at the end of the row. This
problem continued unsolved for more than a week, despite all attempts both
by day and night. Finally, one moist, warm night, Ned, after stealthily
approaching the sound, satisfied himself of its location in a certain tree
and in the morning was rewarded by the discovery of the 'toad' camped on a
branch near the source whence the sound had issued. Replacing the frog so
that the coarse tubercles of its back corresponded to the bark, Ned
enjoyed a merited reward at the expense of his tent mates who, though
often 'hot,' required some minutes to find the hidden treasure. Then came
the wonder of the stick toes and fingers, the feeding with flies, and the
result was--a new pet for the tent. In the next letters written to the
folks this find was the central theme. How much better this discovery and
the examination of the peculiar colors and structures, also the
conclusions, based upon observed structure, as to the life and habits of
the tree frog than would have been a scientifically learned discussion of
the family Hylidae!

"In a camp of fifty boys the writer remembers three who had special
delight in collecting pebbles, and they made several all-day trips to
distant brooks and beaches in the search for new specimens. Another group
became so fascinated with the study of the food of fish that they begged
the 'privilege' of cleaning the catch of each returning party. Proud was
that lad who incidentally located the heart of a pickerel, and because of
his school knowledge of physiology he could not be convinced that the fish
breathed without lungs till he had spent many hours in the vain endeavor
to locate said organs. Then he knew that his former idea had been
inadequate.

Fishology

"Fortunately, nature is so interrelated in her various phases that an
attempt at exploration in one direction soon opens other fields, until
with the growth of experience there comes a corresponding expansion of
interest. Thus the lads, searching for pebbles, were perforce attracted by
the plant and insect life of the brook, and the one delving into the
mystery of breathing oxygen without lungs developed a new interest in the
physics of fluids, while those who located the tree frog enlarged their
sphere by the knowledge that their pet rejected some of the 'bugs' offered
it.

"The leader, commencing thus with the limited or special interest of each
group, may evolve in his own mind the plan which most naturally will lead
the boys not only into a wider field of concrete facts, but also into the
habit of seeing relationships, of drawing conclusions and of raising
questions for further investigation.

"A group of boys interested in a study of fish may well be organized for
an all-day trip to the root of the rapids or the bay of springs; others
with geological preferences may spend a night on the top of the distant
hill which offers outcroppings of interest; the embryo botanists cannot do
better than to take a bog trot for the rare orchid, anomalous pitcher
plant, or glistening sun dew; lovers of the deep shade may paddle to the
inlet of the creek and there enjoy a side trip on the fragrant carpet of
hemlock and pine needles; thus it will be found that by anticipating the
probable findings in which the particular group is interested the leader
gives a point and purpose, adding not only to the enjoyment of the outing,
but imparting, in addition, some satisfactory knowledge of the vicinity."

Longfellow said that a "strong evidence of goodly character was the
thoughtfulness one displayed in caring for a tree." One of the best things
at Camp Becket was a series of out-door talks on nature given by Silas H.
Berry. Seated on a huge rock, he told the boys about the shaping and
clothing of the earth, foundation stones, mountains and hills, lakes,
ponds, and rivers, the beginning of vegetable life, the variation and
place of the freak, the forest and its place in the world's progress, the
alternation of the forest crop, man and his neighbors. Another afternoon
the boys went into the woods and while they squatted on Nature's mattress
of fragrant pine needles (see illustration, page 230), he told about
leaves and their work, cells and their place, roots and their arrangement,
tendrils and their mechanism, flowers and their devices, seeds and their
travels. The third talk was upon the evolution of plant life, law and
logic of creation, perpetuation of life in the lower forms, edible and
poisonous mushrooms, and the perpetuation of life in the higher forms. The
boys had a different conception of life thereafter and they possessed that
nature-love which always tends toward naturalness and simplicity of
living. They could sing with feeling.

I love thy rocks and rills,
Thy woods and templed hills.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

How Nature Study Should be Taught--Edward F. Bigelow, Ph.D. Hinds, Noble
and Eldridge, $1.00. A book of inspiration. Many practical suggestions are
given for arousing interest among boys in Nature Study.

The Nature Study Idea--Liberty H. Bailey. Macmillan Co., $1.25 net. An
interpretation of the new movement to put the boy in sympathy with Nature.

Field and Forest Handy Book--Dan Beard. Charles Scribner's Sons, $2.00.
Nothing better published for the benefit of those having permanent camps.
It should be placed in the hands of every boy.

Outdoors, Indoors, and Up the Chimney--Charles McIlvaine. Sunday School
Times Co., 75 cents net. A series of interesting stories about commonplace
things. Just the kind of information to give a boy on rainy days.

Dan Beard's Animal Book. Moffat, Yard & Company, $1.75 net. Filled with
the kind of incidents about animals that boys delight to hear, including
the famous bear stories. Also tells about the Campfire Club of Animals.

How to Study Birds--Herbert K. Job. Outing Publishing Co., $1.50 net.
Takes up the practical side of bird study. Describes the outfit necessary
for studying the birds in the open. A valuable book.

Manual of Common American Insects--William Beautenmuller. 25 cents.

Manual of Common Butterflies and Moths--William Beautenmuller. Funk &
Wagnalls Co., 25 cents. Two pocket manuals in which the insects,
butterflies and moths are reproduced in natural colors with their common
and scientific names.

Wilderness Pets at Camp Buckshaw--Edward Breck. Houghton, Mifflin Company,
$1.50 net. True tales of wilderness pets written by an experienced
woodsman. Intensely interesting.

Young Folks' Nature Field Book--J. Alden Loring. Dana, Estes & Co., $1.00.
Contains a seasonable hint for every day in the year. The alternate pages
are left blank for notes or record of things seen.

"How to Know the Wild Flowers"--F. T. Parsons. Charles Scribner's Sons,
$2.00 net.

"How to Know the Ferns "--F. T. Parsons. Charles Scribner's Sons, $1.50
net.

"Familiar Trees and Their Leaves"--F. D. Matthews. Appleton and Company,
$1.75 net. Three reliable handbooks written in popular style.

An Out-of-Door Diary--Marion Miller. Sturgis and Walton Co., $1.25 net.
Suitable for very young boys.

[Illustration: Making a Walk to the Beach-Camp Wawayanda]



CHAPTER XIX--FORECASTING THE WEATHER

WEATHER TABLE
CLOUDS
RAIN
CLEAR WEATHER WINDS
HOW TO TELL DIRECTION OF WIND
SIGNALS LOST ON A CLOUDY DAY
POINTS OF COMPASS
HOME-MADE WEATHER PROPHET
PLANT BAROMETER
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sunshine is delicious.
Rain is refreshing.
Wind braces up.
Snow is exhilarating.
There is really no such thing as bad weather,
only different kinds of good weather.
--Ruskin.

It is said that this weather table by Buzzacott is so near the truth as
seldom or never to be found to fail.

FORECASTING THE WEATHER
If the New Moon, First Quarter, Full Moon, or Last Quarter,
 comes between  In Summer           In Winter
 12 and  2 AM   Fair                Frost, unless wind S.W.
  2 and  4 AM   Cold and showers    Snow and stormy
  4 and  6 AM   Rain                Rain
  6 and  8 AM   Wind and rain       Stormy
  8 and 10 AM   Changeable          Cold rain if wind W.
                                     Snow if E.
 10 and 12 PM   Frequent showers    Cold and high wind
 12 and  2 PM   Very rainy          Snow or rain
  2 and  4 PM  Changeable           Fair and mild
  4 and  6 PM   Fair                Fair
  6 and  8 PM   Fair if wind N.W.   Fair and frosty if
                                     wind N. or N.E.
  8 and 10 PM  Rainy if S. or S.W.  Rain or snow if
                                     S. or S.W.
 10 and 12 AM   Fair                Fair and frosty

Clouds

Every cloud is a weather sign.
Low clouds swiftly moving indicate coolness and rain.
Soft clouds, moderate winds, fine weather.
Hard-edged clouds, wind.
Rolled or ragged clouds, strong wind.
"Mackerel" sky, twelve hours dry.

Rain

Look out for rain when
The tree frog cries.
Fish swim near the surface.
Walls are unusually damp.
Flies are troublesome and sting sharply.
A slack rope tightens.
Smoke beats downward.
Sun is red in the morning.
There is a pale yellow sunset.

Rain with East wind is lengthy.
A sudden shower is soon over.
A slow rain lasts long.
Rain before seven, clear before eleven.
Sun drawing water, sure sign of rain.
A circle round the moon means "storm."

"When the grass is dry at night
Look for rain before the light;
When the grass is dry at morning light
Look for rain before the night."

"When the dew is on the grass
Rain will never come to pass."

Fog in the morning, bright sunny day.
Swallow flying high means clearing weather.
If the sun goes down cloudy Friday, sure of a clear Sunday.
Busy spiders mean fine weather.

THE WINDS

East wind brings rain.
West wind brings clear, bright, cool weather.
North wind brings cold.
South wind brings heat.
Birds fly high when the barometer is high, and low when the barometer is
low.

Direction of Wind

The way to find which way the wind is blowing, if there is only very light
breeze, is to throw up little bits of dry grass; or to hold up a handful
of light dust and let it fall, or to suck your thumb and wet it all round
and let the wind blow over it, and the cold side of it will then tell you
which way the wind is blowing.

Weather Bureau

The U. S. Department of Agriculture Weather Bureau publishes a
"Classification of clouds," in colors which may be had for the asking. If
you are near one of the weather signal stations daily bulletins will be
sent to camp upon request, also the weather map.

A set of flag signals run up each day will create interest. The flags are
easily made, or may be purchased.

Keep a daily record of temperature. A boy in charge of the "Weather
Bureau" will find it to be full of interest, as well as to offer an
opportunity to render the camp a real service. He will make a weather
vane, post a daily bulletin board, keep a record of temperature, measure
velocity of wind and rainfall.

If you have lost your bearings and it is a cloudy day, put the point of
your knife blade on your thumb nail, and turn the blade around until the
full shadow of the blade is on the nail. This will tell you where the sun
is, and decide in which direction the camp is.

Points of Compass

Face the sun in the morning, spread out your arms straight from body.
Before you is the east; behind you is the west; to your right hand is the
south; to the left hand is the north.

A Home-made Weather Prophet

For a home-made barometer you need a clean, clear glass bottle. Take one
drachm[1] each of camphor gum, saltpetre and ammonia salts, and dissolve
them in thirteen drachms of pure alcohol. Shake till dissolved. Then pour
in bottle and cork tightly. Hang the bottle of mixture against the wall
facing north, and it will prove a perfect weather prophet. When the liquid
is clear it promises fair weather. When it is muddy or cloudy it is a sign
of rain. When little white flakes settle in the bottom it means that the
weather is growing colder, and the thicker the deposit the colder it
becomes. Fine, starry flakes foretell a storm, and large flakes are signs
of snow. When the liquid seems full of little, threadlike forms that
gradually rise to the top, it means wind and sudden storm.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: Dram, drachma; drachm;  U.S. Customary System
equal to 1/16 of an ounce or 27.34 grains (1.77 grams). Apothecary weight
equal to 1/8 of an ounce or 60 grains (3.89 grams).]

U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE WEATHER BUREAU. EXPLANATION OF FLAG
SIGNALS,

[Illustration: Flags]

No. 1, alone, indicates fair weather, stationary temperature.
No. 2, alone. Indicates rain or snow, stationary temperature.
No. 3, alone, indicates local rain, stationary temperature.
No. 1, with No. 4 above it, indicates fair weather, warmer
No. 1, with No. 4 below it, indicates fair weather, colder.
No. 2, with No. 4 above it, indicates warmer weather, rain or snow.
No. 2, with No. 4 below it, indicates colder weather, rain or snow.
No. 8, with No. 4 above it, indicates warmer weather with local rains.
No. 3, with No. 4 below it, indicates colder weather with local rains.
No. 1, with No. 5 above it, indicates fair weather, cold wave.
No. 2, with No. 5 above it, indicates wet weather, cold wave.

Forecasts made at 10 A.M., and displayed between 12 and 1 P.M., forecast
the weather for the following day until 8 P.M.


 FORECASTING THE WEATHER  245

Plant Barometers

The dandelion is an excellent barometer, one of the commonest and most
reliable. It is when the blooms have seeded and are in the fluffy,
feathery condition that its weather prophet facilities come to the fore.
In fine weather the ball extends to the full, but when rain approaches, it
shuts like an umbrella. If the weather is inclined to be showery it keeps
shut all the time, only opening when the danger from the wet is past.

The ordinary clover and all its varieties, including the trefoil and the
shamrock, are barometers. When rain is coming, the leaves shut together
like the shells of an oyster and do not open again until fine weather is
assured. For a day or two before rain comes their stems swell to an
appreciable extent and stiffen so that the leaves are borne more upright
than usual. This stem swelling when rain is expected is a feature of many
towering grasses.

The fingers of which the leaves of the horse chestnut are made up keep
flat and fanlike so long as fine weather is likely to continue. With the
coming of rain, however, they droop, as if to offer less resistance to the
weather. The scarlet pimpernel, nicknamed the "poor man's weather glass,"
or wind cope, opens its flowers only to fine weather. As soon as rain is
in the air it shuts up and remains closed until the shower or storm is
over.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Talk About the Weather--Charles Barnard. Funk & Wagnalls Co., 75 cents. A
little book of valuable hints and suggestions about the weather and the
philosophy of temperature and rainfall in their relation to living things.

Woodcraft--Jones and Woodward. C. Arthur Pearson, Ltd., 35 cents. Contains
an excellent chapter on weather lore in addition to a mass of valuable
information on woodcraft.

Bulletin of the U. S. Weather Bureau, Washington, D. C,

[Illustration: The Library, 1,200 Volumes Given by the Boys.--Camp Becket]



CHAPTER XX--RAINY DAY GAMES AND SUGGESTIONS

DELIGHTS OF A RAINY DAY
ACCUMULATED ENERGY
HANDKERCHIEF TUSSLE
POTATO JOUST
TERRIER FIGHT
CIRCLE BALL
LEG WRESTLE
HAND WRESTLING
ROOSTER FIGHT
SHOE AND SWEATER RACE
PEANUT RELAY RACE
INTERESTING TESTS
BIBLIOGRAPHY

We knew it would rain for the poplars showed
The white of their leaves, and amber grain
Shrunk in the wind and the lightning now
Is tangled in tremulous skeins of rain.
--Aldrich.

Rainy days break the monotony of continuous sunshiny days. There is
nothing that is so fascinating to a boy in camp as listening to the patter
of the rain drops upon the roof of his canvas house, especially at night,
if he is snug and warm in his blankets and the tent is waterproof. A rainy
day is the kind of a day when the chess and checker enthusiasts get
together. Games are rescued from the bottom of the trunk or box. Ponchos
and rubber boots are now in popular favor. Thunder and lightning but add
to the boys' enjoyment. What indescribable excitement there is in the
shivers and shudders caused by an extra flash of lightning or a double
fortissimo roll of thunder! There is also the delight, of playing in the
puddles of water and wearing a bathing suit and enjoying a real shower
bath.

To some boys it is repair day, rips are sewed up, buttons sewed on
clothing, and for the initiated, the darning of socks. In camps with
permanent buildings a big log fire roars in the fireplace, the boys sprawl
on the floor with their faces toward the fire, and while the rain plays a
tattoo[1] upon the roof some one reads aloud an interesting story, such as
"Treasure Island," "The Shadowless Man," "The Bishop's Shadow," or the
chapters on "The Beneficent Rain" and "When the Dew Falls," from Jean M.
Thompson's book, "Water Wonders." It all depends upon one's viewpoint
whether rainy days are delightful or disagreeable.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: Signal on a drum or bugle to summon soldiers to
their quarters at night. Continuous, even drumming or rapping.]

Surplus Energy

Boys are barometers. Restlessness is usually a sign of an approaching
storm. The wise leader senses the situation and begins preparing his
plans. If the rain is from the east and comes drizzling down, better plan
a several day program, for after the excitement of the first few hours'
rain, the boys begin to loll around, lie on the cots, or hang around the
kitchen and develop a disease  known as "Grouchitis." During the first
stages of the disease the boys are inactive and accumulate an over-supply
of energy, which must find an outlet. Here is where the leader plays an
important part in handling the case; he provides an outlet for the
expenditure of this surplus energy by planning games demanding use of
muscle and the expenditure of energy and noise. The big mess tent, or
dining hall, is cleared and romping games are organized.

The games suggested are adapted for rainy days and selected from a
catalogue of several hundred games.

RAINY DAY GAMES

Few sports are better calculated than a potato joust to amuse boys on
rainy days. It has all the joys of a combat, and yet, try as he will,
there is no possibility for any boy to become rough.

