
"You haven't told me who it is yet, dear."

"Oh, darling, you haven't been listening. It is the dear woman who sent
me the box full of new clothes--Aunt Katie O'Flynn, at your service. But
there! I must be off. I'll think of it all day, and it will make me so
happy."

Kathleen dashed away to her own room, put on her outdoor things, and a
moment or two later was running as fast as she could in the direction of
the White Cross Corner. There she saw a silent, grave-looking girl, very
quietly dressed, standing waiting for her.

"Here I am," said Kathleen; "and here you stand, Ruth. And now, what
have you got to say for yourself?"

"I am sorry," said Ruth. "I thought when you sent Susy to me with your
message that I might as well come here this morning; but I haven't
changed my mind--not a bit of it."

Kathleen's eyes, always extraordinarily dark for blue eyes, now grew
almost black. A flash of real anger shot through them.

"Don't you think it is rather mean," she said, "to give me up when you
promised to belong to me--to give me up altogether and to go with those
dreadful, proud paying girls?"

"It isn't that," said Ruth, "and you know it. It is just this: I can't
belong to two sides. Cassandra Weldon offers me an advantage which I
dare not throw away. It is most essential to me to win the sixty-pounds
scholarship. If I win it I shall be properly educated. When I leave
school I'll be able to take the position my dear father, had he lived,
would have wished for me. I shall be able to support granny and
grandfather. You see for yourself, Kathleen, that I can't refuse it. It
isn't a question of choice; it is a question of necessity. I love you.
Kathleen--I will always love you and be faithful to you--but I can't
give up the scholarship."

"I don't want you to," said Kathleen; "but why shouldn't you belong to
me and yet take the scholarship? I don't want you to be with me all the
time. You can go to that horrible, detestable girl when it is necessary,
and have your odious coach to post you up. But I want you more than
anybody else. Don't you know how I love you? Can't you do both? Think it
over, Ruth."

"I have thought it over, and I can't do it. I would if I could, but it
isn't to be done. It wouldn't be right to you, nor right to Cassandra."

"Well, I think you are very mean; I think I hate you."

Kathleen turned aside. She was impulsive, high-spirited, and defiant,
but where her passions were concerned her heart was very soft. She burst
into tears now and flung her arms around Ruth's neck.

"I like a lot of people," she said--"I like Mrs. Tennant, and even Susy,
although she's not up to much, and two or three other girls--but I only
_love_ you. In the whole of England I only love you, and you are going
to give me up."

"No; I will still be your friend."

"But you have refused to join my society; you have refused to belong to
the Wild Irish Girls."

"I can't help myself."

"But you promised."

"I know I did. I made a mistake. Kathleen, there is no help for it. I
shall love you even if I don't belong to the society. Now there is
nothing more to be said."

Ruth disentangled herself from Kathleen's embrace, and putting wings to
her feet, ran in the direction of the school. Kathleen stood just where
she had left her; over her face was passing a rapid and curious change.

"Do I love her any longer?" she said to herself. "Oh, I think--I think I
love her still. But she has slighted me. She will be sorry some day. Oh,
dear! The only girl in the whole of England that I love has slighted me.
She has thrown ridicule upon me. She said that she would be my Prime
Minister, and she has resigned everything for that horrible Cassandra.
She will be sorry yet; I know she will."




CHAPTER XV.

THE SCHOLARSHIP: TROUBLE IS BREWING.


Over some of the girls of the Great Shirley School there passed that
morning a curious wave of excitement. Those girls who had joined
Kathleen's society were almost now more or less in a state of tension.
Once a week they were to meet in the quarry; once a week, whatever the
weather, in the dead of night, they were to meet in this sequestered
spot. They knew well that if they were discovered they would run a very
great chance of being expelled from the school; for although they were
day scholars, yet integrity of conduct was essential to their
maintaining their place in that great school which gave them so liberal
an education, in some cases without any fees, in all other cases with
very small ones. One of the great ideas of the school was to encourage
brave actions, unselfish deeds, nobility of mind. Those girls who
possessed any talent or any specially strong characteristic had every
chance offered to them in the Great Shirley School; their futures were
more or less assured, for the governors of the school had powers to give
grants to the clever girls, to award scholarships for which all might
compete, and to encourage industry, honesty, and charitable ideas as far
as possible.

Kathleen, when she entered the school and started her society, had not
the slightest idea that, while she was trying to help the foundationers,
she was really leading them into very grave mischief. But several of the
foundationers themselves knew this; nevertheless the fun of the whole
thing, the particular fascination which Kathleen herself exercised over
her followers, kept them her undeniable slaves, and not for the world
would any of them have left her now that they had sworn fealty to her
cause. So Kathleen had thought when she left the house that morning; but
as she entered the school she knew that one girl, and that the girl whom
she most cared for, had decided to choose the thorny path which led far
from Kathleen and her company.

"In addition to everything else, she is quite mean," thought the little
girl, and during that morning's lessons she occupied herself far more in
flashing angry glances in the direction of Ruth one minute, and at
Cassandra the next, than in attending to what she was about. Kathleen
had been given much by Nature. Her father was a very rich man; she had
been brought up with great freedom, but also with certain bold liberal
ideas as regards the best in life and conduct. She was a very beautiful
girl, and she was warm-hearted and amiable. As for her talents, she had
a certain charm which does more for a woman than any amount of ordinary
ability; and she had a passionate and great love for music. Kathleen's
musical genius was already spoken of with much approbation by the rest
of the school. The girls used to ask her to improvise. Kathleen could
improvise in almost any style, in almost any fashion. She could make the
piano sob with her heart-rendering notes; and again she could bring
forth music clear and fairy-like. Again she would lead the tender and
solemn strains of the march; and again she would dance over the keys so
lightly, so ravishingly, that the girls kept time with their feet to her
notes. The music mistress was anxious that Kathleen should try for a
musical scholarship, and she had some ideas of doing so herself. But
to-day she felt cross, and even her music was at fault.

"I can't do it," she said, looking Miss Spicer full in the face. "It
means such drudgery, and I don't believe I'd play a bit better if I
did."

"That is certainly not the case, Kathleen," said Miss Spicer. "Knowledge
must be of assistance. You have great talent; if you add to that real
musical knowledge you can do almost anything."

"But I don't think I much care to. I can play on the piano to imitate
any birds that ever sung at home, and father loves that. I can play all
the dead-marches to make mother cry, and I can play--oh, such dance
music for Aunt Katie O'Flynn! It doesn't matter that I should know more,
does it?"

"I can't agree with you. It would be a very great pleasure to me if I
saw you presented with a musical scholarship."

"Would it?" said Kathleen, glancing at the thin and careworn face of the
music teacher.

"You don't know what it would mean to me," answered Miss Spicer. "It is
seldom that one has the pleasure of teaching real talent, and I can't
say how refreshing it is to me to hear you play as you do. But I want
you to improve; I want you to be a credit to me."

"I'd like to please you, of course," said Kathleen. She spoke gently,
and then she added: "But there is only one piano at the Tennants', and
that is in the drawing-room, and Alice or the boys or Mrs. Tennant are
always there. I have not many opportunities to practice."

"I live in the same terrace," said Miss Spicer eagerly, "and my piano is
hardly ever used. If you only would come and make use of it. There is a
fire in my sitting-room, and you could come at any hour whenever you
have a fancy. Will you? It would be a great pleasure to me."

"You are very kind. Yes, I will come."

Kathleen bent towards the music mistress and, somewhat to that lady's
astonishment, printed a kiss on her forehead. The kiss went right down
into Miss Spicer's somewhat frozen heart.

Immediately after school that day Cassandra held out her hand to Ruth.
Ruth went up to her gravely.

"Well, Ruth," she said, "have you decided? I hope you have. You told me
you would let me know to-day."

"I have, Cassandra," said Ruth.

Kathleen, who was standing not far away, suddenly darted forward and
stood within a foot of the two girls.

"Have you really decided, Ruth?" she said. Her tone was imperious. Ruth
felt her gentle heart beat high. She turned and looked with dignity
first at Kathleen and then at Cassandra.

"I will join you, Cassandra," she said.--"Kathleen, I told you this
morning what my decision was."

"And I hate you!" said Kathleen. She tossed her head and walked away.

Cassandra waited until she was out of hearing.

"You look very pale, dear Ruth," she said. "Come home with me, won't
you?"

Ruth did not speak. Cassandra laid her hand on her arm.

"Why, you are trembling," she said. "What has that horrid girl done to
you?"

"Nothing--nothing."

"But she has."

"Please, Cassie, she is not horrid."

"Oh, well, we won't discuss her. She is not my sort. Won't you come and
have lunch with me, and we can arrange everything? You are going to take
advantage of mother's offer?"

"I can't help myself. It is much too good to be refused. It means--I
can't tell you what it means to me, Cassie. If I can only get a
scholarship I shall be able to help grandfather. And yet--I must tell
you the truth--I was very nearly declining it."

"I don't think I should ever have spoken to you again if you had."

"Even so, I was very nearly declining it; for you know I could not have
accepted your offer and been friends with Kathleen O'Hara in the way she
wants me to be. Now I am very fond of Kathleen, and if I could please
myself I would retain her friendship. But you know, grandfather has lost
some more money. He heard about it two nights ago, and that made me make
up my mind. Of course I love you, Cassie. I have loved you ever since I
came to the school. You have been so very, very kind to me. But had I
the choice I would have stayed with Kathleen."

"Well, it is all a mystery to me," said Cassandra. "I don't like
Kathleen; I will frankly say so. I don't think she has a good influence
in the school. That sort of very rich popular girl always makes
mischief. It is far better for the school not to have anybody like her
in its midst. She has the power of attracting people, but she has also
the power of making enemies. It is my opinion she will get into very
serious trouble before she leaves Great Shirley School. I shall be sorry
for her, of course."

"But what do you mean? What sort of trouble can she get into?"

"There are whispers about her that I don't quite understand. But if it
were known that she does lead other girls astray, she would be had up
before the governors, and then she would not find herself in a very
pleasant position."

Ruth did not say anything. Her face turned white. Cassandra glanced at
her, uttered a quick sigh, and resumed:

"Whether you like it or not, I am glad you are out of the whole thing. I
should hate you to get into trouble. You are so clever, and so different
from the others, that you are certain to succeed. And now let us hurry
home. I must tell you all about our scheme. You must come to me every
day; Miss Renshaw will be with us each evening from six to seven. Oh!
you don't know how happy you are making me."

Ruth smiled and tried to look cheerful.

Mrs. Weldon came out to meet the two girls as they entered the pretty
little cottage. Her face was smiling.

"Ah, Cassandra!" she said, "now you will be happy."

"Yes; Ruth has accepted our offer."

"Indeed I have, Mrs. Weldon," said Ruth; "and I scarcely know how to
thank you."

"Come in, dear, and have some dinner.--Cassandra, I have just heard
from Miss Renshaw, and she is coming this afternoon.--You can either
stay, Ruth, when dinner is over, or come back again."

"I will come back," said Ruth. "Granny is not very well, and I ought not
to have left her, even to have dinner here; but I couldn't help myself."

Cassandra brought her friend into the house. They had a pleasant meal
together, and Ruth tried to forget that she had absolutely quarrelled
with Kathleen, and that Kathleen's heart was half-broken on her account.

But Kathleen herself was determined not to give way to any real feelings
of misery on account of Ruth's desertion.

"I have no time to think about it," she said to herself.

When she returned to the house she found a telegram waiting for her. She
tore it open. It was from Aunt Katie O'Flynn:

"I have arrived. Come and have dinner with me to-night at the Metropole,
and bring any friend you like."

"What a lark!" thought Kathleen. "And what a chance for Ruth if only she
had been different! Oh, dear! I suppose I must ask Alice to come with
me."

"Whom is your telegram from, dear?" asked Mrs. Tennant, coming up to her
at that moment.

Alice was standing in the dining-room devouring a book of Greek history.
She held it close to her eyes, which were rather short-sighted.

"It's from Aunt Katie O'Flynn. She has come, the darling!" said
Kathleen. "She wants me to go to London to dine with her to-night. Of
course I'll go.--- You will come with me, won't you, Alice? She says I
am to bring some one."

"No, I can't come," said Alice; "and for that matter no more can you.
It takes quite thirty-five minutes to get to Charing Cross, and then you
have to get to the Metropole. We girls are not allowed to go to London
by ourselves."

"As if that mattered."

"It matters to me, if it does not to you. Anyhow, here is a note for
you. It is from Miss Ravenscroft, our head-mistress. I rather fancy that
will decide matters."

Kathleen tore open the note which Alice had handed to her. She read the
following words:

     "DEAR MISS O'HARA,--I should be glad if you would come round
     to see me at six o'clock this evening. I have something of
     importance to say to you."

"What can she mean?" said Kathleen. "I scarcely know Miss Ravenscroft. I
just spoke to her the first day I went to the school."

"She has asked me too. What can it be about?" said Alice.

"Then you can take a message from me; I am not going," said Kathleen.

"What?" cried Alice. "I don't think even you will dare to defy the
head-mistress. Why, my dear Kathleen, you will never get over it. This
is madness.--Mother, do speak to her."

"What is it, dear?" said Mrs. Tennant, coming forward.

Alice explained.

"And Kathleen says she won't go?"

"Of course I won't go, dear Mrs. Tennant. On the contrary, you and I
will go together to see Aunt Katie O'Flynn. She is my aunt, and I
wouldn't slight her for all the world. She'd never forgive me.--You can
tell Miss Ravenscroft, Alice, that my aunt has come to see me, and that
I have been obliged to go to town. You can manage it quite easily."

Kathleen did not wait for any further discussion, but ran out of the
room.

"I do wish, mother, you'd try and persuade her," said Alice. "I am sure,
whatever her father may be, he can't want her to come to school here to
get into endless scrapes. There is some mystery afoot, and Miss
Ravenscroft has got wind of it. I know she has, because I have heard it
from one or two of the girls."

"But what mystery? What can you mean?" said Mrs. Tennant.

"I don't know myself," said Alice, "but it has something to do with
Kathleen and a curious influence she has over the foundation girls. I
know Kathleen isn't popular with the mistresses."

"That puzzles me," said Mrs. Tennant, "for I never met a more charming
girl."

"I know you think so; but, you see, mere charm of manner doesn't go down
in a great school like ours. Of course I am sorry for her, and I quite
understand that she doesn't want to disappoint her aunt, but she ought
to come with me; she ought, mother. I haven't the slightest influence
over her, but you have. I don't think she would willingly do anything to
annoy you."

"Well, I will see what I can do. She is a wayward child. I am sorry that
Miss Ravenscroft expects her to go to see her to-day, as she is so
devoted to her aunt and would enjoy seeing her."

Mrs. Tennant left the room, and Alice went steadily on with her
preparations. She wondered why her mother did not come back. Presently
she looked at the clock. It wanted a quarter to six.

"Dear me! I must go upstairs now and fetch Kathleen. She will have to
tidy herself, and I must try to persuade her not to put on anything
_outre_," thought Alice.

She rushed upstairs. She opened the bedroom door. The bedroom was empty.

"Where can she be?" thought Alice.

There were signs of Kathleen's late presence in the shape of a tie flung
on the bed, a hat tossed by its side, an open drawer revealing brushes
and combs, laces and colored ties, and no end of gloves, handkerchiefs,
&c.; but not the girl herself.

"She really is a great trial," thought Alice. "I suppose she has gone
with mother to town. I wonder mother yields to her. Kathleen will get
into a serious scrape at the school, that's certain."
