--GABRIEL SETOUN.




WISE MEN OF GOTHAM


Once upon a time there were some wise men who lived in Gotham. Listen
and you will hear how wise they were.

Twelve of these wise men went fishing one day. Some went into the stream
and some stayed on dry ground. They caught many fish and had a good
time.

As they came home, one of the men said, "We have risked much wading in
that stream. I pray God no one of us is drowned."

"Why, one of us might be! Who knows?" cried another. "Let's see about
it. Twelve of us went fishing this morning. We must count and see if
twelve are returning."

So one man counted, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine, ten, eleven." And he did not count himself!

"Alas! One of us is drowned!" he cried.

"Woe be unto us! Let me count," said another. And he did not count
himself.

"Alas! alas!" he wailed; "truly one of us is drowned!"

Then every man counted, and each one failed to count himself.

"Alas! alas!" they all cried; "one of us is drowned! Which one is it?"

They went back to the shore, and they looked up and down for him that
was drowned. All the time they were lamenting loudly.

A courtier came riding by. "What are you seeking?" he asked, "and why
are you so sorrowful?"

"Oh," said they, "this day we came to fish in the stream. There were
twelve of us, but one is drowned."

"Why," said the courtier, "count yourselves and see how many there be."

Again they counted, and again each man failed to count himself.

"Well, this is sad," said the courtier, who saw how the mistake had been
made. "What will you give me if I find the twelfth man?"

"Sir," cried all together, "you may have all the money we own."

"Give me the money," said the courtier.

Then he began to count. He gave the first man a whack over the shoulders
and said, "There is one."

He gave the next a whack and said, "There is two." And so he counted
until he came to the last man. He gave this one a sounding blow, saying,
"And here is the twelfth."

"God bless you!" cried all the company. "You have found our neighbor."

--OLD ENGLISH STORY.




THE MILLER'S GUEST

I


A hunter who had ridden ahead in the chase was lost. The sun went down,
and darkness fell upon the forest. The hunter blew his horn, but no
answer came. What should he do?

At last he heard the sound of horse's hoofs. Some one was coming. Was it
friend or foe? The hunter stood still, and soon a miller rode out into
the moonlight.

"Pray, good fellow, be so kind as to tell me the way to Nottingham,"
said the hunter.

"Nottingham? Why should you be going to Nottingham? The king and his
court are there. It is not a place for the like of you," replied the
miller.

"Well, well, perhaps you are right, good miller," said the hunter. "And
yet who knows? I'll wager that the king is no better man than I am.
However, it is getting late, and lodging I must have. Will you give me
shelter for the night?"

"Nay, nay, not so fast," said the miller. "Stand forth and let me see if
you are a true man. Many thieves wear fine clothes these days."

The hunter stepped forward. "Well, and what do you think of me?" he
asked gayly. "Will you not give a stranger lodging?"

"How do I know that you have one penny in your purse?" asked the miller.
"You may carry your all on your back, for aught I know. I've heard of
lords who are like that."

"True, good miller, but I have gold. If it be forty pence, I will pay
it," said the hunter.

"If you are a true man, and have the pence, then lodging you may have.
My good wife may not like it, but we'll see," said the miller.

"Good!" cried the hunter. "And here's my hand on it."

"Nay, nay, not so fast," replied the miller. "I must know you better
before I shake hands. None but an honest man's hand will I take."

"Some day, my good miller," replied the hunter, "I hope to have you take
my hand in yours. Proud will I be when the day comes."


II


And so to the miller's house they went. The miller again looked at the
stranger and said, "I like his face well. He may stay with us, may he
not, good wife?"

"Yes, he is a handsome youth, but it's best not to go too fast," said
the good wife. "He may be a runaway servant. Let him show his passport,
and all shall be well."

The hunter bowed low, and said, "I have no passport, good dame, and I
never was any man's servant. I am but a poor courtier who has lost his
way. Pray give me lodging for the night. Your kindness I will surely
repay."

Then the wife whispered to the miller, "The youth is of good manners and
to turn him out would be sin."

"Yea, a well-mannered youth--and one who knows his betters when he sees
them," the miller replied. "Let the lad stay."

"Well, young man," said the wife, "you are welcome here; and well lodged
you shall be, though I do say it myself. You shall have a fresh bed with
good brown sheets."

"Aye," said the miller, "and you shall sleep with our own son Richard."

Then they all sat down to supper--such a supper: pudding, apple pie, and
good things of all kinds. Then at a wink from the miller, the wife
brought out a venison pasty.

"Eat!" said the miller. "This is dainty food."

"Faith!" cried the hunter, "I never before ate such meat."

"Pshaw!" said Richard. "We eat this every day."

"Every day? Where do you buy it?"

"Oh, never a penny pay we. In merry Sherwood Forest we find it. Now and
then, you see, we make bold with the king's deer."

"Then I think that it is venison," said the hunter.

"To be sure. Any fool would know that," replied Richard; "but say
nothing about it. We would not have the king hear of it."

"I'll keep your secret," said the hunter. "Don't fear. The king shall
never know more than he knows now."

And so the evening passed merrily. It was late when the guest sought his
bed, but right soundly did he sleep.

The next morning the miller, the good wife, and Richard came out to see
the hunter on his way. Just then a party of nobles rode up.

"There's the king!" cried one.

"Pardon, your majesty!" cried another, and all fell upon their knees
before the hunter.

The miller stood shaking and quaking, and for once his wife could not
speak. The king, with a grave face, drew his sword, but not a word did
he say.

The terrified miller threw himself at his ruler's feet, crying out for
mercy. Again the sword was raised, and down it fell, but lightly, upon
the miller's shoulder, and the king said:

[Illustration: The king knights the miller]

"Your kind courtesy I will repay; so I here dub thee Knight. Rise, Sir
John of Mansfield."

For many a day the miller and his wife told of the night the king spent
with them. And for many a day the king told of the time he was taken for
a thief and ate of his own deer in the miller's house.

--ENGLISH BALLAD (Adapted).




SADDLE TO RAGS

I


  This story I'm going to sing,
    I hope it will give you content,
  Concerning a silly old man
    That was going to pay his rent,
  With a till-a-dill, till-a-dill-dill,
    Till-a-dill, dill-a-dill, dee,
  Sing fol-de-dill, dill-de-dill, dill,
    Fol-de-dill, dill-de-dill, dee.

A silly old man said to his wife one day, "Well, 'tis time I paid my
rent. The landlord has been away for a year and a day, but now he is
back, and I must pay for twelve months."

"Yes, it's twice forty pounds that is due, and it should be paid," said
the good wife. "So much money in the house keeps me from sleeping at
night."

"Well, I'll bridle old Tib, and away we shall go," said the old man.
"Right glad I'll be, too, to be rid of the gold."

The silly old man bridled old Tib and saddled her too. And away they
started. As he was jogging along, a stranger came riding up on a fine
horse with fine saddle bags.

"Good morning, old man," said the stranger.

"Good morning," said the old man.

"How far are you going?"

"To tell the truth, kind sir, I am going just two miles," said the old
man.

"And where are you going?" asked the stranger.

"I am going to pay my rent, kind sir," said the old man. "I am but a
silly old man who farms a piece of ground. My rent for a half year is
forty pounds; but my landlord has been away for a year, and now I owe
him eighty pounds. Right glad I am to pay it."

"Eighty pounds! That is indeed a large sum," cried the stranger, "and
you ought not to tell anybody you carry so much. There are many thieves
about, and you might be robbed."

"Oh, never mind!" said the old man. "I do not fear thieves. My money is
safe in my saddle bags, on which I ride."

So they rode along most pleasantly.

When they came to a thick wood, the stranger pulled out a pistol and
said, "Stand still, and give me your money."

"Nay," said the old man. "The money is for my landlord. I will not give
it to you."

"Your money or your life!"

"Well, if you will have it, you can go for it," cried the old man, as he
threw his old saddle bags over a hedge.

The thief dismounted and said, "Stand here and hold my horse while I go
over the hedge. You are silly, but surely you can do that."

The thief climbed through the hedge. When he was on the other side, the
old man got on the thief's horse, and away he galloped.

"Stop, stop!" cried the thief. "And half of my share you shall have."

"Nay," cried the man. "I think I'll go on. I'd rather have what's in
your bag."

[Illustration: The old man gallops away]

And away he galloped, riding as he never rode before.


II


The thief thought there must be something in the old man's bags; so with
his big rusty knife he chopped them into rags. But no money did he find,
for the silly old man was not so silly as he seemed. His money was in
his pocket.

The old man rode on to his landlord's home and paid his rent. Then he
opened the thief's bag, which was glorious to behold. There were five
hundred pounds in gold and silver.

"Where did you get the silver?" asked the landlord. "And where did you
get the gold?"

"I met a proud fool on the way," said the old man with a laugh. "I
swapped horses with him, and he gave me this to boot."

"Well, well! But you're too old to go about with so much money," said
the landlord.

"Oh, I think no one would harm a silly old man like me," said the
farmer, as he rode away.

The old man went home by a narrow lane, and there he spied Tib tied to a
tree.

"The stranger did not like his trade, I fear," said he. "So I think I'll
take Tib home."

The old man went home much richer than when he left. When she heard the
story, the wife danced and sang for glee. "'Tis hard to fool my old
man," said she.

--ENGLISH BALLAD (_Adapted_).




[Illustration: The Rock-a-By Lady walking by]

THE ROCK-A-BY LADY


  The Rock-a-By Lady from Hushaby street
    Comes stealing; comes creeping;
  The poppies they hang from her head to her
