victims after all? At least it seemed sure that in the end they would be
overtaken, and Ned began to count the odds in a fight. Anything seemed
better than this interminable flight.

They were cheered a little by the aspect of the country, which began to
change considerably for the better. The cactus reappeared and then a few
trees, lonesome and ragged, but trees, nevertheless. It is wonderful how
much humanity a tree has in a sad and sandy land. The soil grew much
firmer and soon they saw clumps of buffalo grass. Several small groups
of buffalo were also visible.

"There's better country ahead, as you see," said Obed. "Besides, I've
been along this way before. We'll strike water by dark."

They reached a tiny brook just as the twilight came, at which both they
and their horses drank. They also took the time to wash their hands and
faces, but they dared not delay any longer for fear of being overtaken
by the Lipans. The night and the following day passed in the same manner
as the others, and the horses of Ned and Obed, splendid animals though
they were, began to show signs of fatigue. One limped a little. The
dreaded was happening. The Indian ponies made only of bone and muscle
were riding them down.

On the other hand, the character of the country now encouraged the
fugitives. The yucca and the mesquite turned into oak. They passed
through large groves and they hoped that they might soon enter a great
forest in which they could hide their trail wholly from the Lipans. They
crossed two considerable streams, knee deep on the horses, and then they
entered the forest for which they had hoped so much. It was of oaks
without much undergrowth and the ground was hilly. They rode through it
until past midnight. Then they stopped by the edge of a blue pool, and
while the other watched with the rifle each took the bath that he had
coveted so long.

"I feel that I can fight battles and also run better now that I've got
rid of ten pounds of sand and dust," said Obed, "and I guess you feel
the same way, Ned. I suppose you've noticed that the other horse has
gone lame, too?"

"Yes, I noticed it. I don't believe either could make much speed
to-morrow."

"They certainly couldn't unless they had a long rest, and here we stay.
There need be no secrets between you and me, Ned, about this pursuit. I
think it's likely that we'll have a fight in the morning, and we might
as well choose our fort."

The horses were panting and both now limped badly. It was quite evident
that they were spent. Beyond the pool was a tiny valley or glade with a
good growth of grass, and, after tying the reins to the pommels of the
saddles, they released the two faithful beasts there. Obed thought once
of tethering them but he reflected that to do so would make them sure
targets of the Indian bullets or arrows. They, too, deserved a chance to
escape.

Then he and Ned looked around for the fort, of which they had spoken,
and they found it beyond the pool in an opening which would have been
called a little prairie in the far north. In the center of this opening
grew a rather thick cluster of trees, and there was some fallen wood. A
rifle bullet would not reach from any point of the forest to the
cluster.

They drew up all the fallen wood they could find, helping to turn the
ring of trees into a kind of fortification, refilled their water bottles
from the pool, and sat down to wait, with their rifles and pistols
ready.

Ned felt a kind of relief, the relief that comes to one who, having
faced the worst so long, now knows that it has been realized. The
terrible chase had gone on for nights and days. Always the Lipans were
behind them. Well, if they were so fond of pursuing, now let them come.
By the aid of the dead wood they were fairly well protected from a fire
in any direction, and the light was sufficient for them to see an enemy
who attempted to cross the open. There was a certain grim pleasure in
the situation.

"They've run us down at last," said Obed, "but they haven't got us yet.
Before you scalp your man just catch him is a proverb that I would
recommend to the Lipans. Now, Ned, suppose we eat a little, and brace
ourselves for the arrival of the pursuit."

They ate with a good appetite and then lay propped on their elbows,
where they could look just over the logs at the circling forest. It was
very quiet. Nothing stirred among the trees. Their eyes, used now to the
half dusk, could see almost as well as if it were daylight. Ned finally
noticed some dark objects on the boughs of the trees and called Obed's
attention to them.

"Wild turkeys," said Obed, after a long look. "The first we've seen and
we can't take a shot at them. They must know it or they wouldn't sit
there so quiet and easy."

A half hour later, Ned saw something move among the trees at the nearest
point of the forest. It looked like a shadow and was gone in an
instant. But his heart leaped. He felt sure that it was a Lipan, and
told Obed of his suspicion.

"Of course you're right," said the Maine man. "They may have been there
in the woods for an hour spying us out. They've dismounted and have left
their horses further back among the trees. Suppose you watch to the
right while I face to the left. I think the two of us together can cover
a whole circle."

Ned felt a singular composure. It seemed to him that he had passed
through so many emotions that he had none left now but calm and
expectancy. As the night was somewhat cold he even remembered to throw
one of the blankets over his body, as he lay behind the log. Obed
noticed it and his sharp eyes brightened with approval. It was obvious
that the Lipans were now in the woods about them, and that the long
chase was at an end, but the boy was as steady as a rock.

Ned looked continually for the second appearance of the shadows. Nothing
within the range of his half circle escaped him. He saw the wild turkeys
unfold their wings, and fly heavily away, which was absolute proof of
the presence of the Lipans. He finally saw the shadow for the second
time, and, at almost the same moment, a pink dot appeared in the woods.
The crack of a rifle followed, and a bullet knocked up a little dust at
least fifty yards short of them. Obed sniffed contemptuously.

"One good bullet wasted," he said, "and one good bullet, I suppose,
deserves another, but they won't fire again--yet. It shows that they
know we're on guard. They won't rush us. They'll wait for time, thirst
and starvation."

Obed was right. Not another shot was fired, nor did any of the Lipans
show themselves. Day came, and the forest was as quiet and peaceful as
if it were a park. Some little birds of brilliant plumage sang as
heralds of dawn, and sunlight flooded the trees and the opening. Ned and
Obed moved themselves into more comfortable positions and waited.

They were to have another terrible trial of Indian patience. No attack
was made. The two lay behind the logs and watched the circle of the
forest, until their eyes grew weary. The silence and peace that had
marked the dawn continued through all the hours of the morning. Although
the wild turkeys had flown away, the birds that lived in this forest
seemed to take no alarm. They hopped peacefully from bough to bough, and
sang their little songs as if there were no alien presence. But Ned and
Obed had been through too many dangers to be entrapped into a belief
that the Lipans had gone. They matched patience with patience. The sun
went slowly up toward the zenith, and the earth grew hot, but they were
protected from the fiery rays by the foliage of the trees. Yet Ned grew
restless. He was continually poking the muzzle of his rifle over the log
and seeking a target, although the forest revealed no human being.
Finally Obed put his hand upon his arm.

"Easy, now, easy, Ned," he said. "Don't waste your strength and nerves.
They can't charge us, at least in the daylight, without our seeing them,
and, when they come, we want to be as strong of body and brain as
possible. We won't take the fight to them. They must bring it to us."

Ned blushed. Meanwhile the afternoon dragged on, slow and silent, as the
morning had been.




CHAPTER XIII

THE TEXANS


Late in the afternoon Ned's nerves began to affect him again. Once more,
the old longing for action took such strong hold upon him that he could
not cast it off for a long time. But he hid his face from Obed. He did
not want his older comrade to see that he was white and trembling.
Finally, he took some food from his pack and bit fiercely upon it, as he
ate. It was not for the food that he cared, but it was a relief to bring
his teeth together so hard. Obed looked at him approvingly.

"You're setting a good example, Ned," he said, "and I'll follow it."

He too ate, and then took a satisfactory drink from his water bottle.
Meanwhile the sun was setting in a cloudless sky, and both noticed with
satisfaction that it would be a clear night. Eyes, trained like theirs,
could see even in the dusk an enemy trying to creep upon them.

"Do you think you could sleep a while, Ned?" said Obed, persuasively.
"Of course, I'll awake you at the first alarm, if the alarm itself
doesn't do it. Sleep knits us up for the fray, and a man always wants to
be at his best when he goes into battle."

"How could a fellow sleep now?"

"Only the brave and resolute can do it," replied Obed, cunningly.
"Napoleon slept before Austerlitz, and while no Austerlitz is likely to
happen down here in the wilderness of Northern Mexico there is nothing
to keep those who are able from copying a great man."

The appeal to Ned's pride was not lost.

"I think I'll try it," he said.

He lay down behind the log with his rifle by his side, and closed his
eyes. He had no idea that he could go to sleep, but he wished to show
Obed his calmness in face of danger. Yet he did sleep, and he did not
awaken until Obed's hand fell upon his shoulder. He would have sprung
up, all his faculties not yet regained, but Obed's hand pressed him
down.

"Don't forget where you are, Ned," said the Maine man, "and that we are
still besieged."

Yet the night was absolutely still and Ned, from his recumbent position,
looked up at a clear sky and many glittering stars.

"Has anything happened?" he asked.

"Not a thing. No Lipan has shown himself even among the trees."

"About what time do you think it is?"

"Two or three hours after midnight, and now I'm going to take a nap
while you watch. Ned, do you know, I've an idea those fellows are going
to sit in the woods indefinitely, safe, beyond range, and wait for us to
come out. Doesn't it make you angry?"

"It does, and it makes me angry also to think that they have our horses.
Those were good horses."

Obed slept until day, and Ned watched with a vigilance that no creeping
enemy could pass. The Lipans made no movement, but the siege, silent and
invisible, went on. Ned had another attack of the nerves, but, as his
comrade was sleeping soundly, he took no trouble to hide it, and let the
spell shake itself out.

The day was bright, burning and hot, and it threatened to pass like its
predecessor, in silence and inaction. Ned and Obed had been lying down
or sitting down so long that they had grown stiff, and now, knowing that
they were out of range they stood up and walked boldly about, tensing
and flexing their muscles, and relieving the bodily strain. Ned thought
that their appearance might tempt the Lipans to a shot or some other
demonstration, but no sound came from the woods, and they could not see
any human presence there. "Maybe they have gone away after all," said
Ned hopefully.

"If you went over there to the woods you'd soon find out that they
hadn't."

"Suppose they really went away. We'd have no way of knowing it and then
we'd have to sit here forever all the same."

Obed laughed, despite the grimness of their situation.

"That is a problem," he said, "but if you can't work a problem it will
work itself if you only give it enough time."

The morning was without result, but in the afternoon they saw figures
stirring in the wood and concluded that some movement was at hand.

"Ned," said Obed, "I think we've either won in the contest of patience,
or that something else has occurred to disturb the Lipans. Don't you see
horses as well as Indians there among the trees?"

"I can count at least five horses, and I've no doubt there are others."

"All of which to my mind indicates a rush on horseback. Perhaps they
think they can gallop over us. We'd better lay our pistols on the logs,
where we can get at 'em quick, and be ready."

Ned's sharp eye caught sight of more horses at another point.

"They're coming from all sides," he said.

"You face to the right and I'll face to the left," said Obed, "and be
sure your bullet counts. If we bring down a couple of them they will
stop. Indians are not fond of charging in the open, and, besides, it
will be hard for them to force their horses in among these logs and
trees of ours."

Ned did not answer, but he had listened attentively. The muzzle of his
rifle rested upon the log beside his pistol, and, with his eye looking
down the sights, he was watching for whatever might come.

A sharp whistle sounded from the wood. At the same instant, three bands
of Lipans galloped from the trees at different points, and converged
upon the little fortress. They were all naked to the waist, and the sun
blazed down upon their painted bodies, lighting up their lean faces and
fierce eyes. They uttered shout after shout, as they advanced, and as
they came closer, bent down behind the shoulders of their ponies or
clung to their sides.

The tremor of the nerves seized Ned again, but it was gone in a moment.
Then a fierce passion turned the blood in his veins to fire. Why were
these savages seeking his life? Why had they hung upon his trail for
days and days? And why had they kept up that silent and invincible siege
so long? Yet he did not forget his earlier resolution to watch for a
good shot, knowing that his life hung upon it. But it was hard to hold
one's fire when the thud of those charging hoofs was coming closer.

The horsemen in front of him were four in number, and the leader who
wore a brilliant feathered headdress, seemed to be a chief. Ned chose
him for his target, but for a few moments the Lipan made his pony bound
from side to side in such a manner that he could not secure a good aim.
But his chance came. The Lipan raised his head and opened his mouth to
utter a great shout of encouragement to his followers. The shout did not
pass his lips, because Ned's bullet struck him squarely in the forehead,
and he fell backward from his horse, dead before he touched the ground.

Ned heard Obed's rifle crack with his own, but he could not turn his
head to see the result. He snatched up his pistol and fired a second
shot which severely wounded a Lipan rider, and then all three parties of
the Lipans, fearing the formidable hedge, turned and galloped back,
leaving two of their number lifeless upon the ground.

Obed had not fired his pistol, but he stood holding it in his hand, his
eyes flashing with grim triumph. Ned was rapidly reloading his rifle.

"If we didn't burn their noble Lipan faces then I'm mightily mistaken,"
said Obed, as he too began to reload his rifle. "A charge that is not
pressed home is no charge at all. Hark, what is that?"

There was a sudden crash of rifle shots in the forest, the long whining
whoop of the Lipans and then hard upon it a deep hoarse cheer.

"White men!" exclaimed Ned.

"And Texans!" said Obed. "Such a roar as that never came from Mexican
throats. It's friends! Do you hear, Ned, it's friends! There go the
Indians!"

Across the far edge of the open went the Lipans in wild flight, and, as
they pressed their mustangs for more speed, bullets urged them to
efforts yet greater. Fifteen or twenty men galloped from the trees, and
Ned and Obed, breaking cover, greeted them with joyous shouts, which the
men returned in kind.

"You don't come to much," exclaimed Ned, "but we can say to you that
never were men more welcome."

"Which I beg to repeat and emphasize," said Obed White.

"Speak a little louder," said the foremost of the men, leaning from his
horse and couching one hand behind his ear.

Ned repeated his words in a much stronger tone, and the man nodded and
smiled. Ned looked at him with the greatest interest. He was of middle
age and medium size. Hair and eyes were intensely black, and his
complexion was like dark leather. Dressed in Indian costume he could
readily have passed for a warrior. Yet this man had come from the far
northern state of New York, and it was only the burning suns of the
Texas and North Mexican plains that had turned him to his present
darkness.

"Glad to meet you, my boy," he said, leaning from his horse and holding
out a powerful hand, burnt as dark as his face. "My name's Smith,
Erastus Smith."

Ned grasped his hand eagerly. This was the famous "Deaf" Smith--destined
to become yet more famous--although they generally pronounced it D-e-e-f
in Texas.

"Guess we didn't come out of season," said Smith with a smile.

"You certainly didn't," broke in Obed. "There's a time for all things,
and this was your time!"

"I believe they're real glad to see us. Don't you think so, Jim?" said
Smith with a smile.

The man whom he called Jim had been sitting on his horse, silent, and he
remained silent yet, but he nodded in reply. Ned's gaze traveled to him
and he was certainly a striking figure. He was over six feet in height,
with large blue eyes and fair hair. His expression was singularly
gentle and mild, but his appearance nevertheless, both face and figure,
indicated unusual strength. Obed had not noticed him before, but now he
exclaimed joyfully:

"Why, it's Colonel Jim Bowie! Jim, it's me, Obed White! Shake hands!"

"So it is you, Obed," said the redoubtable Bowie, "and here we shake."

The hands of the two met in a powerful clasp. Then they all dismounted
and another man, short and thick, shook Obed by the hand and called him
by his first name. He was Henry Karnes, the Tennesseean, great scout and
famous borderer of the Texas plains.

Ned looked with admiration at these men, whose names were great to him.
On the wild border where life depended almost continually upon skill and
quickness with weapons, "Deaf" Smith, Jim Bowie and Henry Karnes were
already heroes to youth. Ned thrilled. He was here with his own people,
and with the greatest of them. He had finished his long journey and he
was with the Texans. The words shaped themselves again and again in his
brain, the Texans! the Texans! the Texans!

"You two seem to have given the Lipans a lot of trouble," said Bowie,
looking at the two fallen warriors.

"We were putting all the obstacles we could in the way of what they
wanted," said Obed modestly, "but we don't know what would have happened
if you hadn't come. Those fellows had been following us for days, and
they must have had some idea that you were near, or they would have
waited still longer."

"They must not have known that we were as near as we were," said Bowie,
"or they would not have invited our attack. We heard the firing and
galloped to it at once. But you two need something better than talk."

He broke off suddenly, because Ned had sat down on one of the logs,
looking white and ill. The collapse had come after so many terrible
trials and privations, and not even his will could hold him.

"Here, you take a drink of this water, it's good and cold," said "Deaf"
Smith kindly as he held out a canteen. "I reckon that no boy has ever
passed through more than you have, and if there's any hero you are one."

"Good words," said Bowie.

Ned smiled. These words were healing balm to his pride. To be praised
thus by these famous Texans was ample reward. Besides, he had great and
vital news to all, and he knew that Obed would wait for him to tell it.

