It is not too strong a word to say that Matty, Alice and Sophy Bell,
received their invitation to play tennis at the Manor with a due sense
of jubilation. Matty wore the shot silk which had been partly purchased
by the sale of good Mrs. Bell's engagement ring. This silk had been
made, at home, but, with the aid of a dressmaker young Susan Pettigrew,
who had served her time to the Perrys. Susan had made valuable
suggestions, which had been carried into effect, with the result that
the shot silk was provided with two bodies--a high one for morning wear,
and one cut in a modest, demi-style for evening festivities. The evening
body had elbow-sleeves, which were furnished with raffles of
coffee-colored lace, and, when put on, it revealed the contour of a
rather nice plump little throat, and altogether made Matty Bell look
nicer than she had ever looked in anything else before.

The wonderful Miss Pettigrew had also supplied the dress with a train,
which could be hooked on with safety hooks and eyes for evening wear,
and removed easily when the robe was to act as a tennis or morning
costume. Altogether, nothing could have been more complete than this
sinning garment, and no heart could have beat more proudly under it than
did fair Matty's.

When the captain went suddenly away this little girl and her good mother
had both owned to a sense of depression; but his speedy return was soon
bruited abroad, and at the same time that little whisper got into the
air with regard to the gallant captain, that, like Duncan Gray, he was
coming back to woo. It did not require many nods of Mrs. Bell's head to
assure all her acquaintances whom she considered the favored young lady.
Matty once more blushed consciously, and giggled in an audible manner
when the captain's name was mentioned. The invitation to play tennis at
the Manor completed the satisfaction of this mother and daughter.

"There's no doubt of it," said Mrs. Bell; "I thought my fine lady would
have to come down from her high horse. I expect the captain makes his
mother do pretty much what he wishes, and very right, too, very right.
He wants to show his little girl to his proud parent, and, whether she
likes it or not, she'll have to make much of you, my love. Sophy and
Alice, it's more than likely Matty will be asked to dine and spend the
evening, at the Manor, and I think we'll just make up the evening body
of her silk dress and her train in a bit of brown paper, and you can
carry the parcel up between you to the Manor. Then, if it's wanted, it
will come in handy, and my girl won't be behind one of them."

"Lor, ma, what are we to do with such a bulky parcel?" objected Sophy,
who was not looking her best in a washed-out muslin of two years' date.
"What can we do with the parcel when we get to the Manor?"

"Take it up, of course, to the house, child, and give it to the servant,
and tell her it's to be kept till called for. She'll understand fast
enough; servants always guess when there's a sweetheart in the question.
Most likely she'll place the things ready for Matty in one of the
bedrooms. I'll put in your best evening shoes too, Matty, love, and my
old black lace fan, in case you should flush up dreadful when the
captain is paying you attention. And now, Sophy, you'll just be
good-natured, and leave the parcel with the parlor maid, so your sister
will be prepared for whatever happens."

Sophy, having been judiciously bribed by the loan of a large Cairngorm
brooch of her mother's, which took up a conspicuous position at her
throat, finally consented to carry the obnoxious parcel. Alice was
further instructed, in case Mrs. Bertram so far failed in her duty as to
neglect to invite Matty to stay to dine at the Manor to try and bring
Captain Bertram back with them to supper.

"You tell him that I'll have a beautiful lobster, and a crab done to a
turn ready for him," whispered the mother. "You'll manage it, Alice, and
look sympathetic when you speak to him, poor fellow. Let him know that
I'll give him his chances, whether that proud lady, his mother, does or
not. Now then, off you go, all three of you. Kiss me, Matty, my pet.
Well, to be sure, you do look stylish."

The three little figures in their somewhat tight shoes toddled down the
street. In the evening they toddled back again. The brown paper parcel
tossed, and somewhat torn, was tucked fiercely under Sophy's arm, and
Alice was unaccompanied by any brave son of Mars.

Sophy was the first to enter her expectant mother's presence.

"There, ma," she said, flinging the paper parcel on the table. "I hope
we have had enough of those Bertrams and their ways. The fuss I had over
that horrid parcel. I thought I'd never get it back again. In the end I
had to see Mrs. Bertram about it, and didn't she crush me just! She's an
awful woman. I never want to speak to her again all my life, and as to
the captain caring for Matty!"

"Where is Matty?" here interrupted Mrs. Bell. "She was not asked to stay
behind after all, then?"

"_She_ asked to stay behind? You speak for yourself, Matty. For my
part, I think it was very unfair to give Matty that silk. We might all
have had nice washing muslins for the price of it. Where are you, Matty?
Oh, I declare she has gone upstairs in the sulks!"

"You're in a horrid bad temper, Sophy; that I can see," expostulated the
mother. "Well, Alice, perhaps you can tell me what all this fuss is
about? I hope to goodness you gave the captain my message, child."

"I didn't see him to give it, mother," answered Alice. "He never spoke
once to us the whole time. He just shook hands when we arrived, but even
then he didn't speak."

"Captain Bertram never spoke to Matty during the entire evening?" gasped
Mrs. Bell. "Child, you can't be speaking the truth, you must be joking
me."

"I'm not, truly, mother. Captain Bertram didn't even look at Matty. He
was all the time following Beatrice Meadowsweet about like a shadow."

Mrs. Bell gave her head a toss.

"Oh, that's it, is it?" she said. "I didn't think the captain would be
so artful. Mark my word, girls, he behaved like that just as a blind to
put his old mother off the scent."

But as Mrs. Bell spoke her heart sank within her. She remembered again
how Beatrice had looked that evening in the green boat, and she saw once
more Matty's tossed locks and sunburnt hands.

After a time she went upstairs, and without any ceremony entered her
daughter's room.

Matty had tossed off the gaudy silk, and was lying on her bed. Her poor
little face was blistered with tears, and, as Mrs. Bell expressed it, it
"gave me a heart-ache even to look at her." She was not a woman,
however, to own to defeat. She pretended not to see Matty's tears, and
she made her tone purposely very cheerful.

"Come, come, child," she said, "what are you stretched on the bed for,
as if you were delicate? Now, I wouldn't let this get to Captain
Bertram's ears for the world."

"What do you mean, mother?" asked the astonished daughter.

"What I say, my love. I wouldn't let the captain know that you were so
tired as to have to lie down after a game of tennis, for a ten pound
note. Nothing puts a man off a girl so soon as to hear that she's
delicate."

"Oh, he--he doesn't care," half sobbed Matty.

"Oh, doesn't he, though? I never knew anything more like caring than for
him to be too shy to come near you. Things have gone pretty far when a
man has to blind his mother by pretending to be taken up with another
girl. I knew the captain was in love, Matty, but I did not suppose he
was deep enough to play his cards after that fashion. You get up now,
lovey, and come down, and have a nice hot cup of tea. It will revive you
wonderfully, my pet."

Matty allowed her mother to coax her off the bed, and to assist her on
with her every-day brown holland frock. She was a good deal comforted
and inclined to reconsider the position which had seemed so hopeless
half-an-hour ago.

"Only he did neglect me shamefully," she said, with a little toss of her
head. "And I don't see why I should take it from him."

"That's right, my girl. You show Captain Bertram you've got a spirit of
your own. There's nothing brings a man to the point like a girl giving
him a little bit of sauce. Next time he speaks to you, you can be as
stand-off as you please, Matty."

"Yes, mother," said Matty, in a languid tone.

She knew, however, that it was not in her nature to be stand-off to any
one, and beneath all the comfort of her mother's words she could not
help doubting if Captain Bertram would care how she behaved to him.

The next morning the Rector's invitation came for the annual treat, and
the hopes of the Bells once more rose high. On this occasion Mrs. Bell
was to accompany her daughters. Bell would also be present, but, as he
was never of much account, this small fact scarcely rested on any one's
mind. All the town was now in state of ferment. The Rector's party was
the only thing spoken about, and many were the prognostications with
regard to the weather.

The day of festival came at last; the sun arose gloriously, not a cloud
was in the sky, all the merry-makers might go in their best, and all
hearts might be jubilant. It was delightful to see Northbury on this
day, for so gay were the costumes worn by its inhabitants that as they
passed through the narrow old streets they gave the place of their birth
a picturesque and even a foreign appearance.

The Rectory was just outside the town, and, of course, all the footsteps
were bending thither. The Rector had invited his guests to assemble at
three o'clock, and punctually at a quarter to that hour Miss Peters
seated herself in her bay window, armed with a spy-glass to watch the
gathering crowd.

Miss Peters was already arrayed in her festive clothes, but she and Mrs.
Butler thought it ungenteel not to be, at least, an hour late. "The
Bertrams will be sure to be late," remarked the good lady to her sister,
"and we, too, Martha, will show that we know what's what."

"Which we don't," snapped Mrs. Butler. "We are sure and certain to be
put in the wrong before we are half-an-hour there. However, I agree with
you, Maria; we won't be among the hurryers. I hate to be one of those
who snap at a thing. Now, what's the matter? How you do startle me!"

"It's Mrs. Gorman Stanley," gasped Miss Peters; "she's in red velvet,
with a beaded bodice--and--oh, do look at her bonnet, Martha!
Positively, it's hideous. A straw-green, with blue forget-me-nots, and
those little baby daisies dropping over her hair. Well, well, how that
woman does ape youth!"

Mrs. Butler snatched the spy-glass from her sister, and surveyed Mrs.
Gorman Stanley's holiday attire with marked disapproval. She threw down
her glasses presently with a little sniff.

"Disgusting," she said with emphasis. "That woman will never see fifty
again, and she apes seventeen. For my part, I think, when women reach a
certain age they should not deck themselves with artificial flowers.
Flowers are for the young, not for poor worn-out, faded types of
humanity. Now you, Maria----"

"Oh, don't," said Miss Maria, stepping back a few paces in alarm, and
putting up her hand to her bonnet, "don't say that wallflowers aren't
allowable, Martha; I always did think that wallflowers were so
_passe_. That's why I chose them."

"Who's that now?" exclaimed Mrs. Butler. "My word, Maria, get quick
behind the curtain and peep! Give me the spy-glass; I'll look over your
head. Why, if it isn't--no--yes--it is, though--it's that young Captain
Bertram, a _most_ stylish young man! He looks elegant in flannels--quite
a noble face--I should imagine him to be the image of Julius
Caesar--there he comes--and Bee--Bee Meadowsweet with him."

"Just like her name," murmured Miss Peters; "just--just like her name,
bless her!"

The poor, withered heart of the little old maid quite swelled with love
and admiration as the beautiful girl, dressed simply all in white, with
roses on her cheeks, and sparkles in her eyes, walked to the scene of
the coming gayeties in the company of the acknowledged hero of the town.

"Poor Matty Bell, I pity her!" said Mrs. Butler. "Oh, it has been a
sickening sight the way the mother has gone on lately, perfectly
sickening; but she'll have her come down, poor woman, and I, for one,
will say, serve her right."

"We may as well be going, Martha," said Miss Peters.

"Well, I suppose so, since our betters have led the way. Now, Maria,
don't drag behind, and don't ogle me with your eyes more than you can
help. I have made up my mind to have a seat next to Mrs. Bertram at the
feast, and to bring her down a peg if I can. Now, let's come on."

The ladies left the house and joined the group of holiday-seekers, who
were all going in the direction of the Rectory. When they reached the
festive scene, the grounds were already thronged. Mr. Ingram was very
proud of his gardens and smoothly-kept lawns. He hated to see his velvet
swards trampled on and made bare by the tread of many feet. He disliked
the pet flowers in his greenhouses being pawed and smelt, and his trim
ribbon borders being ruthlessly despoiled. But on the day of the annual
treat he forgot all these prejudices. The lawns, the glass-houses, the
flower-beds, might and would suffer, he cared not. He was giving supreme
pleasure to human flowers, and for two days out of the three hundred and
sixty-five they were free to do as they liked with the vegetable kingdom
over which on every other day he reigned as monarch supreme. Marquees
now dotted the lawns, and one or two brass bands played rather shrill
music. There were tennis-courts and croquet lawns, and fields set aside
for archery. Luxurious seats, with awnings over them, were to be found
at every turn, and as the grass was of the greenest here, the trees of
the shadiest, and the view of the blue harbor the loveliest, the
Rector's place, on the day of the feast, appeared to more than one
enthusiastic inhabitant of Northbury just like fairyland.

Matty Bell thought so, as, accompanied by her sisters and mother she
stepped into the enchanted ground. The girls were in white to-day, not
well made, and very bunchy and thick of texture. But still the dresses
were white, and round each modest waist was girdled a sash of virgin
blue.

"It makes me almost weep to look at the dear children," whispered Mrs.
Bell to her husband. "They look so innocent and lamb-like, more
particularly Matty."

Here she sighed profoundly.

"I don't see why you should single out Matty," retorted the spouse.
"She's no more than the others, as far as I can see, and Sophy has the
reddest cheeks."

"That's all you know," said Mrs. Bell. Here she almost shook herself
with disdain. "Well, Peter, I often do wonder what Pas are for--not for
observation, and not for smoothing a girl's path, and helping an ardent
young lover. Oh, no, no!"

"Helping an ardent young lover, Tilly! Whatever are you talking about?
Where is he? I don't see him."

"You make me sick, Peter. Hold your tongue, do, and believe your wife
when she says that's about all you are good for. Matty's on the brink,
and that's the truth."

Poor Bell looked as mystified as he felt. Presently he slunk away to
enjoy a quiet smoke with some congenial spirits in the coal trade, and
Mrs. Bell marshalled her girls to as prominent a position as she could
find.

It was her object to get on the terrace. The terrace was very broad, and
ran not only the length of the front of the house, but a good way beyond
at either side. At each end of the terrace was a marquee, decorated with
colored flags, and containing within the most refined order of
refreshments. On the terrace were many seats, and the whole place was a
blaze of gay dresses, brilliant flowers, and happy, smiling faces.

It was here the _elite_ of the pleasure-seekers evidently meant to
congregate, and as Mrs. Bell intended, on this occasion at least, to
join herself to the select few, her object was to get on the terrace.
She had not at first, however, the courage to mount those five sacred
steps uninvited. The battery of eyes which would be immediately turned
upon her would be greater than even her high spirit could support. Mr.
Ingram had already spoken to her, she did not know Mrs. Bertram,
although she felt that if Catherine or Mabel were near she might call to
one of them, and make herself known as Matty's mother.

Catherine and Mabel were, however, several fields away engaged in a
vigorous game of archery. Mrs. Bell raised her fat face, and surveyed
the potentates of the terrace with anxiety.

"Keep close to me, Matty," she said to her eldest daughter. "Don't go
putting yourself in the background. It isn't becoming, seeing what will
be expected of you by-and-by. Now I wonder where the captain is! Mr.
Ingram is sure to make a fuss about those Bertrams, and that young man
will be expected to be at the beck and call of everybody all day long.
But never you mind, Matty, my pet. He shall have his chances, or my name
is not Tilly Bell."

"I wish ma wouldn't," whispered Sophy to Alice. "I don't believe Captain
Bertram cares a bit for Matty. Now, what are we all going to do! Oh,
dear, I quite shake in my shoes. Ma is awfully venturesome, and I know
we will be snubbed."

"Come on, girls," said Mrs. Bell looking over her shoulder. "What are
you loitering for? I see Mrs. Gorman Stanley at the back there, by one
of the big refreshment booths. I'm going to make for her."

"Oh, ma, she doesn't care a bit for us."

"Never mind, she'll do as an excuse. Now let's all keep close together."

Amongst the select company on the terrace Mrs. Bertram of course
found a foremost place. She was seated next to Lady Verney, whose
daughter, the Lady Georgiana Higginbotham also stood near, languidly
pulling a splendid gloire de Dijon rose to pieces. She was a tall,
sallow-faced girl, with the true aristocratic expression of
"I-won't-tell-you-anything-at-all" stamped on her face. She was to be
married the following week, and had all the airs of a bride-elect.

This young lady raised her pince nez to watch the Bells as they ascended
the steps.

"Who _are_ those extraordinary people?" she whispered to her mother.

"I'm sure I don't know, my dear. How intolerably hot it is. Really our
good Rector ought not to ask us to submit to the fierce rays of the sun
during this intense weather. Georgiana, pray keep in the shade. Yes,
Mrs. Bertram, you must find the absence of all society a drawback here."

"I sha'n't stay here long," responded Mrs. Bertram. "Catherine is still
so young that she does not want society. Ah, there is Loftus. I should
