
One whistle! You have come to a halt. Three pairs of whistles one after
the other! and then, putting on all steam, you make for the drift. The
superintendent locks the door, you do not quite understand why, and in a
second the battle begins. The machine rocks and creaks in all its joints.
There comes a tremendous shock. The cabin is as dark as midnight. The
clouds of flying snow put out the day. The labored breathing of the
locomotives behind you, the clouds of smoke and steam that wrap you up as
in a mantle, the noonday eclipse of the sun, the surging of the ship, the
rattling of chains, the creak of timbers as if the craft were aground and
the sea getting out of its bed to whelm you altogether, the doubt as to
what will come,--all combine to make a scene of strange excitement for a
landlubber.

You have made some impression on the breaker, and again the machine backs
for a fair start, and then another plunge, and shock, and twilight. And
so, from deep cut to deep cut, as if the season had packed all his winter
clothes upon the track, until the stalled trains are reached and passed;
and then, with alternate storm and calm, and halt and shock, till the way
is cleared to Erie.

It is Sunday afternoon, and Erie--"Mad Anthony Wayne's" old
headquarters--has donned its Sunday clothes, and turned out by hundreds to
see the great plow come in,--its first voyage over the line. The
locomotives set up a crazy scream, and you draw slowly into the depot. The
door opened at last, you clamber down, and gaze up at the uneasy house in
which you have been living. It looks as if an avalanche had tumbled down
upon it,--white as an Alpine shoulder. Your first thought is gratitude
that you have made a landing alive. Your second, a resolution that, if
again you ride a hammer, it will not be when three engines have hold of
the handle!


NOTES.--Chautauqua is the most western county in the state of New York; it
borders on Lake Erie.

The Cyclops are described in Grecian mythology as giants having only one
eye, which was circular, and placed in the middle of the forehead.

Cerro de Potosi is a mountain in Bolivia, South America, celebrated for
its mineral wealth. More than five thousand mines have been opened in it;
the product is chiefly silver.

"Mad Anthony Wayne" (b. 1745, d. 1796), so called from his bravery and
apparent recklessness, was a famous American officer during the
Revolution. In 1794 be conducted a successful campaign against the Indians
of the Northwest, making his headquarters at Erie, Pa.



LXI. THE QUARREL OF BRUTUS AND CASSIUS. (234)

Cas. That you have wronged me doth appear in this:
     You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
     For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
     Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
     Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
     Bru. You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
Cas. In such a time as this, it is not meet
     That every nice offense should bear his comment.
Bru. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
     Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
     To sell and mart your offices for gold
     To undeservers.
Cas.                  I an itching palm!
     You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
     Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
Bru. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
     And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Cas. Chastisement!
Bru. Remember March, the ides of March remember!
     Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
     What villain touched his body, that did stab,
     And not for justice? What! shall one of us,
     That struck the foremost man of all this world
     But for supporting robbers; shall we now
     Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
     And sell the mighty space of our large honors
     For so much trash as may be graspe'd thus?
     I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
     Than such a Roman.
Cas.                   Brutus, bay not me;
     I'll not endure it: you forget yourself,
     To hedge me in; I am a soldier, I,
     Older in practice, abler than yourself
     To make conditions.
Bru.                    Go to; you are not, Cassius.
Cas. I am.
Bru. I say you are not.
Cas. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself:
     Have mind upon your health; tempt me no further.
Bru. Away, slight man!
Cas. Is't possible?
Bru.                Hear me, for I will speak.
     Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
     Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
Cas. O ye gods! ye gods! must I endure all this?
Bru. All this! Ay, more: fret till your proud heart break;
     Go, show your slaves how choleric you are,
     And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
     Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
     Under your testy humor? By the gods,
     You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
     Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,
     I'll use you for my mirth, yea for my laughter,
     When you are waspish.
Cas.                      Is it come to this?
Bru. You say you are a better soldier;
     Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
     And it shall please me well: for mine own part,
     I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
Cas. You wrong me every way; you wrong me, Brutus;
     I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
     Did I say "better"?
Bru.                     If you did, I care not.
Cas. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Bru. Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
Cas. I durst not?
Bru. No.
Cas. What! durst not tempt him?
Bru.                            For your life, you durst not.
Cas. Do not presume too much upon my love;
     I may do that I shall be sorry for.
Bru. You have done that you should be sorry for.
     There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
     For I am armed so strong in honesty
     That they pass by me as the idle wind,
     Which I respect not. I did send to you
     For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;--
     For I can raise no money by vile means:
     By heaven! I had rather coin my heart,
     And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
     From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
     By any indirection.--I did send
     To you for gold to pay my legions,
     Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
     Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
     When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
     To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
     Be ready, gods, with an your thunderbolts;
     Dash him to pieces!
Cas.                     I denied you not.
Bru. You did.
Cas. I did not: he was but a fool that brought
     My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart:
     A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
     But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
Bru. I do not, till you practice them on me.
Cas. You love me not.
Bru.                  I do not like your faults.
Cas. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
Bru. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
     As huge as high Olympus.
Cas. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
     Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
     For Cassius is aweary of the world;
     Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
     Checked like a bondman; all his faults observed,
     Set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rate,
     To cast into my teeth. Oh, I could weep
     My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
     And here my naked breast; within, a heart
     Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:
     If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth:
     I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
     Strike, as thou didst at Caesar; for, I know,
     When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
     Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Bru.                                 Sheathe your dagger:
     Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
     Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
     O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
     That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
     Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
     And straight is cold again.
Cas.                             Hath Cassius lived
     To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
     When grief, and blood ill-tempered, vexeth him?
Bru. When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered, too.
Cas. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

238    ECLECTIC SERIES.

Bru. And my heart, too.
Cas.                   O Brutus!
Bru.                             What's the matter?
Cas. Have you not love enough to bear with me,
     When that rash humor which my mother gave me
     Makes me forgetful?
Bru.                     Yes, Cassius; and, from henceforth,
     When you are over earnest with your Brutus,
     He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.

                    Shakespeare.--Julius Caesar, Act iv, Scene iii.


NOTES.--Ides (pro. idz) was a term used in the Roman calendar. It fell on
the fifteenth day of March, May, July, and October, and on the thirteenth
of other months. On the ides of March, 44 B. C., Julius Caesar was
murdered by Brutus, Cassius, and other conspirators. The populace were
aroused to indignation, and the conspirators were compelled to fly.

Indirection; i. e., dishonest means.

Antony and Octavius, who, with Lepidus, formed the triumvirate now
governing Rome, were at this time marching against the forces of Brutus
and Cassius.

Plutus, in ancient mythology, the god of wealth.



LXII. THE QUACK. (238)

John Tobin, 1770-1804, a solicitor, was born at Salisbury, England, and
died on shipboard near Cork. He wrote several comedies, the most popular
being "The Honeymoon," from which this extract is taken; it was published
in 1805.
###


SCENE--The Inn. Enter HOSTESS followed by LAMPEDO, a Quack Doctor.

Host.  Nay, nay; another fortnight.
       Lamp. It can't be.
       The man's as well as I am: have some mercy!
       He hath been here almost three weeks already.
Host.  Well, then, a week.
Lamp.  We may detain him a week. (Enter BALTHAZAR, the patient,
       from behind, in his nightgown, with a drawn sword.)
       You talk now like a reasonable hostess,
       That sometimes has a reckoning with her conscience.
Host.  He still believes he has an inward bruise.
Lamp.  I would to heaven he had! or that he'd slipped
       His shoulder blade, or broke a leg or two,
       (Not that I bear his person any malice,)
       Or luxed an arm, or even sprained his ankle!
Host.  Ay, broken anything except his neck.
Lamp.  However, for a week I'll manage him,
       Though he had the constitution of a horse--
       A farrier should prescribe for him.
Balth. A farrier! (Aside. )
       Lamp. To-morrow, we phlebotomize again;
       Next day, my new-invented patent draught;
       Then, I have some pills prepared;
       On Thursday, we throw in the bark; on Friday--
Balth. (Coming forward.) Well, sir, on Friday--what, on Friday? Come,
       Proceed.
Lamp.  Discovered!

   They (Host.,Lamp.) fall on their knees.

Host.  Mercy, noble sir!
Lamp.  We crave your mercy!
Balth. On your knees? 'tis well!
       Pray! for your time is short.
Host.  Nay, do not kill us.
Balth. You have been tried, condemned, and only wait
       For execution. Which shall I begin with?
Lamp.  The lady, by all means, sir.
Balth. Come, prepare. (To the hostess.)
Host.  Have pity by the weakness of my sex!
Balth. Tell me, thou quaking mountain of gross flesh,
       Tell me, and in a breath, how many poisons--
       If you attempt it--(To LAMPEDO, who is making off)
              you have cooked up for me?
Host.  None, as I hope for mercy!
Balth. Is not thy wine a poison?
Host.  No indeed, sir;
       'T is not, I own, of the first quality;
       But--
Balth. What?
Host.  I always give short measure, sir,
       And ease my conscience that way.
Balth. Ease your conscience!
       I'll ease your conscience for you.
Host.  Mercy, sir!
Balth. Rise, if thou canst, and hear me.
Host.  Your commands, sir?
Balth. If, in five minutes, all things are prepared
       For my departure, you may yet survive.
Host.  It shall be done in less.
Balth. Away, thou lumpfish. (Exit hostess.)
Lamp.  So! now comes my turn! 't is all over with me!
       There's dagger, rope, and ratsbane in his looks!
Baith. And now, thou sketch and outline of a man!
       Thou thing that hast no shadow in the sun!
       Thou eel in a consumption, eldest born
       Of Death and Famine! thou anatomy
       Of a starved pilchard!
Lamp.  I do confess my leanness. I am spare,
       And, therefore, spare me.
Balth. Why wouldst thou have made me
       A thoroughfare, for thy whole shop to pass through?
Lamp.  Man, you know, must live.
Balth. Yes: he must die, too.
Lamp. For my patients' sake!
Balth. I'll send you to the major part of them--
       The window, sir, is open;-come, prepare.
       Lamp. Pray consider!
       I may hurt some one in the street.


[Illustration: Lampedo and Hostess kneeling, with hands folded, pleading
with Balthazar, who is standing over them, holding a sword. Several small
glass bottles are on the table by the wall and scattered on the floor.]


Balth. Why, then,
       I'll rattle thee to pieces in a dicebox,
       Or grind thee in a coffee mill to powder,
       For thou must sup with Pluto:--so, make ready!
       Whilst I, with this good smallsword for a lancet,
       Let thy starved spirit out (for blood thou hast none),
       And nail thee to the wall, where thou shalt look
       Like a dried beetle with a pin stuck through him.
Lamp.  Consider my poor wife.
Balth. Thy wife!
Lamp.  My wife, sir.
Balth. Hast thou dared think of matrimony, too?
       Thou shadow of a man, and base as lean!
Lamp.  O spare me for her sake!
       I have a wife, and three angelic babes,
       Who, by those looks, are well nigh fatherless.
Balth. Well, well! your wife and children shall plead for you.
       Come, come; the pills! where are the pills? Produce them.
Lamp.  Here is the box.
Balth. Were it Pandora's, and each single pill
       Had ten diseases in it, you should take them.
Lamp.  What, all?
Balth. Ay, all; and quickly, too. Come, sir, begin--
       (LAMPEDO takes one.) That's well!--Another.
Lamp.  One's a dose.
Balth. Proceed, sir.
Lamp.  What will become of me?
       Let me go home, and set my shop to rights,
       And, like immortal Caesar, die with decency.
Balth. Away! and thank thy lucky star I have not
       Brayed thee in thine own mortar, or exposed thee
       For a large specimen of the lizard genus.
Lamp.  Would I were one!--for they can feed on air.
Balth. Home, sir! and be more honest.
Lump.  If I am not,
       I'll be more wise, at least.


NOTEs.--Pluto, in ancient mythology, the god of the lower world.

Pandora is described in the Greek legends as the first created woman. She
was sent by Jupiter to Epimetheus as a punishment, because the latter's
brother, Prometheus, had stolen fire from heaven. When she arrived among
men, she opened a box in which were all the evils of mankind, and
everything escaped except Hope.



LXIII. RIP VAN WINKLE. (242)

The appearance of Rip, with his long, grizzled beard, his rusty fowling
piece, his uncouth dress, and an army of women and children at his heels,
soon attracted the attention of the tavern politicians. They crowded
around him, eying him from head to foot with great curiosity. The orator
bustled up to him, and, drawing him partly aside, inquired on which side
he voted. Rip stared in vacant stupidity. Another short but busy little
fellow pulled him by the arm, and, rising on tiptoe, inquired in his ear
"whether he was Federal or Democrat."

Rip was equally at a loss to comprehend the question; when a knowing,
self-important old gentleman, in a sharp cocked hat, made his way through
the crowd, putting them to the right and left with his elbows as he
passed, and planting himself before Van Winkle, with one arm akimbo, the
other resting on his cane, his keen eyes and sharp hat, penetrating, as it
were, into his very soul, demanded, in an austere tone, what brought him
to the election with a gun on his shoulder, and a mob at his heels, and
whether he meant to breed a riot in the village.

"Alas! gentlemen," cried Rip, somewhat dismayed, "I am a poor, quiet man,
a native of the place, and a loyal subject of the king, God bless him!"
Here a general shout burst from the bystanders.--"A tory! a tory! a spy! a
refugee! hustle him! away with him!" It was with great difficulty that the
self-important man in the cocked hat restored order; and, having a tenfold
austerity of brow, demanded again of the unknown culprit, what he came
there for, and whom he was seeking. The poor man humbly assured him that
he meant no harm, but merely came there in search of some of his
neighbors, who used to keep about the tavern. "Well, who are they? name
them."

Rip bethought himself a moment, and inquired, "Where's Nicholas Vedder?"
There was a silence for a little while, when an old man replied, in a
thin, piping voice, "Nicholas Vedder! why he is dead and gone these
eighteen years! There was a wooden tombstone in the churchyard that used
to tell all about him, but that's rotten and gone too." "Where's Brom
Dutcher?" "Oh, he went off to the army in the beginning of the war. Some
say he was killed at the storming of Stony Point; others say he was
drowned in a squall at the foot of Anthony's Nose. I don't know; he never
came back again."

"Where's Van Bummel, the schoolmaster?" "He went off to the wars,  too;
was a great militia general, and is now in Congress." Rip's heart died
away at hearing of these sad changes in his home and friends, and finding
himself thus alone in the world. Every answer puzzled him, too, by
treating of such enormous lapses of time, and of matters which he could
not understand--war, Congress, Stony Point. He had no courage to ask after
any more friends, but cried out in despair, "Does nobody here know Rip Van
Winkle?"

"Oh, Rip Van Winkle!" exclaimed two or three. "Oh, to be sure! That's Rip
Van Winkle yonder, leaning against the tree." Rip looked, and beheld a
precise counterpart of himself as he went up the mountain; apparently as
lazy, and certainly as ragged. The poor fellow was now completely
confounded; he doubted his own identity, and whether he was himself or
another man. In the midst of his bewilderment, the man in the cocked hat
demanded who he was, and what was his name.

"God knows!" exclaimed he, at his wit's end. "I'm not myself; I'm somebody
else; that's me yonder; no, that's somebody else got into my shoes. I was
myself last night; but I fell asleep on the mountain, and they've changed
my gun, and everything's changed, and I'm changed, and I can't tell what's
my name or who I am!"

The bystanders began now to look at each other, nod, wink significantly,
and tap their fingers against their foreheads. There was a whisper, also,
about securing the gun, and keeping the old fellow from doing mischief, at
the very suggestion of which the self-important man in the cocked hat
retired with some precipitation. At this critical moment, a fresh, comely
woman pressed through the throng to get a peep at the gray-bearded man.
She had a chubby child in her arms, which, frightened at his looks, began
to cry. "Hush, Rip!" cried she, "hush, you little fool! the old man won't
hurt you."

The name of the child, the air of the mother, the tone of her voice, all
awakened a train of recollections in his mind. "What is your name, my good
woman?" asked he. "Judith Gardenier." "And your father's name?" "Ah, poor
man! Rip Van Winkle was his name; but it's twenty years since he went away
from home with his gun, and never has been heard of since; his dog came
home without him; but whether he shot himself, or was carried away by the
Indians, nobody can tell. I was then but a little girl."

Rip had but one question more to ask; but he put it with a faltering
voice: "Where's your mother?" "Oh, she, too, died but a short time since;
she broke a blood vessel in a fit of passion at a New England peddler."
There was a drop of comfort, at least, in this intelligence. The honest
man could contain himself no longer. He caught his daughter and her child
in his arms. "I am your father!" cried he. "Young Rip Van Winkle once, old
Rip Van Winkle now! Does nobody know poor Rip Van Winkle?"

All stood amazed, until an old woman, tottering out from among the crowd,
put her hand to her brow, and, peering under it in his face for a moment,
exclaimed, "Sure enough! it is Rip Van Winkle! it is himself! Welcome home
again, old neighbor! Why, where have you been these twenty long years?"
Rip's story was soon told, for the whole twenty years had been to him but
as one night.

To make a long story short, the company broke up and returned to the more
important concerns of the election. Rip's daughter took him home to live
with her. She had a snug, well-furnished house, and a stout, cheery farmer
for a husband, whom Rip recollected for one of the urchins that used to
climb upon his back. Rip now resumed his old walks and habits. He soon
found many of his former cronies, though all rather the worse for the wear
and tear of time, and preferred making friends among the rising
generation, with whom he soon grew into great favor.
                                                                 --Irving.

NOTES.--Rip Van Winkle, according to Irving's story in "The Sketch Book,"
was a great drunkard, and was driven from his home in the Catskill
Mountains, one night, by his wife. Wandering among the mountains, he fell
in with the ghosts of Hendrick Hudson and his crew, with whom he played a
game of ninepins. Upon drinking the liquor which they offered him,
however, he immediately fell into a deep sleep which lasted for twenty
years. The above lesson recounts the events that befell him when he
returned to his native village. In the meantime the Revolution of 1776 had
taken place.

The Federals and the Democrats formed the two leading political parties of
that time.

Stony Point is a promontory on the Hudson, at the entrance of the
Highlands, forty-two miles from New York. It was a fortified post during
the Revolution, captured by the British, and again retaken by the
Americans under Wayne. Anthony's Nose is also a promontory on the Hudson,
about fifteen miles above Stony Point.



LXIV. BILL AND JOE. (246)

Oliver Wendell Holmes, 1809-1894, was the son of Abiel Holmes, D.D. He was
born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and graduated at Harvard in 1829, having
for classmates several men who have since become distinguished. After
graduating, he studied law for about one year, and then turned his
attention to medicine. He studied his profession in Paris, and elsewhere
in Europe, and took his degree at Cambridge in 1836. In 1838 he was
appointed Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in Dartmouth College. He
remained here but a short time, and then returned to Boston and entered on
the practice of medicine. In 1847 he was appointed professor at Harvard,
filling a similar position to the one held at Dartmouth. He discharged the
duties of his professorship for more than thirty years, with great
success. Literature was never his profession; yet few American authors
attained higher success, both as a poet and as a prose writer. His poems
are lively and sparkling, abound in wit and humor, but are not wanting in
genuine pathos. Many of them were composed for special occasions. His
prose writings include works on medicine, essays, and novels; several
appeared first as contributions to the "Atlantic Monthly." He gained
reputation, also, as it popular lecturer. In person, Dr. Holmes was small
and active, with a face expressive of thought and vivacity.
###


Come, dear old comrade, you and I
Will steal an hour from days gone by--
The shining days when life was new,
And all was bright as morning dew,
The lusty days of long ago,
When you were Bill and I was Joe.

Your name may flaunt a titled trail
Proud as a cockerel's rainbow tail,
And mine as brief appendix wear
As Tam O'Shanter's luckless mare;
To-day, old friend, remember still
That I am Joe and you are Bill.

You've won the great world's envied prize,
And grand you look in people's eyes,
With HON. and LL. D.,
In big, brave letters fair to see,--
Your fist, old fellow! Off they go!--
How are you, Bill? How are you, Joe?

You've worn the judge's ermined robe;
You've taught your name to half the globe;
You've sung mankind a deathless strain;
You've made the dead past live again:
The world may call you what it will,
But you and I are Joe and Bill.

The chaffing young folks stare and say,
"See those old buffers, bent and gray;
They talk like fellows in their teens;
Mad, poor old boys! That's what it means"
And shake their heads; they little know
The throbbing hearts of Bill and Joe--

How Bill forgets his hour of pride,
While Joe sits smiling at his side;
How Joe, in spite of time's disguise,
Finds the old schoolmate in his eyes,--
Those calm, stern eyes, that melt and fill,
As Joe looks fondly up to Bill.

Ah! pensive scholar, what is fame?
A fitful tongue of leaping flame;
A giddy whirlwind's fickle gust,
That lifts a pinch of mortal dust;
A few swift years, and who can show
Which dust was Bill, and which was Joe.

The weary idol takes his stand,
Holds out his bruised and aching hand,
While gaping thousands come and go--
How vain it seems, this empty show!--
Till all at once his pulses thrill:
'T is poor old Joe's, "God bless you, Bill!"

And shall we breathe in happier spheres
The names that pleased our mortal ears;
In some sweet lull of heart and song
For earth born spirits none too long,
Just whispering of the world below
When this was Bill, and that was Joe?

No matter; while our home is here,
No sounding name is half so dear;
When fades at length our lingering day,
Who cares what pompous tombstones say?
Read on the hearts that love us still,
Hic jacet Joe. Hic jacet Bill.


NOTE.--Hic jacet (pro. hic ja'cet) is a Latin phrase, meaning here lies.
It is frequently used in epitaphs.



LXV. SORROW FOR THE DEAD. (249)
