
"Sharp work for the eyelids if it gets under the sheet."

They were now close by the Yews, out of which the wind came with a
peculiar chill, as if it had been passing through a vault. Mr. Bartram
Lindsay stooped down, and whispered in Bill's ear. "Listen, my lad. We
can't go down the lane with you, for we want to see the ghost, but we
don't want the ghost to see us. Don't be frightened, but go just as
usual. And mind--when you see the white figure, point with your own
arm _towards the Church_, and scream as loud as you like. Can you do
this?"

"Yes, Sir," whispered Bill.

"Then off with you. We shall creep quietly on behind the trees; and
you shan't be hurt, I promise you."

Bill summoned his courage, and plunged into the shadows. What could be
the meaning of Mr. Lindsay's strange orders? Should he ever have
courage to lift his arm towards the church in the face of that awful
apparition of the murdered man? And if he did, would the unquiet
spirit take the hint, and go back into the grave, which Bill knew was
at that very corner to which he must point? Left alone, his terrors
began to return; and he listened eagerly to see if, amid the
ceaseless soughing of the wind among the long yew branches, he could
hear the rustle of the young men's footsteps as they crept behind. But
he could distinguish nothing. The hish-wishing of the thin leaves was
so incessant, the wind was so dexterous and tormenting in the tricks
it played and the sounds it produced, that the whole place seemed
alive with phantom rustlings and footsteps; and Bill felt as if Master
Arthur was right, and that there was "no limit" to the number of
ghosts!

At last he could see the end of the avenue. There among the few last
trees was the place where the ghost had appeared. There beyond lay the
white road, the churchyard corner, and the tall grey tomb-stone
glimmering in the moonlight. A few steps more, and slowly from among
the yews came the ghost as before, and raised its long white arm. Bill
determined that, if he died for it, he would do as he had been told;
and lifting his own hand he pointed towards the tomb-stone, and gave a
shout. As he pointed, the ghost turned round, and then--rising from
behind the tomb-stone, and gliding slowly to the edge of the wall,
which separated the churchyard from the lower level of the road--there
appeared a sight so awful, that Bill's shout merged into a prolonged
scream of terror.

Truly Master Arthur's anticipations of a "scenic effect" were amply
realized. The walls and buttresses of the old Church stood out dark
against the sky; the white clouds sailed slowly by the moon, which
reflected itself on the damp grass, and shone upon the flat wet
tomb-stones till they looked like pieces of water. It was not less
bright upon the upright ones, upon quaint crosses, short headstones,
and upon the huge ungainly memorial of the murdered Ephraim Garnett.
But _the_ sight on which it shone that night was the figure now
standing by Ephraim Garnett's grave, and looking over the wall. An
awful figure, of gigantic height, with ghostly white garments clinging
round its headless body, and carrying under its left arm the head that
should have been upon its shoulders. On this there was neither flesh
nor hair. It seemed to be a bare skull, with fire gleaming through the
hollow eye-sockets and the grinning teeth. The right hand of the
figure was outstretched as if in warning; and from the palms to the
tips of the fingers was a mass of lambent flame. When Bill saw this
fearful apparition he screamed with hearty good will; but the noise he
made was nothing to the yell of terror that came from beneath the
shroud of the Yew-lane Ghost, who, on catching sight of the rival
spectre, fled wildly up the lane, kicking the white sheet off as he
went, and finally displaying, to Bill's amazement, the form and
features of Bully Tom. But this was not all. No sooner had the first
ghost started, than the second (not to be behind-hand) jumped nimbly
over the wall, and gave chase. But fear had put wings on to Bully
Tom's feet; and the second ghost being somewhat encumbered by his
costume, judged it wisdom to stop; and then taking the fiery skull in
its flaming hands, shied it with such dexterity, that it hit Bully Tom
in the middle of his back, and falling on to the wet ground, went out
with a hiss. This blow was an unexpected shock to the Bully, who
thought the ghost must have come up to him with supernatural rapidity,
and falling on his knees in the mud, began to roar most lustily:

"Lord, have mercy upon me! I'll never do it no more!"

Mr. Lindsay was not likely to alter his opinion on the subject of
bullies. This one, like others, was a mortal coward. Like other men,
who have no fear of GOD before their eyes, he made up for it by having
a very hearty fear of sickness, death, departed souls, and one or two
other things, which the most self-willed sinner knows well enough to
be in the hands of a Power which he cannot see, and does not wish to
believe in. Bully Tom had spoken the truth when he said that if he
thought there was a ghost in Yew-lane he wouldn't go near it. If he
had believed the stories with which he had alarmed poor Bill, the
lad's evening walk would never have been disturbed, as far as he was
concerned. Nothing but his spite against Bessy would have made him
take so much trouble to vex the peace, and stop the schooling, of her
pet brother; and as it was, the standing alone by the churchyard at
night was a position so little to his taste, that he had drunk pretty
heavily in the public-house for half an hour beforehand, to keep up
his spirits. And now he had been paid back in his own coin, and lay
grovelling in the mud, and calling profanely on the Lord, Whose mercy
such men always cry for in their trouble, if they never ask it for
their sins. He was so confused and blinded by drink and fright, that
he did not see the second ghost divest himself of his encumbrances, or
know that it was John Gardener, till that rosy-cheeked worthy, his
clenched hands still flaming with brimstone, danced round him, and
shouted scornfully, and with that vehemence of aspiration, in which he
was apt to indulge when excited:

"Get hup, yer great cowardly booby, will yer? So you thought you was
coming hout to frighten a little lad, did ye? And you met with one of
your hown size, did ye? Now _will_ ye get hup and take it like a man,
or shall I give it you as ye lie there?"

Bully Tom chose the least of two evils, and staggering to his feet
with an oath, rushed upon John. But in his present condition he was no
match for the active little gardener, inspired with just wrath, and
thoughts of Bessy; and he then and there received such a sound
thrashing as he had not known since he first arrogated the character
of village bully. He was roaring loudly for mercy, and John Gardener
was giving him a harmless roll in the mud by way of conclusion, when
he caught sight of the two young gentlemen in the lane--Master Arthur
in fits of laughter at the absurd position of the ex-Yew-lane Ghost
and Mr. Lindsay standing still and silent, with folded arms, set lips,
and the gold eye-glass on his nose. As soon as he saw them, he began
to shout, "Murder! help!" at the top of his voice.

"I see myself," said Master Arthur, driving his hands contemptuously
into his pockets--"I see myself helping a great lout who came out to
frighten a child, and can neither defend his own eyes and nose, nor
take a licking with a good grace when he deserves it!"

Bully Tom appealed to Mr. Lindsay.

"Yah! yah!" he howled: "will you see a man killed for want of help?"

But the clever young gentleman seemed even less inclined to give his
assistance.

"Killed!" he said contemptuously; "I _have_ seen a lad killed on such
a night as this, by such a piece of bullying! Be thankful you have
been stopped in time! I wouldn't raise my little finger to save you
from twice such a thrashing. It has been fairly earned! Give the ghost
his shroud, Gardener, and let him go; and recommend him not to haunt
Yew-lane in future."

John did so, with a few words of parting advice on his own account.

"Be hoff with you," he said. "Master Lindsay, he speaks like a book.
You're a disgrace to your hage and sect, you are! I'd as soon fight
with an old charwoman. Though, bless you, young gentlemen," he added,
as Bully Tom slunk off muttering, "he _is_ the biggest blackguard in
the place; and what the Rector'll say, when he comes to know as you've
been mingled up with him, passes me."

"He'll forgive us, I dare say," said Master Arthur. "I only wish he
could have seen you emerge from behind that stone! It was a sight for
a century! I wonder what the youngster thought of it! Hi, Willie,
here, Sir! What did you think of the second ghost?"

Bill had some doubts as to the light in which he ought to regard that
apparition; but he decided on the simple truth.

"I thought it looked very horrid, Sir."

"I should hope it did! The afternoon's work of three able-bodied men
has been marvellously wasted if it didn't. However, I must say you
halloed out loud enough!"

Bill coloured, the more so as Mr. Lindsay was looking hard at him over
the top of his spectacles.

"Don't you feel rather ashamed of all your fright, now you've seen the
ghosts without their sheets?" inquired the clever young gentleman.

"Yes, Sir," said Bill, hanging his head. "I shall never believe in
ghosts again, Sir, though."

Mr. Bartram Lindsay took off his glasses, and twiddled them in his
fingers.

"Well, well," he said in a low hurried voice; "I'm not the parson, and
I don't pretend to say what you should believe and what you shouldn't.
We know precious little as to how much the spirits of the dead see and
know of what they have left behind. But I think you may venture to
assure yourself that when a poor soul has passed the waves of this
troublesome world, by whatever means, it doesn't come back kicking
about under a white sheet in dark lanes, to frighten little boys from
going to school."

"And that's very true, Sir," said John Gardener, admiringly.

"So it is," said Master Arthur. "I couldn't have explained that
myself, Willie; but those are my sentiments and I beg you'll attend to
what Mr. Lindsay has told you."

"Yes, Sir," said Bill.

Mr. Lindsay laughed, though not quite merrily, and said--

"I could tell him something more, Arthur, though he's too young to
understand it: namely, that if he lives, the day will come, when he
would be only too happy if the dead might come back and hold out their
hands to us, anywhere, and for however short a time."

The young gentleman stopped abruptly; and the gardener heaved a
sympathetic sigh.

"I tell you what it is, Bartram," muttered Master Arthur, "I suppose
I'm too young, too, for I've had quite enough of the melancholies for
one night. As to you, you're as old as the hills; but it's time you
came home; and if I'd known before what you told me to night, old
fellow, you shouldn't have come out on this expedition. Now, for you,
Willie," added the young gentleman, whirling sharply round, "if you're
not a pattern Solomon henceforth, it won't be the fault of your
friends. And if wisdom doesn't bring you to school after this, I shall
try the argument of the one-legged donkey."

"I don't think I shall miss next time, Sir."

"I hope you won't. Now, John, as you've come so far, you may as well
see the lad safe home; but don't shake hands with the family in the
present state of your fists, or you might throw somebody into a fit.
Good-night!"

Yew-lane echoed a round of "Good-nights;" and Bill and the gardener
went off in high spirits. As they crossed the road, Bill looked round,
and under the trees saw the young gentlemen strolling back to the
Rectory, arm in arm. Mr. Bartram Lindsay with his chin high in the
air, and Master Arthur vehemently exhorting him on some topic, of
which he was pointing the moral with flourishes of the one-legged
donkey.

       *       *       *       *       *

For those who like to know "what became of" everybody, these facts are
added:

The young gentlemen got safely home; and Master Arthur gave such a
comical account of their adventure, that the Rector laughed too much
to scold them, even if he had wished.

Beauty Bill went up and down Yew-lane on many a moonlight night after
this one, but he never saw another ghost, or felt any more fears in
connection with Ephraim Garnett. To make matters more entirely
comfortable, however, John kindly took to the custom of walking home
with the lad after night-school was ended. In return for this
attention, Bill's family were apt to ask him in for an hour; and by
their fire-side he told the story of the two ghosts so often--from the
manufacture in the Rectory barn to the final apparition at the
cross-roads--that the whole family declare they feel just as if they
had seen it.

Bessy, under the hands of the cheerful doctor, got quite well, and
eventually married. As her cottage boasts the finest window plants in
the village, it is shrewdly surmised that her husband is a gardener.

Bully Tom talked very loudly for some time of "having the law of" the
rival ghost; but finding, perhaps, that the story did not redound to
his credit, was unwilling to give it further publicity, and changed
his mind.

Winter and summer, day and night, sunshine and moonlight, have passed
over the lane and the churchyard, and the wind has had many a ghostly
howl among the yews, since poor Bill learnt the story of the murder;
but he knows now that the true Ephraim Garnett has never been seen on
the cross-roads since a hundred years ago, and will not be till the
Great Day.

In the ditch by the side of Yew-lane shortly after the events I have
been describing, a little lad found a large turnip, in which someone
had cut eyes, nose, and mouth, and put bits of stick for teeth. The
turnip was hollow, and inside it was fixed a bit of wax candle. He
lighted it up, and the effect was so splendid, that he made a show of
it to his companions at the price of a marble each, who were well
satisfied. And this was the last of the Yew-lane Ghosts.




A BAD HABIT.

CHAPTER I.

    "Oh, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
    By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
    The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
    For that sweet odour which doth in it live."

    SHAKESPEARE.


My godmother, Lady Elizabeth, used to say, "Most things are matters of
habit. Good habits and bad habits." And she generally added, "_Your_
bad habit, Selina, is a habit of grumbling."

I was always accustomed to seeing great respect paid to anything my
godmother said or did. In the first place, she was what Mrs. Arthur
James Johnson called "a fine lady," and what the maids called "a real
lady." She was an old friend and, I think, a relative of my father,
who had married a little below his own rank--my mother being the
daughter of a rich manufacturer. My father had died before I can
remember things, and Joseph and I lived with our mother and her
friends. At least, we were with our mother when she could bear the
noise; and for the rest of our time, when we were tired of playing
games together, we sat with the maids.

"That is where you learned your little _toss_ and your trick of
grumbling, my dear," my godmother said, planting her gold eye-glasses
on her high nose; "and that is why your mouth is growing out of shape,
and your forehead getting puckered, and your chin poked, and--and your
boots bulged crooked."

"_My boots_, godmother?"

"Your boots, my dear. No boots will keep in shape if you shake your
hips and kick with your heels like a servant out Sunday walking. When
little girls flounce on the high road, it only looks ridiculous; but
when you grow up, you'll never have a clean petticoat, or be known for
a well-bred woman behind your back, unless you learn to walk as if
your legs and your feelings were under your own control. That is why
the sergeant is coming to-morrow and every week-day morning to drill
you and Joseph from ten to eleven whilst you remain here."

And my godmother pressed the leaves of the journal on her lap, and cut
them quite straight and very decisively with a heavy ivory
paper-knife.

I had never been taught that it is bad manners to mutter--nurse
always talked to herself when she was "put out"--and, as I stood in
much awe of Lady Elizabeth, I did not like to complain aloud of her
arrangements. So I turned my doll with a sharp flounce in my arms, and
muttered behind her tarlatan skirts that "I did think we were to have
had whole holidays out visiting."

I believe my godmother heard me; but she only looked at me for a
moment over the top of her gold eye-glasses, and then went on reading
the paper through them.

After a few moments, she laid it down on her lap with her left hand,
and with her right hand took off her eye-glasses and held them between
her fingers.

"I shall be sorry if you don't grow up nice-looking, Selina," she
said. "It's a great advantage to a woman--indeed, to anyone--to be
good-looking. Your mother was a pretty woman, too; and your father--"

Lady Elizabeth stopped, and then, seeming suddenly to see that I was
watching her and waiting, put her glasses before her eyes again, and
continued--

"Your father was a very good-looking gentleman, with a fine face and a
fine figure, beautiful eyes and mouth, very attractive hands, and most
fascinating manners. It will be a pity if you don't grow up
nice-looking."

I grew crimson, partly with mortification and partly with
astonishment. I had a strong natural desire to be pretty, but I felt
sure I had been taught somehow that it was much more meritorious not
to care about it. It certainly did not please me when (if I had
offended them) the maids said I should never be as pretty as Maud Mary
Ibbetson, my bosom friend; but when nurse took the good looking-glass
out of the nursery, and hung up the wavy one which used to be in her
