"I aren't bad," cried Diana. "If you say any more, naughty woman, I'll
slap 'oo."

Mrs. Dolman thought it best to let Diana slide down on the floor.

The moment the little girl found her feet she rushed up to her Uncle
Dolman.

"I like you, old man," she said; "you isn't half a bad sort. I'll stay
with you. P'ease, Aunt Jane, punish me by letting me stay with Uncle
William. I'll just sit on the floor curled up, and maybe I'll dwop
as'eep, and have my nice dweams about the time when you is shotted,
and I'm back again in the old garden with all my darlin', dear, sweet
pets. I'll dweam, p'waps, that we is having funerals in the garden and
we is awfu' happy, and you is shotted down dead. Let me stay with
Uncle William, Aunt Jane."

"Now, you see what kind of child she is, William," said Mrs. Dolman.
"You have heard her with your own ears--she absolutely threatens _me_.
Oh, I cannot name what she says; it is so shocking. I never came
across such a terribly bad little girl. William, I must insist here
and now on your chastising her."

"In what way?" said Mr. Dolman. "I am very busy, my dear Jane, over my
sermon. Could it not be postponed, or could not you, my dear?"

"No, William, I could not, for the dark room is not bad enough for
this naughty little girl. She must be whipped, and you must do it.
Fetch the birch rod."

"But really," said Mr. Dolman, looking terribly distressed, "you know
I don't approve of corporal punishment, my dear."

"No more do I, except in extreme cases, but this is one. William, I
insist on your whipping this very bad little girl."

"I don't care if you whip me," said Diana. She stood bolt upright now,
but her round, flushed little face began perceptibly to pale.

Mr. Dolman looked at her attentively, then he glanced at his wife, and
then at the manuscript which lay on his desk. He always hated writing
his sermons, and, truth to tell, did not write at all good ones; but
on this special morning his ideas seemed to come a little more rapidly
than usual--now, of course, he had lost every thought, and the sermon
was ruined. Besides, he was a kind-hearted man. He thought Diana a
very handsome little fury, and was rather amused with her than
otherwise. Had she been left alone with him, he would not have taken
the least notice of her defiant words. He would have said to himself,
"She is but a baby, and if I take no notice she will soon cease to
talk in this very silly manner."

But alas! there was little doubt that Uncle William was very much
afraid of Aunt Jane, and when Aunt Jane dared him to produce the birch
rod, there was nothing whatever for it but to comply. He rose and
walked slowly and very unwillingly across the room. He unlocked the
door of a big cupboard in the wall, and, poking in his large, soft,
flabby hand, presently produced what looked in Diana's eyes a very
terrible instrument. It was a rod, clean, slender, and with, as she
afterwards expressed it, _temper_ all over it. It flashed through her
little mind by and by that, if she could really secure this rod, it
might make a better bow even than the one which she and Apollo had
hidden in the wood, but she had little time to think of any future use
for the birch rod at this awful moment. The terrible instrument in
Uncle William's flabby hand was carried across the room. When she saw
it approaching her vicinity she uttered a piercing shriek and hid
herself under the table.

"Come, come; none of this nonsense!" said Mrs. Dolman. "Punished you
shall be. You must be made to understand that you are to respect your
elders. Now, then, William, fetch that child out."

"Diana, my dear, you are a very naughty little girl; come here," said
Mr. Dolman.

Diana would not have minded in the least defying Aunt Jane, but there
was something in Uncle William's slow tones, particularly in a sort of
regret which seemed to tremble in his voice, and which Diana felt
without understanding, which forced her to obey. She scrambled slowly
out, her hair tumbled over her forehead, her lower lip drooping.

"Suppose I have a little talk with her, Jane; suppose she says she is
sorry and never does it again," said Mr. Dolman.

"Oh, yes, yes, Uncle William!" said Diana, really terrified for the
first time in her life. "Yes, I's sossy--I's awfu' sossy, Aunt Jane.
It's all wight now, Aunt Jane; Diana's sossy."

"You shall be a great deal more sorry before I have done with you,"
said Mrs. Dolman, who had no idea of letting the culprit off. "Now,
then, William, do your duty."

"But it's all wight," said Diana, gazing with puzzled eyes up into her
aunt's face. "I's been a bad girl, but I's sossy; it's all wight, I
say. Naughty wod, go 'way, naughty wod."

She tried to push the rod out of Mr. Dolman's hand.

"Really, Jane, she is only five years old, and--and a poor little
orphan, you know."

"Yes," said Diana eagerly, "I's a poor orphan, only a baby, five years
old, awfu' young, and I's sossy, and it's all wight now. Go 'way, Aunt
Jane; go 'way, naughty Aunt Jane; I's sossy."

"William," said Mrs. Dolman, "if you refuse to give that child the
necessary punishment which is to make her a Christian character, I
shall simply wash my hands of her. Now, then, miss, get on my lap.
William, do your duty."

Poor Mr. Dolman, pale to the very lips, was forced to comply. Down
went the rod on the fat little form--shriek after shriek uttered
Diana. At last, more from terror than pain, she lay quiet on Mrs.
Dolman's knee. The moment she did so, Mr. Dolman threw the rod on the
floor.

"It's a horrid business," he said. "I hate corporal punishment. We
have hurt the child. Here, give her to me."

"Nonsense, William! She is only pretending."

But this was not the case. The fright, joined to the state of
excitement and heat which she had been previously in, proved too much
for the defiant little spirit, and Diana had really fainted.

Mrs. Dolman was frightened now, and rushed for cold water. She bathed
the child's forehead, and soon had the satisfaction of seeing her
coming to again.

There was not a word of defiance from Diana now, and not a single
utterance of reproach, but when she looked at Mrs. Dolman there was an
expression in her black eyes from which this lady absolutely recoiled.

"Uncle William, I's hurted awfu'," whispered Diana. "Let me lie in
your arms, p'ease, Uncle William."

And so she did for the rest of the morning, and the sermon never got
written.




CHAPTER XIV.

DIANA'S REVENGE.


Diana had quite a nice time for the rest of the morning. Uncle William
had not the least idea of sending her back to the schoolroom.

"It's very hot," he said, "and I feel sleepy. I dare say you do also."

"I do awfu'," answered Diana. "You isn't a bad old man, not at all,"
she continued. Here she raised her fat hand and stroked his flabby
cheek. "You hates writing sermons, don't you?"

"Diana," he answered, "I would rather you did not speak about it."

"Oh, I can keep secrets," replied Diana.

"Well, in that case, to be quite frank with you, I do not care for
writing sermons."

"And I don't care for learning lessons. You didn't mean to sting me so
bad with that howid wod, did you, Uncle William?"

Mr. Dolman made no reply with his lips, for he did not like to defy
his wife's authority, but Diana read his thoughts in his rather dull
blue eyes.

"You is a kind old man," she said; "that is, when you isn't tempted by
that naughty, howid woman. You is a kind old man by yourself, and you
shan't be shotted."

"What do you mean by being shotted, Diana?"

But here Diana pursed up her rosy lips and looked rather solemn.

"That's a secret," she answered. "Uncle William, may I have a whole
holiday to-day?"

"I think so, my dear little girl. I really think that can be managed.
It is too hot to work--at least, I find it so."

"Then course I does also," answered Diana, clapping her hands. "Shall
we go out into the garding--what you say?"

"Would you like to?" he asked.

"Yes, more particular in fruit garding. We can eat cherries and
strawberries, and pelt each other. What you say?"

Mr. Dolman looked out of the open window. He was pretty certain that
his wife by this time was absent in the village. The clock on the
mantelpiece pointed to half-past eleven; the early dinner would not be
ready until one o'clock. It would be cool and pleasant in the fruit
garden, and it would please poor little Diana, who, in his opinion,
had been very harshly treated.

"All right," he answered, "but, you know, your aunt is not to be
told."

He rose from his chair as he spoke, and, stretching out his long hand,
allowed Diana to curl her fingers round one of his.

"I should wather think Aunt Jane isn't to know," replied Diana,
beginning to skip in her rapture. "I don't like aunts; I always said
so. I like uncles; they isn't half bad. You isn't bad, for an old man.
You is awfu' old, isn't you?"

"Not so very old, Diana. I'm not forty yet."

"Forty! What a ter'ble age!" said Diana. "You must 'member all the
kings and queens of England; don't you, Uncle William?"

"Not quite all, Diana. Now, I'll just take you through the garden, for
I think a little fresh air will do you good."

"And if I pop cherries into your mouf it 'll do you good," answered
Diana. "Oh, we'll have a lovely time!"

So they did, and Mr. Dolman devoutly hoped that there was no one there
to see. For Diana rapidly recovered her spirits, and picked cherries
in quantities and pelted her uncle; and then she ran races and incited
him to follow her, and she picked strawberries, heaps and heaps, and
got him to sit down on a little bench near the strawberry beds, and
popped the delicious ripe berries into his mouth; and although he had
never played before in such a fashion with any little girl, he quite
enjoyed it, and presently entered the house with his lips suspiciously
red, and a confession deep down in his heart that he had spent quite a
pleasant morning.

At dinner-time Diana and her uncle walked into the room, side by side.

"Well, William," said Mrs. Dolman, "I hope you have finished your
sermon."

"Not quite, my dear," he answered.

"Not kite, my dear," echoed Diana.

Mr. Dolman gave her a half-terrified glance, but she was stanch
enough, and had not the least idea of betraying the happy morning they
had spent together.

Towards the end of the meal, her clear little voice might have been
heard calling to her uncle.

"Uncle William, you wishes me to have a whole holiday; doesn't you?
You pwomised I is to have a whole holiday to-day."

Now, Mrs. Dolman had felt very uncomfortable about Diana during her
hot walk to the village that morning. She had not at all minded
punishing her, but when she saw her lying white and unconscious in her
arms, she had certainly gone through a terrible moment, and had,
perhaps, in the whole course of her life, never felt so thankful as
when the black eyes opened wide, and the little voice sounded once
again. The look, too, that Diana had given her on this occasion she
could not quite efface from her recollection. On the whole, therefore,
she felt inclined to be gentle to the little girl, and when she
pleaded for a holiday Mrs. Dolman did not say a word to interfere.

"It is a very hot day, and Diana was not quite well this morning,"
said Mr. Dolman, glancing first at his wife and then at Miss Ramsay,
"so, all things considered, perhaps--"

"Thank you, uncle," interrupted Diana, "it's kite settled, and you
isn't half a bad sort of old man. And now, p'ease, I want Orion to
have a holiday too."

"Oh, that's another matter!" interrupted Miss Ramsay. "Orion is in
perfect health to-day, and as he is extremely backward for his age--"

"But the heat of the day, and the child being so young," put in Mr.
Dolman.

"I'd be much happier if I had Orion with me," continued Diana, "and
it's 'portant my being happy; isn't it, Uncle William? P'ease, Uncle
William, say that Orion may have a holiday."

"I will give leave if your aunt and Miss Ramsay will," he replied.

"Oh, don't ask me!" said Mrs. Dolman, rising hastily as she spoke. "I
wash my hands of the pair."

"She washes her hands of the pair, so she don't count," said Diana.
"Is we to have a holiday, Uncle William? I is, but is Orion, too?
That's the 'portant part," she added.

"I have no objection," said Miss Ramsay, who thought it best to close
this scene as quickly as possible.

Orion uttered a shout of rapture, Diana rushed up to him, clutched him
round the neck, and pulled him from the room.

Nearly wild with glee, they both ran helter-skelter out of the house,
into the cool shrubbery beyond.

"Now, Orion," said Diana, the moment they found themselves alone, "you
must cool down and not 'cite yourself too much. We has a ter'ble lot
of work to do. I has got my holiday through awfu' suff'in'. I was
beated and killed, and I has come fresh to life again. Course I's in a
wage, and I's got a holiday for you and for me 'cos we must do our
work. Wun upstairs, Orion, and bwing down your big straw hat and mine,
and we'll go and find _them_."

Orion knew perfectly well what "them" meant. He looked hard at Diana,
saw something in her eyes which she could not suppress, and, with a
sigh of mingled pleasure and alarm ran off to do her bidding. He
returned in less than a minute with his large sailor hat stuck on the
back of his head, and a white sun-bonnet for Diana. Diana's sun-bonnet
had a black bow at the back and black strings.

"Howid, hot old thing," she said, "I won't wear it. Here, let's hide
it; I don't mind going with nothing."

"But you must not do that," said Orion, "'cos, if they see you,
they'll catch you and bring you home. You had best sling it on your
arm, Di; and then, if they are seen coming, why, you can pop it on
your head."

