accident, and will know where the Major was taken. Anyhow, I won't
come back without news."

Even to Lady Greendale, anxious and alarmed as she was, it did not
seem long before the steward came down with the news that the boat
was just alongside. This time she was too agitated to go up. She
heard someone come running down the companion, and a moment later,
to her astonishment, Frank Mallett himself came in. He looked pale
and excited.

"What is all this, Lady Greendale?" he exclaimed. "The skipper
tells me that a letter came here saying that I had been hurt and
taken to Dr. Maddison's, and that Bertha and her maid went off at
once, and have not returned, though it is more than two hours since
they went. I have not been hurt. I wrote no letter to Bertha, but
was at dinner at the club when the skipper came for me. What is it
all about?"

"I don't know, Frank. I cannot even think," Lady Greendale said in
an agitated voice. "What can it all mean and where can Bertha be?"
and she burst into tears.

"I don't know. I can't think," Frank said, slowly.

He stood silent for a minute or two, and then went on.

"I cannot suggest anything. I will go ashore at once. The waterman
at our landing stage must have noticed if two ladies got out there.
He could hardly have helped doing so, for it would be curious,
their coming ashore alone after dark. Then I will go to the other
landing places and ask there. There are always boys hanging about
to earn a few pence by taking care of boats. I will be back as soon
as I can."

The boat was still alongside, and the men stretched to their oars.
Th a very few minutes they were at the club landing stage. The
waterman here declared that no ladies whatever, unaccompanied by
gentlemen, had landed after dark.

"I must have seen them, sir," he said, "for you see I go down to
help out every party that arrives here. They must have gone to one
of the other landing places."

But at neither of these could he obtain any information. There were
several boys at each of them who had been there for hours, and they
were unanimous in declaring that no ladies had landed there after
dark at all. He then walked up and down between the watch house and
the club.

He had, when he landed, intended to go to the police office as soon
as he had inquired at the landing stages--the natural impulse of an
Englishman who has suffered loss or wrong--but the more he thought
it over the more inexpedient did such a course seem to him. It was
highly improbable--indeed, it seemed to him impossible--that they
could do more than he had in the matter. The passage of two ladies
through the crowded streets would scarcely have attracted the
attention of anyone, and any idea of violence being used was out of
the question. If they had landed, which he now regarded as very
improbable, they must have at least gone willingly to the place
where they believed they should find him, and unless every house in
Cowes was searched from top to bottom there was no chance of
finding them, carefully hidden away as they would be. He could not
see, therefore, that the police could at present be of any utility
whatever. It might be necessary finally to obtain the aid of the
police, but in that case it was Scotland Yard and not Cowes that
the matter must be laid before; and even this should be only a last
resort, for above all things it was necessary for Bertha's sake
that the matter should be kept a profound secret, and, once in the
hands of the police, it would be in all the papers the next day. If
the aid of detectives was to be called in, it would be far better
to put it into the hands of a private detective.

Having made up his mind upon this point, he returned to the yacht.

"I am sorry to say that I have no news," he said to Lady Greendale,
who was lying on the couch, worn out with weeping. "I have
ascertained almost beyond doubt that they did not land at the club
stage or either of the other two landing places."

"What can it be?" she sobbed. "What can have become of them?"

"I am afraid there is little doubt that they have been carried
off," he replied. "I can see no other possible solution of it."

"But who can have done such a thing?"

"Ah! that is another matter. I have been thinking it over and over,
and there is only one man that I know capable of such a dastardly
action. At present I won't mention his name, even to you; but I
will soon be on his track. Do not give way, Lady Greendale; even he
is not capable of injuring her, and no doubt she will be restored
to you safe and sound. But we shall need patience. Ah! there is a
boat coming alongside."

He ran up on deck. It proved, however, to be only a shore boat,
bringing off George Lechmere, who, having met a comrade in the
town, had asked leave to spend the evening with him. He was, of
course, ignorant of all that had happened since he had left, and
Frank told him.

"I have no doubt whatever that she has been carried off," he said,
"and there is only one man who could have done it."

"That villain, Carthew," George Lechmere exclaimed.

"Yes, he is the man I suspect, George. I heard this evening that he
had been hit tremendously hard on the turf at Goodwood. He would
think that if he could force Miss Greendale to marry him it would
retrieve his fortune, and would, moreover, satisfy his vindictive
spirit for the manner in which she had rejected him, and in
addition give him another triumph over me."

"That is it, sir. I have no doubt that that is it. But his yacht is
not here--at least I have not seen her."

"No, I am sure that she is not here; but I believe, for all that,
that Miss Greendale must have been taken on board a yacht. They
never would have dared to land her in Cowes. Of course, I made
inquiries as a matter of form at the landing places, but as she
knew the way to Dr. Maddison's, and as the streets were full of
people at the time she landed, they could never have attempted to
use violence, especially as she had her maid with her. On the other
hand, it would have been comparatively easy to manage it in the
case of a yacht. They had but to row alongside, to seize and gag
them before they had time to utter a cry, and then to carry them
below. The Phantom is not here--at any rate, was not here this
afternoon, but there is no reason why Carthew should not have
chartered a yacht for the purpose. Ask the skipper to come aft."

"Captain," he said, when Hawkins came aft, "what men went ashore
this afternoon?"

"Harris and Williams and Marvel, sir. They went ashore in the
dinghy, and Harris went to the doctor's for that medicine."

"Ask them to come here."

"Did anyone speak to you, Harris," he went on, as the three men
came aft, "while you were ashore today?--I mean anyone that you did
not know."

"No, sir," the man said, promptly. "Leastwise, the only chap that
spoke to me was a gent as was standing on the steps by the watch
house as I went down to the boat, and he only says to me, 'I
noticed you go in to Dr. Maddison's, my man. There is nothing the
matter with my friend, Major Mallett, I hope.'

"'No, sir,' says I, 'he is all right. I was just getting a bottle
of medicine for an old lady on board.'

"That was all that passed between us."

"Thank you, Harris. That is just what I wanted to know."

After the men had gone forward again, he said to the captain:

"I have a strong conviction, Hawkins, indeed I am almost certain,
that Miss Greendale has been carried off to one of the yachts here,
but whether it is a large one or a small one I have not the
slightest idea. The question is, what is to be done? It is past
eleven now, and it is impossible to go round the fleet and make
enquiries. Besides, the craft may have made off already. They would
have been sure to have placed her in the outside tier, so as to get
up anchor as soon as they had Miss Greendale on board."

"We might get out the boats, sir, and lie off and see if any yachts
set sail," the skipper suggested.

"That would be of no use, Hawkins. You could not stop them. Even if
you hailed to know what yacht it was, they might give you a false
name.

"One thing I have been thinking of that can be done. I wish, in the
first place, that you would ask all the men if anyone has noticed
among the yacht sailors in the streets one with the name of the
Phantom on his jersey. Some of them may have been paid off, for she
has not been raced since Ryde. In any case, I want two of the men
to go ashore, the first thing in the morning, and hang about all
day, if necessary, in hopes of finding one of the Phantom's crew.
If they do find one, bring him off at once, and tell him that he
will be well paid for his trouble.

"By the way, you may as well ask Harris what the gentleman was like
who spoke to him at the landing place."

He walked slowly backwards and forwards with George Lechmere,
without exchanging a word, until in five minutes Hawkins returned.

"It was a clean-shaven man who spoke to Harris, sir; he judged him
to be about forty. He wore a sort of yachting dress, and he was
rather short and thin. About the other matter Rawlins says that he
noticed when he was ashore yesterday two of the Phantom's men
strolling about. Being a Cowes man himself, he knew them both, but
as they were not alone he just passed the time of day and went on
without stopping."

"Does he know where they live? I don't think it at all likely they
would be on leave now, or that he would find either of them at home
tomorrow morning; but it is possible that he might do so. At any
rate it is worth trying. It is curious that two of them should be
here when we have seen nothing of the Phantom since the race for
the cup, unless, of course, her owner has laid her up, which is
hardly likely. If she had been anywhere about here she would have
entered for the race yesterday."

"I will send Rawlins and one of the other Cowes men ashore at six
o'clock, Major. If they don't meet the men, they are safe to be
able to find out where they live."

"And tell them and the others, Hawkins, that on no account whatever
is a word to be said on shore as to the disappearance of Miss
Greendale. It is of great importance that no one should obtain the
slightest hint of what has taken place."

When the captain had again gone forward, Frank went down, and with
some difficulty persuaded Lady Greendale to go to bed.

"We can do nothing more tonight," he said. "You may well imagine
that if I saw the least chance of doing any good I should not be
standing here, but nothing can be done till morning."

Having seen her to her stateroom, he returned to the deck, where he
had told George Lechmere to wait for him.

"It is enough to drive one mad, George," he said, as he joined him;
"to think that somewhere among all those yachts Miss Greendale may
be held a prisoner."

"I can quite understand that, Major, by what I feel myself. I have
seen so much of Miss Greendale, and she has always been so kind to
me, knowing that you considered that I had saved your life, and
knowing about that other thing, that I feel as if I could do
anything for her. And I feel it all the more because it is the
scoundrel I owed such a deep debt to before. But I hardly think
that she can be on board one of the yachts here."

"I feel convinced that she is not, George. They could hardly keep
her gagged all this time, and at night a scream would be heard
though the skylights were closed."

"No, sir; if she was put on board here I feel sure that they would
have got up sail at once."

"That is just what I feel. Likely enough they had the mainsail
already up and the chain short, and directly the boat was up at the
davits they would have got up the anchor and been off. They may be
twenty miles away by this time; though whether east or west one has
no means of even guessing. The wind is nearly due north, and they
may have gone either way, or have made for Cherbourg or Havre. It
depends partly upon her size. If she is a small craft, they can't
get far beyond that range. If she is a large one, she may have gone
anywhere. The worst of it is that unless we can get some clue as to
her size we can do absolutely nothing. A good many yachts went off
today both east and west, and by the end of the week the whole
fleet will be scattered, and even if we do get the size of the
yacht, I don't see that we can do anything unless we can get her
name too.

"If we could do that, we could act at once. I should run up to
town, lay the case before the authorities at Scotland Yard, and get
them to telegraph to every port in the kingdom, that upon her
putting in there the vessel was at once to be searched for two
ladies who were believed to have been forcibly carried away in
her."

"And have those on board arrested, I suppose, Major?"

"Well, that would have to be thought over, George. Carthew could
not be brought to punishment without the whole affair being made
public. That is the thing above all others to be avoided."

"Yes, I see that, sir; and yet it seems hard that he should go off
unpunished again."

"He would not go unpunished, you may be sure," Frank said, grimly;
"for if the fellow ever showed his face in London again, I would
thrash him to within an inch of his life. However, sure as I feel,
it is possible that I am mistaken. Miss Greendale is known to be an
only daughter, and an heiress, and some other impecunious scamp may
have conceived the idea of making a bold stroke for her fortune. It
is not likely, but it is possible."

Until morning broke, the two men paced the deck together. Scarcely
a word was spoken. Frank was in vain endeavouring to think what
course had best be taken, if the search for the men of the phantom
turned out unavailing. George was brooding over the old wrong he
had suffered, and longing to avenge that and the present one.

"Thank God, the night is over," Frank said at last; "and I have
thoroughly tired myself. I have thought until I am stupid. Now I
will lie down on one of the sofas, and perhaps I may forget it all
for a few hours."

Sleep, however, did not come to him, and at seven o'clock he was on
deck again.

"The men went ashore at six, sir," the skipper said. "I expect they
will be back again before long."

Ten minutes later the dinghy came out between two yachts ahead.

"Rawlins is not on board," the skipper said, as they came close. "I
told him to send off the instant they got any news whatever. That
is Simpson in the stern."

"Well, Simpson, what news?" Frank asked as she rowed alongside.

"Well, sir, we have found out as how all the Phantom's crew are
ashore. Some of the chaps told us that they came back a fortnight
ago, the crew having been paid off. Rawlins said that I'd better
come off and tell you that. He has gone off to look one of them up,
and bring him off in a shore boat. He knows where he lives, and I
expect we shall have him alongside in a few minutes."

"Do you think that is good news or bad, sir?" George Lechmere
asked.

"I think that it is bad rather than good," Frank said. "Before, it
seemed to me that, whatever the craft was in which she was carried
away, she would probably be transferred to the Phantom, which might
be lying in Portland or in Dover, or be cruising outside the
island, and if I had heard nothing of the Phantom I should have
searched for her. However, I suppose that the scoundrel thought
that he could not trust a crew of Cowes men to take part in a
business like this. But we shall know more when Rawlins comes off."

In half an hour the shore boat came alongside with Rawlins and a
sailor with a Phantom jersey on.

"So you have all been paid off, my lad?" Frank said to the sailor
as he stepped on deck.

"Yes sir. It all came sudden like. We had expected that she would
be out for another month, at least. However, as each man got a
month's pay, we had nothing to grumble about; although it did seem
strange that even the skipper should not have had a hint of what
Mr. Carthew intended, till he called him into his cabin and paid
him his money."

"And where is she laid up?"

"Well, sir, she is at Ostend. I don't know whether she is going to
be hauled up there, or only dismantled and left to float in the
dock. The governor told the skipper that he thought he might go to
the Mediterranean in December, but that till then he should not be
able to use her. It seemed a rum thing leaving her out there
instead of having her hauled up at Southampton or Gosport, and
specially that he should not have kept two or three of us on board
in charge. But, of course, that was his affair. Mr. Carthew is
rather a difficult gentleman to please, and very changeable-like.
We had all made sure that we were going to race here after winning
the Cup at Ryde; and, indeed, after the race he said as much to the
skipper."

"Has he anyone with him?" Frank asked.

"Only one gentleman, sir. I don't know what his name was."

"What was he like?"

"He was a smallish man, and thin, and didn't wear no hair on his
face."

"Thank you. Here is a sovereign for your trouble.

"That is something, at any rate, George," he went on, as the man
was rowed away. "The whole proceeding is a very strange one, and
you see the description of the man with Carthew exactly answers to
that of the man who found out from the boat's crew that Dr.
Maddison was attending Lady Greendale; and now you see that it is
quite possible that the Phantom is somewhere near, or was somewhere
near yesterday afternoon. Carthew may have hired a foreign crew,
and sailed in her a couple of days after her own crew came over; or
he may have hired another craft either abroad or here. At any rate,
there is something to do. I will go up to town by the midday train,
and then down to Dover, and cross to Ostend tonight."

"Begging your pardon, Major, could not you telegraph to the harbour
master at Ostend, asking if the Phantom is there?"

"I might do that, George, but if I go over there I may pick up some
clue. I may find out what hotel he stopped at after the crew had
left, and if so, whether he crossed to England or left by a train
for France. There is no saying what information I may light on. You
stay on board here. You can be of no use to me on the journey, and
may be of use here. I will telegraph to you from Ostend. Possibly I
may want the yacht to sail at once to Dover to meet me there, or
you may have to go up to town to do something for me.

"Now I must go down and tell Lady Greendale as much as is
necessary. It will, of course, be the best thing for her to go up
to town with me, but if she is not well enough for that, of course
she must stay on board."

Lady Greendale had just come into the saloon when he went down.

"I think I have got a clue--a very faint one," he said. "I am going
up to town at once to follow it up. How are you feeling, Lady
Greendale?"

"I have a terrible headache, but that is nothing. Of course, I will
go up with you."

"But do you feel equal to it?"

"Oh, yes, quite," she said, feverishly. "What is your clue, Frank?"

"Well, it concerns the yacht in which I believe Bertha has been
carried off. At any rate, I feel so certain as to who had a hand in
it, that I have no hesitation in telling you that it was Carthew."

"Mr. Carthew! Impossible, Frank. He always seemed to me a
particularly pleasant and gentlemanly man."

