been exposed to. Macdonald's brigade suffered most, I believe."

"Yes; I saw one of the officers just now. It seems they came down upon
Mahmud's picked bodyguard, and these fought desperately. They found
Mahmud in the usual attitude in which the Dervish emirs await death,
when they are conquered. He was sitting quietly on his mat, with his
arms laid down beside him; and was, I should imagine, somewhat
surprised at finding that he was not cut to pieces, at once."

"I am glad he was not, sir, for he certainly behaved well to me. It was
through the influence of his wife, I admit; but in sparing me he really
risked serious disaffection among his followers, and at last gave way
only to coercion."

The sergeant and men had now come up, and Gregory went off with them.
Three or four hundred women were seated on the ground together, with
half a dozen Egyptian soldiers standing as sentry over them. More or
less closely veiled as they were, Gregory could not distinguish Fatma
among them; and indeed, except when he first reached her in the water,
he had not got a glimpse of her features. The question, however, was
speedily settled when a woman rose, in the middle of the group, with a
cry of gladness.

"So you are saved!" she exclaimed, "I have feared so that you were
killed. Have you news of Mahmud?"

"Yes, lady. He is a prisoner, but well and unharmed. I have obtained an
order, from the General, that you are to be treated with honours, as
his wife. We cannot do much for you, at present, but all that is
possible will be done. I have represented your kindness to me, and
these soldiers will at once erect an arbour for you, and food will be
brought for you all, as soon as matters have settled down a little."

The Egyptian soldiers had already begun to cut down saplings.
Accustomed as they were to the work, in half an hour they had erected
an arbour. Fatma was then assisted into it, with the other women of the
harem. The sergeant gave orders, to the sentries, that no one was to be
allowed to interfere in any way with them; and then Gregory took his
leave, saying that he would return, later on.

He again joined General Hunter, who seemed to be his natural chief, now
that his service in the gunboat was over.

The list of casualties was now being brought in. The Camerons, who had
led the attack in line, had lost most heavily. They had fifteen killed
and forty-six wounded, among them being two officers killed, and one
mortally wounded. The Seaforths had one officer killed and one mortally
wounded, and four others less severely; in all, six killed and
twenty-seven wounded. The Lincolns had one killed and eighteen wounded;
the Warwicks two killed and eighteen wounded. Many of the wounded
afterwards died.

The Egyptians had lost more heavily. The casualties among them were
fifty-seven killed; and four British and sixteen native officers, and
three hundred and sixty-seven non-commissioned officers and men,
wounded.

The Dervish loss was terrible. Three thousand men were killed, among
whom were nearly all the emirs; and two thousand were taken prisoners.
The rest were hopeless fugitives, and a vast number of these must have
been wounded.

There was but a short rest for the troops. When the wounded had been
collected, and carried to a neighbouring palm grove, where the surgeons
did all that could then be done for them; and the trophies of the
fight--banners and spears, guns of all sorts, swords and knives--had
been gathered, principally by the exultant Soudanese and Egyptians, the
force prepared for a start.

"May I ask, General, what is to be done with the women?" Gregory said.

"I have been speaking to the Sirdar about them, and I was just going to
ask you to go with me to them. They are, of course, not to be
considered as prisoners. They cannot stay here, for they would die of
hunger. Therefore they had best follow the troops, at any rate as far
as the Atbara camp. They will have food given them, and must then
decide for themselves what they are to do. It is a difficult question,
altogether. The only thing that can, at present, be settled is that
they mustn't be allowed to die of hunger, and they must be protected
against molestation.

"The troops will march at four o'clock. The Egyptian brigade have
volunteered to carry the wounded. They will start later. The women had
better follow them. No doubt, some of them will find their husbands
among the prisoners, so that there will be no trouble about them."

"What will be done with the men, sir?"

The General smiled.

"Tomorrow they will probably enlist in our service, to a man, and will
fight just as sturdily as the other Soudanese battalions, against their
brethren in Khartoum. All the prisoners we have hitherto taken who are
fit for the work have done so; and, as has been shown today, are just
as ready to fight on our side as they were against us. They are a
fighting people, and it is curious how they become attached to their
white officers, whom formerly they hated as infidels."

When the matter was explained to them, the women accepted the situation
with the resignation that is natural to the Mahometan woman. Gregory
was able to assure Fatma that, in a short time, she would undoubtedly
be allowed to join Mahmud, and accompany him wherever he was sent.

"But will they not kill him?" she said.

"We never kill prisoners. Even the bitterest enemy that may fall into
our hands is well treated. Mahmud will doubtless be sent down to Cairo,
and it will then be settled where he is to be taken to; but you may be
sure that, wherever it may be, he will be well treated and cared for."

"In that case, I shall be happy," she said. "When you saved me, I saw
that the ways of you Christians were better than our ways. Now I see it
still more. To be always raiding, and plundering, and killing cannot be
good. It used to seem to me natural and right, but I have come to think
differently."

At four o'clock the troops marched. At Gregory's request, he was
allowed to remain behind and accompany the Egyptians. He had bought for
a few shillings, from the soldiers, a dozen donkeys that had been found
alive in some of the pits. These he handed over to Fatma, for her
conveyance and that of the wives of some of the emirs, who were of the
party.

The Egyptians started at half-past eight, carrying their own wounded
and those of the British. By the route by which the army had marched,
the night before, the distance was but nine miles; but there had been
some rough places to pass, and to avoid these, where the wounded might
have suffered from jolting, they made a circuit, thereby adding three
miles to the length of the march; and did not reach Umdabieh camp until
two o'clock in the morning. General Hunter, who never spared himself,
rode with them and acted as guide.

During the fight he, Colonel Macdonald, and Colonel Maxwell had ridden
at the head of their brigades, the white regimental officers being on
foot with the men, as was their custom; and it was surprising that the
three conspicuous figures had all come through the storm of fire
unscathed.

The next morning was a quiet one, and in the afternoon all marched off
to the old camp, at Abadar. On Sunday they rested, and on Monday the
British brigade marched to Hudi, and then across the desert to Hermali,
where they were to spend the summer. The Sirdar rode, with the Egyptian
brigades, to Fort Atbara. Macdonald's brigade was to go on to garrison
Berber, Maxwell's to Assillem, and that of Lewis to remain at Atbara.

The question of the prisoners was already half solved. Almost all of
them willingly embraced the offer to enlist in the Egyptian army. Many
of the women found their husbands among the prisoners. Others agreed,
at once, to marry men of the Soudanese battalion. The rest, pending
such offers as they might receive in the future, decided to remain at
Atbara. At Berber their lot would have been a hard one, for they would
have been exposed to the hatred and spite of the Jaalin women there,
whose husbands had been massacred at Metemmeh.

Fatma, with two attendants only, accompanied Macdonald's brigade to
Berber. On arriving outside the town, the force encamped. Next day the
Sirdar, with his staff and General Hunter, came up; and, on the
following morning, made a triumphant entry into the town, followed by
the Soudanese brigade.

Berber was prepared to do honour to the occasion. Flags waved, coloured
cloths and women's garments hung from the windows, and the whole
population lined the streets, and received the conquerors with cries of
welcome and triumph. They had anticipated a very different result, and
had fully expected that the army would have been well-nigh annihilated;
and that, again, the triumphant Dervishes would become their masters.
But the sight of Mahmud walking, a prisoner, with two guards on each
side of him, convinced them that the reports that had reached them were
true, that the Dervishes had been signally defeated, and that there was
no fear of their ever again becoming lords of Berber.

The Sirdar, by whose side General Hunter rode, headed the procession,
followed by his staff. Then, leading his brigade, came Macdonald--stern
and hard of face, burnt almost black with years of campaigning in the
desert--and his staff, followed by the black battalions, erect and
proud, maintaining their soldierly bearing amid the loud quavering
cries of welcome from the women.

Gregory had, on his arrival with the brigade the day before, gone into
the town; and engaged a small house, in its outskirts, as the abode of
Fatma and her two attendants, purchased suitable provisions, and made
what arrangements he could for her comfort. Late in the evening he had
escorted her there, and left Zaki to sleep in an outhouse attached to
it, to secure them from all intrusion.

Then he went down to the river and, finding the Zafir lying there, went
on board. He was received as one returned from the dead by Captain
Keppel, Lieutenant Beatty, and Lieutenant Hood--the commanders of the
other gunboats--who had been dining on board. He had become a general
favourite, during the time he had spent with them, and their
congratulations on his safe return were warm and hearty.

"You may imagine our surprise when, after the fight was over," said
Captain Keppel, "it was discovered that you were missing. No one could
imagine what had become of you. One of the blacks who had been working
your Maxim said they had not noticed your leaving them; and that, when
they found you were not there, they supposed you had come to confer
with me. Then I sent for your man; but he, too, was missing. We
searched everywhere, but no signs of you, dead or alive, and no marks
of blood were to be found. So it seemed that the matter must remain a
mystery. Early the next morning, however, we saw a white rag waving on
the bank, and then a black entered the water and swam out towards us. I
sent the boat to meet him, and when he came on board I found that he
was your man, and the mystery was explained. I fancy I used some strong
language; for I never before heard of a man being so hare-brained as to
spring overboard, in the middle of a battle, and pick up a woman,
without saying a word to anyone of what he was doing, and that with the
boat still steaming ahead. Of course, your man told us that it was
Mahmud's wife you had saved, and that she had taken you under her
protection; but I did not expect that, among those fanatics, your life
would be spared.

"Now, tell us all about your adventures, and how you got down here just
in time to see our fellows enter, in triumph. I suppose you managed to
give them the slip, somehow?"

Gregory then told his story. When he had concluded, Captain Keppel
said:

"Well, you have the luck of the old one! First, you have got hold of as
faithful a fellow as is to be found in all Egypt, or anywhere else;
and, in the second place, you have been in the battle of Atbara, while
we have been kicking our heels here, and fuming at being out of it
altogether, except for our bloodless capture of Shendy.

"So you say the Sirdar blew you up? I am not surprised at that. You
know the story of the man who fell overboard, in the old flogging days,
and the captain sentenced him to two dozen lashes, for leaving the ship
without orders."

"I don't think he was really angry; for when I went to him, the next
evening, he was a good deal milder. Of course, he did say again that I
had done wrong, but not in the same tone as before; and he seemed a
good deal interested in what I told him about Mahmud, and how my boy
had risked his life to rescue me, and had succeeded almost by a
miracle. He said there is a lot of good in these black fellows, if one
could but get at it. They have never had a chance yet; but, given good
administration, and the suppression of all tribal feuds with a stern
hand, they might be moulded into anything."

"And are you coming back to us now, Mr. Hilliard?"

"I have no idea. I don't suppose anything will be settled, for a time.
There is not likely to be much doing, anyway, except on the railway;
and even your gunboats will have an easy time of it, as there is not an
enemy left on this side of the sixth cataract.

"The Dervishes who escaped are pretty sure to cross the Atbara. There
are enough of them still, when they rally, to beat off any attacks that
might be made by our tribesmen from Kassala."



Chapter 13: The Final Advance.


A few days after the return of headquarters to Berber, Mahmud was sent
down country, and Fatma was permitted to accompany him. She expressed
to Gregory, in touching terms, her gratitude for what he had done for
her.

"We have been of mutual assistance," said Gregory. "I have the same
reason to be grateful to you, as you have to thank me. I saved your
life, and you saved mine. You were very kind to me, when I was a
captive--I have done as much as I could for you, since you have been
with us. So we are quits. I hope you will be happy with Mahmud. We do
not treat our prisoners badly, and except that he will be away from the
Soudan, he will probably be more comfortable than he has ever been in
his life."

Gregory was now employed in the transport department, and journeyed
backwards and forwards, with large convoys of camels, to the head of
the railway. The line was completed to Berber, but the officers charged
with its construction were indefatigable; and, as fast as the materials
came up, it was pushed on towards the Atbara. Complete as had been the
victory on that river, the Sirdar saw that the force which had been
sufficient to defeat the twenty thousand men, under Mahmud, was not
sufficiently strong for the more onerous task of coping with three
times that number, fighting under the eye of the Khalifa, and certain
to consist of his best and bravest troops. He therefore telegraphed
home for another British brigade, and additional artillery, with at
least one regiment of cavalry--an arm in which the Egyptian Army was
weak.

Preparations were at once made for complying with the request. The 21st
Lancers, 1st battalion of Grenadier Guards, 2nd battalion of the Rifle
Brigade, 2nd battalion of the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers, a field
battery, a howitzer battery, and two forty-pounders, to batter the
defences of Omdurman, should the Khalifa take his stand, were sent. A
strong detachment of the Army Service Corps and the Royal Army Medical
Corps was to accompany them, but they had yet some months to wait, for
the advance would not be made until the Nile was full, and the gunboats
could ascend the cataract.

However, there was much to be done, and the troops did not pass the
time in idleness. Atbara Fort was to be the base, and here the Egyptian
battalions built huts and storehouses. The Soudanese brigades returned
to Berber, and the transport of provisions and stores for them was thus
saved. The British at Darmali were made as comfortable as possible, and
no effort was spared to keep them in good health, during the ensuing
hot weather. A small theatre was constructed, and here smoking concerts
were held. There was also a race meeting, and one of the steamers took
parties, of the men who were most affected by the heat, for a trip down
the Nile. They were practised in long marches early in the morning, and
although, of course, there was some illness, the troops on the whole
bore the heat well.

Had there been a prospect of an indefinitely long stay, the result
might have been otherwise; but they knew that, in a few months, they
would be engaged in even sterner work than the last battle, that
Khartoum was their goal, and with its capture the power of the Khalifa
would be broken for ever, and Gordon avenged.

Early in April the railway reached Abadia, a few miles from Berber, and
in a short time a wonderful transformation took place here. From a
sandy desert, with scarce a human being in sight, it became the scene
of a busy industry. Stores were sorted and piled as they came up by
rail.

Three gunboats arrived in sections, and these were put together. They
were stronger, and much better defended by steel plates than the first
gunboats; and each of them carried two six-pounder quick-firing guns, a
small howitzer, four Maxims, and a searchlight. They were, however,
much slower than the old boats, and could do very little in the way of
towing.

Besides these, eight steel double-deck troop barges were brought up, in
sections, and put together. Three Egyptian battalions came up from
Merawi to aid in the work, which not only included building the
gunboats and barges, but executing the repairs to all the native craft,
and putting them in a thoroughly serviceable state.

In June the railway reached the Atbara, and for the first time for two
years and a half, the officers who had superintended its construction
had a temporary rest. The stores were now transferred from Abadia to
the Atbara, and two trains ran every day, each bringing up something
like two hundred tons of stores.

In the middle of July two Egyptian battalions left Atbara and proceeded
up the Nile, one on each bank, cutting down trees and piling them for
fuel for the steamers. As the river rose, four steamers came up from
Dongola, together with a number of sailing boats; and in the beginning
of August the whole flotilla, consisting of ten gunboats, five unarmed
steamers, eight troop barges, and three or four hundred sailing boats,
were all assembled.

By this time the reinforcements from home were all at Cairo, and their
stores had already been sent up. It was arranged that they were to come
by half battalions, by squadrons, and by batteries, each one day behind
the other. To make room for them, two Egyptian battalions were sent up
to the foot of the Shabluka cataract.

The six black battalions left Berber on July 30th, and arrived at
Atbara the next day. There were now four brigades in the infantry
divisions instead of three, two battalions having been raised from the
Dervishes taken at the battle of Atbara. These were as eager as any to
join in the fight against their late comrades.

This was scarcely surprising. The Baggara, the tyrants of the desert,
are horsemen. The infantry were, for the most part, drawn from the
conquered tribes. They had enlisted in the Khalifa's force partly
because they had no other means of subsistence, partly from their
innate love of fighting. They had, in fact, been little better than
slaves; and their condition, as soldiers in the Egyptian Army, was
immeasurably superior to that which they had before occupied.

Broadwood, with nine squadrons of Egyptian cavalry, was already on the
western bank of the river opposite Atbara; and was to be joined at
Metemmeh by the camel corps, and another squadron of horse from Merawi.

On the 3rd of August the six Soudanese battalions left Fort Atbara for
the point of concentration, a few miles below the cataract. To the
sides of each gunboat were attached two of the steel barges; behind
each were two native craft. All were filled as tightly as they could be
crammed with troops. They were packed as in slavers, squatting by the
side of each other as closely as sardines in a box. The seven steamers
and the craft they took with them contained six thousand men, so
crowded that a spectator remarked that planks might have been laid on
their heads, and that you could have walked about on them; while
another testified that he could not have shoved a walking stick between
them anywhere. White men could not have supported it for an hour, but
these blacks and Egyptians had a hundred miles to go, and the steamers
could not make more than a knot an hour against the rapid stream, now
swollen to its fullest.

While they were leaving, the first four companies of the Rifle Brigade
arrived. Every day boats laden with stores went forward, every day
white troops came up. Vast as was the quantity of stores sent off, the
piles at Atbara did not seem to diminish. Ninety days' provisions,
forage, and necessaries for the whole force had been accumulated there,
and as fast as these were taken away they were replaced by others from
Berber.

Like everyone connected with the transport or store department, Gregory
had to work from daybreak till dark. Accustomed to a warm climate,
light in figure, without an ounce of spare flesh, he was able to
support the heat, dust, and fatigue better than most; and, as he
himself said, it was less trying to be at work, even in the blazing
sun, than to lie listless and sweating under the shade of a blanket.
There was no necessity, now, to go down the line to make enquiries as
to the progress of the stores, or of the laden craft on their way up.
the telegraph was established, and the Sirdar, at Atbara, knew the
exact position of every one of the units between Cairo and himself; and
from every station he received messages constantly, and despatched his
orders as frequently.

There was no hitch, whatever. The arrangements were all so perfect that
the vast machine, with its numerous parts, moved with the precision of
clockwork. Everything was up to time. For a train or steamer, or even a
native boat, to arrive half an hour after the time calculated for it,
was almost unheard of.

The Sirdar's force of will seemed to communicate itself to every
officer under him, and it is safe to say that never before was an
expedition so perfectly organized, and so marvellously carried out. At
Atbara the Sirdar saw to everything himself. A brief word of
commendation, to those working under him, cheered them through long
days of toil--an equally curt reproof depressed them to the depths.

Twice, when Gregory was directing some of the blacks piling large
cases, as they were emptied from the train; anathematizing the stupid,
urging on the willing, and himself occasionally lending a hand in order
to show how it should be done; the Sirdar, who, unknown to him, had
been looking on, rode up and said shortly, "You are doing well, Mr.
Hilliard!"--and he felt that his offence of jumping overboard had been
condoned.

General Hunter, himself indefatigable, had more occasion to notice
Gregory's work; and his commendations were frequent, and warm.

The lad had not forgotten the object with which he had come to the
front. After Atbara, he had questioned many of the prisoners who, from
their age, might have fought at El Obeid; but none of these had done
so. The forces of the Khalifa came and went, as there was occasion for
them. The Baggara were always under arms, but only when danger
threatened were the great levies of foot assembled; for it would have
been impossible, in the now desolate state of the Soudan, to find food
for an army of a hundred thousand men.

All agreed, however, that, with the exception of the Egyptian
artillerymen, they heard that no single white man had escaped. Numbers
of the black soldiers had been made slaves. The whites had
perished--all save one had fallen on the field. That one had
accompanied a black battalion, who had held together and, repulsing all
attacks, had marched away. They had been followed, however, and after
repeated attacks had dwindled away, until they had finally been broken
and massacred.

With the Khalifa's army were several emirs who had fought at El Obeid;
and these would, no doubt, be able to tell him more; but none of those
who were taken prisoners, at the Atbara, had heard of any white man
having escaped the slaughter of Hicks's army.

Just as the general movement began, the force was joined by three
companies of Soudanese. These had marched from Suakim to Berber, two
hundred and eighty-eight miles, in fifteen days, an average of nineteen
miles a day--a record for such a march, and one that no European force
could have performed. One day, after marching thirty miles, they came
to a well and found it dry, and had to march thirty miles farther to
another water hole, a feat probably altogether without precedent.

"You had better fall back upon your old work, Hilliard," the General
said, the day before they started. "As my aide I shall find plenty for
you to do, now that I command the whole division."

"Thank you very much, sir! I don't think that I shall find any work
hard, after what I have been doing for the past four months."

"You have got your horse?"

"Yes; he is in good condition, for I have had no riding to do, for some
time."

"Well, you had better get him on board one of the gyasses we shall tow
up, tomorrow. All our horses will embark this evening. We shall be on
board at daybreak. Our private camels are going with the marching
column; you had better put yours with them. No doubt they will join us
somewhere. Of course, your kit will be carried with us."

It was a delight to Gregory to be on the water again. There was
generally a cool breeze on the river, and always an absence of dust. He
was now halfway between seventeen and eighteen, but the sun had tanned
him to a deep brown, and had parched his face; thus adding some years
to his appearance, so that the subalterns of the newly-arrived
regiments looked boyish beside him. The responsibilities of his work
had steadied him, and though he retained his good spirits, his laugh
had lost the old boyish ring. The title of Bimbashi, which had seemed
absurd to him seven months before, was now nothing out of the way, for
he looked as old as many of the British subalterns serving with that
rank in the Egyptian army.

Returning to the little hut that Zaki, with the aid of some of the
blacks, had built for him; he gave his orders, and in a short time the
camel--a very good one, which he had obtained in exchange for that
which he had handed over to the transport--started, with its driver, to
join those that were to carry up the baggage and stores of General
Hunter, and his staff. These were in charge of a sergeant and three
privates, of one of the Soudanese battalions. Gregory had got up a case
of whisky, one of bottled fruit, and a stock of tea and sugar from
Berber. No tents could be carried, and he left his tente d'abri at the
stores with his canteen; taking on board, in his own luggage, a plate,
