Ben Soloman entered. Charlie was now much stronger, but he had
carefully abstained from showing any marked improvement, speaking
always in a voice a little above a whisper, and allowing the men to
feed him, after making one or two pretended attempts to convey the
spoon to his mouth.

"Well, Master Englishman," Ben Soloman said, as he came up to his
bedside, "what do you think of things?"

"I do not know what to think," Charlie said feebly. "I do not know
where I am, or why I am here. I remember that there was a fray in
the street, and I suppose I was hurt. But why was I brought here,
instead of being taken to my lodgings?"

"Because you would be no use to me in your lodging, and you may be
a great deal of use to me here," Ben Soloman said. "You know you
endeavoured to entrap me into a plot against the king's life."

Charlie shook his head, and looked wonderingly at the speaker.

"No, no," he said, "there was no plot against the king's life. I
only asked if you would use your influence among your friends to
turn popular feeling against Augustus."

"Nothing of the kind," the Jew said harshly. "You wanted him
removed by poison or the knife. There is no mistake about that, and
that is what I am going to swear, and what, if you want to save
your life, you will have to swear too; and you will have to give
the names of all concerned in the plot, and to swear that they were
all agreed to bring about the death of the king. Now you understand
why you were brought here. You are miles away from another house,
and you may shout and scream as loud as you like. You are in my
power."

"I would die rather than make a false accusation."

"Listen to me," the Jew said sternly. "You are weak now, too weak
to suffer much. This day week I will return, and then you had best
change your mind, and sign a document I shall bring with me, with
the full particulars of the plot to murder the king, and the names
of those concerned in it. This you will sign. I shall take it to
the proper authorities, and obtain a promise that your life shall
be spared, on condition of your giving evidence against these
persons."

"I would never sign such a villainous document," Charlie said.

"You will sign it," Ben Soloman said calmly. "When you find
yourself roasting over a slow charcoal fire, you will be ready to
sign anything I wish you to."

So saying, he turned and left the room. He talked for some time to
the men outside, then Charlie heard him ride off.

"You villain," he said to himself. "When you come, at the end of a
week, you will not find me here; but, if I get a chance of having a
reckoning with you, it will be bad for you."

Charlie's progress was apparently slow. The next day he was able to
sit up and feed himself. Two days later he could totter across the
room, and lie down before the fire. The men were completely
deceived by his acting, and, considering any attempt to escape, in
his present weak state, altogether impossible, paid but little heed
to him, the peasant frequently absenting himself for hours
together.

Looking from his window, Charlie saw that the hut was situated in a
thick wood, and, from the blackened appearance of the peasant's
face and garments, he guessed him to be a charcoal burner, and
therefore judged that the trees he saw must form part of a forest
of considerable extent.

The weather was warm, and his other guard often sat, for a while,
outside the door. During his absence, Charlie lifted the logs of
wood piled beside the hearth, and was able to test his returning
strength, assuring himself that, although not yet fully recovered,
he was gaining ground daily. He resolved not to wait until the
seventh day; for Ben Soloman might change his mind, and return
before the day he had named. He determined, therefore, that on the
sixth day he would make the attempt.

He had no fear of being unable to overcome his Jewish guard, as he
would have the advantage of a surprise. He only delayed as long as
possible, because he doubted his powers of walking any great
distance, and of evading the charcoal burner, who would, on his
return, certainly set out in pursuit of him. Moreover, he wished to
remain in the hut nearly up to the time of the Jew's return, as he
was determined to wait in the forest, and revenge himself for the
suffering he had caused him, and for the torture to which he
intended to put him.

The evening before the day on which he decided to make the attempt,
the charcoal burner and the Jew were in earnest conversation. The
word signifying brigand was frequently repeated, and, although he
could not understand much more than this, he concluded, from the
peasant's talk and gestures, that he had either come across some of
these men in the forest, or had gathered from signs he had
observed, perhaps from their fires, that they were there.

The Jew shrugged his shoulders when the narration was finished. The
presence of brigands was a matter of indifference to him. The next
day, the charcoal burner went off at noon.

"Where does he go to?" Charlie asked his guard.

"He has got some charcoal fires alight, and is obliged to go and
see to them. They have to be kept covered up with wet leaves and
earth, so that the wood shall only smoulder," the man said, as he
lounged out of the hut to his usual seat.

Charlie waited a short time, then went to the pile of logs, and
picked out a straight stick about a yard long and two inches in
diameter. With one of the heavier ones he could have killed the
man, but the fellow was only acting under the orders of his
employer, and, although he would doubtless, at Ben Soloman's
commands, have roasted him alive without compunction, he had not
behaved with any unkindness, and had, indeed, seemed to do his best
for him.

Taking the stick, he went to the door. He trod lightly, but in the
stillness of the forest the man heard him, and glanced round as he
came out.

Seeing the stick in his hand he leaped up, exclaiming, "You young
fool!" and sprang towards him.

He had scarce time to feel surprise, as Charlie quickly raised the
club. It described a swift sweep, fell full on his head, and he
dropped to the ground as if shot.

Charlie ran in again, seized a coil of rope, bound his hands and
feet securely, and dragged him into the hut. Then he dashed some
cold water on his face. The man opened his eyes, and tried to move.

"You are too tightly bound to move, Pauloff," he said. "I could
have killed you if I had chosen, but I did not wish to. You have
not been unkind to me, and I owe you no grudge; but tell your
rascally employer that I will be even with him, someday, for the
evil he has done me."

"You might as well have killed me," the man said, "for he will do
so when he finds I let you escape."

"Then my advice to you is, be beforehand with him. You are as
strong a man as he is, and if I were in your place, and a man who
meant to kill me came into a lonely hut like this, I would take
precious good care that he had no chance of carrying out his
intentions."

Charlie then took two loaves of black bread and a portion of goat's
flesh from the cupboard; found a bottle about a quarter full of
coarse spirits, filled it up with water and put it in his pocket,
and then, after taking possession of the long knife his captive
wore in his belt, went out of the hut and closed the door behind
him.

He had purposely moved slowly about the hut, as he made these
preparations, in order that the Jew should believe that he was
still weak; but, indeed, the effort of dragging the man into the
hut had severely taxed his strength, and he found that he was much
weaker than he had supposed.

The hut stood in a very small clearing, and Charlie had no
difficulty in seeing the track by which the cart had come, for the
marks of the wheels were still visible in the soft soil. He
followed this until, after about two miles' walking, he came to the
edge of the wood. Then he retraced his steps for a quarter of a
mile, turned off, and with some difficulty made his way into a
patch of thick undergrowth, where, after first cutting a formidable
cudgel, he lay down, completely exhausted.

Late in the afternoon he was aroused from a doze by the sound of
footsteps, and, looking through the screen of leaves, he saw his
late jailers hurrying along the path. The charcoal burner carried a
heavy axe, while the Jew, whose head was bound up with a cloth, had
a long knife in his girdle. They went as far as the end of the
forest, and then retraced their steps slowly. They were talking
loudly, and Charlie could gather, from the few words he understood,
and by their gestures, something of the purport of their
conversation.

"I told you it was of no use your coming on as far as this," the
Jew said. "Why, he was hardly strong enough to walk."

"He managed to knock you down, and afterwards to drag you into the
house," the other said.

"It does not require much strength to knock a man down with a heavy
club, when he is not expecting it, Conrad. He certainly did drag me
in, but he was obliged to sit down afterwards, and I watched him
out of one eye as he was making his preparations, and he could only
just totter about. I would wager you anything he cannot have gone
two hundred yards from the house. That is where we must search for
him. I warrant we shall find him hidden in a thicket thereabouts."

"We shall have to take a lantern then, for it will be dark before
we get back."

"Our best plan will be to leave it alone till morning. If we sit
outside the hut, and take it in turns to watch, we shall hear him
when he moves, which he is sure to do when it gets dark. It will be
a still night, and we should hear a stick break half a mile away.
We shall catch him, safe enough, before he has gone far."

"Well, I hope we shall have him back before Ben Soloman comes," the
charcoal burner said, "or it will be worse for both of us. You know
as well as I do he has got my neck in a noose, and he has got his
thumb on you."

"If we can't find this Swede, I would not wait here for any money.
I would fly at once."

"You would need to fly, in truth, to get beyond Ben Soloman's
clutches," the charcoal burner said gruffly. "He has got agents all
over the country."

"Then what would you do?"

"There is only one thing to do. It is our lives or his. When he
rides up tomorrow, we will meet him at the door as if nothing had
happened, and, with my axe, I will cleave his head asunder as he
comes in. If he sees me in time to retreat, you shall stab him in
the back. Then we will dig a big hole in the wood, and throw him
in, and we will kill his horse and bury it with him.

"Who would ever be the wiser? I was going to propose it last time,
only I was not sure of you then; but, now that you are in it as
deep as I am--deeper, indeed, for he put you here specially to look
after this youngster--your interest in the matter is as great as
mine."

The Jew was silent for some time, then he said:

"He has got papers at home which would bring me to the gallows."

"Pooh!" the other said. "You do not suppose that, when it is found
that he does not return, and his heirs open his coffers, they will
take any trouble about what there may be in the papers there,
except such as relate to his money. I will warrant there are papers
there which concern scores of men besides you, for I know that Ben
Soloman likes to work with agents he has got under his thumb. But,
even if all the papers should be put into the hands of the
authorities, what would come of it? They have got their hands full
of other matters, for the present, and with the Swedes on their
frontier, and the whole country divided into factions, who do you
think is going to trouble to hunt up men for affairs that occurred
years ago? Even if they did, they would not catch you. They have
not got the means of running you down that Ben Soloman has.

"I tell you, man, it must be done. There is no other way out of
it."

"Well, Conrad, if we cannot find this fellow before Ben Soloman
comes, I am with you in the business. I have been working for him
on starvation pay for the last three years, and hate him as much as
you can."

When they reached the hut they cooked a meal, and then prepared to
keep alternate watch.

Charlie slept quietly all night, and, in the morning, remained in
his hiding place until he heard, in the distance, the sound of a
horse's tread. Then he went out and sat down, leaning against a
tree by the side of the path, in an attitude of exhaustion.

Presently he saw Ben Soloman approaching. He got up feebly, and
staggered a few paces to another tree, farther from the path. He
heard an angry shout, and then Ben Soloman rode up, and, with a
torrent of execrations at the carelessness of the watchers, leapt
from his horse and sprang to seize the fugitive, whom he regarded
as incapable of offering the slightest resistance.

Charlie straightened himself up, as if with an effort, and raised
his cudgel.

"I will not be taken alive," he said.

Ben Soloman drew his long knife from his girdle. "Drop that stick,"
he said, "or it will be worse for you."

"It cannot be worse than being tortured to death, as you said."

The Jew, with an angry snarl, sprang forward so suddenly and
unexpectedly that he was within the swing of Charlie's cudgel
before the latter could strike. He dropped the weapon at once, and
caught the wrist of the uplifted hand that held the knife.

The Jew gave a cry of astonishment and rage, as they clasped each
other, and he found that, instead of an unresisting victim, he was
in a powerful grasp. For a moment there was a desperate struggle.

The Jew would, at ordinary times, have been no match for Charlie,
but the latter was far from having regained his normal strength.
His fury at the treatment he had received at the man's hands,
however, enabled him, for the moment, to exert himself to the
utmost, and, after swaying backwards and forwards in desperate
strife for a minute, they went to the ground with a crash, Ben
Soloman being undermost.

The Jew's grasp instantly relaxed, and Charlie, springing to his
feet and seizing his cudgel, stood over his fallen antagonist. The
latter, however, did not move. His eyes were open in a fixed stare.
Charlie looked at him in surprise for a moment, thinking he was
stunned, then he saw that his right arm was twisted under him in
the fall, and at once understanding what had happened, turned him
half over. He had fallen on the knife, which had penetrated to the
haft, killing him instantly.

"I didn't mean to kill you," Charlie said aloud, "much as you
deserve it, and surely as you would have killed me, if I had
refused to act as a traitor. I would have broken your head for you,
but that was all. However, it is as well as it is. It adds to my
chance of getting away, and I have no doubt there will be many who
will rejoice when you are found to be missing.

"Now," he went on, "as your agents emptied my pockets, it is no
robbery to empty yours. Money will be useful, and so will your
horse."

He stooped over the dead man, and took the purse from his girdle,
when suddenly there was a rush of feet, and in a moment he was
seized. The thought flashed through his mind that he had fallen
into the power of his late guardians, but a glance showed that the
men standing round were strangers.

"Well, comrade, and who are you?" the man who was evidently the
leader asked. "You have saved us some trouble. We were sleeping a
hundred yards or two away, when we heard the horseman, and saw, as
he passed, he was the Jew of Warsaw, to whom two or three of us owe
our ruin, and it did not need more than a word for us to agree to
wait for him till he came back. We were surprised when we saw you,
still more so when the Jew jumped from his horse and attacked you.
We did not interfere, because, if he had got the best of you, he
might have jumped on his horse and ridden off, but directly he fell
we ran out, but you were so busy in taking the spoil that you did
not hear us.

"I see the Jew is dead; fell on his own knife. It is just as well
for him, for we should have tied him to a tree, and made a bonfire
of him, if we had caught him."

Charlie understood but little of this, but said when the other
finished:

"I understand but little Polish."

"What are you then--a Russian? You do not look like one."

"I am an Englishman, and am working in the house of Allan Ramsay, a
Scotch trader in Warsaw."

"Well, you are a bold fellow anyhow, and after the smart way in
which you disposed of this Jew, and possessed yourself of his
purse, you will do honour to our trade."

"I hope you will let me go," Charlie said. "My friends in Warsaw
will pay a ransom for me, if you will let me return there."

"No, no, young fellow. You would of course put down this Jew's
death to our doing, and we have weight enough on our backs already.
He is a man of great influence, and all his tribe would be pressing
on the government to hunt us down. You shall go with us, and the
purse you took from Ben Soloman will pay your footing."

Charlie saw that it would be useless to try and alter the man's
decision, especially as he knew so little of the language. He
therefore shrugged his shoulders, and said that he was ready to go
with them, if it must be so.

The Jew's body was now thoroughly searched. Various papers were
found upon him, but, as these proved useless to the brigands, they
were torn up.

"Shall we take the horse with us?" one of the men asked the leader.

"No, it would be worse than useless in the forest. Leave it
standing here. It will find its way back in time. Then there will
be a search, and there will be rejoicing in many a mansion
throughout the country, when it is known that Ben Soloman is dead.
They say he has mortgages on a score of estates, and, though I
suppose these will pass to others of his tribe, they can hardly be
as hard and mercenary as this man was.

"I wonder what he was doing in this forest alone? Let us follow the
path, and see where he is going.

"Honred, you have a smattering of several languages, try then if
you can make our new comrade understand."

The man tried in Russian without success, then he spoke in Swedish,
in which language Charlie at once replied.

"Where does this pathway lead to?"

"To a hut where a charcoal burner lives. I have been imprisoned
there for the last fortnight. It was all the Jew's doing. It was
through him that I got this knock here;" and he pointed to the
unhealed wound at the back of his head.

"Well, we may as well pay them a visit," the chief said, when this
was translated to him. "We are short of flour, and they may have
some there, and maybe something else that will be useful."



Chapter 11: With Brigands.


The man who had spoken to Charlie drew the long knife from the back
of the Jew, wiped it on the grass, and handed it to him.

"That ought to be your property," he said. "It has done you good
service."

Not sorry to have a weapon in addition to his cudgel, Charlie
placed it in his belt, and then started with the bandits. He would
not have cared to face the charcoal burner alone; but now that the
band regarded him as enrolled among their number, he felt no
uneasiness respecting him.

When they issued from the trees, the Jew was seen standing at the
door of the hut. He at once ran in on seeing them, and came out
again, accompanied by the charcoal burner, who carried his axe on
his shoulder. The Jew started, on catching sight of Charlie among
the ranks of the brigands, and said a word or two to his companion.

"Well, Master Charcoal Burner," the leader of the party said, "how
is it that honest woodmen consort with rogues of the town?"

"I don't know that they do so, willingly," the man said gruffly.
