
He knew it was lucky for the men that the storm did not break. The
schooner in her position would be almost sure to drag her anchor and
then would drive on the rocks, but they seemed to have no apprehensions,
and, it was quite evident now, that they were not going back to the
vessel until the next day. The ghastly quality of the night increased,
however. The lightning flared so much and it was so red that it was
uncanny, it even had a supernatural tinge, and the sullen rumbling of
the distant thunder added to it.

The effect upon Robert, situated as he was and alone for many months,
was very great. Something weird, something wild and in touch with the
storm that threatened but did not break, crept into his own blood. He
was filled with hatred and contempt of the men who caroused there. He
wondered what crimes they had committed on those seas, and he had not
the least doubt that the list was long and terrible. He ought to be an
avenging spirit. He wished intensely that Tayoga was with him in the
bush. The Onondaga would be sure to devise some plan to punish them or
to fill them with fear. He felt at that moment as if he belonged to a
superior race or order, and would like to stretch forth his hand and
strike down those who disgraced their kind.

The swart leader at last took note of the skies and their sinister
aspect. Robert saw him walking back and forth and looking up. More than
half of his men were stretched full length, either asleep or in a
stupor, but some of the others stood, and glanced at the skies. Robert
thought he saw apprehension in their eyes, or at least his imagination
put it there.

A wild and fantastic impulse seized him. These men were children of the
sea, superstitious, firm believers in omens, and witchcraft, ready to
see the ghosts of the slain, all the more so because they were stained
with every crime, then committed so freely under the black flag. He had
many advantages, too. He was a master of woodcraft, only their
wilderness was that of the waters.

He gave forth the long, melancholy hoot of the owl, and he did it so
well that he was surprised at his own skill. The note, full of
desolation and menace, seemed to come back in many echoes. He saw the
swart leader and the men with him start and look fearfully toward the
forest that curved so near. Then he saw them talking together and gazing
at the point from which the sound had come. Perhaps they were trying to
persuade themselves the note was only fancy.

Robert laughed softly to himself. He was pleased, immensely pleased with
his experiment. His fantastic mood grew. He was a spirit of the woods
himself; one of those old fauns of the Greeks, and he was really there
to punish the evil invaders of his island. His body seemed to grow light
with his spirit and he slid away among the trees with astonishing ease,
as sure of foot and as noiseless as Tayoga himself. Then the owl gave
forth his long, lonely cry with increased volume and fervor. It was a
note filled with complaint and mourning, and it told of the desolation
that overspread a desolate world.

Robert knew now that the leader and his men were disturbed. He could
tell it by the anxious way in which they watched the woods, and, gliding
farther around the circle, he sent forth the cry a third time. He was
quite sure that he had made a further increase in its desolation and
menace, and he saw the swart leader and his men draw together as if they
were afraid.

The owl was not the only trick in Robert's trade. His ambition took a
wide sweep and fancy was fertile. He had aroused in these men the fear
of the supernatural, a dread that the ghosts of those whom they had
murdered had come back to haunt or punish them. He had been an apt pupil
of Tayoga before the slaver came to Albany, and now he meant to show the
ruffians that the owl was not the only spirit of fate hovering over
them.

The deep growl of a bear came from the thicket, not the growl of an
ordinary black bear, comedian of the forest, but the angry rumble of
some great ursine beast of which the black bear was only a dwarf cousin.
Then he moved swiftly to another point and repeated it.

He heard the leader cursing and trying to calm the fears of the men
while it was evident that his own too were aroused. The fellow suddenly
drew a pistol and fired a bullet into the forest. Robert heard it
cutting the leaves near him. But he merely lay down and laughed. His
fantastic impulse was succeeding in more brilliant fashion than he had
hoped.

Imitating their leader, six or eight of the men snatched out pistols and
fired at random into the woods. The cry of a panther, drawn out, long,
full of ferocity and woe, plaintive on its last note, like the haunting
lament of a woman, was their answer. He heard a gasp of fear from the
men, but the leader, of stauncher stuff, cowed them with his curses.

Robert moved back on his course, and then gave forth the shrill, fierce
yelp of the hungry wolf, dying into an angry snarl. It was, perhaps, a
more menacing note than that of the larger animals, and he plainly saw
the ruffians shiver. He was creating in them the state of mind that he
wanted, and his spirits flamed yet higher. All things seemed possible to
him in his present mood.

He moved once more and then lay flat in the dense bushes. He fancied
that the pirates would presently fire another volley into the shadows,
and, in a moment of desperate courage, might even come into the forest.
His first thought was correct, as the leader told off the steadier men,
and, walking up and down in front of the forest, they raked it for a
considerable distance with pistol shots. All of them, of course, passed
well over Robert's head, and as soon as they finished he went back to
his beginnings, giving forth the owl's lament.

He heard the leader curse more fiercely than ever before, and he saw
several of the men who had been pulling trigger retreat to the fire. It
was evident to him that the terror of the thing was entering their
souls. The night itself, as if admiring his plan, was lending him the
greatest possible aid. The crimson lightning never ceased to quiver and
the sullen rumble of the distant thunder was increasing. It was easy
enough for men, a natural prey to superstition, and, with the memories
of many crimes, to believe that the island was haunted, that the ghosts
of those they had slain were riding the lightning, and that demons,
taking the forms of animals, were waiting for them in the bushes.

But the swart leader was a man of courage and he still held his ruffians
together. He cursed them fiercely, told them to stand firm, to reload
their pistols and to be ready for any danger. Those who still slumbered
by the fire were kicked until they awoke, and, with something of a
commander's skill, the man drew up his besotted band against the mystic
dangers that threatened so closely.

But Robert produced a new menace. He was like one inspired that night.
The dramatic always appealed to him and his success stimulated him to
new histrionic efforts. He had planted in their minds the terror of
animals, now he would sow the yet greater terror of human beings,
knowing well that man's worst and most dreaded enemy was man.

He uttered a deep groan, a penetrating, terrible groan, the wail of a
soul condemned to wander between the here and the hereafter, a cry from
one who had been murdered, a cry that would doubtless appeal to every
one of the ruffians as the cry of his own particular victim. The effect
was startling. The men uttered a yell of fright, and started in a panic
run for the boats, but the leader threatened them with his leveled
pistol and stopped them, although the frightful groan came a second
time.

"There's nothing in the bush!" Robert heard him say. "There can't be!
The place has no people and we know there are no big wild animals on the
islands in these seas! It's some freak of the wind playing tricks with
us!"

He held his men, though they were still frightened, and to encourage
them and to prove that no enemy, natural or supernatural, was near, he
plunged suddenly into the bushes to see the origin of the terrifying
sounds. His action was wholly unexpected, and chance brought him to the
very point where Robert was. The lad leaped to his feet and the pirate
sprang back aghast, thinking perhaps that he had come face to face with
a ghost. Then with a snarl of malignant anger he leveled the pistol that
he held in his hand. But Robert struck instantly with his clubbed
rifle, and his instinctive impulse was so great that he smote with
tremendous force. The man was caught full and fair on the head, and,
reeling back from the edge of the bushes in which they stood, fell dead
in the open, where all his men could see.

It was enough. The demons, the ghosts that haunted them for their
crimes, were not very vocal, but they struck with fearful power. They
had smitten down the man who tried to keep them on their island, and
they were not going to stay one second longer. There was a combined yell
of horror, the rush of frightened feet, and, reaching their boats, they
rowed with all speed for the schooner, leaving behind them the body of
their dead comrade.

Robert, awed a little by his own success in demonology, watched until
they climbed on board the ship, drawing the boats after them. Then they
hoisted the anchor, made sail, and presently he saw the schooner tacking
in the wind, obviously intending to leave in all haste that terrible
place.

She became a ghost ship, a companion to the _Flying Dutchman_, outlined
in red by the crimson lightning that still played at swift intervals.
Now she turned to the color of blood, and the sea on which she swam was
a sea of blood. Robert watched her until at last, a dim, red haze, she
passed out of sight. Then he turned and looked at the body of the man
whom he had slain.

He shuddered. He had never intended to take the leader's life. Five
minutes before it occurred he would have said such a thing was
impossible. It was merely the powerful impulse of self-protection that
had caused him to strike with such deadly effect, and he was sorry. The
man, beyond all doubt, was a robber and murderer who had forfeited his
life a dozen times, and still he was sorry. It was a tragedy to him to
take the life of any one, no matter how evil the fallen might be.

He went back to the house, brought a shovel, one of the numerous ship's
stores, and buried the body at once high up the beach where the greatest
waves could not reach it and wash it away. He did his task to the rumble
of thunder and the flash of lightning, but, when he finished it, dawn
came and then the storm that had threatened but that had never burst
passed away. He felt, though, that it had not menaced him. To him it was
a good storm, kindly and protecting, and giving sufficient help in his
purpose that had succeeded so well.

It was a beautiful day, the air crisp with as much winter as the island
ever knew, and shot with the beams from a brilliant sun, but Robert was
exhausted. He had passed through a night of intense emotions, various,
every one of them poignant, and he had made physical and mental efforts
of his own that fairly consumed the nerves. He felt as if he could lie
down and sleep for a year, that it would take at least that long to
build up his body and mind as they were yesterday.

He dragged himself through the woods, forced his unwilling muscles to
cook a breakfast which he ate. Then he laid himself down on his bed, his
nerves now quiet, and fell asleep at once. When he awoke it was night
and he lay giving thanks for his great escape until he slept again. When
he awoke a second time day had returned, and, rising, he went about his
usual tasks with a light heart.




CHAPTER X

THE SLOOP OF WAR


Robert ate a light breakfast and went out to look at his domain, now
unsullied. What a fine, trim, clean island it was! And how desirable to
be alone on it, when the Gulf and the Caribbean produced only such
visitors as those who had come two nights before! He looked toward the
little bay, fearing to see the topmast of the schooner showing its tip
over the trees, but the sky there, an unbroken blue, was fouled by no
such presence. He was rid of the pirates--and forever he hoped.

It seemed to him that he had passed through an epic time, one of the
great periods of his life. He wondered now how he had been able to carry
out such a plan, how he had managed to summon up courage and resources
enough, and he felt that the good spirits of earth and air and water
must have been on his side. They had fought for him and they had won for
him the victory.

He shouldered his rifle and strolled through the woods toward the beach.
He had never noticed before what a fine forest it was. The trees were
not as magnificent as those of the northern wilderness, but they had a
beauty very peculiarly their own, and they were his. There was not a
single other claimant to them anywhere in the world.

It was a noble beach too, smooth, sloping, piled with white sand,
gleaming now in the sun, and the little frothy waves that ran up it and
lapped at his feet, like puppies nibbling, were just the friendliest
frothy little waves in the world. But there were the remains of the fire
left by the ruffians to defile it, and broken bottles and broken food
were scattered about. The litter hurt his eyes so much that he gathered
up every fragment, one by one, and threw them into the sea. When the
last vestige of the foul invasion was cleared away he felt that he had
his lonely, clean island back again, and he was happy.

He strolled up and down the glistening beach, feeling a great content.
After a while, he threw off his clothes and swam in the invigorating
sea, keeping well inside the white line of the breakers, in those waters
into which the sharks did not come. When he had sunned himself again on
the sand he went to the creek, took his dinghy from the bushes, where it
had been so well hidden, and rowed out to sea, partly to feel the spring
of the muscles in his arms, and partly to sit off at a distance and look
at his island. Surely if one had to be cast away that was the very
island on which he would choose to be cast! Not too big! Not too hot!
And not too cold! Without savage man or savage beasts, but with plenty
of wild cattle for the taking, and good fish in the lakes, and in the
seas about it. Plenty of stores of all kinds from the slaver's schooner,
even books to read. So far from being unfortunate he was one of the
lucky. A period of retirement from the companionship of his own kind
might be trying on the spirit, but it also meant meditation and mental
growth.

His joy over the departure of the pirates was so great and his
temperament was such that he felt a mighty revulsion of the spirits. He
had a period of extravagant elation. He took off his cap and saluted his
island. He made little speeches of glowing compliment to it, he called
it the pearl of its kind, the choicest gem of the Gulf or the Caribbean,
and, if pirates came again while he was there, he would drive them away
once more with the aid of the good spirits.

He rowed back, hid his boat in the old covert among the bushes at the
edge of the creek, and, rifle on shoulder, started through the forest
toward his peak of observation. On the way, he passed the lake and saw
the herd of wild cattle grazing there, the old bull at its head. The big
fellow, assured now by use and long immunity, cocked his head on one
side and regarded him with a friendly eye. But the bull had a terrible
surprise. He heard the sharp ping of a rifle and a fearful yell. Then he
saw a figure capering in wild gyrations, and thinking that this human
being whom he had learned to trust must have gone mad, he forgot to be
angry, but was very much frightened. Enemies he could fight, but mad
creatures he dreaded, and, bellowing hoarsely to his convoy, as a
signal, he took flight, all of them following him, their tails streaming
straight out behind them, so fast they ran.

Robert leaped and danced as long as one of them was in sight. When the
last streaming tail had disappeared in the bushes he sobered down. He
realized that he had given his friend, the bull, a great shock. In a
way, he had been guilty of a breach of faith, and he resolved to
apologize to him in some fashion the next time they met. Yet he had been
so exultant that it was impossible not to show it, and he was only a lad
in years.

When he reached the crest of his peak he scanned the sea on all sides.
Eagerly as he had looked before for a sail he now looked to see that
there was none. Around and around the circle of the horizon his eyes
traveled, and when he assured himself that no blur broke the bright line
of sea and sky his heart swelled with relief.

In a day or so, his mind became calm and his thoughts grew sober. Then
he settled down to his studies. The battle of life occupied only a small
portion of his time, and he resolved to put the hours to the best use.
He pored much over Shakespeare, the other Elizabethans and the King
James Bible, a copy of which was among the books. It was his intention
to become a lawyer, an orator, and if possible a statesman. He knew that
he had the gift of speech. His mind was full of thoughts and words
always crowded to his lips. It was easy enough for him to speak, but he
must speak right. The thoughts he wished to utter must be clothed in the
right kind of words arranged in the right way, and he resolved that it
should be so.

The way in which men thought and the way in which their thoughts were
put in the Bible and the great Elizabethans fascinated him. That was the
way in which he would try to think, and the way in which he would try to
put his thoughts. So he recited the noble passages over and over again,
he memorized many of them, and he listened carefully to himself as he
spoke them, alike for the sense and the music and power of the words.

It was then perhaps that he formed the great style for which he was so
famous in after years. His vocabulary became remarkable for its range,
flexibility and power, and he developed the art of selection. His rivals
even were used to say of him that he always chose the best word. He
learned there on the island that language was not given to man merely
that he might make a noise, but that he might use it as a great marksman
uses a rifle.

Work and study together filled his days. They kept far from him also any
feeling of despair. He had an abiding faith that a ship of the right
kind would come in time and take him away. He must not worry about it.
It was his task now to fit himself for the return, to prove to his
friends when he saw them once more that all the splendid opportunities
offered to him on the island had not been wasted.

Almost unconsciously, he began to reason more deeply, to look further
into the causes of things, and his mind turned particularly to the
present war. The more he thought about it the greater became his
conviction that England and the colonies were bound to win. Courage and
numbers, resources and tenacity must prevail even over great initial
mistakes. Duquesne and Ticonderoga would be brushed away as mere events
that had no control over destiny.

He remembered Bigot's ball in Quebec that Willet and Tayoga and he had
attended. It came before him again almost as vivid as reality. He
realized now in the light of greater age and experience how it typified
decadence. A power that was rotten at the top, where the brain should
be, could never defeat one that was full of youthful ardor and strength,
sound through and through, awkward and ill directed though that strength
might be. The young French leaders and their soldiers were valiant,
skillful and enduring--they had proved it again and again on sanguinary
fields--but they could not prevail when they had to receive orders from
a corrupt and reckless court at Versailles, and, above all when they had
to look to that court for help that never came.

His reading of the books in the slaver's chest told him that folly and
crime invariably paid the penalty, if not in one way then in another,
and he remembered too some of the ancient Greek plays, over which he had
toiled under the stern guidance of Master Alexander McLean. Their burden
was the certainty of fate. You could never escape, no matter how you
writhed, from what you did, and those old writers must have told the
truth, else men would not be reading and studying them two thousand
years after they were dead. Only truth could last twenty centuries.
Bigot, Cadet, Pean, and the others, stealing from France and Canada and
spending the money in debauchery, could not be victorious, despite all
the valor of Montcalm and St. Luc and De Levis and their comrades.

He remembered, too, the great contrast between Quebec and New York that
had struck him when he arrived at the port at the mouth of the Hudson
with the hunter and the Onondaga. The French capital in Canada was all
of the state; it was its creature. If the state declined, it declined,
there was little strength at the roots, little that sprang from the
soil, but in New York, which men already forecast as the metropolis of
the New World, there was strength everywhere. It might be a sprawling
town. There might be no courtliness to equal the courtliness at the
heart of Quebec, but there was vigor, vigor everywhere. The people were
eager, restless, curious, always they worked and looked ahead.

He saw all these things very clearly. Silence, loneliness and distance
gave a magnificent perspective. Facts that were obscured when he was
