      And manly hearts to guard the fair:--
        Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
        Britons never will be slaves!

James Thomson




THE COMMANDMENT AND THE REWARD


    My son, forget not my law;
    But let thine heart keep my commandments:
      For length of days, and years of life,
      And peace, shall they add to thee.
    Let not mercy and truth forsake thee:
    Bind them about thy neck;
    Write them upon the table of thine heart:
      So shalt thou find favour,
      And good repute in the sight of God and man.

    Trust in the LORD with all thine heart,
    And lean not upon thine own understanding:
    In all thy ways acknowledge him,
      And he shall direct thy paths.
    Be not wise in thine own eyes;
    Fear the LORD, and depart from evil:
    Honour the LORD with thy substance,
    And with the first-fruits of all thine increase:
      So shall thy barns be filled with plenty,
      And thy vats shall overflow with new wine.

Proverbs, III.




THE SPACIOUS FIRMAMENT


    The spacious firmament on high,
    With all the blue ethereal sky,
    And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
    Their great Original proclaim.
    Th' unwearied Sun from day to day
    Does his Creator's power display;
    And publishes to every land
    The work of an Almighty hand.

    Soon as the evening shades prevail,
    The Moon takes up the wondrous tale;
    And nightly to the listening Earth
    Repeats the story of her birth:
    Whilst all the stars that round her burn,
    And all the planets in their turn,
    Confirm the tidings as they roll,
    And spread the truth from pole to pole.

    What though in solemn silence all
    Move round the dark terrestrial ball;
    What though no real voice nor sound
    Amid their radiant orbs be found?
    In Reason's ear they all rejoice,
    And utter forth a glorious voice;
    Forever singing as they shine,
    "The Hand that made us is divine."

Addison




JUNE


    --What is so rare as a day in June?
      Then, if ever, come perfect days;
    Then Heaven tries earth if it be in tune,
      And over it softly her warm ear lays:
    Whether we look, or whether we listen,
    We hear life murmur, or see it glisten;
    Every clod feels a stir of might,
      An instinct within it that reaches and towers,
    And groping blindly above it for light,
      Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers;
    The flush of life may well be seen
      Thrilling back over hills and valleys;
    The cowslip startles in meadows green,
      The buttercup catches the sun in its chalice,
    And there's never a leaf nor a blade too mean
      To be some happy creature's palace;
    The little bird sits at his door in the sun,
      Atilt like a blossom among the leaves,
    And lets his illumined being o'errun
      With the deluge of summer it receives;
    His mate feels the eggs beneath her wings,
    And the heart in her dumb breast flutters and sings;
    He sings to the wide world, and she to her nest,--
    In the nice ear of Nature which song is the best?
    Now is the high-tide of the year,
      And whatever of life hath ebbed away
    Comes flooding back with a ripply cheer,
      Into every bare inlet and creek and bay;
    Now the heart is so full that a drop overfills it,
    We are happy now because God wills it;
    No matter how barren the past may have been,
    'Tis enough for us now that the leaves are green;
    We sit in the warm shade and feel right well
    How the sap creeps up and the blossoms swell;
    We may shut our eyes, but we cannot help knowing
    That skies are clear and grass is growing;
    The breeze comes whispering in our ear,
    That dandelions are blossoming near,
      That maize has sprouted, that streams are flowing,
    That the river is bluer than the sky,
    That the robin is plastering his house hard by;
    And if the breeze kept the good news back,
    For other couriers we should not lack;
      We could guess it all by yon heifer's lowing.--
    And hark! how clear bold chanticleer,
    Warmed with the new wine of the year,
      Tells all in his lusty crowing!

Lowell




THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINBAD THE SAILOR


All the troubles and calamities I had undergone could not cure me of my
inclination to make new voyages. I therefore bought goods, departed with
them for the best seaport, and there, that I might not be obliged to
depend upon a captain, but have a ship at my own command, I remained
till one was built on purpose at my own charge. When the ship was ready,
I went on board with my goods: but not having enough to load her, I
agreed to take with me several merchants of different nations, with
their merchandise.

We sailed with the first fair wind, and after a long navigation the
first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found an egg of
a roc, equal in size to that I saw on a former voyage, fifty paces
round, and shining as a great white dome when seen even from afar. There
was a young roc in it, just ready to be hatched, and its bill had begun
to appear.

The merchants whom I had taken on board, and who landed with me, broke
the egg with hatchets, and having made a hole in it, pulled out the
young roc piecemeal and roasted it. I had earnestly entreated them not
to meddle with the egg, but they would not listen to me.

Scarcely had they finished their repast, when there appeared in the air,
at a considerable distance from us, two great clouds. The captain whom I
had hired to navigate my ship, knowing by experience what they meant,
said they were the male and female roc that belonged to the young one,
and pressed us to re-embark with all speed, to prevent the misfortune
which he saw would otherwise befall us. We hastened on board and set
sail with all possible expedition. In the meantime, the two rocs
approached with a frightful noise, which they redoubled when they saw
the egg broken and their young one gone. They flew back in the direction
they had come, and disappeared for some time, while we made all the sail
we could to endeavour to prevent that which unhappily befell us.

They soon returned, and we observed that each of them carried between
its talons, stones, or rather rocks, of a monstrous size. When they came
directly over my ship they hovered, and one of them let fall a stone,
but by the dexterity of the steersman it missed us, and, falling into
the sea, divided the water so that we could almost see the bottom. The
other roc, to our misfortune, threw his massy burden so exactly into the
middle of the ship as to split it into a thousand pieces. The mariners
and passengers were all crushed to death, or sunk. I myself was of the
number of the latter, but, as I came up again, I fortunately caught hold
of a piece of the wreck, and swimming, sometimes with one hand and
sometimes with the other, but always holding fast my board, the wind and
tide favouring me, I came to an island whose shore was very steep. I
overcame that difficulty, however, and got ashore.

I sat down upon the grass to recover myself from my fatigue, after which
I went into the island to explore it. It seemed to be a delicious
garden. I found trees everywhere, some of them bearing green, and others
ripe fruits; and there were streams of fresh, pure water running in
pleasant meanders. I ate of the fruits, which I found excellent; and
drank of the water, which was very light and good.

When I was a little advanced into the island I saw an old man, who
appeared very weak and infirm. He was sitting on the bank of a stream,
and at first I took him to be one who had been shipwrecked like myself.
I went towards him and saluted him, but he only slightly bowed his
head. I asked him why he sat so still; but instead of answering me, he
made a sign for me to take him upon my back and carry him over the
brook, signifying that it was to gather fruit.

I believed him really to stand in need of my assistance, took him upon
my back, and having carried him over, bade him get down, and for that
end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but instead of doing so
(which I laugh at every time I think of it), the old man who appeared to
me quite decrepit, threw his legs nimbly about my neck. He sat astride
upon my shoulders, and held my throat so tight that I thought he would
have strangled me, the apprehension of which made me swoon and fall
down.

Notwithstanding my fainting, the ill-natured old fellow kept fast about
my neck. When I had recovered my breath, he thrust one of his feet
against my stomach, and struck me so rudely on the side with the other,
that he forced me to rise up against my will. Having arisen, he made me
carry him under the trees, and forced me now and then to stop, to gather
and eat fruit such as we found. He never left me all day, and when I lay
down to rest at night, he laid himself down with me, holding always
fast about my neck. Every morning he pushed me to make me awake, and
afterwards obliged me to get up and walk, and pressed me with his feet.
You may judge then, what trouble I was in to be loaded with such a
burden of which I could not get rid.

One day I found in my way several dry calabashes that had fallen from a
tree. I took a large one, and after cleaning it, pressed into it some
juice of grapes, which abounded in the island. Having filled the
calabash, I put it by in a convenient place; and going thither again
some days after, I tasted it and found the wine so good that it soon
made me forget my sorrow, gave me new vigour, and so exhilarated my
spirits, that I began to sing and dance as I walked along.

The old man, perceiving the effect which this liquor had upon me, and
that I carried him with more ease than before, made me a sign to give
him some of it. I handed him the calabash, and the liquor pleasing his
palate, he drank it all off. There being a considerable quantity of it,
and the fumes getting into his head, he began to sing and dance upon my
shoulders, and to loosen his legs from about me by degrees. Finding
that he did not press me as before, I threw him upon the ground, where
he lay without motion; then I took up a great stone and crushed his
head.

I was extremely glad to be thus freed for ever from this troublesome
fellow. I now walked towards the beach, where I met the crew of a ship
that had cast anchor, to take water. They were surprised to see me, but
more so at the particulars of my adventures. "You fell," said they,
"into the hands of the old man of the sea, and are the first who ever
escaped strangling by his malicious tricks. He never quitted those he
had once made himself master of till he had destroyed them, and he has
made this island notorious by the number of men he has slain."

After having informed me of these things, they carried me with them to
the ship; the captain received me with great kindness when they told him
what had befallen me. He put out again to sea, and after some days'
sail, we arrived at the harbour of a great city, the houses of which
were built with hewn stone.

One of the merchants who had taken me into his friendship invited me to
go along with him and carried me to a place appointed for the
accommodation of foreign merchants. He gave me a large bag, and having
recommended me to some people of the town, who used to gather
cocoa-nuts, desired them to take me with them. "Go," said he, "follow
them, and act as you see them do; but do not part from them, otherwise
you may endanger your life." Having thus spoken, he gave me provisions
for the journey, and I went with them.

We came to a thick forest of cocoa trees, very lofty, with trunks so
smooth that it was not possible to climb to the branches that bore the
fruit. When we entered the forest, we saw a great number of apes of
several sizes, who fled as soon as they perceived us and climbed up to
the tops of the trees with surprising swiftness.

The merchants gathered stones and threw them at the apes in the trees. I
did the same, and the apes, out of revenge, threw cocoa-nuts at us so
fast, and with such gestures, as sufficiently testified their anger and
resentment. We gathered up the cocoa-nuts, and from time to time threw
stones to provoke the apes; so that by this stratagem we filled our bags
with cocoa-nuts, which it had been impossible otherwise to have done. I
thus gradually collected as many cocoa-nuts as produced me a
considerable sum.

We sailed towards the islands, where pepper grows in great plenty. From
thence we went to the isle of Comari, where the best species of wood of
aloes grows. I exchanged my cocoa in those islands for pepper and wood
of aloes, and went with other merchants a-pearl-fishing. I hired divers,
who brought me up some that were very large and pure. I embarked in a
vessel that happily arrived at Bussorah; from thence I returned to
Bagdat, where I made vast sums of my pepper, wood of aloes, and pearls.
I gave the tenth of my gains in alms, as I had done upon my return from
my other voyages, and endeavoured to dissipate my fatigues by amusements
of different kinds.

"The Arabian Nights Entertainments."




    All are needed by each one;
    Nothing is fair or good alone.
    I thought the sparrow's note from heaven,
    Singing at dawn on the alder bough;
    I brought him home, in his nest, at even;
    He sings the song, but it cheers not now,
    For I did not bring home the river and sky;--
    He sang to my ear,--they sang to my eye.

Emerson




OCEAN


      Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean--roll!
      Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain;
      Man marks the earth with ruin,--his control
      Stops with the shore; upon the watery plain
      The wrecks are all thy deed, nor doth remain
      A shadow of man's ravage, save his own,
      When for a moment, like a drop of rain,
      He sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan--
    Without a grave, unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown.

      His steps are not upon thy paths,--thy fields,
      Are not a spoil for him,--thou dost arise
      And shake him from thee; the vile strength he wields
      For earth's destruction, thou dost all despise,
      Spurning him from thy bosom to the skies,
      And send'st him, shivering in thy playful spray,
      And howling to his gods, where haply lies
      His petty hope in some near port or bay,
    And dashest him again to earth; there let him lay.

      The armaments which thunderstrike the walls
      Of rock-built cities, bidding nations quake,
      And monarchs tremble in their capitals;
      The oak leviathans, whose huge ribs make
      Their clay creator the vain title take
      Of lord of thee, and arbiter of war:
      These are thy toys, and, as the snowy flake,
      They melt into thy yeast of waves, which mar
    Alike the Armada's pride or spoils of Trafalgar.

      Thy shores are empires, changed in all save thee--
      Assyria, Greece, Rome, Carthage, what are they?
      Thy waters washed them power while they were free,
      And many a tyrant since; their shores obey
      The stranger, slave, or savage; their decay
      Has dried up realms to deserts: not so, thou;
      Unchangeable save to thy wild waves' play.
      Time writes no wrinkle on thine azure brow;
    Such as creation's dawn beheld, thou rollest now.

      Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty's form
      Glasses itself in tempests; in all time,
      Calm or convulsed--in breeze or gale or storm,
      Icing the pole, or in the torrid clime,
      Dark-heaving, boundless, endless and sublime--
      The image of eternity--the throne
      Of the Invisible; even from out thy slime
      The monsters of the deep are made; each zone
    Obeys thee; thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.

      And I have loved thee, Ocean! and my joy
      Of youthful sports was on thy breast to be
      Borne, like thy bubbles onward: from a boy
      I wantoned with thy breakers; they to me
      Were a delight; and, if the freshening sea
