may, Doctor. Thank you. I didn't think--I don't exactly know how to say
what I want to say."

"Take time, my dear child; and it is no matter how you put the words."

"When I heard that there was no mother here, I did not want to stay
long. That was before I knew you. Now--I came to say it--I do want to
stay, and so does David."

"But you don't really know me at all, Flower."

"Perhaps not really; but still enough to want to stay. May I stay?"

Flower's charming face looked up inquiringly.

"May I stay?" she repeated, earnestly. "I do wish it!--very much
indeed."

Dr. Maybright was silent for a moment.

"I was thinking about this very point when you knocked at the door," he
said, presently. "I was wondering if you two children could stay. I want
to keep you, and yet I own I am rather fearful of the result. You see,
there are so many motherless girls and boys in this house."

"But we are motherless, too; you should be sorry for us; you should wish
to keep us."

"I am very sorry for you. I have grown to a certain extent already to
love you. You interest me much; still, I must be just to you and to my
own children. You are not a common, everyday sort of girl, Flower. I
don't wish to flatter you, and I am not going to say whether you are
nice or the reverse. But there is no harm in my telling you that you are
out of the common. It is probable that you may be extremely difficult to
manage, and it is possible that your disposition may--may clash with
those of some of the members of my own household. I don't say that this
will be the case, mind, only it is possible. In that case, what would
you expect me to do?"

"To keep me," said Flower, boldly, "and, if necessary, send away the
member of the household, for I am a motherless girl, and I have come
from a long way off to be with you."

"I don't quite think I can do that, Flower. There are many good mothers
in England who would train you and love you, and there are many homes
where you might do better than here. My own children are placed here by
God himself, and I cannot turn them out. Still--what is the matter, my
dear child?"

"I think you are unjust; I thought you would be so glad when I said I
wanted to stay."

"So I am glad; and for the present you are here. How long you remain
depends on yourself. I have no intention of sending you away at present.
I earnestly wish to keep you."

Another tap came to the study door.

"If you please, sir," said Alice, "blind Mrs. Jones is in the kitchen,
and wants to know most particular if she can see you."

"How ridiculous!" said Flower, laughing.

"Show Mrs. Jones in here, Alice," said the Doctor.

His own face had grown a shade or two paler.

"Blind people often speak in that way, Flower," he said, with a certain
intonation in his voice which made her regard him earnestly.

The memory of a rumor which had reached her ears with regard to the
Doctor's own sight flashed before her. She stooped suddenly, and with an
impulsive, passionate gesture kissed his hand.

Outside the room David was waiting.

"Well, Flower, well?" he asked, with intense eagerness.

"I spoke to him," said Flower. "We are here on sufferance, that's all.
He is the dearest man in all the world, but he is actually afraid of
me."

"You are rather fierce at times, you know, Flower. Did you tell him
about--about----"

"About what, silly boy?"

"About the passions. You know, Flower, we agreed that he had better
know."

A queer steely light came into Flower's blue eyes.

"I didn't speak of them," she said. "If I said anything of that sort I'd
soon be packed away. I expect he's in an awful fright about that
precious Polly of his."

"But Polly is nice," interposed David.

"Oh, yes, just because she has a rather good-looking face you go over to
her side. I'm not at all sure that I like her. Anyhow, I'm not going to
play second fiddle to her. There now, Dave, go and play. We're here on
sufferance, so be on your good behavior. As to me, you need not be the
least uneasy. I wish to remain at Sleepy Hollow, so, of course, the
passions won't come. Go and play, Dave."

Firefly called across the lawn. David bounded out of the open window,
and Flower went slowly up to her own room.

There came a lovely day toward the end of October; St. Martin's summer
was abroad, and the children, with the Doctor's permission, had arranged
to take a long expedition across one of the southern moors in search of
late blackberries. They took their dinner with them, and George, the
under-gardener, accompanied the little party for protection. Nurse
elected, as usual, to stay at home with baby, for nothing would induce
her to allow this treasured little mortal out of her own keeping; but
the Doctor promised, if possible, to join the children at Troublous
Times Castle at two o'clock for dinner. This old ruin was at the extreme
corner of one of the great commons, and was a very favorite resort for
picnics, as it still contained the remains of a fine old banqueting-hall,
where in stormy or uncertain weather a certain amount of shelter could
be secured.

The children started off early, in capital spirits. A light wind was
blowing; the sky was almost cloudless. The tints of late autumn were
still abroad in great glory, and the young faces looked fresh, careless,
and happy.

Just at the last moment, as they were leaving the house, an idea darted
through Polly's brain.

"Let's have Maggie," she said. "I'll go round by the village and fetch
her. She would enjoy coming with us so much, and it would take off her
terror of the moor. Do you know, Helen, she is such a silly thing that
she has been quite in a state of alarm ever since the day we went to the
hermit's hut. I won't be a moment running to fetch Mag; do let's have
her. Firefly, you can come with me."

Maggie, who now resided with her mother, not having yet found another
situation--for Mrs. Power had absolutely declined to have her back in
the kitchen--was a favorite with all the children. They were pleased
with Polly's proposal, and a chorus of "Yes, by all means, let's have
Maggie!" rose in the air.

Flower was standing a little apart; she wore a dark green close-fitting
cloth dress; on her graceful golden head was a small green velvet cap.
She was picking a late rose to pieces, and waiting for the others with a
look of languid indifference on her face. Now she roused herself, and
asked in a slightly weary voice:

"Who is Maggie?"

"Maggie?" responded Helen, "she was our kitchen-maid; we are all very
fond of her--Polly especially."

"Fond of a kitchen-maid? I don't suppose you mean that, Helen," said
Flower. "A kitchen-maid's only a servant."

"I certainly mean it," said Helen, with a little warmth. "I am more or
less fond of all our servants, and Maggie used to be a special
favorite."

"How extraordinary!" said Flower. "The English nation have very queer
and plebeian ways about them; it's very plebeian to take the least
notice of servants, except to order them to obey you."

"On the contrary," retorted Polly; "it's the sign of a true lady or
gentleman to be perfectly courteous to their dependents, and if they
deserve love, to give it to them. I'm fond of Maggie; she's a good
little girl, and she shall come to our picnic. Come along, Firefly."

"I certainly will have nothing to say to Polly while she associates with
a servant," said Flower, slowly, and with great apparent calmness. "I
don't suppose we need all wait for her here. She can follow with the
servant when she gets her. I suppose Polly's whims are not to upset the
whole party."

"Polly will very likely catch us up at the cross-roads," said Helen, in
a pleasant voice. "Come, Flower, you won't really be troubled with poor
little Maggie; she will spend her day probably with George, and will
help him to wash up our dinner-things after we have eaten. Come, don't
be vexed, Flower."

"_I_ vexed!" said Flower. "You are quite mistaken. I don't intend to
have anything to say to Polly while she chooses a kitchen-maid for her
friend, but I dare say the rest of you can entertain me. Now, Mabel and
Dolly, shall I tell you what we did that dark night when David and I
stole out through the pantry window?"

"Oh, yes, yes!" exclaimed the twins. The others all clustered round
eagerly.

Flower had a very distinct voice, and when she roused herself she could
really be eloquent. A daring little adventure which she and her brother
had experienced lost nothing in the telling, and when Polly, Firefly,
and Maggie, joined the group, they found themselves taken very little
notice of, for all the other children, even Helen, were hanging on
Flower's words.

"Oh, I say, that isn't fair!" exclaimed Polly, whose spirits were
excellent. "You're telling a story, Flower, and Firefly and I have
missed it. Maggie loves stories, too; don't you, Mag? Do begin again,
please, Flower, please do!"

Flower did not even pretend to hear Polly's words--she walked straight
on, gesticulating a little now and then, now and then raising her hand
in a slightly dramatic manner. Her clear voice floated back to Polly as
she walked forward, the center of an eager, worshipping, entranced
audience.

Polly's own temper was rather hasty, she felt her face flushing, angry
words were bubbling to her lips, and she would have flown after the
little party who were so utterly ignoring her, if David had not suddenly
slipped back and put his hand on her arm.

"I know the story," he said; "so I needn't stay to listen. She's adding
to it awfully. We didn't use any ropes, the window is only three feet
from the ground, and the awful howling and barking of the mastiff was
made by the shabbiest little cur. Flower is lovely, but she does dress
up her stories. I love Flower, but I'll walk with you now, if you'll let
me, Polly."

"You're very kind, David," said Polly. "But I don't know that I want any
one to walk with me, except Maggie. I think Flower was very rude just
now. Oh, you can stay if you like, David--I don't mind, one way or
another. Isn't this south moor lovely, Maggie? Aren't you glad I asked
you to come with us?"

"Well, yes, Miss, I be. It was good-natured of you, Miss Polly, only if
there's stories a-going, I'd like to be in at them. I does love
narrations of outlandish places, Miss. Oh, my word, and is that the
little foreign gentleman? It is a disappointment as I can't 'ear what
the young lady's a-telling of."

"Well, Maggie, you needn't be discontented. _I_ am not hearing this
wonderful story, either. David, what are you nudging me for?"

"Send her to walk with George," whispered David. "I want to say
something to you so badly, Polly."

Polly frowned. She did not feel particularly inclined to oblige any one
just now, but David had a pleading way of his own; he squeezed her arm
affectionately, and looked into her face with a world of beseeching in
his big black eyes. After all it was no very difficult matter to get at
Polly's warm heart. She looked over her shoulder.

"George, will you give Maggie a seat beside you," she said. "No, none of
the rest of us want to drive. Come on, David. Now, David, what is it?"

"It's about Flower," said David. "She--she--you don't none of you know
Flower yet."

"Oh, I am not sure of that," replied Polly, speaking on purpose in a
very careless tone. "I suppose she's much like other girls. She's rather
pretty, of course, and has nice ways with her. I made stories about you
both, but you're not a bit like anything I thought of. In some ways
you're nicer, in some not so nice. Why, what is the matter, David? What
are you staring at me so hard for?"

"Because you're all wrong," responded David. "You don't know Flower.
She's not like other girls; not a bit. There were girls at Ballarat, and
she wasn't like them. But no one wondered at that, for they were rough,
and not like real ladies. And there were girls on board the big ship we
came over in, and they weren't rough, but Flower wasn't a bit like them
either. And she's not like any of you, Polly, although I'm sure you are
nice, and Helen is sweet, and Fly is a little brick. Flower is not like
any other girl I have ever seen."

"She must be an oddity, then," said Polly. "I hate oddities. Do let's
walk a little faster, David."

"You are wrong again," persisted David, quickening his steps. "An oddity
is some one to laugh at, but no one has ever dreamed of laughing at
Flower. She is just herself, like no one else in the world. No, you
don't any of you know her yet. I suppose you are every one of you
thinking that she's the very nicest and cleverest and perfectest girl
you ever met?"

"I'm sure we are not," said Polly. "I think, for my part, there has been
a great deal too much fuss made about her. I'm getting tired of her
airs, and I think she was very rude just now."

"Oh, don't, Polly, you frighten me. I want to tell you something so
badly. Will you treat it as a great, enormous secret? will you never
reveal it, Polly?"

"What a queer boy you are," said Polly. "No, I won't tell. What's the
mystery?"

"It's this. Flower is sometimes--sometimes--oh, it's dreadful to have
to tell!--Flower is sometimes not nice."

Polly's eyes danced.

"You're a darling, David!" she said. "Of course, that sister of yours is
not perfect. I'd hate her if she was."

"But it isn't that," said David. "It's so difficult to tell. When Flower
isn't nice, it's not a small thing, it's--oh, she's awful! Polly, I
don't want any of you ever to see Flower in a passion; you'd be
frightened, oh, you would indeed. We were all dreadfully unhappy at
Ballarat when Flower was in a passion, and lately we tried not to get
her into one. That's what I want you to do, Polly; I want you to try; I
want you to see that she is not vexed."

"I like that," said Polly. "Am I to be on my 'P's and Q's' for this Miss
Flower of yours? Now, David, what do you mean by a great passion? I'm
rather hot myself. Come, you saw me very cross about the lemonade
yesterday; is Flower worse than that? What fun it must be to see her!"

"Don't!" said David, turning pale. "You wouldn't speak in that way,
Polly, if you knew. What you did yesterday like Flower? Why, I didn't
notice you at all. Flower's passions are--are---- But I can't speak
of them, Polly."

"Then why did you tell me?" said Polly. "I can't help her getting into
rages, if she's so silly."

"Oh, yes, you can, and that's why I spoke to you. She's a little vexed
now, about your having brought the--the kitchen-maid here. I know well
she's vexed, because she's extra polite with every one else. That's a
way she has at first. I don't suppose she'll speak to you, Polly; but
oh, Polly, I will love you so much, I'll do anything in all the world
