skulking--"

I left him stamping and streaming with perspiration, but labouring
loyally on in a temperature where labour was little short of heroism.

I went back to my chair, and began to think over my prospects. It is a
disadvantage of idleness that one wearies oneself with thinking, though
one cannot act. I wondered how the prosperous sugar-planter was
receiving Dennis, and whether he would do more for him than one's rich
relations are apt to do. The stars began to pale in the dawn without my
being any the wiser for my speculations, and then my friends came home.
The young officer was full of hopes that I had been comfortable, and
Dennis of regrets that I had not gone with them. His hair was tossed,
his cheeks were crimson, and he had lost the flower from his buttonhole.

"How did you get on with your cousin?" I asked. The reply confounded me.

"Oh, charmingly! Dances like a fairy. I say, Willie, as a mere matter of
natural history, d'ye believe any other human being ever had such feet?"

A vague wonder crept into my brain whether the cousin could possibly
have become half a nigger, from the climate, which really felt capable
of anything, and have developed feet like our friend the pilot; but I
was diverted from this speculation by seeing that Dennis was clapping
his pockets and hunting for something.

"What have you lost now?" asked his friend.

"My pocket-handkerchief. Ah, there it is!" and he drew it from within
his waistcoat, and with it came his gloves, and a third one, and they
fell on the floor. As he picked the odd one up the lieutenant laughed.

"What size does she wear, Dennis--sixes?"

"Five and three-quarters--long fingers; so she tells me." He sighed, and
then wandered to the window, whistling "Robin Adair."

"Now, Dennis, you promised me to go straight to bed. Turn in we must,
for I have to be on an early parade."

"All right, Willie. Good-night, and a thousand thanks to you. It's been
a great evening--I never was so happy in my life. Come along, Jack."

And off he went, tossing his head and singing to the air he had been
whistling,

                    "Who in the song so sweet?
                        Eileen aroon!
                     Who in the dance so fleet?
                        Eileen aroon!
                     Dear were her charms to me,
                     Dearer her laughter free,
                     Dearest her constancy,
                        Eileen aroon!"

"She'll be married to a sugar-planter before you've cut your wisdom
teeth!" bawled the engineer from his bedroom.

"_Will she_?" retorted Dennis, and half-laughing, half-sentimentally, he
sang on louder than before,

                    "Were she no longer true,
                        Eileen aroon!
                     What should her lover do?
                        Eileen aroon!
                     Fly with his broken chain,
                     Far o'er the bounding main,
                     Never to love again,
                        Eileen aroon!"

Willie made no reply. He evidently meant to secure what sleep there was
to be had, and as Dennis did not seem in the mood for discussing our
prospects as seamen, I turned into my hammock and pulled it well round
my ears to keep out bats, night-moths, and the like.

It was thus that I failed at first to hear when Dennis began to talk to
somebody out of the window. But when I lifted my head I could hear what
he said, and from the context I gathered that the other speaker was no
less than Alister, who, having taken his sleep early in the night, was
now refreshing himself by a stroll at dawn. That they were squabbling
with unusual vehemence was too patent, and I was at once inclined to lay
the blame on Dennis, who ought, I felt, to have been brimming over with
generous sympathy, considering how comfortable we had been, and poor
Alister had not. But I soon discovered that the matter was no personal
one, being neither more nor less than an indignant discussion as to
whether the air which Dennis was singing was "Scotch" or "Irish." As I
only caught the Irish side of the argument, I am not qualified to
pronounce any opinion.

"Of course facts are facts, no one denies that. And it's likely enough
your grandmother sang 'Robin Adair' to it, and your great-grandmother
too, rest her soul! But it would take an uncommonly _great-grandmother_
of mine to have sung it when it was new, for it's one of the oldest of
old Irish airs."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stole it of course! as they did plenty more in those times--cattle and
what not. I'd forgive them the theft, if they hadn't spoilt the tune
with a nasty jerk or two that murders the tender grace of it intirely."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Alister, me boy! You're not going? Ye're not cross, are ye? Faith, I'd
give my life for ye, but I can't give ye Eileen aroon. Come in and have
some swizzle! We're in the height of luxury here, and hospitality as
well, and you'll be as welcome as daylight."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Up so late? Up so early you mean! Ah, don't put on that air of
incorruptible morality. Wait now till I get in on the one side of my
hammock and out at the other, and I'll look as early-rising-proud as
yourself. Alister! Alister dear!--"

Through all this the engineer made no sign, and it struck me how wise he
was, so I pulled the hammock round me again and fell asleep; not for
long, I fancy, for those intolerable sandflies woke me once more before
Dennis had turned in.

I looked out and saw him still at the window, his eyes on a waning
planet, his cheek resting on the little glove laid in his right hand,
and singing more sweetly than any nightingale:

                    "Youth must with time decay,
                        Eileen aroon!
                     Beauty must fade away,
                        Eileen aroon!
                     Castles are sacked in war,
                     Chieftains are scattered far,
                     Truth is a fixed star,
                        Eileen aroon!"




CHAPTER XV.

                    "Which is why I remark,
                       And my language is plain,
                     That for ways that are dark,
                       And for tricks that are vain,
                     The heathen Chinee is peculiar."
                                           BRET HARTE.


Alister did more than pick pink-pale oleanders by the dyke side that
morning. His business with the captain was soon despatched, and in the
course of it he "fore-gathered," as he called it, with the man of
business who had spoken to us on the night of the great fire, and whose
own warehouse was in ruins. He proved to be a Scotchman by birth, and a
man of energy (not a common quality in the tropics), and he was already
busy about retrieving his fortune. The hasty repair of part of the
building, in which to secure some salvage, and other similar matters,
was his first object; and he complained bitterly of the difficulty of
inducing any of the coloured gentlemen to do a "fair day's work for a
fair day's wage," except when immediate need pressed them. They would
then work, he said, but they would not go on working till the job was
done, only till they had earned enough wages to take another idle
"spell" upon.

Several Chinamen were already busy among the ruins of the burnt houses,
as we saw, and it was Chinese labour that Alister's friend had resolved
to employ; but he seemed to think that, though industrious, those
smiling, smooth-faced individuals, who looked as if they had come to
life off one of my mother's old tea-cups, were not to be trusted alone
among the salvage.

"Every thief among 'em 's as good as a conjurer," he declared, "and can
conceal just anything up his sleeve."

Thus it came about that when Dennis and I went down to the stelling to
meet Alister, as we had agreed, and delivered the messages of
hospitality with which the young engineer and Dennis's cousin had
charged us, we found that he had made an engagement to help the
burnt-out store-owner for such time as we should be out of seamen's
work, on terms which were to include his board and lodging.

"Alister, dear! I admire ye with all me heart," said Dennis impetuously.
"I never saw such an industrious, persevering fellow. If all Scotch
lads take the tide of life at the flood as you do, small blame to ye for
making your fortunes; and well ye deserve it."

"There's not a doubt about it," replied Alister complacently. "And I'll
tell ye more. Find me arty grand work, if it's at the other end of the
airth, whether it's digging a dyke in the desert, or bigging a mountain
up to the moon, and I'll find ye an Aberdeenshire man not far from the
head of it."

Dennis's face seemed to twitch with a dozen quick thoughts and smiles,
as Alister turned away to meet his new employer, who had just appeared
on the stelling.

"They have wonderful qualities," he said gently. "I envy them, I can
tell ye, Jack. What's an idle lout like me good for? Will I ever be able
to make a home for myself, or for any one else? _They do!_" He spoke
earnestly, and then suddenly relapsing into an imitation of Alister's
accent, which was his latest joke, he added with twinkling eyes, "and
they save a _wee_ in wages to their _ain_ trumpeters--_whiles!_"

And having drawled out the word "whiles" to the uttermost possible
length, he suddenly began to snap his fingers and dance an Irish jig
upon the wooden planks of the stelling. This performance completely
demoralized the Chinamen who caught sight of it. "Eyah!" they cried,
they stopped work, they chuckled, they yelled; they doubled themselves
up, some of their pig-tails came down, and one and all they laughed so
frankly and immoderately, it was hard to believe that anything like
deception could be amongst the faults of these almond-eyed children of
the Flowery-Land.

Mr. Macdonald (the store-owner) seemed, however, to think that they
required pretty close watching, and I do not think he would have been
willing to let Alister go back with us to luncheon at Willie's, but for
his appreciation of social rank. It was obvious that it did Alister no
harm that he had a friend in an officer of her Majesty's Service, and a
comrade in the nephew of a sugar-planter of the uppermost level of
Demerara society.

We three held a fresh council as we sat with the young engineer. He and
Alister got on admirably, and he threw himself into our affairs with
wonderful kindness. One point he disposed of at once, and that was _my_
fate! There could be no question, he said, that my duty was to get back
to Halifax, "report myself" to Uncle Henry's agent there, and then go
home.

"You're ruthlessly dismembering the Shamrock, Willie," Dennis objected.

"I don't see that. _You're_ not to stay here, for instance."

"You're mighty positive," said Dennis, blushing.

"Of course I am. I wouldn't encourage you to waste sentiment anyhow; and
the West Indies is no latitude for boys, to go on with. And you know as
well as I do, that it's rather more than time the squire started you in
life. You must go home, Dennis!"

"If I do, I go with Jack. And what about Alister?"

The young officer tugged his moustaches right and left. Then he said,
"If I were exactly in your place, Auchterlay--"

"Well, sir?" said Alister, for he had hesitated.

--"I should--enlist in the Royal Engineers."

"Nothing like gunpowder," whispered Dennis to me. I kicked him in
return.

The pros and cons of the matter were not lengthy. If Alister enlisted in
any regiment, the two advantages of good behaviour and good education
would tell towards his advancement more rapidly and more certainly than
perhaps in any other line of life. If he enlisted into a scientific
corps, the chance of being almost immediately employed as a clerk was
good, very much of the work would be interesting to an educated and
practical man; the "marching, pipe-claying and starching," of which
Dennis sang, was a secondary part of "R.E." duties at any time, and
there were special opportunities of employment in foreign countries for
superior men. Alister was not at all likely to remain long a private,
and it was quite "on the cards" that he might get a commission while he
was still young. So much for "peace time." But if--in the event of--and
supposing (here the young engineer made a rapid diversion into the
politics of the day) there was a chance of "active service"--the Royal
Engineers not only offered far more than drill and barrack duties in
time of peace, but no branch of the army gave nobler opportunities for
distinguished service in time of war. At this point he spoke with such
obvious relish, that I saw Dennis was ready to take the Queen's Shilling
on the spot. Alister's eyes gave a flash or two, but on the whole he
"kept a calm sough," and put the other side of the question.

He said a good deal, but the matter really lay in small compass. The
profession of arms is not highly paid. It was true that the pay was poor
enough as a seaman, and the life far harder, but then he was only bound
for each voyage. At other times he was his own master, and having
"gained an insight into" trading from his late captain, he saw
indefinite possibilities before him. Alister seemed to have great faith
in openings, opportunities, chances, &c., and he said frankly that he
looked upon his acquired seamanship simply as a means of paying his
passage to any part of the habitable globe where fortunes could be made.

"Then why not stick together?" cried Dennis. "Make your way up to
Halifax with us, Alister dear. Maybe you'll find your cousin at home
this time, and if not, at the worst, there's the captain of our old ship
promised ye employment. Who knows but we'll all go home in her together?
Ah, let's keep the Shamrock whole if we can."

"But you see, Dennis," said the lieutenant, "Alister would regard a
voyage to England as a step backward, as far as his objects are
concerned."

Dennis always maintained that you could never contrive to agree with
Alister so closely that he would not find room to differ from you.

So he nudged me again (and I kicked him once more), when Alister began
to explain that he wouldn't just say _that_, for that during the two or
three days when he was idle at Liverpool he had been into a free library
to look at the papers, and had had a few words of converse with a decent
kind of an old body, who was a care-taker in a museum where they bought
birds and beasts and the like from seafaring men that got them in
foreign parts. So that it had occurred to him that if he could pick up a
few natural curiosities in the tropics, he might do worse, supposing his
cousin be still absent from Halifax, than keep himself from idleness, by
taking service in our old ship, with the chance of doing a little
trading at the Liverpool Museum.

"I wish I hadn't broken that gorgeous lump of coral Alfonso gave me,"
said Dennis. "But it's as brittle as egg-shell, though I rather fancy
the half of it would astonish most museums. You're a wonderful boy,
Alister! Ah, we'll all live to see the day when you're a millionaire,
laying the foundation-stone of some of these big things the Aberdeen men
build, and speechifying away to the rising generation of how ye began
life with nothing but a stuffed Demerary parrot in your pocket. Willie,
can't ye lend me some kind of a gun, that I may get him a few of these
highly-painted fowl of the air? If I had but old Barney at my elbow
now--GOD rest his soul!--we'd give a good account of ourselves among the
cockatoos. Many's the lot of sea-birds we've brought home in the hooker
