every foot of the ground. Lucchesi now saw an opportunity of
retrieving, with his great cavalry force, the terrible consequences
of his own blunder, and led them impetuously down upon the flank of
the Prussians. But Frederick had prepared for such a stroke; and
had placed Draisen, with the left wing of the cavalry, in a hollow
sheltered from the fire of the Austrian batteries, and bade him do
nothing, attempt nothing, but cover the right flank of the infantry
from the Austrian horse. He accordingly let Lucchesi charge down
with his cavalry, and then rushed out on his rear, and fell
suddenly and furiously upon him.

Astounded at this sudden and unexpected attack, and with their
ranks swept by a storm of Prussian bullets, the Austrian cavalry
broke and fled in all directions, Lucchesi having paid for his
fault by dying, fighting to the last. His duty thus performed,
Draisen was free to act, and fell upon the flank and rear of the
Austrian infantry; and in a few minutes the battle was over, and
the Austrians in full retreat.

They made, however, another attempt to stand at Saara; but it was
hopeless, and they were soon pushed backwards again and, hotly
pressed, poured over the four bridges across the Schweidnitz river,
and for the most part continued their flight to Breslau. Until the
Austrians had crossed the river the Prussian cavalry were on their
rear, sabring and taking prisoners, while the infantry were halted
at Saara, the sun having now set.

Exhausted as they were by their work, which had begun at midnight
and continued until now without pause or break, not yet was their
task completely done. The king, riding up the line, asked if any
battalion would volunteer to follow him to Lissa, a village on the
river bank. Three battalions stepped out. The landlord of the
little inn, carrying a lantern, walked by the king's side.

As they approached the village, ten or twelve musket shots flashed
out in the fields to the right. They were aimed at the lantern, but
no one was hurt. There were other shots from Lissa, and it was
evident that the village was still not wholly evacuated.

The infantry rushed forward, scattered through the fields, and
drove out the lurking Croats. The king rode quietly on into the
village, and entered the principal house. To his astonishment, he
found it full of Austrian officers, who could easily have carried
him off, his infantry being still beyond the village. They had but
a small force remaining there and, believing that the Prussians had
halted for the night at Saara, they were as much astonished as
Frederick at his entrance. The king had the presence of mind to
hide his surprise.

"Good evening, gentlemen!" he said. "Is there still room left for
me, do you think?"

The Austrian officers, supposing, of course, that he had a large
force outside, bowed deeply, escorted him to the best room in the
house, and then slipped out at the back, collected what troops they
could as they went, and hurried across the bridge. The Prussians
were not long in entering, and very speedily cleared out the rest
of the Austrians. They then crossed the bridge, and with a few guns
followed in pursuit.

The army at Saara, on hearing the firing, betook itself again to
arms and marched to the king's assistance, the twenty-five thousand
men and their bands again joining in the triumphant hymn, "Nun
danket alle Gott," as they tramped through the darkness. When they
arrived at Lissa they found that all was safe, and bivouacked in
the fields.

Never was there a greater or more surprising victory, never one in
which the military genius of the commander was more strikingly
shown. The Austrians were in good heart. They were excellent
soldiers and brave, well provided with artillery, and strongly
placed; and yet they were signally defeated by a force little over
one-third their number. Had there been two more hours of daylight,
the Austrians would have been not only routed but altogether
crushed. Their loss was ten thousand left on the field, of whom
three thousand were killed. Twelve thousand were taken prisoners,
and one hundred and sixteen cannon captured.

To this loss must be added that of seventeen thousand prisoners
taken when Breslau surrendered, twelve days later, together with a
vast store of cannon and ammunition, including everything taken so
shortly before from Bevern. Liegnitz surrendered, and the whole of
Silesia, with the exception only of Schweidnitz, was again wrested
from the Austrians. Thus in killed, wounded, and prisoners the loss
of the Austrians amounted to as much as the total force of the
Prussians.

The latter lost in killed eleven hundred and forty one, and in
wounded about five thousand. Prince Maurice, upon whose division
the brunt of the battle had fallen, was promoted to the rank of
field marshal.

Fergus Drummond had been with the king throughout that terrible
day. Until the battle began his duties had been light, being
confined to the carrying of orders to Prince Maurice; after which
he took his place among the staff and, dismounting, chatted with
his acquaintances while Karl held his horse.

When, however, the fir tree wood was carried, and the king rode
forward and took his place there during the attack upon the
Austrian position at Sagschuetz, matters became more lively. The
balls from the Austrian batteries sung overhead, and sent branches
flying and trees crashing down. Sagschuetz won, the king followed
the advancing line, and the air was alive with bullets and case
shot.


[Illustration: The roar of battle was so tremendous that his
horse was well-nigh unmanageable]


After that Fergus knew little more of the battle, being incessantly
employed in carrying orders through the thick of it to generals
commanding brigades, and even to battalions. The roar of battle was
so tremendous that his horse, maddened with the din and the sharp
whiz of the bullets, at times was well-nigh unmanageable, and
occupied his attention almost to the exclusion of other thoughts;
especially after it had been struck by a bullet in the hind
quarters, and had come to understand that those strange and
maddening noises meant danger.

Not until after all was over was Fergus aware of the escapes he had
had. A bullet had cut away an ornament from his headdress, one of
his reins had been severed at a distance of an inch or two from his
hand, a bullet had pierced the tail of his coatee and buried itself
in the cantle of his saddle, and the iron guard of his claymore had
been pierced. However, on his return to the king after carrying a
despatch, he was able to curb his own excitement and that of his
horse, and to make the formal military salute as he reported, in a
calm and quiet voice, that he had carried out the orders with which
he had been charged.

It was with great gratification that he heard the king say that
evening, as he and his staff supped together at the inn at Lissa:

"You have done exceedingly well today, Captain Drummond. I am very
pleased with you. You were always at my elbow when I wanted you,
and I observed that you were never flurried or excited; though
indeed, there would have been good excuse for a young soldier being
so, in such a hurly burly. You are over young for further
promotion, for a year or two; but I must find some other way of
testifying my satisfaction at your conduct."

And, indeed, when the list of promotions for bravery in the field
was published, a few days later, Fergus's name appeared among those
who received the decoration of the Prussian military order, an
honour fully as much valued as promotion.

For a time he lost the service of Karl, who had been seriously
although not dangerously wounded, just before the Austrians were
driven out of Leuthen.

The news of the battle filled the Confederates with stupefaction
and dismay. Prince Karl was at once recalled, and was relieved from
military employment, Daun being appointed to the supreme command.
The Prince withdrew to his government of the Netherlands, and there
passed the remainder of his days in peace and quiet. His army was
hunted by Ziethen's cavalry to Koeniggraetz, losing two thousand
prisoners and a large amount of baggage; and thirty-seven thousand
men only, of the eighty thousand that stood in battle array at
Leuthen, reached the sheltering walls of the fortress, and those in
so dilapidated and worn out a condition that, by the end of a week
after arriving there, no less than twenty-two thousand were in
hospital.

Thus, after eight months of constant and weary anxiety, Frederick,
by the two heavy blows he had dealt successfully at the
Confederates, stood in a far better position than he had occupied
at the opening of the first campaign; when, as his enemies fondly
believed, Prussia would be captured and divided without the
smallest difficulty.

Frederick wintered at Breslau, whither came many visitors from
Prussia, and there was a constant round of gaieties and festivity.
Frederick himself desired nothing so much as peace. Once or twice
there had been some faint hope that this might be brought about by
his favourite sister, Wilhelmina, who had been ceaseless in her
efforts to effect it; but the two empresses and the Pompadour were
alike bent on avenging themselves on the king, and the reverses
that they had suffered but increased their determination to
overwhelm him.

Great as Frederick's success had been, it did not blind him to the
fact that his position was almost hopeless. When the war began, he
had an army of a hundred and fifty thousand of the finest soldiers
in the world. The two campaigns had made frightful gaps in their
ranks. At Prague he had fought with eighty thousand men, at Leuthen
he had but thirty thousand. His little kingdom could scarcely
supply men to fill the places of those who had fallen, while his
enemies had teeming populations from which to gather ample
materials for fresh armies. It seemed, even to his hopeful spirit,
that all this could have but one ending; and that each success,
however great, weakened him more than his adversaries.

The winter's rest was, however, most welcome. For the moment there
was nothing to plan, nothing to do, save to order that the drilling
of the fresh levies should go on incessantly; in order that some,
at least, of the terrible gaps in the army might be filled up
before the campaign commenced in the spring.

1758 began badly, for early in January the Russians were on the
move. The empress had dismissed, and ordered to be tried by court
martial, the general who had done so little the previous year; had
appointed Field Marshal Fermor to command in his place, and ordered
him to advance instantly and to annex East Prussia in her name.

On the 16th of January he crossed the frontier, and six days later
entered Koenigsberg and issued a proclamation to the effect that
his august sovereign had now become mistress of East Prussia, and
that all men of official or social position must at once take the
oath of allegiance to her.

East Prussia had been devastated the year before by marauders, and
its hatred of Russia was intense; but the people were powerless to
resist. Some fled, leaving all behind them; but the majority were
forced to take the required oath, and for a time East Prussia
became a Russian province. Nevertheless its young men constantly
slipped away, when opportunity offered, to join the Prussian army;
and moneys were frequently collected by the impoverished people to
despatch to Frederick, to aid him in his necessities.

A far greater assistance was the English subsidy of 670,000 pounds,
which was paid punctually for four years, and was of supreme
service to him. It was spent thriftily, and of all the enormous
sums expended by this country in subsidizing foreign powers, none
was ever laid out to a tenth of the advantage of the 2,680,000
pounds given to Frederick.

In the north the campaign also opened early. Ferdinand of Brunswick
bestirred himself, defeated the French signally at Krefeld, and
drove them headlong across the Rhine. Frederick, too, took the
field early, and on the 15th of March moved from Breslau upon
Schweidnitz. The siege began on the 1st of April, and on the 16th
the place surrendered. Four thousand nine hundred prisoners of war
were taken, with fifty-one guns and 7000 pounds in money.

Three days later Frederick, with forty thousand men, was off;
deceived Daun as to his intentions, entered Moravia, and besieged
Olmuetz. Keith was with him again, and Fergus had returned to his
staff. The march was conducted with the marvellous precision and
accuracy that characterized all Frederick's movements, but Olmuetz
was a strong place and stoutly defended.

The Prussian engineers, who did not shine at siege work, opened
their trenches eight hundred yards too far away. The magazines were
too far off, and Daun, who as usual carefully abstained from giving
battle, so cut up the convoys that, after five weeks of vain
endeavours, the king was obliged to raise the siege; partly owing
to the loss of the convoy that would have enabled him to take the
town, which was now at its last extremity; and partly that he knew
that the Russians were marching against Brandenburg.

He made a masterly retreat, struck a heavy blow at Daun by
capturing and destroying his principal magazine, and then took up a
very strong position near Koeniggraetz. Here he could have
maintained himself against all Daun's assaults, for his position
was one that Daun had himself held and strongly fortified; but the
news from the north was of so terrible a nature that he was forced
to hurry thither.

The Cossacks, as the Russian army advanced, were committing most
horrible atrocities; burning towns and villages, tossing men and
women into the fire, plundering and murdering everywhere; and the
very small Prussian force that was watching them was powerless to
check the swarming marauders.

Frederick therefore, evading Daun's attempts to arrest his march,
crossed the mountains into Silesia again. At Landshut he gave his
army two days' rest; wrote and sent a paper to his brother Prince
Henry, who was commander of the army defending Saxony from
invasion, telling him that he was on the point of marching against
the Russians and might well be killed; and giving him orders as to
the course to be pursued, in such an event.

He left Keith, in command of forty thousand men, to hold Daun in
check should the latter advance against Silesia; and he again took
Fergus with him, finding the young officer's talk a pleasant means
of taking his mind off the troubles that beset him.

In nine days the army, which was but fifteen thousand strong,
marched from Landshut to Frankfort-on-Oder. Here the king learned
that though Kuestrin, which the Russians were besieging, still held
out, the town had been barbarously destroyed by the enemy.

In fierce anger the army pressed forward. The Russian army itself,
officers and men, were indignant in the extreme at the brutalities
committed by the Cossacks, but were powerless to restrain them; for
indeed these ruffians did not hesitate to attack and kill any
officer who ventured to interfere between them and their victims.

The next morning, early, Frederick reached the camp of his general
Dohna; who had been watching, although unable to interfere with the
Russians' proceedings. The king had a profound contempt for the
Russians, in spite of the warning of Keith, who had served with
them, that they were far better soldiers than they appeared to be;
and he anticipated a very easy victory over them.

Early on the 22nd of August the army from Frankfort arrived.
Dohna's strength was numerically about the same as the king's, and
with his thirty thousand men Frederick had no doubt that he would
make but short work of the eighty thousand Russians, of whom some
twenty-seven thousand were the Cossack rabble, who were not worth
being considered, in a pitched battle. Deceiving the Russians as to
his intentions by opening a heavy cannonade on one of their
redoubts, as if intending to ford the river there, he crossed that
evening twelve miles lower down and, after some manoeuvring, faced
the Russians, who had at once broken up the siege on hearing of his
passage.

Fermor sent away his baggage train to a small village called
Kleinkalmin, and planted himself on a moor, where his front was
covered by quagmires and the Zaborn stream. Hearing, late at night
on the evening of the 24th, that Frederick was likely to be upon
them the next morning, the Russian general drew out into the open
ground north of Zorndorf, which stands on a bare rise surrounded by
woods and quagmires, and formed his army into a great square, two
miles long by one broad, with his baggage in the middle--a
formation which had been found excellent by the Russians in their
Turkish wars, but which was by no means well adapted to meet
Frederick's methods of impetuous attack. Being ignorant as to the
side upon which Frederick was likely to attack, and having decided
to stand on the defensive, he adopted the methods most familiar to
him.

Frederick had cut all the bridges across the rivers Warta and Oder,
and believed that he should, after defeating the Russians, drive
them into the angle formed by the junction of these two streams,
and cause them to surrender at discretion. Unfortunately, he had
not heard that the great Russian train had been sent to
Kleinkalmin. Had he done so he could have seized it, and so have
possessed himself of the Russian stores and all their munitions of
war, and have forced them to surrender without a blow; for the
Cossacks had wasted the country far and wide, and deprived it of
all resources. But he and his army were so burning with
indignation, and the desire to avenge the Cossack cruelties, that
they made no pause, and marched in all haste right round the
Russian position, so as to drive them back towards the junction of
the two rivers.


[Map: Battle of Zorndorf]


Fermor's Cossacks brought him in news of Frederick's movements,
which were hidden from him by the forests; and seeing that he was
to be attacked on the Zorndorf side, instead of from that on which
he had expected it to come, he changed his front, and swung round
the line containing his best troops to meet it.

On arriving at Zorndorf, Frederick found that the Cossacks had
already set the village on fire. This was no disadvantage to him,
for the smoke of the burning houses rolled down towards the
Russians, and so prevented them from making observation of the
Prussian movements. The king rode up to the edge of the Zaborn
hollow and, finding it too deep and boggy to be crossed, determined
to attack at the southwest with his left and centre, placing his
cavalry in rear, and throwing back his right wing.

The first division marched forward to the attack, by the west end
of the flaming village. The next division, which should have been
its support, marched by the east end of Zorndorf. Its road was a
longer one, and there was consequently a wide gap between the two
divisions. Heralded by the fire of two strong batteries--which
swept the southwestern corner of the Russian quadrilateral, their
crossfire ploughing its ranks with terrible effect--the first
division, under Manteufel, fell upon the enemy.

The fire of the Prussian batteries had sorely shaken the Russians,
and had produced lively agitation among the horses of the light
baggage train in the centre of the square; and, heralding their
advance with a tremendous fire of musketry, the Prussian infantry
forced its way into the mass. Had the second division been close at
hand, as it should have been, the victory would already have been
won; but although also engaged it was not near, and Fermor poured
out a torrent of horse and foot upon Manteufel's flank and front.
Without support, and surrounded, the Prussians could do nothing,
and were swept back, losing twenty-four pieces of cannon; while the
Russians, with shouts of victory, pressed upon them.

At this critical moment Seidlitz, with five thousand horse, dashed
down upon the disordered mass of Russians, casting it into
irretrievable confusion. At the same time the infantry rallied and
pressed forward again.

In fifteen minutes the whole Russian army was a confused mass.
Fermor, with the Russian horse, fled to Kratsdorf and, had not the
bridge there been burnt by Frederick, he would have made off,
leaving his infantry to their fate. These should now, according to
all rules, have surrendered; but they proved unconquerable save by
death. Seidlitz's cavalry sabred them until fatigued by slaughter,
the Prussian infantry poured their volleys into them, but they
stood immovable and passive, dying where they stood.

At one o'clock in the day the battle ceased for a moment. The
Prussians had marched at three in the morning and, seeing that
although half the Russian army had been destroyed, the other half
had gradually arranged itself into a fresh front of battle,
Frederick formed his forces again, and brought up his right wing
for the attack on the side of the Russian quadrilateral which still
stood. Forward they went, their batteries well in advance; but
before the infantry came within musket range, the Russian horse and
foot rushed forward to the attack, and with such force that they
captured one of the batteries, took a whole battalion prisoners,
and broke the centre.

Here were the regiments of Dohna, perfectly clean and well
accoutred; but, being less accustomed to war than Frederick's
veterans, they gave way at once before the Russian onslaught and,
in spite of Frederick's efforts to prevent them, fled from the
field and could not be rallied until a mile distant from it.

The veterans stood firm, however; until Seidlitz, returning from
pursuit, again hurled his horsemen upon the Russian masses, broke
them up, and drove their cavalry in headlong flight before him.



Chapter 12: Another Step.


The Russian infantry being involved in the turmoil and confusion
caused by the charge of Seidlitz, and the defeat of their cavalry,
the Prussian infantry again pressed forward, pouring in a heavy
fire and charging with the bayonet. Three battalions had been drawn
from this very country and, maddened by the tales they had heard of
Cossack cruelty, were not to be denied. The Russians, however,
keeping their ranks, filling up the gaps as they were formed, and
returning as best they could the fire of the Prussians, held
together with sullen obstinacy. By this time the ammunition on both
sides was exhausted, and now the struggle became hand to hand,
bayonet against bayonet, butt end of musket to butt end.

Seldom has so terrible a struggle ever been witnessed. Nightfall
was approaching. Foot by foot the inert Russian mass was pushed
backwards. One of their generals, Demikof, collected some two
thousand foot and a thousand horse, and took possession of a knoll;
and Frederick ordered them to be dispersed again. Forcade was
ordered to attack them with two battalions, and General Rutter to
bring up the Dohna men again and take them in flank; but the latter
had not recovered from their state of demoralization, and at the
first cannon shot turned and ran, continuing their flight even
further than before, and taking refuge in the woods. Frederick
instantly dismissed Rutter from the service.

Then, as night had completely fallen, the terrible conflict ceased.
Fermor by this time, finding that there was no crossing the rivers,
had returned. No regiment or battalion of his army remained in
order. There was but a confused crowd, which the officers did their
best to form into some sort of order, regardless of regiment or
battalion. The Cossacks scoured the fields under the cover of
night, plundering the dead and murdering the wounded, flames
marking their path. Four hundred of them were caught at their work
by the Prussian hussars, and every one killed.

Frederick sent for his tents, and the army pitched its camp, facing
the Russians; but during the night the latter, having got into a
sort of order, moved away to the westward and bivouacked on Drewitz
Heath, facing the battle ground.

Fermor had some twenty-eight thousand men still with him, while
Frederick had eighteen thousand. The former's loss had been
twenty-one thousand, five hundred and twenty-nine killed, wounded,
or missing; of whom eight thousand were killed. That of the
Prussians was eleven thousand, three hundred and ninety, of whom
three thousand six hundred and eighty were killed. Thus each side
lost a third of its number in this terrible struggle.

The next morning the Russians got into better order, and drew up in
order of battle. A cannonade was for some time kept up on both
sides, but the armies were beyond range of artillery.

Neither party had any real thoughts of fighting. Fermor, beaten on
his own ground the day before, could not dream of attacking the
Prussians. The latter were worn out by the fatigues of the previous
day. Moreover, on each side the musketry ammunition was used up.
The hussars, pursuing the Cossacks, had in the night come upon the
Russian waggon train at Kleim, and carried off a good deal of
portable plunder.

The next morning, under cover of a fog, the Russians retreated,
reached their baggage, and then moved slowly away; and, harassed by
