everything. Friday will very soon come now, thank goodness!"

But those two days were to bring events of their own, events quite
unprecedented in the school, and unexpected by everybody. How they
affected Ulyth and Rona will be related farther on in our story; but
meantime, for a true understanding of their significance, we must pause
to consider a certain feature of the life at The Woodlands. When Miss
Teddington had joined partnership with Miss Bowes she had added many new
ideas to the plan of education which had formerly been pursued.

She was determined that the school should not be dubbed "old-fashioned",
and by all means in her power she kept it abreast of the times. So well
did she succeed that the girls were apt to complain that their second
Principal was a crank on education, and fond of trying every fresh
experiment she could get hold of. The various enterprises added an
atmosphere of novelty, however, and prevented the daily life from
degenerating into a dull routine. No one ever knew what scheme Miss
Teddington might suggest next; and even if each course was not pursued
for very long, it did its work at the time, and was a factor in the
general plan. All kinds and varieties of health exercises had had their
day at The Woodlands--poles, dumb-bells, clubs, had been in turn
discarded for deep breathing or for swimming motions. Slow minuets or
lively tarantellas were danced, according to the fashion of the moment,
and had the virtue of teaching stately dignity as well as poetry of
motion. It was rumoured sometimes that Miss Teddington, with her eye on
the past, contemplated a revival of backboards, stocks, and
chest-expanders; but those instruments of torture, fortunately, never
made their appearance, much to the relief of the intended victims, who
had viewed their advent with apprehension.

Naturally, dancing and indoor P.T. went on mostly in the winter months,
their place being taken by outdoor drill during the summer term. The
Camp-fire movement had appealed to Miss Teddington. She would herself
have liked to be "Guardian of the Fire" and general organizer of the
League, but her better judgment told her it was wiser to leave that
office to one who had not also to wield the authority of a teacher. She
supported the League in every way that came within her province. As
Camp-fire honours were given for nature study, astronomy, and geology,
she took care that all had a chance to qualify in those directions; and
lately, acting on a hint from Mrs. Arnold, she had made a special point
of manual training. Since Christmas the studio had assumed a new
importance in the school. It was a big glass-roofed room at the top of
the house, reached by a small stair from the west bedroom landing. A
carpenter's bench stood at one end of it, and wood-carving went on
fairly briskly. The girls might come in at any time during their
recreation hours, and the occupation was a great resource on wet days.
Bookbinding, stencilling, clay modelling, and fretwork were included
among the hobbies, and though there might not be definite lessons given,
there were handy primers of instruction on the book-shelf, and it was
interesting to try experiments.

"Do something on your own initiative. Take the book and puzzle it out,
even if you make a few mistakes," urged Miss Teddington. "Nothing but
practice can give you the right feel of your tools; you'll learn more
from a couple of failures than from a week's work with a teacher at your
elbow the whole time, saying 'Don't!'"

So the girls struggled on, making merry at each other's often rather
indifferent efforts, but gaining more skill as they learnt to handle the
materials with which they worked. If the mallet hit the chisel so
vigorously as to spoil a part of the pattern, its wielder was wiser next
time; and the experimenters in pyrography soon learned that a red-hot
needle used indiscreetly can dig holes in leather instead of ornamenting
it. Such "dufferisms", as the girls called them, became rarer, and many
quite creditable objects were turned out, and judged worthy of a
temporary place on the view-shelf.

Since Christmas a very special feature had been added to the handicraft
department. Miss Teddington had caused apparatus to be fixed for the
working of art jewellery. A furnace and a high bench with all necessary
equipment had been duly installed. This was a branch much too
technically difficult for the girls to attempt alone, so a skilled
teacher had been procured, who came weekly from Elwyn Bay to give
lessons. Those girls who took the course became intensely enthusiastic
over it. To make even a simple chain was interesting, but when they
advanced to setting polished pebbles or imitation stones as brooches or
pendants, the work waxed fascinating. Some of the students proved much
more adept than others, and turned out really pretty things.

There was not apparatus for many pupils to work, so the class had been
limited to seniors, among whom Doris Deane, Ruth White, and Stephanie
Radford had begun to distinguish themselves. Each had made a small
pendant, and while the craftsmanship might be amateurish, the general
effect was artistic. Miss Teddington was delighted, and wishing to air
her latest hobby, she decided to send the three pendants, together with
some other specimens of school handiwork, to a small Art exhibition
which was to be held shortly at Elwyn Bay. Miss Edwards, the teacher who
came weekly to give instruction, was on the exhibition committee, and
promised to devote a certain case to the articles, and place them in a
good light. Though small shows had been held at The Woodlands
occasionally in connection with the annual prize distribution, the
school had never before ventured to send a contribution to a public
exhibition, and those whose work was to be thus honoured became heroines
of the moment.

On the very evening after Ulyth's and Lizzie's excursion down the
garden, a number of girls repaired to the studio to view the objects
that Miss Teddington had chosen as worthy to represent the artistic side
of the school.

"I wish I were a senior," said Winnie Fowler plaintively. "I'd have
loved this sort of thing. To think of being able to make a little
darling, ducky brooch! It beats drawing hollow. I'd never want to touch
a pencil again."

"You've got to have some eye for drawing, though," said Doris, "or you'd
have your things all crooked. It's not as easy as eating chocolates, I
can tell you!"

"I dare say. But I'll try some day, when I am a senior."

"Are these the three that are to go to the exhibition?" asked Rona,
pushing her way to the front. "Which is which?"

"This is mine, that's Ruth's, and that's Stephanie's," explained Doris.

"Why isn't Ulyth's to go? It's just as nice as Stephanie's, I'm sure."

"Miss Teddington decided that."

"How idiotic of her! Why couldn't she send Ulyth's? I think hers is the
nicest, and it's just the same pattern as Stephie's--exactly."

"Do be quiet, Rona!" urged Ulyth, laying her hand on the arm of her too
partial friend. "My pendant has a defect in it. I bungled, and couldn't
get it right again afterwards."

"It doesn't show."

"Not to you, perhaps; but any judge of such things would notice in a
moment."

"Well, your work's as good as Stephanie's any day, and I hate for her
name to be put into the catalogue and not yours. Yes, I mean what I
say."

"Oh, Rona, do hush! I don't want my name in a catalogue. Here's Stephie
coming in. Don't let her hear you."

"I don't mind if she does. It won't do her any harm to hear somebody's
frank opinion."

"Rona, if you care one atom for me, stop!"

Rather grumbling, Rona allowed herself to be suppressed. She was always
ready to throw a shaft at Stephanie, though she knew Ulyth heartily
disliked the scenes which invariably followed. She took up Ulyth's
pendant, however, and, after ostentatiously admiring it, laid it for a
moment side by side with Stephanie's.

"There isn't a pin to choose between them," she murmured under her
breath, hoping Stephanie might overhear.

Ulyth was at the other side of the room, but Stephanie's quick ears
caught the whisper. She looked daggers at Rona, but she made no remark,
and Ulyth, returning, gently took her pendant away and placed it with
the other non-exhibits on the bench. It had been a wet afternoon. No
outdoor exercise had been possible that day, and the girls were tired of
all their usual indoor occupations.

"I wish somebody'd suggest something new to cheer us up," yawned Nellie
Barlow. "There's a quarter of an hour more 'rec.' It's too short to be
worth while getting out any apparatus, but it's long enough to be deadly
dull."

"Can't someone do some tricks?" asked Edie Maycock.

"All right, Toby; sit on your hind legs and beg for biscuits," laughed
Marjorie Earnshaw.

"I mean real tricks--conjuring and fortune telling; the amateur wizard,
you know."

"I don't know."

"Then you're stupid. Have you never seen amateur conjuring--coins that
vanish, and things that come out of hats?"

"Yes; but I couldn't do it, my good child. Being in the Sixth doesn't
make me a magician."

"We tried a little bit at home," pursued Edie. "We had a book that told
us how; only I never could manage it quickly. People always saw how I
did it."

"Rona's the girl for that," suggested Hattie Goodwin.

"Is she? Come here, Rona, I want you. Can you really and truly do
conjuring?"

"Oh, not properly!" laughed Rona. "But when I was on board ship there
was a gentleman who was very clever at it, and I and some boys I'd made
friends with were tremendously keen at learning. We got him to show us a
few easy tricks, and we were always trying them. I could manage it just
a little, but I'm out of practice now. You'd see in a second how it was
done, I'm afraid."

"Oh, do show us, just for fun!"

"What do you want to see?"

"Oh, anything!"

"The vanishing coin?"

"Yes, yes. Go ahead!"

"Then give me two pennies or shillings, either will do."

The audience who had clustered round looked at one another, each
expecting somebody else to produce a coin. Then everybody laughed.

"We haven't got so much as a copper amongst us! We're a set of absolute
paupers!" declared Doris. "Can't you do some other trick?"

"There is nothing else I could manage so well," said Rona
disconsolately. "This was the only one I really learnt."

"Can't it be done with anything but coins?"

"Something the same size and round, perhaps?"

"My pendant?" said Ulyth, fetching the trinket from the bench. "It's
just as big as a penny."

"Yes, I could try it with this and another like it. Give me
Stephanie's."

"No, no! You shan't try tricks with mine!" objected Stephanie
indignantly.

"I won't do it a scrap of harm."

"Oh, Stephie, don't be mean! She'll not hurt it. Here, Rona, take it!"
exclaimed several of the girls, anxious to witness the experiment.

Stephanie's protests and grumbles were overridden by the majority, and
Rona, in her new capacity of wizard, faced her audience.

"It'll be rather transparent, because you oughtn't really to know that
I've got two pendants," she explained apologetically. "Please forget,
and think it's only one. I must put some patter in, like Mr. Thompson
always used to do. Ladies and gentleman, you've no doubt heard that the
art of conjuring depends upon the quickness of the hand. That's as it
may be, but there is a great deal that can't be accounted for in that
way. Ladies and gentlemen, you see this coin--or rather pendant, as I
should say. I am going to make it fly from my left hand to my right.
One, two, three--pass! Here it is. Did you see it go? No. Well, I can
make it travel pretty quickly. Now we'll try another pretty little
experiment. You see my hand. It's empty, isn't it? Yet when I wave it
over this desk Miss Stephanie Radford's pendant will be returned to its
place. Hey, presto! Pass! There you are! Safe and sound and back again!"

Stephanie took up her treasure and examined it anxiously.

"This isn't mine!" she declared.

"Rubbish! It is."

"I tell, you it isn't! Don't I know my own work? This is Ulyth's. What
have you done with mine?"

"Vanished under the wizard's wand," mocked Rona.

"Give it me this instant!" cried Stephanie angrily, shaking Rona by the
arm.

Rona had been standing upon one leg, and the unexpected assault
completely upset her balance. She toppled, clutched at Doris, and fell,
bumping her head against the corner of the table. It was a hard blow,
and as she got up she staggered.

"I feel--all dizzy!" she gasped.

An officious junior, quite unnecessarily, ran for Miss Lodge, magnifying
the accident so much in her highly coloured account that the mistress
arrived on the scene prepared to find Rona stretched unconscious. Seeing
that the girl looked white and tearful, she ordered her promptly to bed.

"It may be nothing, but any rate you will be better lying down," she
decreed. "Go downstairs, girls, all of you. Nobody is to come into the
studio again to-night."

"Rona had my pendant in her hand all the time," grumbled Stephanie to
Beth as she obeyed the mistress's orders. "She dropped it as she fell.
I've put it back safely, though, and I don't mean to let anybody
interfere with it. I shall complain to Miss Bowes if it's touched
again."




CHAPTER XVII

A Storm-cloud


Rona woke up next morning without even a headache, in Miss Lodge's
opinion "justifying the prompt measures taken", but according to the
girls, "showing there had been nothing the matter with her to make such
a fuss about". Breakfast proceeded as usual, and afterwards came the
short interval before nine-o'clock school. Now on this day the
contributions to the Art exhibition were to be packed up and dispatched
by a special carrier, and Stephanie, as a budding metalworker, ran
upstairs to the studio to take one last peep at her exhibit. She flew
down again with white face and burning eyes.

"Girls!" she cried shakily. "Girls! Somebody's taken my pendant! It's
gone!"

"Why, nonsense, Stephie; it can't be gone! It was there all right last
night."

"It's not there now. Ulyth's has been put in its place, and mine's
vanished. Come and see."

There was an instant stampede for the studio.

"It's probably on the bench," said Doris. "Some people are such bad
lookers. I expect we shall find it directly."

"You can't find a thing that isn't there," retorted Stephanie with
warmth.

Doris considered herself an excellent looker, and, in company with a
dozen others, she searched the studio. Willing hands turned everything
over, hunted under tables, on shelves, and among shavings, but not a
sign of the pendant could they find.

"Are you sure this one isn't yours?" asked Ruth, coming back to the
exhibits.

"Certain! I know my own work. This is Ulyth's; and there's the mistake
she made that disqualified it."

"Yours was put back last night?"

"I saw it safe myself, after Rona'd been juggling with it. Where is
Rona? I believe she's at the bottom of this."

"She's in the garden."

"Then she must be fetched."

"What's the matter? What are you making a bother about?" cried Rona, as
an excited detachment of girls stopped her game of tennis and asked her
a dozen questions at once. "What have I done with Stephanie's pendant?
Why, I've done nothing with it, of course."

"But you must have hidden it somewhere."

"It's a mean trick to play on her."

"You and Steph are always at daggers drawn."

"Do go and put it back."

"I can't think what you're talking about!" flared Rona. "I've not even
been inside the studio. If a joke's being played on Stephanie, it's
somebody else who's doing it, not me. For goodness' sake let me get on
with my game. Come, Winnie, it's your serve."

The girls retired, whispering to one another. They were not at all
satisfied. The news of the loss spread rapidly over the school, and had
soon reached the ears of the authorities. Miss Lodge, who heard it from
a monitress, at once sought Miss Bowes' study. A few moments later she
went in a hurry to summon Miss Teddington, and a rash junior who
ventured within earshot was sent away with a scolding. Miss Bowes looked
grave as she walked into the hall for call-over. She took the names as
usual, then, instead of dismissing the forms, she paused impressively.

"I have something to say to you, girls," she began in a strained voice.
"A most unpleasant thing has happened this morning. The pendant made by
Stephanie Radford, which was to have been sent to the Elwyn Bay
Exhibition, has disappeared, and Ulyth Stanton's pendant has been
substituted for it. It is, I suppose, a practical joke on the part of
one of you. Now I highly disapprove of this foolish form of jesting; it
is neither clever nor funny, and is often very unkind. I beg whoever has
done this thing to come forward at once and replace the pendant. She
need have no fear, for she will not be punished or even scolded, though
she must give me her word never to repeat such a prank."

Miss Bowes stopped, and looked expectantly at the rows of intent eyes
fixed upon her. Nobody spoke and nobody moved. There was dead silence
in the hall. The Principal flushed with annoyance.

"Girls, must I appeal to your honour? Is that necessary at The
