Captain Morris, I think you would better go also.  You will muster your
troop; the men will have returned from carrying my orders to the
different brigades, and can be assembled once more.  I desire you to
attend my person to-night as our only cavalry.  Talbot, you would
better go with General Greene; you also, marquis, so that you can be
with your friend Captain Hamilton.  The rest of us will follow you
shortly."

The officers designated bowed, and in a few moments were on the road.
The officers left at the headquarters were speedily busy with their
necessary duties, and Seymour and his two companions, one of whom, the
boatswain, was most unfamiliar with and uncomfortable upon a horse,
were able to get a couple of hours of needed rest before starting out
upon what they felt would be an arduous journey.  About half after six
o'clock the signal to mount was given, and the whole party, led by the
general himself, and followed by the ragged guard, was soon upon the
road.

It was intensely cold, and the night bade fair to be the severest of
the winter.  The sky was cloudless, however, and there was a bright
moon.




CHAPTER XXIII

_Lieutenant Martin's Lesson_

As they rode along slowly, the general explained his plans.  General
Howe had pursued him relentlessly through the Jerseys, until he had
crossed into Pennsylvania, only escaping further pursuit and certain
defeat because he had had the forethought to seize every boat upon the
Delaware and its tributaries for miles in every direction, and bring
them with his army to the west bank of the river, so that Howe was
unable to cross.  The English general had threatened, however, to wait
until the river was frozen and then cross on the ice, and after
brushing aside the miserable remains of Washington's army, march on to
Philadelphia and establish himself in the rebel capital.  Making that
most serious of mistakes for a military man of despising his opponents,
Howe had scattered his army, for convenience in quartering, in various
small detachments along the river.  The small American army,
supplemented by the Pennsylvania militia, had been placed opposite the
different fords from Yardley to New Hope, to hold the enemy in check in
case an attempt should be made to force a crossing.

The fortunes of the country were at the lowest ebb.  But there was to
be a speedy reversal of conditions, and the world was to learn how
dangerous a man was leading the Continental troops.  Washington, to
whom a retreat was as hateful as it had been necessary, had long
meditated an attack whenever any chance whatever of success might
present itself.  The necessity for a change was apparent, not merely
for the material result which would flow from a victory, but for the
moral effect as well.  The fancied security of the enemy, their exposed
positions, disconnected from each other, and the contempt they felt for
his own troops, were large factors in determining him to strike then;
but another factor had still more weight, and that was the fact that
the time of the enlistment of nearly the whole of his own army expired
with the end of the year, and whatever was to be done must be done
quickly.  He therefore conceived the daring and brilliant design of
suddenly collecting his scattered forces, crossing the river, and
falling upon his unsuspecting enemy at Trenton, where a small brigade
of Hessians, under Colonel Rahl, was stationed.

It would be a piece of unparalleled audacity.  To turn, as it were,
just before the dissolution of his army, and cross a wide and deep
river full of ice, in the dead of winter, and strike, like the hammer
of Thor, upon his unwary foe, rudely disturbing his complacent dreams,
was a conception of exceeding brilliancy, and it at once stamped
Washington as a military genius of the first order.  And with such an
army to make such an attempt!  Said one of the officers of the period
in his memoirs: "An army without cavalry, partially provided with
artillery, deficient in transportation for the little they had to
carry; without tents, tools, or camp equipage,--without magazines of
any kind; half clothed, badly armed, debilitated by disease,
disheartened by misfortune."  But their leader was a Lion, and the Lion
was at last at bay!  There was another factor which contributed greatly
to the efficiency of the army, and that was the high quality and
overwhelming number of the American officers.

Orders had been given to the brigades and troops mentioned to
concentrate at McConkey's Ferry, about nine miles above Trenton.
Another division under Ewing was to cross a mile below Trenton and
seize the bridge and fords across the Assunpink, to check the retreat
of the enemy and co-operate with the main attack.

Cadwalader's Pennsylvania militia under Gates were to cross at Bristol
or below Burlington, and attack Von Donop at that point, while Putnam,
in conjunction with him, was to make a diversion from Philadelphia.
The movements were to be simultaneous, and the result it was hoped
would accord with the effort.  The main column, and the one upon which
the most dependence was to be placed, was that which Washington himself
was to accompany, which was composed of veteran Continentals, to the
number of twenty-four hundred, with eighteen pieces of artillery.

All this was briefly explained by the general to Seymour and the staff,
while they rode slowly along the frozen road.  About eight o'clock they
arrived at the ford, near which the troops who had arrived before them
now stood shivering on the high ground by the river.  A few fires were
burning in the ravines back of the banks, around which the men took
turns in warming themselves, as they munched their frugal fare from the
haversacks.  A large number of boats had been collected for their
transportation, but the river itself was in a most unpromising
condition, full of great cakes of ice which the swift current kept
churning and grinding against each other.

The general surveyed the scene in silence, as his staff and the general
officers gathered about him.

"There is something moving in the river, general," suddenly said
Seymour, pointing, his practised eye detecting a dark object among the
cakes of ice.  "It is a boat, sir!"

"Ah," replied the general, "you have sharp eyes.  Where is it?"

"There, sir, coming nearer every minute; there is a man in it."

"I see now.  So there is.  Who can it be?"

"Probably it is Lieutenant Martin," remarked General Greene, quietly.
"You know you sent him back."

"Oh, so I did," replied the general, nodding sternly at the
recollection.  Meanwhile the man in the boat was skilfully making his
way between the great cakes of ice, which threatened every moment to
crush his frail skiff.  He rapidly drew near until he finally jumped
ashore, and, having tied his boat, hastened up to where the general sat
on his horse.  He stopped.

"I have been across, general," he said, saluting.

"So I perceive, sir.  How did you get across?"

"When I left you, sir, this afternoon," went on the young man, gravely,
"I was in such a hurry that I did not wait for anything.  I swam it,
sir, with my horse."

"Swam it!"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well done, indeed!  Was it cold?"

"Not very, sir.  At least I was too excited to feel it, and a good hard
gallop on the other side soon warmed me up."

"Where did your ride take you?"

"Almost to Trenton, sir."

"And what is the situation there?"

"Very confident, the guard very negligent, the men carousing in the
houses.  I examined both roads, and neither of them is well picketed.
I should think a surprise would not be very difficult, sir."

"Humph!  Where's your horse?"

"He fell dead on the other side just as I got back.  I found that leaky
skiff, and came over to report, sir."

"You have done well, Mr. Martin, very well indeed!  I think you must
have found that man I sent you for!" continued the general, smiling
grimly, while the young soldier blushed with pleasure.  "Meanwhile we
must get you another horse.  Who has a spare one?"

"May it please your honor," spoke out Bentley, who had attached himself
to Seymour, "he can have mine.  I am as much at sea on him as you would
be on the royal yard, begging your honor's pardon, and I 'll feel
better carrying a gun or pulling an oar with the men there than here."

The general laughed.

"There 's your horse, Mr. Martin.  Where do you belong, sir?"

"To Colonel Stark's regiment, sir."

"Good!  Keep at it as you have begun and you will meet with a better
reception when you call upon me again.  Now God grant that fortune may
favor us.  Gentlemen, if the brigades are all up, we will undertake the
crossing.  It looks dangerous, but it can be done--it must be done.
Who will lead us?"

"I will, sir, with your permission, with my Marblehead fishermen," said
Colonel Glover, stepping out.

"Ah, gentlemen, this is our marine regiment.  Go on, sir!  You shall
have the right of way across the river.  I think none will dispute it
with you.  Mr. Seymour, as a seaman, perhaps you can render efficient
service, and your boatswain will find here more opportunities for his
peculiar talents than in carrying a musket.  General Greene, will you
and your staff go over with the first boat to make proper disposition
of the brigades as they arrive?  I shall come over after the first
division has passed.  Then General Sullivan, and lastly our friend
General Knox with his artillery.  I expect we shall have to wait for
him.  Well, we cannot dispense with either him or the guns."

"You won't have to wait any longer than is absolutely necessary to get
the guns and horses over, general."

"I know that, Knox, I know that.  Now, gentlemen, forward! and may God
bless you!"

In a few moments the terrible passage began.




CHAPTER XXIV

_Crossing the Delaware_

The men, divided into small squads, marched down to the boats,--large
unwieldy scows, which had been hauled up against the shore,--and each
boat was speedily filled to its utmost capacity.  The most experienced
seized the oars; three or four Marblehead fishermen armed with long
poles took their stations forward and aft along the upper side of the
boat, with one to steer and one to command; and then, seizing a
favorable opportunity, the boat was pushed off from the shore, and
threading its way in and out between the enormous ice-cakes grinding
down upon her, the difficult and dangerous passage began.  Should the
heavily laden boat be overturned, very few of its occupants would be
able to reach the shore.  Once on the other side, the fishermen took
the boat back, and the weary process was gone over again.  Fortunately
it was yet bright moonlight, though ominous clouds were banking up in
the northeast, and everything could be clearly seen; each boat was
perfectly visible all the way across to the eager watchers on the
shore, and a sigh of relief went up after each fortunate passage.  In
this labor Seymour and Bentley, and in a less degree Philip Wilton,
aided Colonel Glover's men; Seymour having the helm of one boat
continuously, Bentley that of another.

About half-past nine it was reported to General Washington that all of
the first division had crossed, and the boat was now ready for him
according to his orders.  The largest and best boat had been selected
for the commander-in-chief, one sufficiently capacious to receive his
horses and those of his staff who accompanied him.  Seymour was to
steer the boat; Bentley stood in the bow; Colonel Glover stationed
himself amidships, with three or four of his trustiest men, to
superintend the crossing, and all the oars were manned by the hardy
fishermen instead of the soldiers.  The general dismounted and walked
toward the boat, leading his horse.  Just as he was about to enter, an
officer on a panting steed rode up rapidly, and saluted.

"General Washington?"

"Yes, sir."

"A letter, sir!"

"What a time is this to hand me letters!"

"Your excellency, I have been charged to do so by General Gates."

"By General Gates!  Where is he?"

"I left him this morning in Philadelphia, sir."

"What was he doing there?"

"I understood him that he was on his way to Congress."

"On his way to Congress!" said the general earnestly, with much
surprise and disgust in his tone.  And then, after a pause, he broke
the seal and read the letter, frowning; after which he crumpled the
paper up in his hand, and then turned again to the officer.  "How did
you find us, sir?"

"I followed the bloody footprints of the men on the snow, sir."

"Poor fellows!  Did you learn anything of General Ewing or General
Cadwalader?"

"No, sir."

"And General Putnam?"

"He bade me say that there were symptoms of an insurrection in the
city, and he felt obliged to stay there.  He has detached six hundred
of the Pennsylvania militia, however, under Colonel Griffin, to advance
toward Bordentown."

"'T is well, sir.  Do you remain to participate in our attack?"

"Yes, sir, I belong to General St. Clair's brigade."

"You will find it over there; it has not yet crossed.  Now, gentlemen,
let us get aboard."

The general stepped forward in the boat, where Bentley, an enormous
pole in his hands, was stationed, and the remainder of the party soon
embarked.  The order was given to shove off.  The usual difficulties
and the usual fortune attended the passage of the boat with its
precious freight, until it neared the east bank, when one of the
largest cakes that had passed swiftly floated down upon it.

"Pull, men, pull hard!" cried Colonel Glover, as he saw its huge bulk
alongside.  "Head the boat up the stream, Mr. Seymour.  Forward,
there--be ready to push off with your poles."  As the result of these
prompt manoeuvres, the oncoming mass of ice, which was too large to be
avoided, instead of crashing into them amidships and sinking the boat,
struck them a quartering blow on the bow, and commenced to grind along
the sides of the boat, which heeled so far over that the water began to
trickle in through the oar-locks on the other side.

"Steady, men," said Glover, calmly.  "Sit still, for your lives."

Bentley had thrown his pole over on the ice-cake promptly, and was now
bearing down upon it with all the strength of his powerful arms.  But
the task was beyond him; the ice and the boat clung together, and the
ice was reinforced by several other cakes which its checked motion
permitted to close with it.  The vast mass crashed against the side of
the boat; the oar of the first rower was broken short off at the
oar-lock; if the others went the situation of the helpless boat would
be, indeed, hopeless.  The general himself came to the rescue.
Promptly divining the situation, he stepped forward to Bentley's side,
and threw his own immense strength upon the pole.  Great beads of sweat
stood out on Bentley's bronzed forehead as he renewed his efforts; the
stout hickory sapling bent and crackled beneath the pressure of the two
men, but held on, and the boat slowly but steadily began to swing clear
of the ice.  These two Homeric men held it off by sheer strength, until
the boat was in freewater, and the men, who had sat like statues in
their places, could once more use their oars.  The general stepped back
into his place, cool and calm as usual, and entirely unruffled by his
great exertions.  Bentley wiped the sweat from his face, and turned and
looked back at him in admiration.

"Friend Bentley," he said quietly, "you are a man of mighty thews and
sinews.  Had it not been for your powerful arms, I fear we would have
had a ducking--or worse."

"Lord love you, your honor," said the astonished tailor, "I 've met my
match!  It was your arm that saved us.  I was almost done for.  I never
saw such strength as that, though when I was younger I would have done
better.  What a man you would be for reefing topsails in a gale o'
wind, your honor, sir!" he continued, thrusting his pole vigorously
into a small and impertinent cake of ice in the way.  The general was
proud of his great strength, and not ill pleased at the genuine and
