friend in the world.  Was ever such a wretched boy as I?"

And he buried his face in his hands and gave himself over to his misery.
Suddenly in the quiet morning air there came to his ears a wonderful
sound, up from the valley, where, in the sun, shone the towers and
steeples of London town.

It was the sound of distant bells, and as the boy listened, it came
clearer and clearer, and seemed to fill the air with the very voice for
which he had but a minute since been longing.  But what a strange voice
and what a strange story the bells told!--

Turn again, Whittington, Thrice Lord Mayor of London!

Over and over again they said the same words.  Over and over again Dick
persuaded himself he was dreaming, yet felt sure he was awake.  "Turn
again!" that was plain enough, and he could believe it, even though Bow
Bells said it.  But--"Thrice Lord Mayor of London!" what could that
mean?  That was never meant for the poor ill-used scullery boy of Master
Fitzwarren, the mercer in the Minories!  And yet what could be more
distinct than the voice of those bells?

He sprang from his seat, turned his face in the direction of that
wonderful sound, and ran.  And that morning, when the family of Master
Fitzwarren assembled for their early meal, and the scolding cook took
possession of the kitchen, Dick Whittington was in his place, scouring
the pots and pans in the scullery, singing to himself a tune no one had
ever heard before.

Only a few days after this adventure of Dick's, news came of the arrival
in port of one of Master Fitzwarren's vessels with a valuable cargo on
board.  Now it was the custom in those days, in some houses, for all the
servants of a family to invest something in the fortunes of any vessel
their master might send out; and when, many months before this, Master
Fitzwarren had been equipping the vessel now in question, he had
summoned all his servants together, and beginning with the chief, had
called upon them to put their savings into his venture, promising each a
fair return of whatever profit his share should entitle him to at the
end of the voyage.

Dick, poor boy, had no money; nothing in the world but a cat, whom he
loved as his only friend, and to whom he owed no common gratitude for
the manner in which she had protected him against the rats that infested
his garret.  When it came to his turn to put his share into the voyage,
he had not the heart to offer this companion--and he had nothing else he
could call his own--so he begged to be excused.  His master, however,
insisted that, as his servant, he must put down whatever he had, however
little, and even though this cat had cost only a penny, to sea she must
go, and Dick should have full value for her when the voyage was over.

Dick wept at this, and the young daughter of Master Fitzwarren, being
moved to pity, offered from her own money what would preserve to the lad
his four-footed friend.  But not even this would the stern merchant
allow, and Dick therefore had to bid a tearful farewell to his
favourite, and resign himself to his loss.

All this had taken place many months ago.

Now when the "Unicorn"--that was the name of the vessel--returned to
port, great was the astonishment of everybody (and no one's greater than
Dick's) to find that the principal portion of the treasures on board
belonged to the little scullery boy of Master Fitzwarren.

The very first day of its arrival there was brought to the house a
cabinet of jewels, forming part of the boy's share, which was considered
too precious to be left on board ship.  And the men who brought it told
this marvellous story:

When the ship reached Algiers, in Africa, the ruler of the land ordered
all the crew to wait upon him with presents, which accordingly they did,
after which he prepared a feast, and invited them all to partake.  But
no sooner were the covers removed then a swarm of rats, attracted by the
scent of the good things, came and devoured all the victuals before
their very faces.  This, the governor told them, was no unusual thing,
for rats were the plague of his land, and he would give any price to
know of a means to be rid of them.  Then one of the sailors bethought
him of Dick Whittington's cat--who had already distinguished herself on
shipboard by her industry in her art--and accordingly next day, when the
feast was served, and the rats, as usual, prepared to make away with it,
puss was produced, and not only drove away the pest, but killed a
considerable number.  This happening for several days, his highness was
so delighted that he instantly offered an enormous sum for the
possession of so remarkable an animal, and loaded the crew with
presents, in token of his joy and gratitude.

Such was the story of the men, which explained this wonderful prize
which fell to the share of the fortunate Dick Whittington.

He, poor lad, could not understand it all, and went on with his drudgery
in the scullery as if nothing had happened, until his master compelled
him to quit it, and from being his boy-of-all-work made him his partner
in business.

Then Dick remembered the words the bells had sung to him a while ago,
and rejoiced that he had obeyed their call.

He rejoiced at another thing too, which was that the kind young daughter
of Master Fitzwarren, who had pitied him in his poverty, did not avoid
him in his prosperity, but smiled happily upon him when he took his seat
at the family table to eat out of the dishes he had so recently scoured.

So this scullery boy became a rich merchant, and being just and
honourable as well as wealthy, he gained the respect and love of all
with whom he had to do.  When he grew to be a man, he married the kind
Miss Fitzwarren, which made him happier than all his wealth.

Not only did merchants look up to him, but nobles and even kings came to
him in their money difficulties, and he was the same upright gentleman
to all men.  Honours increased, and at last the prophecy of Bow Bells
came true, and Sir Richard Whittington was made Lord Mayor of London.

In that capacity he grew still in riches and fame; and when his first
term was expired, his admiring fellow-citizens, after a few years, made
him Lord Mayor for a second time, and when the second term was past, for
a third.  His third mayoralty happened in 1419, when King Henry the
Fourth was on the throne of England; and then it was his honours rose to
their highest pitch, for he entertained at his own table the king and
queen of the land in such grand style that Henry said of him, "Never
king had such a subject."

And never poor had such a friend.  He never forgot the little forlorn
boy on Highgate Hill, and it was his delight to his latest day to make
the hearts of the needy glad, and show to all that it is not for money
nor grandeur but for an honest soul and a kind heart that a man is to be
loved and honoured by his fellows.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE, THE BOY WHO WON A BATTLE.

The sun rose brightly over the little village of Crecy on the morning of
Saturday, August 26, 1346.  The golden corn was standing in the fields,
the cattle were quietly grazing in the meadows, the birds were
twittering in the woods, and in the still morning air rose the gentle
murmur of a joyous stream.  Everything spoke of peace that bright summer
morning; little could one have dreamed that before that sun should have
set in the west the din and thunder of battle would wake the echoes of
those quiet woods, or that those sunny fields would be torn and
desolated by the angry tread of thousands of feet, or strewn with heaps
of dead or dying!  Yet so it was to be.  A large army was even then
halting in the cover of the forest over against the village, and far,
far away, if any one had listened, might have been heard, mingling with
the voices of the morning, the sound of a great host of horsemen and
soldiers advancing in hot pursuit, with now and then a trumpet blast
which echoed faintly among the hills.

The English soldiers, as they rose from their beds of turf and grass,
heard those far-off sounds, and knew--who better?--they must fight like
men to-day or perish.

So they sprang to their feet and seized their arms and armour, ready at
any instant to obey the summons to action.

Suddenly along the ranks came the cry, "The king and the prince!" and
directly afterwards appeared the great King Edward the Third of England
riding slowly down the line of his army, and at his side a stately boy
of sixteen years, dressed in black armour and mounted on a black horse.
Never was king more honoured or king's son more loved than were these
two as they passed with cheery word and dauntless bearing among their
loyal and devoted soldiers.

The king stopped when he had reached a spot from which a good portion of
his host could hear him, and raised his hand.

Every man stood silent as he spoke.

"My loyal subjects, we must meet to-day a host greater than we in
number, but not greater in valour.  Fight, I charge you, for the honour
of your country.  My son here leads the first division of my army.  This
is his first battle, and sure I am he will quit himself like a man.  Do
you the same, and God will give us the victory."

With such encouraging and confident words the king addressed his men,
who cheered him and the brave prince long and loud.

Then every man took his helmet and his bow, and waited for the enemy.

The morning passed, but still no foe appeared.  But the distant murmur
was now grown to a loud and ever-increasing din; and as they sat the
English could hear shouts and the neighing of horses and the tumult of
many voices, which betokened the near approach of the host of King
Philip of France.

It was not till about three in the afternoon that the French army came
in sight of Crecy.  They had had a rapid and fatiguing march since
daybreak, and were now in no condition, even with their vastly superior
numbers, to grapple with the refreshed and inspirited Englishmen.  So
thought and said many of Philip's officers, and did their best to
persuade him to put off the encounter till next day.

But however much Philip might have been inclined to adopt this good
advice, his army was in such a state of confusion and disorder, owing to
their rapid march, that they were quite unmanageable.  When the officers
bade those in front to halt, those behind, shouting and impatient, still
pressed on, so much so that the king and all his nobles were carried
along with them into the very face of the English, who stood awaiting
the attack.

When Philip saw the collision could not be put off, that the battle was
inevitable, he shouted loudly, "Bring forward the Genoese bowmen!"

Now these bowmen, 15,000 in number, on whom Philip depended to scatter
and drive from the field the main portion of his enemy's force, were in
no sort of condition for beginning a battle after their long, fatiguing
march, and with the strings of their crossbows all loose with damp, and
with a dazzling sun now glaring full in their eyes.  But Philip, too
confident to heed any such trifles, impatiently, nay, angrily, ordered
them to the front, and bade them shoot a volley against the English
archers, who stood opposite.

So these foreigners stepped forward, and, as their manner was, gave
three leaps in the air, with the idea of terrifying the foes, and then
raised their bows to their cheeks, and let fly their arrows wildly in
the direction of the English.

The trusty English archers, with the sun behind them, were not the men
to be intimidated by leapings into the air, nor panic-struck by a
discharge so ill-aimed that scarce one arrow in ten even grazed their
armour.

Their reply to the Genoese was a sudden step forward, and a sharp,
determined twang of their bow-strings.  Then the air was white with the
cloud of their arrows, and next moment the foremost ranks of the Genoese
were seen to drop like one man.

This was enough for those already dispirited hirelings.  They fell back
in panic disorder; they cut their bow-strings; they rushed among the
very feet of the horsemen that Philip, in his rage, had ordered "to ride
forward and cut down the cowardly villains!"  Then the confusion of the
French army was complete.

The English followed up their first advantage steadily and quickly.
Knight after knight of the French dropped from his horse, troop after
troop fell back, standard after standard tottered.

Nowhere was the fight fiercer than where the young Black Prince led the
van of the English; and from a windmill on a near hill, the eager eyes
of King Edward watched with pride that figure clad in black armour ever
in the thick of the fight, and never halting an instant where danger or
duty called.

It would be too long to tell of all the fighting that day.  Philip, with
his great army, could not dislodge his compact foe from their position;
nor could he shelter his men from the deadly flight of their arrows.
Bravely he rushed himself into the fray to rally his men, but to no
avail.  Everywhere they fell back before their invincible enemy.

Once, indeed, it seemed as if his brave knights would surround and drive
back the division of which the boy prince was leader.  An English noble
sent post-haste a message to Edward to say, "Send help; the prince is in
danger."

But Edward knew more of battles than most of his officers.  He replied
coolly--

"Is the prince slain?"

"No."

"Is he wounded?"

"No."

"Is he struck down?"

"No."

"Then go, tell him the battle he has won so far shall be his, and his
only.  To-day he must win his own spurs."

The words flew like wildfire among the English ranks, and our brave men
fought with renewed valour.

That evening, as the sun was getting low in the west, Philip and his
host turned their backs on Crecy and fled--all that were left of them--
anywhere to be out of the reach of the army of that invincible boy.
Horsemen and footmen, bag and baggage, they fled, with the English close
at their heels, and never drew rein till night and darkness put an end
to the pursuit.

Meanwhile, there were rejoicing and thanksgiving on the field of Crecy.
The English king hastened from his post of observation, and, in the
presence of the whole army, embraced his brave son, and gave him the
honours of that glorious victory, wherein two kings, eleven princes,
1,200 knights, and 30,000 men had fallen.  A sad price for glory!
"Sweet son," said he, "God give you good perseverance.  You are my true
and valiant son, and have this day shown yourself worthy of a crown."

And the brave boy bowed low before his father, and modestly disclaimed
the whole glory of the victory.

Loud and long did the loyal knights and soldiers cheer their brave king
and their heroic prince; and when they saw the latter bind on his helmet
the plume of three ostrich feathers, worn by the most illustrious of his
slain foemen, John, King of Bohemia, with the noble motto _Ich dien_ ("I
serve") beneath, their enthusiasm knew no bounds.  And the motto has
descended from prince to prince since then, and remains to this day as a
glorious memorial of this famous boy, who earned it by doing his duty in
the face of danger, and setting an example to all about him that "he who
serves rules."



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

HENRY OF MONMOUTH, THE PRINCE WHOM A JUDGE SENT TO PRISON.

A strange crowd thronged the Court of King's Bench one memorable day
four and a half centuries ago.  Nobles and commoners alike jostled their
way into the sombre hall, every one intent on securing a good place,
some talking loudly, others arguing angrily, all highly excited and
impatient.  It was evident that the trial about to take place was one of
unusual interest and extraordinary importance, for the gloomy court was
not used to be so crowded, and seldom attracted so mixed and so eager a
throng as that which now filled it.

Suddenly a lull fell on the scene, heads were uncovered, the jostling
and wrangling ceased, and order prevailed.

The judge, Lord Justice Gascoigne, entered and took his seat.  He was a
grave, quiet man, but there was something in his look so dignified and
so firm, that it awed into respectful silence all within that place as
if by a spell.  Then he said--"Bring hither the prisoner."

All eyes turned now to the door by which the officer of the court went
out to obey the order.

Presently it swung back, and there entered, between two jailors, a man
of dissipated appearance and reckless demeanour, whose flushed cheeks
and extravagant attire told only too plainly their own sad tale of
intemperance and debauchery.

He regarded with an indifferent look judge, jury, and the crowd which
his trial had drawn together, and took his place at the bar rather with
the air of a man harassed and ill-used than of one guilty and overawed.

The trial began.  The story of the man's crime was a short and simple
one.  He had been ringleader in a highway robbery lately committed, and
taken in the very act, with the booty upon his person.  The evidence was
clear as daylight; no one attempted to dispute it or deny the
accusation.

Was this, then, all that had brought the assembly together?  The man was
of a name known to comparatively few of those present.  His crime was an
ordinary felony, and his defence appeared to be hopeless.  It was
evidently something else than this for which these onlookers had crowded
into court, and it was not long before their curiosity was satisfied.

A witness stood forward to be questioned as to the associates of the
prisoner.  He gave several names, and then stopped.

"Have no others joined him in these expeditions?" inquired the judge.

The witness hesitated.

"The law requires that you shall tell the whole truth," calmly said the
judge.  "Have no others joined the prisoner in these expeditions?"

Then the truth came out.

"The Prince Henry of Wales has borne the prisoner company on divers
occasions."

What!  A Prince of Wales, the coming King of England, implicated in a
disgraceful, discreditable highway robbery!  Though the crowd had heard
of it already, a buzz of astonishment passed through their midst, as the
fact was thus clearly and indisputably established.

"Was the prince concerned in the robbery for which the prisoner is now
charged?"

Witness could not say.

In reply to further questions, however, it was stated that the prince
frequently formed one of the party which indulged in these illegal
practices; that he was as lawless and desperate as the worst of them;
and that he was known to boast among his boon companions of his exploits
as a common highwayman, and to exhibit proudly the plunder he had thus
acquired.

It was enough.  The judge reminded the court that they were met to try,
not the prince, but the prisoner at the bar; and painful as the fact
was, it was no affair of theirs at that time to investigate the conduct
of another man, except in as far as it threw light on the present case.

The good judge was not the only man in England who had watched the
dissipated career of the young prince with sorrow and concern.  All to
whom the honour of their country was dear bewailed the wasted youth and
misused talents of this boy, whom his father's jealousy and illiberality
had driven into courses of riot and debauchery.  They longed for the
time to come, ere it was too late, when the serious duties of the camp
or the throne would call out those better traits of his disposition
