"Yes," resumed Pax, with a sigh, "it _was_ a child, that was.  Her name
was Mariar, but we called 'er Merry.  Her father's name--the Brute's,
you know--was Blackadder, and a blacker adder don't wriggle its slimy
way through filthy slums nowhere--supposin' him to be yet unscragged,
for he was uncommon hard on his wife--that's my Aunt Georgie.  _Her_
name was Georgianna.  I wonder how it is that people _never_ give people
their right names!  Well, Mr Aspel, you must know I was nuss to baby.
An amytoor nuss I was--got no pay for it, but a considerable allowance
o' kicks from the Brute, who wasn't fond o' me, as I'd done 'im a mortal
injury, somehow, by being his defunct brother's orphan child.  You
understand?"

George Aspel having professed a thorough comprehension of these family
relationships, little Pax went on.

"Well then, bein' nuss to Merry, I used to take 'er out long walks in
the fields among the flowers, an' I was used to catch butterflies and
beetles for 'er, an' brought 'em home an' stuck pins through 'em an'
made c'lections; an' oh, I _did_ like to scuttle about the green lanes
an' chase the cows, an' roll on the grass in the sunshine with Merry,
an' tear an bu'st my trousers, for w'ich I got spanked by the Brute, but
didn't care a rap, because that brought me double allowance o' coddlin'
from Aunt Georgie.  One day the Brute drove me into town in the
market-cart; set me down in the middle of a street, and drove away, an'
I haven't seen him, nor Aunt Georgie, nor Merry from that day to this."

"Dear me!" exclaimed George Aspel, rather shocked at this sudden and
unexpected termination of the narrative; "do you mean to say--"

"It strikes me," interrupted Pax, looking pointedly at the door, "that
you've got another visitor."

Aspel turned and saw the dishevelled curls and pretty face of Tottie
Bones in the doorway.

"Please, sir," she said, entering, "I didn't like to interrupt you, but
Miss Lillycrop sent me to say that there was a strange smell of singein'
in the 'ouse, an' would Mr Aspel be so kind as to come and try to find
out where it was, as she didn't understand such things."

"Smell of singeing, child!" exclaimed Aspel, rising at once and putting
on his coat and hat.  "Did you search for the cause, especially about
your kitchen fireplace?"

"O yes, sir," exclaimed Tottie, "an' we couldn't see no cause at all--
only the flue seemed to be 'otter than usual.  We looked all over the
'ouse too, but couldn't see nothink--but we could feel a most drefful
smell."

Desiring Mrs Murridge to call Mr Blurt to attend to the shop, George
Aspel hurried out.

"Don't try to keep up with us," said Aspel to Tottie; "I must run.  It
may be fire!"

"Oh! please, sir, don't leave me behind," pleaded the child.

"All right--we won't; kitch hold of my hand; give the other to Mr
Aspel," said Peter Pax.

Holding on to her two friends, Tottie was swept along the streets at a
rate which she had never before experienced--at least not as a
foot-passenger,--and in a few minutes they were in Miss Lillycrop's
dwelling.

That excellent lady was in a state of dreadful perturbation, as well she
might be, for the house was filled with a thin smoke of very peculiar
odour.

Few persons except the initiated are fully alive to the immense
importance of checking fire at its commencement.  The smoke, although
not dense enough to attract the attention of people outside, was
sufficiently so to make those inside commence an anxious search, when
they should have sent at once for the fire-engine.

Three families occupied the tenement.  Miss Lillycrop's portion was at
the top.  A dealer in oils and stores of a miscellaneous and unsavoury
kind occupied the basement.

George Aspel at once suspected and made for this point, followed by Miss
Lillycrop, who bade Tottie remain in her kitchen, with the intention of
keeping her at once out of danger and out of the way.

"There's certainly fire somewhere, Pax; run, call the engines out," said
Aspel, descending three steps at a time.

Pax took the last six steps at a bound, and rushed along the street,
overturning in his flight two boys bigger than himself, and a
wheelbarrow.

The owner of the cellars was absent and his door locked.  Where was the
key?  No one knew, but George Aspel knew of a key that had done some
service in times past.  He retreated a few steps, and, rushing at the
door with all his weight and momentum, dashed it in with a tremendous
crash, and went headlong into the cellar, from out of which came
belching flames and smoke.  Re-issuing instantly therefrom with singed
hair and glaring eyes, he found Miss Lillycrop lying on her back in a
faint, where the fire and smoke had floored her.  To gather her up and
dash into the street was the work of a moment.  Scarcely less rapid was
the rush of the fire, which, having been richly fed and long pent up in
the cellar, now dashed up the staircases like a giant refreshed.

Meanwhile little Pax ran headlong into a policeman, and was collared and
throttled.

"Now then, young 'un!"

"Fire! station!" gasped Pax.

"All right, this way--just round the corner," said the man in blue,
releasing his captive, and running along with him; but the man in blue
was stout, middle-aged, and heavy.  Pax outran him, saw the red lamp,
found the fire-station door open, and leaped through with a yell of
"_Fire_!" that nearly split his little lungs.

The personification of calmness in the form of a fireman rose and
demanded "Where?"

Before Pax could gasp the address, two other personifications of
calmness, who had been snoring on trestle-beds, dressed and booted, when
he entered, now moved swiftly out, axed and helmeted.  There was a
clattering of hoofs outside.  The double doors flew open, and the red
engine rolled out almost of its own accord.  More brass helmets were
seen flashing outside.

"Are you sure of the address, youngster?" asked one of the imperturbable
firemen, settling his chinstrap more comfortably.

"Are you sure o' your own grandmother?" said Pax.

"You're cheeky," replied the man, with a smile.

"You make haste," retorted Pax; "three minutes allowed to get under
weigh.  Two and a half gone already.  Two-and-six fine if late, besides
a--"

The whip cracked, and Pax, leaping forward, seized the side of the
engine.  Six brass helmets bounded into the air, and their owners
settled on their seats, as the horses made that momentary pause and
semi-rear which often precedes a dashing start.  The man whom he had
been insulting held out a hand; Pax seized it, and was next moment in a
terrestrial heaven, while calmness personified sauntered into the back
office to make a note of the circumstance, and resume his pipe.

Oh! it was a brief but maddening ride.  To experience such a magnificent
rush seemed to Pax worth living for.  It was not more than half-a-mile;
but in that brief space there were three corners to turn like zigzag
lightning, which they did chiefly on the two near wheels, and there were
carts, vans, cabs, drays, apple-stalls, children, dogs, and cats
innumerable.  To have run over or upset these would have been small
gratification to the comparatively tender spirit of Pax, but to _shave_
them; to graze the apple-stalls; to just scrape a lamp-post with your
heart in your mouth; to hear the tremendous roar of the firemen; to see
the abject terror of some people, the excitement of others, the obedient
"skedaddling" of all, while the sparks from the pump-boiler trailed
behind, and the two bull's-eyes glared ahead, so that the engine
resembled some awful monster rushing through thick and thin, and waving
in triumph its fiery tail--ah! words are but feeble exponents of
thought: it was excruciating ecstasy!  To have been born for this one
burst, and died, would have been better than never to have been born at
all,--in the estimation of the enthusiastic Peter Pax!

A few minutes after George Aspel had borne the fainting Miss Lillycrop
from the house the engine arrived.  Some of the men swarmed into the
house, and dived to the basement, as if fire and smoke were their
natural food.  Others got the engine to work in a few seconds, but
already the flames had rushed into the lower rooms and passages and
licked away the windows.  The thick stream of water had just begun to
descend on the fire, when another engine came rattling to the field, and
its brazen-headed warriors leaped down to join the battle.

"Oh!" groaned Miss Lillycrop at that moment, recovering in Aspel's arms.
"Oh!  Tottie--To-o-o-o-tie's in the kitchen!"

Little Pax heard and understood.  In one moment he bounded through the
blazing doorway and up the smoking stair.

Just then the fire-escape came into view, towering up against the black
sky.

"Hold her, some one!" cried Aspel, dropping his poor burden into the
ready arms of a policeman.

"The boy's lost!" he exclaimed, leaping after Pax.

Aspel was a practised diver.  Many a time had he tried his powers under
the Atlantic waves on the west of Ireland.  He drew one long breath, and
was in the attic kitchen before it was expended.  Here he found little
Pax and Tottie on the floor.  The former had fallen, suffocated, in the
act of hauling the latter along by the hair of the head.  Aspel did not
see them.  He stumbled over them, grasped both in his strong arms, and
bore them to the staircase.  It was by that time a roaring furnace.  His
power of retaining breath was exhausted.  In desperation he turned sharp
to the right, and dashed in Miss Lillycrop's drawing-room door, just as
the fire-escape performed the same feat on one of the windows.  The gush
of air drove back the smoke for one moment.  Gasping and reeling to the
window, Aspel hurled the children into the bag of the escape.  He
retained sufficient power to plunge in head first after them and ram
them down its throat.  All three arrived at the bottom in a state of
insensibility.

In this state they were borne to a neighbouring house, and soon restored
to consciousness.

The firemen battled there during the greater part of that night, and
finally gained the victory; but, before this happy consummation was
attained, poor Miss Lillycrop's home was gutted and her little property
reduced to ashes.

In these circumstances she and her little maid found a friend in need in
Miss Stivergill, and an asylum in Rosebud Cottage.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

BEGINS WITH JUVENILE FLIRTATION, AND ENDS WITH CANINE CREMATION.

The disreputable nature of the wind which blows good to nobody has been
so frequently referred to and commented on by writers in general that it
merits only passing notice here.  The particular breeze which fanned the
flames that consumed the property that belonged to Miss Lillycrop, and
drove that lady to a charming retreat in the country thereby rescuing
her from a trying existence in town, also blew small Peter Pax in the
same direction.

"Boy," said Miss Stivergill in stern tones, on the occasion of her first
visit to the hospital in which Pax was laid up for a short time after
his adventure, "you're a good boy.  I like you.  The first of your sex I
ever said that to."

"Thank you, ma'am.  I hope I shan't be the last," returned Pax
languidly, for he was still weak from the effects of the partial
roasting and suffocation he had undergone.

"Miss Lillycrop desired me to come and see you," resumed Miss
Stivergill.  "She has told me how bravely you tried to rescue poor
little Bones, who--"

"Not much hurt, I hope?" asked the boy eagerly.

"No, very little--scarcely at all, I'm glad to say.  Those inexplicable
creatures called firemen, who seem to me what you may call fire-fiends
of a good-natured and recklessly hilarious type, say that her having
fallen down with her nose close to the ground, where there is usually a
free current of air, saved her.  At all events she _is_ saved, and quite
well."

"I hope I didn't haul much of the hair out of her poor head?" said Pax.

"Apparently not, if one may judge from the very large quantity that
remains," replied his visitor.

"You see, ma'am, in neck-or-nothin' scrimmages o' that sort," continued
Pax, in the off-hand tone of one much experienced in such scrimmages,
"one can't well stop to pick and choose; besides, I couldn't see well,
d'ee see? an' her hair came first to hand, you know, an' was convenient.
It's well for both on us, however, that that six foot odd o'
magnificence came to the rescue in time.  I like 'im, I do, an' shall
owe 'im a good turn for savin' little Bones.--What was her other name,
did you say, ma'am?"

"I didn't mention any other name, but I believe it is Tottie.--Now,
little Peter, when the doctor gives you leave to be moved, you are to
come to me to recruit your health in the country."

"Thank you, ma'am.  You're too good," said Pax, becoming languid again.
"Pray give my best respects to Tottie and Miss Lillycrop."

"So small, and so pretty, and such a wise little thing," murmured Miss
Stivergill, unaware, apparently, that she soliloquised aloud.

"So big, and so ugly, and such a good-hearted stoopid old thing!"
murmured Pax; but it is only just to add that he was too polite to allow
the murmur to be heard.

"Good-bye, little Peter, till we meet again," said Miss Stivergill,
turning away abruptly.

"Farewell, ma'am," said Pax, "farewell; and if for ever--"

He stopped, because his visitor was gone.

According to this arrangement, Pax found himself, not many days after,
revelling in the enjoyment of what he styled "tooral-ooral" felicity--
among cows and hay, sunshine and milk, buttercups and cream, green
meadows and blue skies,--free as a butterfly from telegraphic messagery
and other postal cares.  He was allowed to ramble about at will, and, as
little Bones was supposed to be slightly invalided by her late
semi-suffocation, she was frequently allowed by her indulgent mistress
to accompany him.

Seated on a stile one day, Pax drew Tottie out as to her early life, and
afterwards gave an account of his own in exchange.

"How strange," said Tottie, "that you and I should both have had bybies
to nuss w'en we was young, ain't it?"

"It is, Tot--very remarkable.  And we've had a sad fate, both of us, in
havin' bin wrenched from our babbies.  But the wrench couldn't have bin
so bad in your case as in mine, of course, for your babby was nobody to
you, whereas mine was a full cousin, an' such a dear one too.  Oh, Tot,
you've no notion what splendid games we used to have, an' such
c'lections of things I used to make for 'er!  Of course she was too
young to understand it, you know, for she could neither walk nor speak,
and I don't think could understand, though she crowed sometimes as if
she did.  My! how she crowed!--But what's the matter, Tot?"

Tottie was pouting.

"I don't like your bybie at all--not one bit," she said emphatically.

"Not like my babby!" exclaimed Pax.

"No, I don't, 'cause it isn't 'alf so good as mine."

"Well," returned Pax, with a smile, "I was took from mine.  I didn't
forsake it like you."

"I _didn't_ forsake it," cried Tottie, with flashing eyes, and shaking
her thick curls indignantly--which latter, by the way, since her coming
under the stern influence of Miss Stivergill, had been disentangled, and
hung about her like a golden glory.--"I left it to go to service, and
mother takes care of it till I return home.  I won't speak to you any
more.  I hate _your_ bybie, and I _adore_ mine!"

So saying, little Bones jumped up and ran away.  Small Pax made no
attempt to stop her or to follow.  He was too much taken aback by the
sudden burst of passion to be able for more than a prolonged whistle,
followed by a still more prolonged stare.  Thereafter he sauntered away
slowly, ruminating, perhaps, on the fickle character of woman, even in
her undeveloped stages.

Tottie climbed hastily over a stile and turned into a green lane, where
she meant to give full vent to her feelings in a satisfactory cry, when
she was met face to face by Mr Abel Bones.

"Why, father!" she exclaimed, running to her sire with a look of joyful
surprise, for occasional bad treatment had failed to dry up the
bottomless well of love in her little heart.

"Hush!  Tottie; there--take my hand, an' don't kick up such a row.  You
needn't look so scared at seein' me here.  I'm fond o' the country, you
know, an' I've come out to 'ave a little walk and a little talk with
you.--Who was that you was talkin' with just now?"

Tottie told him.

"Stoppin' here, I s'pose?"

"Yes.  He's bin here for some time, but goes away soon--now that he's
better.  It was him as saved my life--at least him and Mr Aspel, you
know."

"No, I don't know, Tot.  Let's hear all about it," replied Mr Bones,
with a look of unwonted gravity.

Tottie went off at once into a glowing account of the fire and the
