him, was sent on a secret mission to Ramsgate.  The reader will observe
how fortunate it was that his mission was _secret_, because it frees us
from the necessity of setting down here an elaborate and tedious
explanation as to how, when, and where the various threads of his
mission became interwoven with the fabric of our tale.  Suffice it to
say that the only part of his mission with which we are acquainted is
that which had reference to two men--one of whom was named Mr Larks,
the other Morley Jones.

Now, it so happened that Queeker's acquaintance, Mr Durant, had an
intimate friend who dwelt near a beautiful village in Kent.  When
Queeker mentioned the circumstance of the secret mission which called
him to Ramsgate, he discovered that the old gentleman was on the point
of starting for this village, in company with his daughter and her
cousin Fanny.

"You'll travel with us, I hope, Queeker; our roads lie in the same
direction, at least a part of the way, you know," said the hearty little
old gentleman, with good-nature beaming in every wrinkle, from the crown
of his bald head to the last fold of his treble chin; "it will be such a
comfort to have you to help me take care of the girls.  And if you can
spare time to turn aside for a day or two, I promise you a hearty
welcome from my friend--whose residence, named Jenkinsjoy, is an antique
paradise, and his hospitality unbounded.  He has splendid horses, too,
and will give you a gallop over as fine a country as exists between this
and the British Channel.  You ride, of course?"

Queeker admitted that he could ride a little.

"At least," he added, after a pause, "I used frequently to get rides on
a cart-horse when I was a very little boy."

So it was arranged that Queeker should travel with them.  Moreover, he
succeeded in obtaining from his employers permission to delay for three
days the prosecution of the mission--which, although secret, was not
immediately pressing--in order that he might visit Jenkinsjoy.  It was
fortunate that, when he went to ask this brief holiday, he found Mr
Merryheart in the office.  Had it been his mischance to fall upon
Dashope, he would have received a blunt refusal and prompt dismissal--so
thoroughly were the joys of that gentleman identified with the woes of
other people.

But, great though Queeker's delight undoubtedly was on this occasion, it
was tempered by a soul-harassing care, which drew forth whole quires of
poetical effusions to the moon and other celestial bodies.  This secret
sorrow was caused by the dreadful and astonishing fact, that, do what he
would to the contrary, the weather-cock of his affections was veering
slowly but steadily away from Katie, and pointing more and more
decidedly towards Fanny Hennings!  It is but simple justice to the poor
youth to state that he loathed and abhorred himself in consequence.

"There am I," he soliloquised, on the evening before the journey began,
"a monster, a brute, a lower animal almost, who have sought with all my
strength to gain--perchance _have_ gained--the innocent, trusting heart
of Katie Durant, and yet, without really meaning it, but, somehow,
without being able to help it, I am--_not_ falling in love; oh! no,
perish the thought! but, but--falling into something strangely,
mysteriously, incomprehensibly, similar to--Oh! base ingrate that I am,
is there no way; no back-door by which--?"

Starting up, and seizing a pen, at this point of irrepressible
inspiration, he wrote, reading aloud as he set down the burning
thoughts--

  Oh for a postern in the rear,
  Where wretched man might disappear;
  And never more should seek her!

  Fly, fly to earth's extremest bounds,--

Bounds, mounds, lounds, founds, kounds, downds, rounds, pounds,
zounds!--hounds--ha! hounds--I have it--

  "Fly, fly to earth's extremest bounds,
  With huntsmen, horses, horns, and hounds
  And die!--dejected Queeker.

"I wonder," thought Queeker, as he sat biting the end of his quill--his
usual method of courting inspiration, "I wonder if there is anything
prophetic in these lines!  Durant said that his friend has splendid
horses.  They may, perhaps, be hunters!  Ha! my early ambition,
perchance, youth's fond dream, may yet be realised!  But let me not
hope.  Hope always tells a false as well as flattering tale _to me_.
She has ever been, in my experience" (he was bitter at this point) "an
incorrigible li--ahem! story-teller."

Striking his clenched fist heavily on the table, Queeker rose, put on
his hat, and went round to Mr Durant's merely to inquire whether he
could be of any service--not that he could venture to offer assistance
in the way of packing, but there _might_ be something such as roping
trunks, or writing and affixing addresses, in regard to which he might
perhaps render himself useful.

"Why, Miss Durant," he said, on entering, "you are _always_ busy."

"Am I?" said Katie, with a smile, as she rose and shook hands.

"Yes, I--I--assure you, Miss Durant," said Queeker, bowing to Fanny, on
whose fat pretty face there was a scarlet flush, the result either of
the suddenness of Queeker's entry, or of the suppression of her
inveterate desire to laugh, "I assure you that it quite rouses my
admiration to observe the ease with which you can turn your hand to
anything.  You can write out accounts better than any fellow in our
office.  Then you play and sing with so much ease, and I often find you
making clothes for poor people, with pounds of tea and sugar in your
pockets, besides many other things, and now, here you are painting
like--like--one of the old masters!"

This was quite an unusual burst on the part of Queeker, who felt as
though he were making some amends for his unfaithfulness in thus
recalling and emphatically asserting the unquestionably good qualities
of his lady-love.  He felt as if he were honestly attempting to win
himself back to his allegiance.

"You are very complimentary," said Katie, with a glance at her cousin,
which threw that young lady into silent convulsions.

"Not at all," cried Queeker, forcing his enthusiasm up to white heat,
and seizing a drawing, which he held up before him, in the vain attempt
to shut Fanny out of his sight.

"Now, I call this most beautiful," he said, in tones of genuine
admiration.  "I _never_ saw anything so sweet before."

"Indeed!" said Katie, who observed that the youth was gazing over the
top of the drawing at her cousin.  "I am _so_ glad you like it, for, to
say truth, I have felt disappointed with it myself, and papa says it is
only so-so.  Do point out to me its faults, Mr Queeker, and the parts
you like best."

She rose and looked over Queeker's shoulder with much interest, and took
hold of the drawing to keep it firmly in its position.

There was an excessively merry twinkle in Katie's eyes as she watched
the expression of Queeker's face when he exclaimed--

"Faults, Miss Durant, there are no--eh! why, what--"

"Oh you wicked, deceptive man, you've got it upside down!" said Katie,
shaking her finger at the unhappy youth, who stammered, tried to
explain--to apologise--failed, broke down, and talked unutterable
nonsense, to the infinite delight of his fair tormentor.

As for Fanny, that Hebe bent her head suddenly over her work-basket, and
thrust her face into it as if searching with microscopic intensity for
something that positively refused to be found.  All that we can safely
affirm in regard to her is, that if her face bore any resemblance to the
scarlet of her neck, the fact that her workbox did not take fire is
little short of a miracle!

Fortunately for all parties Queeker inadvertently trod on the cat's
tail, which resulted in a spurt so violent as to justify a total change
of subject.  Before the storm thus raised had calmed down, Mr Durant
entered the room.

At Jenkinsjoy Queeker certainly did meet with a reception even more
hearty than he had been led to expect.  Mr Durant's friend, Stoutheart,
his amiable wife and daughters and strapping sons, received the youthful
limb of the law with that frank hospitality which we are taught to
attribute "to Merrie England in the olden time."  The mansion was
old-fashioned and low-roofed, trellis-worked and creeper-loved; addicted
to oak panelling, balustrades, and tapestried walls, and highly suitable
to ghosts of a humorous and agreeable tendency.  Indeed it was said that
one of the rooms actually _was_ haunted at that very time; but Queeker
did not see any ghosts, although he afterwards freely confessed to
having seen all the rooms in the house more or less haunted by fairy
spirits of the fair sex, and masculine ghosts in buckskins and
top-boots!  The whole air and aspect of the neighbourhood was such that
Queeker half expected to find a May-pole in the neighbouring village,
sweet shepherdesses in straw hats, pink ribbons, and short kirtles in
the fields, and gentle shepherds with long crooks, playing antique
flageolets on green banks, with innocent-looking dogs beside them, and
humble-minded sheep reposing in Arcadian felicity at their feet.

"Where does the meet take place to-day, Tom?" asked Mr Stoutheart
senior of Mr Stoutheart junior, while seated at breakfast the first
morning after their arrival at Jenkinsjoy.

"At Curmersfield," replied young Stoutheart.

"Ah, not a bad piece of country to cross.  You remember when you and I
went over it together, Amy?"

"We have gone over it so often together, papa," replied Amy, "that I
really don't know to which occasion you refer."

"Why, that time when we met the hounds unexpectedly; when you were
mounted on your favourite Wildfire, and appeared to have imbibed some of
his spirit, for you went off at a tangent, crying out, `Come along,
papa!' and cleared the hedge at the roadside, crossed Slapperton's farm,
galloped up the lane leading to Curmersfield, took the ditch, with the
low fence beyond at Cumitstrong's turnip-field, in a flying leap--
obliging me to go quarter of a mile round by the gate--and overtook the
hounds just as they broke away on a false scent in the direction of the
Neckornothing ditch."

"Oh yes, I remember," replied Amy with a gentle smile; "it was a
charming gallop.  I wished to continue it, but you thought the ground
would be too much for me, though I have gone over it twice since then in
perfect safety.  You are far too timid, papa."

Queeker gazed and listened in open-mouthed amazement, for the young girl
who acknowledged in an offhand way that she had performed such
tremendous feats of horsemanship was modest, pretty, unaffected, and
feminine.

"I wonder," thought Queeker, "if Fan--ah, I mean Katie--could do that
sort of thing?"

He looked loyally at Katie, but thought, disloyally, of her cousin,
accused himself of base unfaithfulness, and, seizing a hot roll, began
to eat violently.

"Would you like to see the meet, Mr Queeker?" said Mr Stoutheart
senior; "I can give you a good mount.  My own horse, Slapover, is
neither so elegant nor so high-spirited as Wildfire, but he can go over
anything, and is quite safe."

A sensitive spring had been touched in the bosom of Queeker, which
opened a floodgate that set loose an astonishing and unprecedented flow
of enthusiastic eloquence.

"I shall like it of all things," he cried, with sparkling eyes and
heightened colour.  "It has been my ambition ever since I was a little
boy to mount a thoroughbred and follow the hounds.  I assure you the
idea of `crossing country,' as it is called, I believe, and taking
hedges, ditches, five-barred gates and everything as we go, has a charm
for me which is absolutely inexpressible--"

Queeker stopped abruptly, because he observed a slight flush on Fanny's
cheeks and a pursed expression on Fanny's lips, and felt uncertain as to
whether or not she was laughing at him internally.

"Well said, Queeker," cried Mr Stoutheart enthusiastically; "it's a
pity you are a town-bred man.  Such spirit as yours can find vent only
in the free air of the country!"

"Amy, dear," said Katie, with an extremely innocent look at her friend,
"do huntsmen in this part of England usually take `everything as they
go?'  I think Mr Queeker used that expression."

"N-not exactly," replied Amy, with a smile and glance of uncertainty, as
if she did not quite see the drift of the question.

"Ah!  I thought not," returned Katie with much gravity.  "I had always
been under the impression that huntsmen were in the habit of going
_round_ stackyards, and houses, and such things--not _over_ them."

Queeker was stabbed--stabbed to the heart!  It availed not that the
company laughed lightly at the joke, and that Mr Stoutheart said that
he (Queeker) should realise his young dream, and reiterated the
assurance that his horse would carry him over _anything_ if he only held
tightly on and let him go.  He had been stabbed by Katie--the gentle
Katie--the girl whom he had adored so long--ha! there was comfort in the
word _had_; it belonged to the past; it referred to things gone by; it
rhymed with sad, bad, mad; it suggested a period of remote antiquity,
and pointed to a hazy future.  As the latter thought rushed through his
heated brain, he turned his eyes on Fanny, with that bold look of
dreadful determination that marks the traitor when, having fully made up
his mind, he turns his back on his queen and flag for ever!  But poor
Queeker found little comfort in the new prospect, for Fanny had been
gently touched on the elbow by Katie when she committed her savage
attack; and when Queeker looked at the fair, fat cousin, she was
involved in the agonies of a suppressed but tremendous giggle.

After breakfast two horses were brought to the door.  Wildfire, a sleek,
powerful roan of large size, was a fit steed for the stalwart Tom, who,
in neatly-fitting costume and Hessian boots, got into the saddle like a
man accustomed to it.  The other horse, Slapover, was a large,
strong-boned, somewhat heavy steed, suitable for a man who weighed
sixteen stone, and stood six feet in his socks.

"Now then, jump up, Queeker," said Mr Stoutheart, holding the stirrup.

If Queeker had been advised to vault upon the ridge-pole of the house,
he could not have looked more perplexed than he did as he stood looking
up at the towering mass of horse-flesh, to the summit of which he was
expected to climb.  However, being extremely light, and Mr Stoutheart
senior very strong, he was got into the saddle somehow.

"Where _are_ the stirrups?" said Queeker, with a perplexed air, trying
to look over the side of his steed.

"Why, they've forgot to shorten 'em," said Mr Stoutheart with a laugh,
observing that the irons were dangling six inches below the rider's
toes.

This was soon rectified.  Queeker's glazed leather leggings--which were
too large for him, and had a tendency to turn round--were put straight;
the reins were gathered up, and the huntsman rode away.

"All you've to do is to hold on," shouted Mr Stoutheart, as they rode
through the gate.  "He is usually a little skittish at the start, but
quiet as a lamb afterwards."

Queeker made no reply.  His mind was brooding on his wrongs and sorrows;
for Katie had quietly whispered him to take care and not fall off, and
Fanny had giggled again.

"I _must_ cure him of his foolish fancy," thought Katie as she
re-entered the house, "for Fanny's sake, if for nothing else; though I
cannot conceive what she can see to like in him.  There is no accounting
for taste!"

"I can at all events _die_;"--thought Queeker, as he rode along, shaking
the reins and pressing his little legs against the horse as if with the
savage intention of squeezing the animal's ribs together.

"There _was_ prophetic inspiration in the lines!--yes," he continued,
repeating them--

  "Fly, fly, to earth's extremest bounds,
  With huntsmen, horses, horn, and hounds,
  And die--dejected Queeker!

"I'll change that--it shall be rejected Queeker _now_."

For some time Tom Stoutheart and Queeker rode over "hill and dale"--that
is to say, they traversed four miles of beautiful undulating and
diversified country at a leisurely pace, having started in good time.

"Your father," observed Queeker, as they rode side by side down a green
lane, "said, I think, when we started, that this horse was apt to be
skittish at the start.  Is he difficult to hold in?"

"Oh no," replied Tom, with a reassuring smile.  "He is as quiet and
manageable as any man could wish.  He does indeed bounce about a little
when we burst away at first, and is apt then to get the bit in his
teeth; but you've only to keep a tight rein and he'll go all right.  His
only fault is a habit of tossing his head, which is a little awkward
until you get used to it."

"Yes, I have discovered that fault already," replied Queeker, as the
horse gave a practical illustration of it by tossing his enormous head
back until it reached to within an inch of the point of his rider's
nose.  "Twice he has just touched my forehead.  Had I been bending a
little forward I suppose he would have given me an unpleasant blow."

"Rather," said Stoutheart junior.  "I knew one poor fellow who was
struck in that way by his horse and knocked off insensible.  I think he
was killed, but don't feel quite sure as to that."

