
"The painter!  What painter?  The portrait!  What portrait, Senor?"

"I refer to your portrait, which I accidentally found hanging in my
apartment."

"Ah! by the mirror?"

"Yes, by the mirror," I answered sullenly.

"But, it is not _mine_, Senor Capitan."

"Ha!--how?  Not yours?"

"No; it is the portrait of my cousin, Maria de Merced.  They say we were
much alike."

My heart expanded.  My whole frame quivered under the influence of
joyful emotions.

"And the gentleman?"  I faltered out.

"Don Emilio?  He was cousin's lover--_huyeron_," (they eloped).

As she repeated the last word she turned her head away, and I thought
there was a sadness in her manner.

I was about to speak, when she continued:

"It was her room--we have not touched anything."

"And where is your cousin now?"

"We know not."

"There is a mystery," thought I.  I pressed the subject no farther.  It
was nothing to me now.  My heart was happy.

"Let us walk farther, Lupita."

She turned her eyes upon me with an expression of wonder.  The change in
my manner--so sudden--how was she to account for it?  I could have knelt
before her and explained all.  Reserve disappeared, and the confidence
of the preceding night was fully restored.

We wandered along under the _guardarayas_, amidst sounds and scenes
suggestive of love and tenderness.  Love!  We heard it in the songs of
the birds--in the humming of the bees--in the voices of all nature
around us.  We felt it in our own hearts.  The late cloud had passed,
making the sky still brighter than before; the reaction had heightened
our mutual passion to the intensity of non-resistance; and we walked on,
her hand clasped in mine.  We had eyes only for each other.

We reached a clump of cocoa-trees; one of them had fallen, and its
smooth trunk offered a seat, protected from the sun by the shadowy
leaves of its fellows.  On this we sat down.  There was no resistance--
no reasoning process--no calculation of advantages and chances, such as
is too often mingled with the noble passion of love.  We felt nothing of
this--nothing but that undefinable impulse which had entered our hearts,
and to whose mystical power neither of us dreamed of offering
opposition.  Delay and duty were alike forgotten.

"I shall ask the question now--I shall know my fate at once," were my
thoughts.

In the changing scenes of a soldier's life there is but little time for
the slow formalities, the zealous vigils, the complicated _finesse_ of
courtship.  Perhaps this consideration impelled me.  I have but little
confidence in the cold heart that is won by a series of assiduities.
There is too much calculation of after-events--too much selfishness.

These reflections passed through my mind.  I bent towards my companion,
and whispered to her in that language--rich above all others in the
vocabulary of the heart:

"_Guadalupe, tu me amas_?"  (Guadalupe, do you love me?)

"_Yo te amo_!" was the simple reply.  Need I describe the joyful
feelings that filled my heart at that moment?  My happiness was
complete.

The confession rendered her sacred in my eyes, and we sat for some time
silent, enjoying that transport only known to those who have truly,
purely loved.

The trampling of hoofs!  It was Clayley at the head of the troop.  They
were mounted, and waiting for me.  Don Cosme was impatient; so was the
Dona Joaquina.  I could not blame them, knowing the cause.

"Ride forward!  I shall follow presently."

The horsemen filed off into the fields, headed by the lieutenant, beside
whom rode Don Cosme, on his white mule.

"You will soon return, Enrique?"

"I shall lose no opportunity of seeing you.  I shall long for the hour
more than you, I fear."

"Oh! no, no!"

"Believe me yes, Lupita!  Say again you will never cease to love me."

"Never, never!  _Tuya--tuya--hasta la muerte_!"  (Yours--yours--till
death!)

How often has this question been asked!  How often answered as above!

I sprang into the saddle.  A parting look--another from a distance--a
wave of the hand--and the next moment I was urging my horse in full
gallop under the shadowy palms.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

A DISAPPOINTMENT AND A NEW PLAN.

I overtook my companions as they were entering the woods.  Clayley, who
had been looking back from time to time, brushed alongside, as if
wishing to enter into conversation.

"Hard work, Captain, to leave such quarters.  By Jove!  I could have
stayed for ever."

"Come, Clayley--you are in love."

"Yes; they who live in glass houses--.  Oh! if I could only speak the
lingo as you do!"

I could not help smiling, for I had overheard him through the trees
making the most he could of his partner's broken English.  I was curious
to know how he had sped, and whether he had been as `quick upon the
trigger' as myself.  My curiosity was soon relieved.

"I tell you, Captain," he continued, "if I could only have talked it, I
would have put the question on the spot.  I did try to get a `yes' or a
`no' out of her; but she either couldn't or wouldn't understand me.  It
was all bad luck."

"Could you not make her understand you?  Surely she knows English enough
for that?"

"I thought so too; but when I spoke about love she only laughed and
slapped me on the face with her fan.  Oh, no; the thing must be done in
Spanish, that's plain; and you see I am going to set about it in
earnest.  She loaned me these."

Saying this, he pulled out of the crown of his foraging-cap a couple of
small volumes, which I recognised as a Spanish grammar and dictionary.
I could not resist laughing aloud.

"Comrade, you will find the best dictionary to be the lady herself."

"That's true; but how the deuce are we to get back again?  A mule-hunt
don't happen every day."

"I fancy there will be some difficulty in it."

I had already thought of this.  It was no easy matter to steal away from
camp--one's brother-officers are so solicitous about your appearance at
drills and parades.  Don Cosme's rancho was at least ten miles from the
lines, and the road would not be the safest for the solitary lover.  The
prospect of frequent returns was not at all flattering.

"Can't we steal out at night?" suggested Clayley.  "I think we might
mount half a dozen of our fellows, and do it snugly.  What do you say,
Captain?"

"Clayley, I cannot return without this brother.  I have almost given my
word to that effect."

"You have?  That is bad!  I fear there is no prospect of getting him out
as you propose."

My companion's prophetic foreboding proved but too correct,
for on nearing the camp we were met by an aide-de-camp of the
commander-in-chief, who informed me that, on that very morning, all
communication between the foreign ships of war and the besieged city had
been prohibited.

Don Cosme's journey, then, would be in vain.  I explained this, advising
him to return to his family.

"Do not make it known--say that some time is required, and you have left
the matter in my hands.  Be assured I shall be among the first to enter
the city, and I shall find the boy, and bring him to his mother in
safety."

This was the only consolation I could offer.

"You are kind, Capitan--very kind; but I know that nothing can now be
done.  We can only hope and pray."

The old man had dropped into a bent attitude, his countenance marked by
the deepest melancholy.

Taking the Frenchman, Raoul, along with me, I rode back until I had
placed him beyond the danger of the straggling plunderer, when we shook
hands and parted.  As he left me, I turned to look after him.  He still
sat in that attitude that betokens deep dejection, his shoulders bent
forward over the neck of his mule, while he gazed vacantly on the path.
My heart sank at the spectacle, and, sad and dispirited, I rode at a
lagging pace towards the camp.

Not a shot had as yet been fired against the town, but our batteries
were nearly perfected, and several mortars were mounted and ready to
fling in their deadly missiles.  I knew that every shot and shell would
carry death into the devoted city, for there was not a point within its
walls out of range of a ten-inch howitzer.  Women and children must
perish along with armed soldiers; and the boy--he, too, might be a
victim.  Would this be the tidings I should carry to his home?  And how
should I be received by her with such a tale upon my lips?  Already had
I sent back a sorrowing father.

"Is there no way to save him, Raoul?"

"Captain?" inquired the man, starting at the vehemence of my manner.

A sudden thought had occurred to me.

"Are you well acquainted with Vera Cruz?"

"I know every street, Captain."

"Where do those arches lead that open from the sea?  There is one on
each side of the mole."

I had observed these when visiting a friend, an officer of the navy, on
board his ship.

"They are conductors, Captain, to carry off the overflow of the sea
after a norther.  They lead under the city, opening at various places.
I have had the pleasure of passing through them."

"Ha!  How?"

"On a little smuggling expedition."

"It is possible, then, to reach the town by these?"

"Nothing easier, unless they may have a guard at the mouth; but that is
not likely.  They would not dream of anyone's making the attempt."

"How would _you_ like to make it?"

"If the Captain wishes it, I will bring him a bottle of _eau-de-vie_
from the Cafe de Santa Anna."

"I do not wish you to go alone.  I would accompany you."

"Think of it, Captain; there is risk for _you_ in such an undertaking.
_I_ may go safely.  No one knows that I have joined you, I believe.  If
_you_ are taken--."

"Yes, yes; I know well the result."

"The risk is not great, either," continued the Frenchman, in a
half-soliloquy.  "Disguised as Mexicans, we might do it; you speak the
language as well as I.  If you wish it, Captain--."

"I do."

"I am ready, then."

I knew the fellow well: one of those dare-devil spirits, ready for
anything that promised adventure--a child of fortune--a stray waif
tumbling about upon the waves of chance--gifted with head and heart of
no common order--ignorant of books, yet educated in experience.  There
was a dash of the heroic in his character that had won my admiration,
and I was fond of his company.

It was a desperate adventure--I knew that; but I felt stronger interest
than common in the fate of this boy.  My own future fate, too, was in a
great degree connected with his safety.  There was something in the very
danger that lured me on to tempt it.  I felt that it would be adding
another chapter to a life which I have termed "adventurous."



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

A FOOLHARDY ADVENTURE.

At night Raoul and I, disguised in the leathern dresses of two
rancheros, stole round the lines, and reached Punta Hornos, a point
beyond our own pickets.  Here we "took the water", wading waist-deep.

This was about ten o'clock.  The tide was just setting out, and the
night, by good fortune, was as dark as pitch.

As the swell rolled in we were buried to the neck, and when it rolled
back again we bent forward; so that at no time could much of our bodies
be seen above the surface.

In this manner, half wading, half swimming, we kept up to the town.

It was a toilsome journey, but the water was warm, and the sand on the
bottom firm and level.  We were strengthened--I at least--by hope and
the knowledge of danger.  Doubtless my companion felt the latter
stimulant as much as I.

We soon reached the battlements of Santiago, where we proceeded with
increased caution.  We could see the sentry up against the sky, pacing
along the parapet.  His shrill cry startled us.  We thought we had been
discovered.  The darkness alone prevented this.

At length we passed him, and came opposite the city, whose battlements
rested upon the water's edge.

The tide was at ebb, and a bed of black, weed-covered rocks lay between
the sea and the bastion.

We approached these with caution, and, crawling over the slippery
boulders, after a hundred yards or so found ourselves in the entrance of
one of the conductors.

Here we halted to rest ourselves, sitting down upon a ledge of rock.  We
were in no more danger here than in our own tents, yet within twenty
feet were men who, had they known our proximity, would have strung us up
like a pair of dogs.

But our danger was far from lying at this end of the adventure.

After a rest of half an hour we kept up into the conductor.  My
companion seemed perfectly at home in this subterranean passage, walking
along as boldly as if it had been brilliantly lighted with gas.

After proceeding some distance we approached a grating, where a light
shot in from above.

"Can we pass out here?"  I inquired.

"Not yet, Captain," answered Raoul in a whisper.  "Farther on."

We passed the grating, then another and another, and at length reached
one where only a feeble ray struggled downward through the bars.

Here my guide stopped, and listened attentively for several minutes.
Then, stretching out his hand, he undid the fastening of the grate, and
silently turned it upon its hinge.  He next swung himself up until his
head projected above ground.  In this position he again listened,
looking cautiously on all sides.

Satisfied at length that there was no one near, he drew his body up
through the grating and disappeared.  After a short interval he
returned, and called down:

"Come, Captain."

I swung myself up to the street.  Raoul shut down the trap with care.

"Take marks, Captain," whispered he; "we may get separated."

It was a dismal suburb.  No living thing was apparent, with the
exception of a gang of prowling dogs, lean and savage, as all dogs are
during a siege.  An image, decked in all the glare of gaud and tinsel,
looked out of a glazed niche in the opposite wall.  A dim lamp burned at
its feet, showing to the charitable a receptacle for their offerings.  A
quaint old steeple loomed in the darkness overhead.

"What church?"  I asked Raoul.

"La Magdalena."

"That will do.  Now onward."

"_Buenas noches, Senor_!"  (good-night) said Raoul to a soldier who
passed us, wrapped in his great-coat.

"_Buenas noches_!" returned the man in a gruff voice.

We stole cautiously along the streets, keeping in the darker ones to
avoid observation.  The citizens were mostly in their beds; but groups
of soldiers were straggling about, and patrols met us at every corner.

It became necessary to pass through one of the streets that was
brilliantly lighted.  When about half-way up it a fellow came swinging
along, and, noticing our strange appearance, stopped and looked after
us.

Our dresses, as I have said, were of leather; our calzoneros, as well as
jackets, were shining with the sea-water, and dripping upon the pavement
at every step.

Before we could walk beyond reach, the man shouted out:

"_Carajo! caballeros_, why don't you strip before entering the _bano_?"

"What is it?" cried a soldier, coming up and stopping us.

A group of his comrades joined him, and we were hurried into the light.

"_Mil diablos_!" exclaimed one of the soldiers, recognising Raoul; "our
