every tart we sell.  We ought to sell four times as many as Bob did,
oughtn't we?"

"Quite that," said they.

"Very well; see how that works out."

And Mr Stratton took his chalk and worked out this sum on the black-
board:--

12 bad tarts at 11/2 pence = 1 shilling, 6 pence, cost 9 pence, profit 9
pence.

48 good tarts at 1 penny = 4 shillings, cost 3 shillings, profit 1
shilling.

"You see," said he, "if we can only increase the demand, we shall easily
make Bob's profit, and more.  Having good tarts will increase it in one
way, and selling cheap will increase it another.  It's worth trying,
anyhow."

And so the deliberations went on, and the boys' minds gradually took on
the new idea.

The thirty shillings, Mr Stratton reported, had been advanced, and Mrs
Stratton was appointed a subcommittee to lay it out.  A method of
accounts was arranged.  The first day's stock was to be charged at the
selling price to the shopman for the day.  At the end of the day he was
to hand over to the treasurer the money he had taken and what was left
of the stock, which two items together ought to make up the sum of his
responsibility.  It was felt that in a very few days the committee would
ascertain pretty nearly what quantity of each article was consumed, and
would be able to order accordingly.  Any deficiency was to be set down
to bad management, and no other reason; and any shopman deficient three
days running was to forfeit his right to officiate again during that
term.

Lots were solemnly drawn for the distinction of opening the shop, and
the choice fell on D'Arcy, and Lickford, who for the next day or two
went about shaking in their shoes.  As the day drew nearer, the venture
seemed a tremendous one, and Mr Stratton had to use all his powers of
encouragement to keep his colleagues from not taking fright at the last
moment.

"It will all go swimmingly, you'll see," said he.  "I will hold myself
in readiness to come down and back you up if there's the least hitch,
but I shall be greatly disappointed if you need me."

The last act of the committee before commencing proceedings was to draw
up a manifesto, which was copied out and duly affixed to the notice
boards and the shop-shutters on the morning of the opening.

_Under the distinguished patronage of Mr and Mrs Stratton_.

  The Fellsgarth Shop will be opened this day from 11 to 12,
  And 4 To 8,
  and daily (sundays excepted) till further notice.
  The following prime goods, at the cheap prices affixed.
  [Here followed a list of the stores.]
  Ready money.  No tick.  Change given.
  no more stomach-ache!!
  Real jam!
  Ripe fruit!
  Fresh pastry!
  All the season's novelties.  Nothing stale.
  Boys of Fellsgarth--
  Come in your thousands!
  No risk to man or boy.
  No favour.
  Masters and fags treated alike.
  All the profits for the clubs.
  Treasurer, Mrs Stratton.
  Managing directors, Nine gentlemen, Carefully Selected.
  President, Mr Stratton.
  Plenty for all.  No questions asked.
  All are welcome.
  Come early and stay late.

  _By Order_.

This soul-stirring manifesto, which had the hearty approval both of the
president and treasurer (who carefully revised the spelling), threw some
satisfactory light on the mystery.  Who were the "carefully selected
gentlemen" was still obscure, although it was generally held that
Fellsgarth only contained nine individuals answering to that particular
description.  What was more important was that Mr and Mrs Stratton
were at the back of the venture.  If so, it was not a swindle, and the
grub was pretty sure to be right.  The new price list, moreover, was
very satisfactory, and on the whole the hours were approved of.

When the eleven o'clock bell sounded, on the Wednesday morning, a
general movement was made for the Watch-Tower Gate, where, firmly
entrenched behind a clean counter piled up with the good things a
schoolboy holds dear, demurely stood D'Arcy and Lickford, looking very
anxious and scared.

At judiciously selected points among the crowd their friends looked on
sympathetically.

After the laughter which had greeted the discovery had died away, an
awkward pause ensued.  No one exactly liked to start.  The seniors
present felt their dignity would be compromised.  The middle-boys did
not like to do what the seniors were too shy to do.  The juniors were
afraid some one might laugh if they led off.  Consequently for a minute
or two every one stared at the two shopmen, who cast down their eyes,
and blushed and simpered.

At length, however, the ice was broken in a very pretty way.  For Mrs
Stratton on her way out of the school looked in, and taking in the
situation, advanced to the counter and said--

"A bottle of ginger-beer, if you please, Lickford."

Lickford, who, to use his own polite phrase, was "bossing the drinks and
fruit" for the day, nearly tumbled down with the shock of this sudden
challenge, and made a wild grab at the nearest bottle within reach.  The
eyes of Fellsgarth were upon him; he lost his head entirely, and made
herculean efforts to draw the cork without loosing the wire.  His
contortions were terrible.

When he could not hold the bottle firm enough between his knees, he
tried gripping it between his feet.  Then in a hot whisper he besought
D'Arcy to hang on to the end, and for a time the bottle was invisible
under the two.  Then he took another, amid the enthusiastic cheers of
the spectators, and was proceeding to release the corkscrew from the
refractory vessel, when Mrs Stratton said in her pleasant way--

"I see you keep the new kind of bottles that have the corks wired down.
They are much better than the old, and it's very little trouble undoing
the wire."

This saved Lickford.  In a moment the wire was removed, and the cork
burst out triumphantly, even before it was pulled, showering a grateful
froth of fizz into the waistcoat of the operator.

"It's beautifully well up.  Thank you, Lickford, how much?" said Mrs
Stratton.

"They're a shilling a dozen.  I mean three-halfpence each," said D'Arcy.
"We can give you change."

"Here's twopence.  I'll take a halfpenny apple.  That will make it
right, won't it?"

And amid loud cheers she departed.

The ice thus broken, a rush took place, as Ridgway, who was poetical,
said--

"Fellows may step in where angels didn't fear to tread."

Then did D'Arcy and Lickford pant and perspire, and wish they had never
been born.  Hands reached in from all sides, and helped themselves to
cakes and tarts, and coppers showered in on them from nobody could tell
where.

They found themselves handing change out into space, and sowing sweets
broadcast among the crowd.

The other directors meanwhile, as in duty bound, nobly rallied round
them, and added to their embarrassment.

"Walk up, walk up!" shouted Wally.  "Try our brandy-balls, eight a
penny.  Eight brandy-balls for Dalton; you chaps, look sharp.  Change
for a sov. for Clapperton; beg pardon, sixpence (didn't know he kept
such small coins).  Hullo, hullo! stand by for my young brother Percy!
He's just a-going to begin.  Fifteen jam tarts, half a pound of
peppermints, half a dozen ginger-beer.  Bite his money hard, D'Arcy; see
there are no bad 'uns.  I know the chap!"

"Bah!  I hope they've got better toffee here than that muck you make,"
said Percy.

"Come, wake up!" cried Cash.  "I've been waiting five minutes for my
cake."

"Can't have 'em; we've run out," said D'Arcy.

"Well, you must be a green one only to get such a few," said a middle-
boy, who had also built his hopes on the same delicacy.

"Very sorry," said Percy to the company generally.  "You must excuse
these chaps--raw hands--they don't know how to manage at present.  Give
'em time.  They'll do better; won't you, Lickford?  Takes some time to
get a notion into Lickford's head, but when it gets there, my word, it
sticks.  Get in a double lot of cakes to-morrow, do you hear, or I shall
give you the sack."

Despite these pleasant recriminations the business went on merrily.  The
"tuck" was pronounced a great advance on anything Robert had provided,
and rumours of its excellence penetrated into quarters which had never
contributed customers to the old shop.

In the afternoon the crowd was less, but the business more steady.  Mr
Stratton dropped in for a slice of cake, and Mrs Wakefield and the
three little Wakefields came to patronise the undertaking.  One or two
fellows, too, sent their fags to secure "extras" for tea, and one or two
left orders for another day.  Inquiries were made, moreover, for certain
articles, such as lemons, tea-cakes, etcetera, which the shopmen took a
note of as worth laying in a stock of.  And the lack of demand for a few
of the things they had, suggested to the same astute young merchants
that they might be dispensed with in future.

Of course, a few boys tried to interfere with the regulations by
demanding "tick," and wanting to make bargains.  But they were promptly
met by a _non possumus_ from the directors present, and finally brought
to reason by being referred to Mr Stratton.

The day passed without the necessity of any appeal to the president.  An
anxious consultation was, however, held in his room after closing time.
Naturally, owing to the exceptional rush, the accounts were a little
out, but as they happened to be on the right side this was a matter for
congratulation rather than distress.  Nearly two pounds had been taken,
and the stock left on hand was valued at five shillings, so that
actually it was possible to repay half of the thirty shillings lent,
after the very first day.  Mr Stratton, however, advised that only ten
shillings should be repaid this time, and the other five shillings put
into a reserve fund, in case of need.

"Of course, you can't expect to do as big a business as this every day,"
said he.  "It will settle down to a regular jog-trot in a few days, and
then we shall be able to judge much better how we stand.  I shall be
very well satisfied if we make about five shillings clear a day."

"I think you boys have started very well," began the treasurer, but her
husband held up his finger admonishingly.

"I should have been very disappointed with them if they had not," said
he.  "It's easy enough to start, the thing will be to keep it up."

"Remember," he added, "it will be better not to brag out of doors about
our profits or that sort of thing.  It will be time enough to talk about
that when we are able to hand over a good lump sum to the clubs.  Now
it's time you went to preparation.  Good night all."

"I tell you what," said Lickford to his fellow-shopman as they walked
across the Green, "we shall have to be pretty smart to-morrow if we're
to get to the club meeting."

"Why," said D'Arcy, "I thought none of you Modern cads were going to
show up?"

"We heard you'd all funked it," said Wally.

"I don't blame them," said Ashby; "they've not much to be proud of,
those Modern chaps."

"Never mind," said Fisher minor, "Fellsgarth can get on well enough
without them."

The party came to a halt and regarded one another seriously, and Percy
said--

"Whoever told you we weren't going to turn up, told crams.  We're
coming.  We'll see you don't have it all to yourselves, rather!"

"My eye, won't you get licked for it!  Nice to belong to a house where
you mayn't sneeze unless your senior lets you."

"Go on!  Shut up!  See if you can't canvass a bit.  That's what you're
best at--that, and getting it hot on the hands for cheating."  Whereupon
the troops separated.

The taunts of the Classics made their rivals wince, despite their
affected contempt.  To-morrow was the day of the meeting; and between
now and then they must decide whether or not they would obey their own
seniors and stay away, or revolt and take the consequences.  The
unanimous opinion was in favour of revolt, unless Clapperton made it
uncommonly worth their while to obey.

They were not destined to remain long in doubt, for the senior invaded
their quarters that very evening.

"Just remember, you youngsters," said he, "no one is going to the
meeting to-morrow from our side."

"Oh?"

"Any fellow who goes will get it hot, I promise him."

"Ah!  What about our conditions?  What have you done about them?"

"Put them in the coal-scuttle; and I've a good mind to put all five of
you there too, for your impudence."

"Ah!"

The captain turned on his heel, with a final warning.

"That settles it, you chaps," said Percy, when he had gone.  "We go."

"Rather," replied everybody.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

SOMETHING WRONG IN THE ACCOUNTS.

Fisher major sat in his study after morning class, next morning, the
picture of boredom and perplexity.  Lists of names, receipt-books, cash-
box, bills, and account-books were littered on the table before him.
Between these and a cobweb on the ceiling his troubled looks travelled,
as he gnawed the end of his pen, and passed his fingers aimlessly
through his hair.

There was something wrong; and what it was he could not for the life of
him make out.  To any one familiar with Fisher major's business--or,
rather, unbusiness--habits, there was nothing wonderful in that.  He was
happy-go-lucky in all his dealings.  He could receive a subscription one
day, and only remember, in a panic, to enter it a week after.  His money
he kept all over the place; some in his desk, some in the cash-box, some
in the drawer of his inkstand.  He had a vague idea that he had a
special reason for dividing it thus--that one lot may have belonged to
the School clubs, another to the House clubs, and another to something
else.  But which was which it passed his wit to remember.

He had had his doubts of the business all along.  His friends had urged
him to take the office, and with their help he had persuaded himself its
duties were simple and easily discharged.  He had determined he would do
the thing thoroughly well.  He had bought these account-books out of his
own private purse, and spent an evening in beautifully ruling them in
red ink, with one column for the date, one for the name, and three for
pounds, shillings, and pence.  He had procured two letter-files,
labelled respectively "Club" and "House," into which to put his
receipts.  And he had provided himself with a dozen elastic bands and an
equal number of paper-fasteners.  What more could a treasurer desire?

Alas! the beautiful account-books got mixed up with one another, the
letter-files remained empty, and the elastic bands somehow did duty as
football garters.  The Club accounts were scrawled, for the most part,
in pencil on the backs of envelopes, awaiting a grand transcription into
the books; and the receipts, pending a similar fortunate time, where
huddled away in the drawer with Greek verses and letters from the people
at home.

Things had now come to a pass.  The captain had yesterday suggested
that, in view of the meeting to-day, it would be well to have the
accounts made up, so as to be able, if called upon, to state exactly how
they stood financially.

"All serene," said Fisher; "I'll let you have the lot in ten minutes."

It was now considerably more than ten hours since the rash undertaking
had been given, and the accounts were considerably more confused than
they had been when Fisher sat down to square them.

The Club and House accounts were hopelessly mixed.  Some fellows
appeared to have paid several times over to both funds, and others not
once to either.  Worse than that, Fisher could not find his memorandum
of what he had paid out in small disbursements since term began.  Still
worse, when he did come in desperation to lump both funds together, and
deduct the total amount he had spent, he found himself between L4 and L5
out of pocket!

That was the serious discovery which, on this particular morning, was
preying on his spirits and making him look a picture of bewilderment.

"I'm bothered if I can make it out," said he to himself.  "Everybody's
marked down as paid--I remember noticing that weeks ago.  At that rate I
ought to have L25 for the Clubs, and L9 12 shillings for the House.
Yes, that's right--I had that; there's a note of it; three lots--L15 7
shillings 6 pence on September 1, L7 2 shillings 6 pence on September
13, and L12 2 shillings on another day--that makes the total.  There you
are.  Why on earth did I put them away in separate lots?  Then I paid L5
for the new goals, and something else--what was it?  Oh, that was for
the House balls--oh, but we are lumping the two together.  What was it?
I know, 17 shillings 6 pence--that's L5 17 shillings 6 pence; and
something else, I know, came to a pound--L6 17 shillings 6 pence.  Take
that from L34 12 shillings, leaves L27 14 shillings 6 pence--and I've
only got L22 18 shillings 6 pence!  Where, in the name of wonder, has
the rest gone?"

And once more the dismal operation of adding up, counting, and
subtracting began anew, with the same, or almost the same, result--there
was a mistake of something like L4 10 shillings, whichever way you
looked at it.

Dalton, who came in presently, could throw no further light on the
problem.  He added up the columns, counted the money, subtracted the
payments and arrived at the same result.

Had the difference been smaller, it might have been accounted for by a
few subscriptions omitted or a few payments not entered.  But L4 10
shillings was too big a sum to leak away by accident; and, with the
exception of the new goals, Fisher major was confident nothing had been
spent approaching the figure.

Dalton then proposed a fresh hunt through the study, in case the missing
sum might be hidden for safety in some corner.  So the room was turned
upside down; the bed-clothes were shaken out, pockets searched, books
turned over, tea-pots peered into; but all to no purpose.
