left the poor youth to learn from experience."

"Pray, who did you leave to that delightful fate?" asked Mr Wilson,
issuing from his bedroom and approaching the stove.

Mr Wilson was a middle-aged, good-humoured, active man, who filled the
onerous offices of superintendent of the men, trader of furs, seller of
goods to the Indians, and general factotum.

"Our friend Hamilton," answered the doctor, in reply to his question.
"I think he is, without exception, the most egregious nincompoop I ever
saw.  Just as I passed the long swamp on my way home, I met him crashing
through the bushes in hot pursuit of a rabbit, the track of which he
mistook for a fox.  Poor fellow! he had been out since breakfast, and
only shot a brace of ptarmigan, although they are as thick as bees and
quite tame.  `But then, do you see,' said he, in excuse, `I'm so very
short-sighted!  Would you believe it, I've blown fifteen lumps of snow
to atoms, in the belief that they were ptarmigan!' and then he rushed
off again."

"No doubt," said Mr Wilson, smiling, "the lad is very green, but he's a
good fellow for all that."

"I'll answer for that," said the accountant; "I found him over at the
men's houses this morning doing _your_ work for you, doctor."

"How so?" inquired the disciple of Aesculapius.

"Attending to your wounded man, Louis Blanc, to be sure; and he seemed
to speak to him as wisely as if he had walked the hospitals, and
regularly passed for an M.D."

"Indeed!" said the doctor, with a mischievous grin.  "Then I must pay
him off for interfering with my patients."

"Ah, doctor, you're too fond of practical jokes.  You never let slip an
opportunity of `paying off' your friends for something or other.  It's a
bad habit.  Practical jokes are very bad things--shockingly bad," said
Mr Wilson, as he put on his fur cap, and wound a thick shawl round his
throat, preparatory to leaving the room.

As Mr Wilson gave utterance to this opinion, he passed Harry
Somerville, who was still staring at the fire in deep mental
abstraction, and, as he did so, gave his tilted chair a very slight push
backwards with his finger--an action which caused Harry to toss up his
legs, grasp convulsively with both hands at empty air, and fall with a
loud noise and an angry yell to the ground, while his persecutor
vanished from the scene.

"O you outrageous villain!" cried Harry, shaking his fist at the door,
as he slowly gathered himself up: "I might have expected that."

"Quite so," said the doctor; "you might.  It was very neatly done,
undoubtedly.  Wilson deserves credit for the way in which it was
executed."

"He deserves to be executed for doing it at all," replied Harry, rubbing
his elbow as he resumed his seat.

"Any bark knocked off?" inquired the accountant, as he took a piece of
glowing charcoal from the stove wherewith to light his pipe.  "Try a
whiff, Harry.  It's good for such things.  Bruises, sores, contusions,
sprains, rheumatic affections of the back and loins, carbuncles, and
earache--there's nothing that smoking won't cure; eh, doctor?"

"Certainly.  If applied inwardly, there's nothing so good for digestion
when one doesn't require tonics.--Try it, Harry; it will do you good, I
assure you."

"No, thank you," replied Harry; "I'll leave that to you and the chimney.
I don't wish to make a soot-bag of my mouth.  But tell me, doctor, what
do you mean to do with that lump of snow there?"

Harry pointed to a mass of snow, of about two feet square, which lay on
the floor beside the door.  It had been placed there by the doctor some
time previously.

"Do with it?  Have patience, my friend, and you shall see.  It is a
little surprise I have in store for Hamilton."

As he spoke, the door opened, and a short, square-built man rushed into
the room, with a pistol in one hand and a bright little bullet in the
other.

"Hullo, skipper!" cried Harry, "what's the row?"

"All right," cried the skipper; "here it is at last, solid as the fluke
of an anchor.  Toss me the powder-flask, Harry; look sharp, else it'll
melt."

A powder-flask was immediately produced, from which the skipper hastily
charged the pistol, and rammed down the shining bullet.

"Now then," said he, "look out for squalls.  Clear the decks there."

And rushing to the door, he flung it open, took a steady aim at
something outside, and fired.

"Is the man mad?" said the accountant, as with a look of amazement he
beheld the skipper spring through the doorway, and immediately return,
bearing in his arms a large piece of fir plank.

"Not quite mad yet," he said, in reply, "but I've sent a ball of
quicksilver through an inch plank, and that's not a thing to be done
every day--even _here_, although it _is_ cold enough sometimes to freeze
up one's very ideas."

"Dear me," interrupted Harry Somerville, looking as if a new thought had
struck him, "that must be it!  I've no doubt that poor Hamilton's ideas
are _frozen_, which accounts for the total absence of any indication of
his possessing such things."

"I observed," continued the skipper, not noticing the interruption,
"that the glass was down at 45 degrees below zero this morning, and put
out a bullet-mould full of mercury, and you see the result."  As he
spoke he held up the perforated plank in triumph.

The skipper was a strange mixture of qualities.  To a wild, offhand,
sailor-like hilarity of disposition in hours of leisure, he united a
grave, stern energy of character while employed in the performance of
his duties.  Duty was always paramount with him.  A smile could scarcely
be extracted from him while it was in the course of performance.  But
the instant his work was done a new spirit seemed to take possession of
the man.  Fun, mischief of any kind, no matter how childish, he entered
into with the greatest delight and enthusiasm.  Among other
peculiarities, he had become deeply imbued with a thirst for scientific
knowledge, ever since he had acquired, with infinite labour, the small
modicum of science necessary to navigation; and his doings in pursuit of
statistical information relative to the weather, and the phenomena of
nature generally, were very peculiar, and in some cases outrageous.  His
transaction with the quicksilver was in consequence of an eager desire
to see that metal frozen (an effect which takes place when the
spirit-of-wine thermometer falls to 39 degrees below zero of
Fahrenheit), and a wish to be able to boast of having actually fired a
mercurial bullet through an inch plank.  Having made a careful note of
the fact, with all the relative circumstances attending it, in a very
much blotted book, which he denominated his scientific log, the worthy
skipper threw off his coat, drew a chair to the stove, and prepared to
regale himself with a pipe.  As he glanced slowly round the room while
thus engaged, his eye fell on the mass of snow before alluded to.  On
being informed by the doctor for what it was intended, he laid down his
pipe and rose hastily from his chair.

"You've not a moment to lose," said he.  "As I came in at the gate just
now, I saw Hamilton coming down the river on the ice, and he must be
almost arrived now."

"Up with it then," cried the doctor, seizing the snow, and lifting it to
the top of the door.  "Hand me those bits of stick, Harry; quick, man,
stir your stumps.--Now then, skipper, fix them in so, while I hold this
up."

The skipper lent willing and effective aid, so that in a few minutes the
snow was placed in such a position that upon the opening of the door it
must inevitably fall on the head of the first person who should enter
the room.

"So," said the skipper; "that's rigged up in what I call a ship-shape
fashion."

"True," remarked the doctor, eyeing the arrangement with a look of
approval; "it will do, I think, admirably."

"Don't you think, skipper," said Harry Somerville gravely, as he resumed
his seat in front of the fire, "that it would be worth while to make a
careful and minute entry in your private log of the manner in which it
was put up, to be afterwards followed by an account of its effect?  You
might write an essay on it now, and call it the extraordinary effects of
a fall of snow in latitude so and so, eh?  What think you of it?"

The skipper vouchsafed no reply, but made a significant gesture with his
fist, which caused Harry to put himself in a posture of defence.

At this moment footsteps were heard on the wooden platform in front of
the building.

Instantly all became silence and expectation in the hall as the result
of the practical joke was about to be realised.  Just then another step
was heard on the platform, and it became evident that two persons were
approaching the door.

"Hope it'll be the right man," said the skipper, with a look savouring
slightly of anxiety.

As he spoke the door opened, and a foot crossed the threshold; the next
instant the miniature avalanche descended on the head and shoulders of a
man, who reeled forward from the weight of the blow, and, covered from
head to foot with snow, fell to the ground amid shouts of laughter.

With a convulsive stamp and shake, the prostrate figure sprang up and
confronted the party.  Had the cast-iron stove suddenly burst into atoms
and blown the roof off the house, it could scarcely have created greater
consternation than that which filled the merry jesters when they beheld
the visage of Mr Rogan, the superintendent of the fort, red with
passion and fringed with snow.

"So," said he, stamping violently with his foot, partly from anger, and
partly with the view of shaking off the unexpected covering, which stuck
all over his dress in little patches, producing a somewhat piebald
effect,--"so you are pleased to jest, gentlemen.  Pray, who placed that
piece of snow over the door?"  Mr Rogan glared fiercely round upon the
culprits, who stood speechless before him.

For a moment he stood silent, as if uncertain how to act; then turning
short on his heel, he strode quickly out of the room, nearly overturning
Mr Hamilton, who at the same instant entered it, carrying his gun and
snow-shoes under his arm.

"Dear me, what has happened?" he exclaimed, in a peculiarly gentle tone
of voice, at the same time regarding the snow and the horror-stricken
circle with a look of intense surprise.

"You _see_ what has happened," replied Harry Somerville, who was the
first to recover his composure; "I presume you intended to ask, `What
has _caused_ it to happen?'  Perhaps the skipper will explain; it's
beyond me, quite."

Thus appealed to, that worthy cleared his throat, and said:--

"Why, you see, Mr Hamilton, a great phenomenon of meteorology has
happened.  We were all standing, you must know, at the open door, taking
a squint at the weather, when our attention was attracted by a curious
object that appeared in the sky, and seemed to be coming down at the
rate of ten knots an hour, right end-on for the house.  I had just time
to cry, `Clear out, lads,' when it came slap in through the doorway, and
smashed to shivers there, where you see the fragments.  In fact, it's a
wonderful aerolite, and Mr Rogan has just gone out with a lot of the
bits in his pocket, to make a careful examination of them, and draw up a
report for the Geological Society in London.  I shouldn't wonder if he
were to send off an express to-night; and maybe you will have to convey
the news to headquarters, so you'd better go and see him about it soon."

_Soft_ although Mr Hamilton was supposed to be, he was not quite
prepared to give credit to this explanation; but being of a peaceful
disposition, and altogether unaccustomed to retort, he merely smiled his
disbelief, as he proceeded to lay aside his fowling-piece, and divest
himself of the voluminous out-of-door trappings with which he was clad.
Mr Hamilton was a tall, slender youth, of about nineteen.  He had come
out by the ship in autumn, and was spending his first winter at York
Fort.  Up to the period of his entering the Hudson's Bay Company's
service, he had never been more than twenty miles from home, and having
mingled little with the world, was somewhat unsophisticated, besides
being by nature gentle and unassuming.

Soon after this the man who acted as cook, waiter, and butler to the
mess, entered, and said that Mr Rogan desired to see the accountant
immediately.

"Who am I to say did it?" inquired that gentleman, as he rose to obey
the summons.

"Wouldn't it be a disinterested piece of kindness if you were to say it
was yourself?" suggested the doctor.

"Perhaps it would, but I won't," replied the accountant, as he made his
exit.

In about half an hour Mr Rogan and the accountant re-entered the
apartment.  The former had quite regained his composure.  He was
naturally amiable; which happy disposition was indicated by a habitually
cheerful look and smile.

"Now, gentlemen," said he, "I find that this practical joke was not
intended for me, and therefore look upon it as an unlucky accident; but
I cannot too strongly express my dislike to practical jokes of all
kinds.  I have seen great evil, and some bloodshed, result from
practical jokes; and I think that, being a sufferer in consequence of
your fondness for them, I have a right to beg that you will abstain from
such doings in future--at least from such jokes as involve risk to those
who do not choose to enter into them."

Having given vent to this speech, Mr Rogan left his volatile friends to
digest it at their leisure.

"Serves us right," said the skipper, pacing up and down the room in a
repentant frame of mind, with his thumbs hooked into the arm-holes of
his vest.

The doctor said nothing, but breathed hard and smoked vigorously.

While we admit most thoroughly with Mr Rogan that practical jokes are
exceedingly bad, and productive frequently of far more evil than fun, we
feel it our duty, as a faithful delineator of manners, customs, and
character in these regions, to urge in palliation of the offence
committed by the young gentlemen at York Fort, that they had really
about as few amusements and sources of excitement as fall to the lot of
any class of men.  They were entirely dependent on their own unaided
exertions, during eight or nine months of the year, for amusement or
recreation of any kind.  Their books were few in number, and soon read
through.  The desolate wilderness around afforded no incidents to form
subjects of conversation further than the events of a day's shooting,
which, being nearly similar every day, soon lost all interest.  No
newspapers came to tell of the doings of the busy world from which they
were shut out, and nothing occurred to vary the dull routine of their
life; so that it is not matter for wonder that they were driven to seek
for relaxation and excitement occasionally in most outrageous and
unnatural ways, and to indulge now and then in the perpetration of a
practical joke.

For some time after the rebuke administered by Mr Rogan, silence
reigned in _Bachelor's Hall_, as the clerks' house was termed.  But at
length symptoms of _ennui_ began to be displayed.  The doctor yawned,
and lay down on his bed to enjoy an American newspaper about twelve
months old.  Harry Somerville sat down to re-read a volume of Franklin's
travels in the polar regions, which he had perused twice already.  Mr
Hamilton busied himself in cleaning his fowling-piece; while the skipper
conversed with Mr Wilson, who was engaged in his room in adjusting an
ivory head to a walking-stick.  Mr Wilson was a jack-of-all-trades, who
could make shift, one way or other, to do _anything_.  The accountant
paced the uncarpeted floor in deep contemplation.

At length he paused, and looked at Harry Somerville for some time.

"What say you to a walk through the woods to North River, Harry?"

"Ready," cried Harry, tossing down the book with a look of
contempt--"ready for anything."

"Will _you_ come, Hamilton?" added the accountant.  Hamilton looked up
in surprise.

"You don't mean, surely, to take so long a walk in the dark, do you?  It
is snowing, too, very heavily, and I think you said that North River was
five miles off, did you not?"

"Of course I mean to walk in the dark," replied the accountant, "unless
you can extemporise an artificial light for the occasion, or prevail on
the moon to come out for my special benefit.  As to snowing, and a short
tramp of five miles, why, the sooner you get to think of such things as
_trifles_ the better, if you hope to be fit for anything in this
country."

"I _don't_ think much of them," replied Hamilton, softly, and with a
slight smile; "I only meant that such a walk was not very _attractive_
so late in the evening."

"Attractive!" shouted Harry Somerville from his bedroom, where he was
equipping himself for the walk; "what can be more attractive than a
sharp run of ten miles through the woods on a cool night to visit your
traps, with the prospect of a silver fox or a wolf at the end of it, and
an extra sound sleep as the result?  Come, man, don't be soft; get
ready, and go along with us."

"Besides," added the accountant, "I don't mean to come back to-night.
To-morrow, you know, is a holiday, so we can camp out in the snow after
visiting the traps, have our supper, and start early in the morning to
search for ptarmigan."

"Well, I will go," said Hamilton, after this account of the pleasures
that were to be expected; "I am exceedingly anxious to learn to shoot
birds on the wing."

"Bless me! have you not learned that yet?" asked the doctor, in affected
surprise, as he sauntered out of his bedroom to relight his pipe.

The various bedrooms in the clerks' house were ranged round the hall,
having doors that opened directly into it, so that conversation carried
on in a loud voice was heard in all the rooms at once, and was not
unfrequently sustained in elevated tones from different apartments, when
the occupants were lounging, as they often did of an evening, in their
beds.

"No," said Hamilton, in reply to the doctor's question, "I have not
learned yet, although there were a great many grouse in the part of
Scotland where I was brought up.  But my aunt, with whom I lived, was so
fearful of my shooting either myself or some one else, and had such an
aversion to firearms, that I determined to make her mind easy, by
promising that I would never use them so long as I remained under her
roof."

"Quite right; very dutiful and proper," said the doctor, with a grave,
patronising air.

"Perhaps you'll fall in with more _fox_ tracks of the same sort as the
one you gave chase to this morning," shouted the skipper, from Wilson's
room.

"Oh! there's hundreds of them out there," said the accountant; "so let's
off at once."

The trio now proceeded to equip themselves for the walk.  Their costumes
were peculiar, and merit description.  As they were similar in the chief
points, it will suffice to describe that of our friend Harry.

On his head he wore a fur cap made of otter-skin, with a flap on each
side to cover the ears, the frost being so intense in these climates
that without some such protection they would inevitably freeze and fall
off.

As the nose is constantly in use for the purposes of respiration, it is
always left uncovered to fight with the cold as it best can; but it is a
hard battle, and there is no doubt that, if it were possible, a nasal
covering would be extremely pleasant.  Indeed, several desperate efforts
_have_ been made to construct some sort of nose-bag, but hitherto
without success, owing to the uncomfortable fact that the breath issuing
from that organ immediately freezes, and converts the covering into a
bag of snow or ice, which is not agreeable.  Round his neck Harry wound
a thick shawl of such portentous dimensions that it entirely enveloped
the neck and lower part of the face; thus the entire head was, as it
were, eclipsed--the eyes, the nose, and the cheek-bones alone being
visible.  He then threw on a coat made of deer-skin, so prepared that it
bore a slight resemblance to excessively coarse chamois leather.  It was
somewhat in the form of a long, wide sur-tout, overlapping very much in
front, and confined closely to the figure by means of a scarlet worsted
belt instead of buttons, and was ornamented round the foot by a number
of cuts, which produced a fringe of little tails.  Being lined with
thick flannel, this portion of attire was rather heavy, but extremely
necessary.  A pair of blue cloth leggings having a loose flap on the
outside, were next drawn over the trousers, as an additional protection
to the knees.  The feet, besides being portions of the body that are
peculiarly susceptible of cold, had further to contend against the
chafing of the lines which attach them to the snow-shoes, so that
special care in their preparation for duty was necessary.  First were
put on a pair of blanketing or duffel socks, which were merely oblong in
form, without sewing or making-up of any kind.  These were wrapped round
the feet, which were next thrust into a pair of made-up socks, of the
same material, having ankle-pieces; above these were put _another_ pair,
_without_ flaps for the ankles.  Over all was drawn a pair of moccasins
made of stout deer-skin, similar to that of the coat.  Of course, the
elegance of Harry's feet was entirely destroyed, and had he been met in
this guise by any of his friends in the "old country," they would
infallibly have come to the conclusion that he was afflicted with gout.
Over his shoulders he slung a powder-horn and shot-pouch, the latter
tastefully embroidered with dyed quill-work.  A pair of deerskin
mittens, having a little bag for the thumb and a large bag for the
fingers, completed his costume.

While the three were making ready, with a running accompaniment of
grunts and groans at refractory pieces of apparel, the night without
