"It's a moot point whether Proserpine was gathering narcissus or
asphodel when Pluto ran away with her," declared Mr. Stacey, offering
Lilias a bouquet which a Greek nymph might have been pleased to accept.
"I incline to asphodel myself, because of its immortal significance. It
gives an added meaning to the myth."

"What is the story exactly?" asked Dulcie. "Do tell it, please!"

"Yes, do!" begged all the children, crowding round Mr. Stacey. "We want
to hear your English story!"

"It's not an English one, but a very old Greek one. Shall we rest on
this wall while I tell it? Luigia shall come on my knee. Yes, there's
room for Pepino too, and Gaspare and Vincent may sit next to me. Well,
in the old Golden Age, when the world was young, Ceres, the Goddess of
the Harvest, who gave all the fruits of earth to men, had a beautiful
daughter named Proserpine, or, as the Greeks called her, Persephone. She
made Sicily her place of residence, and she and her nymphs used to
delight themselves with its flowery meadows and limpid streams, and
beautiful views. One day she and her companions were wandering in the
plain of Enna, gathering flowers, when there suddenly appeared the god
Pluto, king of Hades, the regions of the dead. Falling in love with
beautiful Proserpine, he seized her, and forced her to get into his
chariot. She screamed to her maidens, but they could not help her, and
Pluto carried her off. With his trident he struck a hole in the ground,
so that chariot and horses fell through into Hades, of which place
Proserpine became the queen. Now Ceres did not know what had happened to
her daughter, and she wandered all over the earth seeking for her. At
last she found Proserpine's girdle on the surface of the waters of a
fountain where Pluto had struck his hole in the ground, and the nymph
Arethusa told her how her daughter had been stolen away. Full of
indignation, Ceres went to complain to Jupiter, who promised that
Proserpine should be restored if she had taken nothing to eat in the
realm of Hades. Unfortunately Proserpine, as she walked in the Elysian
fields, had gathered and eaten a pomegranate, which act constituted her
a subject of those regions. To pacify Ceres, Jupiter permitted that
Proserpine should spend six months of every year with Pluto in Hades,
and the other six months with her mother on earth. Each spring Ceres
went to the entrance of a great gloomy grotto to meet her daughter, and
with her return all the flowers bloomed on earth again. There is a very
celebrated picture by Sir Frederick Leighton, called 'The Return of
Persephone.' The artist has painted Ceres at the entrance of the grotto
with the sunshine behind her, holding out her arms to the lovely
daughter whom the god Mercury is bringing back to her out of the
darkness.

"The story is one of those old nature myths of which the Greeks were so
fond. The time Proserpine spent in Hades symbolized winter, when winds
blew cold, and few flowers bloomed, and her return symbolized the advent
of spring. It has a deeper meaning, also, to those who look for it,
because it is a type of the Resurrection, and shows that our dear ones
are not really taken from us, but will come again in more glorious life
and beauty. Many of the old Greek myths had this meaning hidden under
them, as if they were sent to prepare people for the truth that Christ
was to reveal more fully later on. Nearly all early religions began with
pure and beautiful conceptions of God, and then trailed down to earth,
because their followers were too ignorant to understand. The ancient
Egyptians believed in God, and said that one of His attributes was
strength. The strongest thing they knew was a bull, so they made
colossal statues of bulls in black marble, to show God's strength, but
the populace worshipped the statues instead of God himself, and became
idolaters. In the same way the ancient Greeks realized that Beauty was
part of God's scheme of work, and they came to worship Beauty quite
apart from Goodness, forgetting that the two must go together. They
imagined their gods and goddesses as magnificent men and women, with
superb bodies but no beauty of soul, and as there was nothing uplifting
in this religion, it soon died out, as all things die in time, if they
don't help us to grow nearer to God. The story of Proserpine is one of
the prettiest of the old Greek legends, and I can just imagine her
gathering these lovely flowers. I believe we're going on to see her
fountain, aren't we, Vittore? She made it with her tears when Pluto
carried her off."

The object of the expedition was indeed to see Proserpine's fountain, a
clear spring out of which flowed a small river. After walking another
mile across the meadows, the party came to this river, where they were
able to engage boats to row them up to the fount. It was a unique spot,
for the whole of the banks were bordered with an avenue of papyrus,
which grew there in greatest profusion. Legend said that it had been
planted by an Egyptian princess who brought it from the Nile, and that
it grew in no other place in Europe, a statement which was satisfactory
enough, though rather difficult to verify. There was much bargaining,
after true Sicilian fashion, with the native boatmen, who demanded at
least four times what they meant to take, protesting that they would be
ruined at the sum Ernesto named to them, and finally, when he pretended
to walk away, accepting his offer with enthusiasm. This very necessary
preliminary satisfactorily settled, the company was packed into the
small boats, about four going in each. In the distribution of the guests
occurred the first hitch in the Ingletons' visit. Mr. Stacey suggested
that it was advisable to sandwich children and grown-ups, and he and
Lilias started in the first "barca" in charge of little Luigia, Vincent,
and Pepino. Dulcie and Douglas were responsible for Gaspare, Rosalia,
and Nina, while Vittore, and Aimee, Claude, and Bertram went together.
Carmel held Tito and Berta each by a hand, and Ernesto helped them all
three into a boat. Everard was in the very act of jumping in after them,
when Ernesto stopped him.

"Excuse me, Signore, that is my place! There is plenty of room for you
in the other boat."

"And surely in this too?" said Everard, flushing with annoyance.

Ernesto shrugged his shoulders.

"Oh, no! You and I are too heavy to be together. Vittore and the others
are light; you will just make weight." And, stepping in, Ernesto took
his seat beside Carmel, and told the boatman to push off, while Everard,
with a face like a thundercloud, joined the younger children.

Up the narrow little river the light boats pushed, under an overhanging
archway of papyrus reeds, so that they seemed as if penetrating through
a green jungle. The boatmen began to sing Sicilian folk-songs, and
Vittore and Rosalia and Tito and some of the others joined in. To
everyone except Everard the excursion was delightful, but he,
considering himself treated with scant politeness, sat sulking in
Vittore's boat, and would scarcely speak to Aimee, who made a really
heroic effort to amuse him.

Proserpine's fountain, where after half an hour's rowing the boatmen
took them, was a clear deep pool reflecting the blue of the sky, and
encircled with papyrus, donax reeds, and beautiful irises. It seemed a
fit setting for the legend of antiquity, and a fertile imagination could
almost conjure up a vision of Pluto, with his chariot and black horses,
carrying off the lovely nymph from her meadows of flowers to his gloomy
realm of darkness. On the way back the second boat made a halt to cut
some pieces of papyrus reed, and Dulcie called out in much excitement to
the occupants of the other "barcas."

"Lilias! Everard! We're cutting some papyrus, and Douglas is going to
show me how to make it into parchment like the ancient Egyptians used to
write on. Won't it be gorgeous? Don't you want some too?"

"Rather!" replied Lilias, appealing to Mr. Stacey, who promptly pulled
out his penknife, and began to hack away at a stout stem on her behalf.

The lengths of papyrus which they bore off with them somewhat resembled
thick pieces of rhubarb, and how these were ever going to be turned into
writing materials was a puzzle to Dulcie, though Douglas assured her
airily that he knew all about it. The elders of the party were glad to
get the lively youngsters safely on dry land again.

"I thought Rosalia was going to turn into a water nymph," said Lilias,
comparing notes afterwards with Dulcie. "She leaned over in the most
dangerous manner, and so did Tito. If the boats hadn't been so broad,
they would have capsized."

"Then Pluto would have bagged the whole lot of us! More than he quite
bargained for, perhaps!" laughed Dulcie.

The making of the parchment was a matter of great interest to the
Ingletons. With Douglas as an instructor, they all set to work on its
manufacture. Taking ten inch lengths of the papyrus reeds, they cut them
into long, thin, vertical slices, and laid these across each other in
the form of a small mat between sheets of blotting paper. This was next
squeezed through a wringing-machine to rid it of superfluous moisture,
then placed under a heavy weight, in the manner of pressing flowers.
When at last it was dry, the alternate layers of the papyrus had
adhered together and amalgamated into a substance identical with the old
Egyptian parchment, though much coarser and rougher in quality. The
girls were delighted with it. They borrowed a book on Egypt from Mr.
Greville's library, and copied little pictures of the Sphinx, scarabs,
Ra, the Sun god, and other appropriate bits, painting them in bold
colors on their pieces of parchment, and feeling as if they had gone
back a few thousand years in history, and were dwellers in Memphis or
some other great city on the banks of the Nile. They designed special
ones for Miss Walters, Miss Hardy, and Miss Herbert, and smaller
offerings for Gowan, Bertha, Phillida, Noreen, and others of their
friends at Chilcombe Hall. Papyrus, indeed, became the rage at Casa
Bianca. All the various cousins vied with one another in making the
choicest specimens. They wrote letters to each other upon it, rolling up
the parchments and tying them with ribbons in the manner of ancient
scribes. Perhaps the whitest and best welded sheet of all was one made
by Mr. Stacey, who turned out to be so clever at the new craze that he
jokingly declared he must be a priest of some Egyptian temple come to
life again. He used a reed pen, and got some very happy effects in
hieroglyphs, puzzling out the names of each of the company in the
curious picture writing of the days of the Pharaohs who reared the
pyramids.

"Will you take us some day to see the Nile?" asked Lilias, happy in the
possession of her name neatly pictured on the specially white sheet of
papyrus, with a lotus bloom, the lily of Egypt, painted underneath. "You
know Captain Porter said we ought to go to Alexandria!"

"Nothing would please me better, if the fates willed it!" smiled Mr.
Stacey.

"We'll go in a party, and hire a boat up the Nile, and take all the
Grevilles with us, specially Douglas," declared Dulcie. "I count them my
cousins too. Don't you, Everard?"

"Right-o!" laughed Everard. "Cousins by all manner of means let them
be!" ("Though I don't bargain to include the Trapani family among our
new relations!" he added softly to himself, half under his breath).




CHAPTER XVIII

A Night of Adventure


It will be seen from the events recorded in the last chapter that
Everard, while liking the various members of the Greville family, had
taken a great prejudice against Ernesto Trapani. The fact is that
Everard, brought up with all the insular pride of birth of an English
squire, had a poor opinion of foreigners, and was unwise enough
occasionally to reveal his attitude of British superiority, and to give
himself airs. Ernesto, handsome, clever, and with a long line of Italian
ancestry at his back, considered himself in every way a match for the
young Englishman, and would argue with him on many points, often beating
him by logic, though never convincing him. It annoyed Everard to see
Ernesto on terms of great intimacy with Carmel, and to hear them talk
together in Italian, a language of which, as yet, he knew only a few
sentences.

"I wish you'd speak decent English, instead of that beastly lingo!" he
said to her one day, petulantly.

Carmel flushed crimson.

"Please don't call Italian a beastly lingo! I'm sorry if I've been rude
in speaking it, but I sometimes forget that you don't understand what
we're saying. It comes naturally to me. I'll try to remember."

"Remember you're an Ingleton, and the owner of English property," urged
Everard. "Now you're at Casa Bianca I don't believe you ever give a
thought to the Chase!"

"Yes, I do! Oftener than you suppose. I've grown to love England more
than I believed possible. In summer the country was all green and
beautiful, while here every blade of grass gets burnt up by the blazing
sun. Oh, yes! I'm really very fond of the Chase! I am indeed!"

"Then, which do you like better--England or Sicily?"

But at that question Carmel shook her head.

"My opinions are my own, and I'm not going to tell them to anybody!" she
flashed merrily. "It's a good motto to enjoy yourself wherever you may
happen to be! That's all you'll get out of me, Mr. Everard! And quite
enough, too!"

Though Everard might have private reasons of his own that marred the
pleasure of his visit to Montalesso, his sisters were having the time of
their lives. Lilias, with the help of Mr. Stacey, had taken
enthusiastically to botany, and was making a collection of pressed
Sicilian flowers. She had also begun to sketch under his tuition, and
had finished quite a pretty little water color of the house. Dulcie,
always interested in country life, was thoroughly happy on the estate.
She liked to watch the gathering of the oranges and lemons, the pruning
of the vines; to see the great white bullocks plowing in the fields or
slowly drawing the gaily painted carts. The wealth of flowers delighted
her, and much to Everard's disgust, she frankly acknowledged herself in
love with Sicily, and insisted that she would like to live there.

"I shall ask Aunt Nita to keep me instead of Carmel!" she declared. "You
may all go back to England and leave me behind!"

"What would Mr. Bowden say to that?" asked Cousin Clare. "He has
arranged for you to stay another two years at school!"

"Oh! bother Mr. Bowden! I wish he wasn't my guardian! Can't I swop him,
and have Mr. Greville instead?"

"Unfortunately people can't change their guardians!" laughed Cousin
Clare. "They have to stick to those to whom the law assigns them. Cheer
up! You might have a far sterner one than Mr. Bowden, and a much more
disagreeable school than Chilcombe. You've the summer term to look
forward to when you get back."

"Chilcombe isn't Montalesso!" persisted Dulcie, pulling a face. "No, you
dinky, deary Cousin Clare, you'll never persuade me to like school
again! I shall catch a cold on purpose as soon as I go back, and then
you'll have to bring me over here for the sake of a warmer climate. I'll
bribe the old doctor!"

"Who'll probably send you to Switzerland for open-air treatment among
the snow!" said Cousin Clare, who generally managed to get the last
word.

The Ingletons had now been some weeks at the Casa Bianca, and were
beginning to grow more accustomed to Sicilian ways. In Mr. Greville's
car they had been taken to many of the principal places of interest in
the neighborhood; they had seen the Castello, the old ruined tower which
in bygone days had been the stronghold of brigands, the ancient Greek
amphitheater, with its marble seats still bearing the names of owners
who sat and watched the chariot races in the fourth century B. C., the
beautiful Temple of Neptune, and the Palazzo Salvatore, with its museum
of priceless treasures. There was one local gathering, however, which
Carmel declared they must not on any account miss.

"I'm so glad you will here for the fair at Targia Vecchia!" she said.
"It's really the event of the whole year. You'll see more Sicilian
customs there than anywhere else I know. The peasants come down from the
mountains for miles round. You'll just love it!"

Such a spectacle was, of course, a great attraction to the Ingletons, so
a select party was made up to visit the famous fair. Signora Greville,
nervous about infection, would not allow her younger children to go, for
fear they might catch measles among the motley crowd, and the same
cautious care was extended over the children of the other families, but
Douglas and Aimee joined the expedition, and Ernesto and Vittore,
somewhat to Everard's disgust, had a special holiday from Palermo in
order to be present. They all set off on foot, and followed the winding
road that led down the hill-side from Montalesso to the little harbor of
Targia Vecchia.

For once the country-side seemed alive with people. Down every mountain
path descended donkeys, on which were seated girls or women in their
best gala garments, striped skirts, bright aprons, lace on their velvet
bodices, gay kerchiefs on their heads, and large gold ear-rings in their
ears. The men who led the donkeys were dressed in equally picturesque
fashion. Many wore black velvet jackets and scarlet Neapolitan caps, or
long brown cloaks with hoods over their heads; their legs bound with
rough puttees, and their feet thrust into sandals of hide with the hair
left on. Everybody seemed to carry a large cotton umbrella, either of
bright green or magenta.

"They think it looks grand," explained Carmel. "Every peasant brings his
umbrella to the fair, to show that he has one!"

"Except the brigands," added Vittore. "You can always tell a brigand
because he never carries an umbrella."

"Are there any brigands?" asked Dulcie anxiously.

"Oh, yes!" replied Vittore, winking secretly at Ernesto. "There are
quite a number still in the neighborhood."

"I was talking to one only the other day!" admitted Ernesto.

"Not really?"

"It's quite a profession still in Sicily."

"Do they catch people and hold them to ransom?" Dulcie's face was a
study.

"Certainly they do, and chop their fingers off if their relations don't
pay up. It's quite an ordinary little trick of theirs."

"O-o-oh! Is it safe to go to the fair, do you think? That man in front
hasn't any umbrella!"

"Don't be a scared rabbit, Dulcie! You little silly, can't you see
they're ragging you?" put in Everard impatiently. "There are no brigands
left in Sicily now!"

"Aren't there, indeed?" said Ernesto. "Ah! That shows how much you know
about it! Only last week the Count Rozallo was taken prisoner on the
road to Catania, and carried off into the mountains. He's there yet,
till he pays a ransom of 25,000 lire."

"Pooh! I expect he's done it to evade his creditors, if the story is
true. I'll believe in brigands when I meet them, and not before!"
scoffed Everard.

"And I shall be frightened of every man who doesn't carry a big red or
green umbrella!" declared Dulcie, hanging on to the arm which Douglas
gallantly offered for her protection. "What do you think about it,
Carmel?"

"I think I'm quite safe, for the brigands are generally very chivalrous
to women, and only run away with gentlemen and chop off their fingers!"
laughed Carmel.

By this time they had descended the road, and were entering the
picturesque little town. Generally Targia Vecchia was the quietest of
places, but to-day it was _en fete_. The fair was held all along the
main street, in a large square opposite the church, and also on the
beach. Everywhere there were stalls, selling every commodity that can be
imagined. On the sweet-stall was sugared bread in the shape of hearts or
rings, covered with gold and silver tinsel; there were sugar images,
fruits, little baskets, carriages, birds, animals, all made in sugar,
and apparently much in request among the juvenile population. There were
cheap toys, bright handkerchiefs, Venetian shoes, tambourines, lengths
of gay dress materials, dates, figs, and oranges, and the inevitable red
and green cotton umbrellas. The small shops, following an ancient custom
which dates back so many centuries B. C., had hung out signs to signify
the nature of their wares to those peasants who could not read. Over the
baker's doorway dangled a loaf, the shoemaker had a large boot, and the
wine shops still showed the garlands of ivy once dedicated to Bacchus. A
