
It is right to add that such catastrophes are not of frequent occurrence
in the mines.  The danger of "holing to a house of water," is so great
and so well known that the operation is usually conducted with great
care, and accident is well guarded against.

Nevertheless, an occasional act of carelessness will now and then result
in a terrible disaster.  A catastrophe, similar in all its chief
features to that which has been related in the last chapter, happened in
North Levant mine many years ago, and in the burying-ground of the
Wesleyan Chapel of St. Just may be seen a tombstone, which bears record
of the sad event as follows:--

  _Sacred to the memory of_ JAMES, _aged_ 20, _and_ JOHN, _aged_ 15
  _years, sons of James and Nanny Thomas of Bollowall, in this Parish,
  who were drowned (with three others) by the holing to a house of water
  in North Levant Mine on the first of April_ 1867.

A "house" of much larger dimensions, and containing a much greater body
of water than that which caused the latest destruction of life in North
Levant mine, was cleared of water not long ago in Botallack.  The agents
knew of its existence, for, the whole region both above and below ground
being measured off and planned, they could lay their finger on the exact
spot where they knew that an old mine existed.  They kept a large borer,
six feet long, going constantly before them as they cut their way
towards the point of danger.  The result was that when the borer at last
pierced through to the old mine, there were six feet of solid rock
between them and the water.  Through the small hole the water flowed,
and thus the mine was slowly but safely drained.  In the other case, the
ground happened to be soft, and had been somewhat recklessly cut away.

Of course, there are occasions--proving the truth of the proverb that
"accidents will happen in the best regulated families"--in which neither
foresight nor precaution can prevent evil; but these are comparatively
few.  Sometimes the cupidity of a miner will lead him, for the sake of
following a rich lode, to approach too near and too recklessly to
danger, despite the vigilance of captains, and cause considerable risk
to the mine as well as to themselves.  Such was the case once long ago
at Botallack, when the miners below the sea cut away the rock to within
three or four feet of the water, and actually made a small hole through
so that they had to plug it up with a piece of wood.

This is a fact which we can vouch for, having seen the plug, and heard
the boulders rattling loudly over our head with each successive wave;
but there is no danger here, because the cutting under the sea is
narrow, and the rock solid and intensely hard.

Such also was the case, not many years since, at Levant mine, where the
men working in the levels under the sea drove upwards until the salt
water began to trickle through to them in alarming quantities--insomuch
that the other miners struck work, and refused to go again into the
mine, unless the workings in that part were stopped, and the place made
secure.  This was accordingly done, and the men returned to the mine.
The danger here was really great, because the cutting that had been made
was wide, and the ground overhead comparatively soft.

But, to return to our tale.

For many days after the catastrophe Oliver Trembath lay in his bed
suffering from severe cuts and bruises, as well as from what must have
been, as nearly as possible, concussion of the brain, for he had
certainly been washed down one of the winzes, although he himself
retained only a confused recollection of the events of that terrible
day, and could not tell what had befallen him.  At length, however, he
became convalescent, and a good deal of his old vigour returned.

During this period of illness and convalescence Oliver had been
constrained by old Mr Donnithorne to take up his abode in his house,
and the young doctor could not have experienced more attention and
kindness from the old couple if he had been their son.  Rose Ellis, too,
did her best to cheer him, and, as we need scarcely add, was wonderfully
successful in her efforts!

It was during this period that Oliver made the acquaintance of a young
man of St. Just, named Charles Tregarthen--a congenial spirit--and one
who was, besides, a thorough gentleman and an earnest Christian.  With
this youth he formed a sincere friendship, and although the subject of
religion was never obtrusively thrust upon him by young Tregarthen, it
entered so obviously into all his thoughts, and shone so clearly in his
words and conduct, that Oliver's heart was touched, and he received
impressions at that time which never left him.

Oliver and his friend were sitting one forenoon in Mr Donnithorne's
dining-room, which commanded an extensive view of green fields and
grass-covered stone walls, with the beams and machinery of mines on the
horizon, and the blue sea beyond.  They were planning a short walking
tour, which it was thought would be of great benefit to Oliver in that
stage of his recovery, when old Mr Donnithorne entered the room with a
somewhat perturbed expression of countenance.

"How are you, Charlie my boy?" he said.  "Oliver, I want to have a few
minutes' talk with you in my room on business; I know Charlie will
excuse you."

"I was on the point of taking leave at any rate," said Tregarthen with a
smile, as he grasped Oliver's hand; "think over our plan, like a good
fellow; I am sure Mr Donnithorne will approve of it, and I'll look in
to-morrow forenoon to hear what decision you come to."

"Oliver," said Mr Donnithorne, sitting down opposite the invalid when
his friend had left, and frowning portentously, "d'you know I'm a ruined
man?"

"I trust not, uncle," replied Oliver with an incredulous smile,
supposing that the old gentleman was jesting.

"Yes, but I am," he repeated with tremendous gravity.  "At all events, I
shall be ere long.  These--these--vile jewels will be the death of me."

Having thus broken the ice Mr Donnithorne went on with much volubility
of utterance and exasperation of tone to explain that legal proceedings
had been instituted for the recovery of the jewels which he had
purchased from the fishermen; that things seemed almost certain to go
against him; and that in all probability he should be compelled to sell
his estate in order to refund the money.

"But can you not sell your shares in Botallack and refund with the
proceeds?" said Oliver.

"No, I cannot," replied the old gentleman.  "You know that at present
these shares are scarcely saleable except at a ruinous discount, and it
would be a pity to part with them just now, seeing that there is some
hope of improvement at this time.  There is nothing for it but to sell
my estate, and I don't think there will be enough left to buy butter to
my bread after this unhappy affair is settled, for it amounts to some
thousands of pounds."

"Indeed, uncle! how comes it that they found out the value of them?"

"Oh, simply enough, Oliver, but strangely too.  You must know that
Maggot, the scoundrel (and yet not such a scoundrel either, for the
fellow informed on me in a passion, without having any idea of the
severity of the consequences that would follow),--Maggot, it seems, kept
the cloth belt in which the jewels were found tied round the owner's
waist, and there happened to be a piece of parchment sewed up in the
folds of it, in which the number and value of the jewels were
enumerated.  This belt was ferreted out by the lawyers, and the result
is that, as I said before, I shall be a ruined man.  Verily," added Mr
Donnithorne, with a look of vexation, as he stumped up and down the room
with his hands thrust deep into his breeches pockets, "verily, my wife
was a true prophetess when she told me that my sin would be sure to find
me out, and that honesty was the best policy.  'Pon my conscience, I'm
half inclined to haul down my colours and let her manage me after all!"

"I am much concerned at what you tell me," said Oliver, "and I regret
now very deeply that the few hundreds which I possessed when I came
here--and which you know are all my fortune--have also been invested in
Botallack shares, for they should have been heartily at your service,
uncle."

"Don't trouble yourself about your hundreds, lad," said the old
gentleman testily; "I didn't come here to ask assistance from you in
that way, but to tell you the facts of the case, and ask you to do me
the favour to carry a letter to my lawyer in Penzance, and inquire into
the condition of a mine I have something to do with there--a somewhat
singular mine, which I think will surprise as well as interest you; will
you do this, for me, lad?"

"Most willingly," replied Oliver.  "You heard my friend Charlie
Tregarthen speak of our intention to go on a walking tour for a couple
of days; now, if you have no objection, he and I will set off together
without delay, and make Penzance our goal, going round by the Land's End
and the coast."

"So be it, Oliver, and don't hurry yourselves, for the business will
wait well enough for a day or two.  But take care of yourself, lad;
don't go swimming off the Land's End again, and above all things avoid
smugglers.  The scoundrels! they have been the ruin of me, Oliver.  Not
bad fellows in their way either, but unprincipled characters--
desperately regardless of the national laws; and--and--keep clear of
'em, I advise you strongly--have nothing to do with 'em, Oliver, my
son."

So saying the old gentleman left the room, shaking his head with
profound gravity.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

TELLS OF KING ARTHUR AND OTHER MORE OR LESS FABULOUS MATTERS.

Next day Oliver Trembath and his friend Charles Tregarthen, before the
sun had mounted his own height above the horizon, were on their way to
the Land's End.

The young men were admirably suited to each other.  Both were well
educated, and possessed similar tastes, though their temperaments were
dissimilar, and both were strong athletic youths--Oliver's superiority
in this latter respect being at that time counterbalanced by his recent
illness, which reduced him nearly to a level with his less robust
companion.

Their converse was general and desultory until they reached the Land's
End, on the point of which they had resolved to breakfast.

"Now, Oliver, we have purchased an appetite," said Tregarthen, throwing
down a wallet in which he carried some provisions; "let us to work."

"Stay, Charlie, not here," said Oliver; "let us get out on the point,
where we shall have a better view of the cliffs on either side of the
Land's End.  I love a wide, unobstructed view."

"As you will, Oliver; I leave you to select our table, but I pray you to
remember that however steady your head may have been in days of yore
when you scaled the Scottish mountains, the rough reception it has met
with in our Cornish mines has given it a shake that renders caution
necessary."

"Pshaw!  Charlie, don't talk to me of caution, as if I were a timid old
woman."

"Nay, then, I talk of it because you are _not_ a timid old woman, but a
reckless young man who seems bent on committing suicide.  Yonder is a
grassy spot which I think will suit you well."

He pointed to a level patch of sward on the neck of land that connects
the outlying and rugged promontory which forms the extreme Land's End
with the cliffs of the mainland.  Here they spread their meal, and from
this point they could see the cliffs and bays of the iron-bound shore
extending on the one hand towards Cape Cornwall, and on the other
towards that most romantic part of the coast known by the somewhat
curious name of Tolpedenpenwith, where rocks and caverns are found in
such fantastic fashion that the spot has become justly celebrated for
picturesque grandeur.  At their feet, far below, the great waves (caused
by the swell, for there was no wind) boomed in solemn majesty,
encircling the cliffs with a lace-work of foam, while on the horizon the
Scilly Islands could be seen shimmering faintly.  A bright sun shone on
the unruffled sea, and hundreds of ships and boats lay becalmed on its
breast.

"'Tis a splendid scene!" said Oliver, sitting down beside his friend.

"It is indeed, and reminds me of the sea of glass before the great white
throne that we read of in Revelation.  It is difficult to imagine or to
believe that the peaceful water before us, lying between this spot and
the Scilly Islands yonder, was once a land full of verdure and life--yet
such tradition tells us was the case."

"You mean, I suppose, the fabled land of Lionesse?" said Oliver.

"Yes; you have heard the story of its destruction, I suppose?"

"Not I," said Oliver, "so if you have a mind to tell it me while I
satisfy the cravings of an unusually sharp appetite I'll consider you a
most obliging fellow.  Pass me the knuckle of ham--thanks--and the
bread; now go ahead."

"'Tis a romantic story," said Tregarthen.

"All the better," replied Oliver.

"And terrible," added Tregarthen.

"It won't spoil my appetite," said his friend.

"Well, then, I'll tell it--to the best of my ability."  The youth then
began the following legend, pausing ever and anon during the narration
to swallow a piece of bread or a mouthful of cold tea, which constituted
the principal elements of their frugal meal.

"You must know that, once upon a time, long, long ago, in those ancient
days before Norman or Dane had invaded this land, while Britain still
belonged to the British, and King Arthur held his court in Tintagel's
halls, there was a goodly land, named Lethowsow or the Lionesse,
extending a distance of thirty miles between this cape and yonder
shadowy islets which seem to float like cirrus clouds on the horizon.
It is said that this land of Lionesse was rich and fertile, supporting
many hundreds of families, with large flocks and herds.  There were no
fewer than forty churches upon it, from which it follows that there must
have been a considerable population of well-doing people there.

"About the time of the events which I am going to narrate, King Arthur's
reign was drawing to a close.  Treason had thinned the ranks of the once
united and famous knights of the Round Table.  It is true that Sir Kaye,
the seneschal, remained true, and Sir Ector de Mans, and Sir Caradoc,
and Sir Tristram, and Sir Lancelot of the Lake, of whom it was said that
`he was the kindest man that ever struck with sword; and he was the
goodliest person that ever rode among the throng of knights; and he was
the meekest man, and the gentlest, that did ever eat in hall among
ladies; and he was the sternest knight to his mortal foe that ever laid
lance in rest.'  But many seats at the Round Table that once were filled
by brave warriors had become empty, and among these, that of Prince
Mordred, who, it was rumoured, meant to declare open war against his
royal cousin and benefactor.

"One night King Arthur sat at the Round Table in Tintagel Castle with
his knights gathered round him, and Queen Guenever with her maidens by
his side.  At the beginning of the feast the king's brow was clouded,
for, although there was no lack of merriment or song, there was a want
of the free-hearted courtesy and confidence of former days.  Still the
semblance of unabated good-fellowship was kept up, and the evening
passed in gaiety until its close, when the king rose to retire.  Taking
in his hand a golden cup to pledge his guests, he was about to drink,
when a shudder passed through his frame, and he cast the goblet away,
exclaiming, `It is not wine, but blood!  My father Merlin is among us,
and there is evil in the coming days.  Break we up our court, my peers!
It is no time for feasting, but rather for fasting and for prayer.'

"The king glanced with a dark frown at the chair of his kinsman Mordred,
but it was not empty!  A strange, indistinct, shadowy form rested on it.
It had no human shape, but a dreadful outline of something unearthly.
Awe-struck and silent, the company at once broke up.

"On the following day, news of Mordred's revolt arrived at Tintagel
Castle, and day after day fresh rumours reached it of foes flocking in
numbers to the rebel standard.  The army increased as it advanced, but,
strange to say, King Arthur showed no disposition to sally forth and
meet the traitor.  It seemed as if his brave heart had quailed at last,
and his good sword Excalibur had lost its magic virtue.  Some thought
that he doubted the fidelity of those who still remained around him.
But, whatever the cause might have been, King Arthur made no
preparation, and indicated no feeling or intention.  He lay still in his
castle until the rebels had approached to the very gates.  There was
something terrible in this mysterious silence of the king, which had a
tendency to overawe the rebels as they drew near, and remembered that
they were about to match themselves against warriors who had grown old
in fellowship with victory.

"When the main body of the invaders appeared, the great bell of the
fortress at last rang out a stirring peal, and before the barbican the
trumpets sounded to horse.  King Arthur then with his knights and
men-at-arms, the best warriors of Britain, arose and sallied forth to
fight in their last battle.

"Next evening a broken band of horsemen alone remained to tell of the
death of their king and the destruction of all their hopes.  They
numbered several hundreds, but their hacked armour, jaded steeds, and
gaping wounds told that they were unfit to offer battle to any foe.
They were in full flight, bearing a torn banner, still wet with the
blood of King Arthur; yet they fled unwillingly, as men who were unused
to retreat, and scarce knew how to comport them in the novel
circumstances.  Their course was in the direction of the Lionesse, the
tract of country called in the Cornish tongue Lethowsow.  On they
dashed, without uttering a word, over the bleak moors before them.
Sometimes they halted to drink at a spring or tighten their girths, and
occasionally a man fell behind from sheer exhaustion.  At night they
encamped, after a hard ride of thirty miles.  Next morning the flight
was resumed, but the vindictive Mordred still thundered on in pursuit.
Ere long they heard a trumpet sounding in their rear, and King Arthur's
men halted for a few minutes, with the half-formed design of facing the
foe and selling their lives dearly.  While they paused in gloomy
irresolution, gazing sternly on the advancing host, whose arms flashed
back the rays of the morning sun, a mist rose up between them and their
foes.  It was a strange shadowy mist, without distinct form, yet not
without resemblance to something ghostly.  The knights at once
recognised it as the shade of Merlin, the Great Wizard!  Slowly the
cloud uprose between the pursuers and pursued, effectually protecting
