three years among them.  A man who came to them conferring benefits,
and betraying no doubt of their good faith, was as safe among them as
if he had been one of their own people.

It also occurred to Steve that this was hardly what Murray had been
sent out for by To-la-go-to-de, but his devotion to the interests of
that chief was not strong enough to make him care much.

Whatever might be Murray's intentions, Steve was clear enough that his
own would never carry him back to make any sort of report of their
"scouting."

The Apaches wheeled toward the west, and Send Warning and Knotted Cord
rode on at the side of Many Bears.




CHAPTER XVII

If To-la-go-to-de and his Lipans had moved forward just a little
earlier that morning, they might have been in time to witness the
departure of Captain Skinner and his men on their ill-advised
expedition.  As it was, they were astonished enough by what they saw.

"Pale-faces."

"Big wagons."

"Much horse.  Much mule."

"No Tongue leave that behind him for Lipans to take, and go on after
Apaches."

They believed they had solved one of their puzzles; but a good deal
harder one was the question, "Who are those pale-faces, and where do
they come from?"  No such party had ever been known or heard of in that
vicinity, and To-la-go-to-de instantly came to the decision that this
one should never be heard of again.

"Not many," he said.  "Ride straight down valley and eat 'em up.
Plenty plunder.  Carry back big present for squaw to look at."

His eager warriors answered him with whoops and yells of approval, and
he led them swiftly down all that was left of the pass and out into the
valley.

It looked as if Murray had been altogether right when he sent word to
Captain Skinner by Bill that there was "danger behind him."  Bill
himself was thinking of it at that very moment, and saying to one of
his mates, "I'd about as lief see the sheriff and his posse, all the
way from Denver."

"Well, yes, I'd a good deal ruther be arrested than scalped any day."

"Thar's a big swarm of 'em.  No use for us to fight.  I can't even lift
my rifle."

"Try a little friendship.  Maybe old Skinner'll tell ye you've been
showin' good-sense agin."

"May save our scalps, boys; but I don't reckon it'll save us much of
anything else."

"They're comin' right down onto us.  If Skinner and all the boys were
here, we could stop 'em, though."

If To-la-go-to-de's keen eyes had told him there were two dozen
sharp-shooting white men in that camp, instead of three, he and his
Lipans would never have dreamed of charging in as they now did.

It was not a very ceremonious or friendly way of making a morning call.
There was a good deal too much noise about it.  Too much clattering of
lances and too many fierce, exulting war-whoops.

"Our time's come, Bill."

"It is if we anger them.  Keep a steady eye, boys.  Say 'How!'"

Those three miners were men of great courage, and their nerves must
have been in the best of order, for they steadily walked out to the
border of the camp and met the Lipans as if they had invited them to
breakfast and were expecting them to come.  There was just this
difference, however, between their greeting of the Lipans and Murray's
encounter with the Apaches: Bill and his two friends had sent no act of
kindness and good-will ahead of them, while Murray and Steve were
already firmly established, and well known as "friends of the Apaches,
ready to fight for friends."

It was a very wide difference, but the three miners had acted wisely.
The Lipan warriors in front of them lowered their lances, and the chief
himself responded grimly to their "How!"  But he did not offer to shake
hands with them, and he did not check his braves in their rush through
the camp and all over it.

"Don't tell 'em too much, Bill.  The Captain and the boys won't be gone
long.  We can't warn 'em nuther."

That was just before old Two Knives gathered all the English he knew to
question his prisoners.  He saw at a glance that the men before him
were only a part of a large party.  The fires and the signs left of the
breakfast which had been eaten were quite enough for that, not to speak
of the size of the outfit.

"How many?" he asked.

Bill held up both hands, with the fingers spread, twice, and then one
hand.

"Ugh!  How hurt arm?"

"Fight with Apaches."

"Ugh!  Good.  Where gone?  All pale-face braves?"

"Hunt Apaches.  Out there."

"Ugh?  Hope find 'em.  Kill half.  Lipans kill rest.  Kill pale-face
too.  Put down gun.  Prisoner this time.  Shut mouth."

Bill had never in his life seen an uglier expression on the face of a
man than was worn by that of the Lipan chief at that moment.

There was no use in resistance.  Silently the three miners permitted
themselves to be deprived of all their weapons; but the "stripping"
stopped there.  A brave who reached out his hand for the battered hat
on the head of Bill was checked by To-la-go-to-de.

"Ugh!  No want him.  Let pale-face wear him.  Take off scalp too,
by-and-by."

There was nothing very cheering in that, but Bill's head did feel a
little safer with the hat on.

"Tell ye what, boys," he afterward said to his mates, "when that
redskin's hand teched the brim of that hat it felt as if the hull top
o' my head was comin' loose."

It did not take those sixty Lipans long to find out all there was to be
found in that camp.  Their first and keenest interest was in the horses
and mules, and the quality and number of these drew from them shouts of
approval.  The mules alone were worth any number of mustang ponies in a
trade either with other Indians or with the border pale-faces.

Their first attempt at ransacking the wagons was sternly checked by old
Two Knives.

"Maybe pale-faces got fire-water.  To-la-go-to-de not want braves drunk
now.  Big fight maybe."

Every brave among them knew the good-sense of that, but they felt
better satisfied a little later.  The chief himself superintended a
careful inspection of the wagons by two of his oldest sub-chiefs.

"He won't find a drap of any kind of liquor," growled Bill.  "But I
wish thar was some, and I could pisen it for him.  They're a bad lot."

"Thar's too many on 'em for the boys to handle, I'm afraid."

"Captain Skinner's jest the man to try it and find out.  Thar'll be a
hot time, thar will!"

Two Knives probably had some such idea in his head, for his next
orders, when carried out, left Bill and his two mates firmly bound to
separate trees, so that no braves need be compelled to waste their
precious time as "guards" over them.

The camp was now no longer the camp of the miners, it was that of the
Lipans, and everything in it was their property, by all the laws of
Indian warfare.  There was yet to be at some future time, of course, a
fair division of the plunder, but the "transfer" had been fully made
and it was too late for anybody else to interfere.

It takes a great deal of civilization to make a South-western Indian,
of any tribe, understand the white man's idea that his horse is still
his own after it has been fairly stolen.  To the Indian's mind, the
theft gives the thief even a better title than he could acquire by
paying money, and the biggest brave of any band is almost sure to be
its most successful and renowned horse-thief.

The Lipans were specially well pleased over their morning's work, for
they had won all that plunder without the loss of a single warrior.

The fate of the three prisoners was a matter to be thought over.
To-la-go-to-de was by no means sure he had no farther use for them.  He
could wait till his braves should return from the examination he had
ordered of the plain below the valley.  It was less than an hour before
they came back, and in a remarkable hurry, with the news of the
approach of the main body of the pale-faces.

Old Two Knives merely nodded his head.  His captives had told him the
truth.  But that number of white men would not be likely to attack at
once so strong a band as his own.  A full company of regular cavalry
would hardly have been enough to scare him, for the Lipans are second
to no other in their fighting qualities, and these were picked and
chosen warriors.

"Pale-face come.  Laugh at him."

Captain Skinner and his men saw nothing to laugh at when they rode near
enough to understand the condition of affairs in their camp.

The blow had fallen upon them so suddenly that, for some moments after
they halted on the plain, half a mile away, not a man could say a word.

"It's our fault, Cap.  We ort to have follered your advice."

"Ort not to have left the camp."

"You was right."

"It's too late for that kind of talk, boys.  The question for us is,
what had we best do?  Anybody got anything to say?"

There was another moment of glum, sulky silence, and then a perfect
storm of angry outcries.

"Charge in on 'em!"

"Kill every soul of 'em."

"Fight right away."

"We won't lose all that's in them wagons."

"That'll do, boys.  I know you've got all the grit for a fight," said
Captain Skinner, "but suppose they're too much for us, and wipe us all
out, what then?"

"Then that's what it'll have to be, Cap.  We're ready."

"All right, boys.  But no matter what comes, not a man of you must run.
Not for a yard."

"We'll stand by ye, Cap."

"Most likely thar ain't no use talkin' of Bill and the boys."

"Not much, I reckon.  They had no kind of show."

There was no time to do any mourning for their comrades, but the way in
which that line of white horsemen now rode forward made the Lipans open
their eyes in astonishment.

"Keep about a rod apart," said the Captain.  "Walk your horses.  Don't
fire a shot unless you've got a good aim at something.  We'll draw them
nigh enough to teach 'em a thing or two."

For once even old Two Knives, with all his cunning, was led into making
a mistake.  He was unwise enough to try and scare those miners, when
there was not a man among them who knew how to be afraid, and they had
all agreed to be killed rather than not whip those Lipans and get back
what was in the wagons.

It was a bad mistake for those Indians to make even a threat of a
charge, when it brought them in a pretty compact mass, just as they
were about to wheel, instead of "charging," less than two hundred yards
from the steady line of pale-faces.

"Now, boys, save every shot."

It was not a volley.  The rifles cracked rapidly, one after another,
but all were fired in a very few seconds and the Lipans recoiled in
dismay, firing wildly as they went, and carrying off their dead and
wounded.

"Keep it up, boys.  Steady.  Take a pony if you can't hit a redskin."

The "rally" of the Lipans was quickly made, and their own firing grew
hotter, but it had little of the cool accuracy that Captain Skinner
insisted on from his own men.  All the while, too, he was moving
steadily forward, and To-la-go-to-de began to understand what kind of
men he had to deal with.

A sharp, deep-throated order to three of his braves was rapidly obeyed,
and in a few minutes more the miners heard their Captain's voice,
excitedly,

"Halt!  They've brought out the boys.  They've stopped firing."

It was precisely so.  There were Bill and his two mates, on foot, with
their arms tied behind them, and before each stood a Lipan, with his
lance levelled, ready to strike.

"That's plain, boys.  They've got their lesson.  Don't want any more.
Want a talk.  They'll kill those three if we don't hold up."

"We've only lost two, Cap, and we've laid out more'n a dozen of them."

"Save the boys!"

"No fault of their'n."

"Have a talk, Cap."

"We'll have to give up something if we do.  They'll never give us back
the outfit."

"You know what we want.  We're close to the border now."

"All right.  I'll ride out.  I reckon their chief'll come to meet me."

The meaning of the Lipans had been plain enough.  The sudden firing of
the miners upon their superior force had had all the effect of a
surprise.

They were furiously angry over their losses, but their wise leader saw
that he must give them a breathing-spell.  No troops in the world could
stand a fire so withering as that which came from the repeating-rifles
