great was the jubilation.

Greater still was Riddell's own satisfaction in feeling that he had at
least made a good start towards getting on the right side of the juniors
of his new house.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

"IS WILLOUGHBY DEGENERATE?"

As might be expected, the new captain's move in attempting to win over
the juniors of Welch's only served to increase the irritation of those
seniors who had hitherto reigned supreme in the house.

But Riddell had taken this into his calculation, and was therefore not
greatly astonished when immediately after the enthusiastic cricket
meeting just referred to, Silk followed him to his study in a by no
means amiable frame of mind.

Silk was not given to losing his temper, but on the present occasion he
was decidedly ruffled.  And no wonder.

Any fellow would be ruffled who suddenly found himself deposed from his
authority in the manner in which Silk had been.  Had he been one of the
most conscientious and painstaking of monitors, he might well have been
excused flaring up a little, and, indeed, would have shown a poor spirit
had he not done so.

But Silk, as the reader knows, was neither painstaking nor
conscientious.  He did not care a rap about Welch's, still less about
Willoughby.  As long as he could please himself and annoy his enemies,
he did not care what became of his house or the boys in it.  It was only
when any one ventured to dispute his authority as head of the house that
he attached any value to his office.  In fact, it was the story of the
Dog in the Manger carried out in school life--he would not be troubled
doing his duty to Welch's, and he would not if he could help it let any
one else do it for him.

Riddell, if truth must be told, was not at all sorry to have an early
opportunity of coming to an explanation with Silk.

Silk was one of the very few boys in Willoughby whom the captain
positively disliked, and that being so Riddell was troubled with none of
the half-apologetic nervousness which he usually felt in the presence of
his other fellow-seniors.  He looked upon Silk both as an enemy to
Willoughby and as the evil genius of young Wyndham, and therefore was by
no means disposed to beg his pardon or consult his pleasure in the new
order of things at Welch's.

"I hear the juniors have been saying something to you about starting the
cricket club," said Silk, in tones which were the reverse of
conciliatory.

"Yes," said Riddell; "or, rather, I suggested it to them."

"You did!  All I can say is, it's like your impudence.  Welch's is come
to a pretty pass if _you're_ sent here to look after our athletics."

Riddell did not feel called upon to reply to this, and Silk therefore
continued, "Don't you know Tucker and I have been captains of the clubs
here for the last two years?"

"I was told so."

"Then what business have you to interfere?"

"There was no house club at all this year."

"A lot _you_ care about the cricket.  I know well enough it's just a
canting dodge for snubbing Tucker and me before the fellows, nothing
more."

"You're quite mistaken," replied Riddell.

"Oh, of course!  You'd like to make out that you care a fig about
cricket.  You who couldn't even bowl a ball from one end of the wickets
to the other!"

There seemed nothing particular to reply to in this, so Riddell remained
silent.  This only irritated Silk the more, who felt that he was by no
means getting the best of it.

"You'd better stop this sort of thing at once," he said, viciously.
"You're sent here to look after the morals of the house, not to
interfere with what doesn't concern you.  Tucker and I can look after
the cricket without you."

"Are you and Tucker going to start the old club again, then?" asked
Riddell quietly.

"Whatever business of yours is it whether we are or aren't?  Find out."

"That's what I'm trying to do.  If you are, I'll advise the other
fellows to join it and not have two clubs."

"_You_ advise the fellows!" sneered Silk; "they don't want a schoolhouse
prig like you to advise them."

It was evidently no use trying to conciliate a fellow like this, and
Riddell began to get tired of the interview.

"I don't want to offend you or anybody," said he boldly; "but if you and
Tucker won't take the trouble to start the club, I don't see that all
the house is to be done out of their cricket in consequence.  The
fellows have little enough to keep them together as it is."

"You are a nice _little thing_ to keep them together with, I must say,"
snarled Silk, "and you've made a good start by setting the juniors
against their seniors."

"I've done nothing of the sort," replied Riddell, quietly; "and if
you'll excuse me, I've some work to do, and there's really not much use
talking on the subject."

So saying, he turned, and began taking his books down from the shelf.

Silk, whose irritation had been gradually getting beyond bounds, was
pleased to regard this action as a direct insult to himself, and flared
up accordingly.

"Look here, you snivelling, stuck-up, hypocritical prig, you!" exclaimed
he, advancing and seizing the captain roughly by the arm, "we'd better
come to an understanding at once.  If you think you're going to cheek us
just as you please here, you're mistaken, I tell you.  What do you mean
by it?"

"By what?" inquired Riddell, mildly, but quite composedly.

Silk's only reply was a passionate blow in the captain's face, which
sent him staggering to the other side of the room.

It was a critical moment.  Riddell was no coward, nor was he one of
those sickly individuals who, not satisfied to be struck on one cheek
only, invite a repetition of the assault on the other side.  Physically
weak and nervous as he was, he had sufficient British instinct to move
him to stand up for himself.

And yet as he stood there a moment irresolute, it flashed across him
that whatever the cost he must not enter upon a fight with Silk.

Of course he would be called a coward, and nothing he could say could
prove he wasn't.  He was no match for Silk, and consequently his refusal
to defend himself would be called fear.

"And yet," thought he, "if I fight, my chance in Welch's is gone, even
if I were able to beat him.  The fellows will have no more respect for
me than any other rowdy, and will soon enough make my thrashing an
excuse for mutiny."

It was a hard position for any boy, and the courage required to hold him
back cost Riddell more effort than had he blindly rushed into the fray
and given himself up to be thrashed.

"Will you fight?" shouted Silk, advancing.

"No," said Riddell, as coolly as he could.

"Wretched coward!" exclaimed the bully, "of course you won't.  Then take
what you deserve.  I'll give you the biggest hiding you ever had in your
life."

He would probably have carried out his threat, and Riddell would
probably before half a minute have given up all further idea of non-
resistance, when an opportune diversion occurred in the person of
Telson, who appeared with the remainder of his late senior's possessions
from the schoolhouse.

"I say, Riddell," he exclaimed, almost before the door was open, "here's
a jolly go!  I've got to be that beast Gilks's fag, and-- Hullo! what's
up?"

This remark was caused by Silk's suddenly turning on his heel and
hurrying from the study without putting into execution his threat.

"What was he up to?" asked Telson, as the door was shut.  "He was going
to exterminate me, so he said," replied Riddell, smiling.

"I wish he'd tried, and you'd given him a jolly licking," said Telson.
"He's a cad.  I wonder what young Wyndham or any one sees to like in
him."

"Wyndham likes him, then?" asked the captain.  "They always seem jolly
thick," said the fag.  "By the way, Riddell, were you ever at
Beamish's?"

"Beamish's?  No!" exclaimed Riddell.  "Why?"

"Oh," said Telson, "I only wanted to know what sort of place it was."

"Not a good one.  There's a pretty strong rule against it in the school.
Bad job for any one caught going there."

"I know, I'm not going; I only wanted to know what sort of place it was.
But I'm off, I've got a motion on in Parliament to-morrow.  I say,
Riddell, I wish you hadn't left the schoolhouse."

And off went the junior, leaving Riddell somewhat perplexed by his
chatter, but considerably consoled nevertheless to think that there was
any one in the schoolhouse, or anywhere, who was sorry to lose him.

However, the same reason which took Telson away left Riddell also little
time to spend in vague reflections.  He, too, had a speech to prepare
for Parliament to-morrow.

The meeting promised to be an important one in many respects.  It was
the first after the boat-race, and consequently party feeling was likely
to make use of the opportunity to let off a little of its steam.  Then,
of course, it was the captain's first public appearance as the head of
Welch's, and that was sure to excite a good deal of curiosity and
interest.  And last, but not least, the subject for the evening was a
debate on the question, "That Willoughby is Degenerate," to be opened in
the affirmative by Ashley, and in the negative by Porter, and on this
burning question the debate as well as the division promised to be
pretty interesting.

There was the usual lively time before the regular business was reached
over "Questions," of which there were a good many on the notice-paper.
But it will be best to report the meeting in the usual Parliamentary
style, as it would have appeared on the records of the House, had any
record been kept at Willoughby:

Mr Bloomfield took the chair at three o'clock.

Mr Merrison (Welcher) gave notice that at the next meeting he would
move--"That this House gives its support to the Liberal candidate in the
coming election at Shellport, and does all in its power to kick out the
Radical."  (Loud cheers.)

Mr Pringle (Parrett's) asked the Home Secretary what day the summer
holidays were to begin.

Mr Ashley replied that he was not in a position to inform the hon.
member, but probably in about six weeks.

Mr Wyndham, jun.  (schoolhouse), wished to ask why Parrett's would not
row another race when the schoolhouse had offered it?  (Great
schoolhouse cheers.)

Mr Game (First Lord of the Admiralty), amid equally loud cheers on
Parrett's side, replied that as soon as the schoolhouse found out who
had been mean enough to cut the Parrett's rudder-line, and gave him up
to justice, they would see about it.

Whereupon Mr Wibberly begged to ask the schoolhouse stroke whether he
had any information to give the House on the subject.

Mr Fairbairn.--The information I have to give the House is that Mr
Riddell and I, directly after the race, went to Mr Bloomfield and said
we were sorry for the accident--(ironical laughter from Parrett's)--and
offered to row them again any day they liked, and the offer was
declined.  (Schoolhouse cheers.)

Mr Tipper.--I should like to know if the schoolhouse fellows are making
any efforts to discover the culprit by whose assistance they won the
race.  (Tremendous Parrett's cheers.)

Mr Fairbairn.--I can't say we are.  (Derisive cheers of "Of course
not!" from Parrett's.)  The hon. gentlemen opposite seem to know so much
about it, that I think they had better find the culprit themselves.
("Hear, hear," from the schoolhouse.)

The proceedings at this stage became rather noisy, every one being
anxious to express his opinion on the question.  It was not till after
the President had threatened to "adjourn the House" that silence was at
length restored.

Bloomfield took the sensible course, also, of announcing that, as quite
enough questions had been asked about the race, he should not allow any
more on that subject.

Whereupon Mr Tucker, the Welcher, rose and put a question on another
matter.  He wanted to know the reason why Mr Riddell had become a
Welcher; whether it was true that he had been turned out of the
schoolhouse for being incompetent; and whether he had been kicked out of
the captaincy as well.

Mr Crossfield said he had been requested to reply.  And first he must
congratulate the hon. member on having succeeded in asking a question
which any one could understand.  (Laughter.)

In reply, he understood Mr Riddell had been sent to Welch's in order to
study the virtues of a fellow called Tucker, who was--

Mr Tucker, rising: Mr Chairman, I didn't put my question in order to
be insulted by Crossfield or any one.  (Laughter.)

Mr Crossfield.--I apologise to the hon. gentleman.  I will not insult
him by supposing he has any virtues.  I should say Mr Riddell has gone
to take a few lessons in the art of keeping a house in order, which no
one can so well teach him as Mr Tucker.  (Loud laughter.)  In reply to
the gentleman's second question--

Mr Tucker.--I don't want any more.  (Laughter.)

Mr Crossfield.--In reply to the gentleman's second question, I am sorry
to inform him that his impressions are about as correct and intelligent
as they usually are.  (Renewed cheers and laughter, in the midst of
which Tucker subsided in a state of mind hardly amiable.)

As soon as silence was restored, Mr Porter wished to ask the captain of
the eleven whether the team to play against Rockshire was yet settled.

Mr Bloomfield.--Not quite.  Nine names are fixed--Game, Tipper, Ashley,
Wibberly, and myself from Parrett's house, and Fairbairn, Porter,
Coates, and Crossfield from the schoolhouse.  (Cheers and counter-
cheers, and loud cries of "What about the Welchers?") What about the
Welchers?  That's what everybody wants to know!  (Loud cheers.)

Hereupon Mr Cusack rose in his place and asked if the House was aware
that the Welchers' cricket club was started again; that he was the
secretary; and old Mr Pil the treasurer, and Mr Riddell the president,
that the subscription was two shillings and sixpence in advance, and
that-- But here the enthusiastic secretary's announcement was drowned in
the general laughter of the assembly, led by the Parrett's juniors, who
roared as if they'd never heard such a joke in their lives.  "Won't be a
joke when we smash you in one innings," shouted Cusack, standing on his
seat to give emphasis to the challenge.  "Ho, ho! when's that to be?"

"When you like," cried the Welchers.  "Do you funk it?"

"Unless those juniors there hold their row," interposed Bloomfield, "I
shall have them turned out of the meeting."  Whereat the little breeze
calmed down.

The President then called upon Mr Ashley to move the resolution
standing in his name, which he did in a rather feeble speech.

"I really don't think it necessary to say much to prove that the school
is degenerate.  Look at the clubs!  They aren't nearly as good as they
were in old Wyndham's time.  Parrett's clubs, thanks to Mr Bloomfield,
keep up; but where are the others?  Then the rows.  (Hear, hear.)  I'm
sure there have been more rows in the school this term than all the rest
of the year put together.  The juniors seem to do what they
like,"--("Hear, hear," from Telson, Parson, and Co.)--"and no one seems
to know who has a right to keep any one else in order.  Now, why is all
this?  (Loud cheers from Bosher.)  You know as well as I do.  The
captain of the school always used to be a fellow the boys could look up
to.  Old Wyndham and the captain before him were something like fellows.
(Loud Parrett's cheers.) _They_ weren't afraid to look any one in the
face--(cheers)--and _they_ didn't, when they got tired of one
house--(cheers)--ask the doctor to move them to another.  (Terrific
applause from the Parrett's and Welchers.)  Why, if this boat-race
affair had happened in old Wyndham's time, do you suppose he wouldn't
have made it right, and found out the fellow, even if it was his own
brother?  (Loud cheers, amidst which young Wyndham blushed a great deal
at this unexpected piece of notoriety.)  I'm not going to say any more."
("Hear, hear," from Fairbairn.)

Mr Porter rose to open the debate on the other side.  He wasn't going
to give in that Willoughby was going down.  It was unpatriotic.
(Cheers.)  He meant to say if the school did go down it was the fellows'
own fault, and not all to be blamed on one boy.  Mr Riddell would
probably answer for himself--(laughter)--but he (Mr Porter) was pretty
sure the school would not degenerate under him.  The fellows seemed to
think the only thing in the world was brute strength.  He had no
objection to brute strength--(cheers and laughter)--in fact he fancied
he had a little of his own--("Hear, hear," from Telson whose ears Porter
had boxed only that morning)--but Willoughby wanted something better
than that; and he meant to say there were plenty of fellows in the
school who didn't make much noise, but who did as much to keep up the
school as all the rowdies put together.  And when things have quieted
down, as he hoped they would, these fellows would get more thanks than
they did now.  (Cheers from a few, who apparently considered this last
allusion referred specially to them.)

Porter was not a good speaker, and the little he did say was a good deal
bungled.  Still there was a manly ring about his speech which pleased
the better disposed section of his audience, some of whom did not even
belong to the same house.

Silk followed.  The Welcher monitor was clever to a certain degree, and
although he never chose to devote his cleverness to good purposes, he
usually managed to get himself listened to when he chose to take the
trouble.  And at present, his peculiar position as the deposed head of
Welch's gave a certain interest to what he had to say.  Bitter enough it
was.

"What chance is there of the school not going down, I should like to
know," said he, "when cant is the order of the day?  (Hear, hear.)  Of
course the school is going down.  What interests can any one have in his
house when some one comes and begins by setting the juniors against the
seniors and then turning up the whites of his eyes and saying, `What a
shocking state of disorder the house is in?'  Why, before `the little
stranger'--(loud laughter)--came to Welch's, the seniors and juniors
never fell out," ("Hear, hear," from several quarters), "but now there's
a regular mutiny.  And what's bad for one house is bad for the school.
I don't care who's head of Welch's.  He's welcome to the honour if he
likes, but let him act above-board, that's what I say, and not snivel
and look pious while all the time he's doing a dirty trick."  (Cheers
from Tucker and one or two more, which, however, instantly died out when
Crossfield rose.)

Crossfield was the plague of the senior Welchers' lives!

"I was much affected by the beautiful speech of the gentleman who has
just sat down," he began.  "It is always so sweet to hear conscious
innocence asserting itself.  After the gentleman's noble efforts for the
good of his house (laughter)--and the splendid example he has set of
rectitude--(laughter)--and high moral principle--(laughter)--it is truly
touching to find him put on one side for an interloper who is villainous
enough to tell the juniors they need not walk in his saintly footsteps!
(Laughter.)  But that is not what I wanted to say, and as the gentleman
appears to be overcome by his emotions--(Silk was at that moment angrily
leaving the room)--I don't think we need trouble any more about him.
(Cheers and laughter.)  All I wished to say was this: I always
understood from the gentlemen of Parrett's that Mr Bloomfield was
captain of Willoughby," (Loud cries of "So he is!"), "and that nobody
cared a straw for Mr Riddell."  ("No more they do!").  "Then, I don't
think Mr Ashley is very complimentary to Mr Bloomfield when he says
the fault of all the mischief is that the captain is not an all-round
man.  For all that he's quite correct.  Mr Bloomfield is a well-meaning
man, no doubt, but he certainly is not an all-round man."  (Uproar.)

Riddell then rose, and his rising was the signal for a great
demonstration of party feeling.  Parrett's of course went against him,
and a large section of Welch's, but the schoolhouse, aided by Cusack,
Pilbury, and Co., backed him up.  He spoke nervously but boldly.

"I am sorry to have to support the motion of Mr Ashley.  I agree with
him that Willoughby is not what it was, and not what it should be.
(Cheers.)  And I also agree with him in thinking that the school might
have a good deal better captain than it has."  (Cries of "No!" from the
schoolhouse.) "However, I do not want to say a word about myself.  What
I do want to say is this--it's one thing to discover that we are
degenerate, and another to try to put ourselves right again.  And are we
likely to do that as long as we are all at sixes and sevens, pulling
different ways, caring far more about our own gratifications than the
good of the whole school?  I don't think so, and I don't believe Mr
Bloomfield does either.  Every fellow worth the name of a Willoughbite
must be sorry to see things as they are.  (Hear, hear.)  Why should they
remain so?  Surely the good of the school is more important than
squabbling about who is captain and which is the best house.  Of course,
we all back up our own house, and, as a Welcher now, I mean to try if
our house can't give a good account of itself before the term's over.
(Loud cheers from Pilbury, Cusack, Philpot, etcetera.)  And if each
house pulls itself up, not at the expense of a rival house--(Hear,
hear)--but for the glory of the school--(Hear, hear)--we shan't have to
complain of Willoughby being degenerate much longer.  You remember what
old Wyndham said the night before he left.  As long as the fellows think
first of the school and then of themselves Willoughby will be all right.
Depend upon it he was right.  We cheered him loud enough then, why not
take his advice still?"  (Loud cheers.)

This spirited address roused the applause of all the better-minded
section, whose cheers were not wholly unmingled with self-reproach.
Bloomfield himself, it was plain, felt its force, and as to the more
vehement members of Parrett's, it considerably damped their ardour.

"Old man," said Fairbairn that evening to his friend the captain, "you
struck a really good blow for the school this afternoon.  I don't know
how you managed to pitch on just the right thing to say, as you did.
Things will come all right, take my word for it.  They're beginning
already."

Alas, there is many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip, as Willoughby had
yet to discover.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

IS WILLOUGHBY MAD?

Things did not mend all at once at Willoughby.  No one expected they
would.  And within a few days after the "debate in Parliament" it seemed
as if the school had finally abandoned all ideas of order and
discipline.

The reader will remember that more than once mention had been made of an
approaching election for the free and enlightened borough of Shellport,
which was occupying the attention not only of the town, and of the
doctor and his ladies, but also of the boys themselves.  And the cheers
with which Morrison's notice of motion, mentioned in the last chapter,
was received, showed plainly enough how things were going.

By long tradition Willoughby had been a Whig school.  Fellows did not
exactly know what Whig meant, but they knew it was the opposite of Tory
on one side and Radical on the other, and they went accordingly.  On the
present occasion, moreover, they had a sort of personal interest in the
event, for the Whig candidate, Sir George Pony, had been discovered to
be a sort of second uncle a few times removed of Pringle, one of the
Parrett's fags, whereas the Radical, Mr Cheeseman, was a nobody!

For all these reasons Willoughby felt it had a great stake in the
contest, and tacitly determined to make its voice heard.

Small election meetings were held by the more enthusiastic politicians
of the school, for the purpose of giving vent to their anti-radical
sympathies.  At these one boy was usually compelled to represent the
Whig and another to figure as the unpopular Radical.  And the cheering
of the one and the hooting of the other was an immense consolation to
the young patriots; and when, as usually happened, the meeting proceeded
to poll for the candidates, and it was announced that the Whig had got
15,999 votes (there were just 16,000 inhabitants in Shellport), and the
Radical only one (polled by himself), the applause would become simply
deafening.

Even the seniors, in a more dignified way, took up the Whig cause, and
wore the Whig colours; and woe betide the rash boy who sported the
opposition badge!

The juniors were hardly the boys to let an occasion like this slip, and
many and glorious were the demonstrations in which they engaged.  They
broke out into a blaze of yellow, and insisted on wearing their colours
even in bed.  Pringle was a regular hero, and cheered whenever he showed
his face; whereas Brown, the town boy, whose father was suspected of
being a Radical, was daily and almost hourly mobbed till his life became
a burden to him.  All other distinctions and quarrels were forgotten in
this enthusiastic and glorious outburst of patriotic feeling.

Two days before the election a mass meeting of juniors and Limpets of
all houses and ages, summoned by proclamation, was held in a corner of
the playground, "to hear addresses by the candidates, and elect a member
for Shellport."  Pringle, of course, was to figure as his distant uncle,
and upon the unhappy Bosher had fallen the lot of assuming the unpopular
_role_ of Mr Cheeseman.  The meeting, though only professing to be a
juniors' assembly, attracted a good many seniors also, whose curiosity
and sense of humour were by no means disappointed at the proceedings.

The chairman, Parson, standing on the top of two cricket-boxes, with a
yellow band round his hat, a yellow rosette on each side of his jacket,
and a yellow tie round his neck, said they were met to choose a member,
and knew who was their man.  (Loud cheers for "Pringle.") "They didn't
want any Radical cads--(cheers)--and didn't know what they wanted down
here."  (Cheers.) (Bosher: "_I_ don't want to be a Radical, you
know.")--(Loud cries of "Shut up!"  "Turn him out!") He'd like to know
what that young ass Curtis was grinning at?  He'd have him turned out if
he had any of his cheek.  He always suspected Curtis was a Radical.
(Curtis: "No, I'm not--I'm for Pony.") There, he knew he was, because
Radicals always told crams!  Whereat Parson resumed the level ground.
Pringle, who had about as much idea of public speaking as he had of
Chinese, was then hoisted up on to the platform amid terrific applause.

He smiled vacantly, and nodded his head, and waved his hand, and
occasionally, when he caught sight of some particularly familiar friend,
brought it up vertically near his nose.

"Silence!  Shut up!  Hold your row for Pony!" yelled the chairman.

"Go ahead, Pringle!" cried the candidate's supporters.

"Speak out!" shouted the crowd.
