estimation of his companions, Tolly did not object.

"Well now, about that jump," he began, emitting a prolonged and delicate
whiff.

"Ah, yes!  How did you manage to do it?" asked little Trevor, eagerly.

"Oh, for the matter o' that it's easy to explain; but it wasn't _my_
jump I was goin' to tell about; it was the jump o' a poor critter--a
sort o' ne'er-do-well who jined a band o' us trappers the day before we
arrived at this place, on our way through the mountains on a huntin'
expedition.  He was a miserable specimen o' human natur'--all the worse
that he had a pretty stout body o' his own, an' might have made a
fairish man if he'd had the spirit even of a cross-grained rabbit.  His
name was Miffy, an' it sounded nat'ral to him, for there was no go in
him whatever.  I often wonder what sitch men was made for.  They're o'
no use to anybody, an' a nuisance to themselves."

"P'r'aps they wasn't made for any use at all," suggested Tolly, who,
having whittled a small piece of stick down to nothing, commenced
another piece with renewed interest.

"No, lad," returned the trapper, with a look of deeper gravity.  "Even
poor, foolish man does not construct anything without some sort o'
purpose in view.  It's an outrage on common sense to think the Almighty
could do so.  Mayhap sitch critters was meant to act as warnin's to
other men.  He told us that he'd runned away from home when he was a boy
'cause he didn't like school.  Then he engaged as a cabin-boy aboard a
ship tradin' to some place in South America, an' runned away from his
ship the first port they touched at 'cause he didn't like the sea.  Then
he came well-nigh to the starvin' p'int an' took work on a farm as a
labourer, but left that 'cause it was too hard, after which he got a
berth as watchman at a warehouse, or some place o' the sort but left
that, for it was too easy.  Then he tried gold-diggin', but could make
nothin' of it; engaged in a fur company, but soon left it; an' then
tried his hand at trappin' on his own account but gave it up 'cause he
could catch nothin'.  When he fell in with our band he was redooced to
two rabbits an' a prairie hen, wi' only three charges o' powder in his
horn, an' not a drop o' lead.

"Well, we tuck pity on the miserable critter, an' let him come along wi'
us.  There was ten of us altogether, an' he made eleven.  At first we
thought he'd be of some use to us, but we soon found he was fit for
nothin'.  However, we couldn't cast him adrift in the wilderness, for
he'd have bin sure to come to damage somehow, so we let him go on with
us.  When we came to this neighbourhood we made up our minds to trap in
the valley, and as the Injins were wild at that time, owin' to some
rascally white men who had treated them badly and killed a few, we
thought it advisable to pitch our camp on the Outlook here.  It was a
well-known spot to most o' my comrades, tho' I hadn't seen it myself at
that time.

"When we came to the gap, one of the young fellows named Bounce gave a
shout, took a run, and went clear over it just as Leapin' Buck did.  He
was fond o' showin' off, you know!  He turned about with a laugh, and
asked us to follow.  We declined, and felled a small tree to bridge it.
Next day we cut the tree down to a plank, as bein' more handy to shove
across in a hurry if need be.

"Well, we had good sport--plenty of b'ar and moose steaks, no end of
fresh eggs of all sorts, and enough o' pelts to make it pay.  You see we
didn't know there was gold here in those days, so we didn't look for it,
an' wouldn't ha' knowed it if we'd seen it.  But I never myself cared to
look for gold.  It's dirty work, grubbin' among mud and water like a
beaver.  It's hard work, too, an' I've obsarved that the men who get
most gold at the diggin's are not the diggers but the storekeepers, an'
a bad lot they are, many of 'em, though I'm bound to say that I've
knowed a few as was real honest men, who kep' no false weights or
measures, an' had some sort of respec' for their Maker.

"However," continued the trapper, filling a fresh pipe, while Tolly and
his little red friend, whittling their sticks less vigorously as the
story went on and at length dropping them altogether, kept their bright
eyes riveted on Drake's face.  "However, that's not what I've got to
tell 'ee about.  You must know that one evening, close upon sundown, we
was all returnin' from our traps more or less loaded wi' skins an' meat,
all except Miffy, who had gone, as he said, a huntin'.  Bin truer if
he'd said he meant to go around scarin' the animals.  Well, just as we
got within a mile o' this place we was set upon by a band o' Redskins.
There must have bin a hundred of 'em at least.  I've lived a longish
time now in the wilderness, but I never, before or since, heard sitch a
yellin' as the painted critters set up in the woods all around when they
came at us, sendin' a shower o' arrows in advance to tickle us up; but
they was bad shots, for only one took effect, an' that shaft just grazed
the point o' young Bounce's nose as neat as if it was only meant to make
him sneeze.  It made him jump, I tell 'ee, higher than I ever seed him
jump before.  Of course fightin' was out o' the question.

"Ten trappers under cover might hold their own easy enough agin a
hundred Redskins, but not in the open.  We all knew that, an' had no
need to call a council o' war.  Every man let his pack fall, an' away we
went for the Outlook, followed by the yellin' critters closer to our
heels than we quite liked.  But they couldn't shoot runnin', so we got
to the gap.  The plank was there all right.  Over we went, faced about,
and while one o' us hauled it over, the rest gave the savages a volley
that sent them back faster than they came.

"`Miffy's lost!' obsarved one o' my comrades as we got in among the
bushes here an' prepared to fight it out.

"`No great loss,' remarked another.

"`No fear o' Miffy,' said Bounce, feelin' his nose tenderly, `he's a bad
shillin', and bad shillin's always turn up, they say.'

"Bounce had barely finished when we heard another most awesome burst o'
yellin' in the woods, followed by a deep roar.

"`That's Miffy,' says I, feelin' quite excited, for I'd got to have a
sneakin' sort o' pity for the miserable critter.  `It's a twin roar to
the one he gave that day when he mistook Hairy Sam for a grizzly b'ar,
an' went up a spruce-fir like a squirrel.'  Sure enough, in another
moment Miffy burst out o' the woods an' came tearin' across the open
space straight for the gap, followed by a dozen or more savages.

"`Run, Bounce--the plank!' says I, jumpin' up.  `We'll drive the
reptiles back!'

"While I was speakin' we were all runnin' full split to meet the poor
critter, Bounce far in advance.  Whether it was over-haste, or the pain
of his nose, I never could make out, but somehow, in tryin' to shove the
plank over, Bounce let it slip.  Down it went an' split to splinters on
the rock's a hundred feet below!  Miffy was close up at the time.  His
cheeks was yaller an' his eyes starin' as he came on, but his face
turned green and his eyes took to glarin' when he saw what had happened.
I saw a kind o' hesitation in his look as he came to the unbridged
gulf.  The savages, thinkin' no doubt it was all up with him, gave a
fiendish yell o' delight.  That yell saved the poor ne'er-do-well.  It
was as good as a Spanish spur to a wild horse.  Over he came with legs
an' arms out like a flyin' squirrel, and down he fell flat on his
stummick at our feet wi' the nearest thing to a fair bu'st that I ever
saw, or raither heard, for I was busy sightin' a Redskin at the time an'
didn't actually see it.  When the savages saw what he'd done they turned
tail an' scattered back into the woods, so we only gave them a loose
volley, for we didn't want to kill the critters.  I just took the bark
off the thigh of one to prevent his forgettin' me.  We held the place
here for three days, an' then findin' they could make nothin' of us, or
havin' other work on hand, they went away an' left us in peace."

"An' what became o' poor Miffy?" asked little Trevor, earnestly.

"We took him down with us to a new settlement that had been started in
the prairie-land west o' the Blue Mountains, an' there he got a
sitooation in a store, but I s'pose he didn't stick to it long.  Anyhow
that was the last I ever saw of him.  Now, boys, it's time to turn in."

That night when the moon had gone down and the stars shed a feeble light
on the camp of those who slumbered on the Outlook rock, two figures,
like darker shades among the surrounding shadows, glided from the woods,
and, approaching the edge of the gap, gazed down into the black abyss.

"I told you, redskin, that the plank would be sure to be drawn over,"
said one of the figures, in a low but gruff whisper.

"When the tomahawk is red men do not usually sleep unguarded," replied
the other, in the Indian tongue.

"Speak English, Maqua, I don't know enough o' your gibberish to make out
what you mean.  Do you think, now, that the villain Paul Bevan is in the
camp?"

"Maqua is not a god, that he should be able to tell what he does not
know."

"No, but he could guess," retorted Stalker--for it was the robber-chief.
"My scouts said they thought it was his figure they saw.  However, it
matters not.  If you are to earn the reward I have offered, you must
creep into the camp, put your knife in Bevan's heart, and bring me his
scalp.  I would do it myself, redskin, and be indebted to nobody, but I
can't creep as you and your kindred can."

"I'd be sure to make row enough to start them in time for self-defence.
As to the scalp, I don't want it--only want to make certain that you've
done the deed.  You may keep it to ornament your dress or to boast about
to your squaw.  If you should take a fancy to do a little murder on your
own account do so.  It matters nothin' to me.  I'll be ready to back you
up if they give chase."

While the robber-chief was speaking he searched about for a suitable
piece of wood to span the chasm.  He soon found what he wanted, for
there was much felled timber lying about the work of previous visitors
to the Outlook.

In a few minutes Maqua had crossed, and glided in a stealthy, stooping
position towards the camp, seeming more like a moving shadow than a real
man.  When pretty close he went down on hands and knees and crept
forward, with his scalping-knife between his teeth.

It would have been an interesting study to watch the savage, had his
object been a good one--the patience; the slow, gliding movements; the
careful avoidance of growing branches, and the gentle removal of dead
ones from his path, for well did Maqua know that a snapping twig would
betray him if the camp contained any of the Indian warriors of the Far
West.

At last he drew so near that by stretching his neck he could see over
the intervening shrubs and observe the sleepers.  Just then Drake
chanced to waken.  Perhaps it was a presentiment of danger that roused
him, for the Indian had, up to that moment, made not the slightest
sound.  Sitting up and rubbing his eyes, the trapper looked cautiously
round; then he lay down and turned over on his other side to continue
his slumbers.

Like the tree-stems around him, Maqua remained absolutely motionless
until he thought the trapper was again sleeping.  Then he retired, as he
had come, to his anxiously-awaiting comrade.

"Bevan not there," he said briefly, when they had retired to a safe
distance; "only Mahoghany Drake an' two boy."

"Well, why didn't ye scalp them!" asked Stalker, savagely, for he was
greatly disappointed to find that his enemy was not in the camp.  "You
said that all white men were your enemies."

"No, not all," replied the savage.  "Drake have the blood of white mans,
but the heart of red mans.  He have be good to Injins."

"Well, well; it makes no odds to me," returned Stalker, "Come along, an'
walk before me, for I won't trust ye behind.  As for slippery Paul, I'll
find him yet; you shall see.  When a man fails in one attempt, all he's
got to do is to make another.  Now then, redskin, move on!"



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

As widely different as night is from day, summer from winter, heat from
cold, are some members of the human family; yet God made them all, and
has a purpose of love and mercy towards each!  Common sense says this;
the general opinion of mankind holds this; highest of all, the Word
clearly states this: "God willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn from his wickedness and live;" and, "He maketh His
sun to shine upon the just and on the unjust."  Nevertheless, it seemed
difficult to believe that the same God formed and spared and guarded and
fed the fierce, lawless man Stalker, and the loving, gentle delicate
Rose of Oregon.

About the same hour that the former was endeavouring to compass the
destruction of Paul Bevan, Betty was on her knees in her little tented
room, recalling the deeds, the omissions, and the shortcomings of the
past day, interceding alike for friends and foes--if we may venture to
assume that a rose without a thorn could have foes!  Even the
robber-chief was remembered among the rest, and you may be very sure
that Tom Brixton was not forgotten.

Having slept the sleep of innocence and purity, Betty rose refreshed on
the following day, and, before the Indian village was astir, went out to
ramble along a favourite walk in a thicket on the mountain-side.  It so
fell out that Tom had selected the same thicket for his morning ramble.
But poor Tom did not look like one who hoped to meet with his lady-love
that morning.  He had, under good nursing, recovered some of his former
strength and vigour of body with wonderful rapidity, but his face was
still haggard and careworn in an unusual degree for one so young.  When
the two met Tom did not pretend to be surprised.  On the contrary, he
said:--

"I expected to meet you here, Betty, because I have perceived that you
are fond of the place, and, believe me, I would not have presumed to
intrude, were it not that I wish to ask one or two questions, the
answers to which may affect my future movements."

He paused, and Betty's heart fluttered, for she could not help
remembering former meetings when Tom had tried to win her affections,
and when she had felt it her duty to discourage him.  She made no reply
to this rather serious beginning to the interview, but dropped her eyes
on the turf, for she saw that the youth was gazing at her with a very
mingled and peculiar expression.

"Tell me," he resumed, after a few moments' thought, "do you feel quite
safe with these Indians?"

"Quite," replied the girl with a slight elevation of the eyebrows; "they
are unusually gentle and good-natured people.  Besides, their chief
would lay down his life for my father--he is so grateful.  Oh yes, I
feel perfectly safe here."

"But what does your father think.  He is always so fearless--I might say
reckless--that I don't feel certain as to his real opinion.  Have you
heard him speaking about the chance of that rascal Stalker following him
up?"

"Yes; he has spoken freely about that.  He fully expects that Stalker
will search for us, but considers that he will not dare to attack us
while we live with so strong a band of Indians, and, as Stalker's
followers won't hang about here very long for the mere purpose of
pleasing their chief, especially when nothing is to be gained by it,
father thinks that his enemy will be forced to go away.  Besides, he has
made up his mind to remain here for a long time--many months, it may
be."

"That will do," returned Tom, with a sigh of relief; "then there will be
no need for me to--"

"To what?" asked Betty, seeing that the youth paused.

"Forgive me if I do not say what I meant to.  I have reasons for--" (he
paused again)--"Then you are pleased with the way the people treat you?"

"Of course I am.  They could not be kinder if I were one of themselves.
And some of the women are so intelligent, too!  You know I have picked
up a good deal of the Indian language, and understand them pretty well,
though I can't speak much, and you've no idea what deep thinkers some of
them are!  There is Unaco's mother, who looks so old and dried up and
stupid--she is one of the dearest old things I ever knew.  Why,"
continued the girl, with increasing animation, as she warmed with her
subject, "that old creature led me, the other night, into quite an
earnest conversation about religion, and asked me ever so many questions
about the ways of God with man--speculative, difficult questions too,
that almost puzzled me to answer.  You may be sure I took the
opportunity to explain to her God's great love to man in and through
Jesus, and--"

She stopped abruptly, for Tom Brixton was at that moment regarding her
with a steady and earnest gaze.

"Yes," he said, slowly, almost dreamily, "I can well believe you took
your opportunity to commend Jesus to her.  You did so once to me, and--"

Tom checked himself, as if with a great effort.  The girl longed to hear
more, but he did not finish the sentence.  "Well," he said, with a
forced air of gaiety, "I have sought you here to tell you that I am
going off on--on--a long hunting expedition.  Going at once--but I would
not leave without bidding you good-bye."

"Going away, Mr Brixton!" exclaimed Betty, in genuine surprise.

"Yes.  As you see, I am ready for the field, with rifle and wallet,
firebag and blanket."

"But you are not yet strong enough," said Betty.

"Oh! yes, I am--stronger than I look.  Besides, that will mend every
day.  I don't intend to say goodbye to Westly or any one, because I hate
to have people try to dissuade me from a thing when my mind is made up.
I only came to say good-bye to you, because I wish you to tell Fred and
your father that I am grateful for all their kindness to me, and that it
will be useless to follow me.  Perhaps we may meet again, Betty," he
added, still in the forced tone of lightness, while he gently took the
girl's hand in his and shook it; "but the dangers of the wilderness are
numerous, and, as you have once or twice told me, we `know not what a
day or an hour may bring forth.'" (His tone had deepened suddenly to
that of intense earnestness)--"God bless you, Betty; farewell."

He dropped her hand, turned sharply on his heel, and walked swiftly
away, never once casting a look behind.

Poor Tom!  It was a severe wrench, but he had fought the battle manfully
and gained the victory.  In his new-born sense of personal unworthiness
and strict Justice, he had come to the conclusion that he had forfeited
the right to offer heart or hand to the Rose of Oregon.  Whether he was
right or wrong in his opinion we do not pretend to judge, but this does
not alter the fact that a hard battle with self had been fought by him,
and a great victory won.

But Tom neither felt nor looked very much like a conqueror.  His heart
seemed to be made of lead, and the strength of which he had so recently
boasted seemed to have deserted him altogether after he had walked a few
miles, insomuch that he was obliged to sit down on a bank to rest.  Fear
lest Fred or Paul should follow up his trail, however, infused new
strength into his limbs, and he rose and pushed steadily on, for he was
deeply impressed with the duty that lay upon him--namely, to get
quickly, and as far as possible, away from the girl whom he could no
longer hope to wed.

Thus, advancing at times with great animation, sitting down occasionally
for short rests, and then resuming the march with renewed vigour, he
travelled over the mountains without any definite end in view, beyond
that to which we have already referred.

For some time after he was gone Betty stood gazing at the place in the
thicket where he had disappeared, as if she half expected to see him
return; then, heaving a deep sigh, and with a mingled expression of
surprise, disappointment, and anxiety on her fair face, she hurried away
to search for her father.

She found him returning to their tent with a load of firewood, and at
once told him what had occurred.

"He'll soon come back, Betty," said Paul, with a significant smile.
"When a young feller is fond of a lass, he's as sure to return to her as
water is sure to find its way as fast as it can to the bottom of a
hill."

Fred Westly thought the same, when Paul afterwards told him about the
meeting, though he did not feel quite so sure about the return being
immediate; but Mahoghany Drake differed from them entirely.

"Depend on't," he said to his friend Paul, when, in the privacy of a
retired spot on the mountain-side, they discussed the matter--"depend
on't, that young feller ain't made o' butter.  What he says he will do
he'll stick to, if I'm any judge o' human natur.  Of course it ain't for
me to guess why he should fling off in this fashion.  Are ye sure he's
fond o' your lass?"

"Sure?  Ay, as sure as I am that yon is the sun an' not the moon
a-shinin' in the sky."

"H'm! that's strange.  An' they've had no quarrel?"

"None that I knows on.  Moreover, they ain't bin used to quarrel.
Betty's not one o' that sort--dear lass.  She's always fair an' above
board; honest an' straight for'ard.  Says 'zactly what she means, an'
means what she says.  Mister Tom ain't given to shilly-shallyin',
neither.  No, I'm sure they've had no quarrel."

"Well, it's the old story," said Drake, while a puzzled look flitted
across his weather-beaten countenance, and the smoke issued more slowly
from his unflagging pipe, "the conduct o' lovers is not to be accounted
for.  Howsever, there's one thing I'm quite sure of--that he must be
looked after."

"D'ye think so?" said Paul.  "I'd have thought he was quite able to look
arter himself."

"Not just now," returned the trapper; "he's not yet got the better of
his touch o' starvation, an' there's a chance o' your friend Stalker, or
Buxley, which d'ye call him?"

"Whichever you like; he answers to either, or neither, as the case may
be.  He's best known as Stalker in these parts, though Buxley is his
real name."

"Well, then," resumed Drake, "there's strong likelihood o' him prowlin'
about here, and comin' across the tracks o' young Brixton; so, as I said
before, he must be looked after, and I'll take upon myself to do it."

"Well, I'll jine ye," said Paul, "for of course ye'll have to make up a
party."

"Not at all," returned the trapper, with decision.  "I'll do it best
alone; leastwise I'll take only little Tolly Trevor an' Leapin' Buck
with me, for they're both smart an' safe lads, and are burnin' keen to
learn somethin' o' woodcraft."

In accordance with this determination, Mahoghany Drake, Leaping Buck,
and little Trevor set off next day and followed Tom Brixton's trail into
the mountains.  It was a broad trail and very perceptible, at least to
an Indian or a trapper, for Tom had a natural swagger, which he could
