At this moment the man who had butchered the savage a few minutes before
advanced towards the girl with his heavy club.  Jack uttered a yell that
rang like a death-shriek among the rocks.  With one bound he leaped over
a precipice full fifteen feet high, and before the savages had recovered
from their surprise, was in the midst of them, while Peterkin and I
dashed through the bushes towards the prisoners.  With one blow of his
staff Jack felled the man with the club; then turning round with a look
of fury he rushed upon the big chief with the yellow hair.  Had the blow
which Jack aimed at his head taken effect, the huge savage would have
needed no second stroke; but he was agile as a cat, and avoided it by
springing to one side, while at the same time he swung his ponderous
club at the head of his foe.  It was now Jack's turn to leap aside; and
well was it for him that the first outburst of his blind fury was over,
else he had become an easy prey to his gigantic antagonist.  But Jack
was cool now.  He darted his blows rapidly and well, and the superiority
of his light weapon was strikingly proved in this combat; for while he
could easily evade the blows of the chief's heavy club, the chief could
not so easily evade those of his light one.  Nevertheless, so quick was
he, and so frightfully did he fling about the mighty weapon, that
although Jack struck him almost every blow, the strokes had to be
delivered so quickly that they wanted force to be very effectual.

It was lucky for Jack that the other savages considered the success of
their chief in this encounter to be so certain that they refrained from
interfering.  Had they doubted it, they would have probably ended the
matter at once by felling him.  But they contented themselves with
awaiting the issue.

The force which the chief expended in wielding his club now began to be
apparent.  His movements became slower, his breath hissed through his
clenched teeth, and the surprised savages drew nearer in order to render
assistance.  Jack observed this movement.  He felt that his fate was
sealed, and resolved to cast his life upon the next blow.  The chief's
club was again about to descend on his head.  He might have evaded it
easily, but instead of doing so, he suddenly shortened his grasp of his
own club, rushed in under the blow, struck his adversary right between
the eyes with all his force, and fell to the earth, crushed beneath the
senseless body of the chief.  A dozen clubs flew high in air, ready to
descend on the head of Jack; but they hesitated a moment, for the
massive body of the chief completely covered him.  That moment saved his
life.  Ere the savages could tear the chief's body away, seven of their
number fell prostrate beneath the clubs of the prisoners whom Peterkin
and I had set free, and two others fell under our own hand.  We could
never have accomplished this had not our enemies been so engrossed with
the fight between Jack and their chief that they had failed to observe
us until we were upon them.  They still outnumbered our party by three;
but we were flushed with victory, while they were taken by surprise and
dispirited by the fall of their chief.  Moreover, they were awestruck by
the sweeping fury of Jack, who seemed to have lost his senses
altogether, and had no sooner shaken himself free of the chief's body
than he rushed into the midst of them, and in three blows equalised our
numbers.  Peterkin and I flew to the rescue, the savages followed us,
and in less than ten minutes the whole of our opponents were knocked
down or made prisoners, bound hand and foot, and extended side by side
upon the seashore.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

INTERCOURSE WITH THE SAVAGES--CANNIBALISM PREVENTED--THE SLAIN ARE
BURIED AND THE SURVIVORS DEPART, LEAVING US AGAIN ALONE ON OUR CORAL
ISLAND.

After the battle was over, the savages crowded round us and gazed at us
in surprise, while they continued to pour upon us a flood of questions,
which, being wholly unintelligible, of course we could not answer.
However, by way of putting an end to it, Jack took the chief (who had
recovered from the effects of his wound) by the hand and shook it
warmly.  No sooner did the blacks see that this was meant to express
good-will than they shook hands with us all round.  After this ceremony
was gone through Jack went up to the girl, who had never once moved from
the rock where she had been left, but had continued an eager spectator
of all that had passed.  He made signs to her to follow him, and then,
taking the chief by the hand, was about to conduct him to the bower when
his eye fell on the poor infant which had been thrown into the sea and
was still lying on the shore.  Dropping the chief's hand he hastened
towards it, and, to his great joy, found it to be still alive.  We also
found that the mother was beginning to recover slowly.

"Here, get out o' the way," said Jack, pushing us aside as we stooped
over the poor woman and endeavoured to restore her; "I'll soon bring her
round."  So saying, he placed the infant on her bosom and laid its warm
cheek on hers.  The effect was wonderful.  The woman opened her eyes,
felt the child, looked at it, and with a cry of joy, clasped it in her
arms, at the same time endeavouring to rise--for the purpose,
apparently, of rushing into the woods.

"There, that's all right," said Jack, once more taking the chief by the
hand.--"Now, Ralph and Peterkin, make the women and these fellows follow
me to the bower.  We'll entertain them as hospitably as we can."

In a few minutes the savages were all seated on the ground in front of
the bower, making a hearty meal off a cold roast pig, several ducks, and
a variety of cold fish, together with an unlimited supply of cocoa-nuts,
bread-fruits, yams, taro, and plums--with all of which they seemed to be
quite familiar and perfectly satisfied.

Meanwhile we three, being thoroughly knocked up with our day's work,
took a good draught of cocoa-nut lemonade, and throwing ourselves on our
beds, fell fast asleep.  The savages, it seems, followed our example,
and in half-an-hour the whole camp was buried in repose.

How long we slept I cannot tell; but this I know--that when we lay down
the sun was setting, and when we awoke it was high in the heavens.  I
awoke Jack, who started up in surprise, being unable at first to
comprehend our situation.  "Now, then," said he, springing up, "let's
see after breakfast.--Hallo, Peterkin, lazy fellow! how long do you mean
to lie there?"

Peterkin yawned heavily.  "Well," said he, opening his eyes and looking
up after some trouble, "if it isn't to-morrow morning, and me thinking
it was to-day all this time--Hallo, Venus! where did you come from?  You
seem tolerably at home, anyhow.  Bah! might as well speak to the cat as
to you--better, in fact, for it understands me, and you don't."

This remark was called forth by the sight of one of the elderly females,
who had seated herself on the rock in front of the bower, and having
placed her child at her feet, was busily engaged in devouring the
remains of a roast pig.

By this time the natives outside were all astir, and breakfast in an
advanced state of preparation.  During the course of it we made sundry
attempts to converse with the natives by signs, but without effect.  At
last we hit upon a plan of discovering their names.  Jack pointed to his
breast and said "Jack" very distinctly; then he pointed to Peterkin and
to me, repeating our names at the same time.  Then he pointed to himself
again and said "Jack," and laying his finger on the breast of the chief,
looked inquiringly into his face.  The chief instantly understood him,
and said "Tararo" twice distinctly.  Jack repeated it after him, and the
chief, nodding his head approvingly, said "Chuck," on hearing which
Peterkin exploded with laughter.  But Jack turned, and with a frown
rebuked him, saying, "I must look even more indignantly at you than I
feel, Peterkin, you rascal, for these fellows don't like to be laughed
at."  Then turning towards the youngest of the women, who was seated at
the door of the bower, he pointed to her; whereupon the chief said
"Avatea," and pointing towards the sun, raised his finger slowly towards
the zenith, where it remained steadily for a minute or two.

"What can that mean, I wonder?" said Jack, looking puzzled.

"Perhaps," said Peterkin, "the chief means she is an angel come down to
stay here for a while.  If so, she's an uncommonly black one!"

We did not feel quite satisfied with this explanation, so Jack went up
to her and said "Avatea."  The woman smiled sadly and nodded her head,
at the same time pointing to her breast and then to the sun in the same
manner as the chief had done.  We were much puzzled to know what this
could signify; but as there was no way of solving our difficulty, we
were obliged to rest content.

Jack now made signs to the natives to follow him, and taking up his axe,
he led them to the place where the battle had been fought.  Here we
found the prisoners, who had passed the night on the beach, having been
totally forgotten by us, as our minds had been full of our guests, and
were ultimately overcome by sleep.  They did not seem the worse for
their exposure, however, as we judged by the hearty appetite with which
they devoured the breakfast that was soon after given to them.  Jack
then began to dig a hole in the sand, and after working a few seconds,
he pointed to it and to the dead bodies that lay exposed on the beach.
The natives immediately perceived what he wanted, and running for their
paddles, dug a hole in the course of half-an-hour that was quite large
enough to contain all the bodies of the slain.  When it was finished,
they tossed their dead enemies into it with so much indifference that we
felt assured they would not have put themselves to this trouble had we
not asked them to do so.  The body of the yellow-haired chief was the
last thrown in.  This wretched man would have recovered from the blow
with which Jack felled him, and indeed he did endeavour to rise during
the _melee_ that followed his fall; but one of his enemies, happening to
notice the action, dealt him a blow with his club that killed him on the
spot.

While they were about to throw the sand over this chief, one of the
savages stooped over him, and with a knife, made apparently of stone,
cut a large slice of flesh from his thigh.  We knew at once that he
intended to make use of this for food, and could not repress a cry of
horror and disgust.

"Come, come, you blackguard!" cried Jack, starting up and seizing the
man by the arm, "pitch that into the hole.  Do you hear?"

The savage, of course, did not understand the command; but he perfectly
understood the look of disgust with which Jack regarded the flesh, and
his fierce gaze as he pointed towards the hole.  Nevertheless, he did
not obey.  Jack instantly turned to Tararo and made signs to him to
enforce obedience.  The chief seemed to understand the appeal; for he
stepped forward, raised his club, and was on the point of dashing out
the brains of his offending subject when Jack sprang forward and caught
his uplifted arm.

"Stop, you blockhead!" he shouted.  "I don't want you to kill the man!"
He then pointed again to the flesh and to the hole.  The chief uttered a
few words, which had the desired effect; for the man threw the flesh
into the hole, which was immediately filled up.  This man was of a
morose, sulky disposition, and during all the time he remained on the
island, regarded us--especially Jack--with a scowling visage.  His name,
we found, was Mahine.

The next three or four days were spent by the savages in mending their
canoe, which had been damaged by the violent shock it had sustained on
striking the shore.  This canoe was a very curious structure.  It was
about thirty feet long, and had a high, towering stern.  The timbers of
which it was partly composed were fastened much in the same way as those
of our little boat were put together; but the part that seemed most
curious to us was a sort of outrigger, or long plank, which was attached
to the body of the canoe by means of two stout cross-beams.  These beams
kept the plank parallel with the canoe, but not in contact with it, for
it floated in the water with an open space between--thus forming a sort
of double canoe.  This, we found, was intended to prevent the upsetting
of the canoe, which was so narrow that it could not have maintained an
upright position without the outrigger.  We could not help wondering
both at the ingenuity and the clumsiness of this contrivance.

When the canoe was ready, we assisted the natives to carry the prisoners
into it, and helped them to load it with provisions and fruit.  Peterkin
also went to the plum-tree for the purpose of making a special onslaught
upon the hogs, and killed no less than six of them.  These we baked and
presented to our friends, on the day of their departure.  On that day
Tararo made a great many energetic signs to us, which, after much
consideration, we came to understand were proposals that we should go
away with him to his island; but having no desire to do so, we shook our
heads very decidedly.  However, we consoled him by presenting him with
our rusty axe, which we thought we could spare, having the excellent one
which had been so providentially washed ashore to us the day we were
wrecked.  We also gave him a piece of wood with our names carved on it,
and a piece of string to hang it round his neck as an ornament.

In a few minutes more we were all assembled on the beach.  Being unable
to speak to the savages, we went through the ceremony of shaking hands,
and expected they would depart; but before doing so, Tararo went up to
Jack and rubbed noses with him, after which he did the same with
Peterkin and me!  Seeing that this was their mode of salutation, we
determined to conform to their custom; so we rubbed noses heartily with
the whole party, women and all!  The only disagreeable part of the
process was when we came to rub noses with Mahine; and Peterkin
afterwards said that when he saw his wolfish eyes glaring so close to
his face, he felt much more inclined to _bang_ than to _rub_ his nose.
Avatea was the last to take leave of us, and we experienced a feeling of
real sorrow when she approached to bid us farewell.  Besides her modest
air and gentle manners, she was the only one of the party who exhibited
the smallest sign of regret at parting from us.  Going up to Jack, she
put out her flat little nose to be rubbed, and thereafter paid the same
compliment to Peterkin and me.

An hour later the canoe was out of sight; and we, with an indefinable
feeling of sadness creeping round our hearts, were seated in silence
beneath the shadow of our bower, meditating on the wonderful events of
the last few days.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

SAGACIOUS AND MORAL REMARKS IN REGARD TO LIFE--A SAIL!--AN UNEXPECTED
SALUTE--THE END OF THE BLACK CAT--A TERRIBLE DIVE--AN INCAUTIOUS
PROCEEDING AND A FRIGHTFUL CATASTROPHE.

Life is a strange compound.  Peterkin used to say of it that it beat a
druggist's shop all to sticks; for whereas the first is a compound of
good and bad, the other is a horrible compound of all that is utterly
detestable.  And indeed the more I consider it, the more I am struck
with the strange mixture of good and evil that exists, not only in the
material earth, but in our own natures.  In our own Coral Island we had
experienced every variety of good that a bountiful Creator could heap on
us.  Yet on the night of the storm we had seen how almost, in our case--
and altogether, no doubt, in the case of others less fortunate--all this
good might be swept away for ever.  We had seen the rich fruit-trees
waving in the soft air, the tender herbs shooting upwards under the
benign influence of the bright sun; and the next day we had seen these
good and beautiful trees and plants uprooted by the hurricane, crushed
and hurled to the ground in destructive devastation.  We had lived for
many months in a clime, for the most part, so beautiful that we had
often wondered whether Adam and Eve had found Eden more sweet; and we
had seen the quiet solitudes of our paradise suddenly broken in upon by
ferocious savages, and the white sands stained with blood and strewed
with lifeless forms, yet among these cannibals we had seen many symptoms
of a kindly nature.  I pondered these things much, and while I
considered them there recurred to my memory those words which I had read
in my Bible: "The works of God are wonderful, and His ways past finding
out."

After these poor savages had left us we used to hold long and frequent
conversations about them, and I noticed that Peterkin's manner was now
much altered.  He did not, indeed, jest less heartily than before, but
he did so less frequently; and often there was a tone of deep
seriousness in his manner, if not in his words, which made him seem to
Jack and me as if he had grown two years older within a few days.  But
indeed I was not surprised at this when I reflected on the awful
realities which we had witnessed so lately.  We could by no means shake
off a tendency to gloom for several weeks afterwards; but as time wore
away, our usual good spirits returned somewhat, and we began to think of
the visit of the savages with feelings akin to those with which we
recall a terrible dream.

One day we were all enjoying ourselves in the Water Garden preparatory
to going on a fishing excursion, for Peterkin had kept us in such
constant supply of hogs that we had become quite tired of pork and
desired a change.  Peterkin was sunning himself on the ledge of rock,
while we were creeping among the rocks below.  Happening to look up, I
observed Peterkin cutting the most extraordinary capers and making
violent gesticulations for us to come up; so I gave Jack a push and rose
immediately.

"A sail! a sail--Ralph, look--Jack, away on the horizon there, just over
the entrance to the lagoon!" cried Peterkin as we scrambled up the
rocks.

"So it is--and a schooner, too!" said Jack as he proceeded hastily to
dress.

Our hearts were thrown into a terrible flutter by this discovery, for if
it should touch at our island, we had no doubt the captain would be
happy to give us a passage to some of the civilised islands, where we
could find a ship sailing for England or some other part of Europe.
Home, with all its associations, rushed in upon my heart like a flood;
and much though I loved the Coral Island and the bower which had now
been our home so long, I felt that I could have quitted all at that
moment without a sigh.  With joyful anticipations we hastened to the
highest point of rock near our dwelling and awaited the arrival of the
vessel, for we now perceived that she was making straight for the island
under a steady breeze.

In less than an hour she was close to the reef, where she rounded-to and
backed her topsails in order to survey the coast.  Seeing this, and
fearing that they might not perceive us, we all three waved pieces of
cocoa-nut cloth in the air, and soon had the satisfaction of seeing them
beginning to lower a boat and bustle about the decks as if they meant to
land.  Suddenly a flag was run up to the peak, a little cloud of white
smoke rose from the schooner's side, and before we could guess their
intentions, a cannon-shot came crashing through the bushes, carried away
several cocoa-nut trees in its passage, and burst in atoms against the
cliff a few yards below the spot on which we stood.

With feelings of terror we now observed that the flag at the schooner's
peak was black, with a Death's-head and cross-bones upon it.  As we
gazed at each other in blank amazement, the word "pirate" escaped our
lips simultaneously.
