the girls followed him to the bank.

The spot selected was a rapid which terminated in a small and
comparatively quiet but deep pool.  We say comparatively, because in the
state of the river at that time even in the quietest places there was
considerable commotion.  Just below the pool the river opened out into a
broad shallow, over which it passed in noisy foam, but with little
depth, except in the centre.  Below this, again, it narrowed, and formed
another deep pool.

Alric ran into the water till he was about knee-deep, and then plunged
his spear.  Nothing resulted from the first plunge, but the effect of
the second was more tremendous than had ever before happened to the
young sportsman, for the pole of the trident received a twist so violent
that it would infallibly have been torn from the boy's grasp had he not
held on with the tenacity of a vice, and allowed himself to be dragged
bodily into the pool.  As we have said, the pool was deep, but that was
nothing to Alric, who could swim like a duck.  The Norse maidens who
watched him knew this, and although slightly alarmed, felt on the whole
more inclined to laugh than to tremble as his head emerged and sank
again several times, while the fish which he had struck dragged him
about the pool.  After a few seconds of violent and wild exertion it
rushed down the pool into the rapid, and then it was that the girls
perceived that Alric had struck and was clinging to one of the
largest-sized salmon that ever appeared in Horlingdal river.

Fortunate it was for the boy that the fish took the rapid, for it had
almost choked him in the deep pool; but now he scrambled on his feet,
and began to do battle gallantly--endeavouring to thrust the fish
downwards and pin it to the stones whenever it passed over a shallow
part, on which occasions its back and silver sides became visible, and
its great tail--wide spreading, like a modern lady's fan--flashed in the
air as it beat the water in terror or fury.  Alric's spirit was ablaze
with excitement, for the fish was too strong for him, so that every time
it wriggled itself he was made to shake and stagger in a most
ridiculously helpless manner, and when it tried to bolt he was pulled
flat down on his face and had to follow it--sometimes on his knees,
sometimes at full length, for, over and over again, when he was about to
rise, or had half-risen, there was another pull, and down he went again,
quite flat, while the roaring torrent went right over him.

But no limpet ever stuck to rock with greater tenacity than did Alric to
the handle of that trident; and it is but just to add, for the
information of those who know it not, that the difficulty of retaining
one's foothold on the pebbly bed of a river when knee-deep in a foaming
rapid is very great indeed, even when one has nothing more to do than
attend to the balancing of one's own body--much greater, of course, in
circumstances such as we describe.

At last the salmon made a rush, and was swept over a shallow part of the
rapid, close under the bank on which the girls stood.  Here Alric
succeeded in thrusting it against a large stone.  For the first time he
managed to stand up erect, and, although holding the fish with all his
might, looked up, and breathed, or rather gasped, freely:

"Hoch! hah! _what_ a fish! sk-ho!"

"Oh, I wish we could help thee!" exclaimed the girls, with flashing eyes
and outstretched hands, as if they could hardly restrain themselves from
leaping into the water, which was indeed the case!

"N-no! ye can't! 's not poss'ble--hah! my! oh there 'e goes again--
s-t-swash!"

Down he went, flat, as he spoke, and water stopped his utterance, while
the fish wriggled into the centre of the channel, and carried him into
the deep pool below!

Here the scene was not quite so exciting, because the battle was not so
fierce.  The salmon had it all his own way in the deep water, and
dragged his attached friend hither and thither as he pleased.  On the
other hand, Alric ceased to contend, and merely held on with his right
hand, while with his left he kept his head above water.  The pool
circled about in large oily wavelets flecked with foam, so that there
was a great contrast in all this to the tremendous turmoil of the raging
rapid.  But the comparative calm did not last long.  The huge fish made
a frantic, and apparently a last, effort to get free.  It rushed down to
the foot of the pool, and passed over the edge into the next rapid.

The girls shrieked when they saw this, for, unlike the former, this one
was a deep rush of the river, between narrower banks, where its course
was obstructed by large rocks.  Against these the stream beat furiously.
Alric knew the spot well, and was aware of the extreme danger of his
position.  He therefore made a violent effort to drag the fish towards a
point where there was a slight break or eddy among a number of boulders,
intending to let him go, if necessary, rather than lose his life.  He
succeeded, however, in getting upon one of the rocks quite close to the
bank, and then endeavoured to lift the fish out of the water.  In this
also he was successful; made a splendid heave, and flung it with all his
force towards the bank, on which it alighted, trident and all, at the
feet of Hilda.  But in letting go his hold of the handle Alric lost his
balance, flung his arms above his head in a vain endeavour to recover
himself, and, with a loud shout, fell back into the roaring torrent and
was swept away.

A few moments sufficed to carry him into the pool below, to the edge of
which the girls rushed, and found that he was floating round and round
in a state of insensibility, every moment passing near to the vortex of
the rapid that flowed out of it.  Hilda at once rushed in waist-deep and
caught him by the collar.  She would have been swept away along with
him, but Ada also sprang forward and grasped Hilda by the mantle.  She
could not, however, drag her back; neither could Hilda in any way help
herself.  Thus they stood for a few moments swaying to and fro in the
current, and, doubtless, one or more of them would have soon been
carried down had not efficient aid been at hand.

High up on the cliff over the scene where this incident occurred,
Christian the hermit was seated on a log before his door.  He sat gazing
dreamily out upon the landscape when Alric began to fish, but, seeing
the danger to which the lad exposed himself, after he had speared the
fish, and fearing that there might be need of his aid, he quickly
descended to the scene of action.  He did not arrive a moment too soon,
for the whole event occurred very rapidly.  Running to the rescue he
caught Ada round the waist with both hands, and drew her gently back;
she was soon out of danger, after which there was no great difficulty in
dragging the others safely to land.

At once the hermit stripped off the boy's coat, loosened the kerchief
that was round his throat, and sought, by every means in his power, to
restore him to consciousness.  His efforts were successful.  The boy
soon began to breathe, and in a short time stood up, swaying himself to
and fro, and blinking.

The first thing he said was:

"Where is the salmon?"

"The salmon?  Oh, I forgot all about it," said Ada.

"Never mind it, dear Alric," said Hilda.

"Never mind it?" he cried, starting into sudden animation; "what! have
ye left it behind?"

Saying this he burst away from his friends, and ran up the bank of the
river until he came to where the fish was lying, still impaled on the
barbed prongs of the trident.  The run so far restored him that he had
sufficient strength to shoulder the fish, although it afterwards turned
out to be a salmon of thirty-five pounds weight, and he quickly rejoined
his friends, who returned with him to Haldorstede, where, you may be
quite sure, he gave a graphic account of the adventure to willing and
admiring ears.

"So, granny," he said, at the conclusion of the narrative, to the old
crone who was still seated by the fire, "thy prophecy has come true
sooner than ye expected, and it has come doubly true, for though the
good luck in store for me was a matter of small general importance, no
one can deny that it is a great fish!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

TREATS OF ANCIENT DIPLOMACY AMONG THE NORSEMEN, AND SHOWS HOW OUR HERO
TURNS THE TABLES ON A WOULD-BE ASSASSIN.

When King Harald heard the news of the defeat of Hake and the slaughter
of his men by Erling and Glumm, great was his wrath at first, and Jarl
Rongvold had much ado to appease him and prevent him from going at once
to Horlingdal to ravage it with fire and sword.  But when he had cooled
a little, and heard the details of the fight from Hake himself, his
anger against the young warriors changed into admiration of their
dauntless courage.

Harald Fairhair was a kingly man in spirit as well as in appearance, and
was above encouraging a mean or vengeful mood.  He was indeed fierce and
violent in his rage, and often did things which, when read of in the
calm of a comparatively peaceful time, make one shudder; but it must not
be forgotten that the age in which he lived was a cruel and bloody one,
and, in Norway, without one touch of the gentle religion of Christ to
soften its asperities.  He could never have retained his power and rule
over the stern warriors of his day, had he not possessed much of their
own callous indifference to the horrors and cruelties of war.

"Thou hadst tougher work than thou countedst on, it would seem," he said
to Hake; then, turning to Jarl Rongvold, with a laugh, "Methinks I would
fain have this Erling the Bold and his friend Glumm the Gruff among my
men-at-arms."

"I fear, sire, that they will not be easily induced to enter thy
service, for they are both Sea-kings, and independent spirits."

"Such men have submitted to us before now," said the King, with a
peculiar glance.

"Most true," returned the jarl, flushing; "but all men have not the same
belief in your wisdom."

"That may be, yet methinks I could tame this Sea-king--this Erling.
Perchance costly gifts might win him, or it may be that rough blows
would suit him better.  What thinkest thou, Hake? thou hast had some
experience in that way."

"If you mean, sire, that you have a mind to receive rough blows at his
hand, I will guarantee him both able and willing to gratify you.  I know
not the weight of Thor's hammer, but I am bound to say that it occurred
to my mind when Erling's axe came down on my steel headpiece, and set a
host of stars dancing in my brain."

"I believe thee," said the King, smiling grimly, "and thy visage speaks
for itself."

This was indeed the case.  The berserk's countenance was very pale.  He
still suffered from the crashing blow with which he had been felled, and
his heart rankled under his defeat, for he was not aware that the blow,
heavy though it was, had been delivered in mercy, or that if his enemy
had not turned aside the edge of his axe it would have cleft him to the
chin.  Perchance, if he _had_ known this it would not have improved the
state of his feelings; for Hake possessed no nobility of spirit.

"It may be," continued Harald, "that thou shalt have another opportunity
of measuring swords with this Sea-king.  Meanwhile, Jarl Rongvold, go
thou with Rolf, and bring round the Dragon and the other longships to
the fiord, for I mistrust the men of this district, and will fare to the
Springs by sea."

In accordance with these instructions the jarl brought the King's fleet
round without delay.  On the following morning they embarked, and set
sail for the appointed place of meeting.

Here the fleet under Haldor and Ulf had already cast anchor.  The ships
lay close to the rocks, near the mouth of the river into which Erling
had thrust his cutter just before the battle with the Danes; and a fine
sight it was to behold these, with their painted shields and gilded
masts and figure-heads, lying in the still water, crowded with armed
warriors, while Harald's longship, the Dragon, and all his other
vessels, came by twos and threes into the fiord, the oars tossing foam
on the blue waters, and the gaily coloured sails swelling out before a
gentle breeze.

The King laid his ship alongside of a point of rocks on the south side
of the bay.  Then, when all the fleet had assembled, both parties
landed, and the Thing was summoned by sound of horn.  It was held on the
level ground where the recent battle had been fought.  There were still
strewn about many evidences of the ferocity of that fight; and when the
King looked upon the host of stout and well-armed men who had assembled,
not only from Horlingdal, but from the whole of the surrounding
district, he felt that, however much he might wish to force obedience on
his subjects, "discretion" was at that time "the better part of valour."

When the Thing was assembled the King stood up to speak, and there was
probably not a man upon the ground who did not in his heart acknowledge
that the tall, stout warrior, with the thick mass of golden locks, and
the large masculine features, was, as far as physique went, a worthy
wearer of the crown of Norway.  It may be added that physique went a
very long way indeed in those days; yet it is due to the Northmen to say
that, at the same time, intellect was held in higher repute among them
than among any of the feudally governed nations of Europe.  One evidence
of this was, that at the Things the best speaker, no matter what his
rank, had a better chance of swaying the people than the King himself;
while, in other countries, might to a large extent was right, and no one
dared to open his mouth against him who chanced to be in power.

But King Harald Haarfager's power lay not merely in his personal
appearance and indomitable will.  He was also a good speaker, and, like
all good speakers in a wrong cause, was an able sophist.  But he had men
to deal with who were accustomed to think and reason closely, as must
ever be more or less the case with a self-governed people.  There were
acute men there, men who had the laws of the land "by heart", in the
most literal sense of those words,--for there were no books to consult
and no precedents to cite in those days; and his hearers weighed with
jealous care each word he said.

The King began by complimenting the men of the district for their
spirit, and their resolution to defend the laws of the realm; and he
enlarged a little on these laws and on the wisdom of his own father,
Halfdan the Black, and the men of his time, who had made and modified
many of them.  Then he went on to say that with time the circumstances
of nations altered, and that, with these alterations, there arose a
necessity for the alteration and modification of old laws as well as for
the making of new ones.  He deprecated the idea that he wished, as had
been said of him, to trample the laws under his feet, and rule the
country according to his own will and pleasure.  Nothing was further
from his intention or his desire.  His wish was to amend the laws,
especially those of them that touched on the relative position of King
and people.

Up to this point the people heard him with respectful attention, and
hundreds of those who were more addicted to fighting than to reasoning,
especially among the younger men, began to think that after all, Harald
entertained exceedingly just opinions, and appeared to possess a spirit
of candour and fair play which did not seem to justify the outcry that
had been raised against him.  Even these, however, remembered that it
was not very long since a small king of one of the northern glens had
been summoned by Harold to submit to his views of government, and, on
his declining to do so, had been burnt, with all his family and
followers, in his own house, contrary to law!  They therefore knitted
their brows and waited to hear more.

The King then began to explain his ideas with regard to the royal
authority over the chief men of the districts, some of which are already
known to the reader.  At this point the assembly listened with deep,
earnest attention.  Some of the men sat with hands clasped on their
knees, and with stern downcast brows.  Some gazed up at the clouds with
the peculiar expression of men who listen and weigh arguments.  Others
leaned on their swords or shields, and, with compressed lips and
suspicious gaze, looked the King full in the face, while a few regarded
him with a sneer; but the expression on the faces of the greater part
denoted manliness of feeling and honesty of purpose.

After Harald had stated his views, and assured them that his great aim
was to consolidate the kingdom and to prevent the evils that flowed from
the almost unlimited independence of the petty kings, he asked the
assembly to aid him in carrying out his wishes, and to set an example of
fidelity and obedience, which would restrain others from showing that
unseemly opposition to him which had only resulted in severe and merited
punishment.

He then sat down amid a murmur of mingled applause and disapprobation.

After a few minutes of animated converse among themselves, there arose
an old man with a bald head, a flowing beard, and sightless eyes.  He
was the "lagman" or district judge, and law-expounder of Horlingdal.
Deep silence ensued, and he said, in a decided though somewhat tremulous
tone--

"King Harald, I am a very old man now, and can remember the time when
your noble sire, Halfdan the Black, ruled in Norway.  I have fought by
his side, and lost my eyes in his service--in a fight in which our
opponents gave us the tooth-ache.  [Norse expression signifying `the
worst of it.'] I have also heard him speak those words of wisdom to
which you have referred, and have seen him bow to the laws which were
made _not_ by himself, but by him in conjunction with the Thing legally
assembled for the purpose."

There was a loud murmur of applause at this point.

"And now that we have heard the King's opinions," continued the old man,
turning to the people, "and know that his intentions are good, although
the manner in which he has set about carrying them into effect is
undoubtedly wrong, my counsel is that we nevertheless submit to him in
this matter, for we know that a great number of the small kings have
already submitted, and it were better to have a beneficial change--even
when not carried out exactly according to law--than to plunge this
country into prolonged and useless warfare, in which much blood will,
assuredly, be spilt, and nothing of any value gained."

The lagman sat down, but only a few of those present indicated their
approval of his sentiments.

Immediately Haldor the Fierce stood up, and men could see that his
spirit was stirred within him, for a dark frown lowered on a brow which
was at most times fair and unruffled like the summer sky.  There was
deep silence in the assembly before he began to speak, and the King,
despite the suppressed anger which rankled in his breast, could not
choose but look upon his commanding figure with respect, also with
surprise, for he recognised the strong resemblance between him and
Erling, though he knew not their relationship.

"I agree not," said Haldor, "with what has just been said by our
respected lagman.  A change, even for the better, ought _never_ to be
accepted if not made according to law, No one can say that any change
will certainly be for the better until it is tried; and should this one,
perchance, turn out for the worse, then shall we have neither advantage
nor law on our side.  For my part I had rather see my country plunged
into warfare--which no one, unless he is gifted with the foreknowledge
of the gods, can say will be either prolonged or useless--than see her
laws trampled under foot; for well do I know that, if the King be
permitted to make himself an outlaw, blood will be kept boiling
perpetually from one end of the land to the other, and it were better,
methinks, that that blood should spill than boil.  My counsel is, that
the King be advised to call a Thing in the regular way, so that the
changes he would make shall be fully considered, and either be made law
or rejected; for, if he attempts to enforce his plans on us as he has
