
"Impossible!" she cried, drawing back.  "I will not leave my father
now!"

"You'll have to leave him anyhow," cried the sailor.  "You can do him no
good.  If free you might--"

A shout at the moment caused him to glance round.  It proceeded both
from slaves and guards, for both at the same moment caught sight of the
approach of the reinforcements.  The former scattered in all directions,
and the latter gave chase, while pistol-shots and yells rent the air.

Instead of wasting more breath in useless entreaty, Brown seized the
light form of Hester in his arms and ran with her to the ramparts.  In
the confusion of the general skirmish he was not observed--or, if
observed, unheeded--by any one but Sally, who followed him in anxious
haste, thinking that the man was mad, for there could be no possible way
of escape, she thought, in that direction.  She was wrong.  There was
method in Brown's madness.  He had for a long time previously studied
all the possibilities with reference to the meditated uprising, and had
laid down for himself several courses which he might pursue according to
the success, failure, or partial failure of their plans.

There was one part of the rampart they were engaged in repairing at that
time which had given way and partly fallen into the ditch outside.  The
portion of the wall still remaining had been further demolished in order
that a more secure foundation might be laid.  The broken wall here had
been but partially rebuilt, and was not nearly as high as the completed
wall.  A jump from this might be possible to a strong active man if the
ground below were soft, or even level--though the risk of broken limbs
was considerable.

Brown had observed, however, that at this place a small tree grew out
from a mass of rock which had been incorporated as part of the wall, and
that just below it there stood a huge bush of the cactus kind.  To these
two he had made up his mind to intrust himself in the event of things
coming to the worst.

Accordingly it was to this part of the rampart he ran with Hester in his
strong arms.  We have said that Sally ran after the sailor with anxiety,
but that feeling was deepened into dismay when she saw him approach the
portion of the wall just described, and she gave out one of her loudest
coffee-pestle gasps when she saw him jump straight off the wall without
a moment's hesitation.

Craning her neck and gazing downward, she saw the sailor go crashing
through the little tree and alight with a squash in the heart of the
watery cactus, out of which he leaped with such agility that Sally was
led to exclaim under her breath--

"Hoh! don't de spikes make 'im jump!"

Whether it was the spikes or other influences we cannot tell, but
certain it is that Brown did jump with wonderful activity, considering
the burden he carried, dashed up the opposite bank, cut across country
like a hunted hare, and found shelter in a neighbouring wood before the
revolt in the city was completely quelled.

Here he pulled up and set the terrified Hester down.

"You'll excuse me, miss," he said pantingly, as he wiped his brows with
the sleeve of his shirt--which garment, with a pair of canvas trousers,
a grass hat, and thin carpet shoes, constituted his costume.  "I'm wery
sorry to carry you off agin' your will, but you'll thank me for it yet,
maybe, for if I had left you behind, you couldn't have helped your poor
father, and they'd have took you off for sartin to be a slave.  Now,
d'ye see, if you an' I manage to escape, there's no sayin' what we may
do in the way o' raisin' ransom to buy back your father.  Anyway, he has
been so anxious about you, an' afraid o' your bein' catched, an' the
terrible fate in store for you if you are, that I made up my mind for
_his_ sake to carry you off."

To this explanation Hester listened with varying feelings.

"I believe, from the honesty of your look and tone," she said, at last,
"that you have acted for the best, whether wisely or not remains to be
seen; but I thank you heartily for your intentions, and especially for
your kind feelings towards my dear father; but now I must claim the
right to use my own judgment.  I will return to the city and succour my
father, or perish with him.  Yet, rest assured, I will never forget the
brave seaman who has so nobly risked his life to save me.  Your name
is--"

"Brown, miss--at your service."

"Well, good-bye, Brown, and God's blessing attend you," she said,
extending her black little hand.

The seaman gently took it and gave it a timid pressure, as if he feared
to crush it in his brawny hand.

"I'll shake hands with you," he said, "but I won't say good-bye, for
I'll steer back to the city with you."

"Brown, this is sheer madness.  There is no reason in what you propose
to do.  You cannot help me by sacrificing yourself."

"That's exactly what yer father would say to you, miss, if he was
alongside of us--`You can't help me by sacrificin' of yerself.'  Then,
p'r'aps he would foller up that obsarvation by sayin', `but you may an'
can help me if you go wi' that sailor-friend o' mine, who may be rough
and ready, but is sartinly true-blue, who knows the coast hereaway an'
all its hidin'-places, an' who'll wentur his life to do me a good turn,
cause why?  I once wentured my life to do him a good turn o' the same
kind.'"

"Is this true, Brown?  Did you know my father before meeting him here;
and did he really render you some service?"

"Yes, indeed, miss; I have sailed in one o' your father's wessels, an'
once I was washed overboard by a heavy sea, and he flung over a lifebuoy
arter me, and jumped into the water himself to keep me afloat till a
boat picked us up, for I couldn't swim.  Now, look 'ere, miss, if you'll
consent to sail under my orders for a short spell, you'll have a better
chance o' doin' your father a sarvice than by returnin' to that nest o'
pirates.  Moreover, you'll have to make up your mind pretty quick, for
we've lost too much time already."

"Go on, Brown, I will trust you," said Hester, placing her hand in that
of the seaman, who, without another word, led her swiftly into the bush.

Now, all this, and a great deal more was afterwards related by Hester
herself to her friends; but at the time all that was known to Sally--the
only witness of the exploit--was that Hester Sommers had been carried
off in the manner related by an apparently friendly British sailor.
This she told soon after to Peter the Great, and this was the substance
of the communication which Peter the Great, with glaring eyes and bated
breath, made to George Foster, who received it with feelings and
expressions that varied amazingly as the narrative proceeded.

"Is that all?" he asked, when the negro at length came to a decided
stop.

"Das all--an' it's enuff too!  'Pears to me you's not so much cut up
about dis leetle business as I 'spected you would be."

"I am anxious, of course, about Hester," returned the middy; "but at the
same time greatly relieved, first, to know that she is in the hands of a
respectable British sailor; and, second, that she is _not_ in the hands
of these bloodthirsty piratical Moors.  But what about her father?
Nothing more, I suppose, is known about his fate?"

"Not'ing, on'y it's as sure as if we did know it.  If his carcass isn't
on de hooks by dis time it'll soon be."

As the negro spoke the midshipman started up with flashing eyes,
exclaimed angrily, "It shall _never_ be," and ran out of the bower.

Entering the house, he went straight to Ben-Ahmed's private chamber,
which he entered boldly, without even knocking at the door.

The Moor was seated cross-legs on a mat, solacing himself, as usual,
with a pipe.  He was not a little surprised, and at first was inclined
to be angry, at the abrupt entrance of his slave.

"Ben-Ahmed," said the middy, with vehemence, "the father of the English
girl you are so fond of--and whom I _love_--is in terrible danger, and
if you are a true man--as I firmly believe you are--you will save him."

The Moor smiled very slightly at the youth's vehemence, pointed with the
mouthpiece of his hookah to a cushion, and bade him sit down and tell
him all about it.

The middy at once squatted _a la Turk_, not on the cushion, but on the
floor, in front of his master, and, with earnest voice and gesture,
related the story which Peter the Great had just told him.

Ben-Ahmed was visibly affected by it.

"But how can I save him?" he asked, with a look of perplexity.

"Did you not once save the life of the Dey?" asked Foster.

"I did.  How came you to know that?"

"I heard it from Peter the Great, who aided you on the occasion.  And he
told me that the Dey has often since then offered to do you some good
turn, but that you have always declined."

"That is true," said Ben-Ahmed, with the look of a man into whose mind a
new idea had been introduced.

"Yes, something may be done in that way, and it would grieve me that the
father of my poor little Hester should die.  I will try.  Go, have my
horse saddled, and send Peter to me."

Our midshipman bounded rather than rose from the floor, and uttered an
irresistible, "God bless you," as he vanished through the doorway on his
errand.

"Peter," he cried--encountering that worthy as he ran--"we'll manage it!
Go to Ben-Ahmed!  He wants you--quick!  I'm off to fetch his horse."

Foster was much too anxious to have the thing done quickly to give the
order to the head groom.  He ran direct to the stable, and, choosing the
fleetest of the Moor's Arab steeds, quickly put on its crimson saddle,
with its un-European peaks before and behind, and the other gay portions
of harness with which Easterns are wont to caparison their horses.

In a wonderfully short space of time he had the steed round to the front
door, and sent another slave to tell his master that it was ready.

The Moor had also caparisoned himself, if we may say so, for the
intended visit, and he had evidently done it in haste.  Nevertheless,
his gait was stately, and his movements were slow, as he gravely mounted
the horse and rode away.  The impatience of the middy was somewhat
relieved, however, when he saw that Ben-Ahmed, on reaching the main
road, put spurs to his horse, and rode towards the city at full gallop.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A STRANGE VISIT, A STRANGE COMMISSION, AND A STRANGE DISPLAY OF TEMPER.

After Ben-Ahmed had departed on his mission to the Dey of Algiers,
George Foster and Peter the Great re-entered the house, and in the
seclusion of the bower continued to discuss the hopes, fears, and
possibilities connected with the situation.

"Dat was a clebber dodge ob yours, Geo'ge," remarked the negro, "an' I's
got good hope dat somet'ing will come ob it, for massa's pretty sure to
succeed w'en he take a t'ing in hand."

"I'm glad you think so, Peter.  And, to say truth, I am myself very
sanguine."

"But dere's one t'ing dat 'plexes me bery much.  What is we to do about
poo' Hester's fadder w'en he's pardoned?  De Dey can spare his life, but
he won't set him free--an' if he don't set him free de slabe-drivers 'll
be sure to kill 'im out ob spite."

The middy was silent, for he could not see his way out of this
difficulty.

"Perhaps," he said, "Ben-Ahmed may have thought of that, and will
provide against it, for of course he knows all the outs and ins of
Moorish life, and he is a thoughtful man."

"Das true, Geo'ge.  He _am_ a t'oughtful man.  Anyhow, we kin do not'ing
more, 'cept wait an' see.  But I's much more 'plexed about Hester, for
eben if de sailor am a good an' true man, as you say, he can't keep her
or his-self alibe on not'ing in de mountains, no more'n he could swim
wid her on his back across de Mederainyon!"

Again the middy was silent for a time.  He could by no means see his way
out of this greater difficulty, and his heart almost failed him as he
thought of the poor girl wandering in the wilderness without food or
shelter.

"P'r'aps," suggested Peter, "she may manage to git into de town an' pass
for a nigger as she's dood before, an' make tracks for her old place wid
Missis Lilly--or wid Dinah."

"No doubt she may," cried Foster, grasping at the hope as a drowning man
grasps at a plank.  "Nothing more likely.  Wouldn't it be a good plan
for you to go into town at once and make inquiry?"

"Dessay it would," returned the negro.  "Das just what I'll do, an' if
she's not dere, Dinah may gib my int'lec' a jog.  She's a wonderful
woman, Dinah, for workin' up de human mind w'en it's like goin' to
sleep.  Poo' Samson hab diskivered dat many times.  I'll go at once."

"Do, Peter, my fine fellow, and you'll lay me for ever under the deepest
ob--"

He was interrupted by a slave who at the moment approached the bower and
said that a man wanted to see Peter the Great.

"To see Ben-Ahmed, you mean," said Peter.

"No--to see yourself," returned the slave.

"Sen' 'im here," said the negro, with a magnificent wave of the hand.

In a few minutes the slave returned accompanied by a negro, who limped
so badly that he was obliged to use a stick, and whose head was bandaged
up with a blue cloth.  Arrived at the bower, he stood before Peter the
Great and groaned.

"You may go," said Peter to the slave, who lingered as if anxious to
hear the news of the visitor.  When he was out of hearing, Peter turned
to the lame man, looked him sharply in the face, and said--

"You's bery black in de face, my frind, but you's much blacker in de
h'art.  What business hab you to come here widout washin' your white
face clean?"

"Well, you're a pretty smart chap for a nigger.  An' I dare say you'll
understand that I'd have had some difficulty in fetchin' this here port
at all if I'd washed my face," answered the lame man, in excellent
nautical English.

While he spoke, Foster ran towards him, laid a hand on his shoulder, and
looked earnestly into his face.

"You are the British sailor," he said, "who rescued Hes--Miss Sommers
from the janissaries?"

"That's me to a tee," replied the sailor, with a broad grin.

"Is Miss Sommers safe?" asked the middy anxiously.

"Ay! safe as any woman can be in this world.  Leastwise, she's in a cave
wi' three o' the toughest sea-dogs as any man could wish to see--one o'
them bein' a Maltese an' the other two bein' true-blue John Bulls as
well as Jack Tars.  But Miss Sommers gave me orders to say my say to
Peter the Great, so if this nigger is him, I'll be obleeged if he'll
have a little private conversation wi' me."

"Did Miss Sommers say that I was not to hear the message?" asked the
middy, in some surprise.

"She made no mention o' _you_, or anybody else at all, as I knows on,"
returned the sailor firmly, "an' as my orders was to Peter the Great,
an' as this seems to be him, from Sally's description--a monstrous big,
fine-lookin' nigger, with a lively face--I'll say my say to him _alone_,
with your leave."

"You may say it where you is, for dis yar gen'lem'n is a frind ob mine,
an' a hofficer in the Bri'sh navy, an' a most 'tickler friend of Hester
Sommers, so we all frinds togidder."

"You'll excuse me, sir," said the seaman, touching his forelock, "but
you don't look much like a' officer in your present costoom.  Well,
then, here's wot I've got to say--"

"Don't waste your time, Brown, in spinning the yarn of your rescue of
the girl," said Foster, interrupting; "we've heard all about it already
from Sally, and can never sufficiently express our thanks to you for
your brave conduct.  Tell us, now, what happened after you disappeared
from Sally's view."

The sailor thereupon told them all about his subsequent proceedings--how
he had persuaded Hester to accompany him through the woods and by a
round about route to a part of the coast where he expected ere long to
find friends to rescue him.  From some reason or other best known to
himself, he was very secretive in regard to the way in which these
friends had managed to communicate with him.

"You see I'm not free to speak out all I knows," he said.  "But surely
it's enough to say that my friends have not failed me; that I found them
waitin' there with a small boat, so light that they had dragged it up
an' concealed it among the rocks, an' that I'd have bin on my way to old
England at this good hour if it hadn't bin for poor Miss Sommers, whom
we couldn't think of desartin'."

"Then she refused to go with you?" said Foster.

"Refused!  I should think she did!  Nothing, she said, would indooce her
to leave Algiers while her father was in it.  One o' my mates was for
forcing her into the boat, an' carryin' her off, willin' or not willin',
but I stood out agin' him, as I'd done enough o' that to the poor thing
already.  Then she axed me to come along here an' ax Peter the Great if
he knowed anything about her father.  `But I don't know Peter the
Great,' says I, `nor where he lives.'  `Go to Sally,' says she, `an'
you'll get all the information you need.'  `But I'll never get the
length o' Sally without being nabbed,' says I.  `Oh!' says she, `no fear
o' that.  Just you let me make a nigger of you.  I always keep the stuff
about me in my pocket, for I so often cry it off that I need to renew it
frequently.'  An' with that she out with a parcel o' black stuff and
made me into a nigger before you could say Jack Robinson.  Fort'nately,
I've got a pretty fat lump of a nose of my own, an' my lips are pretty
thick by natur', so that with a little what you may call hard poutin'
