
"Yes," said Dick; "but I didn't like it well enough to stay long."

"Why didn't you send for me?"

"Thank you, sir, I didn't like to trouble you. Mr. Murdock was very
kind."

"Have they got the real thief?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Well, 'all's well that ends well.' You can afford to laugh at it now."

Mr. Gilbert listened to this colloquy with very little satisfaction.

It seemed to show such a good understanding between Dick and his
employer that he perceived that it would be a very difficult thing to
supersede him.

"Mr. Rockwell seems to be infatuated with that boy," he muttered to
himself.

"I think I won't resign just yet," said Dick, in a low voice, to the
book-keeper.

"You'll be found out some day," said Gilbert, snappishly. "Go to the
post-office, and mind you don't stop to play on the way."

Dick started on his errand, and, in passing out into the street,
encountered Roswell Crawford, who, attired with extra care, had just
come down the street from Broadway. On seeing Dick, he started as if he
had seen a ghost.

"Good-morning, Roswell," said Dick, pleasantly.

"Good-morning," said Roswell, stiffly.

"Your cousin is in the counting-room. I am in a hurry, and must leave
you."

"I thought he was on his way to the Island by this time," thought
Roswell, perplexed. "What can it mean?"

It occurred to him all at once that Dick might just have been
discharged, and this thought cheered him up considerably. He entered the
counting-room with a jaunty step.

"Good-morning, Cousin James," he said.

Gilbert turned round, and said, in a surly tone, "You may as well take
yourself off. There's no chance for you here."

"Hasn't the boot-black been discharged?"

"No; and isn't going to be."

"How is that?" asked Roswell, looking very much disappointed.

"I can't stop to tell you now. You'd better go now, and I'll tell you
this evening."

"Just my luck!" said Roswell to himself, considerably crest-fallen. "I
wish I hadn't said a word to Edward McLean about the place."




CHAPTER XIX.

ANOTHER ARREST.


Micky Maguire, as the reader will remember, was by no means satisfied
with the compensation he received from Gilbert for his share in the plot
which came so near proving disastrous to our friend Dick.

He felt that the book-keeper had acted meanly to him, and he meant to
have his revenge if a good opportunity should ever offer. He was very
much disappointed to think he must do without the watch which he had set
his heart upon. He would have felt no particular scruples against
stealing it, but that would be rather dangerous. He began to wish he had
kept the pocket-book. Very probably it contained more than enough to buy
the watch.

But, in spite of his disappointment, he had one satisfaction. He had
avenged himself upon Dick, whom he had long disliked. He knew nothing of
Tim Ryan's testimony, and supposed there was no doubt of Dick's
conviction. He would like very well to have been present at the trial;
but he had unpleasant associations connected with the court-room at the
Tombs, having figured there on several occasions in an important but not
very enviable capacity.

As he was standing by the park railings, his particular friend and
admirer, Limpy Jim, came up.

"Mornin', Jim," said Micky. "What luck?"

"None at all," said Jim. "I haven't had a shine yet, and I'm precious
hungry."

"Come and take breakfast with me," said Micky, in an unusual fit of
generosity; for he was generally more willing to be treated than to
treat.

"Have you got stamps enough?"

"Look at this," and Micky displayed the bill which he had received from
Gilbert.

"You're in luck, Micky. Did you make all that by shines?"

"Never mind how I made it. I guess it's good. Come along if you're
hungry."

Limpy Jim followed Micky across Printing-House Square to a cheap
restaurant on Nassau Street, between Ann and Beekman Streets, and they
were soon partaking with relish of a breakfast which, as they were not
very fastidious, proved abundantly satisfactory.

"I've got some news," said Micky, after he had drained his cup of
coffee. "You haven't forgot Ragged Dick, have ye?"

"He's set up for a gentleman. I saw him a week ago strutting round as if
he lived on Fifth Avenue."

"Well, he's set up for something else now."

"What's that?"

"A pick-pocket."

"What?" asked Jim, amazed.

"He stole an old chap's pocket-book yesterday afternoon, and I seed a
policeman haulin' him off to the p'lice station."

"That's where he gets his good clo'es from?" suggested Jim.

"Most likely. I expect he's on his way to the Island by this time."

"Serve him right for puttin' on airs. He won't pretend to be so much
better than the rest of us now."

"Wonder what Tom Wilkins'll say? He's a great friend of Dick's."

"He's a sneak," said Micky.

"That's so. I wanted to borrer a shillin' of him last week, and he
wouldn't lend it to me."

This Tom Wilkins was a boot-black like the two who were expressing so
unfavorable an opinion of his character. He had a mother and two sisters
partially dependent upon him for support, and faithfully carried home
all his earnings. This accounts for his being unwilling to lend Limpy
Jim, who had no one to look out for but himself, and never considered it
necessary to repay borrowed money. Tom had reason to feel friendly to
Dick, for on several occasions, one of which is mentioned in the first
volume of this series, Dick had given him help in time of need. He was
always ready to defend Dick, when reviled by Micky and his followers,
and had once or twice been attacked in consequence. Limpy Jim was right
in supposing that nothing would disturb Tom more than to hear that his
friend had got into trouble.

Micky, who was in a generous mood, bought a couple of cheap cigars, of
which he presented one to his satellite. These were lighted, and both
boys, feeling more comfortable for the hearty meal of which they had
partaken, swaggered out into the street.

They re-entered the park, and began to look out for patrons.

"There's Tom Wilkins now," said Limpy Jim.

Tom was busily engaged in imparting a scientific shine to the boots of
an old gentleman who was sitting on one of the wooden seats to be found
in the neighborhood of the City Hall.

When he had completed his task, and risen from his knees, Limpy Jim
advanced towards him, and said, with a sneer, "I've heard fine news
about your friend Dick."

"What's that?" asked Tom.

"He's got nabbed by a 'copp.'"

"I don't believe it," said Tom, incredulously.

"Isn't it so, Micky?" said Jim, appealing to his friend.

"Yes, it's true. I seed him hauled off for pickin' an old fellow's
pocket in Chatham Street."

"I don't believe it," repeated Tom; but he began to feel a little
uneasy. "I saw him and spoke to him yesterday mornin'."

"What if you did? It didn't happen till afternoon."

"Dick wouldn't steal," said Tom, stoutly.

"He'll find it mighty hard work provin' that he didn't," said Micky.
"You won't see him for the next three months."

"Why won't I?"

"Because he'll be at the Island. Maybe you'll go there yourself."

"If I do, it'll be for the first time," retorted Tom; "and that's more
than either of you can say."

As this happened to be true, it was of course regarded as offensive.

"Shut up, Tom Wilkins!" said Micky, "if you don't want a lickin'."

"None of your impudence!" said Limpy Jim, emboldened by the presence and
support of Micky, who was taller and stronger than Tom.

"I've only told the truth," said Tom, "and you can't deny it."

"Take that for your impudence!" said Micky, drawing off, and hitting Tom
a staggering blow on the side of the head.

Limpy Jim was about to assist Micky, when there was a very unlooked-for
interruption. Micky Maguire was seized by the collar, and, turning
indignantly, found himself in the grip of a policeman.

"So you are fighting, are you, my fine fellow?" demanded the guardian of
the public peace.

"He insulted me," said Micky, doggedly, not attempting resistance, which
he knew would be ineffectual. "Didn't he, Jim?"

But Jim had already disappeared. He had a prejudice, easily accounted
for, against the metropolitan police, and had as little communication
with them as possible.

"I don't know anything about that," said the policeman. "All I know is
that you're wanted."

"Just for hittin' him? I didn't hurt him any."

"He didn't hurt me much," said Tom, generously, not desiring to see
Micky get into trouble on his account.

"He says I didn't hurt him," urged Micky. "Can't you let me go?"

"That isn't what I want you for," said the policeman.

Micky was astonished. The real cause of his arrest never once occurred
to him, and he could not understand why he was "wanted."

"What is it, then?" he asked in some surprise. "What 'ave I been doin'?"

"Perhaps you don't remember relieving an old gentleman of his
pocket-book yesterday in Chatham Street."

"'Twasn't me."

"Who was it then?"

"Ragged Dick,--the feller that was took at the time. I seed him pick the
man's pocket."

"It seems that you remember something about it."

"But it was Dick that did it. If he says I did it, he lies."

"I've nothing to do with that. You must tell your story to the judge."

"Has he let Dick go?"

"Yes."

Micky received this intelligence with dismay. Somehow it had got out
that he was the real thief, and he began to think that his chance of
getting off was small. Just then, while in custody of the policeman, he
saw advancing towards him the man who had inveigled him into the
plot,--Gilbert, the book-keeper. His anger against Gilbert overcame his
prudence, and he said, "Well, if I did take the pocket-book, I was paid
for doin' it, and that was the man that hired me."

With some surprise, the policeman listened to this story.

"If you don't believe me, just wait till I speak to him."

"Mr. Gilbert!" called Micky.

Gilbert, who had not till now noticed his confederate, looked up, and,
rapidly understanding what had happened, determined upon his course.

"Who speaks to me?" he said, quietly.

"You've got me into trouble, Mr. Gilbert," said Micky, "and I want you
to get me out of it."

"What does he mean?" asked Gilbert, coolly, addressing the policeman.

"You hired me to steal a man's pocket-book, and I'm took up for it,"
said Micky. "I want you to help me, or I'll be sent to the Island."

"The boy must be crazy," said Gilbert, shrugging his shoulders.

"You give me a dollar to do it," said Micky, very much incensed at the
desertion of his confederate.

"Do you know the boy?" asked the policeman respectfully, for he put no
faith in Micky's statement.

"He blacked my boots once," said Gilbert. "That's all I know about him.
What is he arrested for?"

"For picking pockets. There was another boy arrested on suspicion, but
it appeared on trial that he was innocent, and that this boy really took
the wallet."

"He looks like a young scamp," said Gilbert, coolly. "I'm much obliged
to him for introducing my name into the matter. I hope he'll get his
desserts."

This was too much for Micky's patience. He assailed Gilbert with such a
shower of oaths that the policeman tightened his grip, and shook him
vigorously. Gilbert shrugged his shoulders, and walked off with apparent
unconcern.

"Wait till I get free," said Micky, furiously. "I'll fix him."

In regard to Micky, I have only to say further at this time, that he was
at once conveyed to the Tombs, summarily tried and convicted, and spent
the same night on Blackwell's Island, where we leave him for three
months.




CHAPTER XX.

BEFORE THE PARTY.


"You'll be able to attend Ida Greyson's party after all, Dick," said
Fosdick, on Tuesday evening.

"Yes," said Dick, "I was afraid that I should be wanted to grace the
fashionable circles at Blackwell's Island; but as my particular friend
Micky Maguire has kindly offered to go in my place, I shall be able to
keep my other engagement."

"Micky's a bad fellow."

"I'm afraid he is," said Dick; "but he's never had a fair chance. His
father was a drunkard, and used to beat him and his mother, till Micky
ran away from home, and set up for himself. He's never had any good
example set him."

"You speak kindly of Micky, considering he has always been your enemy."

"I haven't any ill will against Micky," said Dick, generously. "If I
ever can do him a good turn I will. I've been luckier than he and most
of my old companions, I'm going to do all I can to help them along.
There's good in them if you can only bring it out."

Dick spoke earnestly, in a very different tone from his usual one. He
had a certain philosophy of his own, and had always taken the world
