Hayden was intensely anxious to recapture Kit, whose escape had balked
him of his vengeance, and mortified him exceedingly. As he expressed it,
he could not bear to think that a boy of sixteen had got the advantage
of him.

At length they reached the red house already referred to, and saw Ham
Stover, the owner, in the yard.

"You are up betimes, Dick," said Stover. "What's in the wind?"

"Have you seen aught of a boy of sixteen passin' this way?" asked Dick,
anxiously.

"A likely lookin' lad, well dressed?"

"Yes."

"He was round here an hour ago, and took breakfast in the house."

This was true; the slight refreshment Janet had brought him having
proved insufficient to completely stay the cravings of Kit's appetite
after his night in the cabin.

"Where is he now?"

"What do you want of him?"

"Never you mind--I'll tell you bimeby. Where is he?"

"He wanted me to harness up and take him to Groveton."

Dick Hayden and Stubbs exchanged glances. It was evident that they had
struck Kit's trail.

"Well, did you do it?"

"No; I couldn't spare the time. Besides I wanted the horse to go to the
village. I'm going to harness up now."

"What did the boy do?"

"He walked."

"How long since did he start?"

"About half an hour or thereabouts."

Dick Hayden made a rapid calculation.

"We may overtake him if we walk fast," he said.

Without stopping to enlighten the curiosity of Mr. Stover the two men
set out rapidly on the Groveton road.




CHAPTER XXXI.

IN THE ENEMY'S HANDS.


Mr. Stover was considerably surprised when twenty minutes later, looking
up from his work in the yard, he saw a man of colossal size crossing the
street. He hadn't attended the circus, and had not therefore heard of
the giant, who was one of its principal features.

"Who in creation can that be?" Stover asked himself.

Achilles Henderson turned into the yard, and accosted the farmer:

"Good morning, friend," he said. "Can you tell me if a boy of about
sixteen has passed here this morning?"

"That boy again!" thought the bewildered farmer.

"Yes," he answered.

"Please describe him."

Mr. Stover did so.

"The very one!" said Achilles. "Now how long since was he here?"

"He took breakfast with my family, and started off nigh on to an hour
ago."

"In what direction did he go?"

This question was also answered.

"Thank you, friend," said the giant; "you have done me a favor."

"Then won't you do me one?" said Stover. "Who is this boy that so many
people are askin' for?"

"He is a young acrobat connected with Barlow's circus. But what do you
mean by so many people asking about him?"

"There was two men here twenty minutes ago, that seemed very anxious to
find him."

Achilles Henderson heard this with apprehension. He could guess who they
were, and what he heard alarmed him for Kit's safety.

"Who are they?" he inquired hastily.

"Dick Hayden and Bob Stubbs."

"Are they miners?"

"Yes."

"Did you tell them where the boy went?"

"Sartin! Why not?"

"Because they mean to do the boy a mischief; they may even kill him."

"What in creation should they do that for?"

"Mr. Stover, I must follow them at once. Have you a team?"

"Yes; but I calculated to use it."

"I must have it, and I want you to go with me. You may charge what you
please. Remember a boy's life may depend on it."

"Then you shall have it," said the farmer, "and I'll go with you. I took
a likin' to the boy. He was a gentleman, if ever I saw one; and my women
folks was mightily taken with him. Dick Hayden and Bob Stubbs are rough
kind of men, and I wouldn't trust any one I set store by in their hands.
But why----"

"Harness your horse, and I'll answer your questions on the way, Mr.
Stover."

"How do you know my name?" asked Stover, with sudden thought.

"I was told by some one as I came along."

The farmer lost no time in harnessing his horse, Achilles Henderson
lending a hand. The horse seemed rather alarmed, never having seen a
giant before, but soon got over his fright. The two men then jumped into
the wagon, and set out in search of Kit.

Meanwhile our hero had taken his way leisurely along the road. He didn't
anticipate being followed, at any rate so soon, and felt under no
particular apprehension. He had walked about three miles when a broad
branching elm tree tempted him to rest by its shade. He threw himself
down on the grass, and indulged in self congratulations upon his escape
from his captors. But his congratulation proved to be premature. After
a while he raised his eyes and looked carelessly back in the direction
from which he had come. What he saw startled him.

The two miners, Hayden and Stubbs, had lost no time on the way. They
were bent on capturing Kit, in order to revenge themselves upon him.

Reaching a little eminence in the road Dick Hayden caught sight of his
intended victim sitting under the tree.

His eyes gleamed with a wicked light.

"There's the kid, Stubbs!" he said. "Stir your stumps, old man, and
we'll collar him!"

The two miners started on a run, and when Kit caught sight of them they
were already within a few rods. The young acrobat saw that his only
safety, if indeed there was any chance at all, was in flight. He started
to his feet, and being fleet of limb gave them a good chase. But in the
end the superior strength and endurance of the men conquered. Flushed
and panting, Kit was compelled to stop. Hayden grasped him by the collar
with a look of wicked satisfaction.

"So I've got you, my fine chap, have I?"

"Yes, so it seems!" said Kit, his heart sinking.

"Sit down! I've got a few questions to ask."

There was a broad flat stone by the roadside. He seated Kit upon it with
a forcible push, and the two men ranged themselves one on each side of
him.

"What time did you leave the cabin, boy?"

"I don't know what time it was. It must have been two hours
since--perhaps more."

"Did any one let you out?"

"Yes."

"Who was it?"

"I don't know the person's name."

"Was it a man?"

Kit began to feel that he must be cautious. He knew that she was the
daughter of the man who was questioning him, and that she would be in
danger of rough treatment if her father should find out that she had
thwarted him.

"I cannot tell you," he answered, though he well knew that the answer
was likely to get him into trouble.

"You can't tell? Why not? Don't you know whether it was a man or not?"

"Yes, I know."

"You mean that you won't tell me, then?" said Hayden, in a menacing
tone.

"I mean that I don't care to do it. I might get the person into
trouble."

"You would that, you may bet your life. I can tackle any man round here,
and I'd get even with that man if I swung for it."

"That is why I don't care to tell you," said Kit. "How can you tell that
the man knew you put me there?"

"Didn't you tell him?"

"No."

"It was a man, then!" said Hayden, turning to Stubbs. "Look here, young
feller, if you tell me who it was, you may get off better yourself."

"I would rather not!" answered Kit, pale but firm.

"Suit yourself, kid, but you may as well know that you'll be half killed
before we get through with you. Get up!"

As he spoke, Hayden jerked Kit to his feet, and began to drag him toward
the rail fence.

"Take down the rails, Stubbs!" he said.

"What's your game, Dick?"

"I'm going to give the kid a drubbing that he won't be likely to forget,
but I can't do it in the road, for some one may come along."

"I'm with you, Dick."

At the lower end of the field which they had now entered was a strip of
woods, which promised seclusion and freedom from interruption. Poor Kit,
as he was dragged forward by his relentless captor, found his spirits
sinking to zero.

"Will no one deliver me from this brutal man?" he exclaimed inwardly.

He felt that his life was in peril.




CHAPTER XXXII.

KIT'S DANGER.


The men reached the edge of the woods and halted.

"I'd like to hang him!" growled Dick Hayden with a malignant look.

"It wouldn't do, Dick," said Stubbs. "We'd get into trouble."

"If we were found out."

"Murder will 'most always come out," said Stubbs, uneasily. He was a
shade less brutal and far less daring than his companion.

It can be imagined with what feelings Kit heard this colloquy. He had no
confidence in the humanity of his captors, and considered them, Dick
Hayden in particular, as capable of anything. He did not dare to
remonstrate lest in a spirit of perversity the two men might proceed to
extremities.

Kit was not long in doubt as to the intentions of his captors.

"Take off your coat, boy!" said Hayden, harshly.

Kit looked into the face of his persecutor, and decided that it would be
prudent to obey. Otherwise he would have forcibly resisted.

He removed his coat and held it over his arm.

"Lay down the coat and take off your vest," was the next order.

This also Kit felt compelled to do.

Dick Hayden produced from the capacious side pocket of his coat a cord,
which he proceeded to test by pulling. It was evidently very strong.

"Stubbs, tie him to yonder sapling!" said Dick.

Stubbs proceeded, nothing loth, to obey the directions of his leader.
Kit was tied with his back exposed. Dick Hayden watched the preparations
with evident enjoyment.

"This is the moment I have been longing for," he said.

From his other pocket he drew a cowhide, which he passed through the
fingers of his left hand, while with cruel eyes he surveyed the
shrinking form of his victim.

Meanwhile where was Achilles Henderson?

He and Stover bowled as rapidly over the road as the speed of a fourteen
year old horse would permit. He looked eagerly before him, in the hope
of catching a glimpse either of Kit or of the miners. When they started
they were far behind, but at last they reached a point on the road where
they could see Kit and his two captors making their way across the
fields.

"There they are!" said Stover, who was the first to see them.

"And they've got the boy with them!" ejaculated Achilles. "Where are
they going, do you think?"

"Over to them woods, it's likely," replied Stover.

"What for?"

"I'm afraid they mean to do the boy harm."

"Not if I can prevent it," said Achilles, with a stern look about the
mouth.

"They're goin' to give him a floggin', I think."

"They'll get the same dose in larger measure, I can tell them that. Mr.
Stover, isn't there any way I can reach the woods by a short cut so that
they won't see me?"

"Yes, there is a path in that field there. There is a fringe of trees
separatin' it from the field where they are walkin'."

"Then stop your horse, and I'll jump out!"

Mr. Stover did so with alacrity. He disliked both Dick Hayden and Bob
Stubbs, whom he had reason to suspect of carrying off a dozen of his
chickens the previous season. He had not dared to charge them with it,
knowing the men's ugly disposition, and being certain that they would
revenge themselves upon him.

"Do you want me along, Mr. Giant?" he asked.

"No; I'm more than a match for them both."

"Shouldn't wonder if you were," chuckled Stover.

He kept his place in the wagon and laughed quietly to himself.

"I'd like to see the scrimmage," he said to himself.

With this object in view he drove forward, so that from the wagon seat
he could command a view of the scene of conflict.

"They're tying the boy to a tree," he said. "I reckon the giant'll be in
time, and I'm glad on't. That boy's a real gentleman. Wonder what he's
done to rile Dick Hayden and Bob Stubbs. He'd have a mighty small show
if the giant hadn't come up. Dick's a strong man, but he'll be like a
child in the hands of an eight-footer."

Meanwhile Achilles Henderson was getting over the ground at the rate of
ten miles an hour or more. His long strides gave him a great advantage
over an ordinary runner.

"If they lay a hand on that boy I pity 'em!" he said to himself.

It was fortunate for Kit that Dick Hayden, like a cat who plays with a
mouse, paused to gloat over the evident alarm and uneasiness of his
victim, even after all was ready for the punishment which he proposed to
inflict.

"Well, boy, what have you to say now?" he demanded, drawing the cowhide
through his short stubby fingers.

"I have nothing to say that will move you from your purpose, I am
afraid," replied poor Kit.

"I guess you're about right there, kid!" chuckled Hayden. "Are you ready
to apologize to me for what you done over to the circus?"

"I don't think there is anything to apologize for."

"There isn't, isn't there? Didn't you bring that long-legged ruffian on
to me?"

"I was only doing my duty," said Kit, manfully.

"Oho! so that's the way you look at it, do you?"

"Yes, sir."

"No doubt you'd like it if that tall brute were here now," said Hayden,
tauntingly.

"Yes," murmured Kit; "I wish my good friend Achilles were here."

"So that's his name, is it? Well, I wouldn't mind if he were here.
Stubbs, I think you and I could do for him, eh?"

"I don't know," said Stubbs, dubiously.

"Well I do. He's only one man, while we are two, and strong at that."

"Oho!" thought Achilles, who was now within hearing. "So my friend, the
