She did not mean to do so.  She evidently meant to turn the tables by
bearing suddenly down on us, and, if possible, give us a broadside
before we could get out of range.  The captain saw the intention
instantly, and thwarted it.

"Up your helm!  Square the yards!  Look alive there!"

We fell off, and were soon running before the wind, with the swivel gun
thundering over our stern, as it had formerly thundered over our bows.
The Russian fired a broadside, and lay-to.  Every ball fell short of us.
We also lay-to, and now the fire was kept up steadily.  The ship's fate
was sealed.  Those on board evidently thought so, for the colours which
had hitherto been flying from the mast were presently lowered.  Upon
this we ceased firing, and ranged up alongside.

"Oh! you've had enough, have you?" cried our captain.  "Perhaps you'll
condescend to let your captain and papers come aboard _now_."

The Russian did not reply, but a boat was lowered.  It was evident they
meant to obey.

"Here, you boy," cried our captain, as he paced the deck, awaiting their
arrival.  "Here's a letter for you."

"A letter, sir!"  I exclaimed, stepping forward, and touching my cap.

"Ay, your father gave it to me just afore we set sail.  He told me not
to give it to you until you'd seen a little rough work.  You've seen
some now, I think," (he accompanied this remark with a horrible leer),
"so there's the letter.  Go below and read it.  I'll want you in half an
hour for some still rougher work."

There seemed to me something very unaccountable and mysterious in this.
I knew that the captain did not know my father.  I had not even told him
that I had a father.  It seemed to me impossible that in the course of
the short half-hour that intervened between the time of my engaging to
serve in the _Ring-tailed Smasher_, and the time of my setting sail, my
father could have found out where I had run to, have met and conversed
with the captain, and have written a letter to me.  Yet it seemed that
such was the case.  I recognised the handwriting.

"Whom did you get the letter from?  Did you see my father?"

"Come, youngster, don't you go for to question me.  Go below d'rectly,
an' stop there till ye'r wanted."

The captain seized the end of a rope as he spoke, so I retreated at once
to the bedside of my poor friend Jack, only too glad to escape from the
presence of the men whom I now abhorred with all my heart.

"Jack," said I, eagerly, "here's a letter from my father!"

He evinced no surprise, but, looking up solemnly, said, in a faint
voice, "Read it."

Breaking the seal, I read as follows:--

"My Beloved Son,--I forgive you.  You have sinned deeply in thus leaving
me; but I know that you have repented.  I know that your own conscience
has rebuked you more sternly than any earthly parent could do.  You
cannot now recall the past--you cannot undo what you have done; you must
now continue your voyage, and, in order to relieve your oppressed heart,
I give you my blessing.  I commend you, my dear boy, to Him who is the
Saviour of sinners.

"Beware of the captain.  Obey him in all that is right, but do not serve
him.  Again, I say, beware of him.  There are secrets concerning him
that I cannot unfold.  I have just been to see Jack's mother.  She sends
her forgiveness and blessing to her son.  God bless you, boy.--Your
loving father,

"John Smith."

My father understood human nature.  No reproaches that he could have
heaped upon me would have cut half so deeply into my heart as did this
kind, forgiving letter.  My heart was full.  Yet I felt a deep
undercurrent of joy at knowing that my father loved me still.  I looked
at Jack.  He seemed to be asleep, but he was not.  A single tear coursed
over his pale cheek as he looked up and whispered--

"We don't deserve this, Bob."

Before I could reply, the ship was shaken by a tremendous explosion, and
immediately after I heard the most appalling shrieks and yells on deck,
accompanied by the clashing of swords and the scuffling of men in deadly
conflict.  I looked at Jack; he lay motionless, with his eyes closed.
For a moment I feared that he was dead.

"Bob Smith!  Hallo! tumble up there, you skulker!" shouted a voice down
the hatchway.  At the same moment two wounded men were carried into the
place, and the surgeon appeared with his horrible instruments
glittering, cold and sharp, on a wooden tray.

Seizing my cutlass, and thrusting a brace of pistols in my belt, I
rushed on deck.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 5.

On reaching the deck I saw at once how matters stood.  The Russian had
allowed us to come alongside, and then, throwing out grappling-irons,
had fired a broadside into us, and attempted to board.  They were soon
overcome, however, by the pirates, and driven back into their ship,
whither they were immediately followed.

I resolved, come what might, that I would take no part in the fray; but
I was carried, in spite of myself, on board the strange vessel in the
rush that our men made when they drove their opponents back.  There was
a short, sharp skirmish on the deck of the Russian, and then the crew
were driven below, and the hatches put on.  I remembered having seen a
number of soldiers on board when we first came up with this vessel.
There were none now.  Their mysterious disappearance struck me at first,
but I soon forgot it in the thrilling scenes that followed.

In the middle of the vessel's main-deck there was a cage of wild beasts.
How they had got there of course I knew not, but I at once concluded
the ship must have been in southern climes, and these animals were being
brought home to be presented to some menagerie or zoological garden.
There were several fine specimens of lions and tigers, and the sight of
blood which flowed plentifully on the decks had so excited these
creatures that they were now filling the air with deafening roars,
bounding against the sides of their cage, (which I expected every moment
to see broken to pieces by their united strength), and glaring at us
with the most awful expressions of ferocity I ever beheld.

Our captain, who looked almost as fierce as the wild brutes, could not
make his voice heard for their roaring.  In savage fury he rushed at the
cage and made a desperate cut with his sword at the lion nearest the
bars.  The blood flowed from the wound freely, and the savage animal,
being unable to wreak its vengeance on its cowardly assailant, attacked
one of its comrades.  This, and the blood now flowing in the cage, quite
maddened them all.  An indiscriminate fight ensued.  The wooden
partition that separated the tigers from the lions was smashed in, and
the strong cage shook as if it were made of card-board.

"Turn a gun in-board," yelled the captain, who seemed to have actually
gone mad with passion.

The order was instantly obeyed.

"Load to the muzzle--grape--canister--chain shot.  In with it."

He assisted in the operation; rammed home the extraordinary charge,
pointed the gun at the cage, and applied the match.  Instantly the gun
leaped backwards as if it had been a living thing, broke down the
bulwarks of the ship, and plunged overboard.

The effect of the shot was terrific.  The cage was blown to atoms, and
the mangled remains of the wild beasts were strewn about the deck.  One
animal, however, a magnificent Bengal tiger, had apparently escaped
unhurt.  It sprang at the captain with a hideous roar.  He pointed a
pistol at its open throat!

At that moment the woodcut in my book of travels flashed vividly before
me.  But I had not time to think.  The pistol exploded, sending its
contents down the creature's throat.  The tiger fell short in its leap;
blood poured from its mouth and nose.  With another bound it cleared the
bulwarks, and fell into the sea.

The calm that succeeded this thrilling incident was like a sudden lull
in the midst of a furious storm.  Even the pirates seemed to be
solemnised by what had passed.

"Now to work," cried the captain, wiping his sword, and laying it, with
a brace of loaded pistols, on the capstan.  "What are you staring at,
you fools?--have you lost your senses?  Open the after-hatch, and bring
them up, one at a time.  Get the plank ready."

The first who was led bound before the captain was the steward of the
ship.  He was deadly pale, and trembled very much.

"Now, my man," said the captain, "answer my questions.  The _truth_
mind, else--" he touched the butt of a pistol significantly.

"Where did you last sail from?"

To my amazement, the man gave the name of the port from which we
ourselves had sailed.  I felt certain that this was a falsehood, and
that the poor man's life would be forfeited.  Judge, then, my surprise
when the captain said--

"I know that as well as you.  I saw you sneak out just the day before we
did.  But you didn't escape me, ha! ha!  You are too good to live, my
man.  Stand aside here till I call someone who's not quite so
frightened.  Here, hold him, one of you!  Bring another!"

I started.  My heart almost ceased to beat when the next man was led
forward.  He was my father's man-servant, Edwards.  In the confusion and
horror of that hour I could not reason; but a vague sense of some
mysterious impossibility having actually taken place, oppressed me in a
way that I cannot explain.  The ship had sailed the day before ours did!
I left Edwards behind me in the race from home!  How, then, did I see
him before me?  Then the cage of wild beasts.  How was it possible that
a vessel leaving an English port could have such creatures on board?
Then, my father's letter; it seemed more than ever mysterious how that
letter could reach me, and through such a channel, and without a word of
reference to Edwards.

He did not observe me as he passed.  I tried to utter his name; but my
tongue was tied.  I could not speak.  I could not move.

"Where did you last sail from?" began the captain.

"You'll get nothing out of me," replied Edwards, stoutly.  "Do your
most.  Torture me if you like.  I defy you to your teeth."

"Do you, my fine fellow?" said the captain, with a bitter sneer.  "Then
I'll just send you overboard at once.  I've no time to torture you; and
as I shall find plenty of your comrades willing enough to tell me all
they know, I'll not trouble you any further.  Ho! run out the plank
there!"

I knew what that meant, and a cold shiver passed through my frame as the
men obeyed, and blind-folded Edwards, preparatory to making him walk the
plank.  I could restrain myself no longer.  Darting up to the captain, I
shouted in a voice of indignation--

"Do you mean to murder an innocent man, you dastardly villain?"

He looked at me for a moment in surprise; then, snatching a pistol,
felled me with it to the deck.  I was not rendered quite insensible.  I
heard the shriek of agony uttered by poor Edwards, as he fell off the
end of the plank into the sea; then I fainted.

How long I lay, I know not; probably not long, for I was restored to a
state of consciousness by being plunged into the sea.  I had no doubt
that the captain had ordered me to be thrown overboard, just after I
fell under his brutal blow.

Being a good swimmer, I struck out at once and made for the side of the
pirate vessel, where I caught the end of a rope, and soon clambered on
board.  I was much exhausted, and sat down on the breech of a carronade
to rest and recover my stunned and scattered faculties.

The crew of the pirate were so busily engaged with the captured ship
that I found myself quite alone on the deck.  Not a man remained in the
ship.  An idea suddenly occurred to me just then.  I glanced up at the
sails.  They were all flapping in the wind except the fore-topsail.
That sail had slewed round, and was drawing so that the vessel strained
the ropes and grappling-irons that held her to the captured ship.

I sprang up burning with eager excitement.  I heard the shrieks of the
ill-fated victims, as one by one they walked the plank, which,
fortunately for the success of my design, was thrust out on the other
side of the ship.  A crowbar enabled me to wrench off the
grappling-irons.  Two cuts of a large axe severed the cable that had
been fastened to the bow, and the vessel's head fell slowly off.  As it
did so, all the sails filled with a sudden clap.  This was observed: I
heard a shout, and saw the pirates spring on the bulwarks of the prize.
I flew rather than ran to the stern, where the cable that held the
vessel was rigid as a bar of iron.  One blow cut it, and the rope
recoiled violently in the faces of the men who laid hold of it.  Next
moment the pirate ship was heading away before a stiff breeze which was
quickly freshening to a gale.  As I sprang to the helm, a shower of
musket and pistol bullets tore up the deck round me, and I heard the
captain's voice give the order to load the guns.

It was a few minutes before the _vis inertiae_ of the ship was overcome,
so that I was within close range when a whole broadside was fired at me.
But not a shot struck.  They tore up the water all round, and
ricochetted over me.  Before they could reload I was almost beyond
range, for the gale was freshening every moment, and the canvas spread
was enough almost to tear the masts out of the ship.  The water hissed
as she flew over the heaving waves, and in a few minutes I felt that I
was _free_.

Oh the feeling of wild delight that filled me when I realised this!  I
lashed the helm amidships, and ran down below to tell Jack what I had
done.  He was asleep.  By a powerful effort I restrained myself, and did
not disturb him.  Then I rushed on deck.  My brain seemed on fire.  I
shouted, laughed, and sang, and wept, until I began to feel a terrible
sensation of dread lest I should go mad.  But this, instead of calming
me, caused me to dance and sing and shout the more.  A burning thirst
came upon me.  I ran to the water-cask and drank till I could drink no
more.  I was refreshed; but soon the fever returned fiercer than ever.
I was mad!  I knew it; I felt it; but I did not care.  I saw that the
storm increased; this caused me to shout again with joy at the thought
that I was so quickly borne away from the scene of butchery, and from
the fiends in human form with whom I had so lately associated.

The gale burst in all its fury upon us.  The sails were new and strong;
the ship plunged into the waves, a green billow swept in-board and burst
in fury on the deck, carrying away boats and loose spars.  I yelled with
delight, and plunged into the brine that lashed the deck from stem to
stern.  I heard a noise overhead; but was so confused that I could not
understand what it was.  As I gazed, there came a terrific blast.  The
mainsail split from top to bottom.  The topsails burst and were blown to
ribbons.  At the same moment, I received a violent blow on the head.

After that, all was darkness and oblivion.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 6.

When consciousness returned to me I found myself lying on my back on the
deck of a vessel, surrounded and propped up by pillows; and Jack Brown
sitting beside me reading a book.

I felt a curious sensation of weakness and emptiness in my head--as if
it were hollow, and a strange disinclination, almost inability, to speak
or think.  Suddenly this passed away, and the events which I have
related in the previous chapters rushed back upon my memory with vivid
power.

"It must have been a dream," I thought, "or I must have been ill and
delirious, and these things have passed through my fevered brain."

At that moment the thought of Jack's amputated leg came into my head.
"That will prove it," thought I, and turned quickly to look at my
friend.  One glance was sufficient--a wooden stump occupied the place of
his right leg.  I groaned aloud and burst into tears.

"Come, Bob," said Jack in a soft, kind tone, laying down his book and
bending over me.  "Come, my poor fellow, keep quiet.  It's about time
you had your dinner.  Lie still and I'll fetch it to you."

I laid my hand on his arm and detained him.  "Then it's all true," said
I in a tone of the deepest despondency.

"Is what all true?"

"This--this horrible--your leg; your leg--"

Jack suddenly stooped and gazed earnestly into my face.  "Do you know
me, Bob?"  He trembled as he spoke.

"Know you, Jack! why should I not know you?  When did I ever forget
you?"

"Thank God!" he exclaimed fervently, taking my hand and pressing it to
his breast.  "You're all right again.  Oh, how I have longed and prayed
for this."

"All right, Jack.  Have I been wrong, then?"

"That you have just," said Jack, smiling sadly.  "You've just been as
mad as a March hare, that's all!"

I fell flat down and gazed at him.  In a minute more I raised myself on
one elbow, and, looking at him earnestly, said, "How long, Jack?"

"Just three weeks to-day."

I fell flat down again, in which position Jack left me to go and fetch
me some dinner.  He returned quickly with a plate of soup.  Before
commencing to eat it I pressed my hand on my forehead, and said--

"Jack, I am surrounded by mysteries.  How got you so soon well?  Where
got you that wooden leg?  How are we here alone?  Where are we going?
Clear up my faculties, Jack, while I eat this soup--do, like a good
fellow."

"I can easily do that, Bob.  First, I got well because you took care of
me."

"What!  I?"

"Yes, you!  At the commencement of your madness you tended me and cared
for me as if you had been my mother.  When you got to lose all `method
in your madness' I was well enough to take care of myself and you too.
Secondly, I found this wooden leg in the carpenter's berth, and gladly
availed myself of its services, though it _is_ three inches too short,
and causes me to hobble in a most undignified manner.  Thirdly, we are
here alone because there is no one else with us.  You took good care of
that by cutting the ropes before any of our crew could get aboard--so
you told me just before you went mad."

"Oh!  I remember now!  I recollect it all.  Go on."

"Fourthly, as to where we are going, I don't know.  Our compass was
smashed to pieces in the fight, and I've been running for the last three
weeks right before the wind.  So now you know all, and as you've
finished your soup I'll go and get you a lump of boiled junk."

"Don't," said I, rising and shaking myself.  "I've dined.  I feel quite
strong.  I don't feel a bit as if I had been ill.  Hallo! what land is
that?"

Jack started and gazed at it with surprise.  He had evidently not known
that we were in the neighbourhood of land.  A dense fog-bank had
concealed it from us.  Now that it cleared away it revealed to our gaze
a stretch of yellow sand, backed by the lofty blue hills of the
interior, and from the palm-trees that I could make out distinctly I
judged that we must have been making for the tropical regions during the
last three weeks.

Yet here again mystery surrounded me.  How was it possible that we
should have reached the tropics in so short a time?  While I was
puzzling over this question, the greatest mystery of all occurred to us.
If I were not conscientiously relating events exactly as they occurred,
I should expect my readers to doubt my veracity here.

As we were sailing smoothly along, our ship, without any apparent cause,
began to sink.  She went down gradually, but quickly--inch by inch--
until the water was on a level with the decks.  We struck no rock! we
did not cease to advance towards the shore!  I fancied that we must
certainly have sprung a leak; but there had been no sound of a plank
starting, and there was no noise of water rushing into the hold.  I
could not imagine what had occurred, but I had not much time for
thought.  We could do nothing to avert the catastrophe.  It occurred so
suddenly that we were both rendered mute and helpless.  We stood gazing
at the water as it crept over the deck without making the slightest
effort to save ourselves.

At length the water reached the hatchway and poured in a roaring
cataract into the hold.  The vessel filled, gave a heavy lurch to port,
a species of tremor passed through her frame as if she was a living
thing and knew that her hour had come, then she went down in a
whirlpool, leaving Jack and me struggling in the sea.

We were both good swimmers, so that we did not experience much alarm,
especially when we felt that the sea was comparatively warm; we struck
out for the shore, and, being the better swimmer of the two, I took the
lead.

But now to our horror we found that we were followed by sharks!

No sooner did we observe this than we struck out with all the energy of
terror.  We never swam as we did on that occasion.  It seemed to me
quite miraculous.  The water burst from our breasts in foam, and we left
long white tracks behind us as we clove our way through the water like
two boats.  It was awful.  I shall never forget my feelings on that
occasion: they were indescribable--inconceivable!
