2. Now go out at night and see how many Pleiades you can count; see Tale
52. If you see a mere haze, your star number is 0; if you see 4 little
pin points in the haze, your number is 8; if you see 6, your number is
12. If you see 7 your number is 14; and you will not get beyond that.

3. Now look for the Pappoose on the Squaw's back, as in Tale 50. If you
do not see it, you score nothing. If you can see it, and prove that you
see it, your number is 14 more.

Now add up these, thus: 60 plus 14 plus 14; this gives 88 as your
_farsight_ number. Anything over 60 means you can see like a hawk.


TALE 86

Quicksight

Take two boards, cards or papers, each about half a foot square; divide
them with black lines into 25 squares each, i. e. 5 each way; get 6 nuts
and 4 pebbles, or 6 pennies and 4 beans; or any other set of two things
differing in size and shape.

Let the one to be tested turn his back, while the Guide places 3 nuts
and 2 pebbles on one of the boards, in any pattern he pleases, except
that there must be only one on a square.

Now, let the player see them for 5 seconds by the watch; then cover it
up.

From memory, the player must place the other 3 nuts and 2 pebbles on the
other board, in exactly the same pattern. Counting one for every one
that was right. Note that a piece exactly on the line does not count;
but one chiefly in a square is reckoned to be in that square.

Do this 4 times. Then multiply the total result by 5. This gives his
_quicksight_ number, to be added to his _aliveness_ score.


TALE 87

Hearing

Can you hear like an owl? An owl can find his prey by hearing after
dark. His ears are wonderful. Let us try if yours are.

1. _Watch-test._ First, you must be blindfolded, and in some perfectly
quiet place indoors. Now have the Guide hold a man's watch (open if
hunting-cased), near your head; if you can hear it at 40 inches,
measured on a tapeline, and prove that you do, by telling exactly where
it is, in several tries, your hearing number is 40, which is high. If at
20 inches, it is low (20 pts.); if at 60 inches (60 pts.), it is
remarkable. Anything over 50 points means you can hear like an owl. In
this you go by your best ear.

2. _Pindrop-test._ Sometimes it is difficult to get a good watch-test.
Then the trial may be made with an ordinary, silvered brass stick-pin,
1-1/8 inches long, with small head. Lay the pin on a block of wood that
is exactly half an inch thick. Set this on a smooth polished board, or
table top of hardwood, not more than an inch thick, and with open space
under it. Set it away from the edge of the table so as to be clear of
the frame and legs. After the warning "ready," let the Guide tip the
block of wood, so the pin drops from the block to the table top (half an
inch). If you hear it at 35 feet in a perfectly still room, your hearing
is normal, and your hearing number is 35. If 20 feet is your farthest
limit of hearing it, your number is 20, which is low. If you can hear it
at 70 feet, your number is 70, which is remarkable.

You can use either the watch-test or the pin-test. If you use both, you
add the totals together, and divide by 2, to get your _hearing_ number.


TALE 88

Feeling

1. Have you got wise fingers like a blind man?

Put 10 nickels, 10 coppers and 10 dimes in a hat or in one hand if you
like. Then, while blindfolded, separate them into three separate piles,
all of each kind in a separate pile, within 2 minutes. If it takes you
the full 2 minutes (120 seconds), you are slow, and your feel number is
0. If you do it without a mistake in 1 minute and 20 seconds, your feel
number is 40, one point for each second you are less than 2 minutes. But
you must take off 3 points for every one wrongly placed, so 3 wrongly
placed would reduce your 40 to 31. I have known some little boys on the
East Side of New York to do it in 50 seconds without a mistake, so their
feel-number by coins was 70. That is, 120 seconds minus 50 seconds
equals 70. This is the best so far.

2. Now get a quart of corn or beans. Then when blindfolded, and using
but one hand, lay out the corn or beans in "threes"; that is, three at a
time laid on the table for 2 minutes. The Guide may move the piles aside
as they are made. Then stop and count all that are exactly three in a
pile (those with more or less do not count at all). If there are 40
piles with 3 in each, 40 is your number, by corn.

3. The last test is: Can you lace your shoes in the dark, or
blind-folded, finishing with a neat double bow knot?

Arrange it so your two shoes together have a total of at least 20 holes
or hooks to be used in the test, i. e., which do not have the lace in
them when you begin. Allow 1 point for each hole or hook, i. e., 20
points, finish the lacing in 2 minutes, in any case stop when the 2
minutes is up; then take off 2 points for each one that is wrongly
laced, or not laced. Thus: Supposing 4 are wrong, take off 4 times 2
from 20, and your blindfold lacing number is 12; if the number wrong was
10 or more, your lacing number is 0; if you had 3 wrong, your number is
14.

Suppose by these three tests--coins, corn, and laces--you scored 40,
30, and 14; add these together and they give your _feel_ number; 84.


TALE 89

Quickness

Put down 12 potatoes (or other round things) in a row, each one exactly
6 feet from the last, and the last 12 feet from a box with a hole in it,
just large enough to take in one potato. Now at the word "go," run and
get the first potato, put it through the hole into the box; then get the
second, bring it to the box, and so on, one at each trip. After one
minute, stop. Now multiply the number of potatoes in the box by 10, and
you have your _quickness_ number. If you have 8 in the box, you score 80
points, you are as quick as a cat. Very few get over 80. No one so far
has made 100 points.


TALE 90

Guessing Length

Take two common nails, or other thin bits of metal, and lay them on a
table or board, at what you guess to be exactly one yard (36 inches)
apart. Then let the Guide lay the tape-line on it, and, allowing 20
points for exactly right, take off 1 point for each half inch you are
wrong, over or under. Do not count quarter inches, but go by the nearest
half-inch mark. Do this 5 times, add up the totals, that will give your
_guessing-length_ number.

Thus, if your first guess turns out to be 37 inches, that is, 2
half-inches too much, 2 from 20 gives 18 points. Your next guess was 34
inches, that is 4 half-inches too little, 4 from 20 gives 16 points.
Your next guess gave 12 points, your next 17, and your last 19. The
total, 18 plus 16 plus 12 plus 17 plus 19, equals your number of
_guessing length_ or 82.


TALE 91

Aim or Limb-control

Take 25 medium-sized potatoes, and set up a bucket or bag whose mouth is
round and exactly one foot across. Draw a line exactly 10 feet from the
bucket or bag. Toe that line, and throw the potatoes, one by one, into
the bag. Those that go in, then bounce out, are counted as in. Do it
four times, then add up all the four totals of those that went in; that
gives your _aim_ or _control_ number.

For example, suppose that in the 4 tries you got 10 in the first time,
15 in the second, 20 in the third, 19 in the fourth. Add these together,
it gives your arm-control or _aim_ number as 64.

Now add up all these high numbers:

        Farsight                   88
        Quicksight                 50
        Hearing                    50
        Feeling                    84
        Quickness                  80
        Guessing Length            82
        Aim                        64

        Your aliveness number is  498

But very few can score so high. If you can score 400 you are surely
alive; you can see like a hawk, you can take in at a glance, you can
hear like an owl, you can feel like a blind man, you are quick as a cat,
you are a good judge of size, and you can aim true; That is, you are as
_alive as an Indian_.


TALE 92

A Treasure Hunt

Make 24 little white sticks, each about three inches long, and as thick
as a pencil. They are easy to make of willow shoots, after the bark is
peeled off. While the young folk hide their eyes, the Guide walks off in
the woods, ties a white rag on a tall stake or limb, for the point of
beginning. Then, one step apart and in a very crooked line, sets each of
the little white sticks in the ground, standing straight up. Under the
last stick should be buried the treasure; usually a stick of chocolate.
This the players are to find by following the sticks.

When the young folk get used to it, the line should be longer, the
sticks farther apart, and the last one may be ten steps from the last
but one.

When they are well trained at it, scraps of paper, white beans, corn, or
even chalk marks on trees, instead of sticks, will serve for trail; and
still later holes prodded in the ground with a sharp pointed cane will
do.

This game can be played in the snow; in which case, the track of the
Guide, when he hides the treasure, takes the place of the sticks.

Finally it makes a good game for indoors on a rainy day. In which case
we use buttons, corn, or scraps of white cotton for trail sticks. Of
course the trail now should be upstairs and down, and as long and
crooked as possible.


TALE 93

Moving Pictures

One of the best developers of imagination is the Moving Picture.
Sometimes called Pantomime, or Dumb-show which means all signs without
sounds.

The one who is to put on the "movie" is given a subject and must then
stand out on the stage or Council Ring, and carry all the story to the
spectators, without using any sound and with as few accessories as
possible.

The "print between the reels" is supplied by the Guide who simply
announces what is needed to explain.

The following subjects have been used successfully (unless otherwise
stated they are for one actor each):

    Miss Muffet and the Spider--the well-known
      Nursery Rhyme
    Old Mother Hubbard
    Little Jack Horner
    Mary and her Little Lamb
    Red Ridinghood--walk through the woods,
      meeting the wolf, etc.
    Robinson Crusoe--finding the track of a man
      in the sand
    A Barber Shop--shaving a customer (two actors)
    The Man's First Speech at a Dinner
    The Politician who was rotten-egged after vainly
      trying to control a meeting
    Joyride in a Ford Car--ending in a bad upset
      (two actors)
    The Operation--a scene in a hospital following
      the accident (two or more)
    The Professor of Hypnotism and His Subject (two actors)
    The Man who Found a Hair in His Soup
    The Young Lady Finds a Purse, on opening it a mouse
      jumps out and she remembers that it is 1st of April
    A Young Man Telephoning to His Best Girl
    A Man Meeting and Killing a Rattlesnake
    Lighting a Lamp
    Drawing a Cork
    Looking for a Lost Coin--finding it in one pocket or
      shoe
    A Musician Playing His Own Composition
    The Sleeping Beauty and the Prince (two actors)
    Goldilocks and the Three Bears
    William Tell and the Apple (best rendered in caricature
      with a pumpkin and two actors)
    Eliza Crossing the Ice
    The Kaiser Signing His Abdication
    The Judgment of Solomon (three actors)
    Brutus Condemning His Two Sons to Death.


TALE 94

A Natural Autograph Album

If you live in the country, I can show you an old Woodcraft trick. Look
for a hollow tree. Sometimes you can pick one out afar, by the dead top,
and sometimes by noting a tree that had lost one of the biggest limbs
years ago. In any case, basswoods, old oaks and chestnuts are apt to be
hollow; while hickories and elms are seldom so, for once they yield to
decay at all, they go down.

Remember that every hollow tree is a tenement house of the woods. It may
be the home of a score of different families. Some of these, like Birds
and Bats, are hard to observe, except at nesting time. But the fourfoots
are easier to get at. For them, we will arrange a visitors' book at the
foot of the tree, so that every little creature in fur will write his
name, and some passing thought, as he comes to the tree.

How?

Oh, it is simple; I have often done it. First clear and level the ground
around the tree for three or four feet; then cover it with a coat of
dust, ashes, or sand--whichever is easiest to get; rake and brush it
smooth; then wait over one night.

Next morning--most quadrupeds are night-walkers--come back; and you
will find that every creature on four feet that went to the tree
tenement-house has left us its trail; that is its track or trace.

No two animals make the same trail, so that every Squirrel that climbed,
every 'Coon or 'Possum, every Tree-mouse, and every Cottontail that went
by, has clearly put himself on record without meaning to do so; and we
who study Woodcraft can read the record, and tell just who passed by in
the night.


TALE 95

The Crooked Stick

Once upon a time there was a girl who was very anxious to know what sort
of a husband she should get; so, of course, she went to the old
wood-witch.

The witch asked a few questions, then said to the girl: "You walk
straight through that woods, turn neither to right nor left, and never
turn back an inch, and pick me out a straight stick, the straighter the
better; but pick only one, and bring it back."

