
At this Johnny Chuck pricked up his ears.  "Do you sleep all
winter, Bobby?" he asked eagerly.

"Not all winter, but a good part of it," replied Bobby.  "I don't
turn in until the weather gets pretty cold, and it is hard to find
anything to eat.  But after the first snow I'm usually ready to
sleep.  Then I curl up in a warm bed of leaves in a certain big
hollow tree, and don't care how cold or stormy the weather is.
Sometimes I wake up once or twice, when the weather is mild, and
take a little walk around for exercise.  But I don't go far and
soon return to sleep."

"What do you do when Bowser the Hound gets after you?" asked
Peter Rabbit.

"Run till I get out of breath," replied Bobby.  "And if by that time
I haven't been able to fool him so that he loses my trail, I take to
a tree.  Thank goodness, he can't climb a tree.  Sometimes I climb
from the top of one tree into the top of another, and sometimes
into a third and then a fourth, when they are near enough together.
That fools the hunters, if they follow Bowser."

"Have you any relatives, Bobby?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"I didn't know I had until you mentioned that fellow with the ringed
tail you said you would tell us about.  I didn't know there was
anybody with a tail like mine, and I would like to know about it,"
replied Bobby.

"He isn't exactly a Raccoon, but he is more nearly related to you
than any one else," replied Old Mother Nature.  "His tail shows
that.  Aside from this, he is nothing like you at all.  He is
called the Ring-tailed Cat.  But he doesn't look any more like a
Cat than he does like you, and he isn't related to the Cat family
at all.  He has several names.  He is called the Bassaris, the
Civet Cat, Ring-tailed Cat, Coon Cat and Cacomixtle.  Instead of
being thick and clumsy-looking, as is Bobby here, he is long and
rather slender, with a yellowish-brown coat, somewhat grayish on
the back and whitish underneath.  His head is rather small, long
and beautifully shaped.  His ears are of good size and very pretty.
In some ways he looks like Reddy Fox.  But the really beautiful
thing about him is his tail.  It is nearly as long as his body,
thick and beautifully marked with black and white bands.

"He is quick and graceful in his movements, and, like Bobby, prefers
to be abroad at night.  Also, like Bobby, he eats about everything
that he can find--flesh, reptiles, fruit, nuts and insects.  He
lives in the Far Southwest, and also in some of the mountains of
the Far West.  Why he should be called Civet Cat is more than I can
guess, for he is neither a Civet nor a Cat.  He is very clever at
catching Mice, and sometimes he is kept as a pet, just as Farmer
Brown keeps Black Pussy, to catch the Mice about the homes of men.

"Now, Bobby, you can trot along home, and I hope all that green
corn you have eaten will not give you the stomach ache.  To-morrow
we will see what we can find out about Buster Bear."



CHAPTER XXXII  Buster Bear Nearly Breaks Up School

"Has Buster Bear a tail?" asked Old Mother Nature, and her
eyes twinkled.

"No," declared Whitefoot the Wood Mouse promptly.

"Yes," contradicted Chatterer the Red Squirrel.

"What do you say, Prickly Porky?" Old Mother Nature asked.

"I don't think he has any; if he has, I've never seen it," said
Prickly Porky.

"That's because you've got poor eyes," spoke up Jumper the Hare.
"He certainly has a tail.  It isn't much of a one, but it is a
tail.  I know because I've seen it many times."

"Woof, woof," said a deep, rumbly, grumbly voice.  "What's going
on here?  Who is it hasn't any tail?"

At the sound of that deep, rumbly, grumbly voice it looked for a
few minutes as if school would be broken up for that day.  There
was the same mad scrambling to get away that there had been the
morning Reddy Fox unexpectedly appeared.  However, there was this
difference: When Reddy appeared, most of the little people sought
safe hiding places, but now they merely ran to safe distances,
and there turned to stare with awe and great respect at the owner
of that deep, rumbly, grumbly voice.  It was great, big Buster
Bear himself.

Buster stood up on his hind legs, like a man, and his small eyes,
for they are small for his size, twinkled with fun as he looked
around that awe filled circle.  "Don't let me interrupt," said
he.  "I heard about this school and I thought I would just pay a
friendly visit.  There is nothing for you to fear.  I have just
had my breakfast and I couldn't eat another mouthful to save me,
not even such a tender morsel as Whitefoot the Wood Mouse."

Whitefoot hurriedly ran a little farther away, and Buster Bear
chuckled.  Then he looked over at Old Mother Nature.  "Won't you
tell them that I'm the best-natured and most harmless fellow in
all the Great World?" he asked.

Old Mother Nature smiled.  "That depends on the condition of your
stomach," said she.  "If it is as full as you say it is, and I know
you wouldn't tell me an untruth, not even timid Whitefoot has
anything to fear from you."  Then she told all the little people
to put aside their fears and return.

Buster, seeing that some of the more timid were still fearful,
backed off a short distance and sat down on his haunches.  "What
was that about a tail I overheard as I came up?" he asked.

"It was a little discussion as to whether or not you have a tail,"
replied Old Mother Nature.  "Some say you have, and some say you
haven't.  Whitefoot thinks you haven't."

Once more Buster Bear chuckled way down deep in his throat.
"Whitefoot never in his life looked at me long enough to know
whether I've got a tail or not," said he.  "I never yet have
seen him until now, when he wasn't running away as fast as his
legs could take him.  So with me always behind him, how could he
tell whether or not I have a tail?"

"Well, have you?" demanded Peter Rabbit bluntly.

"What do you think?" asked Buster.

"I think you have," said Peter.  "But if you have you are sitting
down on it and I can't tell.  It can't be much of a one, anyhow."

Again Buster chuckled.  "Quite right, Peter; quite right," said
he.  "I've got a tail, but hardly enough of a one to really call
it a tail."

As Buster sat there, every one had a splendid chance to see just
how he looked.  His coat was all black; in fact he was black all
over, with the exception of his nose, which was brown.  His fur
was long and rather shaggy.  His ears were round.  His paws were
big and armed with strong, wicked looking claws.

"You all see what a black coat Buster has," said Old Mother Nature.
"Now I'm going to tell you something which may surprise you.  Just
as there are Red Foxes that are black, so there are Black Bears
that are brown."

"What's that?" grunted Buster, with the funniest look of surprise
on his face.

"It's a fact, Buster," said Old Mother Nature.  "A great many of
your family live out in the mountains of the Far West, and there
quite often there will be one who is all brown.  People used to
think that these brown Bears were a different kind of Bear, and
called them Cinnamon Bears.  It was a long, long time before it
was found out that those brown Bears are really black Bears.
Sometimes one of the twin babies will be all black and the other
all brown.  Sometimes one of Buster's family will have a white
spot on his breast.  Buster's branch of the family is found in
nearly all of the wooded parts of the entire country.  In the
Sunny South they live in the swamps and do not grow as big as in
the North.  Buster, there is a soft spot on the ground; I want
you to walk across it so that these little folks can see your
footprints."

Good-naturedly Buster dropped on all fours and walked across the
soft spot.  Right away every one understood why Old Mother Nature
had asked Buster to do this.  The prints of his hind feet were
very like the prints of Farmer Brown's boy when barefooted, only
of course very much larger.  You see, they showed the print of
the heel as well as the rest of the foot.

"You see," said Old Mother Nature, "Buster puts his whole foot on
the ground, while all members of the Dog and Cat families walk
wholly on their toes.  Animals that put the whole foot down are
called plantigrade.  How big do you think Buster was when he
was born?"

"Of course I'm only guessing," said Chatterer the Red Squirrel,
"but he is such a big fellow that I think he must have been a
bouncing big baby."

Old Mother Nature smiled.  "I don't wonder you think so," said she.
"The fact is, however, Buster was a very tiny and very helpless
little chap.  He was just about the size of one of Prickly Porky's
babies.  He was no bigger than a Rat.  He was born in the middle of
winter and didn't get his eyes open for forty days.  It was two
months before he poked his head outside the den in which he was
born, to find out what the Great World was like.  At that time he
wasn't much bigger than Peter Rabbit, and he and his twin sister
were as lively a pair of youngsters and as full of mischief as
any Bears the Green Forest has ever seen.  You might tell us,
Buster, what you live on."

Buster's eyes snapped. "I live on anything I can eat, and I can
eat most everything.  I suppose a lot of people think I live
almost wholly on the little people who are my neighbors, but that
is a mistake.  I do catch Mice when I am lucky enough to find them
where I can dig them out, and they certainly are good eating."

At this Whitefoot the Wood Mouse and Danny Meadow Mouse hastily
scurried farther away, and Buster's eyes twinkled with mischief.
"Of course I don't mind a Rabbit either, if I am lucky enough to
catch one," said he, and Peter Rabbit quickly backed off a few
steps.  "In fact I like meat of any kind," continued Buster.  "But
the greater part of my food isn't meat at all.  In the spring I
dig up roots of different kinds, and eat tender grass shoots and
some bark and twigs from young trees.  When the insects appear
they help out wonderfully.  I am very fond of Ants.  I pull over
all the old logs and tear to pieces all the old stumps I can find,
and lick up the Ants and their eggs that I am almost sure to find
there.  Almost any kind of insect tastes good to me if there are
enough of them.  I love to find and dig open the nests of Wasps
that make their homes in the ground, and of course I suppose you
all know that there is nothing in the world I like better than
honey.  If I can find a Bee nest I am utterly happy.  For the sake
of the honey, I am perfectly willing to stand all the stinging the
Bees can give me.  I like fish and I love to hunt Frogs.  When the
berry season begins, I just feast.  In the fall I get fat on
beechnuts and acorns.  The fact is, there isn't much I don't like."

"I've been told you sleep all winter," said Johnny Chuck.

"That depends on the winter," replied Buster Bear.  "I don't go to
sleep until I have to.  I don't have to as long as I can find
enough to eat.  If the winter begins early, with bad weather, I
make a comfortable bed of leaves in a cave or under a big pile
of fallen trees or even in a hollow log, if I can find one big
enough.  Then I go to sleep for the rest of the winter.  But if
the winter is mild and open and there is a chance of finding
anything to eat, I sleep only in the really bad weather."

"Do you try to get fat before going to sleep, the way I do?" asked
Johnny Chuck.

Buster grinned.  "Yes, Johnny, I try," said he, "and usually I
succeed.  You see, I need to be fat in order to keep warm and also
to have something to live on in the spring, just the same as you do.

"I've been told that you can climb, but as I don't live in the Green
Forest I have never seen you climb.  I should think it would be slow
work for such a big fellow as you to climb a tree," said Johnny Chuck.

Buster looked up at Happy Jack Squirrel and winked.  Then he walked
over to the tree in which Happy Jack was sitting, stood up and
suddenly began to scramble up the tree.  There was nothing slow
about the way Buster Bear went up that tree.  Happy Jack squealed
with sudden fright and started for the top of that tree as only
Happy Jack can climb.  Then he made a flying jump to the next tree.
Halfway up Buster stopped.  Then he began to come down.  He came
down tail first.  When he was within ten feet of the ground he
simply let go and dropped.

"I did that just to show you how I get out of a tree when I am
really in a hurry," explained Buster.  "I don't climb trees much
now unless it is for honey, but when I was a little fellow I used
to love to climb trees."

Suddenly Buster sat up very straight and pointed his nose up in
the wind.  An anxious look crept into his face.  He cocked his ears
as if listening with all his might.  That is just what he was doing.
Presently he dropped down to all fours.  "Excuse me," said he, "I
think I had better be going.  Farmer Brown is coming down the Lone
Little Path."

Buster turned and disappeared at a speed that was simply astonishing
in such a clumsy-looking fellow.  Old Mother Nature laughed.
"Buster's eyes are not very good," said she, "but there is nothing
the matter with his nose or with his ears.  If Buster says that
Farmer Brown is coming down the Lone Little Path, there is no doubt
that he is, although he may be some distance away yet.  Buster has
been smart enough to learn that he has every reason to fear man,
and he promptly takes himself out of the way at the first hint that
man is near.  It is a funny thing, but most men are as afraid of
Buster as Buster is of them, and they haven't the least need of
being afraid at all.  Where man is concerned there isn't one of
you little people more timid than Buster Bear.  The faintest smell
of man will make him run.  If he should be wounded or cornered, he
would fight.  Mrs. Bear would fight to protect her babies, but these
are the only conditions under which a Black Bear will face a man.
You think Buster is big, and he is, but Buster has relatives very
much bigger than he.  He has one beside whom he would look actually
small.  I'll tell you a little about these cousins of Buster."



CHAPTER XXXIII  Buster Bear's Big Cousins

Buster Bear had been right about the coming of Farmer Brown.  It
was only a few minutes after Buster's disappearance that Farmer
Brown's footsteps were heard coming down the Lone Little Path,
and of course that ended school for that morning.  But the next
morning all were on hand again at sun-up, for every one wanted to
hear about Buster Bear's big cousins.

"Way out in the mountains of the Far West, where Whistler the
Marmot and Little Chief the Pika live, is a big cousin of Buster
Bear," began Old Mother Nature.  "He is Silvertip the Grizzly
Bear, and in the past no animal in all this great country was so
feared by man, as he.  But times have changed, and Silvertip has
been so hunted with terrible guns that he has learned to fear man
quite as much as Buster does.

"He is larger than Buster and possessed of tremendous strength.
Instead of a black coat, he has a coat which varies from
yellowish-brown to almost black.  The tips of the hairs usually are
lighter, giving him a frosted appearance, and this is what has given him
his name.  His claws are longer and more curved than those of Buster; in
fact those claws are so big that they look very terrible. Because they
are so long, Silvertip cannot climb trees.  But if they prevent him
climbing trees they are the finest kind of tools for digging out Marmots
and ground Squirrels.  Even when Whistler the Marmot makes his home down
in among the rocks, he is not safe. Silvertip's strength is so great
that he can pull over and roll aside great rocks.

"He is a great traveler and covers a wide range of country in his
search for food.  Sometimes he visits the Cattle ranges and kills
Cattle.  So great is his strength that he can kill a Cow with ease.
Clumsy looking as he is, he is a very fast runner, and only a fast
Horse can outrun him.  Like Buster, he lives on anything he can
find that is eatable.  He has been so hunted by man that he has
become very cunning, and in all the great mountains where he lives
there is no one with quicker wits.  At certain seasons of the year
great numbers of a fish called Salmon come up the rivers in that
country, and then Silvertip lives high.  He watches beside a pool
until a Salmon swims within reach; then, with a swift movement of
one paw, he scoops the fish on to the bank.  Or he finds a place
where the water is so shallow that the fish have difficulty in
getting across, and there he seizes them as they struggle up the
river.  In winter he sleeps just as Buster does, usually in a
well-hidden cave.

"Mrs. Silvertip is a splendid mother.  Usually the cubs, of which
as a rule there are two, remain with her until they are a year old.
Both Buster Bear and Silvertip have a queer habit of standing up
against a tree and biting it as high up as they can reach.  The
next Bear who comes along that way sees the mark and makes his
own on the same tree.  Silvertip knows every inch of that part of
the country in which he lives and always picks out the best way
of getting from one place to another.  He is one of the finest
animals in this country, and it is a matter for sadness that his
splendid race will soon come to an end unless man makes laws to
protect him from the hunters.  In very many places where he used
to be found he lives no longer.

"Silvertip is not so good-natured as Buster, but all he asks is
to be left alone.  Of course when he turns Cattle killer he is
getting into the worst possible kind of mischief and man cannot
be blamed for hunting him.  But it is only now and then that one
of Silvertip's family turns Cattle killer.  The others do no harm.

"I told you yesterday that Buster Bear has one cousin beside whom
he would look small.  This is Bigfoot the Alaska or Great Brown
Bear, who lives in the extreme northwest part of the continent.
Even Silvertip would look small beside him.  He is a giant, the
largest flesh-eating animal in all the great world.  His coat is
dark brown.  When he stands up on his hind legs, he is almost half
again as tall as a tall man.  He stands very high at the shoulders
and his head is very large.  Like the other members of the Bear
family, he eats all sorts of things.  He hunts for Mice and other
small animals, digs up roots, stuffs himself with berries, and at
times grazes on a kind of wild grass, just as Cattle might do.  He
is a great fish eater, for fish are very plentiful in the streams
in the country where he lives.  Big as he is, he has learned to
fear man just as Silvertip has.  Occasionally when surprised he
has been known to attack man and kill him, but as a rule he will
run at the first hint of man's approach.

"The last of the Bear cousins is Snow King the Polar Bear.  Snow
King is king of the Frozen North.  He lives in the region of snow
and ice, and his coat is all white.  He also is a big Bear, and of
somewhat different shape from his cousins.  He is longer, and has
a much longer neck and a long head.  His ears are rather small and
close to his head.  Snow King lives the year round where it would
seem that no animal could live, and he manages to live well.
Though his home is in the coldest part of the Great World, he does
not mind the cold at all.

"More than any other member of the Bear family, Snow King is a
flesh eater.  This is because only in certain places, and then only
for a few weeks in midsummer, is there any plant life.  He is a
great fisherman, and fish furnish him a great deal of his food.  In
that far northern country are great numbers of animals who live in
the ocean, but come ashore to rest and bask in the sun, and to have
their babies there.  They are Seals, Sea Lions and Walruses.  I will
tell you about them later.  On these Snow King depends for much of
his food.  He is himself a wonderful swimmer, and often swims far
out in the icy water.

"Up there there are great fields of floating ice, and Snow King
swims from one to another in search of Seals, for they often
climb out on these ice fields, just as they do on shore.
Sometimes Mrs. Bear takes her cubs for long swims.  When they
become tired, one will climb on her back, and the other will
seize her tail, so she will carry one and tow the other.

"Snow King's babies are born in a house of snow.  Early in the
winter Mrs. Bear finds a sheltered place where the snow will drift
over her.  There she goes to sleep, and the snow drifts and drifts
over her until she is buried deep.  You might think she would be
cold, but she isn't, for the snow keeps her warm.  Her breath melts
a little hole up through the snow, so that she always has air.
There the babies are born, and there they remain, just as Buster
Bear's remain in their home, until they are big enough to follow
their mother about.  Then she breaks her way out in the spring, and
leads her cubs forth to teach them how to take care of themselves.
Snow King, himself, does not sleep through the winter, but roams
about, just as in the summer.

"Snow King is fearless and has not yet learned to dread man, as
have his cousins.  He will not hesitate to attack man and is
terrible to meet at close quarters.  Because he lives in that far,
cold country, he is not hunted as much as other bears are.  Besides
the Seals and fish, he sometimes catches an Arctic Hare.  In the
summer great numbers of Ducks and other sea birds nest in that
far northern country, and their eggs and young add to Snow King's
bill of fare.  His white coat is so in keeping with his surroundings
that it is of the greatest aid to him in his hunting.  It is a
very beautiful coat and makes him the most beautiful of all the
Bear family.

"Now this is all about the Bears, and also it is all about the order
of flesh eaters, or Carnivora.  I think that next we will see what
we can find out about a certain little friend of yours, who, though
he eats flesh, is not a member of the flesh-eating order at all, but
belongs to an order of which he is the only member in this country.
I will leave you to guess who it is."



