"I think it is likely he will guess," Dr. Swinburne said, "when he hears
the nurses speaking English; and, indeed, it seems that either he or one
of the others particularly asked to be sent here. If it is as you say,
your presence may do him good rather than harm, and you can go to him
for a short time; but remember that you are not fit for nursing and that
the sooner you are able to get home again the better. You have been on
duty more than twenty-four hours and it has been a terribly trying time
for you all."

Mary nodded.

"I really feel better now, Doctor. I have been very anxious about Mr.
Hartington ever since I knew that his corps had gone out, and I think
suspense is harder to bear than anything. You will see I shan't break
down again."

"If you do, Miss Brander, remember I shall have to take your name off
the list of nurses. We have enough to do and think about here without
having fainting young ladies on our hands." He spoke gravely, but Mary
saw he was not really in earnest.

"I never thought," she said, "that I should come under the category of a
fainting young lady, and I feel humiliated. Then I may go in, Doctor?"

"Yes, if you are sure of yourself and are certain that it won't agitate
him."

A minute later she stood by Cuthbert's side. He was lying on his back
with his eyes open. A hospital rug had been thrown over him. As she
bent over him his eyes fell on her face and he smiled faintly.

"I was wondering whether you had heard I was here," he said, in a voice
so low that she could scarce hear it. "Well, you see, I brought my eggs
to a bad market, and your friends, the Prussians, have given me a lesson
I would not learn from you. But we beat them fairly and squarely, there
is a satisfaction in that."

"There does not seem much consolation in it, Cuthbert," she said,
quietly.

"There is to me," he said, "that shows you are not a soldier. To a
soldier it makes all the difference as he lies wounded, whether he has
shared in a victory or suffered in a defeat."

"Then I am very glad that you have won if it makes any difference to
you, Cuthbert. Now you know you have to lie very still, and I am sure
talking is very bad for you."

"I don't suppose it makes any difference one way or the other, Mary. A
few hours, perhaps, but whether it is to-day or to-morrow is
immaterial."

"You must not talk like that, Cuthbert, and you must not think so. The
doctor says that although, of course, you are badly wounded, he thinks
there is every hope for you."

"So the surgeon said who dressed my wounds last night, Mary, but I knew
that he did not really think so."

"But I am sure Dr. Swinburne does think so, Cuthbert. I am certain that
he was not trying to deceive me."

"Well, I hope that he is right," Cuthbert replied, but with the
indifference common to men in extreme weakness. "I should certainly like
to give the finishing touches to those two pictures. There is nothing
else to show for my life. Yes, I should like to finish them. You are
looking bad yourself," he added, suddenly, "all this is too much for
you."

"I am only tired," she said, "and of course it has been trying work for
the last twenty-four hours."

"Well, you must go home and get some rest. If I had been going soon I
should have liked you to have stopped with me till I went, but if, as
you say, the doctor thinks I may last for a time it does not matter, and
I would rather know that you were getting a rest than that you were
wearing yourself out here. What o'clock is it now?"

"It is just two. Please don't worry about me. If I were to break down
there are plenty to take my place, but I am not going to. Anyhow I shall
wait to hear what Dr. Swinburne says when he next comes round, and then
if the report is favorable I shall go home for the night and be here
again the first thing in the morning. Are you in much pain, Cuthbert?"

"No, I am in no pain at all. I just feel numbed and a little drowsy, and
my feet are cold."

Mary went away, filled a tin bottle with hot water and placed it at his
feet, and then covered them over with another rug.

"Now you must not talk any more, Cuthbert. Your hands are cold, let me
put the rug over them. There, you look more comfortable. Now shut your
eyes and try to get to sleep until the doctor comes round."

Cuthbert closed his eyes at once. Mary went about the ward doing her
work for the next two hours, returning at frequent intervals to the
bedside, and seeing with satisfaction that he was sleeping quietly. At
four o'clock the surgeon came in. She was occupied in serving out some
soup to the patients and did not go round with him. She had finished her
work when he returned to where she was standing near the entrance.

"I did not wake him," he said, in answer to her look, "but his pulse is
stronger, and the action of his heart regular. There is certainly a good
chance for him. My hopes that there is no vital injury are strengthened.
He will, I hope, sleep for hours, perhaps till morning. By that time I
may be able to give a more decided opinion. Now, I think you had better
be off at once. I can see you have recovered your nerve, but there will
be a dozen fresh nurses here in a few minutes, and I shall clear you all
out. Do you feel strong enough to walk home?"

"Oh, yes, Doctor, I may come in the first thing in the morning, mayn't
I?"

"Yes, if you feel equal to it. It is possible," he thought to himself,
as he went to the next marquee, "that the poor fellow only regards her
as a cousin, but I am greatly mistaken if she has not very much warmer
feelings towards him, though she did so stoutly declare that they were
but old friends."

Mary, putting on her bonnet and cloak, went out. As she did so, a man,
in the uniform of the Franc-tireurs, and a young woman approached.

"Pardon, mademoiselle," he said, lifting his cap as he came up to her,
"is it possible for friends to visit the wounded?"

Mary glanced at the speaker's companion and at once recognized her. It
was the face of which she had seen so many drawings in Cuthbert's
sketch-book.

"It is not possible to-day," she said, "except in extreme cases. There
have been many applicants, but they have all been refused."

"I fear this is an extreme case," Rene, for it was he, urged. "It is a
comrade of mine, and the surgeon told me after examining him that he was
hit very seriously. This lady is his fiancee."

"I know who you mean," Mary said, after a moment's silence, "but she
could not see him even if she were his wife. He is asleep now and
everything depends upon his sleep being unbroken."

"If I could only see him I would not wake him," the woman wailed, while
Rene asked--

"Can you tell us if there are any hopes for him?"

"The surgeon says there are some hopes," Mary said, coldly, "but that
everything depends upon his being kept perfectly quiet. However, I have
no power in the matter. I am off duty now, and you had better apply to
Mrs. Stanmore. She is in charge of the ward. It is the farthest of the
three marquees."

"What is that woman to him?" Minette exclaimed, passionately, as Mary
walked on. "She loves him or she hates him. I saw her look at me as you
spoke first, and her face changed. She knew me though I did not know
her."

"Oh, that is all fancy, Minette. How can she know Arnold? She is tired
and worn out. Parbleu, they must have had terrible work there since the
sortie began. It is getting dark, but it is easy to see how pale and
worn out she looked. For my part I would rather go through that fight in
the garden again than work for twenty-four hours in a hospital."

"She knows him," the girl said, positively.

"Well, let us go on. This woman may give you leave to go in."

But Mrs. Stanmore was also firm in her refusal.

"We cannot allow even the nearest relatives to enter," she said, "we are
all taken up by duty and cannot have strangers in the wards; but if the
patient is likely to die and wishes to see a friend or relative in the
city we send for him or her. If you will give me your name and address I
will see that you are sent for should the patient ask for you. The rule
I can assure you is absolute, and I have no power whatever to grant
permission to anyone except in the case I have named."

Minette went away raving, and it needed indeed all Rene's remonstrances
and entreaties to induce her to leave.

"It is clear," he said, "that he cannot be near death; were he so he
would assuredly ask for you. So after all it is good news that you have
received, and as I told you all along, though the surgeon said that it
was a serious wound, he did not say that it was likely to be fatal, as
he did in the case of Cuthbert Hartington. These army surgeons do not
mince matters, and there was no reason why he should not have said at
once to me that the American was likely to die if he thought it would be
so."

"I will go to see him to-morrow," she said, with an angry stamp of her
foot. "If the women try to prevent me I will tear their faces. If the
men interfere to stop me I will scream so loud that they will be forced
to let me in. It is abominable to keep a woman from the bedside of the
man she loves."

"It is of no use you talking in that wild way, Minette," Rene said,
sternly; "how do you suppose a hospital is to be managed if every sick
man is to have women sitting at his bed. It is childish of you to talk
so, and most ungrateful. These foreigners are supporting this ambulance
at their own expense. The ladies are working like slaves to succor our
wounded and you go on like a passionate child because, busy as they
are, they are obliged to adhere to their regulations. At any rate I will
come here with you no more. I am not going to see these kind people
insulted."




CHAPTER XV.


Mary Brander made her way wearily home.

"You have had another terrible time, I can see it in your face," Madame
Michaud said, as she entered. "They say there have been four thousand
wounded and fifteen hundred killed. I cannot understand how you support
such scenes."

"It has been a hard time," Mary said; "I will go up to my room at once,
madame. I am worn out."

"Do so, my dear. I will send you in a basin of broth."

Without even taking her bonnet off Mary dropped into a chair when she
entered her room and sat there till Margot brought in the broth.

"I don't think I can take it, thank you, Margot."

"But you must take it, mademoiselle," the servant said, sturdily; "but
wait a moment, let me take off your bonnet and brush your hair. There is
nothing like having your hair brushed when you are tired."

Passively Mary submitted to the woman's ministrations, and presently
felt soothed, as Margot with, by no means ungentle hands, brushed
steadily the long hair she had let down.

"You feel better, mademoiselle?" the woman asked, presently. "That is
right, now take a little of this broth. Please try, and then I will take
off your cloak and frock and you shall lie down, and I will cover you
up."

Mary made an effort to drink the broth, then the servant partly
undressed her and covered her up warmly with blankets, drew the curtains
across the window and left her with the words. "Sleep well,
mademoiselle."

But for a time Mary felt utterly unable to sleep. She was too worn out
for that relief. It had been a terrible time for her. For twenty-four
hours she had been engaged unceasingly in work of the most trying
description. The scent of blood still seemed to hang about her, and she
vaguely wondered whether she should ever get rid of it. Then there had
been her own special anxiety and suspense, and the agony of seeing
Cuthbert brought in apparently wounded to death. The last blow had been
dealt by this woman. She said she was his fiancee, but although she had
it from her lips, Mary could not believe it. She might be his mistress
but surely not the other. Surely he could never make that wild
passionate woman his wife. Then she felt she was unjust. This poor
creature would naturally be in a passion of grief and agony, at finding
that she could not go to the bedside of the man she loved. She should
not judge her from that. She remembered how different was her expression
in some of the sketches she had seen in Cuthbert's book.

"At any rate," she said to herself with a hard sob, "I have no right to
complain. He told me he loved me and I was almost indignant at the idea,
and told him he was not worthy of my love. There was an end of it. He
was free to do as he liked, and of course put it out of his mind
altogether as I did out of mine. How could I tell that the time would
come when I should find out what a terrible mistake I had made, how
could I dream of such a thing! How could I guess that he would come into
my life again and that he would have the power to spoil it! What a fool,
I have been. What a conceited, silly fool," and so Mary Brander's
thoughts ran on till they become more and more vague, and sleep at last
arrested them altogether. She was awakened by Madame Michaud coming into
the room with a cup of coffee.

"Well, my child, have you slept well?"

"Have I slept, madame? It cannot have been for more than a minute or
two." She looked round in surprise. "Why, it is broad daylight, what
time is it?"

"It is eleven o'clock, my dear. I thought it was time to arouse you, and
in truth I was getting anxious that you had not made your appearance. It
is seventeen hours since you lay down."

"Good gracious!" Mary exclaimed. "And I was due at the ambulance at
eight. I must have been asleep hours and hours, madame. I lay awake for
a time--two hours, perhaps, and the last thing I thought was that I
should never get to sleep, and then I have slept all this dreadful
time."

"Not a dreadful time at all," Madame Michaud said with a smile. "You
have not slept a minute too long. I feared for you when you came in
yesterday. I said to my husband in the evening, 'That angel is killing
herself. She could scarce speak when she came in, and I cry when I think
of her face.' You may thank the good God that you have slept so long and
so soundly. I can tell you that you look a different being this
morning."

"I feel different," Mary said, as she sprang up, "will you ask Margot to
bring me my can of water at once."

"Yes, but drink your coffee and eat your bread first. Margot said you
only took a few spoonsful of broth last night."

"I must have my bath first and then I will promise you I will drink the
coffee and eat the last crumb of bread. You will see I shall be quite
blooming by the time I come down."

Madame Michaud was obliged to admit that Mary looked more herself than
she had done for days past when, half an hour later, she came downstairs
ready to start.

"I shall be scolded dreadfully, madame, when I get to the ambulance four
hours after my time."

"You look so much fitter for work, my dear, that if the doctor has eyes
in his head, he will be well content that you have taken it out in
sleep."

Mary walked with a brisk step down to the hospital.

"I will think no more of it," she said resolutely to herself. "I have
chosen to be a nurse and I will go through with it. I think when I get
home after this is over I will become a nursing sister--at any rate I
may do some good at that; there is plenty of work in the world, even if
it is not in the way I thought of doing it."

But she hesitated when she reached the tents, afraid to go in. One of
the other nurses came out presently.

"Which tent is Dr. Swinburne in?" she asked.

"In this," she said, "I was just speaking to him."

"Would you mind going in again and asking him to come out. I am
dreadfully late this morning and I should like to see him before I go
in."

A minute later the surgeon came out.

"What is it, Miss Brander?" he said, kindly. "I missed you this morning,
and hoped you were taking a good sleep."

"That was just it, Doctor, and I do feel so ashamed of myself. They
thought I looked tired, when I came in, and were silly enough not to
wake me this morning."

"Not silly at all, my dear. They did the very best thing for you, for
you had gone through a terrible strain here. I am glad, indeed, it was
sleep and not illness that kept you away. You are looking quite a
different woman this morning."

"I am so glad that you are not angry. Please tell me how the wounded are
getting on?"

"There were ten deaths in the night," he said, "but as a whole they are
going on well. You will be glad to hear that the young Englishman who
was shot through the body has passed a quiet night, and I have now an
almost assured hope that he will recover. Had there been any vital
injury its effects would be visible by now. Now run in and take up your
work."

With a grateful look Mary entered the tent and was soon engaged at her
work. She was some little time before she made her way to the farther
end of the tent. Then she went quietly up to Cuthbert's bedside.

"I have just had good news of you, Cuthbert. The doctor says he has the
strongest hopes now of your recovery."

"Yes, he has been telling me that I am doing well," he said. "Have you
only just come? I have been wondering what had had become of you. You
looked so pale, yesterday, that I was afraid you might be ill."

"I have been sleeping like a top," she said, "for I should be ashamed to
say how many hours. Of course I ought to have been here at eight, but
they did not wake me, and I feel all the better for it."

"I remember not so long ago," he said, "that a certain young lady
declared that it was ridiculous for persons to interfere in business
which did not concern them. Now here you are knocking yourself up and
going through horrible work for people who are nothing to you. That is a
little inconsistent."

"I do not argue with people who cannot speak above a whisper," she said.
"Another time I shall be able to prove to you that there is nothing
inconsistent whatever in it. Well, thank God that you are better,
Cuthbert. I should not have gone away yesterday afternoon if Dr.
Swinburne had not assured me that there was nothing that I could do for
you, and that he really thought you might recover. You believe me, don't
you?"

He nodded.

"I do believe you, Mary. I did not think myself that I had a shadow of a
chance, but this morning I began to fancy that the doctor may be right,
and that I may possibly live to be a shining light among artists."

"Did you sleep at all?" she asked.

"Yes, I have been dozing on and off ever since you went away. I have
drunk a good deal of brandy and water and I really think I could take
some broth. I told the doctor so this morning, but he said I had better
wait another twelve hours, and then I might have two or three spoonsful
of arrowroot, but the less the better. I suppose there is no list of
killed and wounded published yet. I should like to know who had gone.
They were good fellows, every one of them."

"I don't know, Cuthbert, but I should hardly think so. I think Madame
Michaud would have told me had there been a list published this
morning."

Mary now turned to the next bed, but the patient was lying with his eyes
closed.

"I expect he has gone off to sleep," Cuthbert said, "he has been in a
lot of pain all night and half an hour ago they took off his bandages
and put on fresh ones, and I fancy they must have hurt him amazingly. I
could tell that by his quick breathing, for he did not utter a moan. I
am glad that he has gone off to sleep. I heard the doctor tell him that
he thought he might get the use of his arm again, though it would
probably be stiff for some time."

"You must not talk, indeed you mustn't," she said, facing round again.
"I am sure the doctor must have told you to keep perfectly quiet. If you
are quiet and good, I will come to you very often, but if not I shall
hand you over to the charge of another nurse. I blame myself for asking
you any questions. Indeed I am quite in earnest; you are not fit to
talk; the slightest movement might possibly set your wound off bleeding;
besides you are not strong enough; it is an effort to you, and the great
thing is for you to be perfectly quiet and tranquil. Now shut your eyes
and try to doze off again."

She spoke in a tone of nursely authority, and with a faint smile he
obeyed her orders. She stood for a minute looking at him, and as she did
so her eyes filled with tears at the change that a few days had made,
and yet her experience taught her that it would be far greater before
long. As yet weakness and fever, and pain, had scarcely begun their work
of hollowing the cheeks and reducing him to a shadow of himself. There
was already scarcely a tinge of color in his face, while there was a
drawn look round the mouth and a bluish tinge on the lips. The eyes
seemed deeper in the head and the expression of the face greatly
changed--indeed, it was rather the lack of any expression that
characterized it. It might have been a waxen mask.

From time to time she went back to him, and although the soft clinging
material of her dress and her list slippers rendered her movements
noiseless, he always seemed conscious of her presence, and opened his
eyes with a little welcoming smile, as she stood beside him, sipped a
few drops from the glass she held to his lips, and then closed his eyes
again without a word. After a few hours the period of pain and fever set
in, but the doctor found no reason for anxiety.

"You must expect it, my dear," he said to Mary one day when the fever
