with a face full of the deepest anxiety.

"How can you talk of that so soon? Why, Kit, you unromantic girl, you
ought to be thinking of your lover and not your clothes," said Rose,
amused yet rather scandalized at such want of sentiment.

"I am thinking of my lover, for he says he will not have a long
engagement, so I must begin to think about the most important things at
once, mustn't I?"

"Ah, he wants to be sure of you, for you are such a slippery creature
he is afraid you'll treat him as you did poor Jackson and the rest,"
interrupted Rose, shaking her finger at her prospective cousin, who had
tried this pastime twice before and was rather proud than otherwise of
her brief engagements.

"You needn't scold, for I know I'm right, and when you've been in
society as long as I have you'll find that the only way to really know a
man is to be engaged to him. While they want you they are all devotion,
but when they think they've got you, then you find out what wretches
they are," answered Kitty with an air of worldly wisdom which contrasted
oddly with her youthful face and giddy manners.

"A sad prospect for poor Steve, unless I give him a hint to look well to
his ways."

"Oh, my dear child, I'm sure of him, for my experience has made me very
sharp and I'm convinced I can manage him without a bit of trouble. We've
known each other for ages" Steve was twenty and Kitty eighteen "and
always been the best of friends. Besides, he is quite my ideal man. I
never could bear big hands and feet, and his are simply adorable. Then
he's the best dancer I know and dresses in perfect taste. I really do
believe I fell in love with his pocket handkerchiefs first, they were so
enchanting I couldn't resist," laughed Kitty, pulling a large one out
of her pocket and burying her little nose in the folds, which shed a
delicious fragrance upon the air.

"Now, that looks promising, and I begin to think you have got a little
sentiment after all," said Rose, well pleased, for the merry brown eyes
had softened suddenly and a quick color came up in Kitty's cheek as she
answered, still half hiding her face in the beloved handkerchief: "Of
course I have, lots of it, only I'm ashamed to show it to most people,
because it's the style to take everything in the most nonchalant way. My
gracious, Rose, you'd have thought me a romantic goose last night while
Steve proposed in the back parlor, for I actually cried, he was so
dreadfully in earnest when I pretended that I didn't care for him, and
so very dear and nice when I told the truth. I didn't know he had it in
him, but he came out delightfully and never cared a particle, though I
dropped tears all over his lovely shirtfront. Wasn't that good of him?
For you know he hates his things to be mussed."

"He's a true Campbell, and has got a good warm heart of his own under
those fine fronts of his. Aunt Jane doesn't believe in sentiment, so
he has been trained never to show any, but it is there, and you must
encourage him to let it out, not foolishly, but in a way to make him
more manly and serious."

"I will if I can, for though I wouldn't own this to everybody, I like it
in him very much and feel as if Steve and I should get on beautifully.
Here we are now, be sure not to breathe a word if we meet anyone. I want
it to be a profound secret for a week at least," added Kitty, whisking
her handkerchief out of sight as the carriage stopped before the
fashionable store they were about to visit.

Rose promised with a smile, for Kitty's face betrayed her without
words, so full was it of the happiness which few eyes fail to understand
whenever they see it.

"Just a glance at the silks. You ask my opinion about white ones, and
I'll look at the colors. Mama says satin, but that is out now, and I've
set my heart on the heaviest corded thing I can find," whispered Kitty
as they went rustling by the long counters strewn with all that could
delight the feminine eye and tempt the feminine pocket.

"Isn't that opal the loveliest thing you ever saw? I'm afraid I'm too
dark to wear it, but it would just suit you. You'll need a variety, you
know," added Kitty in a significant aside as Rose stood among the white
silks while her companion affected great interest in the delicate hues
laid before her.

"But I have a variety now, and don't need a new dress of any sort."

"No matter, get it, else it will be gone. You've worn all yours several
times already and must have a new one whether you need it or not. Dear
me! If I had as much pocket money as you have, I'd come out in a fresh
toilet at every party I went to," answered Kitty, casting an envious eye
upon the rainbow piles before her.

The quick-witted shopman saw that a wedding was afoot, for when two
pretty girls whisper, smile, and blush over their shopping, clerks
scent bridal finery and a transient gleam of interest brightens their
imperturbable countenances and lends a brief energy to languid voices
weary with crying, "Cash!" Gathering both silks with a practiced turn
of the hand, he held them up for inspection, detecting at a glance which
was the bride-elect and which the friend, for Kitty fell back to study
the effect of silvery white folds with an absorbing interest impossible
to mistake while Rose sat looking at the opal as if she scarcely heard a
bland voice saying, with the rustle of silk so dear to girlish ears:
"A superb thing, just opened; all the rage in Paris; very rare shade;
trying to most, as the lady says, but quite perfect for a blonde."

Rose was not listening to those words but to others which Aunt Clara had
lately uttered, laughed at then, but thought over more than once since.

"I'm tired of hearing people wonder why Miss Campbell does not dress
more. Simplicity is all very well for schoolgirls and women who can't
afford anything better, but you can, and you really ought. Your things
are pretty enough in their way, and I rather like you to have a style
of your own, but it looks odd and people will think you are mean if
you don't make more show. Besides, you don't do justice to your beauty,
which would be both peculiar and striking if you'd devote your mind to
getting up ravishing costumes."

Much more to the same effect did her aunt say, discussing the subject
quite artistically and unconsciously appealing to several of Rose's
ruling passions. One was a love for the delicate fabrics, colors, and
ornaments which refined tastes enjoy and whose costliness keeps them
from ever growing common; another, her strong desire to please the eyes
of those she cared for and gratify their wishes in the smallest matter
if she could. And last, but not least, the natural desire of a young and
pretty woman to enhance the beauty which she so soon discovers to be her
most potent charm for the other sex, her passport to a high place among
her maiden peers.

She had thought seriously of surprising and delighting everyone by
appearing in a costume which should do justice to the loveliness which
was so modest that it was apt to forget itself in admiring others what
girls call a "ravishing" dress, such as she could imagine and easily
procure by the magic of the Fortunatus' purse in her pocket. She
had planned it all, the shimmer of pale silk through lace like woven
frostwork, ornaments of some classic pattern, and all the dainty
accessories as perfect as time, taste, and money could make them.

She knew that Uncle Alec's healthful training had given her a figure
that could venture on any fashion and Nature blessed her with a
complexion that defied all hues. So it was little wonder that she felt
a strong desire to use these gifts, not for the pleasure of display, but
to seem fair in the eyes that seldom looked at her without a tender sort
of admiration, all the more winning when no words marred the involuntary
homage women love.

These thoughts were busy in Rose's mind as she sat looking at the lovely
silk and wondering what Charlie would say if she should some night burst
upon him in a pale rosy cloud, like the Aurora to whom he often likened
her. She knew it would please him very much and she longed to do all she
honestly could to gratify the poor fellow, for her tender heart already
felt some remorseful pangs, remembering how severe she had been the
night before. She could not revoke her words, because she meant them
every one, but she might be kind and show that she did not wholly shut
him out from her regard by asking him to go with her to Kitty's ball
and gratify his artistic taste by a lovely costume. A very girlish but
kindly plan, for that ball was to be the last of her frivolities, so
she wanted it to be a pleasant one and felt that "being friends" with
Charlie would add much to her enjoyment.

This idea made her fingers tighten on the gleaming fabric so temptingly
upheld, and she was about to take it when, "If ye please, sir, would
ye kindly tell me where I'd be finding the flannel place?" said a voice
behind her, and, glancing up, she saw a meek little Irishwoman looking
quite lost and out of place among the luxuries around her.

"Downstairs, turn to the left," was the clerk's hasty reply, with a
vague wave of the hand which left the inquirer more in the dark than
ever.

Rose saw the woman's perplexity and said kindly, "I'll show you this
way."

"I'm ashamed to be throublin' ye, miss, but it's strange I am in it, and
wouldn't be comin' here at all, at all, barrin' they tould me I'd get
the bit I'm wantin' chaper in this big shop than the little ones more
becomin' the like o' me," explained the little woman humbly.

Rose looked again as she led the way through a well-dressed crowd of
busy shoppers, and something in the anxious, tired face under the old
woolen hood the bare, purple hands holding fast a meager wallet and a
faded scrap of the dotted flannel little children's frocks are so often
made of touched the generous heart that never could see want without
an impulse to relieve it. She had meant only to point the way, but,
following a new impulse, she went on, listening to the poor soul's
motherly prattle about "me baby" and the "throuble" it was to "find
clothes for the growin' childer when me man is out av work and the
bit and sup inconvaynient these hard times" as they descended to that
darksome lower world where necessities take refuge when luxuries crowd
them out from the gayer place above.

The presence of a lady made Mrs. Sullivan's shopping very easy now, and
her one poor "bit" of flannel grew miraculously into yards of several
colors, since the shabby purse was no lighter when she went away, wiping
her eyes on the corner of a big, brown bundle. A very little thing, and
no one saw it but a wooden-faced clerk, who never told, yet it did Rose
good and sent her up into the light again with a sober face, thinking
self-reproachfully, "What right have I to more gay gowns when some poor
babies have none, or to spend time making myself fine while there is so
much bitter want in the world?"

Nevertheless the pretty things were just as tempting as ever, and she
yearned for the opal silk with a renewed yearning when she got back. It
is not certain that it would not have been bought in spite of her better
self if a good angel in the likeness of a stout lady with silvery curls
about the benevolent face, enshrined in a plain bonnet, had not accosted
her as she joined Kitty, still brooding over the wedding gowns.

"I waited a moment for you, my dear, because I'm in haste, and very glad
to save myself a journey or a note," began the newcomer in a low tone as
Rose shook hands with the most affectionate respect. "You know the great
box factory was burned a day or two ago and over a hundred girls thrown
out of work. Some were hurt and are in the hospital, many have no homes
to go to, and nearly all need temporary help of some sort. We've had
so many calls this winter I hardly know which way to turn, for want is
pressing, and I've had my finger in so many purses I'm almost ashamed
to ask again. Any little contribution ah, thank you, I was sure you
wouldn't fail me, my good child," and Mrs. Gardener warmly pressed the
hand that went so quickly into the little porte-monnaie and came out so
generously filled.

"Let me know how else I can help, and thank you very much for allowing
me to have a share in your good works," said Rose, forgetting all
about gay gowns as she watched the black bonnet go briskly away with an
approving smile on the fine old face inside it.

"You extravagant thing! How could you give so much?" whispered Kitty,
whose curious eye had seen three figures on the single bill which had so
rapidly changed hands.

"I believe if Mrs. Gardener asked me for my head I should give it to
her," answered Rose lightly, then, turning to the silks, she asked,
"Which have you decided upon, the yellow white or the blue, the corded
or the striped?"

"I've decided nothing; except that you are to have the pink and wear it
at my ahem! ball," said Kitty, who had made up her mind, but could not
give her orders till Mama had been consulted.

"No, I can't afford it just yet. I never overstep my allowance, and I
shall have to if I get any more finery. Come, we ought not to waste time
here if you have all the patterns you want." And Rose walked quickly
away, glad that it was out of her power to break through two resolutions
which hitherto had been faithfully kept one to dress simply for
example's sake, the other not to be extravagant for charity's sake.

As Rosamond had her day of misfortunes, so this seemed to be one of
small temptations to Rose. After she had set Kitty down at home and been
to see her new houses, she drove about doing various errands for the
aunts and, while waiting in the carriage for the execution of an order,
young Pemberton came by.

As Steve said, this gentleman had been "hard hit" and still hovered
mothlike about the forbidden light. Being the most eligible parti of the
season, his regard was considered a distinction to be proud of, and Rose
had been well scolded by Aunt Clara for refusing so honorable a mate.
The girl liked him, and he was the suitor of whom she had spoken so
respectfully to Dr. Alec because he had no need of the heiress and had
sincerely loved Rose. He had been away, and she hoped had gotten over
his disappointment as happily as the rest, but now when he saw her,
and came hurrying up so hungry for a word, she felt that he had not
forgotten and was too kind to chill him with the bow which plainly says
"Don't stop."

A personable youth was Pemberton, and had brought with him from the
wilds of Canada a sable-lined overcoat which was the envy of every
masculine and the admiration of every feminine friend he had, and as he
stood at her carriage window Rose knew that this luxurious garment
and its stalwart wearer were objects of interest to the passersby. It
chanced that the tide of shoppers flowed in that direction and, as she
chatted, familiar faces often passed with glances, smiles, and nods of
varying curiosity, significance, and wonder.

She could not help feeling a certain satisfaction in giving him a
moment's pleasure, since she could do no more, but it was not that
amiable desire alone which made her ignore the neat white parcels which
the druggist's boy deposited on the front seat and kept her lingering a
little longer to enjoy one of the small triumphs which girls often risk
more than a cold in the head to display. The sight of several snowflakes
on the broad shoulders which partially obstructed her view, as well as
the rapidly increasing animation of Pemberton's chat, reminded her that
it was high time to go.

"I mustn't keep you it is beginning to storm," she said, taking up her
muff, much to old Jacob's satisfaction, for small talk is not exciting
to a hungry man whose nose feels like an icicle.

"Is it? I thought the sun was shining." And the absorbed gentleman
turned to the outer world with visible reluctance, for it looked very
warm and cozy in the red-lined carriage.

"Wise people say we must carry our sunshine with us," answered Rose,
taking refuge in commonplaces, for the face at the window grew pensive
suddenly as he answered, with a longing look, "I wish I could." Then,
smiling gratefully, he added, "Thank you for giving me a little of
yours."

"You are very welcome." And Rose offered him her hand while her eyes
mutely asked pardon for withholding her leave to keep it.

He pressed it silently and, shouldering the umbrella which he forgot to
open, turned away with an "up again and take another" expression, which
caused the soft eyes to follow him admiringly.

"I ought not to have kept him a minute longer than I could help, for it
wasn't all pity; it was my foolish wish to show off and do as I liked
for a minute, to pay for being good about the gown. Oh, me! How weak
and silly I am in spite of all my trying!" And Miss Campbell fell into a
remorseful reverie, which lasted till she got home.

"Now, young man, what brought you out in this driving storm?" asked Rose
as Jamie came stamping in that same afternoon.

"Mama sent you a new book thought you'd like it. I don't mind your
old storms!" replied the boy, wrestling his way out of his coat and
presenting a face as round and red and shiny as a well-polished Baldwin
apple.

"Much obliged it is just the day to enjoy it and I was longing for
something nice to read," said Rose as Jamie sat down upon the lower
stair for a protracted struggle with his rubber boots.

"Here you are, then no yes I do believe I've forgotten it, after all!"
cried Jamie, slapping his pockets one after the other with a dismayed
expression of countenance.

"Never mind, I'll hunt up something else. Let me help you with those
your hands are so cold." And Rose good-naturedly gave a tug at the boots
while Jamie clutched the banisters, murmuring somewhat incoherently
as his legs flew up and down: "I'll go back if you want me to. I'm so
sorry! It's very good of you, I'm sure. Getting these horrid things on
made me forget. Mother would make me wear 'em, though I told her they'd
stick like like gumdrops," he added, inspired by recollections of
certain dire disappointments when the above-mentioned sweetmeat melted
in his pockets and refused to come out.

"Now what shall we do?" asked Rose when he was finally extricated.
"Since I've nothing to read, I may as well play."

"I'll teach you to pitch and toss. You catch very well for a girl, but
you can't throw worth a cent," replied Jamie, gamboling down the hall
in his slippers and producing a ball from some of the mysterious
receptacles in which boys have the art of storing rubbish enough to fill
a peck measure.

Of course Rose agreed and cheerfully risked getting her eyes blackened
and her fingers bruised till her young receptor gratefully observed that
"it was no fun playing where you had to look out for windows and jars
and things, so I'd like that jolly book about Captain Nemo and the
Nautilus, please."

Being gratified, he spread himself upon the couch, crossed his legs in
the air, and without another word dived Twenty Thousand Leagues
