Carl was glad to take the reins, for he liked driving.

"Now for a race!" said Gilbert, who was mounted on his bicycle.

"All right!" replied Carl. "Look out for us!"

They started, and the two kept neck and neck till they entered the
driveway leading up to a handsome country mansion.

Carl followed them into the house, and was cordially received by Mr.
and Mrs. Vance, who were very kind and hospitable, and were favorably
impressed by the gentlemanly appearance of their son's friend.

Half an hour later dinner was announced, and Carl, having removed the
stains of travel in his schoolmate's room, descended to the dining-room,
and, it must be confessed, did ample justice to the bounteous repast
spread before him.

In the afternoon Julia, Gilbert and he played tennis, and had a trial at
archery. The hours glided away very rapidly, and six o'clock came before
they were aware.

"Gilbert," said Carl, as they were preparing for tea, "you have a
charming home."

"You have a nice house, too, Carl."

"True; but it isn't a home--to me. There is no love there."

"That makes a great difference."

"If I had a father and mother like yours I should be happy."

"You must stay here till day after tomorrow, and I will devote to-morrow
to a visit in your interest to your home. I will beard the lion in his
den--that is, your stepmother. Do you consent?"

"Yes, I consent; but it won't do any good."

"We will see."



CHAPTER III.

INTRODUCES PETER COOK.


Gilbert took the morning train to the town of Edgewood Center, the
residence of the Crawfords. He had been there before, and knew that
Carl's home was nearly a mile distant from the station. Though there was
a hack in waiting, he preferred to walk, as it would give him a chance
to think over what he proposed to say to Dr. Crawford in Carl's behalf.

He was within a quarter of a mile of his destination when his attention
was drawn to a boy of about his own age, who was amusing himself and a
smaller companion by firing stones at a cat that had taken refuge in
a tree. Just as Gilbert came up, a stone took effect, and the poor cat
moaned in affright, but did not dare to come down from her perch, as
this would put her in the power of her assailant.

"That must be Carl's stepbrother, Peter," Gilbert decided, as he noted
the boy's mean face and turn-up nose. "Stoning cats seems to be his idea
of amusement. I shall take the liberty of interfering."

Peter Cook laughed heartily at his successful aim.

"I hit her, Simon," he said. "Doesn't she look seared?"

"You must have hurt her."

"I expect I did. I'll take a bigger stone next time."

He suited the action to the word, and picked up a rock which, should
it hit the poor cat, would in all probability kill her, and prepared to
fire.

"Put down that rock!" said Gilbert, indignantly.

Peter turned quickly, and eyed Gilbert insolently.

"Who are you?" he demanded.

"No matter who I am. Put down that rock!"

"What business is it of yours?"

"I shall make it my business to protect that cat from your cruelty."

Peter, who was a natural coward, took courage from having a companion
to back him up, and retorted: "You'd better clear out of here, or I may
fire at you."

"Do it if you dare!" said Gilbert, quietly.

Peter concluded that it would be wiser not to carry out his threat, but
was resolved to keep to his original purpose. He raised his arm again,
and took aim; but Gilbert rushed in, and striking his arm forcibly,
compelled him to drop it.

"What do you mean by that, you loafer?" demanded Peter, his eyes blazing
with anger.

"To stop your fun, if that's what you call it."

"I've a good mind to give you a thrashing."

Gilbert put himself in a position of defense.

"Sail in, if you want to!" he responded.

"Help me, Simon!" said Peter. "You grab his legs, and I'll upset him."

Simon, who, though younger, was braver than Peter, without hesitation
followed directions. He threw himself on the ground and grasped Gilbert
by the legs, while Peter, doubling up his fists, made a rush at his
enemy. But Gilbert, swiftly eluding Simon, struck out with his right
arm, and Peter, unprepared for so forcible a defense, tumbled over on
his back, and Simon ran to his assistance.

Gilbert put himself on guard, expecting a second attack; but Peter
apparently thought it wiser to fight with his tongue.

"You rascal!" he shrieked, almost foaming at the mouth; "I'll have you
arrested."

"What for?" asked Gilbert, coolly.

"For flying at me like a--a tiger, and trying to kill me."

Gilbert laughed at this curious version of things.

"I thought it was you who flew at me," he said.

"What business had you to interfere with me?"

"I'll do it again unless you give up firing stones at the cat."

"I'll do it as long as I like."

"She's gone!" said Simon.

The boys looked up into the tree, and could see nothing of puss. She
had taken the opportunity, when her assailant was otherwise occupied, to
make good her escape.

"I'm glad of it!" said Gilbert. "Good-morning, boys! When we meet again,
I hope you will be more creditably employed."

"You don't get off so easy, you loafer," said Peter, who saw the village
constable approaching. "Here, Mr. Rogers, I want you to arrest this
boy."

Constable Rogers, who was a stout, broad-shouldered man, nearly six feet
in height, turned from one to the other, and asked: "What has he done?"

"He knocked me over. I want him arrested for assault and battery."

"And what did you do?"

"I? I didn't do anything."

"That is rather strange. Young man, what is your name?"

"Gilbert Vance."

"You don't live in this town?"

"No; I live in Warren."

"What made you attack Peter?"

"Because he flew at me, and I had to defend myself."

"Is this so, Simon? You saw all that happened."

"Ye--es," admitted Simon, unwillingly.

"That puts a different face on the matter. I don't see how I can arrest
this boy. He had a right to defend himself."

"He came up and abused me--the loafer," said Peter.

"That was the reason you went at him?"

"Yes."

"Have you anything to say?" asked the constable, addressing Gilbert.

"Yes, sir; when I came up I saw this boy firing stones at a cat, who
had taken refuge in that tree over there. He had just hit her, and had
picked up a larger stone to fire when I ordered him to drop it."

"It was no business of yours," muttered Peter.

"I made it my business, and will again."

"Did the cat have a white spot on her forehead?" asked the constable.

"Yes, sir."

"And was mouse colored?"

"Yes, sir."

"Why, it's my little girl's cat. She would be heartbroken if the cat
were seriously hurt. You young rascal!" he continued, turning suddenly
upon Peter, and shaking him vigorously. "Let me catch you at this
business again, and I'll give you such a warming that you'll never want
to touch another cat."

"Let me go!" cried the terrified boy. "I didn't know it was your cat."

"It would have been just as bad if it had been somebody else's cat. I've
a great mind to put you in the lockup."

"Oh, don't, please don't, Mr. Rogers!" implored Peter, quite
panic-stricken.

"Will you promise never to stone another cat?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then go about your business."

Peter lost no time, but scuttled up the street with his companion.

"I am much obliged to you for protecting Flora's cat," then said the
constable to Gilbert.

"You are quite welcome, sir. I won't see any animal abused if I can help
it."

"You are right there."

"Wasn't that boy Peter Cook?"

"Yes. Don't you know him?"

"No; but I know his stepbrother, Carl."

"A different sort of boy! Have you come to visit him?"

"No; he is visiting me. In fact, he has left home, because he could not
stand his step-mother's ill-treatment, and I have come to see his father
in his behalf."

"He has had an uncomfortable home. Dr. Crawford is an invalid, and very
much under the influence of his wife, who seems to have a spite against
Carl, and is devoted to that young cub to whom you have given a lesson.
Does Carl want to come back?"

"No; he wants to strike out for himself, but I told him it was no more
than right that he should receive some help from his father."

"That is true enough. For nearly all the doctor's money came to him
through Carl's mother."

"I am afraid Peter and his mother won't give me a very cordial welcome
after what has happened this morning. I wish I could see the doctor
alone."

"So you can, for there he is coming up the street."

Gilbert looked in the direction indicated, and his glance fell on a
thin, fragile-looking man, evidently an invalid, with a weak, undecided
face, who was slowly approaching.

The boy advanced to meet him, and, taking off his hat, asked politely:
"Is this Dr. Crawford?"



CHAPTER IV.

AN IMPORTANT CONFERENCE.


Dr. Crawford stopped short, and eyed Gilbert attentively.

"I don't know you," he said, in a querulous tone.

"I am a schoolmate of your son, Carl. My name is Gilbert Vance."

"If you have come to see my son you will be disappointed. He has treated
me in a shameful manner. He left home yesterday morning, and I don't
know where he is."

"I can tell you, sir. He is staying--for a day or two--at my father's
house."

"Where is that?" asked Dr. Crawford, his manner showing that he was
confused.

"In Warren, thirteen miles from here."

"I know the town. What induced him to go to your house? Have you
encouraged him to leave home?" inquired Dr. Crawford, with a look of
displeasure.

"No, sir. It was only by chance that I met him a mile from our home. I
induced him to stay overnight."

"Did you bring me any message from him?" "No, sir, except that he is
going to strike out for himself, as he thinks his home an unhappy one."

"That is his own fault. He has had enough to eat and enough to wear. He
has had as comfortable a home as yourself."

"I don't doubt that, but he complains that his stepmother is continually
finding fault with him, and scolding him."

"He provokes her to do it. He is a headstrong, obstinate boy."

"He never had that reputation at school, sir. We all liked him."

"I suppose you mean to imply that I am in fault?" said the doctor,
warmly.

"I don't think you know how badly Mrs. Crawford treats Carl, sir."

"Of course, of course. That is always said of a stepmother."

"Not always, sir. I have a stepmother myself, and no own mother could
treat me better."

"You are probably a better boy."

"I can't accept the compliment. I hope you'll excuse me saying it, Dr.
Crawford, but if my stepmother treated me as Carl says Mrs. Crawford
treats him I wouldn't stay in the house another day."

"Really, this is very annoying," said Dr. Crawford, irritably. "Have you
come here from Warren to say this?"

"No, sir, not entirely."

"Perhaps Carl wants me to receive him back. I will do so if he promises
to obey his stepmother."

"That he won't do, I am sure."

"Then what is the object of your visit?"

"To say that Carl wants and intends to earn his own living. But it is
hard for a boy of his age, who has never worked, to earn enough at first
to pay for his board and clothes. He asks, or, rather, I ask for him,
that you will allow him a small sum, say three or four dollars a week,
which is considerably less than he must cost you at home, for a time
until he gets on his feet."

"I don't know," said Dr. Crawford, in a vacillating tone. "I don't think
Mrs. Crawford would approve this."

"It seems to me you are the one to decide, as Carl is your own son.
Peter must cost you a good deal more."

"Do you know Peter?"

"I have met him," answered Gilbert, with a slight smile.

"I don't know what to say. You may be right. Peter does cost me more."

"And Carl is entitled to be treated as well as he."

"I think I ought to speak to Mrs. Crawford about it. And, by the way,
I nearly forgot to say that she charges Carl with taking money from her
bureau drawer before he went away. It was a large sum, too--twenty-five
dollars."

"That is false!" exclaimed Gilbert, indignantly. "I am surprised that
you should believe such a thing of your own son."

"Mrs. Crawford says she has proof," said the doctor, hesitating.

"Then what has he done with the money? I know that he has but
thirty-seven cents with him at this time, and he only left home
yesterday. If the money has really been taken, I think I know who took
it."

"Who?"

"Peter Cook. He looks mean enough for anything."

"What right have you to speak so of Peter?"

"Because I caught him stoning a cat this morning. He would have killed
the poor thing if I had not interfered. I consider that worse than
taking money."

"I--I don't know what to say. I can't agree to anything till I have
spoken with Mrs. Crawford. Did you say that Carl had but thirty seven
cents?"

"Yes, sir; I presume you don't want him to starve?"

"No, of course not. He is my son, though he has behaved badly. Here,
give him that!" and Dr. Crawford drew a ten-dollar bill from his wallet,
and handed it to Gilbert.

"Thank you, sir. This money will be very useful. Besides, it will show
Carl that his father is not wholly indifferent to him."

"Of course not. Who says that I am a bad father?" asked Dr. Crawford,
peevishly.

"I don't think, sir, there would be any difficulty between you and Carl
if you had not married again."

"Carl has no right to vex Mrs. Crawford. Besides, he can't agree with
Peter."

"Is that his fault or Peter's?" asked Gilbert, significantly.

"I am not acquainted with the circumstances, but Mrs. Crawford says that
Carl is always bullying Peter."

"He never bullied anyone at school."

"Is there anything, else you want?"

"Yes, sir; Carl only took away a little underclothing in a gripsack. He
would like his woolen clothes put in his trunk, and to have it sent----"

"Where?"

"Perhaps it had better be sent to my house. There are one or two things
in his room also that he asked me to get."

"Why didn't he come himself?"

"Because he thought it would be unpleasant for him to meet Mrs.
Crawford. They would be sure to quarrel."

"Well, perhaps he is right," said Dr. Crawford, with an air of relief.
"About the allowance, I shall have to consult my wife. Will you come
with me to the house?"

"Yes, sir; I should like to have the matter settled to-day, so that Carl
will know what to depend upon."

Gilbert rather dreaded the interview he was likely to have with Mrs.
Crawford; but he was acting for Carl, and his feelings of friendship
were strong.
