"Shall I go with you, Edmund?"

"I think it will be better not, Egbert. Your beard would mark you as a
Saxon at once."

"But that I can cut off," Egbert said. "It would be a sacrifice truly,
but I would do it without hesitation."

"Thanks, dear kinsman, but I think it would be of more purpose for you
to remain in command of the Dragon. She may meet many foes, and it were
best that you were there to fight and direct her. I pray you at once to
descend the Seine and sailing round the north coast of France, place
the Dragon at the mouth of the Rhine. Do not interfere with any Danish
ships that you may see pass out, but keep at a distance. Should Sweyn
descend the Rhine I will, if possible, send a messenger down before
him, so do you look out for small boats; and if you see one in which
the rower hoists a white flag at the end of his oar, you will know he
is my messenger. If I find Sweyn goes on towards the Elbe I will also
send you word, and you will then move the Dragon to the mouth of that
river.

"Lastly, if you receive no message, but if you mark that in a Danish
vessel when passing you a white cloth is waved from one of the windows
of the cabins in the poop, that will be a signal to you that the vessel
is Sweyn's, and that Freda is a captive on board. In that case you will
of course at once attack it. Let us ask Siegbert. He has sailed up both
the Rhine and the Elbe, and can tell us of some quiet port near the
mouth of each river where you may lay the Dragon somewhat out of sight
of passers-by, while you can yet note all ships that go down the river.
My messengers will then know where to find you." Having settled this
point they returned to Siegbert, and Edmund told him what he thought of
doing.

"I can advise no better," Siegbert said. "Assuredly you cannot prevail
by force. At present I have only ten of my followers with me; the rest,
after I was wounded, and it was plain that a long time must elapse
before I could again lead them in the field, asked me to let them
follow some other chief, and as they could not be idle here I
consented. I have ten men with me, but these would be but a small
reinforcement. As you say, your Saxons would be instantly known, and
the Northmen have suffered so at their hands during the siege that the
first party you met would set upon you."

"I will take two only of your men," Edmund said. "Choose me two who are
not known by sight to Sweyn. I wish one to be a subtle fellow, who will
act as a spy for me; the other I should choose of commanding stature;
and the air of a leader. He will go with my party, and should we come
upon Danes he will assume the place of leader, and can answer any
questions. There is far too much difference between the Saxon and
Danish tongue for me and my men to pass as Danes if we have many words
to say. I shall take four of my men, all full grown, strong, and good
fighters. They have but little hair upon their chins at present, and
they can shave that off. Now, jarl, I want five Danish dresses, for
your costume differs somewhat from ours. Have you horses? If not, I
must send back to Paris to buy some."

"I have plenty to mount you and your party."

"Good," Edmund said; "I will go down to my ship and pick my men."

In half an hour the party were ready to start. Egbert had received from
Siegbert particulars of villages at the mouths of the Rhine and Elbe,
and he promised Edmund that a watch should be kept night and day at the
mouth of the Rhine until a messenger arrived. Edmund had already
ascertained that Sweyn had left a fortnight before with his following,
and had marched towards Champagne. There probably he had halted his
main body, returning only with a party of horsemen to carry off Freda.

"I would I could go with you," Siegbert groaned as Edmund said adieu to
him. "I would ride straight into his camp and challenge him to mortal
combat, but as it is I am helpless."

"Never fear, good Siegbert," Edmund said cheerfully; "when your leg is
cured travel straight homeward, and there, I trust, before very long to
place Freda safe and unharmed in your arms. If I come not you will know
that I have perished."

A minute later, after a few parting words with Egbert, Edmund mounted
his horse, and followed by his six companions, rode off at full speed.
He knew that it would be useless making any inquiries about Sweyn and
his party. But few of the inhabitants of the country were to be seen
about, for the Danes had burned every house within very many miles of
Paris, and the peasants would assuredly not have paid any special
attention to a party of Danes, for whenever they saw the dreaded
marauders even at a distance they forsook their homes and fled to the
forests. The party therefore rode eastward until nightfall, then
picketed their horses, and having lit a fire, made their supper from
the store of provisions they had brought with them, and then lay down
to sleep for the night.

At daybreak they again started and continued their journey until it was
necessary to halt to give their horses a rest. They had passed several
parties of Danes, for these in great numbers, after the siege of Paris
had been given up, were journeying towards Burgundy. There was but
slight greeting as they passed; but on one occasion a horseman rode out
from one of the bands and entered into conversation with the two Danes
who rode at the head of the party. They told them that they were
followers of the Jarl Siegbert, and were riding to join the rest of his
band, who were with the company of Jarl Eric, as Siegbert would be long
before he would be able to move, and had therefore kept only a few of
his followers with him.

"Eric is a long way ahead," the Dane said; "he must be full as far as
Nancy by this time. Those who left first," he grumbled, "will have the
pick of the country. We were fools to linger so long before Paris."
Then turning his horse, he rode back to his comrades, and the party
continued their way.

They avoided all towns and large Danish encampments on the way, but
made inquiries from all small parties they met after the party of
Sweyn. They learned without difficulty the place where he had been
encamped a few days before, but on their arriving in the neighbourhood
they found that the place was deserted, nor could any tell them the
direction in which the Northmen had travelled.




CHAPTER XVI: FREDA


For some days Edmund and his party scoured the country round,
journeying now in one direction, now in another, but without hearing
ought of Sweyn's party. Certainly they had not gone along the track
which the main body of the Danes had followed; but the question was
whether they had turned rather to the south in order to cross the
mountain ranges between them and the Rhine, or had turned north and
journeyed through the great forest of Ardennes, and so to some of the
other rivers which run down into the North Sea.

The latter was in some respects the most likely course to have been
chosen. By taking it Sweyn would avoid altogether the track which the
majority of his countrymen were taking, and this would naturally be his
object. Siegbert had many powerful friends, and the carrying off of the
jarl's daughter from the side of her wounded father would be regarded
as a grave offence; and Sweyn might well wish to keep clear of his
countrymen until he had forced Freda to become his wife. Even then it
would not be safe for him for a long time to return to his country.
Striking through the Ardennes he would come down upon the Scheldt, the
Moselle, the Maas, or other rivers flowing into the North Sea direct,
or into the Rhine.

Edmund knew nothing of these streams; but the Danes with him said there
were several rivers so situated, for they had sailed up them. Where
they took their rise they knew not, but it would probably be in or
beyond the forest of Ardennes.

"Then in that way we will search," Edmund said. "If they come upon a
river they will doubtless set to work to build galleys to carry them to
the sea, for with only three hundred men Sweyn will not venture to
march by land through a country which has but lately suffered heavily
at the hands of the Danes. It will take him a month or six weeks to cut
down trees and build his ships; therefore we may hope to find him
before he is ready to embark. First we will push through the forest to
the other side; there we will question the inhabitants concerning the
position of the nearest rivers; then we will divide into parties and go
on the search, appointing a place of rendezvous where we may rejoin
each other. It can hardly be that we shall fail to find them if they
have taken that way."

Before entering the forest they obtained a considerable store of
provisions; for they had no idea of its extent, and had no time to
spend in hunting game. The forest of Ardennes was at that time of
immense size, extending from Verdun and Metz on the south, to Liege and
Aix on the north.

Men of the present day would have found it impossible to find their way
through, but would speedily have been lost in its trackless recesses;
but the Saxons and Danes were accustomed to travel in forests, and knew
the signs as well as did the Red-skins and hunters of the American
forests. Therefore they felt no hesitation in entering the forest
without a guide.

The danger which might beset them was of a different kind. Immense
numbers of the inhabitants of France, Champagne, and Burgundy had taken
refuge in the forests, driving their flocks and herds before them. Here
they lived a wild life, hoping that the emperor would ere long clear
the country of the invaders. No mercy could be expected if Edmund and
his party fell in with a number of these fugitives. They would have no
time to tell their story, but would be attacked at once as a party of
plundering Danes.

Knowing that the horses would be an encumbrance to them in the forest,
they were sold to the last party of Northmen they encountered before
entering it, and they pursued their way on foot. The greatest caution
was observed; every sound was marked, and at the call of a human voice,
the low of cattle, or the bleating of sheep, they turned their course
so as to avoid encounter with the inhabitants of the forest. They lit
no fires at night, and scarce a word was spoken on the march. Several
times they had to take refuge in thickets when they heard the sound of
approaching voices, and it needed all their knowledge of woodcraft to
maintain their direction steadily towards the north. At last, after six
days' journey, they issued out into the open country beyond the forest
and soon arrived at a cottage.

The peasant was struck with terror and astonishment at the appearance
of seven Danes; and he could with difficulty be made to understand that
their object was neither plunder nor murder, but that they wished only
information from him of the situation and direction of the various
rivers of the country. After learning from him all that he knew Edmund
arrived at the conclusion that Sweyn would probably attempt to descend
either by a branch of the Moselle, and so to the Rhine on the right, or
by one of the Maas on the left of the place at which they had emerged
from the forest.

Edmund decided to strike the Maas, and to follow its course up into the
forest, taking with him one of the Danes and two of his Saxons, and to
send the others to search the banks of the tributary of the Moselle.
Before starting he sent the peasant to the nearest village to purchase
garments of the country for the whole party. He had already told the
man that they were not Danes but Saxons, the bitter enemies of the
Northmen, and that he had been aiding in the defence of Paris against
them.

The peasant did not doubt what Edmund told him, for the conduct of his
visitors was so opposed to all that he had heard of the doings of the
Danes that he well believed they could not belong to that nation. He
was away some hours, and returned with the required dresses. Having put
these on, and laying aside their helmets and shields, the two parties
started, the Danes alone carrying with them their former garments. The
next day Edmund arrived at the river, and at once followed its course
upwards, for Sweyn and his party would be building their ships in the
forest.

They had not proceeded many miles before they heard the sound of axes.
Edmund gave an exclamation of delight. It was almost certain that he
had hit upon Sweyn's track, for it was unlikely that any of the
inhabitants of the country would have gone so far into the forest for
timber. They now moved with the greatest caution, and as they
approached the place whence the sound proceeded Edmund halted the two
Saxons and bade them conceal themselves. The Dane resumed his own
garments and put on his helmet and shield; and then, taking advantage
of every clump of undergrowth, and moving with the greatest caution, he
and Edmund made their way forward. Presently they came within sight of
an animated scene.

A large number of trees had been felled by the banks of the river and
three hundred Northmen were busily at work. The frames of two great
galleys had already been set up, and they were now engaged in chopping
out planks for their sides. Two huts were erected in the middle of the
clearing. One was large, and Sweyn's banner floated from a spear before
it. The other which stood close by was much smaller, and Edmund doubted
not that this was appropriated to Freda.

Nothing more could be done now--their object was so far attained; and
retiring they joined the two Saxons and made their way along the river
bank till they reached the edge of the forest. One of the Saxons was
now sent off to the peasant's hut, where he was to remain until the
return of the other party, and was then to bring them on to the spot
which Edmund had chosen for his encampment. This was in the heart of a
large clump of underwood extending down to the river.

The brushwood was so thick that it was entered with difficulty, and no
passer-by would dream that a party was hidden within it. Near the
stream Edmund and his companions with their swords soon cleared away a
circle, and with the boughs constructed an arbour. A thin screen of
bushes separated them from the river, but they could see the water, and
none could pass up or down unperceived.

The Saxon was charged to bring with him on his return a considerable
supply of provisions, for it would have been dangerous to wander in the
woods in pursuit of game. The Northmen had, Edmund noticed, some cattle
with them; but they would be sure to be hunting in the woods, as they
would wish to save the cattle for provision on their voyage. It was
nightfall before the hut was completed; and as they had journeyed far
for many days Edmund determined to postpone an attempt to discover what
was passing in Sweyn's camp until the following evening.

The day passed quietly, and towards evening Edmund and the Dane started
for Sweyn's camp. When they approached it they saw many fires burning,
and the shouting and singing of the Norsemen rang through the forest.
They waited until the fires burnt down somewhat and they could see many
of the Danes stretching themselves down by them. Then Edmund's
companion proceeded to the camp.

Anxious as Edmund was himself to learn what was doing, he restrained
his impatience, for it was safer that the Northman should go alone. In
the dull light of the dying fires his features would be unnoticed, and
his tongue would not betray him if spoken to. Siegbert had commended
him as a crafty and ready fellow, and Edmund felt that he would be able
to gather more information than he could do himself. From his place of
concealment he kept his eyes fixed on the Northman's figure. Presently
he saw him enter the clearing, and sauntering slowly across it throw
himself down near a fire by which a party of Danes were still sitting
talking.

One by one these lay down, and when the last had done so the Northman
rose quietly and stole out again into the forest. When he rejoined
Edmund the latter set forward with him, and not a word was spoken until
they were some distance from the camp; then Edmund stopped.

"What have you learned?" he asked.

"All that there is to learn, I think," the Northman replied. "The lady
Freda is, as you supposed, a captive in the little hut. Two men only
keep watch over it by day, but at night six lie around it, two being
always on foot. They speak in admiration of her courage and spirit. She
has sworn to Sweyn that she will slay herself if he attempts to use
violence to force her to marriage with him, and they doubt not that she
will keep her word. However, they believe that she will grow tired out
at last when she finds that there is no hope whatever of a rescue. The
ships are being built for a long sea voyage, for Sweyn is going to lead
them to join the Viking Hasting in the Mediterranean, and has promised
his men the plunder of countries ten times richer than France or
England. With so long an expedition in view, they may well think that
the Lady Freda's resolution will soon give way, and that she may come
to see that the position of the wife of a bold viking is a thousand
times preferable to that of a captive. Many of the men loudly express
their wonder why she would refuse the love of so valiant a warrior as
Sweyn."

The news was at once good and bad. Edmund did not fear Freda's
resolution giving way for a long time, but the news that Sweyn intended
to carry her upon so distant an expedition troubled him. It was of
course possible that he might intercept them with the Dragon at the
mouth of the Maas, but it was uncertain whether the ship would arrive
at the mouth of the Rhine in time to be brought round before the
Northmen descended. The length of her voyage would depend entirely on
the wind. Were this favourable when she reached the mouth of the Seine,
a week would carry her to her destination. Should it be unfavourable
there was no saying how long the voyage would last.

The risk was so great that Edmund determined to make an effort to rouse
the country against the Danes, and to fall upon them in their
encampment; but the task would he knew be a hard one, for the dread of
the Danes was so great that only in large towns was any resistance to
them ever offered. However he determined to try, for if the Northmen
succeeded in getting to the sea the pursuit would indeed be a long one,
and many weeks and even months might elapse before he could again come
up to them.

On the following day the rest of the party arrived, and leaving the
forest Edmund proceeded with them through the country, visiting every
village, and endeavouring to rouse the people to attack the Danes, but
the news that the dreaded marauders were so near excited terror only.
The assurances of Edmund that there was much rich plunder in their camp
which would become the property of those who destroyed them, excited
but a feeble interest. The only point in the narrative which excited
their contentment was the news that the Danes were building ships and
were going to make their way down to the sea.

"In Heaven's name let them go!" was the cry; "who would interfere with
the flight of a savage beast? If they are going down the river they
will scarcely land to scatter and plunder the country, and he would be
mad indeed who would seek them when they are disposed to let us alone."

Finding his efforts vain in the country near the forest Edmund went
down the river to the town of Liege, which stood on its banks. When it
became known that a band of Northmen was on the upper river, and was
likely to pass down, the alarm spread quickly through the town, and a
council of the principal inhabitants was summoned. Before these Edmund
told his story, and suggested that the fighting men of the town should
march up the river and fall upon the Danes in their camp.

"It is but two days' march--the Northmen will be unsuspicious of
danger, and taken by surprise may be easily defeated." The proposition,
however, was received with absolute derision.

"You must be mad to propose such a thing, young Saxon, if Saxon indeed
you are, but for aught we know you may be a Northman sent by them to
draw us into an ambush. No; we will prepare for their coming. We will
man our walls and stand on the defensive, and if there be, as you say,
but three hundred of them, we can defend ourselves successfully; and we
may hope that, seeing our strength, and that we are prepared for their
coming, the Northmen will pass by without molesting us; but as for
moving outside our walls, it would be worse than folly even to think of
such a thing."

After this rebuff Edmund concluded that he could hope for no assistance
from the inhabitants of the country, but must depend upon himself and
the Dragon alone. He at once despatched two of his men, a Dane and a
Saxon, with orders to journey as rapidly as possible to the rendezvous,
where the Dragon was to be found at the mouth of the Rhine, and to beg
Egbert to move round with all speed to the Maas.

Having done this, he purchased a small and very fast rowing-skiff at
Liege, and taking his place in this with his four remaining followers,
he rowed up the river. It took them three days before they reached the
edge of the forest. On reaching their former hiding-place, they landed.
The bushes were carefully drawn aside, and the boat hauled up until
completely screened from sight of the river, and Edmund and the Dane at
once started for the encampment of the Northmen.

They had been ten days absent, and in that time great progress had been
made with the galleys. They looked indeed completely finished as they
stood high and lofty on the river bank. The planks were all in their
places; the long rows of benches for the rowers were fastened in; the
poop and forecastle were finished and decked. A number of long straight
poles lay alongside ready to be fashioned into oars; and Edmund thought
that in another two or three days the galleys would be ready for
launching. They were long and low in the waist, and were evidently
built for great speed. Edmund did not think that they were intended to
sail, except perhaps occasionally when the wind was favourable, as an
aid to the rowers. Each would carry a hundred and fifty men, and there
were thirty seats, so that sixty would row at once.

"They are fine galleys," the Dane whispered. "Sweyn has a good eye for
a boat."

"Yes," Edmund said, "they look as if they will be very fast. With oars
alone they would leave the Dragon behind, but with sails and oars we
should overhaul them in a wind. I wish it had been otherwise, for if,
when they reach the mouth of the river, there is no wind, they may give
the Dragon the slip. Ah!" he exclaimed, "there is Freda."

As he spoke a tall maiden came out from the small hut. The distance was
too great for Edmund to distinguish her features, but he doubted not
from the style of her garments that it was Siegbert's daughter. There
were other women moving about the camp, for the Danes were generally
accompanied by their wives on their expeditions; but there was
something in the carriage and mien of the figure at the door of the hut
which distinguished it from the rest. She did not move far away, but
stood watching the men at work on the ships and the scene around.
Presently a tall figure strode down from the vessels towards her.

"There is Sweyn!" Edmund exclaimed, seeing that the warrior possessed
but one arm.

"Ah! you know him by sight then?" The Dane said.

"I should do so," Edmund answered grimly, "seeing that it was I who
smote off that right arm of his. I regret now that I did not strike at
his head instead."

The Dane looked with admiration and surprise at his leader. He had
heard of the fight between the Saxon champion and Sweyn, which had cost
the latter his right arm, but until now he had been ignorant of
Edmund's identity with Sweyn's conqueror.

