
'What prevents your marrying him?' asked the eldest, 'you would become
a gardener too; it is a charming profession. You could live in a cottage
at the end of the park, and help your husband to draw up water from the
well, and when we get up you could bring us our bouquets.'

The Princess Lina was very angry, and when the Star Gazer presented her
bouquet, she received it in a disdainful manner.

Michael behaved most respectfully. He never raised his eyes to her, but
nearly all day she felt him at her side without ever seeing him.

One day she made up her mind to tell everything to her eldest sister.

'What!' said she, 'this rogue knows our secret, and you never told me! I
must lose no time in getting rid of him.'

'But how?'

'Why, by having him taken to the tower with the dungeons, of course.'

For this was the way that in old times beautiful princesses got rid of
people who knew too much.

But the astonishing part of it was that the youngest sister did not seem
at all to relish this method of stopping the mouth of the gardener's
boy, who, after all, had said nothing to their father.


XIII


It was agreed that the question should be submitted to the other ten
sisters. All were on the side of the eldest. Then the youngest sister
declared that if they laid a finger on the little garden boy, she would
herself go and tell their father the secret of the holes in their shoes.

At last it was decided that Michael should be put to the test; that they
would take him to the ball, and at the end of supper would give him the
philtre which was to enchant him like the rest.

They sent for the Star Gazer, and asked him how he had contrived to
learn their secret; but still he remained silent.

Then, in commanding tones, the eldest sister gave him the order they had
agreed upon.

He only answered:

'I will obey.'

He had really been present, invisible, at the council of princesses, and
had heard all; but he had made up his mind to drink of the philtre, and
sacrifice himself to the happiness of her he loved.

Not wishing, however, to cut a poor figure at the ball by the side of
the other dancers, he went at once to the laurels, and said:

'My lovely rose laurel, with the golden rake I have raked thee, with
the golden bucket I have watered thee, with a silken towel I have dried
thee. Dress me like a prince.'

A beautiful pink flower appeared. Michael gathered it, and found himself
in a moment clothed in velvet, which was as black as the eyes of the
little Princess, with a cap to match, a diamond aigrette, and a blossom
of the rose laurel in his button-hole.

Thus dressed, he presented himself that evening before the Duke of
Beloeil, and obtained leave to try and discover his daughters' secret.
He looked so distinguished that hardly anyone would have known who he
was.


XIV


The twelve princesses went upstairs to bed. Michael followed them, and
waited behind the open door till they gave the signal for departure.

This time he did not cross in Lina's boat. He gave his arm to the eldest
sister, danced with each in turn, and was so graceful that everyone
was delighted with him. At last the time came for him to dance with the
little Princess. She found him the best partner in the world, but he did
not dare to speak a single word to her.

When he was taking her back to her place she said to him in a mocking
voice:

'Here you are at the summit of your wishes: you are being treated like a
prince.'

'Don't be afraid,' replied the Star Gazer gently. 'You shall never be a
gardener's wife.'

The little Princess stared at him with a frightened face, and he left
her without waiting for an answer.

When the satin slippers were worn through the fiddles stopped, and the
negro boys set the table. Michael was placed next to the eldest sister,
and opposite to the youngest.

They gave him the most exquisite dishes to eat, and the most delicate
wines to drink; and in order to turn his head more completely,
compliments and flattery were heaped on him from every side.

But he took care not to be intoxicated, either by the wine or the
compliments.


XV


At last the eldest sister made a sign, and one of the black pages
brought in a large golden cup.

'The enchanted castle has no more secrets for you,' she said to the Star
Gazer. 'Let us drink to your triumph.'

He cast a lingering glance at the little Princess, and without
hesitation lifted the cup.

'Don't drink!' suddenly cried out the little Princess; 'I would rather
marry a gardener.'

And she burst into tears.

Michael flung the contents of the cup behind him, sprang over the table,
and fell at Lina's feet. The rest of the princes fell likewise at the
knees of the princesses, each of whom chose a husband and raised him to
her side. The charm was broken.

The twelve couples embarked in the boats, which crossed back many times
in order to carry over the other princes. Then they all went through
the three woods, and when they had passed the door of the underground
passage a great noise was heard, as if the enchanted castle was
crumbling to the earth.

They went straight to the room of the Duke of Beloeil, who had just
awoke. Michael held in his hand the golden cup, and he revealed the
secret of the holes in the shoes.

'Choose, then,' said the Duke, 'whichever you prefer.'

'My choice is already made,' replied the garden boy, and he offered his
hand to the youngest Princess, who blushed and lowered her eyes.


XVI


The Princess Lina did not become a gardener's wife; on the contrary, it
was the Star Gazer who became a Prince: but before the marriage ceremony
the Princess insisted that her lover should tell her how he came to
discover the secret.

So he showed her the two laurels which had helped him, and she, like a
prudent girl, thinking they gave him too much advantage over his wife,
cut them off at the root and threw them in the fire. And this is why the
country girls go about singing:

     Nous n'irons plus au bois,
     Les lauriers sont coupes,'

and dancing in summer by the light of the moon.




THE PRINCESS MAYBLOSSOM

ONCE upon a time there lived a King and Queen whose children had all
died, first one and then another, until at last only one little daughter
remained, and the Queen was at her wits' end to know where to find a
really good nurse who would take care of her, and bring her up. A herald
was sent who blew a trumpet at every street corner, and commanded all
the best nurses to appear before the Queen, that she might choose one
for the little Princess. So on the appointed day the whole palace was
crowded with nurses, who came from the four corners of the world to
offer themselves, until the Queen declared that if she was ever to see
the half of them, they must be brought out to her, one by one, as she
sat in a shady wood near the palace.

This was accordingly done, and the nurses, after they had made their
curtsey to the King and Queen, ranged themselves in a line before her
that she might choose. Most of them were fair and fat and charming,
but there was one who was dark-skinned and ugly, and spoke a strange
language which nobody could understand. The Queen wondered how she dared
offer herself, and she was told to go away, as she certainly would not
do. Upon which she muttered something and passed on, but hid herself in
a hollow tree, from which she could see all that happened. The Queen,
without giving her another thought, chose a pretty rosy-faced nurse,
but no sooner was her choice made than a snake, which was hidden in
the grass, bit that very nurse on her foot, so that she fell down as
if dead. The Queen was very much vexed by this accident, but she soon
selected another, who was just stepping forward when an eagle flew by
and dropped a large tortoise upon her head, which was cracked in pieces
like an egg-shell. At this the Queen was much horrified; nevertheless,
she chose a third time, but with no better fortune, for the nurse,
moving quickly, ran into the branch of a tree and blinded herself with a
thorn. Then the Queen in dismay cried that there must be some malignant
influence at work, and that she would choose no more that day; and she
had just risen to return to the palace when she heard peals of malicious
laughter behind her, and turning round saw the ugly stranger whom she
had dismissed, who was making very merry over the disasters and mocking
everyone, but especially the Queen. This annoyed Her Majesty very
much, and she was about to order that she should be arrested, when
the witch--for she was a witch--with two blows from a wand summoned a
chariot of fire drawn by winged dragons, and was whirled off through the
air uttering threats and cries. When the King saw this he cried:

'Alas! now we are ruined indeed, for that was no other than the Fairy
Carabosse, who has had a grudge against me ever since I was a boy and
put sulphur into her porridge one day for fun.'

Then the Queen began to cry.

'If I had only known who it was,' she said, 'I would have done my best
to make friends with her; now I suppose all is lost.'

The King was sorry to have frightened her so much, and proposed that
they should go and hold a council as to what was best to be done to
avert the misfortunes which Carabosse certainly meant to bring upon the
little Princess.

So all the counsellors were summoned to the palace, and when they had
shut every door and window, and stuffed up every keyhole that they might
not be overheard, they talked the affair over, and decided that every
fairy for a thousand leagues round should be invited to the christening
of the Princess, and that the time of the ceremony should be kept a
profound secret, in case the Fairy Carabosse should take it into her
head to attend it.

The Queen and her ladies set to work to prepare presents for the fairies
who were invited: for each one a blue velvet cloak, a petticoat of
apricot satin, a pair of high-heeled shoes, some sharp needles, and a
pair of golden scissors. Of all the fairies the Queen knew, only five
were able to come on the day appointed, but they began immediately
to bestow gifts upon the Princess. One promised that she should be
perfectly beautiful, the second that she should understand anything--no
matter what--the first time it was explained to her, the third that she
should sing like a nightingale, the fourth that she should succeed in
everything she undertook, and the fifth was opening her mouth to speak
when a tremendous rumbling was heard in the chimney, and Carabosse, all
covered with soot, came rolling down, crying:

'I say that she shall be the unluckiest of the unlucky until she is
twenty years old.'

Then the Queen and all the fairies began to beg and beseech her to think
better of it, and not be so unkind to the poor little Princess, who had
never done her any harm. But the ugly old Fairy only grunted and made no
answer. So the last Fairy, who had not yet given her gift, tried to mend
matters by promising the Princess a long and happy life after the fatal
time was over. At this Carabosse laughed maliciously, and climbed away
up the chimney, leaving them all in great consternation, and especially
the Queen. However, she entertained the fairies splendidly, and gave
them beautiful ribbons, of which they are very fond, in addition to the
other presents.

When they were going away the oldest Fairy said that they were of
opinion that it would be best to shut the Princess up in some place,
with her waiting-women, so that she might not see anyone else until she
was twenty years old. So the King had a tower built on purpose. It had
no windows, so it was lighted with wax candles, and the only way into
it was by an underground passage, which had iron doors only twenty feet
apart, and guards were posted everywhere.

The Princess had been named Mayblossom, because she was as fresh and
blooming as Spring itself, and she grew up tall and beautiful, and
everything she did and said was charming. Every time the King and Queen
came to see her they were more delighted with her than before, but
though she was weary of the tower, and often begged them to take her
away from it, they always refused. The Princess's nurse, who had never
left her, sometimes told her about the world outside the tower, and
though the Princess had never seen anything for herself, yet she always
understood exactly, thanks to the second Fairy's gift. Often the King
said to the Queen:

'We were cleverer than Carabosse after all. Our Mayblossom will be happy
in spite of her predictions.'

And the Queen laughed until she was tired at the idea of having
outwitted the old Fairy. They had caused the Princess's portrait to be
painted and sent to all the neighbouring Courts, for in four days she
would have completed her twentieth year, and it was time to decide
whom she should marry. All the town was rejoicing at the thought of the
Princess's approaching freedom, and when the news came that King Merlin
was sending his ambassador to ask her in marriage for his son, they
were still more delighted. The nurse, who kept the Princess informed
of everything that went forward in the town, did not fail to repeat the
news that so nearly concerned her, and gave such a description of the
splendour in which the ambassador Fanfaronade would enter the town, that
the Princess was wild to see the procession for herself.

'What an unhappy creature I am,' she cried, 'to be shut up in this
dismal tower as if I had committed some crime! I have never seen
the sun, or the stars, or a horse, or a monkey, or a lion, except in
pictures, and though the King and Queen tell me I am to be set free when
I am twenty, I believe they only say it to keep me amused, when they
never mean to let me out at all.'

And then she began to cry, and her nurse, and the nurse's daughter, and
the cradle-rocker, and the nursery-maid, who all loved her dearly, cried
too for company, so that nothing could be heard but sobs and sighs. It
was a scene of woe. When the Princess saw that they all pitied her she
made up her mind to have her own way. So she declared that she would
starve herself to death if they did not find some means of letting her
see Fanfaronade's grand entry into the town.

'If you really love me,' she said, 'you will manage it, somehow or
other, and the King and Queen need never know anything about it.'

Then the nurse and all the others cried harder than ever, and said
everything they could think of to turn the Princess from her idea.
But the more they said the more determined she was, and at last they
consented to make a tiny hole in the tower on the side that looked
towards the city gates.

After scratching and scraping all day and all night, they presently
made a hole through which they could, with great difficulty, push a very
slender needle, and out of this the Princess looked at the daylight for
the first time. She was so dazzled and delighted by what she saw, that
there she stayed, never taking her eyes away from the peep-hole for a
single minute, until presently the ambassador's procession appeared in
sight.

At the head of it rode Fanfaronade himself upon a white horse, which
pranced and caracoled to the sound of the trumpets. Nothing could have
been more splendid than the ambassador's attire. His coat was nearly
hidden under an embroidery of pearls and diamonds, his boots were solid
gold, and from his helmet floated scarlet plumes. At the sight of him
the Princess lost her wits entirely, and determined that Fanfaronade and
nobody else would she marry.

'It is quite impossible,' she said, 'that his master should be half as
handsome and delightful. I am not ambitious, and having spent all my
life in this tedious tower, anything--even a house in the country--will
seem a delightful change. I am sure that bread and water shared with
Fanfaronade will please me far better than roast chicken and sweetmeats
with anybody else.'

And so she went on talk, talk, talking, until her waiting-women
wondered where she got it all from. But when they tried to stop her,
and represented that her high rank made it perfectly impossible that she
should do any such thing, she would not listen, and ordered them to be
silent.

As soon as the ambassador arrived at the palace, the Queen started to
fetch her daughter.

All the streets were spread with carpets, and the windows were full
of ladies who were waiting to see the Princess, and carried baskets of
flowers and sweetmeats to shower upon her as she passed.

They had hardly begun to get the Princess ready when a dwarf arrived,
mounted upon an elephant. He came from the five fairies, and brought for
the Princess a crown, a sceptre, and a robe of golden brocade, with a
petticoat marvellously embroidered with butterflies' wings. They also
sent a casket of jewels, so splendid that no one had ever seen anything
like it before, and the Queen was perfectly dazzled when she opened it.
But the Princess scarcely gave a glance to any of these treasures, for
she thought of nothing but Fanfaronade. The Dwarf was rewarded with
a gold piece, and decorated with so many ribbons that it was hardly
possible to see him at all. The Princess sent to each of the fairies a
new spinning-wheel with a distaff of cedar wood, and the Queen said she
must look through her treasures and find something very charming to send
them also.

When the Princess was arrayed in all the gorgeous things the Dwarf had
brought, she was more beautiful than ever, and as she walked along the
streets the people cried: 'How pretty she is! How pretty she is!'

The procession consisted of the Queen, the Princess, five dozen other
princesses her cousins, and ten dozen who came from the neighbouring
kingdoms; and as they proceeded at a stately pace the sky began to
grow dark, then suddenly the thunder growled, and rain and hail fell
in torrents. The Queen put her royal mantle over her head, and all the
princesses did the same with their trains. Mayblossom was just about to
follow their example when a terrific croaking, as of an immense army of
crows, rooks, ravens, screech-owls, and all birds of ill-omen was heard,
and at the same instant a huge owl skimmed up to the Princess, and
threw over her a scarf woven of spiders' webs and embroidered with bats'
wings. And then peals of mocking laughter rang through the air, and they
guessed that this was another of the Fairy Carabosse's unpleasant jokes.

The Queen was terrified at such an evil omen, and tried to pull the
black scarf from the Princess's shoulders, but it really seemed as if it
must be nailed on, it clung so closely.

'Ah!' cried the Queen, 'can nothing appease this enemy of ours? What
good was it that I sent her more than fifty pounds of sweetmeats, and as
much again of the best sugar, not to mention two Westphalia hams? She is
as angry as ever.'

While she lamented in this way, and everybody was as wet as if they had
been dragged through a river, the Princess still thought of nothing but
the ambassador, and just at this moment he appeared before her, with
the King, and there was a great blowing of trumpets, and all the people
shouted louder than ever. Fanfaronade was not generally at a loss for
something to say, but when he saw the Princess, she was so much more
beautiful and majestic than he had expected that he could only stammer
out a few words, and entirely forgot the harangue which he had been
learning for months, and knew well enough to have repeated it in his
sleep. To gain time to remember at least part of it, he made several
low bows to the Princess, who on her side dropped half-a-dozen curtseys
without stopping to think, and then said, to relieve his evident
embarrassment:

'Sir Ambassador, I am sure that everything you intend to say is
charming, since it is you who mean to say it; but let us make haste
into the palace, as it is pouring cats and dogs, and the wicked Fairy
Carabosse will be amused to see us all stand dripping here. When we are
once under shelter we can laugh at her.'

Upon this the Ambassador found his tongue, and replied gallantly that
the Fairy had evidently foreseen the flames that would be kindled by
the bright eyes of the Princess, and had sent this deluge to extinguish
them. Then he offered his hand to conduct the Princess, and she said
softly:

'As you could not possibly guess how much I like you, Sir Fanfaronade,
I am obliged to tell you plainly that, since I saw you enter the town on
your beautiful prancing horse, I have been sorry that you came to speak
for another instead of for yourself. So, if you think about it as I do,
I will marry you instead of your master. Of course I know you are not a
prince, but I shall be just as fond of you as if you were, and we can go
and live in some cosy little corner of the world, and be as happy as the
days are long.'

The Ambassador thought he must be dreaming, and could hardly believe
what the lovely Princess said. He dared not answer, but only squeezed
the Princess's hand until he really hurt her little finger, but she did
not cry out. When they reached the palace the King kissed his daughter
on both cheeks, and said:

'My little lambkin, are you willing to marry the great King Merlin's
son, for this Ambassador has come on his behalf to fetch you?'

'If you please, sire,' said the Princess, dropping a curtsey.

'I consent also,' said the Queen; 'so let the banquet be prepared.'

This was done with all speed, and everybody feasted except Mayblossom
and Fanfaronade, who looked at one another and forgot everything else.

After the banquet came a ball, and after that again a ballet, and at
last they were all so tired that everyone fell asleep just where he sat.
Only the lovers were as wide-awake as mice, and the Princess, seeing
that there was nothing to fear, said to Fanfaronade:

'Let us be quick and run away, for we shall never have a better chance
than this.'

Then she took the King's dagger, which was in a diamond sheath, and the
Queen's neck-handkerchief, and gave her hand to Fanfaronade, who carried
a lantern, and they ran out together into the muddy street and down to
the sea-shore. Here they got into a little boat in which the poor old
boatman was sleeping, and when he woke up and saw the lovely Princess,
with all her diamonds and her spiders'--web scarf, he did not know what
to think, and obeyed her instantly when she commanded him to set
out. They could see neither moon nor stars, but in the Queen's
neck-handkerchief there was a carbuncle which glowed like fifty torches.
Fanfaronade asked the Princess where she would like to go, but she only
answered that she did not care where she went as long as he was with
her.

'But, Princess,' said he, 'I dare not take you back to King Merlin's
court. He would think hanging too good for me.'

'Oh, in that case,' she answered, 'we had better go to Squirrel Island;
it is lonely enough, and too far off for anyone to follow us there.'

So she ordered the old boatman to steer for Squirrel Island.

Meanwhile the day was breaking, and the King and Queen and all the
courtiers began to wake up and rub their eyes, and think it was time
to finish the preparations for the wedding. And the Queen asked for her
neck-handkerchief, that she might look smart. Then there was a scurrying
hither and thither, and a hunting everywhere: they looked into every
place, from the wardrobes to the stoves, and the Queen herself ran about
from the garret to the cellar, but the handkerchief was nowhere to be
found.

By this time the King had missed his dagger, and the search began all
over again. They opened boxes and chests of which the keys had been lost
for a hundred years, and found numbers of curious things, but not the
dagger, and the King tore his beard, and the Queen tore her hair, for
the handkerchief and the dagger were the most valuable things in the
