
"Randolph is sitting down on a log taking it easy. What is your
loss, Luke, is his gain."

"Yes."

"I think he might have come back to inquire after you, Tom, as you
are a friend of his."

Tom looked resentfully at Randolph, and marked his complacent look,
and it occurred to him also that the friend he had risked so much
to serve was very ungrateful. But he hoped now, at any rate, to get
the watch, and thought it prudent to say nothing.

The boys had now reached the shore.

"Hope you're not much hurt, Tom?" said Randolph, in a tone of
mild interest.

"I don't know but my skull is fractured," responded Tom, bitterly.

"Oh, I guess not. It's the fortune of war. Well, I got in first."

Randolph waited for congratulations, but none came. All the boys
looked serious, and more than one suspected that there had been
foul play. They waited for the teacher to speak.



CHAPTER III

RANDOLPH GETS THE WATCH


"It is true," said the teacher, slowly. "Randolph has won the race."

Randolph's face lighted up with exultation.

"But it is also evident," continued Mr. Hooper, "that he would
not have succeeded but for the unfortunate collision between Luke
Larkin and Tom Harper."

Here some of Luke's friends brightened up.

"I don't know about that," said Randolph. "At any rate, I
came in first."

"I watched the race closely," said the teacher, "and I have
no doubt on the subject. Luke had so great a lead that he would
surely have won the race."

"But he didn't," persisted Randolph, doggedly.

"He did not, as we all know. It is also clear that had he not
stopped to ascertain the extent of Tom's injuries he still might
have won."

"That's so!" said half a dozen boys.

"Therefore I cannot accept the result as indicating the superiority
of the successful contestant."

"I think I am entitled to the prize," said Randolph.

"I concede that; but, under the circumstances, I suggest to you
that it would be graceful and proper to waive your claim and try
the race over again."

The boys applauded, with one or two exceptions.

"I won't consent to that, Mr. Hooper," said Randolph, frowning.
"I've won the prize fairly and I want it."

"I am quite willing Randolph should have it, sir," said Luke. "I
think I should have won it if I had not stopped with Tom, but that
doesn't affect the matter one way or the other. Randolph came in
first, as he says, and I think he is entitled to the watch."

"Then," said Mr. Hooper, gravely, "there is nothing more to be said.
Randolph, come forward and receive the prize."

Randolph obeyed with alacrity, and received the Waterbury watch
from the hands of Mr. Hooper. The boys stood in silence and offered
no congratulations.

"Now, let me say," said the teacher, "that I cannot understand
why there was any collision at all. Tom Harper, why did you get
in Luke's way?"

"Because I was a fool, sir," answered Tom, smarting from his
injuries, and the evident indifference of Randolph, in whose
cause he had incurred them.

"That doesn't answer my question. Why did you act like a fool, as
you expressed it?"

"I thought I could get out of the way in time," stammered Tom, who
did not dare to tell the truth.

"You had no other reason?" asked the teacher, searchingly.

"No, sir. What other reason could I have?" said Tom, but his manner
betrayed confusion.

"Indeed, I don't know," returned the teacher, quietly. "Your
action, however, spoiled Luke's chances and insured the success
of Randolph."

"And got me a broken head," muttered Tom, placing his hand upon the
swelling at the back of his head.

"Yes, you got the worst of it. I advise you to go home and apply
cold water or any other remedy your mother may suggest."

Randolph had already turned away, meaning to return home. Tom joined
him. Randolph would gladly have dispensed with his company, but had
no decent excuse, as Tom's home lay in the same direction as his.

"Well, Randolph, you've won the watch," said Tom, when they were
out of hearing of the other boys.

"Yes," answered Randolph, indifferently. "I don't care so much for
that as for the ten dollars my father is going to give me."

"That's what I thought. You've got another watch, you know--more
valuable."

"Well, what of it?" said Randolph, suspiciously.

"I think you might give me the Waterbury. I haven't got any."

"Why should I give it to you?" answered Randolph, coldly.

"Because but for me you wouldn't have won it, nor the ten
dollars, neither."

"How do you make that out?"

"The teacher said so himself."

"I don't agree to it."

"You can't deny it. Luke was seven or eight rods ahead when
I got in his way."

"Then it was lucky for me."

"It isn't lucky for me. My head hurts awfully."

"I'm very sorry, of course."

"That won't do me any good. Come, Randolph, give me the watch, like
a good fellow."

"Well, you've got cheek, I must say. I want the watch myself."

"And is that all the satisfaction I am to get for my broken head?"
exclaimed Tom, indignantly.

Randolph was a thoroughly mean boy, who, if he had had a dozen
watches, would have wished to keep them all for himself.

"I've a great mind to tell Luke and the teacher of the arrangement
between us."

"There wasn't any arrangement," said Randolph, sharply. "However,
as I'm really sorry for you, I am willing to give you a quarter.
There, now, don't let me hear any more about the matter."

He drew a silver quarter from his vest pocket and tendered it
to Tom.

Tom Harper was not a sensitive boy, but his face flushed with
indignation and shame, and he made no offer to take the money.

"Keep your quarter, Randolph Duncan," he said scornfully. "I think
you're the meanest specimen of a boy that I ever came across. Any
boy is a fool to be your friend. I don't care to keep company with
you any longer."

"This to me!" exclaimed Randolph, angrily. "This is the pay I
get for condescending to let you go with me."

"You needn't condescend any longer," said Tom, curtly, and he
crossed to the other side of the street.

Randolph looked after him rather uneasily. After all, he was
sorry to lose his humble follower.

"He'll be coming round in a day or two to ask me to take him back,"
he reflected. "I would be willing to give him ten cents more, but
as for giving him the watch, he must think me a fool to part with
that."



CHAPTER IV

LUKE'S NIGHT ADVENTURE


"I am sorry you have lost the watch, Luke," said the teacher,
after Randolph's departure. "You will have to be satisfied with
deserving it."

"I am reconciled to the disappointment, sir," answered Luke. "I
can get along for the present without a watch."

Nevertheless, Luke did feel disappointed. He had fully expected to
have the watch to carry home and display to his mother. As it was,
he was in no hurry to go home, but remained for two hours skating
with the other boys. He used his friend Linton's skates, Linton
having an engagement which prevented his remaining.

It was five o'clock when Luke entered the little cottage which
he called home. His mother, a pleasant woman of middle age,
was spreading the cloth for supper. She looked up as he entered.

"Well, Luke?" she said inquiringly.

"I haven't brought home the watch, mother," he said. "Randolph
Duncan won it by accident. I will tell you about it."

After he had done so, Mrs. Larkin asked thoughtfully. "Isn't it
a little singular that Tom should have got in your way?"

"Yes; I thought so at the time."

"Do you think there was any arrangement between him and Randolph?"

"As you ask me, mother, I am obliged to say that I do."

"It was a very mean trick!" said Mrs. Larkin, resentfully.

"Yes, it was; but poor Tom was well punished for it. Why, he's got
a bunch on the back of his head almost as large as a hen's egg."

"I don't pity him," said Mrs. Larkin.

"I pity him, mother, for I don't believe Randolph will repay him
for the service done him. If Randolph had met with the same accident
I am not prepared to say that I should have pitied him much."

"You might have been seriously injured yourself, Luke."

"I might, but I wasn't, so I won't take that into consideration.
However, mother, watch or no watch, I've got a good appetite.
I shall be ready when supper is."

Luke sat down to the table ten minutes afterward and proved his
words good, much to his mother's satisfaction.

While he is eating we will say a word about the cottage. It was
small, containing only four rooms, furnished in the plainest
fashion. The rooms, however, were exceedingly neat, and presented an
appearance of comfort. Yet the united income of Mrs. Larkin and Luke
was very small. Luke received a dollar a week for taking care of the
schoolhouse, but this income only lasted forty weeks in the year.
Then he did odd jobs for the neighbors, and picked up perhaps as
much more. Mrs. Larkin had some skill as a dressmaker, but Groveton
was a small village, and there was another in the same line, so that
her income from this source probably did not average more than three
dollars a week. This was absolutely all that they had to live on,
though there was no rent to pay; and the reader will not be
surprised to learn that Luke had no money to spend for watches.

"Are you tired, Luke?" asked his mother, after supper.

"No, mother. Can I do anything for you?"

"I have finished a dress for Miss Almira Clark. I suppose she
will want to wear it to church to-morrow. But she lives so far
away, I don't like to ask you to carry it to her."

"Oh, I don't mind. It won't do me any harm."

"You will get tired."

"If I do, I shall sleep the better for it."

"You are a good son, Luke."

"I ought to be. Haven't I got a good mother?"

So it was arranged. About seven o'clock, after his chores were
done--for there was some wood to saw and split--Luke set out, with
the bundle under his arm, for the house of Miss Clark, a mile and
a half away.

It was a commonplace errand, that on which Luke had started, but
it was destined to be a very important day in his life. It was to
be a turning-point, and to mark the beginning of a new chapter of
experiences. Was it to be for good or ill? That we are not prepared
to reveal. It will be necessary for the reader to follow his career,
step by step, and decide for himself.

Of course, Luke had no thought of this when he set out. To him it
had been a marked day on account of the skating match, but this
had turned out a disappointment. He accomplished his errand, which
occupied a considerable time, and then set out on his return. It was
half-past eight, but the moon had risen and diffused a mild radiance
over the landscape. Luke thought he would shorten his homeward way
by taking a path through the woods. It was not over a quarter of a
mile, but would shorten the distance by as much more. The trees were
not close together, so that it was light enough to see. Luke had
nearly reached the edge of the wood, when he overtook a tall man,
a stranger in the neighborhood, who carried in his hand a tin box.
Turning, he eyed Luke sharply.

"Boy, what's your name?" he asked.

"Luke Larkin," our hero answered, in surprise.

"Where do you live?"

"In the village yonder."

"Will you do me a favor?"

"What is it, sir?"

"Take this tin box and carry it to your home. Keep it under lock
and key till I call for it."

"Yes, sir, I can do that. But how shall I know you again?"

"Take a good look at me, that you may remember me."

"I think I shall know you again, but hadn't you better give me
a name?"

"Well, perhaps so," answered the other, after a moment's thought.
"You may call me Roland Reed. Will you remember?"

"Yes, sir."

"I am obliged to leave this neighborhood at once, and can't
conveniently carry the box," explained the stranger. "Here's
something for your trouble."

Luke was about to say that he required no money, when it occurred
to him that he had no right to refuse, since money was so scarce
at home. He took the tin box and thrust the bank-bill into his
vest pocket. He wondered how much it was, but it was too dark to
distinguish.

"Good night!" said Luke, as the stranger turned away.

"Good night!" answered his new acquaintance, abruptly.

If Luke could have foreseen the immediate consequences of this
apparently simple act, and the position in which it would soon
place him, he would certainly have refused to take charge of the
box. And yet in so doing it might have happened that he had made a
mistake. The consequences of even our simple acts are oftentimes
far-reaching and beyond the power of human wisdom to foreknow.

Luke thought little of this as, with the box under his arm, he
trudged homeward.



CHAPTER V

LUKE RECEIVES AN INVITATION


"What have you there, Luke?" asked Mrs. Larkin, as Luke entered the
little sitting-room with the tin box under his arm.

"I met a man on my way home, who asked me to keep it for him."

"Do you know the man?" asked his mother, in surprise.

"No," answered Luke.

"It seems very singular. What did he say?"

"He said that he was obliged to leave the neighborhood at once, and
could not conveniently carry the box."

"Do you think it contains anything of value?"

"Yes, mother. It is like the boxes rich men have to hold their
stocks and bonds. I was at the bank one day, and saw a gentleman
bring in one to deposit in the safe."

"I can't understand that at all, Luke. You say you did not know
this man?"

"I never met him before."

"And, of course, he does not know you?"

"No, for he asked my name."

"Yet he put what may be valuable property in your possession."

"I think," said Luke, shrewdly, "he had no one else to trust
it to. Besides, a country boy wouldn't be very likely to make
use of stocks and bonds."

"No, that is true. I suppose the tin box is locked?"

"Yes, mother. The owner--he says his name is Roland Reed--wishes
it put under lock and key."

"I can lock it up in my trunk, Luke."

"I think that will be a good idea."

"I hope he will pay you for your trouble when he takes away
the tin box."

"He has already. I forgot to mention it," and Luke drew from his
vest pocket, the bank-note he had thrust in as soon as received.
"Why, it's a ten-dollar bill!" he exclaimed. "I wonder whether he
knew he was giving me as much?"

"I presume so, Luke," said his mother, brightening up. "You are
in luck!"

"Take it, mother. You will find a use for it."

