Hannibal meditated a prolonged halt there. Great fires were lit and the
animals unloaded. The natives, seeing from above everything that was
being done, deserted their posts as usual at nightfall, confident that
the Carthaginians had no intention of moving forward.

Malchus with his scouts crept on along the path, and soon sent down
word to Hannibal that the heights were deserted. The general himself now
moved forward with all his light troops, occupied the head of the pass,
and posted strong parties of men upon the heights commanding it. As soon
as day broke the rest of the army got into motion and proceeded up the
pass. The natives were now seen approaching in great numbers, but they
halted in dismay on seeing that the Carthaginians had already gained
possession of the strong places.

The road by which the column was ascending wound along the face of
a precipice, and was so narrow that it was with difficulty that the
horses, snorting with fright, could be persuaded to proceed. The
natives, seeing the confusion which the fright of the animals created in
the column, at once took to the mountains, climbing up rugged precipices
which appeared to the Carthaginians absolutely inaccessible, and
presently made their appearance far up on the mountain side above the
column.

Here, sending up the most piercing yells, they began to roll rocks and
stones down upon the column. The confusion below became terrible. The
horses, alarmed by the strange wild cries, echoed and re-echoed a score
of times among the mountains, and struck by the falling stones, plunged
and struggled wildly to escape. Some tore along the path, precipitating
those in front of them over the precipice, others lost their footing,
and, dragging with them the carts to which they were attached, fell
into the valley below. All order was lost. Incapable of defence or of
movement the column appeared to be on the verge of destruction.

"Come, my men," Malchus exclaimed to his Arabs, "where these men can
climb we can follow them; the safety of the whole column is at stake."

Slinging their weapons behind them the scouts began to climb the crags.
Sure footed and hardy as they were, it was with the greatest difficulty
that they could make their way up. Many lost their footing, and rolling
down were dashed to pieces; but the great majority succeeded in climbing
the heights, and at once became engaged in desperate battle with the
natives.

Every narrow ledge and crag was the scene of a conflict. The natives
from the distant heights encouraged their companions with their shouts,
and for a time the confusion in the column below was heightened by the
combat which was proceeding far above them. Every stone dislodged by the
feet of the combatants thundered down upon them, and the falling bodies
of those hit by arrow or javelin came crushing down with a dull thud
among the mass.

At last the bravery and superior weapons of the Arabs prevailed. The
precipice was cleared of the natives, and as the uproar ceased and the
missiles ceased to fall, the column recovered its order, and again moved
forward until the whole army gained the top of the pass. Here Hannibal
took possession of a rough fort erected by the natives, captured several
villages, and enough flocks and herds to feed his army for three days.
Then descending from the top of the pass, which is now known as the
Gol-du-Chat, he entered the valley of Chambery, and marched forward for
three days without opposition.

Malchus and his scouts received the warmest congratulations for their
conduct at the pass, for they had undoubtedly saved the army from what
had at one time threatened to be a terrible disaster. On arrival at a
town supposed to be identical with the modern Conflans, the inhabitants
came out with green boughs and expressed their desire for peace and
friendship. They said that they had heard of the fate which had befallen
those who ventured to oppose the Carthaginians, and that they were
anxious to avoid such misfortunes. They offered to deliver hostages as a
proof of their good intentions, to supply sheep and goats for the army,
and to furnish guides through the difficult country ahead.

For two days the march continued. The route the army was passing was
that now known as the little St. Bernard. Fortunately Hannibal had from
the first entertained considerable doubt as to the good faith of his
guides, and never relaxed his vigilance. The scouts and light infantry,
with the cavalry, preceded the great column of baggage, the heavy
cavalry defended the rear.

The track, which had for the last five days' march proceeded along a
comparatively level valley, now mounted rapidly, and turning aside from
the valley of the Isere it led up the deep bed of the mountain torrent
known as the Reclus; this stream ran in a deep trough hollowed out in a
very narrow valley. The bed is now so piled with rocks and stones as to
be impassable, and the Romans afterwards cut a road along on the side
of the mountain. But at this time it was possible for men and animals to
proceed along the bed of the torrent.

Suddenly while struggling with the difficulties of the ascent, a vast
number of the natives appeared on the hills on either side, and began to
hurl down stones and rocks upon the column below, while at the same
time a still stronger force attacked them in the rear. The instant
the natives made their appearance the treacherous guides, who were
proceeding with the scouts at the head of the column, attempted to make
their escape by climbing the mountain side. The Arabs were starting off
in pursuit, but Malchus checked them.

"Keep together," he shouted, "and on no account scatter; the enemy are
upon us in force, and it behooves us all to be steady and deliberate in
our action."

A flight of arrows was, however, sent after the traitors, and most of
them rolled lifeless down the slope again.

Hannibal's first care was to extricate his cavalry from the gorge. This
was performed with great difficulty, and they were drawn up in good
order on the narrow piece of level ground between the gorge in which the
river ran and the mountains bordering the side of the pass.

The light troops now ascended the hills on both sides, and speedily
became engaged with the enemy. The confusion in the bed of the torrent
was tremendous. Great numbers of men and animals were killed by the
rocks and missiles from above, but more of the soldiers were trampled to
death by the frightened horses. The heavy infantry in the rear remained
steady, and repulsed every effort of the main body of the enemy to break
in upon the column.

As night fell the combat ceased, but Hannibal and the troops in advance
of the column passed the night under arms at the foot of a certain white
rock standing above the ravine, and which still marks the exact site of
the conflict. The natives had suffered heavily both from their conflict
with the light troops upon the hillside, and from the repulse of their
assaults upon the rear guard, and in the morning they did not venture
to renew the attack, and the column moved forward out of the ravine
and continued its march, the natives from time to time dashing down to
attack it.

The elephants were placed on the flank of the line of march, and the
appearance of these strange beasts so terrified the enemy that they
desisted from their attack, and by evening the army encamped on the
summit of the pass.

The snow had already fallen deeply, the army were worn out and
dispirited by the exertions and dangers through which they had passed,
and had suffered great losses in men and animals in the nine days which
had elapsed since they first entered the mountains. Hannibal gave them
two days' rest, in which time they were joined by many stragglers who
had fallen behind, and by beasts of burden which, in the terror and
confusion of the attack, had got rid of their loads and had escaped, but
whose instinct led them to follow the line of march.

At the end of the second day Hannibal assembled his troops and addressed
them in a stirring speech. He told them that the worst part of their
journey was now over. He pointed to them the plains of Italy, of which a
view could be obtained through the pass ahead, and told them that there
they would find rest and friends, wealth and glory. The soldiers as
usual responded to the words of their beloved general with shouts of
acclamation, and with renewed spirits prepared to meet the difficulties
which still lay before them.

The next morning the march was renewed. The snow lay deep on the track,
and the soldiers found that, great as had been the difficulties of the
ascent, those of the descent were vastly greater, for the slopes of the
Alps on the Italian side are far steeper and more abrupt than are those
on the French. Every step had to be made with care; those who strayed in
the slightest from the path found the snow gave way beneath their feet
and fell down the precipice beside them.

Many of the baggage animals thus perished; but at last the head of the
column found itself at the foot of the steep descent in a ravine with
almost perpendicular walls, amid whose foot was in summer occupied by a
mountain stream. Into the depth of this ravine the rays of the sun never
penetrated, and in it lay a mass of the previous year's snow which had
never entirely melted, but which formed with the water of the torrent a
sheet of slippery ice.

The newly formed snow prevented the troops from seeing the nature of the
ground, and as they stepped upon it they fell headlong, sliding in
their armour down the rapidly sloping bed of ice, many dashing out
their brains or breaking their limbs against the great boulders which
projected through it. The cavalry next attempted the passage, but with
even less success, for the hoofs of the horses broke through the hard
upper crust of the old snow and the animals sank in to their bellies.
Seeing that it was impossible to pass this obstacle, Hannibal turned
back the head of the column until they reached the top of the ascent
down which they had just come. There he cleared away the snow and
erected a camp; all the infantry were then brought down into the pass
and set to work to build up a road along the side of the ravine.

The engineers with fire and explosives blasted away the foot of the
cliffs; the infantry broke up the rocks and formed a level track. All
night the work continued, the troops relieving each other at frequent
intervals, and by the morning a path which could be traversed by men
on foot, horses, and baggage animals was constructed for a distance of
three hundred yards, beyond which the obstacle which had arrested the
advance of the army did not continue.

The cavalry, baggage animals, and a portion of the infantry at once
continued their way down the valley, while the rest of the infantry
remained behind to widen the road sufficiently for the elephants to
pass along. Although the work was pressed on with the greatest vigour it
needed three days of labour in all before the elephants could be passed
through. The animals were by this time weak with hunger, for from the
time when they had turned aside from the valley of the Isere the Alps
had been wholly bare of trees, and the ground being covered with snow,
no foliage or forage had been obtainable to eke out the store of flour
which they carried for their consumption. Nor was any wood found with
which to manufacture the flat cakes into which the flour was formed for
their rations.

The elephants once through, the march was continued, and, joining the
troops in advance, who had halted in the woods below the snow level,
the column continued its march. On the third day after passing the gorge
they issued out on to the plain of the Po, having lost in the fifteen
days' passage of the Alps great numbers of men from the attacks of
the enemy, from the passage of the rapid torrents, from falls over the
precipices, and from cold, and having suffered still more severely in
horses and baggage animals.

Of the 59,000 picked troops with which he had advanced after the
conquest of Catalonia, Hannibal reached the plains of Italy with but
12,000 African infantry, 8,000 Spanish and Gaulish infantry, and 6,000
cavalry--in all 26,000 men. A small force indeed with which to enter
upon the struggle with the might and power of Rome. Of the 33,000 men
that were missing, 13,000 had fallen in the passes of the Pyrenees and
the march through Gaul, 20,000 had died in the passage of the Alps.



CHAPTER XIII: THE BATTLE OF THE TREBIA


Well was it for the Carthaginians that Hannibal had opened
communications with the Gaulish tribes in the plains at the foot of
the Alps, and that on its issue from the mountain passes his army found
itself among friends, for had it been attacked it was in no position to
offer a vigorous resistance, the men being utterly broken down by their
fatigues and demoralized by their losses. Many were suffering terribly
from frostbites, the cavalry were altogether unable to act, so worn out
and enfeebled were the horses. Great numbers of the men could scarce
drag themselves along owing to the state of their feet; their shoes and
sandals, well enough adapted for sandy plains, were wholly unfitted for
traversing rocky precipices, and the greater part of the army was almost
barefoot.

So long as they had been traversing the mountains they had struggled on
doggedly and desperately; to lag behind was to be slain by the natives,
to lie down was to perish of cold; but with the cessation of the
absolute necessity for exertion the power for exertion ceased also.
Worn out, silent, exhausted, and almost despairing, the army of Hannibal
presented the appearance of one which had suffered a terrible defeat,
rather than that of a body of men who had accomplished a feat of arms
unrivalled in the history of war.

Happily they found themselves among friends. The Insubres, who had been
looking forward eagerly to their coming, flocked in great numbers to
receive them as they issued out into the plain, bringing with them
cattle, grain, wine, and refreshments of all kinds, and inviting the
army to take up their quarters among them until recovered from their
fatigues. This offer Hannibal at once accepted. The army was broken
up and scattered among the various towns and villages, where the
inhabitants vied with each other in attending to the comforts of the
guests. A fortnight's absolute rest, an abundance of food, and the
consciousness that the worst of their labours was over, did wonders for
the men.

Malchus had arrived in a state of extreme exhaustion, and had, indeed,
been carried for the last two days of the march on the back of one of
the elephants. The company which he commanded no longer existed; they
had borne far more than their share of the fatigues of the march; they
had lost nearly half their number in the conflict among the precipices
with the natives, and while the rest of the army had marched along a
track where the snow had already been beaten hard by the cavalry in
front of them, the scouts ahead had to make their way through snow knee
deep. Inured to fatigue and hardship, the Arabs were unaccustomed to
cold, and every day had diminished their numbers, until, as they issued
out into the plain, but twenty men of the company remained alive.

Hannibal committed his young kinsman to the care of one of the chiefs
of the Insubres. The latter caused a litter to be constructed by his
followers, and carried the young Carthaginian away to his village, which
was situated at the foot of the hills on the banks of the river Orcus.

Here he was handed over to the care of the women. The wounds and bruises
caused by falls on the rocks and ice were bathed and bandaged, then he
was placed in a small chamber and water was poured on to heated stones
until it was filled with hot steam, and Malchus began to think that
he was going to be boiled alive. After being kept for an hour in this
vapour bath, he was annointed with oil, and was rubbed until every limb
was supple, he was then placed on a couch and covered with soft skins,
and in a few more minutes was sound asleep.

It was late next day before he woke, and on rising he found himself a
new man. A breakfast of meat, fresh cheese formed from goats' milk, and
flat cakes was set before him, and, had it not been that his feet were
still completely disabled from the effects of the frostbites, he felt
that he was fit again to take his place in the ranks. The chief's wife
and daughters waited upon him. The former was a tall, majestic looking
woman. She did not belong to the Insubres, but was the daughter of a
chief who had, with a portion of his tribe, wandered down from their
native home far north of the Alps and settled in Italy.

Two of the daughters were young women of over twenty, tall and robust in
figure like their mother, the third was a girl of some fifteen years of
age. The girls took after their German mother, and Malchus wondered at
the fairness of their skins, the clearness of their complexion, and the
soft light brown of their hair, for they were as much fairer than the
Gauls as these were fairer than the Carthaginians. Malchus was able to
hold little converse with his hosts, whose language differed much from
that of the Transalpine Gauls.

His stay here was destined to be much longer than he had anticipated,
for his feet had been seriously frostbitten, and for some time it
was doubtful whether he would not lose them. Gradually, however, the
inflammation decreased, but it was six weeks after his arrival before he
was able to walk. From time to time messengers had arrived from Hannibal
and his father to inquire after him, and from them he learned that the
Carthaginians had captured the towns of Vercella, Valentinum, and
Asta, and the less important towns of Ivrea, Chivasso, Bodenkmag, and
Carbantia.

By the time he was cured he was able to talk freely with his hosts, for
he soon mastered the points of difference between their language and
that of the Gauls, with which he was already acquainted. The chief, with
the greater part of his followers, now started and joined the army of
Hannibal, which laid siege to the town of Turin, whose inhabitants were
in alliance with Rome. It was strongly fortified. Hannibal erected an
intrenchment at a distance of sixty yards from the wall, and under cover
of this sank a well, and thence drove a wide gallery, the roof above
being supported by props.

Divided in brigades, each working six hours, the troops laboured night
and day, and in three days from its commencement the gallery was carried
under the walls. It was then driven right and left for thirty yards each
way, and was filled with wood, combustibles, and explosives. The workers
then retired and the wood was fired, the props supporting the roof were
soon burned away, the earth above fell in bringing down the walls, and
a great breach was made, through which the besiegers, drawn up in
readiness, rushed in and captured the town.

On the same day that Hannibal captured Turin, Scipio entered Piacenza.
After finding that Hannibal had escaped him on the Rhone, he had
despatched the principal part of his army, under his brother Cneius, to
Spain, their original destination, and with the rest sailed to Pisa and
landed there. Marching with all haste north he enlisted 10,000 troops
from among the inhabitants of the country, many of them having already
served in the Roman army. He then marched north to Tenneto, where he was
joined by the praetors Manlius and Attilius with over 20,000 men, with
whom he marched to Piacenza.

Hannibal, after, as usual, rousing the enthusiasm of his soldiers by
an address, marched towards Scipio. The latter, with his cavalry, had
crossed the Ticino and was within five miles of Vercella, when Hannibal,
also with his cavalry, came within sight. Scipio's front was covered
with a swarm of foot skirmishers mixed with irregular Gaulish horsemen;
the Roman cavalry and the cavalry of the Italian allies formed his main
body.

Hannibal ordered the Carthaginian horse to charge full upon the centre
of the enemy, and the Numidians to attack them on both flanks. The
Romans, in those days, little understood the use of cavalry, the troops
frequently dismounting and fighting on foot. Hannibal's soldiers were,
on the other hand, trained to fight in tactics resembling those
of modern days. No sooner was the word given to charge than the
Carthaginian horse, delighted at being at last, after all their toils
and sufferings, within striking distance of their foes, gave a mighty
shout, and setting spurs to their splendid horses flung themselves at
the enemy.

The charge of this solid mass of picked cavalry was irresistible. They
swept before them the skirmishers and Gaulish horse, and fell with fury
upon the main body, cleaving a way far into its ranks. Before the Romans
could recover from their confusion the Numidian horse burst down upon
their flanks. The charge was irresistible; large numbers of the
Romans were killed and the rest fled in panic, hotly pursued by the
Carthaginians, until they reached the shelter of the Roman infantry,
which was advancing behind them. Scipio, who had been wounded in the
fight, at once led his army back to Piacenza.

The news of this battle reached Malchus just as he was preparing to
depart. The messenger who brought it brought also a lead horse, which
Hamilcar had sent for his son's use. Resuming his armour Malchus mounted
and rode off at once, after many warm thanks to his friends, whom he
expected to see again shortly, as they, with the rest of that section
of the tribe, were about to join the chief--the Gaulish women frequently
accompanying their husbands in their campaigns.

Malchus was delighted to rejoin the army, from which he had now been
separated more than two months. He saw with pleasure that they had now
completely recovered from the effects of their hardships, and presented
as proud and martial an appearance as when they had started from
Carthagena.

The issue of their first fight with the Romans had raised their spirits
and confidence, and all were eager to enter upon the campaign which
awaited them. Malchus, upon his arrival, was appointed to the command of
the company of Gauls who formed the bodyguard of the general. Hannibal
moved up the Po and prepared to cross that river at Gambio, two days'
easy march above its junction with the Ticino. The army was accompanied
by a considerable number of the Insubres. The work of constructing a
bridge was at once commenced.

Malchus, riding through the camp, came upon the tents of his late host,
who had been joined that day by his family. To them Malchus did the
honours of the camp, took them through the lines of the Carthaginian
cavalry, showed them the elephants, and finally conducted them to
Hannibal, who received them most kindly, and presented them with many
presents in token of his thanks for their care of his kinsman. The next
day the bridge was completed and the troops began to pass over, the
natives crowding to the banks and even venturing on the bridge to
