
"I have come back to tell you exactly what I think of you," said Faith
in clear, ringing tones. "I am not afraid of you. You are a rude,
unjust, tyrannical, disagreeable old man. Susan says you are sure to go
to hell, and I was sorry for you, but I am not now. Your wife never had
a new hat for ten years--no wonder she died. I am going to make faces at
you whenever I see you after this. Every time I am behind you you will
know what is happening. Father has a picture of the devil in a book in
his study, and I mean to go home and write your name under it. You are
an old vampire and I hope you'll have the Scotch fiddle!"

Faith did not know what a vampire meant any more than she knew what the
Scotch fiddle was. She had heard Susan use the expressions and gathered
from her tone that both were dire things. But Norman Douglas knew
what the latter meant at least. He had listened in absolute silence to
Faith's tirade. When she paused for breath, with a stamp of her foot, he
suddenly burst into loud laughter. With a mighty slap of hand on knee he
exclaimed,

"I vow you've got spunk, after all--I like spunk. Come, sit down--sit
down!"

"I will not." Faith's eyes flashed more passionately. She thought she
was being made fun of--treated contemptuously. She would have enjoyed
another explosion of rage, but this cut deep. "I will not sit down in
your house. I am going home. But I am glad I came back here and told you
exactly what my opinion of you is."

"So am I--so am I," chuckled Norman. "I like you--you're fine--you're
great. Such roses--such vim! Did I call her cheese-face? Why, she never
smelt a cheese. Sit down. If you'd looked like that at the first, girl!
So you'll write my name under the devil's picture, will you? But he's
black, girl, he's black--and I'm red. It won't do--it won't do! And you
hope I'll have the Scotch fiddle, do you? Lord love you, girl, I had
IT when I was a boy. Don't wish it on me again. Sit down--sit in. We'll
tak' a cup o' kindness."

"No, thank you," said Faith haughtily.

"Oh, yes, you will. Come, come now, I apologize, girl--I apologize. I
made a fool of myself and I'm sorry. Man can't say fairer. Forget and
forgive. Shake hands, girl--shake hands. She won't--no, she won't! But
she must! Look-a-here, girl, if you'll shake hands and break bread with
me I'll pay what I used to to the salary and I'll go to church the first
Sunday in every month and I'll make Kitty Alec hold her jaw. I'm the
only one in the clan can do it. Is it a bargain, girl?"

It seemed a bargain. Faith found herself shaking hands with the ogre and
then sitting at his board. Her temper was over--Faith's tempers never
lasted very long--but its excitement still sparkled in her eyes and
crimsoned her cheeks. Norman Douglas looked at her admiringly.

"Go, get some of your best preserves, Wilson," he ordered, "and stop
sulking, woman, stop sulking. What if we did have a quarrel, woman? A
good squall clears the air and briskens things up. But no drizzling and
fogging afterwards--no drizzling and fogging, woman. I can't stand that.
Temper in a woman but no tears for me. Here, girl, is some messed up
meat and potatoes for you. Begin on that. Wilson has some fancy name for
it, but I call lit macanaccady. Anything I can't analyze in the
eating line I call macanaccady and anything wet that puzzles me I call
shallamagouslem. Wilson's tea is shallamagouslem. I swear she makes it
out of burdocks. Don't take any of the ungodly black liquid--here's some
milk for you. What did you say your name was?"

"Faith."

"No name that--no name that! I can't stomach such a name. Got any
other?"

"No, sir."

"Don't like the name, don't like it. There's no smeddum to it. Besides,
it makes me think of my Aunt Jinny. She called her three girls Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Faith didn't believe in anything--Hope was a born
pessimist--and Charity was a miser. You ought to be called Red Rose--you
look like one when you're mad. I'LL call you Red Rose. And you've roped
me into promising to go to church? But only once a month, remember--only
once a month. Come now, girl, will you let me off? I used to pay a
hundred to the salary every year and go to church. If I promise to pay
two hundred a year will you let me off going to church? Come now!"

"No, no, sir," said Faith, dimpling roguishly. "I want you to go to
church, too."

"Well, a bargain is a bargain. I reckon I can stand it twelve times a
year. What a sensation it'll make the first Sunday I go! And old Susan
Baker says I'm going to hell, hey? Do you believe I'll go there--come,
now, do you?"

"I hope not, sir," stammered Faith in some confusion.

"WHY do you hope not? Come, now, WHY do you hope not? Give us a reason,
girl--give us a reason."

"It--it must be a very--uncomfortable place, sir."

"Uncomfortable? All depends on your taste in comfortable, girl. I'd soon
get tired of angels. Fancy old Susan in a halo, now!"

Faith did fancy it, and it tickled her so much that she had to laugh.
Norman eyed her approvingly.

"See the fun of it, hey? Oh, I like you--you're great. About this church
business, now--can your father preach?"

"He is a splendid preacher," said loyal Faith.

"He is, hey? I'll see--I'll watch out for flaws. He'd better be careful
what he says before ME. I'll catch him--I'll trip him up--I'll keep tabs
on his arguments. I'm bound to have some fun out of this church going
business. Does he ever preach hell?"

"No--o--o--I don't think so."

"Too bad. I like sermons on that subject. You tell him that if he wants
to keep me in good humour to preach a good rip-roaring sermon on hell
once every six months--and the more brimstone the better. I like 'em
smoking. And think of all the pleasure he'd give the old maids, too.
They'd all keep looking at old Norman Douglas and thinking, 'That's for
you, you old reprobate. That's what's in store for YOU!' I'll give an
extra ten dollars every time you get your father to preach on hell.
Here's Wilson and the jam. Like that, hey? IT isn't macanaccady. Taste!"

Faith obediently swallowed the big spoonful Norman held out to her.
Luckily it WAS good.

"Best plum jam in the world," said Norman, filling a large saucer and
plumping it down before her. "Glad you like it. I'll give you a couple
of jars to take home with you. There's nothing mean about me--never was.
The devil can't catch me at THAT corner, anyhow. It wasn't my fault that
Hester didn't have a new hat for ten years. It was her own--she pinched
on hats to save money to give yellow fellows over in China. _I_ never
gave a cent to missions in my life--never will. Never you try to
bamboozle me into that! A hundred a year to the salary and church once a
month--but no spoiling good heathens to make poor Christians! Why,
girl, they wouldn't be fit for heaven or hell--clean spoiled for either
place--clean spoiled. Hey, Wilson, haven't you got a smile on yet? Beats
all how you women can sulk! _I_ never sulked in my life--it's just one
big flash and crash with me and then--pouf--the squall's over and the
sun is out and you could eat out of my hand."

Norman insisted on driving Faith home after supper and he filled the
buggy up with apples, cabbages, potatoes and pumpkins and jars of jam.

"There's a nice little tom-pussy out in the barn. I'll give you that
too, if you'd like it. Say the word," he said.

"No, thank you," said Faith decidedly. "I don't like cats, and besides,
I have a rooster."

"Listen to her. You can't cuddle a rooster as you can a kitten. Who ever
heard of petting a rooster? Better take little Tom. I want to find a
good home for him."

"No. Aunt Martha has a cat and he would kill a strange kitten."

Norman yielded the point rather reluctantly. He gave Faith an exciting
drive home, behind his wild two-year old, and when he had let her out at
the kitchen door of the manse and dumped his cargo on the back veranda
he drove away shouting,

"It's only once a month--only once a month, mind!"

Faith went up to bed, feeling a little dizzy and breathless, as if she
had just escaped from the grasp of a genial whirlwind. She was happy
and thankful. No fear now that they would have to leave the Glen and
the graveyard and Rainbow Valley. But she fell asleep troubled by a
disagreeable subconsciousness that Dan Reese had called her pig-girl and
that, having stumbled on such a congenial epithet, he would continue to
call her so whenever opportunity offered.



CHAPTER XVII. A DOUBLE VICTORY

Norman Douglas came to church the first Sunday in November and made all
the sensation he desired. Mr. Meredith shook hands with him absently on
the church steps and hoped dreamily that Mrs. Douglas was well.

"She wasn't very well just before I buried her ten years ago, but I
reckon she has better health now," boomed Norman, to the horror
and amusement of every one except Mr. Meredith, who was absorbed in
wondering if he had made the last head of his sermon as clear as he
might have, and hadn't the least idea what Norman had said to him or he
to Norman.

Norman intercepted Faith at the gate.

"Kept my word, you see--kept my word, Red Rose. I'm free now till the
first Sunday in December. Fine sermon, girl--fine sermon. Your father
has more in his head than he carries on his face. But he contradicted
himself once--tell him he contradicted himself. And tell him I want that
brimstone sermon in December. Great way to wind up the old year--with
a taste of hell, you know. And what's the matter with a nice tasty
discourse on heaven for New Year's? Though it wouldn't be half as
interesting as hell, girl--not half. Only I'd like to know what your
father thinks about heaven--he CAN think--rarest thing in the world--a
person who can think. But he DID contradict himself. Ha, ha! Here's a
question you might ask him sometime when he's awake, girl. 'Can God make
a stone so big He couldn't lift it Himself?' Don't forget now. I want to
hear his opinion on it. I've stumped many a minister with that, girl."

Faith was glad to escape him and run home. Dan Reese, standing among the
crowd of boys at the gate, looked at her and shaped his mouth into
"pig-girl," but dared not utter it aloud just there. Next day in school
was a different matter. At noon recess Faith encountered Dan in the
little spruce plantation behind the school and Dan shouted once more,

"Pig-girl! Pig-girl! ROOSTER-GIRL!"

Walter Blythe suddenly rose from a mossy cushion behind a little clump
of firs where he had been reading. He was very pale, but his eyes
blazed.

"You hold your tongue, Dan Reese!" he said.

"Oh, hello, Miss Walter," retorted Dan, not at all abashed. He vaulted
airily to the top of the rail fence and chanted insultingly,

    "Cowardy, cowardy-custard
    Stole a pot of mustard,
    Cowardy, cowardy-custard!"

"You are a coincidence!" said Walter scornfully, turning still whiter.
He had only a very hazy idea what a coincidence was, but Dan had none at
all and thought it must be something peculiarly opprobrious.

"Yah! Cowardy!" he yelled gain. "Your mother writes lies--lies--lies!
And Faith Meredith is a pig-girl--a--pig-girl--a pig-girl! And she's
a rooster-girl--a rooster-girl--a rooster-girl! Yah!
Cowardy--cowardy--cust--"

Dan got no further. Walter had hurled himself across the intervening
space and knocked Dan off the fence backward with one well-directed
blow. Dan's sudden inglorious sprawl was greeted with a burst of
laughter and a clapping of hands from Faith. Dan sprang up, purple with
rage, and began to climb the fence. But just then the school-bell rang
and Dan knew what happened to boys who were late during Mr. Hazard's
regime.

"We'll fight this out," he howled. "Cowardy!"

"Any time you like," said Walter.

"Oh, no, no, Walter," protested Faith. "Don't fight him. _I_ don't mind
what he says--I wouldn't condescend to mind the like of HIM."

"He insulted you and he insulted my mother," said Walter, with the same
deadly calm. "Tonight after school, Dan."

"I've got to go right home from school to pick taters after the harrows,
dad says," answered Dan sulkily. "But to-morrow night'll do."

"All right--here to-morrow night," agreed Walter.

"And I'll smash your sissy-face for you," promised Dan.

Walter shuddered--not so much from fear of the threat as from repulsion
over the ugliness and vulgarity of it. But he held his head high and
marched into school. Faith followed in a conflict of emotions. She
hated to think of Walter fighting that little sneak, but oh, he had been
splendid! And he was going to fight for HER--Faith Meredith--to punish
her insulter! Of course he would win--such eyes spelled victory.

Faith's confidence in her champion had dimmed a little by evening,
however. Walter had seemed so very quiet and dull the rest of the day in
school.

"If it were only Jem," she sighed to Una, as they sat on Hezekiah
Pollock's tombstone in the graveyard. "HE is such a fighter--he could
finish Dan off in no time. But Walter doesn't know much about fighting."

"I'm so afraid he'll be hurt," sighed Una, who hated fighting and
couldn't understand the subtle, secret exultation she divined in Faith.

"He oughtn't to be," said Faith uncomfortably. "He's every bit as big as
Dan."

"But Dan's so much older," said Una. "Why, he's nearly a year older."

"Dan hasn't done much fighting when you come to count up," said Faith.
"I believe he's really a coward. He didn't think Walter would fight,
or he wouldn't have called names before him. Oh, if you could just have
seen Walter's face when he looked at him, Una! It made me shiver--with a
nice shiver. He looked just like Sir Galahad in that poem father read us
on Saturday."

"I hate the thought of them fighting and I wish it could be stopped,"
said Una.

"Oh, it's got to go on now," cried Faith. "It's a matter of honour.
Don't you DARE tell anyone, Una. If you do I'll never tell you secrets
again!"

"I won't tell," agreed Una. "But I won't stay to-morrow to watch the
fight. I'm coming right home."

"Oh, all right. _I_ have to be there--it would be mean not to,
when Walter is fighting for me. I'm going to tie my colours on his
arm--that's the thing to do when he's my knight. How lucky Mrs. Blythe
gave me that pretty blue hair-ribbon for my birthday! I've only worn it
twice so it will be almost new. But I wish I was sure Walter would win.
It will be so--so HUMILIATING if he doesn't."

Faith would have been yet more dubious if she could have seen her
champion just then. Walter had gone home from school with all his
righteous anger at a low ebb and a very nasty feeling in its place. He
had to fight Dan Reese the next night--and he didn't want to--he hated
