die within a week."

Mosely and his friend looked at each other in silence, and the
conversation languished.

"Ben," said Bradley, after the two visitors were fast asleep, "shall
I tell you what I think of these two men?"

"Well, Bradley?"

"They are thieves, and they meant to steal our hosses."

"Won't they do it now?"

Bradley laughed.

"They'll be afraid to," he answered. "I've beaten them at their own
game, and they think I'm as desperate a bully as they pretend to be.
No; they won't think it safe to interfere with our property."

"How many men did you say you had killed, Jake?" asked Ben, with a
smile.

"That was all talk. Thank Heaven, I haven't the blood of any fellow
creature on my hands!"




CHAPTER XXV.

THE HORSE-THIEVES.


All four slept soundly, but the visitors awoke first.

"Are you awake, Tom?" inquired Mosely.

"I should say so," answered his friend.

Bill Mosely raised himself on his elbow and surveyed Ben and
Bradley. Their deep, tranquil breathing showed that they were sound
asleep.

Mosely next glanced at the mustangs which were tethered near-by.

"Tom," said he, "I wish we had them mustangs. It's a deal easier
ridin' than walkin'."

"I should say so."

"When I struck this party last night I meant to have 'em; but this
man is such a bloody ruffian that I don't know as it would be safe."

Hadley said nothing. His customary phrase would not apply, and he
was a man of few words, besides.

"What did he say he would do if a fellow stole his horses, Tom?"

"Said he'd die within a week," answered Had-ley, with unfailing
memory.

Bill Mosely looked discouraged. He privately thought Bradley was
just the man to keep his word, and he did not fancy getting into
difficulty with him.

"That depends on whether he caught him," he said, after a while,
hopefully.

"I should say so, Bill."

"Now," said Mosely, lowering his voice, "if we could get away while
they are asleep, there wouldn't be much chance of their knowin'
where we were."

"That's so, Bill."

"Anyway, if we don't take 'em we may be overtaken by the party that
we borrowed some gold-dust from."

Tom Hadley responded in his customary manner.

"And that would be mighty bad luck," continued Mosely, with a
shudder.

"I should say so, Bill."

In fact, Mosely felt that their situation was not likely to be made
worse by a new theft. Only thirty miles away was a party of miners
with whom they had worked in company, but without much success,
till, emboldened by temptation and opportunity, they had stolen a
bag of gold-dust from a successful comrade, and fled under cover of
the night.

In the primitive state of society at the mines, stealing was a
capital offense, and if they were caught their lives would probably
pay the penalty. Even now some of the injured party might be on
their track, and this naturally inspired them with uneasiness. Thus
they were between two fires, and, in spite of the fear with which
Bradley had inspired them, it looked as if another theft would
conduce to their safety. If they carried away the mustangs, Bradley
and Ben, even if they hit on the right trail, would have to pursue
them on foot, and among the Sierras a man is no match for a mustang
in speed and endurance.

"I've a great mind to carry off them mustangs," said Mosely
thoughtfully. "Are you with me?"

"I should say so."

"Why don't you ever say something else, Tom?" demanded Mosely
impatiently.

"What do you want me to say?" asked Hadley, in surprise.

"Well, never mind; it's your way, I suppose, and I can rely upon
you."

"I should say so."

Mosely shrugged his shoulders. It was clearly idle to expect any
great variety in Tom Hadley's conversation.

"Whatever we do must be done quickly," he said, in a quiet, decided
tone. "They'll wake up before long, and there won't be any chance.
You, Tom, take that near animal, and I'll tackle the other. Jest
untie them quiet and easy, and when I say the word start. Do you
understand?"

"I should say so, Bill," said Hadley, nodding.

"Then here goes."

In a few seconds they had loosened the mustangs and had sprung upon
their backs.

"Now, go!" exclaimed Mosely, in a energetic whisper.

So on their stolen horses they drew stealthily away from the camp
till they were perhaps a furlong away, and then, putting the
mustangs to their speed, they soon put a distance of miles between
them and their sleeping owners. They would have liked to remain long
enough to have a trout breakfast, but that was impracticable.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WHAT NEXT?


Some persons are said to have premonitions of coming ill, but this
could not be said in the present instance of Bradley and his young
companion. Bradley had the shrewdness to read the real cowardice of
Mosely, who was the leader, and did not dream that he would have the
courage to take the horses. But then, he did not know the danger in
which their two visitors had placed themselves by their recent
theft. Danger will strengthen the courage of the timid, and, in this
case, it decided Mosely to commit a new theft.

The robbers were quite five miles away when Ben opened his eyes.

He looked about him with sleepy eyes, and it was only by an effort
that he remembered the events of the previous evening.

It was with no misgiving that he looked for the horses. When he
realized that they were gone, his heart gave a great bound, and he
rose on his elbow. Next he looked for Mosely and Hadley, but, of
course, in vain.

"They've stolen the mustangs!" he said to himself, in genuine
dismay, and instantly seizing Bradley by the shoulder, shook him
energetically.

"What's the matter, Ben?" demanded Bradley, in amazement. "You
needn't be quite so rough."

"It's time you were awake!" said Ben hurriedly. "Those fellows have
stolen our mustangs!"

"What's that you say?" ejaculated Bradley, now thoroughly awake.

"The mustangs are gone, and they are gone!" said Ben.

"When did you find it out?"

"Only just now. I was sleepy, and overslept myself."

"Half-past seven o'clock," said Bradley, referring to a cheap silver
watch which he had bought for a trifle from a miner at Murphy's who
was hard up. "I'm afraid they must have been gone some time. It's a
bad lookout for us, Ben."

"So it is, Jake. You thought they wouldn't dare to take anything."

"No more I thought they would. That Bill Mosely bragged so much I
didn't think he had enough pluck."

"Does it take much pluck to be a thief, Jake?"

"Well, in Californy it does," answered Bradley. "When a man steals a
boss here, he takes his life in his hand, and don't you forget it.
If it was only a year in the penitentiary, or something like that,
it wouldn't scare 'em so bad. That Mosely's a bad lot, and will
likely die in his boots."

"What's that?"

"Be shot standing, or swing from the branch of a tree. I thought I'd
said enough last night to put him off the notion of playin' us such
a trick."

"Probably he thought there wouldn't be any chance of our catching
him when we were reduced to walk."

"It's likely you're right, Ben, and I ought to have thought of that.
I jest wish I could set eyes on the critter at this particular
minute. To treat us that way after our kindness, that's what riles
me."

"What shall we do, Jake?"

"That's to be considered. Blamed if I know, unless we foot it, and
that will be no joke, over these hills and through these forests."

"We may come upon their track, and overtake them when they are not
expecting it."

"I wish we might," said Bradley, the lines about his mouth
tightening. "I'd give 'em a lesson."

"They are two men," said Ben thoughtfully, "and we are only a man
and a boy."

"That is so, Ben; but I'll match you against Hadley. He don't amount
to a row of pins; and if I can't tackle Bill Mosely, then I'll never
show myself in 'Frisco again."

"I don't mind so much the loss of the mustangs," said Ben, "but I'm
sorry that we shall be delayed in our search for Richard Dewey."

"That's bad, too. I expect that nice young lady in 'Frisco is
a-waitin' anxiously to hear from him. Plague take that rascal
Mosely!" he broke out, in fresh exasperation.

"Well, Jake, suppose we get some breakfast, and then consider what
we will do."

"That's a good thought, Ben. We can't do much on an empty stomach,
that's a fact."

For reasons which need not be specified, it was decided that the
breakfast should consist of trout. Despite their loss, both had a
good appetite, and when that was satisfied they became more hopeful.




CHAPTER XXVII.

KI SING.


Leaving Ben and his companion for a time, we go back to record an
incident which will prove to have a bearing upon the fortunes of
those in whom we are interested.

One morning two men, Taylor and O'Reilly, who had been out
prospecting, came into camp, conveying between them, very much as
two policemen conduct a prisoner, a terrifled-looking Chinaman,
whose eyes, rolling helplessly from one to the other, seemed to
indicate that he considered his position a very perilous one.

At that early period in the settlement of California, a few Chinamen
had found their way to the Pacific coast; but the full tide of
immigration did not set in till a considerable time later, and,
therefore, the miners regarded one as a curiosity.

"Who have you got there, O'Reilly?" inquired one of his
mining-comrades.

"A yeller haythen!" answered O'Eeilly. "Look at the craythur! Ain't
he a beauty jist wid his long pigtail hangin' down his back like a
monkey's tail?"

"Where did you find him?"

"He was huntin' for gold, the haythen, jist for all the world as if
he was as white as you or I."

Mr. Patrick O'Reilly appeared to hold the opinion that gold-hunting
should be confined to the Caucasian race. He looked upon a Chinaman
as rather a superior order of monkey, suitable for exhibition in a
cage, but not to be regarded as possessing the ordinary rights of an
adopted American resident. If he could have looked forward
twenty-five years, and foreseen the extent to which these barbarians
would throng the avenues of employment, he would, no doubt, have
been equally amazed and disgusted. Indeed, the capture of Ki Sing
was made through his influence, as Taylor, a man from Ohio, was
disposed to let him alone.

Soon a crowd gathered around the terrified Chinaman and his captors,
and he was plied with questions, some of a jocular character, by the
miners, who were glad of anything that relieved the monotony of
their ordinary life.

"What's your name?" asked one.

The Chinaman gazed at the questioner vacantly.

"What's your name, you haythen?" repeated O'Reilly, emphasizing the
inquiry by a powerful shake.

"My name Ki Sing," answered the Mongolian nervously.

"Where did you come from, old pigtail?"

"My name Ki Sing, not Pigtail," said the Chinaman, not understanding
the meaning of the epithet.

This answer appeared to be regarded by the crowd as either witty or
absurd, for it elicited a roar of laughter.

"Never mind what your name is, old stick in the mud! We'll call you
whatever we please. Where do you come from?"

"Me come from 'Flisco."

It is well known that a Chinaman cannot pronounce the letter r,
which in his mouth softens to l, in some cases producing a ludicrous
effect.

"What have you come here for, Cy King, or whatever your name is."

"My name Ki Sing."

"Well, it's a haythen name; anyhow," remarked Mr. Patrick O'Eeilly.
"Before I'd have such a name, I'd go widout one intirely. Did you
hear the gintleman ask you what you came here for?"

"You bling me," answered Ki Sing shrewdly.

There was another laugh.

"That Chinee ain't no fool!" said Dick Roberts.

"What made you leave China?" he asked.

"Me come to Amelica fol gold."

"Hi, ho! That's it, is it? What are you going to do with your gold
when you find it?"

