returning, took out the knife and found the blade was red as blood. Then
she cried out to her brothers that something terrible had come to pass.

'I will go and find him,' said the second. And he went.

And he walked, and he walked, and he walked, till he met the giant, and
asked him if he had seen a young man travelling towards the mountain.

And the giant answered, 'Yes, I have seen him pass, but I have not seen
him come back. The spell must have worked upon him.'

'Then what can I do to disenchant him, and find the water of life, the
talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Follow this path, and when you reach the mountain you will find it
covered with stones. Do not stop to look at them, but climb steadily on.
Above all, heed not the laughs and scoffs that will arise on all sides,
and never turn round. And when you reach the top you can then take all
you desire.'

The young man thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain.
But no sooner did he reach it than loud jests and gibes broke out on
every side, and almost deafened him. For some time he let them rail,
and pushed boldly on, till he had passed the place which his brother had
gained; then suddenly he thought that among the scoffing sounds he heard
his brother's voice. He stopped and looked back; and another stone was
added to the number.

Meanwhile the sister left at home was counting the days when her two
brothers should return to her. The time seemed long, and it would be
hard to say how often she took out the knife and looked at its polished
blade to make sure that this one at least was still safe. The blade was
always bright and clear; each time she looked she had the happiness of
knowing that all was well, till one evening, tired and anxious, as she
frequently was at the end of the day, she took it from its drawer, and
behold! the blade was red with blood. Her cry of horror brought her
youngest brother to her, and, unable to speak, she held out the knife!

'I will go,' he said.

So he walked, and he walked, and he walked, until he met the giant, and
he asked, 'Have two young men, making for yonder mountain, passed this
way?'

And the giant answered, 'Yes, they have passed by, but they never came
back, and by this I know that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'Then what must I do to free them, and to get the water of life, and the
talking bird, and the branch of the tree of beauty?'

'Go to the mountain, which you will find so thickly covered with stones
that you will hardly be able to place your feet, and walk straight
forward, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, and paying
no heed to the laughs and scoffs which will follow you, till you reach
the top, and then you may take all that you desire.'

The young man thanked the giant for his counsel, and set forth to the
mountain. And when he began to climb there burst forth all around him
a storm of scoffs and jeers; but he thought of the giant's words, and
looked neither to the right hand nor to the left, till the mountain top
lay straight before him. A moment now and he would have gained it, when,
through the groans and yells, he heard his brothers' voices. He turned,
and there was one stone the more.


And all this while his sister was pacing up and down the palace, hardly
letting the knife out of her hand, and dreading what she knew she would
see, and what she did see. The blade grew red before her eyes, and she
said, 'Now it is my turn.'

So she walked, and she walked, and she walked till she came to the
giant, and prayed him to tell her if he had seen three young men pass
that way seeking the distant mountain.

'I have seen them pass, but they have never returned, and by this I know
that the spell has fallen upon them.'

'And what must I do to set them free, and to find the water of life, and
the talking bird, and a branch of the tree of beauty?'

'You must go to that mountain, which is so full of stones that your
feet will hardly find a place to tread, and as you climb you will hear
a noise as if all the stones in the world were mocking you; but pay
no heed to anything you may hear, and, once you gain the top, you have
gained everything.'

The girl thanked him for his counsel, and set out for the mountain; and
scarcely had she gone a few steps upwards when cries and screams broke
forth around her, and she felt as if each stone she trod on was a living
thing. But she remembered the words of the giant, and knew not what had
befallen her brothers, and kept her face steadily towards the mountain
top, which grew nearer and nearer every moment. But as she mounted the
clamour increased sevenfold: high above them all rang the voices of her
three brothers. But the girl took no heed, and at last her feet stood
upon the top.

Then she looked round, and saw, lying in a hollow, the pool of the water
of life. And she took the brazen pitcher that she had brought with her,
and filled it to the brim. By the side of the pool stood the tree of
beauty, with the talking bird on one of its boughs; and she caught the
bird, and placed it in a cage, and broke off one of the branches.

After that she turned, and went joyfully down the hill again, carrying
her treasures, but her long climb had tired her out, and the brazen
pitcher was very heavy, and as she walked a few drops of the water spilt
on the stones, and as it touched them they changed into young men and
maidens, crowding about her to give thanks for their deliverance.

So she learnt by this how the evil spell might be broken, and she
carefully sprinkled every stone till there was not one left--only a
great company of youths and girls who followed her down the mountain.

When they arrived at the palace she did not lose a moment in planting
the branch of the tree of beauty and watering it with the water of life.
And the branch shot up into a tree, and was heavy with flowers, and the
talking bird nestled in its branches.

Now the fame of these wonders was noised abroad, and the people flocked
in great numbers to see the three marvels, and the maiden who had won
them; and among the sightseers came the king's son, who would not go
till everything was shown him, and till he had heard how it had all
happened. And the prince admired the strangeness and beauty of the
treasures in the palace, but more than all he admired the beauty and
courage of the maiden who had brought them there. So he went home and
told his parents, and gained their consent to wed her for his wife.

Then the marriage was celebrated in the church adjoining the palace.
Then the bridegroom took her to his own home, where they lived happy for
ever after.




The Wounded Lion

Cuentos Populars Catalans.


There was once a girl so poor that she had nothing to live on, and
wandered about the world asking for charity. One day she arrived at
a thatched cottage, and inquired if they could give her any work. The
farmer said he wanted a cowherd, as his own had left him, and if the
girl liked the place she might take it. So she became a cowherd.

One morning she was driving her cows through the meadows when she heard
near by a loud groan that almost sounded human. She hastened to the spot
from which the noise came, and found it proceeded from a lion who lay
stretched upon the ground.

You can guess how frightened she was! But the lion seemed in such pain
that she was sorry for him, and drew nearer and nearer till she saw he
had a large thorn in one foot. She pulled out the thorn and bound up the
place, and the lion was grateful, and licked her hand by way of thanks
with his big rough tongue.

When the girl had finished she went back to find the cows, but they had
gone, and though she hunted everywhere she never found them; and she had
to return home and confess to her master, who scolded her bitterly, and
afterwards beat her. Then he said, 'Now you will have to look after the
asses.'

So every day she had to take the asses to the woods to feed, until one
morning, exactly a year after she had found the lion, she heard a groan
which sounded quite human. She went straight to the place from which the
noise came, and, to her great surprise, beheld the same lion stretched
on the ground with a deep wound across his face.

This time she was not afraid at all, and ran towards him, washing the
wound and laying soothing herbs upon it; and when she had bound it up
the lion thanked her in the same manner as before.

After that she returned to her flock, but they were nowhere to be
seen. She searched here and she searched there, but they had vanished
completely!

Then she had to go home and confess to her master, who first scolded her
and afterwards beat her. 'Now go,' he ended, 'and look after the pigs!'

So the next day she took out the pigs, and found them such good feeding
grounds that they grew fatter every day.

Another year passed by, and one morning when the maiden was out with her
pigs she heard a groan which sounded quite human. She ran to see what
it was, and found her old friend the lion, wounded through and through,
fast dying under a tree.

She fell on her knees before him and washed his wounds one by one, and
laid healing herbs upon them. And the lion licked her hands and thanked
her, and asked if she would not stay and sit by him. But the girl said
she had her pigs to watch, and she must go and see after them.

So she ran to the place where she had left them, but they had vanished
as if the earth had swallowed them up. She whistled and called, but only
the birds answered her.

Then she sank down on the ground and wept bitterly, not daring to return
home until some hours had passed away.

And when she had had her cry out she got up and searched all up and down
the wood. But it was no use; there was not a sign of the pigs.

At last she thought that perhaps if she climbed a tree she might
see further. But no sooner was she seated on the highest branch than
something happened which put the pigs quite out of her head. This was a
handsome young man who was coming down the path; and when he had almost
reached the tree he pulled aside a rock and disappeared behind it.

The maiden rubbed her eyes and wondered if she had been dreaming. Next
she thought, 'I will not stir from here till I see him come out, and
discover who he is.' Accordingly she waited, and at dawn the next
morning the rock moved to one side and a lion came out.

When he had gone quite out of sight the girl climbed down from the tree
and went to the rock, which she pushed aside, and entered the opening
before her. The path led to a beautiful house. She went in, swept and
dusted the furniture, and put everything tidy. Then she ate a very good
dinner, which was on a shelf in the corner, and once more clambered up
to the top of her tree.

As the sun set she saw the same young man walking gaily down the path,
and, as before, he pushed aside the rock and disappeared behind it.

Next morning out came the lion. He looked sharply about him on all
sides, but saw no one, and then vanished into the forest.

The maiden then came down from the tree and did exactly as she had done
the day before. Thus three days went by, and every day she went and
tidied up the palace. At length, when the girl found she was no nearer
to discovering the secret, she resolved to ask him, and in the evening
when she caught sight of him coming through the wood she came down from
the tree and begged him to tell her his name.

The young man looked very pleased to see her, and said he thought it
must be she who had secretly kept his house for so many days. And he
added that he was a prince enchanted by a powerful giant, but was only
allowed to take his own shape at night, for all day he was forced to
appear as the lion whom she had so often helped; and, more than this,
it was the giant who had stolen the oxen and the asses and the pigs in
revenge for her kindness.

And the girl asked him, 'What can I do to disenchant you?'

But he said he was afraid it was very difficult, because the only way
was to get a lock of hair from the head of a king's daughter, to spin
it, and to make from it a cloak for the giant, who lived up on the top
of a high mountain.

'Very well,' answered the girl, 'I will go to the city, and knock at
the door of the king's palace, and ask the princess to take me as a
servant.'

So they parted, and when she arrived at the city she walked about the
streets crying, 'Who will hire me for a servant? Who will hire me for a
servant?' But, though many people liked her looks, for she was clean and
neat, the maiden would listen to none, and still continued crying, 'Who
will hire me for a servant? Who will hire me for a servant?'

At last there came the waiting-maid of the princess.

'What can you do?' she said; and the girl was forced to confess that she
could do very little.

'Then you will have to do scullion's work, and wash up dishes,' said
she; and they went straight back to the palace.

Then the maiden dressed her hair afresh, and made herself look very neat
and smart, and everyone admired and praised her, till by-and-bye it came
to the ears of the princess. And she sent for the girl, and when she saw
her, and how beautifully she had dressed her hair, the princess told her
she was to come and comb out hers.

Now the hair of the princess was very thick and long, and shone like
the sun. And the girl combed it and combed it till it was brighter than
ever. And the princess was pleased, and bade her come every day and comb
her hair, till at length the girl took courage, and begged leave to cut
off one of the long, thick locks.

The princess, who was very proud of her hair, did not like the idea of
parting with any of it, so she said no. But the girl could not give
up hope, and each day she entreated to be allowed to cut off just one
tress. At length the princess lost patience, and exclaimed, 'You may
have it, then, on condition that you shall find the handsomest prince in
the world to be my bridegroom!'

And the girl answered that she would, and cut off the lock, and wove it
into a coat that glittered like silk, and brought it to the young man,
who told her to carry it straight to the giant. But that she must be
careful to cry out a long way off what she had with her, or else he
would spring upon her and run her through with his sword.

So the maiden departed and climbed up the mountain, but before she
reached the top the giant heard her footsteps, and rushed out breathing
fire and flame, having a sword in one hand and a club in the other. But
she cried loudly that she had brought him the coat, and then he grew
quiet, and invited her to come into his house.

He tried on the coat, but it was too short, and he threw it off, and
declared it was no use. And the girl picked it up sadly, and returned
quite in despair to the king's palace.

The next morning, when she was combing the princess's hair, she begged
leave to cut off another lock. At first the princess said no, but the
girl begged so hard that at length she gave in on condition that she
should find her a prince as bridegroom.

The maiden told her that she had already found him, and spun the lock
into shining stuff, and fastened it on to the end of the coat. And when
it was finished she carried it to the giant.

This time it fitted him, and he was quite pleased, and asked her what
he could give her in return. And she said that the only reward he could
give her was to take the spell off the lion and bring him back to his
own shape.

For a long time the giant would not hear of it, but in the end he gave
in, and told her exactly how it must all be done. She was to kill the
lion herself and cut him up very small; then she must burn him, and cast
his ashes into the water, and out of the water the prince would come
free from enchantment for ever.

But the maiden went away weeping, lest the giant should have deceived
her, and that after she had killed the lion she would find she had also
slain the prince.

Weeping she came down the mountain, and weeping she joined the prince,
who was awaiting her at the bottom; and when he had heard her story he
comforted her, and bade her be of good courage, and to do the bidding of
the giant.

And the maiden believed what the prince told her; and in the morning
when he put on his lion's form she took a knife and slew him, and cut
him up very small, and burnt him, and cast his ashes into the water, and
out of the water came the prince, beautiful as the day, and as glad to
look upon as the sun himself.


Then the young man thanked the maiden for all she had done for him, and
said she should be his wife and none other. But the maiden only wept
sore, and answered that that she could never be, for she had given her
promise to the princess when she cut off her hair that the prince should
wed her and her only.

But the prince replied, 'If it is the princess, we must go quickly. Come
with me.'

So they went together to the king's palace. And when the king and queen
and princess saw the young man a great joy filled their hearts, for they
knew him for the eldest son, who had long ago been enchanted by a giant
and lost to them.

And he asked his parents' consent that he might marry the girl who had
saved him, and a great feast was made, and the maiden became a princess,
and in due time a queen, and she richly deserved all the honours
showered upon her.




The Man Without a Heart


Once upon a time there were seven brothers, who were orphans, and had no
sister. Therefore they were obliged to do all their own housework. This
they did not like at all; so after much deliberation they decided to get
married. There were, unfortunately, no young girls to be found in the
place where they lived; but the elder brothers agreed to go out into the
world and seek for brides, promising to bring back a very pretty wife
