Their father could not speak. He grasped their hands warmly. He saw
how great the danger must have been, and how gallantly his boys
must have borne themselves.

"The Indians may be back in a few minutes, papa. Your horse is
dead, but there is one of the Indians' standing by his dead master.
Let us catch him and shift the saddle." The animal, when they
approached it, made no move to take flight, and they saw that his
master's foot, as he fell, had become entangled in the lasso, and
the well-trained beast had stood without moving. In three minutes
the saddles were transferred, and the party again ready for fight
or flight.

"What next, papa?"

"We turned to the right, and rather toward home, when we started;
so the Indian halting-place is to the southeast of us, is it not?"

"Yes, papa; as near as may be," Charley said, making out the points
with some difficulty on the pocket compass, one of which they each
carried, as the danger of being lost upon the pathless pampas is
very great.

"We had ridden about two miles when I got my fall, so we are a mile
to the west of their camp. We will ride now a couple of miles due
north. The Indians are sure to send out a scout to see whether we
have returned home, and our track will lead them to believe that we
have. It is dusk now. We shall get three hours' rest before we have to
move."

It was perfectly dark before they reached their halting-place. The
saddles were again loosened, a little Indian corn, moistened with
water, given to the horses, and another slight meal taken by
themselves. The boys, by Mr. Hardy's orders, though sorely against
their own wishes, then lay down to get a couple of hours' sleep;
while Mr. Hardy went back about a hundred yards along the trail
they had made on coming, and then turned aside and sat down at a
distance of a few yards to watch, in case any Indian should have
followed up their trail.

Here he sat for over two hours, and then returned to the boys.
Charley he found fast asleep. The pain of Hubert's wound had kept
him awake. Mr. Hardy poured some water over the bandage, and
then, waking Charley, gave them instructions as to the part they were
to play.

Both of them felt rather uncomfortable when they heard that they
were to be separated from their father. They raised no objections,
however, and promised to obey his instructions to the letter. They
then mounted their horses--Hubert having to be lifted up, for his
leg was now very stiff and sore--and then began to retrace their
steps, keeping a hundred yards or so to the west of the track by
which they had come.

They rode in single file, and they had taken the precaution of
fastening a piece of tape round their horses' nostrils and mouth,
to prevent their snorting should they approach any of their own
species. The night was dark, but the stars shone out clear and
bright. At starting Mr. Hardy had opened his watch, and had felt by
the hands that it was ten o'clock. After some time he felt again.

It was just half an hour from the time of their starting.

"Now, boys, we are somewhere close to the place of your fight. In
another ten minutes we must separate."

At the end of that time they again closed up.

"Now, boys, you see that bright star. That is nearly due east of
us; go on as nearly as you can guess for ten minutes, at a walk, as
before. You will then be within a mile of the enemy. Then get off
your horses. Mind, on no account whatever are you to leave their
bridles, but stand with one hand on the saddle, ready to throw
yourself into it. Keep two blue-lights, and give me one. Don't
speak a word, but listen as if your lives depended upon detecting a
sound, as indeed they do. You are to remain there until you see
that I have fairly succeeded and then you are to dash in behind the
cattle and fire off your revolvers, and shout so as to quicken
their pace as much as possible. I do not think there is the least
fear of the Indians following, the rockets will scare them too
much. When you have chased the herd for about two miles, draw aside
half a mile on their side, and then listen for the Indians passing
in pursuit of the cattle; wait ten minutes, and then blow your
dog-whistle--a sharp, short note. If you hear Indians following
you, or think there is danger, blow twice, and go still further to
the right. God bless you, boys. I don't think there is much fear of
your falling upon any scouts; they have been too badly cut up
to-day, and must look upon our guns as witches. I need not say keep
together, and, if attacked, light a blue-light and throw it down;
ride a short way out of its circle of light, and I will come
straight to you through everything. Don't be nervous about me.
There is not the least danger."

In another minute the boys lost sight of their father, and turning
their horses proceeded in the direction he had ordered. Every now
and then they stopped to listen, but not a sound could they hear.
Their own horses' hoofs made no noise as they fell upon the soft
turf.

At the end of the ten minutes, just as Charley was thinking of
stopping, they heard a sound which caused them to halt
simultaneously. It was the low baa of a sheep, and seemed to come
from directly ahead of them. Charley now alighted, and Hubert
brought his horse up beside him, keeping his place, however, in the
saddle, but leaning forward on the neck of his horse, for he felt
that if he got off he should be unable to regain his seat hurriedly
in case of alarm.

"About a mile off, I should say, by the sound," Charley whispered;
"and just in the direction we expected."

The spot Charley had chosen for the halt was a slight hollow,
running east and west; so that, even had the moon been up, they
would not have been visible except to any one in the line of the
hollow.

Here, their carbines cocked and ready for instant use, they
remained standing for what appeared to them ages, listening with
the most intense earnestness for any sound which might tell of the
failure or success of their father's enterprise.

Mr. Hardy had ridden on for, as nearly as he could tell, two miles,
so that he was now to the southwest of the enemy; then, turning
west, he kept along for another mile, when he judged that he was,
as nearly as possible, a mile in their direct rear. He now advanced
with the greatest caution, every faculty absorbed in the sense of
listening. He was soon rewarded by the sound of the baaing of the
sheep; and dismounting and leading his horse, he gradually
approached the spot. At last, on ascending a slight rise, he
fancied that he could make out a black mass, at a distance of a
quarter of a mile. Of this, however, he was not certain; but he was
sure, from an occasional sound, that the herd was exactly in this
direction, and at about that distance.

He now left his horse, taking the precaution of tying all four
legs, to prevent his starting off at the sound of the rockets. He
next set to work to cut some turf, with which he formed a narrow
sloping bank, with a hollow for the rocket to rest in--calculating
the exact distance, and the angle required. During this operation
he stopped every minute or two and listened with his ear on the
ground; but except a faint stamping noise from the distant cattle
all was quiet.

All being prepared, Mr. Hardy took the signal rocket, and placing
it at a much higher angle than that intended for the others, struck
a match and applied it to the touch-paper. In a moment afterward
there was a loud roar, and the rocket soared up, with its train of
brilliant sparks behind it, and burst almost over the Indian camp.
Five or six balls of an intense white light broke from it, and
gradually fell toward the ground, lighting tip the whole
surrounding plain.

A yell of astonishment and fear broke from the Indians, and in a
moment another rocket rushed out.

Mr. Hardy watched its fiery way with anxiety, and saw with delight
that its direction was true. Describing a slight curve, it rushed
full at the black mass, struck something, turned abruptly, and then
exploded with a loud report, followed instantly by a cracking
noise, like a straggling fusillade of musketry.

It had scarcely ceased before the third followed it, greeted, like
its predecessors, with a yell from the Indians.

Its success was equal to that of its predecessors, and Mr. Hardy
was delighted by the sound of a dull, heavy noise, like distant
thunder, and knew, that the success was complete, and that he had
stampeded the cattle.

He now ran to his horse, which was trembling in every limb and
struggling wildly to escape, soothed it by patting it, loosed its
bonds, sprang into the saddle, and went off at full gallop in the
direction by which he had come. He had not ridden very far before
he heard, in the still night air, the repeated sound of firearms,
and knew that the boys were upon the trail of the cattle. Mr. Hardy
had little fear of the Indians pursuing them; he felt sure that the
slaughter of the day by the new and mysterious firearms, together
with the effect of the rockets, would have too much terrified and
cowed them for them to think of anything but flight. He was,
however, much alarmed when, after a quarter of a hour's riding, he
heard a single sharp whistle at about a few hundred yards'
distance.

"Hurrah! papa," the boys said as he rode up to them. "They have
gone by at a tremendous rush--sheep and cattle and all. We started
the moment we saw your first rocket, and got up just as they rushed
past, and we joined in behind and fired, and yelled till we were
hoarse. I don't think they will stop again to-night."

"Did you see or hear anything of the Indians, boys?"

"Nothing, papa. When the first rocket burst we saw several dark
figures leap up from the grass--where they had been, no doubt,
scouting--and run toward the camp but that was all. What are we to
do now?"

"Ride on straight for home. We need not trouble about the animals;
they won't stop till they are back. We must go easily, for our
horses have done a very long day's work already. They have been
between fifty and sixty miles. I think that we had better ride on
for another hour. By that time the moon will be up, and we shall be
able to see for miles across the plain. Then we will halt till
daybreak--it will only be three hours--and the horses will be able
to carry us in at a canter afterward."

And so it was done. In an hour the moon was fairly up, and,
choosing a rise whence a clear view could be obtained, the horses
were allowed to feed, and Mr. Hardy and Hubert lay down to sleep,
Charley taking the post of sentry, with orders to wake the others
at daybreak.

The day was just dawning when he aroused them. "Wake up, papa.
There are some figures coming over the plain."

Mr. Hardy and Hubert were on their feet in an instant. "Where,
Charley?"

"From the north, papa. They must have passed us in their pursuit of
the cattle, and are now returning--empty-handed, anyhow; for there
are only seven or eight of them, and they are driving nothing
before them."

By this time all three were in the saddle again.

"Shall we attack them, papa?"

"No, boys; we have given them quite a severe lesson enough. At the
same time, we will move a little across, so that we can get a good
sight of them as they pass, and make sure that they have got
nothing with them."

"They are coming exactly this way, papa."

"Yes, I see, Hubert; they are no doubt riding back upon their
trail. They will turn off quickly enough when they see us."

But the newcomers did not do so, continuing straight forward.

"Get your carbines ready, boys; but don't fire till I tell you.
They must belong to some other party, and cannot know what has
happened. No doubt they take us for Indians."

"I don't think they are Indians at all," Hubert said as the figures
rapidly approached.

"Don't you, Hubert? We shall soon see. Halloo!"

"Halloo! hurrah!" came back to them; and in another five minutes
they were shaking hands heartily with their three friends from
Canterbury, the Jamiesons, and two or three other neighboring
settlers.

They told them that Farquhar, as soon as Lopez brought news of the
attack, had sent mounted men off to all the other settlements,
begging them to meet that night at Mount Pleasant. By nine o'clock
they had assembled, and, after a consultation, had agreed that the
Indians would be satisfied with their present booty, and that
therefore no guard would be necessary at their own estancias.

A good feed and four hours' rest had been given to their horses,
and when the moon rose they had started. Two hours after leaving
they had seen a dark mass approaching, and had prepared for an
encounter; but it had turned out to be the animals, who were going
toward home at a steady pace. There seemed, they said, to be a good
many horses among them.

Assured by this that some encounter or other had taken place with
the Indians, they had ridden on with much anxiety, and were greatly
relieved at finding Mr. Hardy and his boys safe.

The whole party now proceeded at a rapid pace toward home, which
they reached in four hours' riding. As they came in sight of the
watch-tower Mr. Herries separated himself from the others, and rode
thirty or forty yards away to the left, returning to the others.
This he repeated three times, greatly to Mr. Hardy's surprise.

"What are you doing, Herries?" he asked.

"I am letting them know you are all well. We agreed upon that
signal before we started. They would be able to notice one separate
himself from the rest in that way as far as they could see us, and
long before they could make out any other sort of signal."

In a short time three black spots could be seen upon the plain in
the distance. These the boys very shortly pronounced to be Mrs.
Hardy and the girls.

When they approached the rest of the party fell back, to allow Mr.
Hardy and his sons to ride forward and have the pleasure of the
first meeting to themselves. Needless is it to tell with what a
feeling of delight and thankfulness Mrs. Hardy, Maud, and Ethel
received them. After the first congratulations the girls observed
that Mr. Hardy had his arm bound up with a handkerchief.

"Are you hurt, papa?" they exclaimed anxiously.

"Nothing to speak of--only an arrow in my arm. Old Hubert has got
the worst of it: he has had one through the calf of his leg."

"Poor old Hubert!" they cried. And Hubert had some difficulty in
persuading the girls that he could wait on very fairly till he
reached home without his being bandaged or otherwise touched.

"And how did it all happen?" Mrs. Hardy asked.

"I will tell you all about it when we have had breakfast, my dear,"
her husband said. "I have told our friends nothing about it yet,
for it is a long story, and one telling will do for it. I suppose
the animals have got back? How many are missing?"

"Lopez came in from counting them just as we started," Mrs. Hardy
said. "He says there are only four or five cattle missing, and
about a couple of hundred sheep; and, do you know, in addition to
our own horses, there are a hundred and twenty-three Indian
horses?"

"Hurrah!" the boys shouted delightedly, "That is a triumph; isn't
it, papa?"

"It is indeed, boys; and explains readily enough how it was that
there was not the slightest attempt at pursuit. The Indian horses
evidently broke their lariats and joined in the stampede. I suppose
Lopez has driven them all into the enclosure?"

"Oh, yes, papa. They went in by themselves with our own animals,
