
Petru thanked her and rode off, and, taking out his treasure box,
inquired how matters were going at home. Not well, it said. The emperor
was blind altogether now, and Florea and Costan had besought him to give
the government of the kingdom into their hands; but he would not, saying
that he did not mean to resign the government till he had washed his
eyes from the well of the Fairy of the Dawn. Then the brothers had gone
to consult old Birscha, who told them that Petru was already on his way
home bearing the water. They had set out to meet him, and would try
to take the magic water from him, and then claim as their reward the
government of the emperor.

'You are lying!' cried Petru angrily, throwing the box on the ground,
where it broke into a thousand pieces.

It was not long before he began to catch glimpses of his native land,
and he drew rein near a bridge, the better to look at it. He was still
gazing, when he heard a sound in the distance as if some one was calling
hit by his name.

'You, Petru!' it said.

'On! on!' cried the horse; 'it will fare ill with you if you stop.'

'No, let us stop, and see who and what it is!' answered Petru, turning
his horse round, and coming face to face with his two brothers. He had
forgotten the warning given him by the Goddess of Thunder, and when
Costan and Florea drew near with soft and flattering words he jumped
straight off his horse, and rushed to embrace them. He had a thousand
questions to ask, and a thousand things to tell. But his brown horse
stood sadly hanging his head.

'Petru, my dear brother,' at length said Florea, 'would it not be better
if we carried the water for you? Some one might try to take it from you
on the road, while no one would suspect us.'

'So it would,' added Costan. 'Florea speaks well.' But Petru shook his
head, and told them what the Goddess of Thunder had said, and about the
cloth she had given him. And both brothers understood there was only one
way in which they could kill him.

At a stone's throw from where they stood ran a rushing stream, with
clear deep pools.

'Don't you feel thirsty, Costan?' asked Florea, winking at him.

'Yes,' replied Costan, understanding directly what was wanted. 'Come,
Petru, let us drink now we have the chance, and then we will set out on
our way home. It is a good thing you have us with you, to protect you
from harm.'

The horse neighed, and Petru knew what it meant, and did not go with his
brothers.

No, he went home to his father, and cured his blindness; and as for his
brothers, they never returned again.

(From Rumanische Marchen.)




THE ENCHANTED KNIFE

Once upon a time there lived a young man who vowed that he would never
marry any girl who had not royal blood in her veins. One day he plucked
up all his courage and went to the palace to ask the emperor for his
daughter. The emperor was not much pleased at the thought of such a
match for his only child, but being very polite, he only said:

'Very well, my son, if you can win the princess you shall have her,
and the conditions are these. In eight days you must manage to tame and
bring to me three horses that have never felt a master. The first is
pure white, the second a foxy-red with a black head, the third coal
black with a white head and feet. And besides that, you must also bring
as a present to the empress, my wife, as much gold as the three horses
can carry.'

The young man listened in dismay to these words, but with an effort he
thanked the emperor for his kindness and left the palace, wondering
how he was to fulfil the task allotted to him. Luckily for him, the
emperor's daughter had overheard everything her father had said, and
peeping through a curtain had seen the youth, and thought him handsomer
than anyone she had ever beheld.

So returning hastily to her own room, she wrote him a letter which she
gave to a trusty servant to deliver, begging her wooer to come to her
rooms early the next day, and to undertake nothing without her advice,
if he ever wished her to be his wife.

That night, when her father was asleep, she crept softly into his
chamber and took out an enchanted knife from the chest where he kept his
treasures, and hid it carefully in a safe place before she went to bed.

The sun had hardly risen the following morning when the princess's nurse
brought the young man to her apartments. Neither spoke for some minutes,
but stood holding each other's hands for joy, till at last they both
cried out that nothing but death should part them. Then the maiden said:

'Take my horse, and ride straight through the wood towards the sunset
till you come to a hill with three peaks. When you get there, turn first
to the right and then to the left, and you will find yourself in a sun
meadow, where many horses are feeding. Out of these you must pick out
the three described to you by my father. If they prove shy, and refuse
to let you get near them, draw out your knife, and let the sun shine on
it so that the whole meadow is lit up by its rays, and the horses will
then approach you of their own accord, and will let you lead them away.
When you have them safely, look about till you see a cypress tree, whose
roots are of brass, whose boughs are of silver, and whose leaves are
of gold. Go to it, and cut away the roots with your knife, and you will
come to countless bags of gold. Load the horses with all they can carry,
and return to my father, and tell him that you have done your task, and
can claim me for your wife.'

The princess had finished all she had to say, and now it depended on the
young man to do his part. He hid the knife in the folds of his girdle,
mounted his horse, and rode off in search of the meadow. This he found
without much difficulty, but the horses were all so shy that they
galloped away directly he approached them. Then he drew his knife, and
held it up towards the sun, and directly there shone such a glory that
the whole meadow was bathed in it. From all sides the horses rushed
pressing round, and each one that passed him fell on its knees to do him
honour.

But he only chose from them all the three that the emperor had
described. These he secured by a silken rope to his own horse, and then
looked about for the cypress tree. It was standing by itself in one
corner, and in a moment he was beside it, tearing away the earth with
his knife. Deeper and deeper he dug, till far down, below the roots of
brass, his knife struck upon the buried treasure, which lay heaped up
in bags all around. With a great effort he lifted them from their hiding
place, and laid them one by one on his horses' backs, and when they
could carry no more he led them back to the emperor. And when the
emperor saw him, he wondered, but never guessed how it was the young man
had been too clever for him, till the betrothal ceremony was over. Then
he asked his newly made son-in-law what dowry he would require with his
bride. To which the bridegroom made answer, 'Noble emperor! all I desire
is that I may have your daughter for my wife, and enjoy for ever the use
of your enchanted knife.'

(Volksmarchen der Serben.)




JESPER WHO HERDED THE HARES

There was once a king who ruled over a kingdom somewhere between sunrise
and sunset. It was as small as kingdoms usually were in old times, and
when the king went up to the roof of his palace and took a look round
he could see to the ends of it in every direction. But as it was all his
own, he was very proud of it, and often wondered how it would get along
without him. He had only one child, and that was a daughter, so he
foresaw that she must be provided with a husband who would be fit to be
king after him. Where to find one rich enough and clever enough to be
a suitable match for the princess was what troubled him, and often kept
him awake at night.

At last he devised a plan. He made a proclamation over all his kingdom
(and asked his nearest neighbours to publish it in theirs as well) that
whoever could bring him a dozen of the finest pearls the king had ever
seen, and could perform certain tasks that would be set him, should
have his daughter in marriage and in due time succeed to the throne. The
pearls, he thought, could only be brought by a very wealthy man, and the
tasks would require unusual talents to accomplish them.

There were plenty who tried to fulfil the terms which the king proposed.
Rich merchants and foreign princes presented themselves one after the
other, so that some days the number of them was quite annoying; but,
though they could all produce magnificent pearls, not one of them could
perform even the simplest of the tasks set them. Some turned up, too,
who were mere adventurers, and tried to deceive the old king with
imitation pearls; but he was not to be taken in so easily, and they were
soon sent about their business. At the end of several weeks the stream
of suitors began to fall off, and still there was no prospect of a
suitable son-in-law.

Now it so happened that in a little corner of the king's dominions,
beside the sea, there lived a poor fisher, who had three sons, and their
names were Peter, Paul, and Jesper. Peter and Paul were grown men, while
Jesper was just coming to manhood.

The two elder brothers were much bigger and stronger than the youngest,
but Jesper was far the cleverest of the three, though neither Peter nor
Paul would admit this. It was a fact, however, as we shall see in the
course of our story.

One day the fisherman went out fishing, and among his catch for the day
he brought home three dozen oysters. When these were opened, every shell
was found to contain a large and beautiful pearl. Hereupon the three
brothers, at one and the same moment, fell upon the idea of offering
themselves as suitors for the princess. After some discussion, it was
agreed that the pearls should be divided by lot, and that each should
have his chance in the order of his age: of course, if the oldest was
successful the other two would be saved the trouble of trying.

Next morning Peter put his pearls in a little basket, and set off for
the king's palace. He had not gone far on his way when he came upon the
King of the Ants and the King of the Beetles, who, with their armies
behind them, were facing each other and preparing for battle.

'Come and help me,' said the King of the Ants; 'the beetles are too big
for us. I may help you some day in return.'

'I have no time to waste on other people's affairs,' said Peter; 'just
fight away as best you can;' and with that he walked off and left them.

A little further on the way he met an old woman.

'Good morning, young man,' said she; 'you are early astir. What have you
got in your basket?'

'Cinders,' said Peter promptly, and walked on, adding to himself, 'Take
that for being so inquisitive.'

'Very well, cinders be it,' the old woman called after him, but he
pretended not to hear her.

Very soon he reached the palace, and was at once brought before the
king. When he took the cover off the basket, the king and all his
courtiers said with one voice that these were the finest pearls they
had ever seen, and they could not take their eyes off them. But then
a strange thing happened: the pearls began to lose their whiteness and
grew quite dim in colour; then they grew blacker and blacker till at
last they were just like so many cinders. Peter was so amazed that he
could say nothing for himself, but the king said quite enough for both,
and Peter was glad to get away home again as fast as his legs would
carry him. To his father and brothers, however, he gave no account of
his attempt, except that it had been a failure.

Next day Paul set out to try his luck. He soon came upon the King of the
Ants and the King of the Beetles, who with their armies had encamped on
the field of battle all night, and were ready to begin the fight again.

'Come and help me,' said the King of the Ants; 'we got the worst of it
yesterday. I may help you some day in return.'

'I don't care though you get the worst of it to-day too,' said Paul.
'I have more important business on hand than mixing myself up in your
quarrels.'

So he walked on, and presently the same old woman met him. 'Good
morning,' said she; 'what have YOU got in your basket?'

'Cinders,' said Paul, who was quite as insolent as his brother, and
quite as anxious to teach other people good manners.

'Very well, cinders be it,' the old woman shouted after him, but Paul
neither looked back nor answered her. He thought more of what she said,
however, after his pearls also turned to cinders before the eyes of
king and court: then he lost no time in getting home again, and was very
sulky when asked how he had succeeded.

The third day came, and with it came Jesper's turn to try his fortune.
He got up and had his breakfast, while Peter and Paul lay in bed and
made rude remarks, telling him that he would come back quicker than
he went, for if they had failed it could not be supposed that he would
succeed. Jesper made no reply, but put his pearls in the little basket
and walked off.

The King of the Ants and the King of the Beetles were again marshalling
their hosts, but the ants were greatly reduced in numbers, and had
little hope of holding out that day.

'Come and help us,' said their king to Jesper, 'or we shall be
completely defeated. I may help you some day in return.'

Now Jesper had always heard the ants spoken of as clever and industrious
little creatures, while he never heard anyone say a good word for the
beetles, so he agreed to give the wished-for help. At the first charge
he made, the ranks of the beetles broke and fled in dismay, and those
escaped best that were nearest a hole, and could get into it before
Jesper's boots came down upon them. In a few minutes the ants had the
field all to themselves; and their king made quite an eloquent speech to
Jesper, thanking him for the service he had done them, and promising to
assist him in any difficulty.

'Just call on me when you want me,' he said, 'where-ever you are. I'm
never far away from anywhere, and if I can possibly help you, I shall
not fail to do it.'

Jesper was inclined to laugh at this, but he kept a grave face, said
he would remember the offer, and walked on. At a turn of the road he
suddenly came upon the old woman. 'Good morning,' said she; 'what have
YOU got in your basket?'

'Pearls,' said Jesper; 'I'm going to the palace to win the princess with
them.' And in case she might not believe him, he lifted the cover and
let her see them.

'Beautiful,' said the old woman; 'very beautiful indeed; but they will
go a very little way towards winning the princess, unless you can also
perform the tasks that are set you. However,' she said, 'I see you have
brought something with you to eat. Won't you give that to me: you are
sure to get a good dinner at the palace.'

'Yes, of course,' said Jesper, 'I hadn't thought of that'; and he handed
over the whole of his lunch to the old woman.

He had already taken a few steps on the way again, when the old woman
called him back.

'Here,' she said; 'take this whistle in return for your lunch. It isn't
much to look at, but if you blow it, anything that you have lost or that
has been taken from you will find its way back to you in a moment.'

Jesper thanked her for the whistle, though he did not see of what use it
was to be to him just then, and held on his way to the palace.

When Jesper presented his pearls to the king there were exclamations
of wonder and delight from everyone who saw them. It was not pleasant,
however, to discover that Jesper was a mere fisher-lad; that wasn't the
kind of son-in-law that the king had expected, and he said so to the
queen.

'Never mind,' said she, 'you can easily set him such tasks as he will
never be able to perform: we shall soon get rid of him.'

'Yes, of course,' said the king; 'really I forget things nowadays, with
all the bustle we have had of late.'

That day Jesper dined with the king and queen and their nobles, and at
night was put into a bedroom grander than anything of the kind he had
ever seen. It was all so new to him that he could not sleep a wink,
especially as he was always wondering what kind of tasks would be set
him to do, and whether he would be able to perform them. In spite of the
softness of the bed, he was very glad when morning came at last.

After breakfast was over, the king said to Jesper, 'Just come with me,
and I'll show you what you must do first.' He led him out to the barn,
and there in the middle of the floor was a large pile of grain. 'Here,'
said the king, 'you have a mixed heap of wheat, barley, oats, and rye, a
sackful of each. By an hour before sunset you must have these sorted out
into four heaps, and if a single grain is found to be in a wrong heap
you have no further chance of marrying my daughter. I shall lock the
door, so that no one can get in to assist you, and I shall return at the
appointed time to see how you have succeeded.'

The king walked off, and Jesper looked in despair at the task before
him. Then he sat down and tried what he could do at it, but it was soon
very clear that single-handed he could never hope to accomplish it
in the time. Assistance was out of the question--unless, he suddenly
thought--unless the King of the Ants could help. On him he began to
call, and before many minutes had passed that royal personage made his
appearance. Jesper explained the trouble he was in.

'Is that all?' said the ant; 'we shall soon put that to rights.' He gave
the royal signal, and in a minute or two a stream of ants came pouring
into the barn, who under the king's orders set to work to separate the
grain into the proper heaps.

Jesper watched them for a while, but through the continual movement
of the little creatures, and his not having slept during the previous
night, he soon fell sound asleep. When he woke again, the king had just
come into the barn, and was amazed to find that not only was the task
accomplished, but that Jesper had found time to take a nap as well.

'Wonderful,' said he; 'I couldn't have believed it possible. However,
the hardest is yet to come, as you will see to-morrow.'

Jesper thought so too when the next day's task was set before him. The
king's gamekeepers had caught a hundred live hares, which were to be let
loose in a large meadow, and there Jesper must herd them all day, and
bring them safely home in the evening: if even one were missing, he
must give up all thought of marrying the princess. Before he had quite
grasped the fact that this was an impossible task, the keepers had
opened the sacks in which the hares were brought to the field, and, with
a whisk of the short tail and a flap of the long ears, each one of the
hundred flew in a different direction.

'Now,' said the king, 'as he walked away, 'let's see what your
cleverness can do here.'

Jesper stared round him in bewilderment, and having nothing better to do
with his hands, thrust them into his pockets, as he was in the habit of
doing. Here he found something which turned out to be the whistle given
to him by the old woman. He remembered what she had said about the
virtues of the whistle, but was rather doubtful whether its powers
would extend to a hundred hares, each of which had gone in a different
direction and might be several miles distant by this time. However, he
blew the whistle, and in a few minutes the hares came bounding through
the hedge on all the four sides of the field, and before long were all
sitting round him in a circle. After that, Jesper allowed them to run
