Suddenly there arose a cry from the woods, and, in a few seconds, the two
savages hastened towards the fire dragging the three women and their two
infants along with them.  One of those women was much younger than her
companions, and we were struck with the modesty of her demeanour and the
gentle expression of her face, which, although she had the flattish nose
and thick lips of the others, was of a light-brown colour, and we
conjectured that she must be of a different race.  She and her companions
wore short petticoats and a kind of tippet on their shoulders.  Their
hair was jet black, but instead of being long, was short and
curly,--though not woolly--somewhat like the hair of a young boy.  While
we gazed with interest and some anxiety at these poor creatures, the big
chief advanced to one of the elder females and laid his hand upon the
child.  But the mother shrank from him, and clasping the little one to
her bosom, uttered a wail of fear.  With a savage laugh, the chief tore
the child from her arms and tossed it into the sea.  A low groan burst
from Jack's lips as we witnessed this atrocious act and heard the
mother's shriek, as she fell insensible on the sand.  The rippling waves
rolled the child on the beach, as if they refused to be a party in such a
foul murder, and we could observe that the little one still lived.

The young girl was now brought forward, and the chief addressed her; but
although we heard his voice, and even the words distinctly, of course we
could not understand what he said.  The girl made no answer to his fierce
questions, and we saw by the way in which he pointed to the fire that he
threatened her life.

"Peterkin," said Jack in a hoarse whisper, "have you got your knife?"

"Yes," replied Peterkin, whose face was pale as death.

"That will do.  Listen to me, and do my bidding quick.  Here is the small
knife, Ralph.  Fly both of you through the bush, cut the cords that bind
the prisoners and set them free.  There! quick, ere it be too late."  Jack
sprang up, and seized a heavy but short bludgeon, while his strong frame
trembled with emotion, and large drops rolled down his forehead.

At this moment the man who had butchered the savage a few minutes before
advanced towards the girl with his heavy club.  Jack uttered a yell that
rang like a death-shriek among the rocks.  With one bound he leaped over
a precipice full fifteen feet high, and, before the savages had recovered
from their surprise, was in the midst of them; while Peterkin and I
dashed through the bushes towards the prisoners.  With one blow of his
staff Jack felled the man with the club, then, turning round with a look
of fury, he rushed upon the big chief with the yellow hair.  Had the blow
which Jack aimed at his head taken effect, the huge savage would have
needed no second stroke; but he was agile as a cat, and avoided it by
springing to one side, while, at the same time, he swung his ponderous
club at the head of his foe.  It was now Jack's turn to leap aside, and
well was it for him that the first outburst of his blind fury was over,
else he had become an easy prey to his gigantic antagonist; but Jack was
cool now.  He darted his blows rapidly and well, and the superiority of
his light weapon was strikingly proved in this combat, for while he could
easily evade the blows of the chief's heavy club, the chief could not so
easily evade those of his light one.  Nevertheless, so quick was he, and
so frightfully did he fling about the mighty weapon, that, although Jack
struck him almost every blow, the strokes had to be delivered so quickly
that they wanted force to be very effectual.

It was lucky for Jack that the other savages considered the success of
their chief in this encounter to be so certain that they refrained from
interfering.  Had they doubted it, they would have probably ended the
matter at once by felling him.  But they contented themselves with
awaiting the issue.

The force which the chief expended in wielding his club now began to be
apparent.  His movements became slower, his breath hissed through his
clenched teeth, and the surprised savages drew nearer in order to render
assistance.  Jack observed this movement.  He felt that his fate was
sealed, and resolved to cast his life upon the next blow.  The chiefs
club was again about to descend on his head.  He might have evaded it
easily, but instead of doing so, he suddenly shortened his grasp of his
own club, rushed in under the blow, struck his adversary right between
the eyes with all his force and fell to the earth, crushed beneath the
senseless body of the chief.  A dozen clubs flew high in air ready to
descend on the head of Jack, but they hesitated a moment, for the massive
body of the chief completely covered him.  That moment saved his life.
Ere the savages could tear the chief's body away, seven of their number
fell prostrate beneath the clubs of the prisoners whom Peterkin and I had
set free, and two others fell under our own hand.  We could never have
accomplished this had not our enemies been so engrossed with the fight
between Jack and their chief that they had failed to observe us until we
were upon them.  They still out-numbered our party by three, but we were
flushed with victory while they were taken by surprise and dispirited by
the fall of their chief.  Moreover, they were awe-struck by the sweeping
fury of Jack, who seemed to have lost his senses altogether, and had no
sooner shaken himself free of the chief's body than he rushed into the
midst of them, and in three blows equalized our numbers.  Peterkin and I
flew to the rescue, the savages followed us, and, in less than ten
minutes, the whole of our opponents were knocked down or made prisoners,
bound hand and foot, and extended side by side upon the sea shore.




CHAPTER XX.


Intercourse with the savages--Cannibalism prevented--The slain are buried
and the survivors depart, leaving us again alone on our Coral Island.

After the battle was over, the savages crowded round us and gazed at us
in surprise, while they continued to pour upon us a flood of questions,
which, being wholly unintelligible, of course we could not answer.
However, by way of putting an end to it, Jack took the chief (who had
recovered from the effects of his wound) by the hand and shook it warmly.
No sooner did the blacks see that this was meant to express good-will
than they shook hands with us all round.  After this ceremony was gone
through Jack went up to the girl, who had never once moved from the rock
where she had been left, but had continued an eager spectator of all that
had passed.  He made signs to her to follow him and then, taking the
chief by the hand, was about to conduct him to the bower when his eye
fell on the poor infant which had been thrown into the sea and was still
lying on the shore.  Dropping the chief's hand he hastened towards it,
and, to his great joy, found it to be still alive.  We also found that
the mother was beginning to recover slowly.

"Here, get out o' the way," said Jack, pushing us aside, as we stooped
over the poor woman and endeavoured to restore her, "I'll soon bring her
round."  So saying, he placed the infant on her bosom and laid its warm
cheek on hers.  The effect was wonderful.  The woman opened her eyes,
felt the child, looked at it, and with a cry of joy clasped it in her
arms, at the same time endeavouring to rise, for the purpose, apparently,
of rushing into the woods.

"There, that's all right," said Jack, once more taking the chief by the
hand.  "Now Ralph and Peterkin, make the women and these fellows follow
me to the bower.  Well entertain them as hospitably as we can."

In a few minutes the savages were all seated on the ground in front of
the bower making a hearty meal off a cold roast pig, several ducks, and a
variety of cold fish, together with an unlimited supply of cocoa-nuts,
bread-fruits, yams, taro, and plums; with all of which they seemed to be
quite familiar and perfectly satisfied.

Meanwhile, we three being thoroughly knocked up with our day's work, took
a good draught of cocoa-nut lemonade, and throwing ourselves on our beds
fell fast asleep.  The savages it seems followed our example, and in half-
an-hour the whole camp was buried in repose.

How long we slept I cannot tell, but this I know, that when we lay down
the sun was setting and when we awoke it was high in the heavens.  I
awoke Jack, who started up in surprise, being unable at first to
comprehend our situation.  "Now, then," said he, springing up, "let's see
after breakfast.  Hallo!  Peterkin, lazy fellow, how long do you mean to
lie there?"

Peterkin yawned heavily.  "Well!" said he, opening his eyes and looking
up after some trouble, "if it isn't to-morrow morning, and me thinking it
was to-day all this time.  Hallo!  Venus, where did you come from? you
seem tolerably at home, any how.  Bah! might as well speak to the cat as
to you--better, in fact, for it understands me, and you don't."

This remark was called forth by the sight of one of the elderly females,
who had seated herself on the rock in front of the bower, and, having
placed her child at her feet, was busily engaged in devouring the remains
of a roast pig.

By this time the natives outside were all astir, and breakfast in an
advanced state of preparation.  During the course of it we made sundry
attempts to converse with the natives by signs, but without effect.  At
last we hit upon a plan of discovering their names.  Jack pointed to his
breast and add "Jack," very distinctly; then he pointed to Peterkin and
to me, repeating our names at the same time.  Then he pointed to himself
again, and said "Jack," and laying his finger on the breast of the chief,
looked inquiringly into his face.  The chief instantly understood him and
said "Tararo," twice, distinctly.  Jack repeated it after him, and the
chief, nodding his head approvingly, said "Chuck."  On hearing which,
Peterkin exploded with laughter; but Jack turned and with a frown rebuked
him, saying, "I must look even more indignantly at you than I feel,
Peterkin, you rascal, for these fellows don't like to be laughed at."
Then turning towards the youngest of the women, who was seated at the
door of the bower, he pointed to her; whereupon the chief said, "Avatea;"
and pointing towards the sun, raised his finger slowly towards the
zenith, where it remained steadily for a minute or two.

"What can that mean, I wonder," said Jack, looking puzzled.

"Perhaps," said Peterkin, "the chief means she is an angel come down to
stay here for a while.  If so, she's an uncommonly black one!"

We did not feel quite satisfied with this explanation, so Jack went up to
her and said, "Avatea."  The woman smiled sadly, and nodded her head, at
the same time pointing to her breast and then to the sun, in the same
manner as the chief had done.  We were much puzzled to know what this
could signify, but as there was no way of solving our difficulty we were
obliged to rest content.

Jack now made signs to the natives to follow him, and, taking up his axe,
he led them to the place where the battle had been fought.  Here we found
the prisoners, who had passed the night on the beach having been totally
forgotten by us, as our minds had been full of our guests, and were
ultimately overcome by sleep.  They did not seem the worse for their
exposure, however, as we judged by the hearty appetite with which they
devoured the breakfast that was soon after given to them.  Jack then
began to dig a hole in the sand, and, after working a few seconds, he
pointed to it and to the dead bodies that lay exposed on the beach.  The
natives immediately perceived what he wanted, and, running for their
paddles, dug a hole in the course of half an hour that was quite large
enough to contain all the bodies of the slain.  When it was finished they
tossed their dead enemies into it with so much indifference that we felt
assured they would not have put themselves to this trouble had we not
asked them to do so.  The body of the yellow-haired chief was the last
thrown in.  This wretched man would have recovered from the blow with
which Jack felled him, and, indeed, he did endeavour to rise during the
melee that followed his fall, but one of his enemies, happening to notice
the action, dealt him a blow with his club that killed him on the spot.

While they were about to throw the sand over this chief, one of the
savages stooped over him, and with a knife, made apparently of stone, cut
a large slice of flesh from his thigh.  We knew at once that he intended
to make use of this for food, and could not repress a cry of horror and
disgust.

"Come, come, you blackguard," cried Jack, starting up and seizing the man
by the arm, "pitch that into the hole.  Do you hear?"

The savage of course did not understand the command, but he perfectly
understood the look of disgust with which Jack regarded the flesh, and
his fierce gaze as he pointed towards the hole.  Nevertheless he did not
obey.  Jack instantly turned to Tararo and made signs to him to enforce
obedience.  The chief seemed to understand the appeal, for he stepped
forward, raised his club, and was on the point of dashing out the brains
of his offending subject, when Jack sprang forward and caught his
uplifted arm.

"Stop!" he shouted, "you blockhead, I don't want you to kill the man."  He
then pointed again to the flesh and to the hole.  The chief uttered a few
words, which had the desired effect; for the man threw the flesh into the
hole, which was immediately filled up.  This man was of a morose, sulky
disposition, and, during all the time he remained on the island, regarded
us, especially Jack, with a scowling visage.  His name, we found, was
Mahine.

The next three or four days were spent by the savages in mending their
canoe, which had been damaged by the violent shock it had sustained on
striking the shore.  This canoe was a very curious structure.  It was
about thirty feet long, and had a high towering stern.  The timbers, of
which it was partly composed, were fastened much in the same way as those
of our little boat were put together; but the part that seemed most
curious to us was a sort of out-rigger, or long plank, which was attached
to the body of the canoe by means of two stout cross beams.  These beams
kept the plank parallel with the canoe, but not in contact with it, for
it floated in the water with an open space between; thus forming a sort
of double canoe.  This we found was intended to prevent the upsetting of
the canoe, which was so narrow that it could not have maintained an
upright position without the out-rigger.  We could not help wondering
both at the ingenuity and the clumsiness of this contrivance.

When the canoe was ready, we assisted the natives to carry the prisoners
into it, and helped them to load it with provisions and fruit.  Peterkin
also went to the plum-tree for the purpose of making a special onslaught
upon the hogs, and killed no less than six of them.  These we baked and
presented to our friends on the day of their departure.  On that day
Tararo made a great many energetic signs to us, which, after much
consideration, we came to understand were proposals that we should go
away with him to his island; but, having no desire to do so, we shook our
heads very decidedly.  However, we consoled him by presenting him with
our rusty axe, which we thought we could spare, having the excellent one
which had been so providentially washed ashore to us the day we were
wrecked.  We also gave him a piece of wood with our names carved on it,
and a piece of string to hang it round his neck as an ornament.

In a few minutes more we were all assembled on the beach.  Being unable
to speak to the savages, we went through the ceremony of shaking hands,
and expected they would depart; but, before doing so, Tararo went up to
Jack and rubbed noses with him, after which he did the same with Peterkin
and me!  Seeing that this was their mode of salutation, we determined to
conform to their custom, so we rubbed noses heartily with the whole
party, women and all!  The only disagreeable part of the process was,
when we came to rub noses with Mahine, and Peterkin afterwards said, that
when he saw his wolfish eyes glaring so close to his face, he felt much
more inclined to _bang_ than to _rub_ his nose.  Avatea was the last to
take leave of us, and we experienced a feeling of real sorrow when she
approached to bid us farewell.  Besides her modest air and gentle manners
she was the only one of the party who exhibited the smallest sign of
regret at parting from us.  Going up to Jack, she put out her flat little
nose to be rubbed, and thereafter paid the same compliment to Peterkin
and me.

An hour later the canoe was out of sight, and we, with an indefinable
feeling of sadness creeping round our hearts, were seated in silence
beneath the shadow of our bower, meditating on the wonderful events of
the last few days.




CHAPTER XXI.


Sagacious and moral remarks in regard to life--A sail!--An unexpected
salute--The end of the black cat--A terrible dive--An incautious
proceeding and a frightful catastrophe.

Life is a strange compound.  Peterkin used to say of it, that it beat a
druggist's shop all to sticks; for, whereas the first is a compound of
good and bad, the other is a horrible compound of all that is utterly
detestable.  And indeed the more I consider it the more I am struck with
the strange mixture of good and evil that exists not only in the material
earth but in our own natures.  In our own Coral Island we had experienced
every variety of good that a bountiful Creator could heap on us.  Yet on
the night of the storm we had seen how almost, in our case,--and
altogether, no doubt, in the case of others less fortunate--all this good
might be swept away for ever.  We had seen the rich fruit-trees waving in
the soft air, the tender herbs shooting upwards under the benign
influence of the bright sun; and, the next day, we had seen these good
and beautiful trees and plants uprooted by the hurricane, crushed and
hurled to the ground in destructive devastation.  We had lived for many
months in a clime for the most part so beautiful, that we had often
wondered whether Adam and Eve had found Eden more sweet; and we had seen
the quiet solitudes of our paradise suddenly broken in upon by ferocious
savages, and the white sands stained with blood and strewed with lifeless
forms; yet, among these cannibals, we had seen many symptoms of a kindly
nature.  I pondered these things much, and, while I considered them,
there recurred to my memory those words which I had read in my Bible,--the
works of God are wonderful, and his ways past finding out.

After these poor savages had left us, we used to hold long and frequent
conversations about them, and I noticed that Peterkin's manner was now
much altered.  He did not, indeed, jest less heartily than before, but he
did so less frequently, and often there was a tone of deep seriousness in
his manner, if not in his words, which made him seem to Jack and me as if
he had grown two years older within a few days.  But indeed I was not
surprised at this, when I reflected on the awful realities which we had
witnessed so lately.  We could by no means shake off a tendency to gloom
for several weeks afterwards; but, as time wore away, our usual good
spirits returned somewhat, and we began to think of the visit of the
savages with feelings akin to those with which we recall a terrible
dream.

One day we were all enjoying ourselves in the Water Garden, preparatory
to going on a fishing excursion; for Peterkin had kept us in such
constant supply of hogs that we had become quite tired of pork, and
desired a change.  Peterkin was sunning himself on the ledge of rock,
while we were creeping among the rocks below.  Happening to look up, I
observed Peterkin cutting the most extraordinary capers and making
violent gesticulations for us to come up; so I gave Jack a push, and rose
immediately.
