wanderings.

One day, soon after this, he came upon two men resting under a tree in
the heat of the day. Being tired he stretched himself on the ground at
no great distance from them, and soon they all three began to talk to
one another. In the course of conversation, Bobino asked the two men
where they were going; and they replied that they were on their way to a
neighbouring town, where, that day, a new ruler was to be chosen by the
people.

While they were still talking, some sparrows settled on the tree under
which they were lying. Bobino was silent, and appeared to be listening
attentively. At the end of a few minutes he said to his companions, 'Do
you know what those sparrows are saying? They are saying that to-day one
of us will be chosen ruler of that town.'

The men said nothing, but looked at each other. A few minutes later,
seeing that Bobino had fallen asleep, they stole away, and made with all
haste for the town, where the election of a new ruler was to take place.

A great crowd was assembled in the market-place, waiting for the hour
when an eagle should be let loose from a cage, for it had been settled
that on whose-soever house the eagle alighted, the owner of that house
should become ruler of the town. At last the hour arrived; the eagle was
set free, and all eyes were strained to see where it would alight. But
circling over the heads of the crowd, it flew straight in the direction
of a young man, who was at that moment entering the town. This was none
other than Bobino, who had awakened soon after his companions had left
him, and had followed in their footsteps. All the people shouted and
proclaimed that he was their future ruler, and he was conducted by a
great crowd to the Governor's house, which was for the future to be his
home. And here he lived happily, and ruled wisely over the people.




The Dog and the Sparrow


There was once upon a time a sheep-dog whose master was so unkind that
he starved the poor beast, and ill-treated him in the cruellest manner.
At last the dog determined to stand this ill-usage no longer, and, one
day, he ran away from home. As he was trotting along the road he met a
sparrow, who stopped him and said: 'Brother, why do you look so sad?'

The dog answered: 'I am sad because I am hungry, and have nothing to
eat.'

'If that's all, dear brother,' said the sparrow, 'come to the town with
me, and I'll soon get food for you.'

So they went together to the town, and when they came to a butcher's
shop, the sparrow said to the dog: 'You stand still and I'll peck down a
piece of meat for you.'

First she looked all round to see that no one was watching her, and then
she set to work to peck at a piece of meat that lay on the edge of a
shelf, till at last it fell down. The dog seized it ravenously, and ran
with it to a dark corner where he gobbled it up in a very few minutes.

When he had finished it, the sparrow said: 'Now come with me to another
shop, and I will get you a second piece, so that your hunger may be
satisfied.' When the dog had finished the second piece of meat, the
sparrow asked him: 'Brother, have you had enough now?'

'Yes,' replied the dog, 'I've had quite enough meat, but I haven't had
any bread yet.'

The sparrow said: 'You shall have as much bread as you like, only come
with me.' Then she led him to a baker's shop, and pecked so long at two
rolls on a shelf that at last they fell down, and the dog ate them up.

But still his hunger was not appeased; so the sparrow took him to
another baker's shop, and got some more rolls for him. Then she asked
him: 'Well, brother, are you satisfied?'

'Yes,' he replied; 'and now let us go for a little walk outside the
town.'

So the two went for a stroll into the country; but the day was very hot,
and after they had gone a short distance the dog said: 'I am very tired,
and would like to go to sleep.'

'Sleep, then,' said the sparrow, 'and I will keep watch meantime on the
branch of a tree.'

So the dog lay down in the middle of the road, and was soon fast asleep.
While he was sleeping a carter passed by, driving a waggon drawn by
three horses, and laden with two barrels of wine. The sparrow noticed
that the man was not going out of his way to avoid the dog, but was
driving right in the middle of the road where the poor animal lay; so
she called out: 'Carter, take care what you are about, or I shall make
you suffer for it.'

But the carter merely laughed at her words, and, cracking his whip, he
drove his waggon right over the dog, so that the heavy wheels killed
him.

Then the sparrow called out: 'You have caused my brother's death, and
your cruelty will cost you your waggon and horses.'

'Waggon and horses, indeed,' said the carter; 'I'd like to know how you
could rob me of them!'

The sparrow said nothing, but crept under the cover of the waggon and
pecked so long at the bunghole of one of the barrels that at last
she got the cork away, and all the wine ran out without the carter's
noticing it.

But at last he turned round and saw that the bottom of the cart was
wet, and when he examined it, he found that one of the barrels was quite
empty. 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!' he exclaimed.

'You'll have worse luck still,' said the sparrow, as she perched on the
head of one of the horses and pecked out its eyes.

When the carter saw what had happened, he seized an axe and tried to hit
the sparrow with it, but the little bird flew up into the air, and the
carter only hit the blind horse on the head, so that it fell down dead.
'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!' he exclaimed again.

'You'll have worse luck yet,' said the sparrow; and when the carter
drove on with his two horses she crept under the covering again, and
pecked away at the cork of the second barrel till she got it away, and
all the wine poured out on to the road.

When the carter perceived this fresh disaster he called out once more:
'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

But the sparrow answered: 'Your bad luck is not over yet,' and flying on
to the head of the second horse she pecked out its eyes.

The carter jumped out of the waggon and seized his axe, with which he
meant to kill the sparrow; but the little bird flew high into the air,
and the blow fell on the poor blind horse instead, and killed it on the
spot. Then the carter exclaimed: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

'You've not got to the end of your bad luck yet,' sang the sparrow; and,
perching on the head of the third horse, she pecked out its eyes.

The carter, blind with rage, let his axe fly at the bird; but once more
she escaped the blow, which fell on the only remaining horse, and killed
it. And again the carter called out: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

'You'll have worse luck yet,' said the sparrow, 'for now I mean to make
your home desolate.'

The carter had to leave his waggon on the road, and he went home in a
towering passion. As soon as he saw his wife, he called out: 'Oh! what
bad luck I have had! all my wine is spilt, and my horses are all three
dead.'

'My dear husband,' replied his wife, 'your bad luck pursues you, for a
wicked little sparrow has assembled all the other birds in the world,
and they are in our barn eating everything up.'

The carter went out to the barn where he kept his corn and found it was
just as his wife had said. Thousands and thousands of birds were eating
up the grain, and in the middle of them sat the little sparrow. When he
saw his old enemy, the carter cried out: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I
am!'

'Not unlucky enough yet,' answered the sparrow; 'for, mark my words,
carter, your cruel conduct will cost you your life;' and with these
words she flew into the air.

The carter was much depressed by the loss of all his worldly goods, and
sat down at the fire plotting vengeance on the sparrow, while the little
bird sat on the window ledge and sang in mocking tones: 'Yes, carter,
your cruel conduct will cost you your life.'

Then the carter seized his axe and threw it at the sparrow, but he
only broke the window panes, and did not do the bird a bit of harm. She
hopped in through the broken window and, perching on the mantelpiece,
she called out; 'Yes, carter, it will cost you your life.'

The carter, quite beside himself with rage, flew at the sparrow again
with his axe, but the little creature always eluded his blows, and he
only succeeded in destroying all his furniture. At last, however, he
managed to catch the bird in his hands. Then his wife called out: 'Shall
I wring her neck?'

'Certainly not,' replied her husband, 'that would be far too easy a
death for her; she must die in a far crueller fashion than that. I will
eat her alive;' and he suited the action to his words. But the sparrow
fluttered and struggled inside him till she got up into the man's mouth,
and then she popped out her head and said: 'Yes, carter, it will cost
you your life.'

The carter handed his wife the axe, and said: 'Wife, kill the bird in my
mouth dead.'

The woman struck with all her might, but she missed the bird and hit the
carter right on the top of his head, so that he fell down dead. But the
sparrow escaped out of his mouth and flew away into the air.

[From the German, Kletke.]




The Story of the Three Sons of Hali


Till his eighteenth birthday the young Neangir lived happily in a
village about forty miles from Constantinople, believing that Mohammed
and Zinebi his wife, who had brought him up, were his real parents.

Neangir was quite content with his lot, though he was neither rich nor
great, and unlike most young men of his age had no desire to leave
his home. He was therefore completely taken by surprise when one day
Mohammed told him with many sighs that the time had now come for him to
go to Constantinople, and fix on a profession for himself. The choice
would be left to him, but he would probably prefer either to be a
soldier or one of the doctors learned in the law, who explain the Koran
to the ignorant people. 'You know the holy book nearly by heart,' ended
the old man, 'so that in a very short time you would be fitted to teach
others. But write to us and tell us how you pass your life, and we, on
our side, will promise never to forget you.'

So saying, Mohammed gave Neangir four piastres to start him in the great
city, and obtained leave for him to join a caravan which was about to
set off for Constantinople.

The journey took some days, as caravans go very slowly, but at last
the walls and towers of the capital appeared in the distance. When the
caravan halted the travellers went their different ways, and Neangir was
left, feeling very strange and rather lonely. He had plenty of courage
and made friends very easily; still, not only was it the first time he
had left the village where he had been brought up, but no one had ever
spoken to him of Constantinople, and he did not so much as know the name
of a single street or of a creature who lived in it.

Wondering what he was to do next, Neangir stood still for a moment to
look about him, when suddenly a pleasant-looking man came up, and bowing
politely, asked if the youth would do him the honour of staying in
his house till he had made some plans for himself. Neangir, not seeing
anything else he could do, accepted the stranger's offer and followed
him home.

They entered a large room, where a girl of about twelve years old was
laying three places at the table.

'Zelida,' said the stranger, 'was I not quite right when I told you that
I should bring back a friend to sup with us?'

'My father,' replied the girl, 'you are always right in what you say,
and what is better still, you never mislead others.' As she spoke, an
old slave placed on the table a dish called pillau, made of rice and
meat, which is a great favourite among people in the East, and setting
down glasses of sherbet before each person, left the room quietly.

During the meal the host talked a great deal upon all sorts of subjects;
but Neangir did nothing but look at Zelida, as far as he could without
being positively rude.

The girl blushed and grew uncomfortable, and at last turned to her
father. 'The stranger's eyes never wander from me,' she said in a low
and hesitating voice. 'If Hassan should hear of it, jealousy will make
him mad.'

'No, no,' replied the father, 'you are certainly not for this young man.
Did I not tell you before that I intend him for your sister Argentine.
I will at once take measures to fix his heart upon her,' and he rose
and opened a cupboard, from which he took some fruits and a jug of
wine, which he put on the table, together with a small silver and
mother-of-pearl box.

'Taste this wine,' he said to the young man, pouring some into a glass.

'Give me a little, too,' cried Zelida.

'Certainly not,' answered her father, 'you and Hassan both had as much
as was good for you the other day.'

'Then drink some yourself,' replied she, 'or this young man will think
we mean to poison him.'

'Well, if you wish, I will do so,' said the father; 'this elixir is not
dangerous at my age, as it is at yours.'

When Neangir had emptied his glass, his host opened the mother-of-pearl
box and held it out to him. Neangir was beside himself with delight at
the picture of a young maiden more beautiful than anything he had ever
dreamed of. He stood speechless before it, while his breast swelled with
a feeling quite new to him.

His two companions watched him with amusement, until at last Neangir
roused himself. 'Explain to me, I pray you,' he said, 'the meaning of
these mysteries. Why did you ask me here? Why did you force me to drink
this dangerous liquid which has set fire to my blood? Why have you shown
me this picture which has almost deprived me of reason?'

'I will answer some of your questions,' replied his host, 'but all,
I may not. The picture that you hold in your hand is that of Zelida's
sister. It has filled your heart with love for her; therefore, go and
seek her. When you find her, you will find yourself.'

'But where shall I find her?' cried Neangir, kissing the charming
miniature on which his eyes were fixed.

'I am unable to tell you more,' replied his host cautiously.

'But I can' interrupted Zelida eagerly. 'To-morrow you must go to the
Jewish bazaar, and buy a watch from the second shop on the right hand.
And at midnight--'

But what was to happen at midnight Neangir did not hear, for Zelida's
father hastily laid his hand over her mouth, crying: 'Oh, be silent,
child! Would you draw down on you by imprudence the fate of your unhappy
sisters?' Hardly had he uttered the words, when a thick black vapour
rose about him, proceeding from the precious bottle, which his rapid
movement had overturned. The old slave rushed in and shrieked loudly,
while Neangir, upset by this strange adventure, left the house.

He passed the rest of the night on the steps of a mosque, and with
the first streaks of dawn he took his picture out of the folds of his
turban. Then, remembering Zelida's words, he inquired the way to the
bazaar, and went straight to the shop she had described.

In answer to Neangir's request to be shown some watches, the merchant
produced several and pointed out the one which he considered the best.
The price was three gold pieces, which Neangir readily agreed to give
him; but the man made a difficulty about handing over the watch unless
he knew where his customer lived.

'That is more than I know myself,' replied Neangir. 'I only arrived in
the town yesterday and cannot find the way to the house where I went
first.'

'Well,' said the merchant, 'come with me, and I will take you to a good
Mussulman, where you will have everything you desire at a small charge.'

Neangir consented, and the two walked together through several streets
till they reached the house recommended by the Jewish merchant. By his
advice the young man paid in advance the last gold piece that remained
to him for his food and lodging.

As soon as Neangir had dined he shut himself up in his room, and
thrusting his hand into the folds of his turban, drew out his beloved
portrait. As he did so, he touched a sealed letter which had apparently
been hidden there without his knowledge, and seeing it was written
by his foster-mother, Zinebi, he tore it eagerly open. Judge of his
surprise when he read these words:

'My dearest Child,--This letter, which you will some day find in your
turban, is to inform you that you are not really our son. We believe
your father to have been a great lord in some distant land, and inside
this packet is a letter from him, threatening to be avenged on us if you
are not restored to him at once. We shall always love you, but do not
seek us or even write to us. It will be useless.'

In the same wrapper was a roll of paper with a few words as follows,
traced in a hand unknown to Neangir:

'Traitors, you are no doubt in league with those magicians who have
stolen the two daughters of the unfortunate Siroco, and have taken from
them the talisman given them by their father. You have kept my son from
me, but I have found out your hiding-place and swear by the Holy Prophet
to punish your crime. The stroke of my scimitar is swifter than the
lightning.'

The unhappy Neangir on reading these two letters--of which he understood
absolutely nothing--felt sadder and more lonely than ever. It soon
dawned on him that he must be the son of the man who had written to
Mohammed and his wife, but he did not know where to look for him, and
indeed thought much more about the people who had brought him up and
whom he was never to see again.

To shake off these gloomy feelings, so as to be able to make some plans
