
Pietro finally posted himself at the side of the house, where he could
command a view of both front and rear, and there maintained his
stand nearly underneath the window at which his intended prisoner was
standing.

As Phil was watching him, suddenly he heard steps, and Bridget McGuire
entered the chamber. She bore in her hand the same tin dipper before
noticed, filled with steaming hot water. Phil regarded her with some
surprise.

"Would you like to see some fun now?" she asked, her face covered by a
broad smile.

"Yes," said Phil.

"Open the windy, aisy, so he won't hear."

Phil obeyed directions, and managed not to attract the attention of his
besieger below, who chanced at the moment to be looking toward the door
in the rear.

"Now," said Bridget, "take this dipper and give him the binifit of it."

"Don't let him see you do it," cautioned his protector.

Phil took the idea and the dipper at once.

Phil, holding the dipper carefully, discharged the contents with such
good aim that they drenched the watching Pietro. The water being pretty
hot, a howl of pain and rage rose from below, and Pietro danced about
frantically. Looking up, he saw no one, for Phil had followed directions
and drawn his head in immediately. But Mrs. McGuire, less cautious,
looked out directly afterward.

"Will ye go now, or will ye stand jist where I throw the hot water?"

In reply, Pietro indulged in some rather emphatic language, but being
in the Italian language, in which he was more fluent, it fell unregarded
upon the ears of Mrs. McGuire.

"I told you to go," she said. "I've got some more wather inside."

Pietro stepped back in alarm. He had no disposition to take another warm
shower bath, and he had found out to his cost that Bridget McGuire was
not a timid woman, or easily frightened.

But he had not yet abandoned the siege. He shifted his ground to the
front of the house, and took a position commanding a view of the front
door.



CHAPTER XXII

THE SIEGE IS RAISED

Though Phil was the besieged party, his position was decidedly
preferable to that of Pietro. The afternoon was passing, and he was
earning nothing. He finally uncovered his organ and began to play. A few
gathered around him, but they were of that class with whom money is not
plenty. So after a while, finding no pennies forthcoming, he stopped
suddenly, but did not move on, as his auditors expected him to. He still
kept his eyes fixed on Mrs. McGuire's dwelling. He did this so long as
to attract observation.

"You'll know the house next time, mister," said a sharp boy.

Pietro was about to answer angrily, when a thought struck him.

"Will you do something for me?" he asked.

"How much?" inquired the boy, suggestively.

"Five cents," answered Pietro, understanding his meaning.

"It isn't much," said the boy, reflectively. "Tell me what you want."

Though Pietro was not much of a master of English, he contrived to make
the boy understand that he was to go round to the back door and tell
Mrs. McGuire that he, Pietro, was gone. He intended to hide close
by, and when Phil came out, as he hoped, on the strength of his
disappearance, he would descend upon him and bear him off triumphantly.

Armed with these instructions, the boy went round to the back door and
knocked.

Thinking it might be Phil's enemy, Mrs. McGuire went to the door,
holding in one hand a dipper of hot suds, ready to use in case of
emergency.

"Well, what do you want?" she asked, abruptly, seeing that it was a boy.

"He's gone," said the boy.

"Who's gone?"

"The man with the hand-organ, ma'am."

"And what for do I care?" demanded Bridget, suspiciously.

This was a question the boy could not answer. In fact, he wondered
himself why such a message should have been sent. He could only look at
her in silence.

"Who told you to tell the man was gone?" asked Bridget, with a
shrewdness worthy of a practitioner at the bar.

"The Italian told me."

"Did he?" repeated Bridget, who saw into the trick at once. "He's very
kind."

"He didn't want you to know he told me," said the boy, remembering his
instructions when it was too late.

Mrs. McGuire nodded her head intelligently.

"True for you," said she. "What did he pay you for tellin' me?"

"Five cents."

"Thin it's five cints lost. Do you want to earn another five cints?"

"Yes," said the boy, promptly.

"Thin do what I tell you."

"What is it?"

"Come in and I'll tell you."

The boy having entered, Mrs. McGuire led him to the front door.

"Now," said she, "when I open the door, run as fast as you can. The man
that sint you will think it is another boy, and will run after you. Do
ye mind?"

The young messenger began to see the joke, and was quite willing to help
carry it out. But even the prospective fun did not make him forgetful of
his promised recompense.

"Where's the five cents?" he asked.

"Here," said Bridget, and diving into the depths of a capacious pocket,
she drew out five pennies.

"That's all right," said the boy. "Now, open the door."

Bridget took care to make a noise in opening the door, and, as it
opened, she said in a loud and exultant voice, "You're all safe now; the
man's gone."

"Now run," she said, in a lower voice.

The boy dashed out of the doorway, but Mrs. McGuire remained standing
there. She was not much surprised to see Pietro run out from the
other side of the house, and prepare to chase the runaway. But quickly
perceiving that he was mistaken, he checked his steps, and turning, saw
Mrs. McGuire with a triumphant smile on her face.

"Why don't you run?" she said. "You can catch him."

"It isn't my brother," he answered, sullenly.

"I thought you was gone," she said.

"I am waiting for my brother."

"Thin you'll have to wait. You wanted to chate me, you haythen! But
Bridget McGuire ain't to be took in by such as you. You'd better lave
before my man comes home from his work, or he'll give you lave of
absence wid a kick."

Without waiting for an answer, Bridget shut the door, and bolted
it--leaving her enemy routed at all points.

In fact Pietro began to lose courage. He saw that he had a determined
foe to contend with. He had been foiled thus far in every effort to
obtain possession of Phil. But the more difficult the enterprise seemed,
the more anxious he became to carry it out successfully. He knew that
the padrone would not give him a very cordial reception if he returned
without Phil, especially as he would be compelled to admit that he had
seen him, and had nevertheless failed to secure him. His uncle would
not be able to appreciate the obstacles he had encountered, but would
consider him in fault. For this reason he did not like to give up
the siege, though he saw little hopes of accomplishing his object. At
length, however, he was obliged to raise the siege, but from a cause
with which neither Phil nor his defender had anything to do.

The sky, which had till this time been clear, suddenly darkened. In ten
minutes rain began to fall in large drops. A sudden shower, unusual
at this time of the year, came up, and pedestrians everywhere, caught
without umbrellas, fled panic-stricken to the nearest shelter. Twice
before, as we know, Pietro had suffered from a shower of warm water.
This, though colder, was even more formidable. Vanquished by the forces
of nature, Pietro shouldered his instrument and fled incontinently. Phil
might come out now, if he chose. His enemy had deserted his post, and
the coast was clear.

"That'll make the haythen lave," thought Mrs. McGuire, who, though sorry
to see the rain on account of her washing, exulted in the fact that
Pietro was caught out in it.

She went to the front door and looked out. Looking up the street, she
just caught a glimpse of the organ in rapid retreat. She now unbolted
the door, the danger being at an end, and went up to acquaint Phil with
the good news.

"You may come down now," she said.

"Is he gone?" inquired Phil.

"Shure he's runnin' up the street as fast as his legs can carry him."

"Thank you for saving me from him," said, Phil, with a great sense of
relief at the flight of his enemy.

"Whisht now; I don't nade any thanks. Come down by the fire now."

So Phil went down, and Bridget, on hospitable thoughts intent, drew her
only rocking-chair near the stove, and forced Phil to sit down in it.
Then she told him, with evident enjoyment, of the trick which Pietro had
tried to play on her, and how he had failed.

"He couldn't chate me, the haythen!" she concluded. "I was too smart for
the likes of him, anyhow. Where do you live when you are at home?"

"I have no home now," said Phil, with tears in his eyes.

"And have you no father and mother?"

"Yes," said Phil. "They live in Italy."

"And why did they let you go so far away?"

"They were poor, and the padrone offered them money," answered Phil,
forced to answer, though the subject was an unpleasant one.

"And did they know he was a bad man and would bate you?"

"I don't think they knew," said Phil, with hesitation. "My mother did
not know."

"I've got three childer myself," said Bridget; "they'll get wet comin'
home from school, the darlints--but I wouldn't let them go with any man
to a far country, if he'd give me all the gowld in the world. And where
does that man live that trates you so bad?"

"In New York."

"And does Peter--or whatever the haythen's name is--live there too?"

"Yes, Pietro lives there. The padrone is his uncle, and treats him
better than the rest of us. He sent him after me to bring me back."

"And what is your name? Is it Peter, like his?"

"No; my name is Filippo."

"It's a quare name."

"American boys call me Phil."

"That's better. It's a Christian name, and the other isn't. Before I
married my man I lived five years at Mrs. Robertson's, and she had a boy
they called Phil. His whole name was Philip."

"That's my name in English."

"Then why don't you call it so, instead of Philip-O? What good is the O,
anyhow? In my country they put the O before the name, instead of to the
tail-end of it. My mother was an O'Connor. But it's likely ivery country
has its own ways."

Phil knew very little of Ireland, and did not fully understand Mrs.
McGuire's philosophical remarks. Otherwise they might have amused him,
as they may possibly amuse my readers.

I cannot undertake to chronicle the conversation that took place between
Phil and his hostess. She made numerous inquiries, to some of which he
was able to give satisfactory replies, to others not. But in half
an hour there was an interruption, and a noisy one. Three stout,
freckled-faced children ran in at the back door, dripping as if they had
just emerged from a shower-bath. Phil moved aside to let them approach
the stove.

Forthwith Mrs. McGuire was engaged in motherly care, removing a part
of the wet clothing, and lamenting for the state in which her sturdy
offspring had returned. But presently order was restored, and the bustle
was succeeded by quiet.

"Play us a tune," said Pat, the oldest.

Phil complied with the request, and played tune after tune, to the great
delight of the children, as well as of Mrs. McGuire herself. The result
was that when, shortly after, on the storm subsiding, Phil proposed
to go, the children clamored to have him stay, and he received such
a cordial invitation to stop till the next morning that he accepted,
nothing loath. So till the next morning our young hero is provided for.



CHAPTER XXIII

A PITCHED BATTLE

Has my youthful reader ever seen a dog slinking home with downcast
look and tall between his legs? It was with very much the same air
that Pietro in the evening entered the presence of the padrone. He had
received a mortifying defeat, and now he had before him the difficult
task of acknowledging it.

"Well, Pietro," said the padrone, harshly, "where is Filippo?"

"He is not with me," answered Pietro, in an embarrassed manner.

"Didn't you see him then?" demanded his uncle, hastily.

For an instant Pietro was inclined to reply in the negative, knowing
that the censure he would incur would be less. But Phil might yet be
taken--he probably would be, sooner or later, Pietro thought--and then
his falsehood would be found out, and he would in consequence lose the
confidence of the padrone. So, difficult though it was, he thought it
politic to tell the truth.

"Si, signore, I saw him," said he.

"Then why didn't you drag him home?" demanded his uncle, with contracted
