would far rather fight with my vizor up, save that one must have its
protection when arrows or cross-bow bolts are flying; but as against
other knights I would always keep it up; the helm itself and the
cheek-pieces cover no small part of the face, and naught but a straight
thrust could harm one, and I think I could trust my sword to ward that
off. However, I have never yet had occasion to try. I have had more
than one encounter with Eastern and African pirates during my voyages,
but I have never taken my helmet with me on such journeys, and have not
suffered by its loss."

By this time they were across the bridge, and, proceeding at a sharp
trot, until beyond the boundaries of Southwark, they broke into a
gallop. When, after going at this pace for three or four miles, they
reined their horses into a walk, Sir Ralph said, "Albert, if it likes
you, you can remove your helmet and carry it on your saddle-bow."

"Thanks, father; indeed I was well-nigh reeling in my saddle with heat.
Edgar, will you take yours off?"

"No, thank you, I have got to get accustomed to it, and may as well do
so now as at any other time." Under their helmet both wore a small
velvet cap. "You are looking quite pale, Albert," Edgar went on, as his
friend unhelmed.

"It is not everyone who is made of iron, as you are," Albert laughed.
"You must make allowances for me. In another year or two I hope that I
too shall be able to bear the weight of all these things without
feeling them; but you must remember that it is not two years since I
began hard exercise, while you have been at it since your childhood."

"I don't forget it, Albert, and I wonder at you daily."

At Greenwich they heard many tales as to the damage committed by the
peasants on their homeward way. Houses had been sacked and burnt, and
many persons of substance killed.

"The king ought to have let us charge the fellows," Sir Ralph said, as
they went forward again. "When men find that they get off without
punishment for misdeeds, they will recommence them as soon as the
danger is past. One lesson would have made itself felt over the whole
land. I heard last night that there was news that many manors and the
houses of men of law have been destroyed in Essex, and that the rioters
have beheaded the Lord Chief-Justice of England, Sir John of Cambridge,
and the Prior of St. Edmondsbury, and set up their heads on poles in
the market-place of Bury, and have destroyed all the charters and
documents of the town. We shall have great trouble before order is
restored, whereas had we charged the rioters of Kent, who are the worst
of all, the others would have been cowed when they heard of the
slaughter. By our lady, we will give these fellows a rough lesson if we
find them besieging our castle."

"Is it a strong place, Sir Ralph?"

"No. With a fair garrison it could easily repel any assault by such
fellows as these, but it could not stand for a day against an attack by
a strong body of men-at-arms, even if they were unprovided with
machines."

When within five miles of the castle they obtained sure news that it
was attacked by some two thousand of the rioters, but that so far as
was known it was still holding out.

"Shall we gallop on, Sir Ralph?" the alderman asked.

"Nay, we will rather go more slowly than before, so that our horses may
be in good wind when they arrive. We shall need all their strength, for
we may have to charge through them two or three times before they break
and run, and then we will pursue and cut them up as long as the horses
have breath. These fellows must have a lesson, or we shall never be
able to dwell in peace and quiet."

When within half a mile of the castle they saw that the flag was still
flying above it, and knew that they had arrived in time. Then Albert
put on his helmet again, and the two lads followed the example of Sir
Ralph and the alderman, and lowered their vizors, for, as the knight
said, "Though some of the knaves threw away their bows at Smithfield,
many of the others took them away." On reaching a field near the
castle, they could see that a fierce fight was going on. The rioters
had procured ladders, and were striving to climb the walls, while a
small party of armed men were defending the battlement.

"By St. Mary, we are but just in time!" the knight said. "We four will
ride in front. Sir Robert, will you bid your men form in two lines and
follow us, one line twenty yards behind the other. Bid them all keep
together in their rank, the second line closing up with the first if
the fellows make a stout resistance, but above all things they must
keep in their order, and follow close behind us."

The alderman raised his voice, and repeated the orders to the men.

"The reports as to the rascals' numbers were about right," Sir Ralph
said. "Now, boys, do you keep between us, and leave a space of some
three yards between each horse, so as to give each man room to swing
his sword. Now, Sir Robert, let us have at them."

Going slowly at first, they increased their speed to a fierce gallop as
they neared the mass of rioters. They had been noticed now. The men on
the ladders hastily climbed down again; confused orders were heard, and
many were seen separating themselves from the main body and flying. The
mass of the rioters, however, held their ground, seeing how small was
the number of their opponents. A flight of arrows was shot when they
were some sixty yards distant, but as all were bending forward in their
saddles, and the arrows were shot in haste, most of them fell harmless;
three or four of the horses were struck, and plunged violently from the
pain, but still kept on with the others. With a shout the party fell
upon the rioters, the weight of the riders and horses throwing great
numbers to the ground, while the knights and their followers hewed
right and left with their swords.

The bravest spirits had thrown themselves in front, and once the troops
had cut their way through these, but little resistance was met with
beyond, the peasants seeking only to get out of their way. As soon as
they were through the crowd they turned again, and in the same order as
before, charged the mob, with the same success. As they drew up and
again turned, Sir Ralph ordered them to charge this time in single line.

"They are becoming utterly disheartened now," he said, "and we shall
sweep a wider path."

This time when they drew up they saw that the crowd had broken up, and
the rioters were flying filled with dismay through the fields.

"Chase and slay!" Sir Ralph shouted, raising his vizor that his voice
might reach all; "give no quarter; the business must be ended once and
for all."

Edgar and Albert both threw up their vizors--there was no fear of
arrows now, and both felt half stifled. There was no longer any order
kept, and the horsemen followed the fugitives in all directions. The
two lads kept together so as to be able to give each other assistance
should any stand be made. None, however, was attempted; the greater
portion of the rioters had thrown away their arms, and when overtaken
they raised cries, for mercy.

"You gave none to the Flemings," the lads shouted in return, infuriated
by the scenes that they had witnessed in London; and for an hour they
followed the fugitives, sparing none who came within reach of their
swords.

"We have done enough now," Albert exclaimed at last; "I am fairly
spent, and can scarce lift my sword."

"My horse is spent, but not my strength," Edgar said, as he reined up.
"Well, we have avenged the Flemings, and have done something towards
paying these fellows for their insults to the princess. Now let us wend
our way back; I must say good-bye to Sir Ralph and the sturdy alderman,
and will then ride home and see how my father has fared. I have little
fear that any harm has befallen him, for his magic would frighten the
rioters even more than our swords. Well, our armour has stood us in
good stead, Albert. When we charged the first time I was several times
struck with bill-hook and pike, and more than one arrow shivered on my
breast-piece, but I found that the blows all fell harmless, and after
that I wasted no pains in defending myself, but simply struck
straightforward blows at my opponents."

"I found the same, Edgar; the weapons glanced off the armour as a stone
would fly from a sheet of strong ice."

For a while they rode slowly to give their horses time to recover wind.
When they had done so, they rode more rapidly, and, keeping a straight
line--they had before ridden a devious course in pursuit--they arrived
in an hour at the castle. Here they found that most of the horsemen had
already returned. Two hundred bodies lay dead on the ground over which
they had charged so often; and when notes were compared they calculated
that no less than five hundred of the rioters had been slain.

"I think we shall hear no more of rioting in this neighbourhood," Sir
Ralph said, grimly. "If the king had but taken my advice and ridden out
to Blackheath with his knights and half the garrison of the Tower, and
with such aid as the loyal citizens would have furnished him, he and
the city would have been spared the humiliation that they have
suffered. One blow struck in time will save the need of twenty struck
afterwards. Had we but killed a thousand on Blackheath it would have
spared us the trouble of slaying perhaps ten times that number now;
would have saved the lives of many honourable gentlemen throughout the
country, to say nothing of the damage that has been wrought in London.
So you are riding home, Edgar? You are right, lad; I trust you will
find all quiet there."

"Would you like twenty of my men to ride with you?" the alderman asked.

"No, thank you, Sir Robert; my father, who, as I told you, is a man of
science, has prepared sundry devices, any one of which would terrify
these peasants out of their wits; and if they have troubled him, which
is like enough, I will warrant that he has given them as great a scare
as we have given these fellows to-day."

"At any rate, Edgar, you had best take a fresh horse. Yours has done a
good day's work, indeed; and it is just as well that you should
bestride an animal that can carry you off gaily should you fall in with
another party. There are half a dozen in the stalls. I don't suppose
they have been out since we have been away; besides, methinks that
after such hot work as we have been doing a cup of wine will do us all
good."

Edgar, therefore, rode into the castle, and while he was taking a cup
of wine and a hasty meal in the hall, Sir Ralph's servitors changed his
saddle to a fresh horse, and the lad then started for home. Confident
as he felt, it was still a great satisfaction to him to see that no
signs of violence were visible as he approached the house. The door in
the gate was indeed closed, contrary to usual custom.

Dismounting, he rung the bell. A small grille in the door opened, then
the servitor's head appeared.

"Now then, Andrew, what are you staring at? Why don't you open the
gate?"

"I was not sure that it was yourself, Master Edgar. In that grand
helmet I did not at first make you out. Well, I am glad that you have
come back safely, young master, for we heard of parlous doings in
London."

"Yes, I have come back all right. I hope that everything has gone on
well here."

"Ay, ay, sir; we had a bit of trouble, but, bless you, the master sent
them running, most scared out of their senses." And the man burst into
a fit of laughter.

"Here, take the horse, Andrew; I must go in to see him."

"Hulloa! hulloa!" Mr. Ormskirk exclaimed; "is this really my son?"

"It is, father; and right glad am I to see you safe and well. I told
Sir Ralph that I felt sure you would be able to hold your own here;
still, I was very pleased when I saw that the gate stood uninjured, and
that there were no signs of attack."

"Has Sir Ralph come back?" Mr. Ormskirk asked; "and knows he that the
rabble are besieging his castle?"

"Were besieging, father; for with us came a worthy city knight with a
troop of fifty stout men; and we have given the rioters such a lesson
that methinks there will be no more rioting in this part of Kent, for
from four to five hundred of them have been slain, and I believe all
the rest are still running!"

"It was a lesson much needed, Edgar, for after their doings in London
these fellows would never have been quiet, had they not been roughly
taught that they are but like a flock of sheep before the charge of
men-at-arms.

"But whence this armour, my son? Truly it is a goodly suit. My coffer
is so low that I know not how I shall make shift to pay for it."

"It is a gift, father, and Albert has one like it. 'Tis of the finest
steel, and is, as you see, all undinted, though it has had many a
shrewd blow from arrow, bill-hook, and pike in to-day's fight. But the
story is a long one to tell, and I pray you, before I begin it, to let
me know how matters have fared here, for I hear from Andrew that you
have not been left entirely alone."

Mr. Ormskirk smiled. "No, I had a goodly company three days ago. Some
hundred of men from Dartford joined, I am sorry to say, by a good share
of those at the village, came round here in the evening with the
intent, as they were good enough to say, of roasting the witchman in
his bed. Andrew had brought me news of their intentions, so I was ready
for them. I had gone out and had painted on the door, with that stuff I
told you of, the rough figure of a skeleton holding a dart in his hand.
It was of the same colour as the door, so that it did not show in the
daylight. Then I fixed along on the top of the wall a number of
coloured lights that I had seen in use in Italy on fete days, and of
which I learned the composition. I had, as I told you before, placed
cases of Friar Bacon's powder round the house, and had laid trains to
them by which they could be fired from within the wall.

"Had it been dark when they came the skeleton and that skull would have
sufficed; but it wanted still an hour before these devices would be of
use. I made them out in the distance, and thought that something else
would be needed. Therefore I got that Eastern gong that I purchased as
a curiosity at Genoa, and lighted a fire in the courtyard. As soon as
they approached I threw pitch into the fire, making thereby a great
column of smoke, and set Andrew to beat the gong furiously, telling him
to shout and yell as he pleased. Then I went to an upper window to
observe the effect. The crowd had halted some fifty yards away and
stood open-mouthed gazing at the place, and indeed it was no wonder
that such ignorant men were scared, for truly the yelling of Andrew and
the noise of the gong were enough to frighten anyone who knew not what
it meant.

"For some time it seemed to me that they would depart without venturing
farther, but some of the bolder spirits plucked up courage and went
about among the others shouting that no true Kentish man would be
frightened by a noise that meant nothing, they had but to break down
the door and they would soon put an end to it. However, the night began
to fall before they got fairly in motion, and I went down and prepared
to fire the powder should it be needful, and besides I hoisted the
skull above the parapet over the gate. Thinking that the light of the
phosphorus might not show up well a short distance away, I placed in
addition some red fire in the skull. I then got on the wall, and sat
down where I could peep out without being seen. Shouting a great deal
to encourage each other, they came on until within a few paces of the
gate. Then I heard a sudden cry, and those in front pushed back and
stood staring at the door as if bewitched; then all ran away some
distance. After much talk they came forward again, timidly pointing to
the figure as they advanced.

"This was now, doubtless, plain enough to be well made out fifty yards
away. There they came to a halt again. Then I called out to Andrew to
light the fire in the skull, and set the jaw wagging, having so
balanced it, that having been once set going it would wag for two or
three minutes before it stopped. Then he ran one way with a brand from
the fire, and I the other, and twelve green fires burst out. There was
a yell of horror when the skull was made out. The alarm was doubtless
heightened by the green fire, they having never seen such a thing
before, and they started to run wildly off. To hasten their flight I
ran down and fired four of the powder cases, which exploded with a
noise that might have been heard at Dartford.

"After that Andrew and I went quietly to bed, sure that not another
soul would venture to attack the house. Andrew went into the village in
the morning. He found that some of the men had been well-nigh killed by
fright. All sorts of tales were told of great blazing skeletons that
dashed out from the gate with dart in hand, and of a skull that
breathed out red fire from a blazing mouth, and grinned and gibbered at
them. As to the noises and the ghastly green fire, none could account
for them, and I do believe that there is not a villager who would
approach within a quarter of a mile of the house after dark, on any
condition."




CHAPTER XI

AN INVITATION


Edgar laughed heartily at his father's account of the success of his
defence of the house. Then he said: "I hope, father, that distorted
accounts of the affair may not get you into trouble with the Church."

"I have no fear of that, Edgar. I had shown the prior my preparations,
and he approved of them heartily, being a man of much broader
intelligence than is common. Indeed, he begged of me a pot of my
shining paste, and with it painted the stone crucifix over the abbey
gateway. And it was well that he did so, for last night some men came
out from Dartford with intent to plunder the priory of its deeds and
muniments, but on seeing the glowing crucifix, they went off in fear
and trembling, and the villagers were saying this morning that the
priory had been protected by a miracle, while you see in my case they
attribute it to the work of the devil. And now, Edgar, tell me all that
has befallen you since you went away."

Edgar related the various adventures that had happened.

When he had concluded, his father said: "Truly, Edgar, you have been
fortunate indeed, which is another way of saying that you have
skilfully grasped the opportunities that presented themselves. The man
who bemoans ill-fortune is the man too apathetic, too unready, or too
cowardly to grasp opportunity. The man who is called fortunate is, on
the other hand, he who never lets a chance slip by, who is cool,
resolute, and determined. During the time that you have been away you
have made friends of two wealthy merchants, and have rendered them both
high services; you have also as greatly benefited our neighbour, Sir
Ralph De Courcy, and have placed your foot so firmly on the ladder,
that 'tis your own fault if you do not rise high. And now, what think
you of doing?"

"I have the intention of staying at home for a while, father. There
will be troubles for a time, but I care not to take part in the hunting
down of these poor peasants north of the river, who, unlike these
fellows, were well content when the king offered them the charter
granting their demands, and retired peacefully to their homes. So I
would rather remain here quietly until I have a chance of drawing sword
in a foreign war, either against the French or the Scots."

"I think that you are right; and, moreover, although you have proved
your manhood against men, you can hardly, when with an army, be
regarded as more than a young esquire till another year or two have
gone over your head."

Two days later, finding that all was now perfectly quiet, and that
there was no probability whatever of a renewal of the troubles, Sir
Ralph went up to London with the city knight and his company. They had
ridden over on the previous day to call upon Mr. Ormskirk to thank him
for the services that Edgar had rendered them, and upon which they
entered in much fuller detail than Edgar had allowed himself. In return
he gave them a description of the defence of his house, in which Sir
Robert was greatly interested, going down into the laboratory and
examining the luminous paint and its effect upon the skull.

"It is a goodly device," he said, "and though I myself have, during my
visit to Italy, come to believe but little in the superstitions that
are held by the mass of the people, I own that my courage would have
been grievously shaken if I had encountered suddenly that gibbering
head. How long does the effect last?"

"Three or four days. I believe that it is a sort of slow combustion
which, although it has no sensible heat, gradually consumes the
