"Them are the hours," said Ebenezer, who knew better how to make money
than to speak grammatically.

"It makes a pretty long day," observed Mrs. Carr.

"So it does, ma'am, but it's no longer than I work myself."

"You get paid rather better, I presume."

"Of course, ma'am, as I am the proprietor."

"I couldn't think of working for any such sum," said Herbert, decidedly.

Mr. Graham looked disturbed, for he had reasons for desiring to secure
Herbert, who was familiar with the routine of post-office work.

"Well," he said, "I might be able to offer you a leetle more, as you
know how to tend the post office. That's worth somethin'! I'll
give you--lemme see--twenty-five cents more; that is, a dollar and
seventy-five cents a week."

Herbert and his mother exchanged glances. They hardly knew whether to
feel more amused or disgusted at their visitor's meanness.

"Mr. Graham," said Herbert, "if you wish to secure my services, you will
have to pay me three dollars a week."

The storekeeper held up both hands in dismay.

"Three dollars a week for a boy!" he exclaimed.

"Yes, sir; I will come for a short time for that sum, till you get used
to the management of the post office, but I shall feel justified in
leaving you when I can do better."

"You must think I am made of money," said Ebenezer hastily.

"I think you can afford to pay me that salary."

For twenty minutes the new postmaster tried to beat down his prospective
clerk, but Herbert was obstinate, and Ebenezer rather ruefully promised
to give him his price, chiefly because it was absolutely necessary that
he should engage some one who was more familiar with the post-office
work than he was. Herbert agreed to go to work the next morning.




CHAPTER III. A PRODIGAL SON.



Herbert did not look forward with very joyful anticipations to the new
engagement he had formed. He knew very well that he should not like
Ebenezer Graham as an employer, but it was necessary that he should earn
something, for the income was now but two dollars a week. He was sorry,
too, to displace Tom Tripp, but upon this point his uneasiness was soon
removed, for Tom dropped in just after Mr. Graham had left the house,
and informed Herbert that he was to go to work the next day for a farmer
in the neighborhood, at a dollar and a half per week, and board besides.

"I am glad to hear it, Tom," said Herbert, heartily. "I didn't want to
feel that I was depriving you of employment."

"You are welcome to my place in the store," said Tom. "I'm glad to give
it up. Mr. Graham seemed to think I was made of iron, and I could work
like a machine, without getting tired. I hope he pays you more than a
dollar and a half a week."

"He has agreed to pay me three dollars," said Herbert.

Tom whistled in genuine amazement.

"What! has the old man lost his senses?" he exclaimed. "He must be crazy
to offer such wages as that."

"He didn't offer them. I told him I wouldn't come for less."

"I don't see how he came to pay such a price."

"Because he wanted me to take care of the post office. I know all about
it, and he doesn't."

"As soon as he learns, he will reduce your wages."

"Then I shall leave him."

"Well, I hope you'll like store work better than I do."

The next two or three days were spent in removing the post office to
one corner of Eben-ezer Graham's store. The removal was superintended by
Herbert, who was not interfered with to any extent by his employer, nor
required to do much work in the store. Our hero was agreeably surprised,
and began to think he should get along better than he anticipated.

At the end of the first week the storekeeper, while they were closing
the shutters, said: "I expect, Herbert, you'd just as lieves take your
pay in groceries and goods from the store?"

"No, sir," answered Herbert, "I prefer to be paid in money, and to pay
for such goods as we buy."

"I don't see what odds it makes to you," said Ebenezer. "It comes to the
same thing, doesn't it?"

"Then if it comes to the same thing," retorted Herbert, "why do you want
to pay me in goods?"

"Ahem! It saves trouble. I'll just charge everything you buy, and give
you the balance Saturday night."

"I should prefer the money, Mr. Graham," said Herbert, firmly.

So the storekeeper, considerably against his will, drew three dollars in
bills from the drawer and handed them to his young clerk.

"It's a good deal of money, Herbert," he said, "for a boy. There ain't
many men would pay you such a good salary."

"I earn every cent of it, Mr. Graham," said Herbert, whose views on the
salary question differed essentially from those of his employer.

The next morning Mr. Graham received a letter which evidently disturbed
him. Before referring to its contents, it is necessary to explain that
he had one son, nineteen years of age, who had gone to Boston two years
previous, to take a place in a dry-goods store on Washington Street.
Ebenezer Graham, Jr., or Eben, as he was generally called, was, in some
respects, like his father. He had the same features, and was quite as
mean, so far as others were concerned, but willing to spend money for
his own selfish pleasures. He was fond of playing pool, and cards, and
had contracted a dangerous fondness for whisky, which consumed all the
money he could spare from necessary expenses, and even more, so that, as
will presently appear, he failed to meet his board bills regularly.
Eben had served an apprenticeship in his father's store, having been,
in fact, Tom Tripp's predecessor; he tired of his father's strict
discipline, and the small pay out of which he was required to purchase
his clothes, and went to Boston to seek a wider sphere.

To do Eben justice, it must be admitted that he had good business
capacity, and if he had been able, like his father, to exercise
self-denial, and make money-getting his chief enjoyment, he would no
doubt have become a rich man in time. As it was, whenever he could make
his companions pay for his pleasures, he did so.

I now come to the letter which had brought disquietude to the
storekeeper.

It ran thus:

"DEAR SIR: I understand that you are the father of Mr. Eben Graham,
who has been a boarder at my house for the last six months. I regret to
trouble you, but he is now owing me six weeks board, and I cannot get
a cent out of him, though he knows I am a poor widow, dependent on my
board money for my rent and house expenses. As he is a minor, the law
makes you responsible for his bills, and, though I dislike to trouble
you, I am obliged, in justice to myself, to ask you to settle his board
bill, which I inclose.

"You will do me a great favor if you will send me the amount--thirty
dollars--within a week, as my rent is coming due.

"Yours respectfully, SUSAN JONES."

The feelings of a man like Ebenezer Graham can be imagined when he read
this unpleasant missive.

"Thirty dollars!" he groaned. "What can the graceless boy be thinking
of, to fool away his money, and leave his bills to be settled by me. If
this keeps on, I shall be ruined! It's too bad, when I am slaving here,
for Eben to waste my substance on riotous living. I've a great mind to
disown him. Let him go his own way, and fetch up in the poorhouse, if he
chooses."

But it is not easy for a man to cast off an only son, even though he is
as poorly supplied with natural affections as Ebenezer Graham. Besides,
Eben's mother interceded for him, and the father, in bitterness of
spirit, was about to mail a registered letter to Mrs. Jones, when the
cause of his anguish suddenly made his appearance in the store.

"How are you, father?" he said, nonchalantly, taking a cigar from his
mouth. "Didn't expect to see me, did you?"

"What brings you here, Eben?" asked Mr. Graham, uneasily.

"Well, the cars brought me to Stockton, and I've walked the rest of the
way."

"I've heard of you," said his father, frowning. "I got a letter last
night from Mrs. Jones."

"She said she was going to write," said Eben, shrugging his shoulders.

"How came it," said his father, his voice trembling with anger, "that
you haven't paid your board bill for six weeks?"

"I didn't have the money," said Eben, with a composure which was
positively aggravating to his father.

"And why didn't you have the money? Your wages are ample to pay all your
expenses."

"It costs more money to live in Boston than you think for, father."

"Don't you get ten dollars a week, sir? At your age I got only seven,
and saved two dollars a week."

"You didn't live in Boston, father."

"I didn't smoke cigars," said his father, angrily, as he fixed his eye
on the one his son was smoking. "How much did you pay for that miserable
weed?"

"You're mistaken, father. It's a very good article. I paid eight dollars
a hundred."

"Eight dollars a hundred!" gasped Mr. Graham. "No wonder you can't pay
your board bill--I can't afford to spend my money on cigars."

"Oh, yes, you can, father, if you choose. Why, you're a rich man."

"A rich man!" repeated Mr. Graham, nervously. "It would take a rich man
to pay your bills. But you haven't told me why you have come home."

"I lost my situation, father--some meddlesome fellow told my employer
that I occasionally played a game of pool, and my tailor came to the
store and dunned me; so old Boggs gave me a long lecture and my walking
papers, and here I am."

Ebenezer Graham was sorely troubled, and, though he isn't a favorite of
mine, I confess, that in this matter he has my sincere sympathy.




CHAPTER IV. HERBERT LOSES HIS PLACE.



Ebenezer Graham with some difficulty ascertained from Eben that he had
other bills, amounting in the aggregate to forty-seven dollars. This
added to the board bill, made a total of seventy-seven dollars. Mr.
Graham's face elongated perceptibly.

"That is bad enough," he said; "but you have lost your income also, and
that makes matters worse. Isn't there a chance of the firm taking you
back?"

"No, sir," replied the prodigal. "You see, we had a flare up, and I
expressed my opinion of them pretty plainly. They wouldn't take me back
if I'd come for nothing."

"And they won't give you a recommendation, either?" said Ebenezer, with
a half groan.

"No, sir; I should say not."

"So you have ruined your prospects so far as Boston is concerned," said
his father, bitterly. "May I ask how you expect to get along?"

"I have a plan," said Eben, with cheerful confidence.

"What is it?"

"I would like to go to California. If I can't get any situation in San
Francisco, I can go to the mines."

"Very fine, upon my word!" said his father, sarcastically. "And how do
you propose to get to California?"

"I can go either by steamer, across the isthmus, or over the Union
Pacific road."

"That isn't what I mean. Where are you to get the money to pay your fare
with?"

"I suppose you will supply that," said Eben.

"You do? Well, it strikes me you have some assurance," ejaculated Mr.
Graham. "You expect me to advance hundreds of dollars, made by working
early and late, to support a spendthrift son!"

"I'll pay you back as soon as I am able," said Eben, a little abashed.

"No doubt! You'd pay me in the same way you pay your board bills," said
Ebenezer, who may be excused for the sneer. "I can invest my money to
better advantage than upon you."

"Then, if you will not do that," said Eben, sullenly, "I will leave you
to suggest a plan."

"There is only one plan I can think of, Eben. Go back to your old place
in the store. I will dismiss the Carr boy, and you can attend to the
post office, and do the store work."

"What, go back to tending a country grocery, after being a salesman in a
city store!" exclaimed Eben, disdainfully.

"Yes, it seems the only thing you have left. It's your own fault that
you are not still a salesman in the city."

Eben took the cigar from his mouth, and thought rapidly.

"Well," he said, after a pause, "if I agree to do this, what will you
pay me?"

"What will I pay you?"

"Yes, will you pay me ten dollars a week--the same as I got at Hanbury &
Deane's?"

"Ten dollars a week!" ejaculated Ebenezer, "I don't get any more than
that myself."

"I guess there's a little mistake in your calculations, father," said
Eben, significantly. "If you don't make at least forty dollars a week,
including the post office, then I am mistaken."

"So you are--ridiculously mistaken!" said his father, sharply. "What
you presume is entirely out of the question. You forget that you will
be getting your board, and Tom Tripp only received a dollar and a half a
week without board."

"Is that all you pay to Herbert Carr?"

"I pay him a leetle more," admitted Ebenezer.

"What will you give me?"

"I'll give you your board and clothes," said Ebenezer, "and that seems
to be more than you made in Boston."

"Are you in earnest?" asked Eben, in genuine dismay.

"Certainly. It isn't a bad offer, either."

"Do you suppose a young man like me can get along without money?"

"You ought to get along without money for the next two years, after the
sums you've wasted in Boston. It will cripple me to pay your bills," and
the storekeeper groaned at the thought of the inroads the payment would
make on his bank account.

"You're poorer than I thought, if seventy-five dollars will cripple
you," said Eben, who knew his father's circumstances too well to be
moved by this representation.

"I shall be in the poorhouse before many years if I undertake to pay all
your bills, Eben."

After all, this was not, perhaps, an exaggeration, for a spendthrift son
can get through a great deal of money.

"I can't get along without money, father," said Eben, decidedly. "How
can I buy cigars, let alone other things?"

"I don't want you to smoke cigars. You'll be a great deal better off
without them," said his father, sharply.

"I understand; it's necessary to my health," said Eben, rather absurdly.

"You won't smoke at my expense," said Ebenezer, decidedly. "I don't
smoke myself, and I never knew any good come of it."

"All the same, I must have some money. What will people say about a
young man of my age not having a cent in his pocket? They think my
father is very mean."

"I'll allow you fifty cents a week," said Mr. Graham, after a pause.

"That won't do! You seem to think I am only six or seven years old!"

Finally, after considerable haggling, Mr. Graham agreed to pay his son
a dollar and a half a week, in cash, besides board and clothes. He
reflected that he should be obliged to board and clothe his son at any
rate, and should save a dollar and a half from Herbert's wages.

"Well," he said, "when will you be ready to go to work?"

"I must have a few days to loaf, father. I have been hard at work for a
long time, and need some rest."

"Then you can begin next Monday morning. I'll get Herbert to show you
how to prepare the mail, so that you won't have any trouble about the
post-office work."

"By the way, father, how do you happen to have the post office? I
thought Mrs. Carr was to carry it on."

"So she did, for a time, but a woman ain't fit for a public position of
that kind. So I applied for the position, and got it."

"What's Mrs. Carr going to do?"

"She's got her pension," said Ebenezer, shortly.

"Eight dollars a month, isn't it?"

