more inclined to cry than to laugh, and more inclined to sleep than
either.  For, by ones and twos and threes, people kept coming in
all the afternoon, and Robert had to shake hands with those who
wished it, and allow himself to be punched and pulled and patted
and thumped, so that people might make sure he was really real.

The other children sat on a bench and watched and waited, and were
very bored indeed.  It seemed to them that this was the hardest way
of earning money that could have been invented.  And only fifteen
shillings!  Bill had taken four times that already, for the news of
the giant had spread, and tradespeople in carts, and gentlepeople
in carriages, came from far and near.  One gentleman with an
eyeglass, and a very large yellow rose in his buttonhole, offered
Robert, in an obliging whisper, ten pounds a week to appear at the
Crystal Palace.  Robert had to say 'No'.

'I can't,' he said regretfully.  'It's no use promising what you
can't do.'

'Ah, poor fellow, bound for a term of years, I suppose!  Well,
here's my card; when your time's up come to me.'

'I will - if I'm the same size then,' said Robert truthfully.

'If you grow a bit, so much the better,' said the gentleman.
When he had gone, Robert beckoned Cyril and said:

'Tell them I must and will have an easy.  And I want my tea.'

Tea was provided, and a paper hastily pinned on the tent.  It said:

     CLOSED FOR HALF AN HOUR
     WHILE THE GIANT GETS HIS TEA

Then there was a hurried council.

'How am I to get away?' said Robert.  'I've been thinking about it
all the afternoon.'

'Why, walk out when the sun sets and you're your right size.  They
can't do anything to us.'

Robert opened his eyes.  'Why, they'd nearly kill us,' he said,
'when they saw me get my right size.  No, we must think of some
other way.  We MUST be alone when the sun sets.'

'I know,' said Cyril briskly, and he went to the door, outside
which Bill was smoking a clay pipe and talking in a low voice to
'Becca.  Cyril heard him say - 'Good as havin' a fortune left you.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'you can let people come in again in a
minute.  He's nearly finished his tea.  But he must be left alone
when the sun sets.  He's very queer at that time of day, and if
he's worried I won't answer for the consequences.'

'Why - what comes over him?' asked Bill.

'I don't know; it's - it's a sort of a change,' said Cyril
candidly.  'He isn't at all like himself - you'd hardly know him.
He's very queer indeed.  Someone'll get hurt if he's not alone
about sunset.'  This was true.

'He'll pull round for the evening, I s'pose?'

'Oh yes - half an hour after sunset he'll be quite himself again.'

'Best humour him,' said the woman.

And so, at what Cyril judged was about half an hour before sunset,
the tent was again closed 'whilst the giant gets his supper'.

The crowd was very merry about the giant's meals and their coming
so close together.

'Well, he can pick a bit,' Bill owned.  'You see he has to eat
hearty, being the size he is.'

Inside the tent the four children breathlessly arranged a plan of
retreat.
'You go NOW,' said Cyril to the girls, 'and get along home as fast
as you can.  Oh, never mind the beastly pony-cart; we'll get that
to-morrow.  Robert and I are dressed the same.  We'll manage
somehow, like Sydney Carton did.  Only, you girls MUST get out, or
it's all no go.  We can run, but you can't - whatever you may
think.  No, Jane, it's no good Robert going out and knocking people
down.  The police would follow him till he turned his proper size,
and then arrest him like a shot.  Go you must!  If you don't, I'll
never speak to you again.  It was you got us into this mess really,
hanging round people's legs the way you did this morning.  Go, I
tell you!'

And Jane and Anthea went.

'We're going home,' they said to Bill.  'We're leaving the giant
with you.  Be kind to him.'  And that, as Anthea said afterwards,
was very deceitful, but what were they to do?

When they had gone, Cyril went to Bill.

'Look here,' he said, 'he wants some ears of corn - there's some in
the next field but one.  I'll just run and get it.  Oh, and he says
can't you loop up the tent at the back a bit?  He says he's
stifling for a breath of air.  I'll see no one peeps in at him.
I'll cover him up, and he can take a nap while I go for the corn.
He WILL have it - there's no holding him when he gets like this.'

The giant was made comfortable with a heap of sacks and an old
tarpaulin.  The curtain was looped up, and the brothers were left
alone.  They matured their plan in whispers.  Outside, the
merry-go-round blared out its comic tunes, screaming now and then
to attract public notice.

Half a minute after the sun had set, a boy in a Norfolk suit came
out past Bill.

'I'm off for the corn,' he said, and mingled quickly with the
crowd.

At the same instant a boy came out of the back of the tent past
'Becca, posted there as sentinel.

'I'm off after the corn,' said this boy also.  And he, too, moved
away quietly and was lost in the crowd.  The front-door boy was
Cyril; the back-door was Robert - now, since sunset, once more his
proper size.  They walked quickly through the field, and along the
road, where Robert caught Cyril up.  Then they ran.  They were home
as soon as the girls were, for it was a long way, and they ran most
of it.  It was indeed a very long way, as they found when they had
to go and drag the pony-trap home next morning, with no enormous
Robert to wheel them in it as if it were a mail-cart, and they were
babies and he was their gigantic nursemaid.


I cannot possibly tell you what Bill and 'Becca said when they
found that the giant had gone.  For one thing, I do not know.



CHAPTER 9
GROWN UP


Cyril had once pointed out that ordinary life is full of occasions
on which a wish would be most useful.  And this thought filled his
mind when he happened to wake early on the morning after the
morning after Robert had wished to be bigger than the baker's boy,
and had been it.  The day that lay between these two days had been
occupied entirely by getting the governess-cart home from
Benenhurst.

Cyril dressed hastily; he did not take a bath, because tin baths
are so noisy, and he had no wish to rouse Robert, and he slipped
off alone, as Anthea had once done, and ran through the dewy
morning to the sand-pit.  He dug up the Psammead very carefully and
kindly, and began the conversation by asking it whether it still
felt any ill effects from the contact with the tears of Robert the
day before yesterday.  The Psammead was in a good temper.  It
replied politely.

'And now, what can I do for you?' it said.  'I suppose you've come
here so early to ask for something for yourself, something your
brothers and sisters aren't to know about eh?  Now, do be persuaded
for your own good!  Ask for a good fat Megatherium and have done
with it.'

'Thank you - not to-day, I think,' said Cyril cautiously.  'What I
really wanted to say was - you know how you're always wishing for
things when you're playing at anything?'

'I seldom play,' said the Psammead coldly.

'Well, you know what I mean,' Cyril went on impatiently.  'What I
want to say is: won't you let us have our wish just when we think
of it, and just where we happen to be?  So that we don't have to
come and disturb you again,' added the crafty Cyril.

'It'll only end in your wishing for something you don't really
want, like you did about the castle,' said the Psammead, stretching
its brown arms and yawning.  'It's always the same since people
left off eating really wholesome things.  However, have it your own
way.  Good-bye.'

'Good-bye,' said Cyril politely.

'I'll tell you what,' said the Psammead suddenly, shooting out its
long snail's eyes - 'I'm getting tired of you - all of you.  You
have no more sense than so many oysters.  Go along with you!'
And Cyril went.

'What an awful long time babies STAY babies,' said Cyril after the
Lamb had taken his watch out of his pocket while he wasn't
noticing, and with coos and clucks of naughty rapture had opened
the case and used the whole thing as a garden spade, and when even
immersion in a wash-hand basin had failed to wash the mould from
the works and make the watch go again.  Cyril had said several
things in the heat of the moment; but now he was calmer, and had
even consented to carry the Lamb part of the way to the woods.
Cyril had persuaded the others to agree to his plan, and not to
wish for anything more till they really did wish it.  Meantime it
seemed good to go to the woods for nuts, and on the mossy grass
under a sweet chestnut-tree the five were sitting.  The Lamb was
pulling up the moss by fat handfuls, and Cyril was gloomily
contemplating the ruins of his watch.

'He does grow,' said Anthea.  'Doesn't oo, precious?'

'Me grow,' said the Lamb cheerfully - 'me grow big boy, have guns
an' mouses - an' - an' ...'  Imagination or vocabulary gave out
here.  But anyway it was the longest speech the Lamb had ever made,
and it charmed everyone, even Cyril, who tumbled the Lamb over and
rolled him in the moss to the music of delighted squeals.

'I suppose he'll be grown up some day,' Anthea was saying, dreamily
looking up at the blue of the sky that showed between the long
straight chestnut-leaves.  But at that moment the Lamb, struggling
gaily with Cyril, thrust a stoutly-shod little foot against his
brother's chest; there was a crack! - the innocent Lamb had broken
the glass of father's second-best Waterbury watch, which Cyril had
borrowed without leave.

'Grow up some day!' said Cyril bitterly, plumping the Lamb down on
the grass.  'I daresay he will when nobody wants him to.  I wish to
goodness he would -'

'OH, take care!' cried Anthea in an agony of apprehension.  But it
was too late - like music to a song her words and Cyril's came out
together - Anthea - 'Oh, take care!' Cyril - 'Grow up now!'

The faithful Psammead was true to its promise, and there, before
the horrified eyes of its brothers and sisters, the Lamb suddenly
and violently grew up.  It was the most terrible moment.  The
change was not so sudden as the wish-changes usually were.  The
Baby's face changed first.  It grew thinner and larger, lines came
in the forehead, the eyes grew more deep-set and darker in colour,
the mouth grew longer and thinner; most terrible of all, a little
dark moustache appeared on the lip of one who was still - except as
to the face - a two-year-old baby in a linen smock and white
open-work socks.

'Oh, I wish it wouldn't!  Oh, I wish it wouldn't!  You boys might
wish as well!'  They all wished hard, for the sight was enough to
dismay the most heartless.  They all wished so hard, indeed, that
they felt quite giddy and almost lost consciousness; but the
wishing was quite vain, for, when the wood ceased to whirl round,
their dazzled eyes were riveted at once by the spectacle of a very
proper-looking young man in flannels and a straw hat - a young man
who wore the same little black moustache which just before they had
actually seen growing upon the Baby's lip.  This, then, was the
Lamb - grown up!  Their own Lamb!  It was a terrible moment.  The
grown-up Lamb moved gracefully across the moss and settled himself
against the trunk of the sweet chestnut.  He tilted the straw hat
over his eyes.  He was evidently weary.  He was going to sleep.
The Lamb - the original little tiresome beloved Lamb often went to
sleep at odd times and in unexpected places.  Was this new Lamb in
the grey flannel suit and the pale green necktie like the other
Lamb? or had his mind grown up together with his body?

That was the question which the others, in a hurried council held
among the yellowing bracken a few yards from the sleeper, debated
eagerly.

'Whichever it is, it'll be just as awful,' said Anthea.  'If his
inside senses are grown up too, he won't stand our looking after
him; and if he's still a baby inside of him how on earth are we to
get him to do anything?  And it'll be getting on for dinner-time in
a minute 'And we haven't got any nuts,' said Jane.

'Oh, bother nuts!' said Robert; 'but dinner's different - I didn't
have half enough dinner yesterday.  Couldn't we tie him to the tree
and go home to our dinners and come back afterwards?'

'A fat lot of dinner we should get if we went back without the
Lamb!' said Cyril in scornful misery.  'And it'll be just the same
if we go back with him in the state he is now.  Yes, I know it's my
doing; don't rub it in!  I know I'm a beast, and not fit to live;
you can take that for settled, and say no more about it.  The
question is, what are we going to do?'

'Let's wake him up, and take him into Rochester or Maidstone and
get some grub at a pastrycook's,' said Robert hopefully.

'Take him?' repeated Cyril.  'Yes - do!  It's all MY fault - I
don't deny that - but you'll find you've got your work cut out for
you if you try to take that young man anywhere.  The Lamb always
was spoilt, but now he's grown up he's a demon - simply.  I can see
it.  Look at his mouth.'

'Well then,' said Robert, 'let's wake him up and see what HE'LL do.
Perhaps HE'LL take us to Maidstone and stand Sam.  He ought to have
a lot of money in the pockets of those extra-special bags.  We MUST
have dinner, anyway.'

They drew lots with little bits of bracken.  It fell to jane's lot
to waken the grown-up Lamb.

She did it gently by tickling his nose with a twig of wild
honeysuckle.  He said 'Bother the flies!' twice, and then opened
his eyes.

'Hullo, kiddies!' he said in a languid tone, 'still here?  What's
the giddy hour?  You'll be late for your grub!'

'I know we shall,' said Robert bitterly.

'Then cut along home,' said the grown-up Lamb.

'What about your grub, though?' asked Jane.

'Oh, how far is it to the station, do you think?  I've a sort of
notion that I'll run up to town and have some lunch at the club.'

Blank misery fell like a pall on the four others.  The Lamb - alone
- unattended - would go to town and have lunch at a club!  Perhaps
he would also have tea there.  Perhaps sunset would come upon him
amid the dazzling luxury of club-land, and a helpless cross sleepy
baby would find itself alone amid unsympathetic waiters, and would
wail miserably for 'Panty' from the depths of a club arm-chair!
The picture moved Anthea almost to tears.

'Oh no, Lamb ducky, you mustn't do that!' she cried incautiously.

The grown-up Lamb frowned.  'My dear Anthea,' he said, 'how often
am I to tell you that my name is Hilary or St Maur or Devereux? -
any of my baptismal names are free to my little brothers and
sisters, but NOT "Lamb" - a relic of foolish and far-off
childhood.'

This was awful.  He was their elder brother now, was he?  Well, of
course he was, if he was grown up - since they weren't.  Thus, in
whispers, Anthea and Robert.

But the almost daily adventures resulting from the Psammead wishes
were making the children wise beyond their years.

'Dear Hilary,' said Anthea, and the others choked at the name, 'you
know father didn't wish you to go to London.  He wouldn't like us
to be left alone without you to take care of us.  Oh, deceitful
beast that I am!' she added to herself.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'if you're our elder brother, why not
