
As Colonel Beale could not accomplish anything during the winter months,
he returned to Taos, where he remained until February, when, learning
that a large force of Indians were congregated on the Arkansas, with a
number of Mexican captives, he went thither intending to retake them
by force, if they could not be secured by peaceable means. He had two
companies of dragoons, and as before, engaged Carson as guide.

When he reached the Arkansas, he found himself confronted by two
thousand Indians who had gathered to meet their agent and probably to
consult as to their future movements. The agent was present and was a
man of practical sense and experience. He told Colonel Beale that it
would never do to demand the prisoners, for the Indians were in ugly
temper and if aroused, would massacre the whole command. Colonel Beale
himself was resentful, and very much disposed to give the red men
battle, but he suffered himself to be dissuaded from carrying out his
original purpose.

When Carson returned once more to Taos, he reflected that he was
approaching middle life, and as he now had quite a family, he was
anxious to provide something for them. Though he had rendered services
beyond value to the United States government, and to different
individuals, he had not received enough compensation to place them
above want should he become disabled. About this time, his old friend,
Maxwell, proposed that they should build a ranch in a beautiful valley
some distance north of Taos. The site was a most charming one, though it
was so much exposed to the attack of Indians that until then no one had
dared to settle there.

Handsome, roomy and substantial structures were erected, and many of the
most enjoyable days of their lives were spent on this famous ranche. It
would be a pleasant farewell to leave them there to end their days
in comfort and peace, but it was to be far otherwise with both and
especially with Carson.

In 1848-49, Colonel Fremont made a fourth exploring expedition across
the continent, he bearing all the expense, as he did in the case of
his fifth expedition made in 1853. The fourth was an appalling failure,
marked by an extremity of suffering that is incredible. The guide
employed was wholly ignorant and the command became entangled among the
snows of the mountains, where some of them lived not only on mules
but on each other. The strongest lay down and died, and the horrible
features of Fremont's fourth expedition were only approached by that
of Lieutenant Strain on the Isthmus of Darien. When the few ghastly
survivors staggered out of the mountains they tottered to Carson's
ranche, where they received the kindest treatment from him who had
served Fremont so faithfully on his former expeditions.

Carson had been on his ranche but a short time, when news reached him of
a most atrocious murder by the Apaches. A wealthy merchant was returning
in his private carriage with his wife and child from the United States
to Santa Fe. He was accompanied by a small escort and the wagon train
carrying his goods. When he believed all danger past, he hurried forward
with his family, who were becoming tired of the journey.

At a point where there was no suspicion of danger, the Apaches fired
upon the carriage, killing every one who accompanied it, including the
merchant himself. The wife and child were made prisoners and carried
away. Shortly after the little one was tomahawked and thrown into the
river.

When news of the outrage reached New Mexico, a party was hastily
organized and started out in the hope of saving the woman and punishing
the wretches who had committed the murders. When Carson learned of what
was contemplated, he offered his services. They were accepted, but much
to the surprise of his friends, he was given an inferior position. It
was characteristic of the splendid scout that he did not show by word or
look that he felt the slightest resentment on account of the slight.

With a less skilful leader than himself, Carson galloped with
the company to the scene of the murder. The sight was frightfully
suggestive: pieces of harness, band boxes, trunks, strips of blood
stained clothing, and fragments of the carriage attested the untamable
ferocity of the Apaches who had swooped down on the doomed party like a
cyclone.

From that point the trail was taken and the infuriated mountaineers
urged their steeds to the utmost, knowing the value of every hour and
that in the case of a fight with the Indians a surprise is half the
battle.

Day after day the pursuit was maintained until nearly two weeks had gone
by, before the first glimpse of a warrior was obtained. The trail was
one of the worst imaginable, and, had the pursuers been less skilful,
they would have been baffled almost from the first. At certain points,
the Apaches would break up into parties of two or three that would take
different routes, reuniting at some place many miles beyond where water
was known to be. This was done repeatedly, with a view of disconcerting
any avengers who might take their trail, and it is a tribute to the
ability of the mountaineers that the cunning artifice failed, so far as
they were concerned, of its purpose.

At last the Apaches were descried in the distance. Carson was the
first to discover them, he being some distance in advance. Knowing how
necessary it was to surprise them he shouted to his companions to charge
at once. Not doubting he would be followed, he dashed ahead with his
horse on a dead run, but looking over his shoulder when he had gone part
way, he saw to his consternation he was alone.

Angered and impatient, he rode back to learn what it meant. The chief
guide had directed the men to wait as there was no doubt the Apaches
desired to hold a parley. It meant the next moment in the shape of
a bullet from the Indians which struck the leader in the breast and
rendered him senseless. As soon as he recovered, he ordered his men to
make the attack and leave him to himself.

He was obeyed, but the delay was fatal. On charging into the camp they
were able to kill only one warrior. The body of the woman was found
still warm, showing that she had been slain only a brief while before.

All those acquainted with the particulars of this sad affair agreed that
had the advice of Carson been followed the poor lady might have been
saved.



CHAPTER XXXII.


 The Wounded Herder--A Successful Pursuit--An Atrocious Plot--How it
 was Frustrated--Gratitude of the Gentlemen Whom Carson was the Means of
 Saving From Death.

Carson returned to his ranche where he spent the winter. One day in
spring a wounded herder managed to reach the place with the news that
he and his companion, stationed a few miles away, had been attacked by
Apaches, who wounded both, and ran off all the horses and mules.

A squad of ten dragoons and a sergeant were on guard near Carson's
ranche. They and three settlers, including Carson, started at once in
pursuit. It was so late in the day that when they came to the place
where the outrage had been committed, it was dark and they went into
camp; but they were astir at the earliest dawn, and soon striking the
trail of the thieves, put their animals to a keen gallop. Some twenty
miles further, the Apaches were described a long distance away. As it
was upon the open prairie the contest at once resolved itself into an
open chase.

It was no time to spare the animals, whose rapid gait was increased
until it became a killing pace. The pursuers were steadily gaining, when
four of their horses succumbed and their riders, much to their chagrin,
were shut out from the impending fray. The others had no time to stop:
they could simply shout goodbye to them and spur their steeds to
greater exertions. Fortunately the pursuers were better mounted than the
fugitives who numbered a full score. With a bravery characteristic
of their tribe, they clung to their stolen property, preferring to be
overtaken and forced into a fight rather than abandon it.

As soon as the parties were within rifle range, the battle began
and became of the most exciting character. The Apaches were splendid
horsemen and displayed great skill. They threw themselves on the far
side of their steeds, firing from under the neck, and keeping their
bodies so well concealed that it was a difficult task to bring them
down.

But the white men were accustomed to that sort of work, and the Apaches
learned a lesson they never forgot. Five of their best warriors were
killed, several badly wounded and nearly all the animals recaptured. Kit
Carson directed every movement of his men and to that fact their great
success was due.

The mountaineer was favored with prosperous times on his ranche. He and
a companion drove fifty head of mules and horses to Fort Laramie,
where they were disposed of at a liberal profit. The round journey of
a thousand miles was attended with much danger, but it was accomplished
without mishap.

He reached home just in time to learn that the Apaches had visited the
little settlement and run off all the animals. But as enough soldiers
were within call, a pursuit was soon organized and very nearly all the
stock was recovered.

Some months later an officer of the United States Army in Taos learned
of a most atrocious plot that was on foot. Two wealthy gentlemen,
travelling leisurely through that section of the country, had engaged an
American named Fox to hire enough men to escort them across the plains.
This Fox was one of the most conscienceless wretches and desperadoes
that ever lived. He formed a scheme to murder the two gentlemen at a
certain point on the plains and to divide their money among him and his
companions. Those whom he secured were taken into his confidence and
agreed to the crime before hand.

Among those to whom he applied was a miscreant in Taos, who, for some
reason, refused to go with him. However, he kept the secret until
sure the entire party were so far out on the plains that nothing could
prevent the perpetration of the crime. He then told it to several
associates, one of whom made it known to the officer of whom we have
spoken.

This gentleman was horrified, and uncertain what could be done, if
indeed he could do anything, hastened to Kit Carson, to whom he made
known the story. The mountaineer listened eagerly, and, as soon as he
grasped the whole plot, declared there was reason to believe it was not
too late to frustrate it. With that wonderful intuition which was such a
marked characteristic of his nature, he fixed upon the very place where
it had been decided the crime was to be committed. Knowing the entire
route, it was easy to determine the spot most likely to be selected,
which was more than two hundred miles distant. Instead, therefore, of
following the trail, he struck directly across the open prairie by the
most direct course to his destination.

Ten finely mounted dragoons accompanied, all ready for any deed of
daring. The route led through a country where the Indians were very
hostile, but they were avoided with little difficulty. The second night
out, they came upon the encampment of a detachment of United States
troops, whose captain volunteered to take twenty of his soldiers and
help bring the desperadoes to justice.

The expedition was a complete success. They overtook the party at the
very spot fixed upon, and Fox was arrested before he suspected the
business of the strangers in camp. When the overthrow of the wretches
was complete, the gentlemen were told the story. They were speechless
for a moment and could not believe it; but the proof was complete, and
they turned pale at the thought of the fate they had escaped.

Their gratitude was unbounded. Taking the hand of Carson they begged him
to name some reward he would accept, but the mountaineer shook his head.

"I am more than repaid in being able to help frustrate such a crime as
was contemplated; I cannot think of accepting anything of the kind you
name."

The gentlemen, however, could not forget that under heaven, they owed
their lives to Kit Carson. The following spring a couple of splendid
revolvers arrived at the mountaineer's ranche addressed to him.
Beautifully engraved on them were a few sentences expressive of the
feelings of the donors and the special occasion which called forth the
gift.

It is easy to understand how much more acceptable such an
acknowledgement was to Kit Carson than any sum of money could have been.

Fox was lodged in jail, but though there was no doubt of his guilt in
the minds of every one, yet the meditated crime was so difficult to
establish that ultimately he was set free.



CHAPTER XXXIII.


 Carson Visits St. Louis on Business--Encounter with Cheyenne on
 his Return--His Sagacity Does not Fail Him--Carson's Last Beaver
 Expedition--His California Speculation.

Maxwell, the mountaineer and intimate friend of Carson, was quite
wealthy and was of great assistance in several schemes which they
undertook in partnership. One of their enterprises was that of sending a
train of wagons belonging to the two to the States. Carson took charge,
and, jogging along at a comfortable rate, they reached in due time the
Missouri, where he went by steamboat to St. Louis. There he purchased
a large amount of merchandise which was taken up stream on the boat,
transferred to his wagon train, and the faces of all were then turned
toward New Mexico.

Everything went well until they approached the fording of the Arkansas,
when they came upon a large village of Cheyenne Indians. Unfortunately
some days before, a company of recruits had shown such cruelty toward
several warriors belonging to that tribe, that they were roused to the
highest point of fury, and were only waiting an opportunity to visit
punishment on the first whites that came in their way.

Carson knew nothing of the occurrence nor did he know of the bitter
hostility of the Cheyennes, but when they went into council, and he
overheard some expressions, he saw that something was wrong. He warned
his men to be ready for instant attack, never permitting the Indians to
catch them off their guard for a single moment.

The warriors fell behind, but after awhile, a number rode up on
horseback. They were in their war paint and there could be no doubt of
their hostility. Carson spoke in a conciliating manner and invited them
into his camp to have a smoke and talk. The invitation was accepted.
The hypocritical ceremony continued some time, when the warriors began
talking among themselves.

They spoke in Sioux at first, their purpose being to lay the impending
massacre against those people, but in their excitement, they dropped
back to their own tongue and the whole appalling truth became speedily
known to Carson and through him to his companions.

He sat on the ground with the furious warriors, and heard them agree
that at the moment the leader (as they recognized Carson to be), laid
down his arms to take the pipe in his mouth, they would leap upon and
kill him. They would then massacre all the rest. Inasmuch as they were
powerful enough to carry out this diabolical plan, it will be admitted
that Carson's nerves were pretty thoroughly tested, when the pipe
passing from one to the other was within a few minutes of reaching him.

Most of the men with the mountaineer were Mexicans, very deficient in
courage and in a hand to hand encounter, the Cheyennes could overcome
the party in the space of a few minutes.

It was in such crises as these that the remarkable fertility of
resources possessed by Kit Carson displayed themselves. He seemed to
perceive by intuition the wisest course to adopt and that perception
came to him the instant the demand for it appeared.

Rising to his feet and grasping his weapons, he strode to the middle of
the group and astounded them by beginning his address in their native
tongue. He reminded them that that was proof he comprehended every word
uttered by them. He spoke as if grieved by their course, for he insisted
he had never wronged any one of their tribe, but on the contrary had
been their friend. He then commanded them to leave the camp without
delay or they would be riddled with bullets.

Carson's blue eyes flashed and his face was like a thunder cloud. It was
the Cheyennes who were surprised and they could but obey orders, though
from their manner, it was clear the trouble was not yet ended. They
withdrew and went into council, while Carson and his friends pushed
rapidly forward.

The peril in which this little command was placed could not be
overestimated. There were not twenty men all told and except two or
three, were Mexicans who in no respect were the superiors if indeed
they were the equals of the Cheyennes. Had Carson been absent a score of
warriors could have charged into camp and slain every one. Instead of
a score there were several hundred of them: if they chose to make the
attack he knew there was no escape.

The horses, therefore, were lashed to do their utmost. The train pushed
forward with all speed, while the apprehensive leader continually
glanced back over the prairie, almost certain of seeing the Cheyennes
galloping toward them. When night came, there was little sleep in camp.
Nearly every one stood on guard, but the night and the following day
passed without molestation.

Convinced beyond question that the attack would be made unless some
extraordinary means was taken to avert it, Carson took one of the
fleetest footed Mexican boys outside the camp, and, pointing in the
direction of the ranche of himself and Maxwell, nearly three hundred
miles away, told him he must make all speed thither, and tell the
soldiers that unless they hurried to his help he and all his companions
were doomed to certain death at the hands of an overwhelming war party
of Cheyennes. Everything depended on the quickness with which the
Mexican youth brought assistance. The latter being promised a liberal
