and that way, and then, with his heart in his mouth, started towards the
Old Pasture as fast as he could go, lipperty--lipperty--lip.




CHAPTER III

HOOTY THE OWL CHANGES HIS HUNTING GROUNDS


 A full stomach makes a pleasant Day;
 An empty stomach turns the whole world gray.
                           Peter Rabbit.

Hooty the owl sat on the tip-top of a tall dead tree in the Green Forest
while the Black Shadows crept swiftly among the trees. He was talking to
himself. It wouldn't have done for him to have spoken aloud what he was
saying to himself, for then the little people in feathers and fur on
whom he likes to make his dinner would have heard him and known just
where he was. So he said it to himself, and sat so still that he looked
for all the world like a part of the tree on which he was sitting. What
he was saying was this:

"Towhit, towhoo! Towhit, towhoo! Will some one tell me what to do?
 My children have an appetite
 That keeps me hunting all the night,
 And though their stomachs I may stuff
 They never seem to have enough.
 Towhit, towhoo! Towhit, towhoo!
 Will some one tell me what to do?"

When it was dark enough he gave his fierce hunting call--"Whooo-hoo-hoo,
whoo-hoo!"

Now that is a terrible sound in the dark woods, very terrible indeed
to the little forest people, because it sounds so fierce and hungry. It
makes them jump and shiver, and that is just what Hooty wants them
to do, for in doing it one of them is likely to make just the least
scratching with his claws, or to rustle a leaf. If he does, Hooty, whose
ears are very, very wonderful, is almost sure to hear, and with his
great yellow eyes see him, and then--Hooty has his dinner.

The very night when Peter Rabbit started on his journey to the Old
Pasture, Hooty the Owl had made up his mind that something had got to
be done to get more food for those hungry babies of his up in the big
hemlock-tree in the darkest corner of the Green Forest. Hunting was very
poor, very poor indeed, and Hooty was at his wits' end to know what he
should do. He had hooted and hooted in vain in the Green Forest, and
he had sailed back and forth over the Green Meadows like a great black
shadow without seeing so much as a single Mouse.

"It's all because of Old Man Coyote and Granny and Reddy Fox," said
Hooty angrily. "They've spoiled the hunting. Yes, Sir, that's just what
they have done! If I expect to feed those hungry babies of mine, I
must find new hunting grounds. I believe I'll go up to the Old Pasture.
Perhaps I'll have better luck up there."

So Hooty the Owl spread his broad wings and started for the Old Pasture
just a little while after Peter Rabbit had started for the same place.
Of course he didn't know that Peter was on his way there, and of course
Peter didn't know that Hooty even thought of the Old Pasture. If he had,
perhaps he would have thought twice before starting. Anyway, he would
have kept a sharper watch on the sky. But as it was his thoughts were
all of Old Man Coyote and Granny Fox, and that is where Peter made a
very grave mistake, a very grave mistake indeed, as he was soon to find
out.



CHAPTER IV

THE SHADOW WITH SHARP CLAWS

 Now what's the use, pray tell me this,
   When all is said and done;
 A thousand things and one to learn
   And then forget the one?
 For when that one alone you need,
   And nothing else will do,
 What good are all the thousand then?
   I do not see; do you?
                              Peter Rabbit.

Forgetting leads to more trouble than almost anything under the sun.
Peter Rabbit knew this. Of course he knew it. Peter had had many a
narrow escape just from forgetting something. He knew just as well as
you know that he might just as well not learn a thing as to learn it and
then forget it. But Peter is such a happy-go-lucky little fellow that
he is very apt to forget, and forgetting leads him into all kinds of
difficulties, just as it does most folks.

Now Peter had learned when he was a very little fellow that when he went
out at night, he must watch out quite as sharply for Hooty the Owl as
for either Granny or Reddy Fox, and usually he did. But the night he
started to make a journey to the Old Pasture, his mind was so full of
Old Man Coyote and Granny and Reddy Fox that he wholly forgot
Hooty the Owl. So, as he scampered across the Green Meadows,
lipperty--lipperty--lip, as fast as he could go, with his long ears
and his big eyes and his wobbly nose all watching out for danger on the
ground, not once did he think that there might be danger from the sky
above him.

It was a moonlight night, and Peter was sharp enough to keep in the
shadows whenever he could. He would scamper as fast as he knew how from
one shadow to another and then sit down in the blackest part of each
shadow to get his breath, and to look and listen and so make sure that
no one was following him. The nearer he got to the Old Pasture, the
safer he felt from Old Man Coyote and Granny and Reddy Fox. When he
scampered across the patches of moonshine his heart didn't come up in
his mouth the way it had at first. He grew bolder and bolder. Once or
twice he stopped for a mouthful of sweet clover. He was tired, for he
had come a long way, but he was almost to the Old Pasture now, and it
looked very dark and safe, for it was covered with bushes and brambles.

"Plenty of hiding places there," thought Peter. "It really looks as safe
as the dear Old Briar-patch. No one will ever think to look for me way
off here."

Just then he spied a patch of sweet clover out in the moonlight. His
mouth began to water. "I'll just fill my stomach before I go into the
Old Pasture, for there may not be any clover there," said Peter.

"You'd better be careful, Peter Rabbit," said a wee warning voice inside
him.

"Pooh!" said Peter. "There's nothing to be afraid of way up here!"

A shadow drifted across the sweet clover patch. Peter saw it. "That must
be made by a cloud crossing the moon," said Peter, and he was so sure of
it that he didn't even look up to see, but boldly hopped out to fill his
stomach. Just as he reached the patch of clover, the shadow drifted over
it again. Then all in a flash a terrible thought entered Peter's head.
He didn't stop to look up. He suddenly sprang sideways, and even as he
did so, sharp claws tore his coat and hurt him dreadfully. He twisted
and dodged and jumped and turned this way and that way, and all the time
the shadow followed him. Once again sharp claws tore his coat and made
him squeal with pain.

[Illustration: HE DODGED AND JUMPED, AND ALL THE TIME THE SHADOW
FOLLOWED HIM.]

At last, when his breath was almost gone, he reached the edge of the Old
Pasture and dived under a friendly old bramble-bush.

"Oh," sobbed Peter, "I forgot all about Hooty the Owl! Besides, I didn't
suppose he ever came way up here."




CHAPTER V

IN THE OLD PASTURE


     Brambles never scratch those who understand
     and are considerate of them.
     --Peter Rabbit.

Peter Rabbit sat under a friendly bramble-bush on the edge of the
Old Pasture and panted for breath, while his heart went pit-a-pat,
pit-a-pat, as if it would thump its way right through his sides. Peter
had had a terrible fright. There were long tears in his coat, and he
smarted and ached dreadfully where the cruel claws of Hooty the Owl had
torn him. And there he was in a strange place, not knowing which way to
turn, for you know he never had visited the Old Pasture before.

But Peter had had so many narrow escapes in his life that he had learned
not to worry over dangers that are past. Peter is what wise men call a
phi-los-o-pher. That is a big word, but its meaning is very simple. A
philosopher is one who believes that it is foolish to think about things
that have happened, except to learn some lesson from them, and that the
best thing to do is to make the most of the present. Peter had learned
his lesson. He was sure of that.

"I never, never will forget again to watch out for Hooty the Owl," said
he to himself, as he nursed his wounds, "and so perhaps it is a good
thing that he so nearly caught me this time. If he hadn't, I might have
forgotten all about him some time when he could catch me. I certainly
wouldn't have watched out for him way up here, for I didn't think he
ever came up to the Old Pasture. But now I know he does, Mr. Hooty'll
have to be smarter than he's ever been before to catch me napping again.
My, how I do smart and ache! I know now just how Danny Meadow Mouse felt
that time Hooty caught him and dropped him into the Old Briar-patch.
Ouch! Well, as my mother used to say:

    'Yesterday has gone away;
     Make the most of just to-day.'

Here I am up in the Old Pasture, and the question is, what shall I do
next?"

Peter felt a queer little thrill as he peeped out from under the
friendly bramble-bush. Very strange and wonderful it seemed. Of course
he couldn't see very far, because the Old Pasture was all overgrown with
bushes and briars, and they made the very blackest of black shadows in
the moonlight. Peter wondered what dangers might be awaiting him there,
but somehow he didn't feel much afraid. No, Sir, he didn't feel much
afraid. You see those briars looked good to him, for briars are always
friendly to Peter and unfriendly to those who would do harm to Peter. So
when he saw them, he felt almost at home.

Peter drew a long breath. Then he cried "Ouch!" You see, he had
forgotten for a minute how sore he was. He was eager to explore this new
wonderland, for Sammy Jay had told him wonderful tales about it, and he
knew that here old Granny Fox and Reddy Fox had found safety when Farmer
Brown's boy had hunted for them so hard on the Green Meadows and in
the Green Forest. He felt sure that there must be the most splendid
hiding-places, and it seemed as if he certainly must start right out to
see them, for you know Peter is very, very curious. But the first move
he made brought another "Ouch" from him, and he made up a wry face.

"I guess the best thing for me to do is to stay right where I am," said
he, "for here I am safe under this friendly old bramble."

So with a sigh Peter settled down to make himself as comfortable as
he could, and once, as far, far away on the Green Meadows he heard the
voice of Old Man Coyote, Peter even smiled.

"I haven't anything to fear from him, anyway, for he'll never think of
coming way up here," said he.




CHAPTER VI

PETER RABBIT IS STILL LONESOME


     A sympathetic word or two
     A wond'rous help is, when you're blue.
     So pity him who sits alone
     His aches and troubles to bemoan.
                                         Peter Rabbit.

All the rest of that night Peter sat under a friendly old bramble-bush
on the edge of the Old Pasture and nursed the sore places made by the
claws of Hooty the Owl. At last jolly, round, red Mr. Sun began to climb
up in the blue, blue sky, just as he does every day. Peter looked up at
him, and he felt sure that Mr. Sun winked at him. Somehow it made him
feel better. The fact is, Peter was beginning to feel just a wee, wee
bit homesick. It is bad enough to be in a strange place alone, but to
be sore and to smart and ache as Peter did makes that lonesome feeling
a whole lot harder to bear. It is dreadful not to have any one to speak
to, but to look around and not see a single thing you have ever seen
before,--my, my, my, it certainly does give you a strange, sinking
feeling way down inside!

Before that long night was over Peter felt as if his heart had gone way
down to his very toes. Yes, Sir, that's the way he felt. Every time
he moved at all he cried "Ouch!" He just knew that he was growing more
stiff and sore every minute. Then he began to wonder what he should do
for something to eat, for he was in a strange place, you remember. And
that made him think of all his private little paths through the dear Old
Briar-patch, the little paths he had made all himself, and which no one
used but himself, excepting Danny Meadow Mouse when he came for a visit.

"Perhaps I shall never, never see them again," moaned Peter, and two big
tears filled his eyes and were just ready to drop.

At that moment he looked up and saw jolly, round, red Mr. Sun wink.
Peter tried to wink back, and that made the two tears fall. But there
were no more tears to follow. You see that wink had made all the
difference in the world, Peter's heart had jumped right back where it
belonged. Mr. Sun was one of his oldest friends and you know

    When trouble comes, a friendly face
    Makes bright the very darkest place.

And so, just as he made bright all the Old Pasture, Mr. Sun also made
bright the dark little corners in Peter's heart just because he was an
old friend. To be sure Peter was still lonesome, but it was a different
kind of lonesomeness. He hadn't anybody to talk to, which is always a
dreadful thing to Peter, but he had only to look up to catch a friendly
wink, and somehow that not only made him feel better inside but it
seemed to make his aches and smarts better too.




CHAPTER VII

PETER FINDS TRACKS


 Every day is different from every other day,
 And always there is something new to see along the way.
                                        Peter Rabbit.

Peter Rabbit had sat still just as long as he could. He was stiff and
lame and sore from the wounds made by Hooty the Owl, but his curiosity
wouldn't let him sit still a minute longer. He just HAD to explore the
Old Pasture. So with many a wry face and many an "Ouch" he limped out
from the shelter of the friendly old bramble-bush and started out to see
what the Old Pasture was like.

Now Hooty the Owl had taught Peter wisdom. With his torn clothes and his
aches and smarts he couldn't very well forget to be careful. First he
