down on you. I guess that long-legged chap that I was talkin' to knows
enough for that. You seem to have more sense than any of 'em, and I'll
give you a little advice. Let's see, what's your name?"

The Irishman gave it, and the hunter responded by mentioning his own.

"Do you put some one in here to keep watch night and day, and the minute
you see the redskins comin' give the signal and run for your friends
there. Then if the red-skins foller, you must let 'em have it right and
left. If you find you can't hold your own agin 'em, you must make all
haste to Fort Severn, as you heard me say a while ago. Aim for the
setting sun, and after you've gone fifty miles or so you'll be thar.
Good by to you, now; I'm watching the Injin movements in these parts,
and, if the signs are bad, and I have the chance, I'll give you notice;
but you must n't depend on me."

The hunter leaned over the saddle, and warmly shook the hand of the
Irishman, the two having conceived a strong liking for each other.

Then he wheeled his mustang about, and gave him a word that caused him
at once to break into a swift gallop, which quickly carried him up the
slope, until he reached the margin of the valley, over which he went at
the same rate, and speedily vanished from view.

The Irishman stood gazing at the spot where he had vanished, and then he
walked thoughtfully back toward the settlement, where all were as busy
as beavers, getting their rude huts and homes in condition for living.
In doing this Caleb Barnwell was guided by a desire to be prepared for
the Indian visitation, which he knew was likely soon to be made. They
had gathered an immense quantity of driftwood along the banks of the Rio
Pecos, and the other timber that they needed had already been cut and
dragged from the woods, so that about all the material they needed was
at hand.

Even with their huts a third or a half finished, they would be in a much
better condition to receive the attack of the Apaches than if compelled
to place their heavy luggage-wagons in a semi-circle and fight from
behind them.

"The gentleman spakes the thruth," muttered Mickey, as he walked along,
"and I'm not the one to forgit such a favor, when he took so much pains
to tell me. I'll remember and fix a watch in the wood."



CHAPTER III. FRED GOES ON GUARD

Mickey O'Rooney, fully believing the warning of the hunter, could not
but feel deeply anxious for the safety of himself and those around him.
He was particularly concerned for his young friend, Fred Munson, who had
been committed to his charge.

"It's myself that is the only one he has to look after him, and if I
does n't attend to my dooty, there's no telling what may become of it,
and be the same towken, I can't say what'll become of him if I _does_
attend to the same. Whisht! there."

The last exclamation was uttered to Caleb Barnwell, whom he approached
at that moment. The leader stepped aside a few minutes, and they
conferred together. The Irishman impressed upon the leader the warning
he had received from the hunter, and Barnwell admitted that there might
be grounds for the fear, but he added that he was doing all he could
to guard against it. At Mickey's suggestion, he sent two of his most
trustworthy men to the woods to keep watch, while a third was stationed
on some elevated ground beyond, where he commanded an extensive view of
the surrounding prairie. As this was to be a permanent arrangement,
it would seem that he had taken all reasonable precautions. Not a
suspicious sign was seen through the day.

When night came, the two men were called in, and Mickey O'Rooney, Fred
Munson, and a man named Thompson went on duty. As two was the regular
number at night, it will be seen that the boy was an extra.

"We're to come in at one o'clock," he said, in reply to the remonstrance
of his friend, "and I'm sure I can keep awake that long. I believe the
Indians will be around to-night, and I won't be able to sleep if I go
into the wagon."

Mickey had not yet learned how to refuse the boy, and so he took him
along.

Thompson was a powerful, stalwart man, who had joined the party in
Nebraska, and who was supposed to have considerable knowledge of the
frontier and its ways. He had proved himself a good shot, and, on more
than one occasion, had displayed such coolness and self-possession in
critical moments, that he was counted one of the most valuable men in
the entire company.

The sentinels were stationed on the other side of the wood, Mickey
at one corner, Thompson at another, with Fred about half way between,
something like a hundred yards separating them from each other.

It must be said that, so far as it was possible, Fred Munson was
furnished with every advantage that he could require. He had a rifle
suited to his size and strength, but it was one of the best ever made,
and long-continued and careful practice had made him quite skillful in
handling it. Besides this, both he and Mickey were provided each with
the fleetest and most intelligent mustang that money could purchase, and
when mounted and with a fair field before them, they had little to fear
from the pursuit of the Apaches and Comanches.

But it is the Indian's treacherous, cat-like nature that makes him so
dangerous, and against his wonderful cunning all the precautions of the
white men are frequently in vain.

"Now, Fred," said Mickey, after they had left Thompson, as he was on the
point of leaving the boy, "I don't feel exactly aisy 'bout laving you
here, as me mother used to observe when she wint out from the house,
while I remained behind with the vittles. If one of the spalpeens should
slip up and find you asleep, he'd never let you wake up."

"You need n't be afraid of my going to sleep," replied Fred, in a voice
of self-confidence. "I know what the danger is too well."

With a few more words they separated, and each took his station, the
Irishman somewhat consoled by the fact that from where he stood he was
able, he believed, to cover the position of the lad.

The moon overhead was gibbous, and there were no clouds in the sky.
Thompson's place was such that he was close to the river, which flowed
on his right, and he had that stream and the prairie in his front at his
command. Mickey O'Rooney, being upon the extreme left, was enabled to
range his eye up the valley to the crest of the slope, so that he was
confident he could detect any insidious approach from that direction.
Down the valley, on the other side of the settlement, were placed a
couple of other sentinels, so that New Boston, on that memorable night,
was well guarded.

The position of Fred Munson, it will be understood, was apparently the
least important, as it was commanded by the other two, but the lad felt
as if the lives of the entire company were placed in his hands.

"Talk of my going to sleep," he repeated, as soon as he found himself
alone. "I can stand or sit here till daylight, and wink less times than
either Thompson or Mickey."

As every boy feels this way a short time before going to sleep, no one
who might have overheard Fred's boast would have been over-persuaded
thereby. Before him stretched the sloping valley of the Rio Pecos.
Glancing to the right, he could just catch the glimmer of the river as
it flowed by in the moonlight, the banks being low and not wooded, while
looking straight up the valley, his vision was bounded only by darkness
itself. Carefully running his eye over the ground, he was confident that
the slyest and most stealthy Indian that ever lived could not approach
within a hundred feet of him without detection.

"And the minute I'm certain its a red-skin, that minute I'll let him
have it," he added, instinctively grasping his rifle. "A boy need n't be
as old as I am to learn that it won't do to fool with such dogs as they
are."

The grove which was guarded in this manner, it will be understood, was
nearly square in shape, reaching from the shore of the Rio Pecos on
toward the left until the termination of the valley in that direction
had been gained. It had been so plentifully drawn upon for logs and
lumber that here and there were spaces from which, several trees having
been cut, the moon's rays found unobstructed entrance. One of these
oasis, as they may be termed, was directly in the rear of Fred, who
noticed it while reconnoitering his position. The open space was some
twenty feet square, and was bisected by the trunk of a large cottonwood,
which had fallen directly across it.

Being left entirely to himself, the boy now devoted himself to the
somewhat dismal task of keeping watch, an occupation that cannot be
classed as the most cheerful in which a man may engage. The excitement
and apprehension that marked the first two or three hours prevented the
time from hanging too heavily upon his hands, but as the night stole
along and nothing was heard or seen to cause alarm, the fear grew
less and less, until, like a boy, he began to suspect that all these
precautions were useless.

For the twentieth time he stood up and listened. The soft, musical
murmur of the Rio Pecos was heard, as it flowed by on his right, and
now and then the gentlest possible breath of night-wind disturbed the
branches overhead; but nothing else caught his notice. To prevent
the feeling of utter loneliness from gaining possession of him, Fred
occasionally emitted a low, soft, tremulous whistle, which was instantly
responded to from the direction of Mickey. It was the old familiar
signal which they had used many a time when off on their little hunting
expeditions, and either, hearing it, could not mistake its source. But
this grew wearisome at last, and he leaned back against a tree, looking
out upon the moonlit valley beyond, where nothing as yet had caught
his eye that looked in the least suspicious, and where everything still
appeared as silent as a graveyard.

"I don't believe there are any Indians within fifty miles," he muttered,
impatiently; "and yet we must have three or four men on the look-out
till morning. Well, I s'pose it's the only safe thing to do, and I'm
bound to stick it out till one o'clock. It must be near midnight now,
and if Mickey should come around here, an hour from now, and find me
asleep, I never would hear the last of it."

He felt very much like sitting down upon the ground, but he knew if he
did that he would be sure to fall asleep, while, as long as he kept
his feet, he was sure to retain his senses. When disposed to become too
drowsy, a sudden giving away at the knees recalled him so vigorously,
that it was a considerable time before the drowsiness crept over him
again.

Thus the night advanced, until all at once, Fred aroused himself as if a
sharp pin had been thrust in him.

"By George! I heard something then!" he exclaimed, in an excited
undertone, looking sharply about him; "but I don't know where it came
from."

His impression was that it came from some point directly before him
out on the open space; but the most rigid scrutiny failed to reveal the
cause. There was the level stretch of grass, unbroken by stone or shrub,
but nothing that could be tortured into the remotest resemblance to a
human figure.

"It can't be there," he muttered; "or if it was, it do n't amount--"

His senses were aroused to the highest pitch, and he was all attention.

Just as the thoughts were running through his head, he caught the
slightest possible rustle from some point behind him. He turned his head
like lightning, and looked and listened. He could dimly discern the
open moonlit space to which reference has already been made; but the
intervening trees and undergrowth prevented anything like a satisfactory
view.

"There's where it seemed to come from," he said, to himself; "and yet
I do n't see how an Indian could have got there without our finding it
out. Maybe it was n't anything, after all."

He waited and listened awhile longer, but no more. Anxious to learn
what it all meant, he began a cautious movement toward the open space,
for the purpose of finding out.



CHAPTER IV. FACING LONE WOLF

Fred's few weeks spent in crossing the plains on his way to the valley
of the Rio Pecos had taught him much of the ways of the Indians, and he
knew that if any of the scamps were in his immediate neighborhood, it
would be almost impossible for him to stir from his position by the tree
without betraying himself. The lad half suspected that the sound was
made by some wild animal that was stealing through the wood, or what was
more likely, that it was no more than a falling leaf; but, whatever
it was, he was determined to learn if the thing were among the
possibilities.

A veteran Comanche, himself, could not have picked his way through the
undergrowth any better than did he; and, when at last he stood upon the
edge of the open space and looked around, he was morally certain that no
other creature was aware of his movement. Nor was he aware of the action
of the other party, if there was really such a one, which had been the
means of bringing him thither. If some wild animal or wild Indian were
lurking in the vicinity, he knew how to remain invisible.

"I'll stay here a little while--"

Fred at that moment was looking at the cottonwood tree, which, it will
be remembered, had been felled directly across the opening, when, to his
speechless terror, the figure of an Indian warrior suddenly rose
upright from behind it, and stood as motionless as a statue. His action
indicated that he was not aware that any one was standing so near him.
He had probably crept up to the log behind which he crouched, until,
believing he was not in danger of being seen, he arose to his feet and
assumed the attitude of one who was using his eyes and ears to their
utmost extent.

He was of ordinary stature, without any blanket, his long, black
hair hanging loosely down upon his shoulders, his scarred and ugly
countenance daubed and smeared with different colored paint, his chest
bare, and ornamented in the same fashion, a knife at his girdle, and
a long, formidable rifle in his hand--such were the noticeable
characteristics, to a superficial observer, of Lone Wolf, the Apache
chief--for the Indian confronting Fred Munson was really he, and no one
else.

The lad suspected the identity of the red-skin, although, having
never seen him, it amounted only to a suspicion. No matter who he was,
however, he was prepared for him.

The Apache showed his usual cunning. He was evidently attempting to
steal upon the sentinels, and, having risen to his feet, he remained
motionless and upright, listening for any sign that might betray any
motion of the individuals whom he was seeking to slay, as does the
assassin at night.

"He must have been after _me_, for he is right behind where I stood,"
thought the boy, as he grasped his rifle more firmly than ever, resolved
to fire upon the wretch the moment he attempted to advance.

Lone Wolf stood but a minute in the position described, when, seemingly,
he was satisfied that the way was clear, and, throwing one moccasin on
the trunk, he climbed over as silently as a shadow, and stood again holt
upright upon the other side. This brought the Indian and boy within ten
feet of each other, and still the advantage was all upon the side of the
latter, who stood in such deep shadow that he was not only invisible,
but his presence was unsuspected.

The Indian was not gazing in the direction of the lad, but seemed
to turn his attention more to the left, toward the spot where Mickey
O'Rooney, the Irishman, was stationed. In ignoring the proximity of a
boy, it cannot be said that he acted unreasonably.

Lone Wolf remained like a carven statue for a few seconds longer, and
then began a cautious movement forward. In the moonlight, Fred could
observe the motion of the foot, and the gradual advance of the body.
He felt that it would not do to defer any longer his intention of
obstructing him. If permitted to go on in this manner, he might kill
Mickey O'Rooney, and bring down a whole host of red-skins upon the
sleeping settlers, cutting them off to a man.

Fred had his rifle to his shoulder, and pointed toward the Indian.
Suddenly stepping forward, he placed himself in the moonlight, and, with
the muzzle of his piece almost at the breast of the chief, he said:

"Another step forward, and I'll bore you through!"

The lad did not stop to consider whether it was likely that the Indian
understood the English tongue; but, as it happened, Lone Wolf could
use it almost as if to the manner born; and it would have required
no profound linguistic knowledge upon the part of anyone to have
comprehended the meaning of the young hero. It was one of those
situations in which gesture told the meaning more plainly than mere
words could have done. But if ever there was an astonished aborigine,
