
'The wish said ALL a dream, you know, Panther; you cut up and ask if he
lent you anything.'

'I beg your pardon,' said Anthea politely, following the sound of her
knock into the presence of the learned gentleman, 'I'm so sorry to
trouble you, but DID you lend me a pound today?'

'No,' said he, looking kindly at her through his spectacles. 'But it's
extraordinary that you should ask me, for I dozed for a few moments this
afternoon, a thing I very rarely do, and I dreamed quite distinctly that
you brought me a ring that you said belonged to the Queen of Babylon,
and that I lent you a sovereign and that you left one of the Queen's
rings here. The ring was a magnificent specimen.' He sighed. 'I wish it
hadn't been a dream,' he said smiling. He was really learning to smile
quite nicely.

Anthea could not be too thankful that the Psammead was not there to
grant his wish.



CHAPTER 9. ATLANTIS

You will understand that the adventure of the Babylonian queen in London
was the only one that had occupied any time at all. But the children's
time was very fully taken up by talking over all the wonderful things
seen and done in the Past, where, by the power of the Amulet, they
seemed to spend hours and hours, only to find when they got back to
London that the whole thing had been briefer than a lightning flash.

They talked of the Past at their meals, in their walks, in the
dining-room, in the first-floor drawing-room, but most of all on the
stairs. It was an old house; it had once been a fashionable one, and was
a fine one still. The banister rails of the stairs were excellent for
sliding down, and in the corners of the landings were big alcoves that
had once held graceful statues, and now quite often held the graceful
forms of Cyril, Robert, Anthea, and Jane.

One day Cyril and Robert in tight white underclothing had spent a
pleasant hour in reproducing the attitudes of statues seen either in the
British Museum, or in Father's big photograph book. But the show ended
abruptly because Robert wanted to be the Venus of Milo, and for this
purpose pulled at the sheet which served for drapery at the very moment
when Cyril, looking really quite like the Discobolos--with a gold and
white saucer for the disc--was standing on one foot, and under that one
foot was the sheet.

Of course the Discobolos and his disc and the would-be Venus came down
together, and everyone was a good deal hurt, especially the saucer,
which would never be the same again, however neatly one might join its
uneven bits with Seccotine or the white of an egg.

'I hope you're satisfied,' said Cyril, holding his head where a large
lump was rising.

'Quite, thanks,' said Robert bitterly. His thumb had caught in the
banisters and bent itself back almost to breaking point.

'I AM so sorry, poor, dear Squirrel,' said Anthea; 'and you were looking
so lovely. I'll get a wet rag. Bobs, go and hold your hand under the
hot-water tap. It's what ballet girls do with their legs when they hurt
them. I saw it in a book.'

'What book?' said Robert disagreeably. But he went.

When he came back Cyril's head had been bandaged by his sisters, and he
had been brought to the state of mind where he was able reluctantly to
admit that he supposed Robert hadn't done it on purpose.

Robert replying with equal suavity, Anthea hastened to lead the talk
away from the accident.

'I suppose you don't feel like going anywhere through the Amulet,' she
said.

'Egypt!' said Jane promptly. 'I want to see the pussy cats.'

'Not me--too hot,' said Cyril. 'It's about as much as I can stand
here--let alone Egypt.' It was indeed, hot, even on the second landing,
which was the coolest place in the house. 'Let's go to the North Pole.'

'I don't suppose the Amulet was ever there--and we might get our fingers
frost-bitten so that we could never hold it up to get home again. No
thanks,' said Robert.

'I say,' said Jane, 'let's get the Psammead and ask its advice. It will
like us asking, even if we don't take it.'

The Psammead was brought up in its green silk embroidered bag, but
before it could be asked anything the door of the learned gentleman's
room opened and the voice of the visitor who had been lunching with him
was heard on the stairs. He seemed to be speaking with the door handle
in his hand.

'You see a doctor, old boy,' he said; 'all that about
thought-transference is just simply twaddle. You've been over-working.
Take a holiday. Go to Dieppe.'

'I'd rather go to Babylon,' said the learned gentleman.

'I wish you'd go to Atlantis some time, while we're about it, so as to
give me some tips for my Nineteenth Century article when you come home.'

'I wish I could,' said the voice of the learned gentleman. 'Goodbye.
Take care of yourself.'

The door was banged, and the visitor came smiling down the stairs--a
stout, prosperous, big man. The children had to get up to let him pass.

'Hullo, Kiddies,' he said, glancing at the bandages on the head of Cyril
and the hand of Robert, 'been in the wars?'

'It's all right,' said Cyril. 'I say, what was that Atlantic place you
wanted him to go to? We couldn't help hearing you talk.'

'You talk so VERY loud, you see,' said Jane soothingly.

'Atlantis,' said the visitor, 'the lost Atlantis, garden of the
Hesperides. Great continent--disappeared in the sea. You can read about
it in Plato.'

'Thank you,' said Cyril doubtfully.

'Were there any Amulets there?' asked Anthea, made anxious by a sudden
thought.

'Hundreds, I should think. So HE'S been talking to you?'

'Yes, often. He's very kind to us. We like him awfully.'

'Well, what he wants is a holiday; you persuade him to take one. What
he wants is a change of scene. You see, his head is crusted so thickly
inside with knowledge about Egypt and Assyria and things that you can't
hammer anything into it unless you keep hard at it all day long for days
and days. And I haven't time. But you live in the house. You can hammer
almost incessantly. Just try your hands, will you? Right. So long!'

He went down the stairs three at a time, and Jane remarked that he was a
nice man, and she thought he had little girls of his own.

'I should like to have them to play with,' she added pensively.

The three elder ones exchanged glances. Cyril nodded.

'All right. LET'S go to Atlantis,' he said.

'Let's go to Atlantis and take the learned gentleman with us,' said
Anthea; 'he'll think it's a dream, afterwards, but it'll certainly be a
change of scene.'

'Why not take him to nice Egypt?' asked Jane.

'Too hot,' said Cyril shortly.

'Or Babylon, where he wants to go?'

'I've had enough of Babylon,' said Robert, 'at least for the present.
And so have the others. I don't know why,' he added, forestalling the
question on Jane's lips, 'but somehow we have. Squirrel, let's take
off these beastly bandages and get into flannels. We can't go in our
unders.'

'He WISHED to go to Atlantis, so he's got to go some time; and he might
as well go with us,' said Anthea.

This was how it was that the learned gentleman, permitting himself a few
moments of relaxation in his chair, after the fatigue of listening to
opinions (about Atlantis and many other things) with which he did not
at all agree, opened his eyes to find his four young friends standing in
front of him in a row.

'Will you come,' said Anthea, 'to Atlantis with us?'

'To know that you are dreaming shows that the dream is nearly at an
end,' he told himself; 'or perhaps it's only a game, like "How many
miles to Babylon?".' So he said aloud: 'Thank you very much, but I have
only a quarter of an hour to spare.'

'It doesn't take any time,' said Cyril; 'time is only a mode of thought,
you know, and you've got to go some time, so why not with us?'

'Very well,' said the learned gentleman, now quite certain that he was
dreaming.

Anthea held out her soft, pink hand. He took it. She pulled him gently
to his feet. Jane held up the Amulet.

'To just outside Atlantis,' said Cyril, and Jane said the Name of Power.

'You owl!' said Robert, 'it's an island. Outside an island's all water.'

'I won't go. I WON'T,' said the Psammead, kicking and struggling in its
bag.

But already the Amulet had grown to a great arch. Cyril pushed the
learned gentleman, as undoubtedly the first-born, through the arch--not
into water, but on to a wooden floor, out of doors. The others followed.
The Amulet grew smaller again, and there they all were, standing on the
deck of a ship whose sailors were busy making her fast with chains to
rings on a white quay-side. The rings and the chains were of a metal
that shone red-yellow like gold.

Everyone on the ship seemed too busy at first to notice the group of
newcomers from Fitzroy Street. Those who seemed to be officers were
shouting orders to the men.

They stood and looked across the wide quay to the town that rose beyond
it. What they saw was the most beautiful sight any of them had ever
seen--or ever dreamed of.

The blue sea sparkled in soft sunlight; little white-capped waves broke
softly against the marble breakwaters that guarded the shipping of a
great city from the wilderness of winter winds and seas. The quay was of
marble, white and sparkling with a veining bright as gold. The city
was of marble, red and white. The greater buildings that seemed to be
temples and palaces were roofed with what looked like gold and silver,
but most of the roofs were of copper that glowed golden-red on the
houses on the hills among which the city stood, and shaded into
marvellous tints of green and blue and purple where they had been
touched by the salt sea spray and the fumes of the dyeing and smelting
works of the lower town.

Broad and magnificent flights of marble stairs led up from the quay to a
sort of terrace that seemed to run along for miles, and beyond rose the
town built on a hill.

The learned gentleman drew a long breath. 'Wonderful!' he said,
'wonderful!'

'I say, Mr--what's your name,' said Robert. 'He means,' said Anthea,
with gentle politeness, 'that we never can remember your name. I know
it's Mr De Something.'

'When I was your age I was called Jimmy,' he said timidly. 'Would you
mind? I should feel more at home in a dream like this if I--Anything
that made me seem more like one of you.'

'Thank you--Jimmy,' said Anthea with an effort. It seemed such a cheek
to be saying Jimmy to a grown-up man. 'Jimmy, DEAR,' she added, with no
effort at all. Jimmy smiled and looked pleased.

But now the ship was made fast, and the Captain had time to notice other
things. He came towards them, and he was dressed in the best of all
possible dresses for the seafaring life.

'What are you doing here?' he asked rather fiercely. 'Do you come to
bless or to curse?'

'To bless, of course,' said Cyril. 'I'm sorry if it annoys you, but
we're here by magic. We come from the land of the sun-rising,' he went
on explanatorily.

'I see,' said the Captain; no one had expected that he would. 'I didn't
notice at first, but of course I hope you're a good omen. It's needed.
And this,' he pointed to the learned gentleman, 'your slave, I presume?'

'Not at all,' said Anthea; 'he's a very great man. A sage, don't they
call it? And we want to see all your beautiful city, and your temples
and things, and then we shall go back, and he will tell his friend, and
his friend will write a book about it.'

'What,' asked the Captain, fingering a rope, 'is a book?'

'A record--something written, or,' she added hastily, remembering the
Babylonian writing, 'or engraved.'

Some sudden impulse of confidence made Jane pluck the Amulet from the
neck of her frock.

'Like this,' she said.

The Captain looked at it curiously, but, the other three were relieved
to notice, without any of that overwhelming interest which the mere name
of it had roused in Egypt and Babylon.

'The stone is of our country,' he said; 'and that which is engraved on
it, it is like our writing, but I cannot read it. What is the name of
your sage?'

'Ji-jimmy,' said Anthea hesitatingly.

The Captain repeated, 'Ji-jimmy. Will you land?' he added. 'And shall I
lead you to the Kings?'

'Look here,' said Robert, 'does your King hate strangers?'

'Our Kings are ten,' said the Captain, 'and the Royal line, unbroken
from Poseidon, the father of us all, has the noble tradition to do
honour to strangers if they come in peace.'

'Then lead on, please,' said Robert, 'though I SHOULD like to see all
over your beautiful ship, and sail about in her.'

'That shall be later,' said the Captain; 'just now we're afraid of a
storm--do you notice that odd rumbling?'

'That's nothing, master,' said an old sailor who stood near; 'it's the
pilchards coming in, that's all.'

'Too loud,' said the Captain.

There was a rather anxious pause; then the Captain stepped on to the
quay, and the others followed him.

'Do talk to him--Jimmy,' said Anthea as they went; 'you can find out all
sorts of things for your friend's book.'

'Please excuse me,' he said earnestly. 'If I talk I shall wake up; and
