find it and to take the greatest care that nothing should frighten
us while we were eating. And then, after we had got in the habit
of feeding in that particular place and had grown to feel perfectly
safe there, they have hidden close by until a lot of us were feeding
together and then fired their terrible guns and killed a lot of
my friends and dreadfully hurt a lot more. I wouldn't trust one of
them, not ONE!"

"Oh, how dreadful!" cried Peter, looking quite as shocked as he felt.
Then he added eagerly, "But our Farmer Brown's boy wouldn't do anything
like that. You haven't the least thing to fear from him."

"Perhaps not," said Mrs. Quack, shaking her head doubtfully, "but
I wouldn't trust him. I wouldn't trust him as far off as I could
see him. The Smiling Pool is a very nice place, although it is
dreadfully small, but if Farmer Brown's boy is likely to come over
here, I guess I better look for some other place, though goodness
knows where I will find one where I will feel perfectly safe."

"You are safe right here, if you have sense enough to stay here,"
declared Jerry Muskrat rather testily. "Don't you suppose Peter
and I know what we are talking about?"

"I wish I could believe so," returned Mrs. Quack sadly, "but if
you had been through what I've been through, and suffered what I've
suffered, you wouldn't believe any place safe, and you certainly
wouldn't trust one of those two-legged creatures. Why, for weeks
they haven't given me a chance to get a square meal, and--and--I
don't know what has become of Mr. Quack, and I'm all alone!" There
was a little sob in her voice and tears in her eyes.

"Tell us all about it," begged Peter. "Perhaps we can help you."




III

MRS. QUACK TELLS ABOUT HER HOME


"It's a long story," said Mrs. Quack, shaking the tears from her
eyes, "and I hardly know where to begin."

"Begin at the beginning," said Jerry Muskrat. "Your home is somewhere
way up in the Northland where Honker the Goose lives, isn't it?"

Mrs. Quack nodded. "I wish I were there this very minute," she
replied, the tears coming again. "But sometimes I doubt if ever
I'll get there again. You folks who don't have to leave your homes
every year don't know how well off you are or how much you have to
be thankful for."

"I never could understand what people want to leave their homes
for, anyway," declared Peter.

"We don't leave because we want to, but because we HAVE to," replied
Mrs. Quack, "and we go back just as soon as we can. What would you
do if you couldn't find a single thing to eat?"

"I guess I'd starve," replied Peter simply.

"I guess you would, and that is just what we would do, if we didn't
take the long journey south when Jack Frost freezes everything
tight up there where my home is," returned Mrs. Quack. "He comes
earlier up there and stays twice as long as he does here, and
makes ten times as much ice and snow. We get most of our food in
the water or in the mud under the water, as of course you know,
and when the water is frozen, there isn't a scrap of anything we
can get to eat. We just HAVE to come south. It isn't because we
want to, but because we must! There is nothing else for us to do."

"Then I don't see what you want to make your home in such a place
for," said practical Peter. "I should think you would make it where
you can live all the year around."

"I was born up there, and I love it just as you love the dear Old
Briar-patch," replied Mrs. Quack simply. "It is home, and there
is no place like home.  Besides, it is a very beautiful and a very
wonderful place in summer. There is everything that Ducks and Geese
love. We have all we want of the food we love best. Everywhere is
shallow water with tall grass growing in it."

"Huh!" interrupted Peter, "I wouldn't think much of a place like
that."

"That's because you don't know what is good," snapped Jerry
Muskrat. "It would suit me," he added, with shining eyes.

"There are the dearest little islands just made for safe nesting-places,"
continued Mrs. Quack, without heeding the interruptions. "And the
days are long, and it is easy to hide, and there is nothing to
fear, for two-legged creatures with terrible guns never come there."

"If there is nothing to fear, why do you care about places to hide?"
demanded Peter.

"Well, of course, we have enemies, just as you do here, but they
are natural enemies,--Foxes and Minks and Hawks and Owls," explained
Mrs. Quack. "Of course, we have to watch out for them and have
places where we can hide from them, but it is our wits against their
wits, and it is our own fault if we get caught.  That is perfectly
fair, so we don't mind that. It is only men who are not fair.  They
don't know what fairness is."

Peter nodded that he understood, and Mrs. Quack went on. "Last
summer Mr. Quack and I had our nest on the dearest little island,
and no one found it. First we had twelve eggs, and then twelve of
the dearest babies you ever saw."

"Maybe," said Peter doubtfully, thinking of his own babies.

"They grew so fast that by the time the cold weather came, they
were as big as their father and mother," continued Mrs. Quack.
"And they were smart, too. They had learned how to take care of
themselves just as well as I could. I certainly was proud of that
family. But now I don't know where one of them is."

Mrs. Quack suddenly choked up with grief, and Peter Rabbit politely
turned his head away.




IV

MRS. QUACK CONTINUES HER STORY


When Mrs. Quack told of her twelve children and how she didn't know
where one of them was, Peter Rabbit and Jerry Muskrat knew just
how badly she was feeling, and they turned their heads away and
pretended that they didn't see her tears.  In a few minutes she
bravely went on with her story.

"When Jack Frost came and we knew it was time to begin the long
journey, Mr.  Quack and myself and our twelve children joined
with some other Duck families, and with Mr. Quack in the lead, we
started for our winter home, which really isn't a home but just a
place to stay. For a while we had nothing much to fear.  We would
fly by day and at night rest in some quiet lake or pond or on some
river, with the Great Woods all about us or sometimes great marshes.
Perhaps you don't know what marshes are. If the Green Meadows here
had little streams of water running every which way through them,
and the ground was all soft and muddy and full of water, and the
grass grew tall, they would be marshes."

Jerry Muskrat's eyes sparkled. "I would like a place like that!"
he exclaimed.

"You certainly would," replied Mrs. Quack. "We always find lots of
your relatives in such places."

"Marshes must be something like swamps," ventured Peter Rabbit,
who had been thinking the matter over.

"Very much the same, only with grass and rushes in place of trees
and bushes," replied Mrs. Quack. "There is plenty to eat and the
loveliest hiding-places. In some of these we stayed days at a time.
In fact, we stayed until Jack Frost came to drive us out. Then as
we flew, we began to see the homes of these terrible two-legged
creatures called men, and from that time on we never knew a minute
of peace, excepting when we were flying high in the air or far out
over the water.  If we could have just kept flying all the time or
never had to go near the shore, we would have been all right. But
we had to eat."

"Of course," said Peter. "Everybody has to eat."

"And we had to rest," said Mrs. Quack.

"Certainly," said Peter. "Everybody has to do that."

"And to eat we had to go in close to shore where the water was
not at all deep, because it is only in such places that we can get
food," continued Mrs. Quack.  "It takes a lot of strength to fly
as we fly, and strength requires plenty of food. Mr. Quack knew all
the best feeding-places, for he had made the long journey several
times, so every day he would lead the way to one of these. He always
chose the wildest and most lonely looking places he could find, as
far as possible from the homes of men, but even then he was never
careless. He would lead us around back and forth over the place
he had chosen, and we would all look with all our might for signs
of danger. If we saw none, we would drop down a little nearer and
a little nearer. But with all our watchfulness, we never could be
sure, absolutely sure, that all was safe. Sometimes those terrible
two-legged creatures would be hiding in the very middle of the
wildest, most lonely looking marshes. They would be covered with
grass so that we couldn't see them.  Then, as we flew over them,
would come the bang, bang, bang, bang of terrible guns, and always
some of our flock would drop. We would have to leave them behind,
for we knew if we wanted to live we must get beyond the reach of
those terrible guns. So we would fly our hardest. It was awful,
just simply awful!"

Mrs. Quack paused and shuddered, and Peter Rabbit and Jerry Muskrat
shuddered in sympathy.

"Sometimes we would have to try three or four feeding-places before
we found one where there were no terrible guns. And when we did
find one, we would be so tired and frightened that we couldn't
enjoy our food, and we didn't dare to sleep without some one on
watch all the time. It was like that every day. The farther we got,
the worse it became. Our flock grew smaller and smaller. Those who
escaped the terrible guns would be so frightened that they would
forget to follow their leader and would fly in different directions
and later perhaps join other flocks. So it was that when at last we
reached the place in the sunny Southland for which we had started,
Mr. Quack and I were alone. What became of our twelve children I
don't know. I am afraid the terrible guns killed some. I hope some
joined other flocks and escaped, but I don't know."

"I hope they did too," said Peter.




V

PETER LEARNS MORE OF MRS. QUACK'S TROUBLES


