   BE NUMB' ED, deprived of feeling.
   EX PLOITS', heroic deeds.
   IL LUS' TRATES, explains; makes clear.
   HE RO'IC, brave; fearless.
   UN FLINCH'ING, determined; resolute.

   BAY' O NET, a short, pointed instrument of iron, or broad dagger,
   fitted to the barrel of a gun. It is so called, because the first
   bayonets were made at Bayonne, in France.


NAPOLEON'S ARMY CROSSING THE ALPS.

1. When Napoleon was carrying war into Italy, he ordered one of his
officers, Marshal Macdonald, to cross the Splugen with fifteen thousand
soldiers, and join him on the plains below. The Splugen is one of the
four great roads which cross the Alps from Switzerland to Italy.

2. When Macdonald received the order, it was about the last of November,
and the winter storms were raging among the mountain passes. It was a
perilous undertaking, yet he must obey; and the men began their terrible
march through narrow defiles and overhanging precipices, six thousand
feet up, up among the gloomy solitudes of the Alps.

3. The cannon were placed on sleds drawn by oxen, and the ammunition was
packed on mules. First came the guides, sticking their long poles in the
snow, in order to find the path; then came workmen to clear away the
drifts; then the dragoons, mounted on their most powerful horses, to
beat down the track; after which followed the main body of the army.

4. They encountered severe storms and piercing cold. When half-way up
the summit, a rumbling noise was heard among the cliffs. The guides
looked at each other in alarm; for they knew well what it meant. It grew
louder and louder. "_An avalanche! an avalanche!_" they shrieked, and
the next moment a field of ice and snow came leaping down the mountain,
striking the line of march, and sweeping thirty dragoons in a wild
plunge below. The black forms of the horses and their riders were seen
for an instant struggling for life, and then they disappeared forever.

5. The sight struck the soldiers with horror; they crouched and shivered
in the blast. Their enemy was not now flesh and blood, but wild winter
storms; swords and bayonets could not defend them from the desolating
avalanche. Flight or retreat was hopeless; for all around lay the
drifted snow, like a vast winding-sheet. On they must go, or death was
certain, and the brave men struggled forward.

6. "Soldiers!" exclaimed their commander, "you are called to Italy; your
general needs you. Advance and conquer, first the mountain and the snow,
then the plains and the enemy!" Blinded by the winds, benumbed with the
cold, and far beyond the reach of aid, Macdonald and his men pressed on.
Sometimes a whole company of soldiers were suddenly swept away by an
avalanche.

7. On one occasion, a poor drummer, crawling out from the mass of snow,
which had torn him from his comrades, began to beat his drum for relief.
The muffled sound came up from his gloomy resting-place, and was heard
by his brother soldiers; but none could go to his rescue. For an hour,
he beat rapidly, then the strokes grew fainter, until they were heard no
more, and the poor drummer laid himself down to die. Two weeks were
occupied in this perilous march, and two hundred men perished in the
undertaking.

8. This passage of the Splugen is one of the bravest exploits in the
history of Napoleon's generals, and illustrates the truth of the
proverb, "_Where there is a will there is a way_." No one can read the
heroic deeds of brave men grappling with danger and death, without a
feeling of respect and admiration; but heroic deeds are always the fruit
of _toil_ and _self-sacrifice_. _No one can accomplish great things,
unless he aims at great things, and pursues that aim with unflinching
courage and perseverance._

QUESTIONS.--1. What orders had Napoleon given to Marshal Macdonald? 2.
What time of year was it? 3. Describe the march of the army over the
Alps. 4. What disaster occurred to them? 5. How did their commander
address the army? 6 Describe the drummer boy's fate. 7. How many men
perished? 8. What does this exploit of the army illustrate? 9. What is
said of heroic deeds?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LIV.

   PROV' ERBS, sayings; maxims.
   TRAC' ED, shown; marked out.
   WOO ERS, suitors; lovers.
   DENSE, close; thick.
   STRIV' ING, making efforts.
   CON TROL', restraint; government.
   COPE, strive; contend.
   DE FY' ING, daring; outbraving.
   GHOST, specter; apparition.
   RE LY' ING, trusting; depending.
   WIN' NING, getting; gaining.
   BRAM' BLES, prickly shrubs.


WHERE THERE'S A WILL THERE'S A WAY.

ELIZA COOK.

1. We have faith in old proverbs full surely,
     For wisdom has traced what they tell,
   And truth may be drawn up as purely
     From them, as it may from a "well."
   Let us question the thinkers and doers,
     And hear what they honestly say,
   And you'll find they believe, like bold wooers,
     In "_Where there's a WILL there's a WAY._"

2. The hills have been high for man's mounting,
     The woods have been dense for his ax,
   The stars have been thick for his counting,
     The sands have been wide for his tracks.
   The sea has been deep for his diving,
     The poles have been broad for his sway,
   But bravely he's proved by his striving,
     That "_Where there's a WILL there's a WAY._"

3. Have ye vices that ask a destroyer,
     Or passions that need your control?
   Let Reason become your employer,
     And your body be ruled by your soul.
   Fight on, though ye bleed at the trial,
     Resist with all strength that ye may,
   Ye may conquer Sin's host by denial,
     For, "_Where there's a WILL there's a WAY._"

4. Have ye poverty's pinching to cope with'?
     Does suffering weigh down your might'?
   Only call up a spirit to hope with,
     And dawn may come out of the night.
   Oh! much may be done by defying
     The ghost of Despair and Dismay,
   And much may be gained by relying
     On "_Where there's a WILL there's a WAY._"

5. Should ye see afar off that worth winning,
     Set out on a journey with trust,
   And ne'er heed though your path at beginning
     Should be among brambles and dust.
   Though it is by footsteps ye do it,
     And hardships may hinder and stay,
   Keep a heart and be sure ye go through it,
     For, "_Where there's a WILL there's a WAY._"

QUESTIONS.--1. What is the meaning of this proverb, "_Where there's a
WILL there's a WAY?_" 2. What instances can you mention in which its
truth has been realized? 3. Do you apply this proverb in getting your
lessons?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LV.

   TAL' IS MAN, charm; amulet.
   VAN, front or head of an army.
   FI' ER Y, ardent; passionate.
   PLUMES, supplies with feathers.
   TENSE' LY, tightly.
   SWERVES, deviates.
   DAUNT, frighten; terrify.
   BAN' ISH, expel; drive away.

   TEL EGRAPH,(TELE,_far off_; GRAPH, _writing or marking_,) a machine
   to convey news far off. See SANDERS' NEW SPELLER, p. 161, Ex. 419.


"I CAN!"

1. "I CAN!" oh yes,--we _know_ you can!
     We read it in your eye;
   There is a mystic talisman
     Flashing all gloriously!
   Speak it out boldly, let it ring,
     There is a volume there,
   There's meaning in the eagle's wing
     _Then soar, and do, and dare!_

2. "I CAN!" climbs to the mountain top,
     And plows the billowy main;
   He lifts the hammer in the shop,
     And drives the saw and plane;
   He's fearless in the battle shock,
     And always leads the van
   Of young America's brave sons,--
     They never quailed nor ran.

3. "I CAN!" He is a fiery youth,
     And WILL a brother twin,
   And, arm in arm, in love and truth.
     They'll either die or win.
   Shoulder to shoulder, ever ready,
     All firm and fearless still
   These brothers labor,--true and steady,--
     "I CAN," and brave "I WILL."

4. "I CAN," e'en on his pleasure trips,
     Travels by telegraph;
   He plumes the snowy wing of ships,
     And never works by half;
   His music is the humming loom,
     And shuttles are his dancers.,
   Then clear the way, and quick give room
     For the noble-souled "I CAN," sirs!

5. "I CAN!" Indeed, we _know_ you can!
     'Tis lithe in every limb,
   To your blood 'tis a busy fan,
     How can the flame burn dim?
   It tensely draws your sturdy nerves,--
     No bow's without a string,
   And when nor bow nor bow-string swerves,
     An arrow's on the wing.

6. There is a magic in the power
     Of an unbending _will_,
   That makes us stronger every hour,
     For greater efforts still.
   Then banish from you every CAN'T,
     And show yourself a MAN,
   And nothing will your purpose daunt,
     Led by the brave "I CAN!"

QUESTIONS.--1. What does "_I can_" do? 2. Who is called his twin
brother? 3. What is said of an unbending will?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LVI.

   CAS' ED, invested.
   ARM' OR, defensive arms.
   STORM' ING, taking by assault.
   AIR' Y, fanciful; visionary.
   FOR' TRESS, fort; strong-hold.
   DE TAIN', hinder; keep back.
   WEAP' ONS, instruments for defense, or offense.
   UN WOR' THY, undeserving.
   RE GRET', sorrow for the past.
   PHAN' TOM, specter; ghost-like.
   SCARCE' LY, hardly.


NOW, TO-DAY.

ADELAIDE A. PROCTER.

 1. ARISE`! for the day is passing,
      And you lie dreaming on;
    Your brothers are cased in armor,
      And forth to the fight are gone!
    A place in the ranks awaits you;
      Each man has some part to play;
    The Past and the Future are nothing
      In the face of stern TO-DAY.

 2. ARISE from your dreams of the Future,--
     Of gaining some hard-fought field,
    Of storming some airy fortress,
      Or bidding some giant yield;
    Your Future has deeds of glory,
      Of honor, (God grant it may!)
    But your arm will never be stronger,
      Or needed as _now_,--TO-DAY.

 3. ARISE`! if the Past detain you,
      Her sunshine and storms forget;
    No chains so unworthy to hold you
      As those of a vain regret;
    Sad or bright, she is lifeless ever;
      Cast her phantom arms away,
    Nor look back, save to learn the lesson
      Of a nobler strife TO-DAY.

 4. ARISE`! for the day is passing;
      The sound that you scarcely hear,
    Is the enemy marching to battle!
(f.)  _Rise_`! RISE`! for the foe is near!
    Stay not to sharpen your weapons,
      Or the hour will strike at last,
    When, from dreams of a coming battle,
      You may wake to find it past!

QUESTIONS.--1. What reasons are assigned why we should arouse to effort
_now, to-day?_ 2. What rule for the falling inflection on _arise?_ See
Rule VIII., page 33. 3. How, according to the notation mark, should the
last verse be read?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LVII.

   REV O LU' TION, change of government.
   FAN' CI ED, thought; imagined,
   UN GEN' ER OUS, mean; ignoble.
   AC KNOWL' EDG ED, owned.
   PLOT' TING, planning; contriving.
   DE SIGN', purpose; intention.
   COR RE SPOND' ENCE, intercourse by letters.
   CON' QUEST, victory.
   IN' TER VIEW, meeting; conference.
   SOL' I TA RY, lonely; retired.
   CON GRAT' U LA TING, rejoicing with.
   IS' SU ED, started up; come forth.
   SUS PECT' ING, mistrusting.
   DE TECT' ED, exposed; found out.
   A' MI A BLE, lovely; agreeable.
   FEL' ON, criminal.
   CON' SE QUENCE, (CON, _with_; SEQUENCE, _a following_,) a following
   with, as an effect, or result.
   IM PRESS' IVE, (IM, _in_; PRESS, _to bear upon_; IVE, _tending to_,)
   tending to press in, or upon; producing an effect.
   IN VOLV' ED, (IN, _in_; VOLVED, _rolled_,) rolled in; enveloped.


THE CAPTURE OF MAJOR ANDRE.

1. One of the saddest events in the history of the American Revolution
is the _treason of Arnold_, and, in consequence of it, _the death of
Major Andre_. Arnold was an officer in the American army, who, though
brave, had a proud and impatient spirit.

2. He fancied he had not all the honor and the pay due for his services,
and, having plunged himself into debt by his expensive style of living,
these things soured his heart; and, as is the case with ungenerous
minds, he never acknowledged a fault, or forgave an injury. More than
this, he sought revenge against his countrymen by plotting _treason
against his country_.

3. Soon after forming this bad design, he opened a secret correspondence
with the English General, Henry Clinton, and, at the same time, asked
General Washington to give him the command of West Point, an important
post on the Hudson river. Washington let him have it, and this he
determined to betray into the hands of the enemy, provided he could make
out of it a good bargain for himself.

4. He wrote to General Clinton what he would do, and asked to have a
secret interview with some English officer, in order to agree upon the
terms. General Clinton was delighted; for he thought an army divided
against itself, must prove an easy conquest; and he asked Major Andre, a
gallant young officer, to meet Arnold, and settle the price of his
treason.

5. Andre did not wish to engage in such business; but he obeyed, and
went up the Hudson in an English sloop-of-war for this purpose. Arnold
agreed to meet him at a certain spot, and when night came on, sent a
little boat to bring him ashore. He landed at the foot of a mountain
called the Long Clove, on the western side of the river, a few miles
from Haverstraw, where he found the traitor hid in a clump of bushes.

6. Little did poor Andre foresee the fatal consequences of this step.
All that still star-light night they sat and talked; daylight came, and
the business was not concluded. Arnold dismissed the boatmen, and led
his companion to a solitary farm-house on the river's bank, where the
papers were finally drawn up, and hid in one of Andre's stockings. Andre
felt how exposed he was to danger in the enemy's country, and heartily
wished himself back to the sloop.

7. Forced now, however, to go by land, Arnold gave him a pass to go
through the American lines; and, at sunset, he set off, on horseback,
with a guide. They crossed the river, and, getting along on their
dangerous journey with but few alarms, the guide left the next morning,
and Andre rode briskly on, congratulating himself upon leaving all
dangers behind, for he was rapidly nearing the English lines, when there
was a loud shout, "_Stand!_ HALT!" and three men [Footnote: Paulding,
Williams, and Van Wart.] issued from the woods, one seizing the bridle,
and the others presenting their guns.

8. Andre told them he had a pass to White Plains, on urgent business
from General Arnold, and begged them not to detain him; but the men,
suspecting that all was not right, began to search him; and, hauling off
his boots, they discovered his papers in his stockings.

9. Finding himself detected, he offered them any sum of money, if they
would let him go. "No;" answered the sturdy men, "not if you would give
us ten thousand guineas;" for, though poor, they were above selling
their country at any price. Andre was sent a prisoner to General
Washington's camp. Arnold, on learning the news of his capture,
immediately fled from West Point, and made his escape to the English
sloop.

10. According to the rules of war, poor Andre was sentenced to the death
of a spy. Great efforts were made to save him. General Clinton offered a
large sum to redeem him. So young, so amiable, so gallant, and to meet a
felon's doom! but, in ten days he was hung.

11. Arnold lived; but, with the thirty thousand dollars--the price of
his treachery--he lived a miserable man, despised even by those who
bought him. And one impressive lesson which the story teaches, is, that
_the consequences of guilt do not fall alone on the guilty man;_ others
are often involved in distress, disgrace, and ruin.

QUESTIONS.--1. What is one of the saddest events in the history of the
American Revolution? 2. Who was Arnold? 3. What reason is assigned why
he plotted treason against his country? 4. What measures did he adopt to
do this? 5. With whom, and where did he make the agreement? 6. By whom
was Andre detected? 7. What became of Andre and Arnold?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LVIII.

   SE CUR' ED, obtained.
   HES' I TA TED, paused.
   MIS' ER A BLE, wretched.
   SUP' PLI ANT, petitioner; beggar.
   PECUL' IAR, singular; remarkable.
   IN DIC' A TIVE, showing; intimating.
   SO LIC' IT ED, asked; requested.
   COS TUME', mode of dress.
   VIG' OR OUS, stout; strong.
   SYN' O NYM, a word meaning the same as some other word.
   IN' FA MY, utter disgrace.

[Headnote 1: TAL' LEY RAND, a distinguished French statesman, was born
Feb. 13th, 1754. He died May 20th, 1838.]


BENEDICT ARNOLD.

1. There was a day when Talleyrand [Headnote 1] arrived in Havre, direct
from Paris. It was the darkest hour of the French Revolution. Pursued by
the blood-hounds of the Reign of Terror, stripped of every wreck of
property or power, Talleyrand secured a passage to America, in a ship
about to sail. He was a beggar and a wanderer in a strange land, to earn
his bread by daily labor.

2. "Is there an American staying at your house?" he asked the landlord
of the hotel. "I am bound to cross the water, and should like a letter
to a person of influence in the New World." The landlord hesitated a
moment, then replied: "There is a gentleman up-stairs, either from
America or Britain; but whether an American or an Englishman, I can not
tell."

3. He pointed the way, and Talleyrand, who, in his life, was Bishop,
Prince, and Prime Minister, ascended the stairs. A miserable suppliant,
he stood before the stranger's door, knocked, and entered. In the far
corner of the dimly-lighted room, sat a man of some fifty years, his
arms folded, and his head bowed on his breast. From a window directly
opposite, a faint light rested on his forehead.

4. His eyes looked from beneath the downcast brows, and gazed on
Talleyrand's face with a peculiar and searching expression. His face was
striking in outline,--the mouth and chin indicative of an iron will. His
form, vigorous, even with the snows of fifty winters, was clad in a
dark, but rich and distinguished costume.

5. Talleyrand advanced, stated that he was a fugitive; and, under the
impression that the gentleman before him was an American, he solicited
his kind and generous offices. He related his history in eloquent French
and broken English.

6. "I am a wanderer, and an exile. I am forced to flee to the New World,
without a friend or home. You are an American! Give me, then, I beseech
you, a letter of yours, so that I may be able to earn my bread. I am
willing to toil in any manner; the scenes of Paris have seized me with
such horror, that a life of labor would be a paradise to a career of
luxury in France. You will give me a letter to one of your friends? A
gentleman like yourself has, doubtless, many friends."

7. The strange gentleman rose. With a look that Talleyrand never forgot,
he retreated to the door of the next chamber,--his eyes looking still
from beneath his darkened brow. He spoke as he retreated backward,--his
voice was full of meaning. "I am the only man born in the New World, who
can raise his hand to God and say, I have not a friend, not one, in all
America!" Talleyrand never forgot the overwhelming sadness of that look
which accompanied these words.

8. "Who are you?" he cried, as the strange man retreated to the next
room: "your name?" "My name," he replied, with a smile that had more of
mockery than joy in its convulsive expression,--"my name is Benedict
Arnold!" He was gone: Talleyrand sank into his chair, gasping the words,
"ARNOLD, THE TRAITOR!"

9. Thus, you see, he wandered over the earth another Cain, with the
wanderer's mark upon his brow. Even in that secluded room, in that inn
at Havre, his crimes found him out, and forced him to tell his name:
that name the synonym of infamy. The last twenty years of his life are
covered with a cloud, from whose darkness but a few gleams of light
flash out upon the page of history.

10. The manner of his death is not exactly known; but we can not doubt
that he died utterly friendless,--that remorse pursued him to the grave,
whispering "John Andre" in his ear,--and that the memory of his course
of infamy gnawed like a canker at his heart, murmuring forever, "True to
your country, what might you have been, O ARNOLD, THE TRAITOR!"

QUESTIONS.--1. Who was Talleyrand? 2. Why was he obliged to flee from
Paris? 3. Whom did he seek at Havre? 4. Why did he wish to see the
stranger? 5. Describe the appearance of this stranger. 6. What did he
say to Talleyrand? 7. Who did the stranger prove to be? 8. What is said
of Arnold? 9. Where is Havre? 10. Where is Paris? 11. What is meant by
_New World_?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LIX.

   LO CO MO' TIVE, steam-engine to propel rail-cars.
   COL LIS' ION, (_s_ like _zh_,) shock; violent contact.
   EN GIN EER', one who manages an engine.
   PRE CIP' I TA TED, thrown headlong.
   RE-EN FORCE' MENTS, additional forces.
   OB' STI NATE, unyielding.
   CORPS, (_kore_,) body of troops.
   BANK' RUPT CY, insolvency.
   E NOR' MOUS, immense; very large.
   AS' SETS, amounts due.
   RE MIT' TANCE, money remitted.
   PRE SERV' ED, secured; saved.
   MA TU' RI TY, time of payment.
   RE PRIEVE', respite.
   IN SOLV' ENT, one unable to pay his debts.
   PROV O CA' TION, incitement to anger.
   IG NO MIN' I OUS, disgraceful.
   SAC RI FIC' ED, (_c_ like _z_,) thrown away.


BEHIND TIME.

FREEMAN HUNT.

1. A railroad train was rushing along at almost lightning speed. A curve
was just ahead, beyond which was a station, at which the cars usually
passed each other. The conductor was late,--so late that the period
during which the down train was to wait, had nearly elapsed: but he
hoped yet to pass the curve safely. Suddenly, a locomotive dashed into
sight right ahead. In an instant, there was a collision. A shriek, a
shock, and fifty souls were in eternity; and all because an engineer had
been _behind time_.

2. A great battle was going on. Column after column had been
precipitated for eight mortal hours on the enemy posted along the ridge
of a hill. The summer sun was sinking to the west; re-enforcements for
the obstinate defenders were already in sight; it was necessary to carry
the position with one final charge, or every thing would be lost. A
powerful corps had been summoned from across the country, and, if it
came up in season, all would yet be right. The great conqueror,
confident in its arrival, formed his reserve into an attacking column,
and led them down the hill. The whole world knows the result. Grouchy
[Footnote: Pronounced _Groo' shee_.] failed to appear; the imperial
guard was beaten back; Waterloo was lost. Napoleon died a prisoner at
St. Helena, because one of his marshals was _behind time_.

3. A leading firm, in commercial circles had long struggled against
bankruptcy. As it had enormous assets in California, it expected
remittances by a certain day; and if the sums promised arrived, its
credit, its honor, and its future prosperity would be preserved. But
week after week elapsed without bringing the gold. At last, came the
fatal day on which the firm had bills maturing to enormous amounts. The
steamer was telegraphed at daybreak; but it was found on inquiry that
she brought no funds; and the house failed. The next arrival brought
nearly half a million to the insolvents, but it was too late; they were
ruined, because their agent, in remitting, had been _behind time_.

