How happy the child felt as she flew along! She need not stand all day
at the wash-tub: she could go instead to school. How beautiful it was
everywhere about! The birds sang more sweetly than ever from the
trees, the grass was scented, and the pretty red and yellow flowers
glistened in the sun. Wiseli could not stop to enjoy them,--it was too
late for that,--but she felt the beauty as she ran along, and rejoiced
at every step.

That same evening, just as all the children streamed out of the
close schoolroom into the beautiful afternoon light, the teacher
called out, with his serious face peering into the little crowd,
"Whose week is this?"

"Otto's, Otto's," called the whole company at once, and ran off.

"Otto," said the teacher, earnestly, "yesterday it was not swept up here
at all. I excuse you for once; but do not let it happen again, or I must
punish you, boy."

Otto looked for a moment at all the nut-shells and apple-parings and
bits of paper that lay scattered about the floor waiting to be brushed
up; then he turned his head quickly away, and scampered out of the door,
for the teacher had disappeared into his own part of the house. Otto
stood outside and gazed about him at the golden sunset, and thought, "If
I could go home now, I could get a capful of cherries, and I could ride
the brown horse home from the field when the groom fetches the hay; and
now I must stay here instead, and sweep up these scraps from the floor!"
And Otto was so angry over this unpleasant task, that he scowled about
him, saying, "I wish the day of judgment would come, and carry off the
schoolhouse, and break it up into a thousand pieces!" But every thing
was still and peaceful all about, and not a sign of any such ravaging
earthquake to be seen or heard.

After a while Otto turned back towards the schoolroom-door with a savage
determination, for he knew that he must bite into his sour apple, or be
punished the next day by having to sit still during recess; and he would
not run the risk of that disgraceful punishment. He entered the room,
but stood still with surprise as soon as he stepped past the threshold.
Every thing was brushed up in the school-room: not a scrap nor bit to be
seen anywhere. The windows all stood wide open, and the soft evening
breeze blew through the quiet room. Just then the teacher came out of
his own room and looked about him, and at the staring Otto, and said,
pleasantly, "You may well look about you with satisfaction. I did not
think that you could do it so well. You are a good scholar; but you have
surpassed yourself to-day in cleaning up, for I never saw it so neatly
done before."

So saying, the teacher went away; and after Otto had convinced himself
by a last glance that what he saw was fact, and no witchcraft, he dashed
down the steps, two at a time, across the little place and up the
hillside: and not until he began to tell it all to his mother did he
begin to wonder to whom he was indebted for this good turn.

"Nobody has done it through a mistake, that is certain," said his
mother. "Have not you some good friend who is noble enough to sacrifice
himself in this way for you? Think over all of them: who can it be?"

"I know," cried Pussy, who had been listening eagerly.

"Yes; pray who?" said Otto, half curiously, half incredulously.

"Jack, the mouse," explained Pussy in a tone of conviction; "because you
gave him an apple last year."

"Oh, yes; or William Tell, because I did not take away his, year before
last. One would be quite as probable as the other, you wonderfully
clever Puss." And Otto ran away barely in time to catch the groom, who
was going for the hay.

Wiseli also ran about this time. Down the hill with a happy heart and a
merry countenance, past Andrew's garden, she ran, jumping and leaping in
her frolicsome mood; and then about she went, and jumped back again to
the garden, for she had espied the pinks all in bloom just within the
enclosure, and must look at them again, they, were so beautiful. "I
shall soon overtake the boys," she thought; "they stop at every corner
to play ball."

But the pinks were most lovely to look upon; and they had such a
sweet perfume, too, that the child lingered, looking over the low
hedge for a long time. Suddenly Andrew came out of his house-door,
and stood in front of Wiseli. He offered her his hand over the hedge,
and said most kindly,--

"Will you take a pink, Wiseli?"

"Yes, indeed," she replied; "and I have a message to give you from
my mother."

"From your mother?" repeated Andrew the carpenter in great surprise, and
let the pink that he had just gathered fall from his hand. Wiseli ran
round the hedge and picked it up from the ground; then she looked up at
the man who stood still and looked at her strangely, and said,--

"Yes; at the very end, when my mother could do nothing more, she drank
up the nice syrup that you put on the kitchen-table for her, and it
refreshed her very much; and she charged me to tell you that she thanked
you for it very much indeed, and for all the many acts of kindness that
you had shown her; and she said, 'He always felt kindly to me.'"

Now Wiseli perceived that big tears rolled from Andrew's eyes and fell
over his cheeks. He tried to say something, but could not speak. He
pressed the child's hand, turned him about, and went into the house.

Wiseli stood still and wondered. Nobody had wept for her mother. Even
she had not dared to cry, except when nobody could see her; for her
cousin said that he would not have any whining, and she was even more
afraid of making his wife angry. And now here was some one who wept
because she had spoken of her mother to him. It seemed to the child as
if Andrew were her very best friend upon the earth, and she felt herself
strongly drawn towards him. But now she ran with her pink as fast as
possible towards the beech grove; and it was well that she did so, for
she saw the boys also drawing near the house, and it would never have
done for her to be later than they.

Wiseli said her prayer with a light heart that night, and could not
understand why she had been so depressed the night before, and why she
had felt no confidence in God's kindness, and could not even say her
hymn. Now she felt sure that he had not forgotten her, and she would
never allow herself to think that again. Had she not received many kind
things from him? And as she fell asleep she saw before her the kind face
of Andrew the carpenter, with the tears in his eyes.

On the following day--it was Wednesday--Otto was again surprised by the
good deed performed for him by his unknown friend; for he could not
refrain from going out with the others when school was first over, and
making a few gambols here and there to refresh himself after the long
confinement. When, at last, he returned somewhat sadly to his work, it
was all done again, and the schoolroom perfectly tidy. Now his curiosity
began to be excited, and also gratitude to his invisible benefactor
began to stir in his heart. He would certainly find out on Thursday what
it all meant.

So, when the classes were dismissed, and they all left the house as
usual, Otto stood for a while by his seat, thinking how he could
discover his helpful friend. But a knot of his schoolmates rushed in as
he stood there, grasped him by arms and shoulders, and dragged him out,
crying, "Come along! Come on! We are playing 'Robbers,' and you must be
our leader."

Otto defended himself for a moment. "This is my week," he cried.

"Oh, nonsense! put it off," they said. "Only just for a quarter of an
hour. Come along!"

And Otto went. To tell the truth, he relied secretly upon his unseen
friend, who would certainly shield him from punishment. He found it
extremely agreeable to feel such a support under his feet; and the
quarter slipped into the full hour, and Otto was lost. He went back to
the schoolhouse to fulfil his duty, and threw open the door with such a
slam that the master rushed out of his room very quickly, and asked,--

"What do you want, Otto?"

"Only to look in again, to see if every thing is as it should be,"
stammered the boy.

"This is excellent," said the teacher; "but it is not necessary for you
to slam the door in that way."

Otto went away in good spirits. On Friday he made up his mind not to do
his work of cleaning until he was satisfied about the mystery; and
then,--then there would only be Saturday morning left of his week.

"Otto," called out the teacher on Friday, as the clock struck four,
"take this paper over to the pastor as quickly as you can. He will give
you some papers to bring back. It will only take you a moment or two,
and you will be here in time to brush out the room."

The boy did not like to go very well, but there was no help for it; and,
of course, he could be back in a twinkling. He reached the parsonage in
half a dozen bounds. The pastor was busy, just then, with a visitor. His
wife called Otto to her in the garden. She wanted to know how his mamma
found herself; if his father were well, and Pussy, too; how Uncle Max
was employed; and if they had good news from their relations in Germany.
Then the pastor made his appearance, and Otto had to explain why it was
his business to bring the papers, and what the teacher was doing at
present. At last he got his papers, and was off like an arrow, pulled
open the door of the schoolroom,--to find every thing swept and
garnished, and no living being visible.

"And I have not been obliged to stoop once, to clear away the tiresome
bits, the whole week through," thought Otto contentedly. "But who can
have done all this dirty work without being obliged to do it?" Now he
determined, for once and all, to have that question settled.

The school hours ended at eleven o'clock on Saturday. Otto waited until
all the children had gone, and the room was empty. Then he went outside,
closed the door, and leaned with his back against it. There could no one
enter without his seeing who it was. He preferred to do this, rather
than to go at once to work at the sweeping and cleaning. He waited and
waited: no one came. He heard the clock strike the half-hour. There were
plans at home for an excursion that afternoon. The family were to dine
early, to get away soon after dinner. He ought to begin with his work at
once, if he wanted to get home in good season. How he hated it!

He opened the door. Now Otto stared about him even more than he had done
the first time. The work was all done. It was certainly so, and nicer
than ever before.

Things began to look rather queerly to Otto. He thought of ghost
stories, and such things. Very much more softly than usual he
slipped out, and closed the door behind him. Just at the same time,
something slipped silently out of the teacher's kitchen, and they
came together face to face. It was Wiseli. She grew red and redder,
just as if Otto had detected her in something mischievous. Now the
truth flashed into his mind.

"So it is you who have done my work all the week, Wiseli?" he said.
"Nobody else would have thought of doing it unless obliged to, I am
sure of that."

"You have no idea how glad I am to get the chance," said Wiseli, in
reply.

"No, no; you must not say that, Wiseli. Nobody in the world can be glad
to do such things," said the boy decidedly.

"But I mean it,--I really do," repeated the girl. "I have thought,
all day long through the week, with pleasure of the chance the
afternoon would give me; and, while I was working, I was more than
ever glad, because I thought, when Otto comes, he will find the work
done, and be pleased."

"But what put it into your head to do it for me?"

"Oh! I knew how much you disliked it; and I have always wanted to give
you something, as you once gave me your sled. Don't you remember? But I
have nothing to give."

"What you have done is worth a great deal more than lending a sled. I
won't forget your kindness, Wiseli." So saying, Otto offered her his
hand, quite overcome for the moment.

Wiseli's eyes shone with satisfaction as they seldom did nowadays.
Presently Otto wanted to know how she had managed to get into the room
again, for he had always waited until all the children were gone.

"Oh! I never did go out," said the girl. "I hid myself quickly
behind the closet-door. I thought you would go out for a few
moments, as usual."

"How did you get out without my seeing you afterwards?" Otto wanted to
know all about it.

"Oh! while you were running around with the other boys, I got out easily
enough. I listened; but yesterday and to-day, as I was not certain where
you were, I went through the teacher's kitchen, and asked his wife if
she had any errand for me to do,--she often gives me a message to carry
somewhere,--and then I went out that way. Yesterday I was behind the
kitchen-door when you ran into the schoolroom."

Now Otto knew all the ghost story. He offered his hand again to Wiseli.
"I thank you," he said; and they both ran off with happy hearts, each a
separate way.




CHAPTER VI.

OLD AND NEW.


Summer was over, and Autumn had followed in her footsteps. The evenings
were cool and misty. In the damp meadows the cows were eating the last
grass of the season, and here and there little fires were visible where
the sheep-boys cooked their potatoes and warmed their stiffened fingers.

It was on such a misty evening that Otto, on leaving the schoolhouse,
ran home for a moment to tell his mother that he was going to see what
kept Wiseli from school; for she had not been there since the autumn
vacation,--certainly not for eight days.

As he approached the beech grove, he saw Rudi sitting before the door,
eating pear after pear from a heap that lay before him.

"Where is Wiseli?" asked Otto.

"Outside," was the answer.

"Where outside?"

"In the meadow."

"In which meadow?"

"I don't know;" and Rudi went on munching his pears.

"You won't die early because you know too much," remarked Otto, and
went haphazard towards the big meadow that stretched away from the
house to the wood.

Presently he discovered three black spots under the pear-trees, and went
towards them.

He was right. There was Wiseli stooping over the pears which she was
sorting, while a little farther off Cheppi sat astride of his rake; and
behind him Hannes lay on his back across the piled-up basket, and rocked
it back and forth so violently, that it nearly fell over at each
movement. Cheppi looked at him, laughing loudly.

When Wiseli saw Otto coming towards her, her whole countenance glowed
with pleasure.

"Good evening, Wiseli," cried the lad from afar. "Why have you not been
to school for so long?"

The girl stretched out her hand with a pleasant smile to her friend.

"We have had so much to do that I was not able to go," she said. "Just
look, what a lot of pears we have! I have to sort them from morning till
night, there are so many."

"Your shoes and stockings are all wet. It is not pleasant here. Are you
not cold when you are so wet?"

"Yes, I do feel chilly sometimes; but, in general, I get very warm at
this work."

At this moment Hannes gave his basket such a powerful twist that over it
went, and there lay Hannes, the basket, and the pears all in a heap on
the ground.

"Oh, oh!" cried Wiseli in distress; "now they are all to be picked
up again."

"And this one, too," cried Cheppi, and laughed aloud as the pear that he
had in his hand struck Wiseli's cheek with such force that it brought
the tears to her eyes, and she turned quite white with the pain.

Scarcely had Otto seen this than he flew at Cheppi, threw him and his
rake to the ground, and seized him by the nape of the neck.

"Stop, or I shall choke!" Cheppi was not laughing now.

"I want to make you remember that you will also have me to deal with in
future, when you treat Wiseli in that way," said Otto, scarlet with
anger. "Have you got enough? Will you remember it now?"

"Yes, yes! Let me go!" said Cheppi, in a very humble tone.

Otto released him.

"Now you have felt," he said, "how it will be whenever you hurt Wiseli
again. I will give you some more of this each time, even if you are
sixty years old. Good-by, Wiseli." And Otto went his way to carry his
anger to his mother.

He unburdened himself to her as soon as he reached home. It was a
terrible thing to the generous boy that Wiseli should be obliged to
submit to such treatment. He was determined to go at once to the
pastor to complain of him and of his whole family, and demand that
Wiseli should be taken away from them at once. His mother listened
quietly to him, and let his indignation have time to cool off a
little; then she said,--

"I do not think, my dear boy, that there is the least use in your doing
this. They would not take the child from her cousin Gotti, I am sure;
and it would only irritate him, should he hear that such a thing was
thought of. He himself does not feel unkindly towards Wiseli, and there
is really no sufficient ground for removing her from his roof. I know
very well that the poor girl has a hard time of it there. I have not
forgotten her, and am constantly hoping to find some way to help her. It
lies very heavily on my heart to know how much she has to suffer, you
may be sure of that, Otto. And if you can at any time manage to shelter
her and intimidate that brutal fellow Cheppi, without being too rough
yourself, I shall be very glad."

