"It's the greatest danger to be feared," he said, "and we must overtake
them in the night when they are not suspecting. If we attack by day they
will tomahawk the captives the very first thing."

"Shorely,', said the shiftless one.

"Then," said Henry, "we don't need to hurry. We'll go on until about
midnight, and then sleep until sunrise."

They continued at a fair pace along a trail that frontiersmen far less
skillful than they could have followed. But a silent dread was in the
heart of every one of them. As they saw the path of the small feet
staggering more and more they feared to behold some terrible object
beside the path.

"The trail of the littlest child is gone," suddenly announced Paul.

"Yes," said Henry, "but the mother has picked it up and is carrying it.
See how her trail has suddenly grown more uneven."

"Poor woman," said Paul. "Henry, we're just bound to overtake that
band."

"We'll do it," said Henry.

At the appointed time they sank down among the thickest bushes that they
could find, and slept until the first upshot of dawn. Then they resumed
the trail, haunted always by that fear of finding something terrible
beside it. But it was a trail that continually grew slower. The Indians
themselves were tired, or, feeling safe from pursuit, saw no need of
hurry. By and by the trail of the smallest child reappeared.

"It feels a lot better now," said Tom Ross. "So do I."

They came to another camp fire, at which the ashes were not yet cold.
Feathers were scattered about, indicating that the Indians had taken
time for a little side hunt, and had shot some birds.

"They can't be more than two or three hours ahead," said Henry, "and
we'll have to go on now very cautiously."

They were in a country of high hills, well covered with forests, a
region suited to an ambush, which they feared but little on their own
account; but, for the sake of extreme caution, they now advanced slowly.
The afternoon was long and warm, but an hour before sunset they looked
over a hill into a glade, and saw the warriors making camp for the
night.

The sight they beheld made the pulses of the five throb heavily. The
Indians had already built their fire, and two of them were cooking
venison upon it. Others were lying on the grass, apparently resting,
but a little to one side sat a woman, still young and of large, strong
figure, though now apparently in the last stages of exhaustion, with her
feet showing through the fragments of shoes that she wore. Her head was
bare, and her dress was in strips. Four children lay beside her' the
youngest two with their heads in her lap. The other two, who might be
eleven and thirteen each, had pillowed their heads on their arms, and
lay in the dull apathy that comes from the finish of both strength
and hope. The woman's face was pitiful. She had more to fear than the
children, and she knew it. She was so worn that the skin hung loosely on
her face, and her eyes showed despair only. The sad spectacle was almost
more than Paul could stand.

"I don't like to shoot from ambush," he said, "but we could cut down
half of those warriors at our firs fire and rush in on the rest."

"And those we didn't cut down at our first volley would tomahawk the
woman and children in an instant," replied Henry. "We agreed, you know,
that it would be sure to happen. We can't do anything until night comes,
and then we've got to be mighty cautious."

Paul could not dispute the truth of his words, and they withdrew
carefully to the crest of a hill, where they lay in the undergrowth,
watching the Indians complete their fire and their preparations for the
night. It was evident to Henry that they considered themselves perfectly
safe. Certainly they had every reason for thinking so. It was not likely
that white enemies were within a hundred miles of them, and, if so, it
could only be a wandering hunter or two, who would flee from this fierce
band of Senecas who bad taken revenge for the great losses that they'
had suffered the year before at the Oriskany.

They kept very little watch and built only a small fire, just enough
for broiling deer meat which they carried. They drank at a little spring
which ran from under a ledge near them, and gave portions of the meat to
the woman and children. After the woman had eaten, they bound her hands,
and she lay back on the grass, about twenty feet from the camp fire. Two
children lay on either side of her, and they were soon sound asleep. The
warriors, as Indians will do when they are free from danger and care,
talked a good deal, and showed all the signs of having what was to them
a luxurious time. They ate plentifully, lolled on the grass, and looked
at some hideous trophies, the scalps that they carried at their belts.
The woman could not keep from seeing these, too, but her face did not
change from its stony aspect of despair. Then the light of the fire went
out, the sun sank behind the mountains, and the five could no longer see
the little group of captives and captors.

They still waited, although eagerness and impatience were tugging at the
hearts of every one of them. But they must give the Indians time to
fall asleep if they would secure rescue, and not merely revenge. They
remained in the bushes, saying but little and eating of venison that
they carried in their knapsacks.

They let a full three hours pass, and the night remained dark, but
with a faint moon showing. Then they descended slowly into the valley,
approaching by cautious degrees the spot where they knew the Indian camp
lay. This work required at least three quarters of an hour, and they
reached a point where they could see the embers of the fire and the dark
figures lying about it. The Indians, their suspicions lulled, had put
out no sentinels, and all were asleep. But the five knew that, at the
first shot, they would be as wide awake as if they had never slept, and
as formidable as tigers. Their problem seemed as great as ever. So they
lay in the bushes and held a whispered conference.

"It's this," said Henry. "We want to save the woman and the children
from the tomahawks, and to do so we must get them out of range of the
blade before the battle begins." "How?" said Tom Ross.

"I've got to slip up, release the woman, arm her, tell her to run for
the woods with the children, and then you four must do the most of the
rest."

"Do you think you can do it, Henry?" asked Shif'less Sol.

"I can, as I will soon show you. I'm going to steal forward to the woman,
but the moment you four hear an alarm open with your rifles and pistols.
You can come a little nearer without being heard."

All of them moved up close to the Indian camp, and lay hidden in the
last fringe of bushes except Henry. He lay almost flat upon the ground,
carrying his rifle parallel with his side, and in his right hand. He
was undertaking one of the severest and most dangerous tests known to
a frontiersman. He meant to crawl into the very midst of a camp of the
Iroquois, composed of the most alert woodsmen in the world, men who
would spring up at the slightest crackle in the brush. Woodmen who,
warned by some sixth sense, would awaken at the mere fact of a strange
presence.

The four who remained behind in the bushes could not keep their hearts
from beating louder and faster. They knew the tremendous risk undertaken
by their comrade, but there was not one of them who would have shirked
it, had not all yielded it to the one whom they knew to be the best
fitted for the task.

Henry crept forward silently, bringing to his aid all the years of skill
that he had acquired in his life in the wilds. His body was like that
of a serpent, going forward, coil by coil. He was near enough now to see
the embers of the fire not yet quite dead, the dark figures scattered
about it, sleeping upon the grass with the long ease of custom, and then
the outline of the woman apart from the others with the children about
her. Henry now lay entirely flat, and his motions were genuinely those
of a serpent. It was by a sort of contraction and relaxation of the body
that he moved himself, and his progress was absolutely soundless.

The object of his advance was the woman. He saw by the faint light of
the moon that she was not yet asleep. Her face, worn and weather beaten,
was upturned to the skies, and the stony look of despair seemed to have
settled there forever. She lay upon some pine boughs, and her hands were
tied behind her for the night with deerskin.

Henry contorted himself on, inch by inch, for all the world like a great
snake. Now he passed the sleeping Senecas, hideous with war paint, and
came closer to the woman. She was not paying attention to anything about
her, but was merely looking up at the pale, cold stars, as if everything
in the world had ceased for her.

Henry crept a little nearer. He made a slight noise, as of a lizard
running through the grass, but the woman took no notice. He crept
closer, and there he lay flat upon the grass within six feet of her,
his figure merely a slightly darker blur against the dark blur of the
earth. Then, trusting to the woman's courage and strength of mind, he
emitted a hiss very soft and low, like the warning of a serpent, half in
fear and half in anger.

The woman moved a little, and looked toward the point from which the
sound had come. It might have been the formidable hiss of a coiling
rattlesnake that she heard, but she felt no fear. She was too much
stunned, too near exhaustion to be alarmed by anything, and she did
not look a second time. She merely settled back on the pine boughs, and
again looked dully up at the pale, cold stars that cared so little for
her or hers.

Henry crept another yard nearer, and then he uttered that low noise,
sibilant and warning, which the woman, the product of the border, knew
to be made by a human being. She raised herself a little, although it
was difficult with her bound hands to sit upright, and saw a dark shadow
approaching her. That dark shadow she knew to be the figure of a man. An
Indian would not be approaching in such a manner, and she looked again,
startled into a sudden acute attention, and into a belief that the
incredible, the impossible, was about to happen. A voice came from the
figure, and its quality was that of the white voice, not the red.

"Do not move," said that incredible voice out of the unknown. "I have
come for your rescue, and others who have come for the same purpose are
near. Turn on one side, and I will cut the bonds that hold your arms."

The voice, the white voice, was like the touch of fire to Mary Newton.
A sudden fierce desire for life and for the lives of her four children
awoke within her just when hope had gone the call to life came. She
had never heard before a voice so full of cheer and encouragement. It
penetrated her whole being. Exhaustion and despair fled away.

"Turn a little on your side," said the voice.

She turned obediently, and then felt the sharp edge of cold steel as it
swept between her wrists and cut the thongs that held them together. Her
arms fell apart, and strength permeated every vein of her being.

"We shall attack in a few moments," said the voice, "but at the first
shots the Senecas will try to tomahawk you and your children. Hold out
your hands."

She held out both hands obediently. The handle of a tomahawk was pressed
into one, and the muzzle of a double-barreled pistol into the other.
Strength flowed down each hand into her body.

"If the time comes, use them; you are strong, and you know how," said
the voice. Then she saw the dark figure creeping away.



CHAPTER XIV. THE PURSUIT ON THE RIVER


The story of the frontier is filled with heroines, from the far days
of Hannah Dustin down to the present, and Mary Newton, whom the unknown
figure in the dark had just aroused, is one of them. It had seemed to
her that God himself had deserted her, but at the last moment he had
sent some one. She did not doubt, she could not doubt, because the bonds
had been severed, and there she lay with a deadly weapon in either hand.
The friendly stranger who had come so silently was gone as he had come,
but she was not helpless now. Like many another frontier woman, she
was naturally lithe and powerful, and, stirred by a great hope, all her
strength had returned for the present.

Nobody who lives in the wilderness can wholly escape superstition,
and Mary Newton began to believe that some supernatural creature had
intervened in her behalf. She raised herself just a little on one elbow
and surveyed the surrounding thicket. She saw only the dead embers of
the fire, and the dark forms of the Indians lying upon the bare ground.
Had it not been for the knife and pistol in her hand, she could have
believed that the voice was only a dream.

There was a slight rustling in the thicket, and a Seneca rose quickly
to his knees, grasping his rifle in both hands. The woman's fingers
clutched the knife and pistol more tightly, and her whole gaunt figure
trembled. The Seneca listened only a moment. Then he gave a sharp cry,
and all the other warriors sprang up. But three of them rose only
to fall again, as the rifles cracked in the bushes, while two others
staggered from wounds.

The triumphant shout of the frontiersmen came from the thicket, and then
they rushed upon the camp. Quick as a flash two of the Senecas started
toward the woman and children with their tomahawks, but Mary Newton was
ready. Her heart had leaped at the shots when the Senecas fell, and
she kept her courage. Now she sprang to her full height, and, with the
children screaming at her feet, fired one barrel of the pistol directly
into the face of the first warrior, and served the second in the same
way with the other barrel when he was less than four feet away. Then,
tomahawk in hand, she rushed forward. In judging Mary Newton, one must
consider time and place.

But happily there was no need for her to use her tomahawk. As the five
rushed in, four of them emptied their double-barreled pistols, while
Henry swung his clubbed rifle with terrible effect. It was too much
for the Senecas. The apparition of the armed woman, whom they had left
bound, and the deadly fire from the five figures that sprang upon them,
was like a blow from the hand of Aieroski. The unhurt and wounded fled
deep into the forest, leaving their dead behind. Mary Newton, her great
deed done, collapsed from emotion and weakness. The screams of the
children sank in a few moments to frightened whimpers. But the oldest,
when they saw the white faces, knew that rescue had come.

Paul brought water from the brook in his cap, and Mary Newton was
revived; Jim was reassuring the children, and the other three were in
the thickets, watching lest the surviving Senecas return for attack.

"I don't know who you are, but I think the good God himself must have
sent you to our rescue," said Mary Newton reverently.

"We don't know," said Paul, "but we are doing the best we can. Do you
think you can walk now?"

"Away from the savages? Yes!" she said passionately. She looked down at
the dead figures of the Senecas, and she did not feel a single trace of
pity for them. Again it is necessary to consider time and place.

"Some of my strength came back while I was lying here," she said, "and
much more of it when you drove away the Indians."

"Very well," said Henry, who had returned to the dead camp fire with
his comrades, "we must start on the back trail at once. The surviving
Senecas, joined by other Iroquois, will certainly pursue, and we need
all the start that we can get."

Long Jim picked up one of the two younger children and flung him over
his shoulder; Tom Ross did as much for the other, but the older two
scorned help. They were full of admiration for the great woodsmen,
mighty heroes who had suddenly appeared out of the air, as it were,
and who had swept like a tornado over the Seneca band. It did not seem
possible now that they, could be retaken.

But Mary Newton, with her strength and courage, had also recovered her
forethought.

"Maybe it will not be better to go on the back trail," she said. "One
of the Senecas told me to-day that six or seven miles farther on was a
river flowing into the Susquehanna, and that they would cross this river
on a boat now concealed among bushes on the bank. The crossing was at a
sudden drop between high banks. Might not we go on, find the boat, and
come back in it down the river and into the Susquehanna?"

"That sounds mighty close to wisdom to me," said Shif'less Sol.
"Besides, it's likely to have the advantage o' throwin' the Iroquois off
our track. They'll think, o' course, that we've gone straight back, an'
we'll pass 'em ez we're going forward."

"It's certainly the best plan," said Henry, "and it's worth our while
to try for that hidden boat of the Iroquois. Do you know the general
direction?"

"Almost due north."

"Then we'll make a curve to the right, in order to avoid any Iroquois
who may be returning to this camp, and push for it."

Henry led the way over hilly, rough ground, and the others followed in a
silent file, Long Jim and Tom still carrying the two smallest children,
who soon fell asleep on their shoulders. Henry did not believe that the
returning Iroquois could follow their trail on such a dark night, and
the others agreed with him.

After a while they saw the gleam of water. Henry knew that it must be
very near, or it would have been wholly invisible on such a dark night.

"I think, Mrs. Newton," he said, "that this is the river of which you
spoke, and the cliffs seem to drop down just as you said they would."

The woman smiled.

"Yes," she said, "you've done well with my poor guess, and the boat must
be hidden somewhere near here."

Then she sank down with exhaustion, and the two older children, unable
to walk farther, sank down beside her. But the two who slept soundly on
the shoulders of Long Jim and Tom Ross did not awaken. Henry motioned
to Jim and Tom to remain there, and Shif'less Sol bent upon them a
quizzical and approving look.

"Didn't think it was in you, Jim Hart, you old horny-handed galoot," he
said, "carryin' a baby that tender. Knew Jim could sling a little black
bar 'roun' by the tail, but I didn't think you'd take to nussin' so
easy."

"I'd luv you to know, Sol Hyde," said Jim Hart in a tone of high
condescension, "that Tom Ross an' me are civilized human bein's. In face
uv danger we are ez brave ez forty thousand lions, but with the little
an' the weak we're as easy an' kind an' soft ez human bein's are ever
made to be."

"You're right, old hoss," said Tom Ross.

"Well," said the shiftless one, "I can't argify with you now, ez the
general hez called on his colonel, which is me, an' his major, which is
Paul, to find him a nice new boat like one o' them barges o' Clepatry
that Paul tells about, all solid silver, with red silk sails an' gold
oars, an' we're meanin' to do it."

Fortune was with them, and in a quarter of an hour they discovered, deep
among bushes growing in the shallow water, a large, well-made boat with
two pairs of oars and with small supplies of parched corn and venison
hidden in it.

"Good luck an' bad luck come mixed," said the shift-less one, "an' this
is shorely one o' our pieces o' good luck. The woman an' the children
are clean tuckered out, an' without this boat we could never hev got
them back. Now it's jest a question o' rowin' an' fightin'."

"Paul and I will pull her out to the edge of the clear water," said
Henry, "while you can go back and tell the others, Sol."

"That just suits a lazy man," said Sol, and he walked away jauntily.
Under his apparent frivolity he concealed his joy at the find, which he
knew to be of such vast importance. He approached the dusky group, and
his really tender heart was stirred with pity for the rescued captives.
Long Jim and Silent Tom held the smaller two on their shoulders, but
the older ones and the woman, also, had fallen asleep. Sol, in order to
conceal his emotion, strode up rather roughly. Mary Newton awoke.

