
Fletcher senior, Hawley, and Gull sat on three sides of the small table,
while Thurston himself occupied the fourth.

"Hang it all!" exclaimed the latter, throwing down a handful of playing
cards upon the table, and pushing back his chair.  "I shan't play any
more to-night; I've got no more tin."

"Oh, go on; I'll lend you some," answered Fletcher.  "I don't care
whether I win or lose; it's only the game I play for."

As a matter of fact, Fletcher nearly always _did_ win, and was mightily
displeased on the rare occasions when he lost.

"No; I've borrowed enough already," returned the other.  "I shan't be
able to square up as it is till next term.  It's all very well for
fellows like you three, who have rich people, and can write home any
time for a fiver; but I'm not so flush of cash.--Look here, Gull, have
you got that banjo?  Sing us a song."

"All right," answered Gull, reaching down and picking a small
five-stringed instrument off the floor; "what'll you have?"

"Oh, something with a good swing to it.  I feel like kicking up a row."

Gull tuned up, struck a few chords, and then launched out into a
rattling nigger song with an amount of "go" and clatter sufficient to
inspire the hearer with an almost irresistible desire to get up and
dance.  The three listeners shouted the chorus at the top of their
voices, pounding the table with their fists by way of a sort of drum
accompaniment.  Gull was just preparing to commence the fourth verse
when there was a knock at the study door.

"Wait a jiff," said Thurston.--"Who's there?  What d'you want?"

"Why," came the answer, uttered in rather a drawling tone, "I wish you
fellows wouldn't make so much row.  I can't possibly work.  Do be
quiet."

"Oh, go to Bath!" shouted Thurston.--"It's only that old stew-pot
Browse," he added.  "The beggar's got the next study, and he's cramming
up for some 'exam.'--Go on, Gull."

The entertainment continued, and waxed more noisy than ever, the
performers hammering the table with a ruler and two walking-sticks to
add zest to the choruses.

Soon there came another interruption, very different in tone from the
mild expostulation of the studious Browse.  The door was violently
shaken, and from without came the sharp, peremptory order of the
school captain,--

"Look here, Thurston, just shut up; we've had enough of this horrible
row for one night.  Stop it, d'you hear?"

"All right," growled the owner of the study; "keep your hair on, old
fellow!"

"Sh! steady on, Thirsty," said Fletcher, in a low tone.  "Don't go too
far, or he'll put a stop to our next merry meeting.  I know Allingford,
and he's rather a hard wall to run your head against."

"That confounded old Browse has gone and sneaked!" cried the other, with
a flush of passion on his face.  "Let's wait till Ally's gone, and then
make a raid on the old stew-pot."

Hawley and Gull sprang to their feet with a murmur of assent; Fletcher
shrugged his shoulders and remained silent.

"What we'll do is this," continued Thurston.  "He sits with his back to
the door.  I'll pop in first and throw this tablecloth over his head;
then, while I hold him down, you chaps upset the things and put out the
light.  Then we'll rush out all together, and he won't know for certain
who did it."

Five minutes later the conspirators crept out into the passage, and
tip-toed towards the door of the adjoining study.  Fletcher lingered
behind, and, instead of following the expedition, stole softly away
in the opposite direction.  Another moment, and the unfortunate Browse
was struggling to rise from his chair, with his head enveloped in the
tablecloth.  Hawley and Gull, following immediately in rear of their
leader, sent the table, with its load of books and writing materials,
over with a crash, threw the chairs into different corners of the room,
and were about to scatter the contents of the bookcase over the floor,
when Allingford suddenly burst into the room, and stood glaring round
like an angry lion.

With one swing of his right arm he sent Thurston staggering against the
wall, and then, stepping forward without an instant's hesitation, he
dealt each of the other marauders a swinging box on the ear.

The two Fifth Form boys were big, strong fellows, and for a moment it
seemed as though a stand-up fight would ensue.  The captain, however,
followed up his attack with amazing promptness, and before his
antagonists had time to think of resistance he had taken them both by
the shoulders and sent them flying into the passage.

"There!" he exclaimed.  "I'll teach you gentlemen to come playing pranks
on Sixth Form studies.  What business have you got here, I should like
to know?--As for you," continued the speaker, casting a scornful glance
at the originator of the outrage, "I should have thought a fellow who's
a prefect ought to know better than to go rioting with every scamp in
the school."

Thurston's conduct on the cricket field had clearly proved him to be no
coward.  He stood his ground, and returned Allingford's angry glances
with a look of fierce defiance.  He attempted to make some reply, but
somehow the words failed him, and turning on his heel he walked away to
his own study.

"Confound that fellow Fletcher!" he muttered between his teeth.
"He always takes precious good care to sneak away when there's any row
on.  If it wasn't for that money I owe him, I'd punch his head."

Half an hour later there was a sharp rap at the door, and Allingford,
Oaks, and Acton entered the room.

"Well," said Thurston, looking up with a frown from the book he was
reading, "what d'you want now?  I don't remember asking you fellows to
come and see me.  A chap can't call his study his own nowadays."

"No," answered Acton grimly.  "If a chap wants to work, a lot of
blackguards come and wreck his furniture."

"Look here, Thurston," said the captain coldly, "we've no wish to stay
here longer than we can help.  We've come simply to tell you this--that
after what's happened to-night the prefects are determined that
to-morrow morning you send in your resignation to the doctor."

"And supposing I don't choose to send in my resignation?" returned the
other.

"Then," answered the captain calmly, "we shall send it in for you."

There was a moment's silence; then Thurston rose from his chair, and
closing his book flung it down with a bang upon the table.

"All right," he said; "I'll do it.  You fellows have been set against me
from the first.  I know all about it, and before I leave this place I'll
pay you out."

"I almost wish we'd left it till after the holidays," said Oaks, as the
three prefects walked down the passage.

"No," said Allingford firmly; "if we hesitate, and the fellows see it,
we're lost.  It must be done at once."

"Well, perhaps so," answered Oaks; "but I'll tell you this--Thurston
means mischief.  I wish he was going to leave.  He won't forget this in
a hurry, and my belief is we shall hear more about it next term."



CHAPTER XIII.


THE ELECTIONS.

Thurston's resignation, as might have been expected, gave rise to a
considerable amount of excitement and conflicting opinion.  Nearly every
boy in the school saw clearly that he was both unworthy and unfitted to
fulfil the duties of a prefect, but the peculiar circumstances under
which he had, as "Rats" put it, been given "notice to quit," caused a
large number of his schoolfellows to side with him, and condemn the
action of the captain.  Only a few of the general public knew exactly
what the row had been.  The Sixth Form authorities, refusing to be
catechized, would answer no questions; while the other side took good
care to spread abroad a very one-sided account of the affair.

The Wraxby match was fresh in everybody's mind.  "Awfully hard lines I
call it," said the cricketers.  "He won that game for us; why didn't
they let him go on a few days more till the end of the term?"
While those young gentlemen, of whom a few are to be found in every
school, who cherish a strong dislike to anything in the shape of law and
order, were, of course, loud in their expressions of dissatisfaction at
the removal of one who always winked at their transgressions.

At the commencement of the winter session it soon became evident that
seven weeks of summer holiday had not dispelled the cloud which had
overshadowed the close of the previous term.  No sooner had the first
excitement of meeting and settling down subsided a little than the
question of Thurston's deposal cropped up again, and caused an unusual
amount of interest to be felt by all Ronleigh in the forthcoming
elections.

Every school has its own methods of choosing those who are to fill the
posts and offices in connection with its various institutions, and it
will be well to describe, in a few words, how this was done at Ronleigh,
in order that the reader may follow with greater interest the working
out of an important event in the history of the college.

The elections took place twice a year--at the commencement of the summer
and winter terms--their chief object being to appoint what was known as
the Sports Committee (who had the management of athletics and of the
forthcoming cricket or football season), two librarians, and a keeper of
the reading-room.  In addition to this, when any of the prefects left,
fresh ones were chosen in their places.  Only members of the Sixth Form
were eligible for this office, which was not conferred before the choice
of the boys had been confirmed by the sanction of the head-master, and
was understood to last for the remainder of the recipient's school life.

On the second or third morning of the term a paper was posted up on the
notice-board in the big schoolroom, announcing the fact that the
elections would take place two days later, and mentioning exactly what
each voter was required to do.  Every boy who had been two terms at the
school received a voting paper, which he filled up at his leisure and
handed over to the returning officers at a special assembly called for
the purpose.

At the commencement of this particular winter term the school
reassembled on a Tuesday, and on Thursday notice was given that the
elections would take place on the following Saturday afternoon.

According to the usual custom, when fresh prefects were to be chosen,
the names of all the Sixth Form boys who were not already holding that
office were mentioned on the notice, to show who were eligible for the
position.  Thurston's name did not appear on the list; some one added it
in pencil, another hand crossed it out, and an hour or two later it was
added again, this time in red ink.

This simple action seemed the signal for a general agitation on
Thurston's behalf.  His friends throughout the school openly proclaimed
their intention of voting for him, and exhorted others to do the same.
Almost to a man the Sixth and Remove sided with the captain, but Hawley
and Gull in the Fifth, Noaks and Mouler in the Upper Fourth, and other
fellows in the lower forms made up their minds to secure Thurston's
return, and set to work to carry out their project with a zeal worthy of
a better cause.

Two fresh prefects were required, and the friends of law and order were
unanimous in naming Fielding and Parkes as the most suitable candidates
to fill the vacancies.  Rival posters appeared on the double doors
leading to the playground:--

              REMEMBER THE WRAXBY MATCH,

                         AND

                  VOTE FOR THURSTON.


                  PLUMP FOR PARKES,

                     AND HAVE A

                   PROPER PREFECT.

But this method of carrying on the campaign was soon brought into
disrepute, owing to the fact that certain juveniles, seeing in this new
idea of bill-posting a fresh field for practical joking, began to adorn
the walls of the "grub-room," and other spaces which did not often come
under the eye of a master, with placards exhibiting inscriptions which
had no bearing on the elections--such irrelevant remarks as,
"nooks Two wants kicking !" or, "_Lost_-my wits. (Signed) B. BIBBS," being
calculated to occasion a considerable amount of strife and bad blood
without serving any useful purpose.

The Lower School was in a fever heat of excitement, and it is quite
possible that the little pleasantries which have just been alluded to
were occasioned by difference of opinion on the one absorbing topic of
the day.  The close of the previous holidays had witnessed a general
parliamentary election, and with the details of contests which had taken
place in their native towns vividly impressed upon their minds, the
younger boys, from the Lower Fourth downwards, threw themselves into the
present conflict with an amount of energy and spirit which was not to be
found in the more sober and deliberate action of their seniors.

The greater number of the old "Happy Family" had now been removed into
the Lower Fourth, and this form in particular was rent with opposing
views, and shaken with continued outbursts of hostility between the
rival factions.  The Triple Alliance were loyal to the old _regime_, and
were supported by "Rats," Carton, and several of their old friends.

"Acton saved us from getting into a row after that 'coffee-mill'
business," remarked Diggory.

"Rowland gave Noaks a dressing down when he hit me in the mouth," said
Jack Vance.

"And old Ally boxed Mouler's ears when they made me upset that paint,"
added Mugford.

"Rats" declared that he meant to conduct what he called a
"house-to-house visitation," and accordingly, beginning at the bottom of
the form, the first person he called upon was Grundy, a great lout of
sixteen, who had been at the tail end of the Lower Fourth for the last
twelve months.  As it happened, Grundy was a strong partisan of the
opposite side, and not only refused to vote for Parkes, but, seizing
hold of the unfortunate canvasser, proceeded to twist his arms and pinch
his ears for daring to oppose the election of Thurston.

Fletcher Two, whose sympathies, as might have been expected, were with
his brother's chum, organized open-air meetings in one corner of the
field where the big cricket-roller could be used as a platform.
But here, again, the love of larking which is so characteristic
of the lawless small boy came into evidence, and with that touch of
nature which makes the whole world kin, friend and foe alike joined in
the spree of interrupting the proceedings.  Just when the orator
had reached the most important point in his harangue, and was pouring
forth a torrent of impassioned eloquence, the platform would begin to
move, or the audience would insist on turning the gathering into an
imaginary "scrum," and almost crushing the life out of those who
