at the upper end of Manhattan Island, and they drew in to their
anchorage near the Battery. They did not see the stone government
buildings that had marked Quebec, nor the numerous signs of a fortress
city, but they beheld more ships and more indications of a great
industrial life.

"Every time I come here," said Willet, "it seems to me that the masts
increase in number. Truly it is a good town, and an abundant life
flows through it."

"Where shall we stop, Dave?" asked Robert. "Do you have a tavern in
mind?"

"Not a tavern," replied the hunter. "My mind's on a private house,
belonging to a friend of mine. You have not met him because he is at
sea or in foreign parts most of the time. Yet we are assured of a
welcome."

An hour later they said farewell to Captain Van Zouten, carried their
own light baggage, and entered the streets of the port.




CHAPTER X

THE PORT


The three walked toward the Battery, and, while Tayoga attracted more
attention in New York than in Quebec, it was not undue. The city was
used to Indians, especially the Iroquois, and although comments were
made upon Tayoga's height and noble appearance there was nothing
annoying.

Meanwhile the two youths were using their excellent eyes to the
full. Although the vivid imagination of Robert had foreseen a great
future for New York he did not dream how vast it would be. Yet all
things are relative, and the city even then looked large to him and
full of life, both size and activity having increased visibly since
his last visit. Some of the streets were paved, or at least in part,
and the houses, usually of red brick, often several stories in height,
were comfortable and strong. Many of them had lawns and gardens as at
Albany, and the best were planted with rows of trees which would
afford a fine shade in warm weather. Above the mercantile houses and
dwellings rose the lofty spire of St. George's Chapel in Nassau
Street, which had been completed less than three years before, and
which secured Robert's admiration for its height and impressiveness.

The aspect of the whole town was a mixture of English and Dutch, but
they saw many sailors who were of neither race. Some were brown men
with rings in their ears, and they spoke languages that Robert did not
understand. But he knew that they came from far southern seas and that
they sailed among the tropic isles, looming large then in the world's
fancy, bringing with them a whiff of romance and mystery.

The sidewalks in many places were covered with boxes and bales brought
from all parts of the earth, and stalwart men were at work among
them. The pulsing life and the air of prosperity pleased Robert. His
nature responded to the town, as it had responded to the woods, and
his imagination, leaping ahead, saw a city many times greater than the
one before his eyes, though it still stopped far short of the gigantic
reality that was to come to pass.

"It's not far now to Master Hardy's," said Willet cheerfully. "It's
many a day since I've seen trusty old Ben, and right glad I'll be to
feel the clasp of his hand again."

On his way Willet bought from a small boy in the street a copy each of
the _Weekly Post-Boy_ and of the _Weekly Gazette_ and _Mercury_,
folding them carefully and putting them in an inside pocket of his
coat.

"I am one to value the news sheets," he said. "They don't tell
everything, but they tell something and 'tis better to know something
than nothing. Just a bit farther, my lads, and we'll be at the steps
of honest Master Hardy. There, you can see where fortunes are made and
lost, though we're a bit too late to see the dealers!"

He pointed to the Royal Exchange, a building used by the merchants at
the foot of Broad Street, a structure very unique in its plan. It
consisted of an upper story resting upon arches, the lower part,
therefore, being entirely open. Beneath these arches the merchants met
and transacted business, and also in a room on the upper floor, where
there were, too, a coffee house and a great room used for banquets,
and the meetings of societies, the Royal Exchange being in truth the
beginning of many exchanges that now mark the financial center of the
New World.

"Perhaps we'll see the merchants there tomorrow," said Willet. "You'll
note the difference between New York and Quebec. The French capital
was all military. You saw soldiers everywhere, but this is a town of
merchants. Now which, think you, will prevail, the soldiers or the
merchants?"

"I think that in the end the merchants will win," replied Robert.

"And so do I. Now we have come to the home of Master Hardy. See you
the big brick house with high stone steps? Well, that is his, and I
repeat that he is a good friend of mine, a good friend of old and of
today. I heard that in Albany, which tells me we will find him here
in his own place."

But the big brick house looked to Robert and Tayoga like a fortress,
with its massive door and iron-barred windows, although friendly smoke
rose from a high chimney and made a warm line against the frosty blue
air.

Willet walked briskly up the high stone steps and thundered on the
door with a heavy brass knocker. The summons was quickly answered and
the door swung back, revealing a tall, thin, elderly man, neatly
dressed in the fashion of the time. He had the manner of one who
served, although he did not seem to be a servant. Robert judged at
once that he was an upper clerk who lived in the house, after the
custom of the day.

"Is Master Benjamin within, Jonathan?" asked Willet.

The tall man blinked and then stared at the hunter in astonishment.

"Is it in very truth you, Master Willet?" he exclaimed.

"None other. Come, Jonathan, you know my voice and my face and my
figure very well. You could not fail to recognize me anywhere. So
cease your doubting. My young friends here are Robert Lennox, of whom
you know, and Tayoga, a coming chief of the Clan of the Bear, of the
nation Onondaga, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, known to you
as the Six Nations. He's impatient of disposition and unless you
answer my question speedily I'll have him tomahawk you. Come now, is
Master Benjamin within?"

"He is, Mr. Willet. I had no intent to delay my answer, but you must
allow something to surprise."

"I grant you pardon," said the hunter whimsically. "Robert and
Tayoga, this is Master Jonathan Pillsbury, chief clerk and man of
affairs for Master Benjamin Hardy. They are two old bachelors who live
in the same house, and who get along well together, because they're so
unlike. As for Master Jonathan, his heart is not as sour as his face,
and you could come to a worse place than the shop of Benjamin and
Jonathan. Master Jonathan, you will take particular notice of
Mr. Lennox. He is well grown and he appears intelligent, does he not?"

The old clerk blinked again, and then his appraising eyes swept over
Robert.

"'Twould be hard to find a nobler youth," he said.

"I thought you would say so, and now lead us, without further delay,
to Master Hardy."

"Who is it who demands to be led to me?" thundered a voice from the
rear of the house. "I seem to know that voice! Ah, it's Willet! Good
old Willet!  Honest Dave, who wields the sharpest sword in North
America!"

A tall, heavy man lunged forward. "Lunged" was the word that described
it to Robert, and his impetuous motion was due to the sight of Willet,
whom he grasped by both hands, shaking them with a vigor that would
have caused pain in one less powerful than the hunter, and as he shook
them he uttered exclamations, many of them bordering upon oaths and
all of them pertaining to the sea.

Robert's eyes had grown used to the half light of the hall, and he
took particular notice of Master Benjamin Hardy who was destined to
become an important figure in his life, although he did not then dream
of it. He saw a tall man of middle age, built very powerfully, his
face burnt almost the color of an Indian's by the winds and suns of
many seas. But his hair was thick and long and the eyes shining in the
face, made dark by the weather, were an intensely bright blue. Robert,
upon whom impressions were so swift and vivid, reckoned that here was
one capable of great and fierce actions, and also with a heart that
contained a large measure of kindness and generosity.

"Dave," said the tall man, who carried with him the atmosphere of the
sea, "I feared that you might be dead in those forests you love so
well, killed and perhaps scalped by the Hurons or some other savage
tribe. You've abundant hair, Dave, and you'd furnish an uncommonly
fine scalp."

"And I feared, Benjamin, that you'd been caught in some smuggling
cruise near the Spanish Main, and had been put out of the way by the
Dons. You love gain too much, Ben, old friend, and you court risks too
great for its sake."

Master Benjamin Hardy threw back his head and laughed deeply and
heartily. The laugh seemed to Robert to roll up spontaneously from his
throat. He felt anew that here was a man whom he liked.

"Perchance 'tis the danger that draws me on," said Master Hardy. "You
and I are much alike, Dave. In the woods, if all that I hear be true,
you dwell continually in the very shadow of danger, while I incur it
only at times. Moreover, I am come to the age of fifty years, the head
is still on my shoulders, the breath is still in my body, and Master
Jonathan, to whom figures are Biblical, says the balance on my books
is excellent."

"You talk o'er much, Ben, old friend, but since it's the way of
seafaring men and 'tis cheerful it does not vex my ears. You behold
with me, Tayoga, a youth of the best blood of the Onondaga nation, one
to whom you will be polite if you wish to please me, Benjamin, and
Master Robert Lennox, grown perhaps beyond your expectations."

Master Benjamin turned to Robert, and, as Master Jonathan had done,
measured him from head to foot with those intensely bright blue eyes
of his that missed nothing.

"Grown greatly and grown well," he said, "but not beyond my
expectations. In truth, one could predict a noble bough upon such a
stem. But you and I, Dave, having many years, grow garrulous and
forget the impatience of youth. Come, lads, we'll go into the
drawing-room and, as supper was to have been served in half an hour,
I'll have the portions doubled."

Robert smiled.

"In Albany and New York alike," he said, "they welcome us to the
table."

"Which is the utmost test of hospitality," said Master Benjamin.

They went into a great drawing-room, the barred windows of which
looked out upon a busy street, warehouses and counting houses and
passing sailors. Robert was conscious all the while that the brilliant
blue eyes were examining him minutely. His old wonder about his
parentage, lost for a while in the press of war and exciting events,
returned. He felt intuitively that Master Hardy, like Willet, knew who
and what he was, and he also felt with the same force that neither
would reply to any question of his on the subject. So he kept his
peace and by and by his curiosity, as it always did, disappeared
before immediate affairs.

The drawing-room was a noble apartment, with dark oaken beams, a
polished oaken floor, upon which eastern rugs were spread, and heavy
tables of foreign woods. A small model of a sloop rested upon one
table and a model of a schooner on another. Here and there were great
curving shells with interiors of pink and white, and upon the walls
were curious long, crooked knives of the Malay Islands. Everything
savored of the sea. Again Robert's imagination leaped up. The blazing
hues of distant tropic lands were in his eyes, and the odors of
strange fruits and flowers were in his nostrils.

"Sit down, Dave," said Master Benjamin, "and you, too, Robert and
Tayoga. I suppose you did not come to New Amsterdam--how the name
clings!--merely to see me."

"That was one purpose, Benjamin," replied Willet, "but we had others
in mind too."

"To join the war, I surmise, and to get yourselves killed?"

"The first part of your reckoning is true, Benjamin, but not the
second. We would go to the war, in which we have had some part
already, but not in order that we may be killed."

"You suffer from the common weakness. One entering war always thinks
that it's the other man and not he who will be killed. You're too old
for that, David."

Willet laughed.

"No, Benjamin," he said, "I'm not too old for it, and I never will
be. It's the belief that carries us all through danger."

"Which way did you think of going in these warlike operations?"

"We shall join the force that comes out from England."

"The one that will march against Fort Duquesne?"

"Undoubtedly."

"I hear that it's to be commanded by a general named Braddock, Edward
Braddock. What do you know of him?"

"Nothing."

"But you do know, David, that regular army officers fare ill in the
woods as a rule. You've told me often that the savages are a tricky
lot, and, fighting in the forest in their own way, are hard to beat."

"You speak truth, Benjamin, and I'll not deny it, but there are many
of our men in the woods who know the ways of the Indians and of the
French foresters. They should be the eyes and ears of General
Braddock's army."

"Well, maybe! maybe! David, but enough of war for the present. One
cannot talk about it forever. There are other things under the
sun. You will let these lads see New Amsterdam, will you not? Even
Tayoga can find something worth his notice in the greatest port of the
New World."

"Is any play being given here?" asked Robert.

"Aye, we're having plays almost nightly," replied Master Hardy, "and
they're being presented by some very good actors, too. Lewis Hallam,
who came several years ago from Goodman's Fields Theater in England,
and his wife, known on the stage as Mrs. Douglas, are offering the
best English plays in New York. Hallam is said to be extremely fine
in Richard III, in which tragedy he first appeared here, and he gives
it tomorrow night."

"Then we're going," said Robert eagerly. "I would not miss it for
anything."

"I had some thought of going myself, and if Dave hasn't changed, he
has a fine taste for the stage. I'll send for seats and we'll go
together."

Willet's eyes sparkled.

"In truth I'll go, too, and right gladly," he said. "You and I,
Benjamin, have seen the plays of Master Shakespeare together in
London, and 'twill please me mightily to see one of them again with
you in New York. Jonathan, here, will be of our company, too, will he
not?"

Master Pillsbury pursed his lips and his expression became severe.

"'Tis a frivolous way of passing the time," he said, "but it would be
well for one of serious mind to be present in order that he might
impose a proper dignity upon those who lack it."

Benjamin Hardy burst into a roar of laughter. Robert had never known
any one else to laugh so deeply and with such obvious spontaneity and
enjoyment. His lips curled up at each end, his eyes rolled back and
then fairly danced with mirth, and his cheeks shook. It was
contagious. Not only did Master Benjamin laugh, but the others had to
laugh, not excluding Master Jonathan, who emitted a dry cackle as
became one of his habit and appearance.

"Do you know, Dave, old friend," said Hardy, "that our good Jonathan
is really the most wicked of us all? I go upon the sea on these
cruises, which you call smuggling, and what not, and of which he
speaks censoriously, but if they do not show a large enough profit on
his books he rates me most severely, and charges me with a lack of
enterprise. And now he would fain go to the play to see that we
observe the proper decorum there. My lads, you couldn't keep the
sour-visaged old hypocrite from it."

Master Jonathan permitted himself a vinegary smile, but made no other
reply, and, a Dutch serving girl announcing that supper was ready,
Master Hardy led them into the dining-room, where a generous repast
was spread. But the room itself continued and accentuated the likeness
of a ship. The windows were great portholes, and two large swinging
lamps furnished the light. Pictures of naval worthies and of sea
actions lined the walls. Two or three of the battle scenes were quite
spirited, and Robert regarded them with interest.

"Have you fought in any of those encounters, Mr. Hardy?" he asked.

Willet laid a reproving hand upon his shoulder.

"'Twas a natural question of yours, Robert," he said, "but 'tis the
fashion here and 'tis courtesy, too, never to ask Benjamin about his
past life. Then he has no embarrassing questions to answer."

Robert reddened and Hardy broke again into that deep, spontaneous
laughter which, in time, compelled all the others to laugh too and
with genuine enjoyment.


"Don't believe all that David tells you, Robert, my brave macaroni,"
he said. "I may not answer your questions, but faith they'll never
prove embarrassing. Bear in mind, lad, that our trade being
restricted by the mother country and English subjects in this land not
having the same freedom as English subjects in England, we must resort
to secrecy and stratagem to obtain what our fellow subjects on the
other side of the ocean may obtain openly. And when you grow older,
Master Robert, you will find that it's ever so in the world. Those to
whom force bars the way will resort to wiles and stratagems to achieve
their ends. The fox has the cunning that the bear lacks, because he
hasn't the bear's strength. Lads, you two will sit together on this
side of the table, Jonathan, you take the side next to the portholes,
and David, you and I will preside at the ends. Benjamin, David and
Jonathan, it has quite a Biblical sound, and at least the friendship
