Benella confessed that she had not the heart to refuse Francesca
anything. "She's too handsome," she said, "and too winnin'. I s'pose
she'll cook up some dreadful messes, but I'm willin' to eat 'em, to
oblige her, and perhaps it'll save her husband a few spells of dyspepsy
at the start; though, as far as my experience goes, ministers'll always
eat anything that's set before 'em, and look over their shoulders for
more."

We had a heavenly week of silliness, and by dint of concealing our real
relations from the general public, I fancy we escaped harsh criticism.
There is a very large percentage of lunacy anyway in Ireland, as well
as great leniency of public opinion, and I fancy there is scarcely a
country on the map in which one could be more foolish without being
found out. Visit each other we did constantly, and candour obliges me to
state that, though each of us secretly prided herself on the perfection
of her cuisine, Miss Monroe gave the most successful afternoon tea of
all, on the 'wee grass,' under the Japanese umbrella. How unexpectedly
good were her scones, her tea-cakes, and her cress sandwiches, and how
pretty and graceful and womanly she was, all flushed with pride at our
envy and approbation! I did a water-colour sketch of her and sent it to
Ronald, receiving in return a letter bubbling over with fond admiration
and gratitude. She seems always in tone with the season and the
landscape, does Francesca, and she arrives at it unconsciously, too.
She glances out of her window at the yellow laburnum-tree when she
is putting on her white frock, and it suggests to her all her amber
trinkets and her drooping hat with the wreath of buttercups. When she
came to my hawthorn luncheon at Rosaleen Cottage she did not make the
mistake of heaping pink on pink, but wore a cotton gown of palest green,
with a bunch of rosy blossoms at her belt. I painted her just as she
stood under the hawthorn, with its fluttering petals and singing birds,
calling the picture Grainne Mael [*]: A Vision of Erinn, writing under
it the verse:--


     'The thrushes seen in bushes green are singing loud--
      Bid sadness go and gladness glow,--give welcome proud!
      The Rover comes, the Lover, whom you long bewail,
      O'er sunny seas, with honey breeze, to Grainne Mael.'

     * Pronounced Graunia Wael, the M being modified.  It is one
     of the endearing names given to Ireland in the Penal Times.

Benella, I fancy, never had so varied a week in her life, and she was
in her element. We were obliged to hire a side-car by the day, as two
of our residences were over a mile apart; and the driver of that vehicle
was the only person, I think, who had any suspicion of our sanity. In
the intervals of teaching Francesca cooking, and eating the results
while the cook herself prudently lunched or dined with her friends,
Benella 'spring-cleaned' the lodge at the Old Hall, scrubbed the
gateposts, mended stone walls, weeded garden beds, made bags for the
brooms and dusters and mattresses, burned coffee and camphor and other
ill-smelling things in all the rooms, and devoted considerable time to
superintending my little maid, that I might not feel neglected. We were
naturally obliged, meanwhile, to wait upon ourselves and keep our frocks
in order; but as long as the Derelict was so busy and happy, and
so devoted to the universal good, it would have been churlish and
ungrateful to complain.

On leaving the Wee Hut, as Francesca had, with ostentatious modesty,
named her residence, she paid her landlady two pounds, and was
discomfited when the exuberant and impetuous woman embraced her in a
paroxysm of weeping gratitude.

"I cannot understand, Penelope, why she was so disproportionately
grateful, for I only gave her five shillings over the two pounds rent."

"Yes, dear," I responded drily; "but you remember that the rent was for
the month, and you paid her two pounds five shillings for the week."

All the rest of that day Francesca was angelic. She brought footstools
for Salemina, wound wool for her, insisted upon washing my paint
brushes, read aloud to us while we were working, and offered to be the
one to discharge Benella if the awful moment for that surgical operation
should ever come. Finally, just as we were about to separate for the
night, she said, with insinuating sweetness, "You won't tell Ronald
about my mistake with the rent-money, will you, dearest and darlingest
girls?"

We are now quite ready to join in all the gaieties that may ensue when
Rosnaree welcomes its master and his guests. Our page in buttons at the
lodge gives Benella full scope for her administrative ability, which
seems to have sprung into being since she entered our service; at least,
if I except that evidence of it which she displayed in managing us when
first we met. She calls our page 'the Button Boy,' and makes his life
a burden to him by taking him away from his easy duties at the gate,
covering his livery with baggy overalls, and setting him to weed the
garden. It can never, in the nature of things, be made free from weeds
during our brief term of tenancy, but Benella cleverly keeps her slave
at work on the beds and the walks that are the most conspicuous to
visitors. The Old Hall used simply to be called 'Aunt David's house' by
the Welsh Joyces, and it was Aunt David herself who made the garden;
she who traced the lines of the flower-beds with the ivory tip of her
parasol; she who planned the quaint stone gateways and arbours and
hedge seats; she who devised the interminable stretches of paths, the
labyrinthine walks, the mazes, and the hidden flower-plots. You walk on
and on between high hedges, until, if you have not missed your way, you
presently find a little pansy or rose or lily garden. It is quite the
most unexpected and piquant method of laying out a place I have ever
seen; and the only difficulty about it is that any gardener, unless
he were possessed of unusual sense of direction, would be continually
astray in it. The Button Boy, obeying the laws of human nature, is lost
in two minutes, but requires two hours in which to find himself.
Benella suspects that he prefers this wandering to and fro to the more
monotonous task of weeding, and it is no uncommon thing for her to
pursue the recalcitrant page through the mazes and labyrinths for an
hour at a time, and perhaps lose herself in the end. Salemina and I were
sitting this morning in the Peacock Walk, where two trees clipped into
the shape of long-tailed birds mount guard over the box hedge, and put
their beaks together to form an arch. In the dim distance we could see
Benella 'bagging' the Button Boy, and, after putting the trowel and rake
in his reluctant hands, tying the free end of a ball of string to his
leg, and sending him to find and weed the pansy garden. We laughed until
the echoes rang, to see him depart, dragging his lengthening chain,
or his Ariadne thread, behind him, while Benella grimly held the ball,
determined that no excuses or apologies should interfere with his work
on this occasion.



Chapter XXVIII. Round towers and reflections.

     'On Lough Neagh's banks, as the fisherman strays,
        When the cool, calm eve's declining.
      He sees the round towers of other days
        Beneath the waters shining.'
                           Thomas Moore.

A Dublin car-driver told me one day that he had just taken a
picnic-party to the borders of a lake, where they had had tea in a
tramcar which had been placed there for such purposes. Francesca and I
were amused at the idea, but did not think of it again until we drove
through the La Touche estate, on one of the first days after our arrival
at Devorgilla. We left Salemina at Rosnaree House with Aunt La Touche
and the children, and proceeded to explore the grounds, with the view of
deciding on certain improvements to be made when the property passes, so
to speak, into our hands.

Truth to say, nature has done more for it than we could have done; and
if it is a trifle overgrown and rough and rank, it could hardly be
more beautiful. At the very furthest confines of the demesne there is a
brook,--large enough, indeed, to be called a river here, where they have
no Mississippi to dwarf all other streams and serve as an impossible
standard of comparison. Tall trees droop over the calm water, and on
its margins grow spearwort, opening its big yellow cups to the sunshine,
meadow rue, purple and yellow loosestrife, bog bean, and sweet flag.
Here and there float upon the surface the round leaves and delicate
white blossoms of the frogbit, together with lilies, pondweeds, and
water starworts.

"What an idyllic place to sit and read, or sew, or have tea!" exclaimed
Francesca.

"What a place for a tram tea-house!" I added. "Do you suppose we
could manage it as a surprise to Dr. La Touche, in return for all his
kindness?"

"It would cost a pretty penny, I fear," said Francesca prudently,
"though it isn't as if it were going out of the family. Now that there
is no longer any need for you to sell pictures, I suppose you could
dash off one in an hour or two that would buy a tram; and papa cabled me
yesterday, you know, to draw on him freely. I used to think, whenever
he said that, that he would marry again within the week; but I did him
injustice. A tram tea-house by the river,--wouldn't it be unique? Do
let us see what we can do about it through some of our Dublin
acquaintances."

The plan proved unexpectedly easy to carry out, and not ruinously
extravagant, either; for our friend the American consul knew the
principal director in a tram company, and a dilapidated and discarded
car was sent to us in a few days. There were certain moments--once when
we saw that it had not been painted for twenty years, once when the
freight bill was handed us, and again when we contracted for the removal
of our gift from the station to the river-bank--when we regretted the
fertility of imagination that had led us to these lengths; but when
we finally saw the car by the water-side, there was no room left for
regret. Benella said that, with the assistance of the Button Boy, she
could paint it easily herself; but we engaged an expert, who put on a
coat of dark green very speedily, and we consoled the Derelict with the
suggestion that she could cover the cushions, and make the interior cosy
and pretty.

All this happened some little time ago. Dr. La Touche has been at home
for a fortnight, and we have had to use the greatest ingenuity to keep
people away from that particular spot, which, fortunately for us, is
a secluded one. All is ready now, however, and the following cards of
invitation have been issued:--

               The honour of your presence
                   is requested at the
               Opening of the New Tea Tram
            On the River Bank, Rosnaree Demesne,
              Wednesday, June 27th, at 4 p.m.
             The ceremony will be performed by
                  H.R.H. Salemina Peabody.
             The Bishop of Ossory in the Chair.

I have just learned that a certain William Beresford was Bishop of
Ossory once on a time, and I intend to personate this dignitary, clad
in Dr. La Touche's cap and gown. We spend this sunny morning by the
river-bank; Francesca hemming the last of the yellow window curtains,
and I making souvenir programmes for the great occasion. Salemina had
gone for the day with the Colquhouns and Dr. La Touche to lunch with
some people near Kavan and see Donaghmore Round Tower and the moat.

"Is she in love with Dr. Gerald?" asked Francesca suddenly, looking
up from her work. "Was she ever in love with him? She must have been,
mustn't she? I cannot and will not entertain any other conviction."

"I don't know, my dear," I answered thoughtfully, pausing over an
initial letter I was illuminating; "but I can't imagine what we shall do
if we have to tear down our sweet little romance, bit by bit, and leave
the stupid couple sitting in the ruins. They enjoy ruins far too well
already, and it would be just like their obstinacy to go on sitting in
them."

"And they are so incredibly slow about it all," Francesca commented.
"It took me about two minutes, at Lady Baird's dinner, where I first
met Ronald, to decide that I would marry him as soon as possible. When
a month had gone by, and he hadn't asked me, I thought, like Rosalind,
that I'd as lief be wooed of a snail."

"I was not quite so expeditious as you," I confessed, "though I believe
Himself says that his feeling was instantaneous. I never cared for
anything but painting before I met him, so I never chanced to suffer any
of those pangs that lovelorn maidens are said to feel when the beloved
delays his avowals: perhaps that is the reason I suffer so much now,
vicariously."

"The lack of positive information makes one so impatient," Francesca
went on. "I am sure he is as fond of her as ever; but if she refused
him when he was young and handsome, with every prospect of a brilliant
career before him, perhaps he thinks he has even less chance now. He
was the first to forget their romance, and the one to marry; his estates
have been wasted by his father's legal warfares, and he has been an
unhappy and a disappointed man. Now he has to beg her to heal his
wounds, as it were, and to accept the care and responsibility of his
children."

"It is very easy to see that we are not the only ones who suspect his
sentiments," I said, smiling at my thoughts. "Mrs. Colquhoun told me
that she and Salemina stopped at one of the tenants' cabins, the other
day, to leave some small comforts that Dr. La Touche had sent to a sick
child. The woman thanked Salemina, and Mrs. Colquhoun heard her say,
'When a man will stop, coming in the doore, an' stoop down to give a
sthroke and a scratch to the pig's back, depend on it, ma'am, him that's
so friendly with a poor fellow-crathur will make ye a good husband.'

"I have given him every opportunity to confide in me," I continued,
after a pause, "but he accepts none of them; and yet I like him a
thousand times better now that I have seen him as the master of his
own house. He is so courtly, and, in these latter days, so genial and
sunny... Salemina's life would not at first be any too easy, I fear; the
aunt is very feeble, and the establishment is so neglected. I went into
Dr. Gerald's study the other day to see an old print, and there was a
buzz-buzz-zzzz when the butler pulled up the blinds. 'Do you mind bees,
ma'am?' he asked blandly. 'There's been a swarm of them in one corner
of the ceiling for manny years, an' we don't like to disturb them.'...
Benella said yesterday: 'Of course, when you three separate, I shall
stay with the one that needs me most; but if Miss Peabody SHOULD settle
over here anywhere, I'd like to take a scrubbing brush an' go through
the castle, or whatever she's going to live in, with soap and sand and
ammonia, and make it water-sweet before she sets foot in it.'... As for
the children, however, no one could regard them as a drawback, for they
are altogether charming; not well disciplined, of course, but lovable
to the last degree. Broona was planning her future life when we were
walking together yesterday. Jackeen is to be 'an engineer, by the
sea,' so it seems, and Broona is to be a farmer's wife with a tiny red
bill-book like Mrs. Colquhoun's. Her little boys and girls will sell the
milk, and when Jackeen has his engineering holidays he will come and
eat fresh butter and scones and cream and jam at the farm, and when her
children have their holidays they will go and play on 'Jackeen's beach.'
It is the little people I rely upon chiefly, after all. I wish you could
have seen them cataract down the staircase to greet her this morning. I
notice that she tries to make me divert their attention when Dr. Gerald
is present; for it is a bit suggestive to a widower to see his children
pursue, hang about, and caress a lovely, unmarried lady. Broona,
especially, can hardly keep away from Salemina; and she is such a
fascinating midget, I should think anybody would be glad to have her
included in a marriage contract. 'You have a weeny, weeny line between
your eyebrows, just like my daddy's,' she said to Salemina the other
day. 'It's such a little one, perhaps I can kiss it away; but daddy has
too many, and they are cutted too deep. Sometimes he whispers, 'Daddy is
sad, Broona,' and then I say, 'Play up, play up, and play the game!' and
that makes him smile.'"

"She is a darling," said Francesca, with the suspicion of a tear in her
eye. "'Were you ever in love, Miss Fancy?' she asked me once. 'I was; it
was long, long ago before I belonged to daddy'; and another time when
I had been reading to her, she said 'I often think that when I get
into the kingdom of heaven the person I'll be gladdest to see will be
Marjorie Fleming.' Yes, the children are sure to help; they always do in
whatever circumstances they chance to be placed. Did you notice Salemina
with them at tea-time, yesterday? It was such a charming scene. The
heavy rain had kept them in, and things had gone wrong in the
nursery. Salemina had glued the hair on Broona's dolly, and knit up a
heart-breaking wound in her side. Then she mended the legs of all the
animals in the Noah's ark, so that they stood firm, erect, and proud;
and when, to draw the children's eyes from the wet window-panes, she
proposed a story, it was pretty to see the grateful youngsters snuggle
in her lap and by her side."

"When does an artist ever fail to see pictures? I have loved Salemina
always, even when she used to part her hair in the middle and wear
spectacles; but that is the first time I ever wanted to paint her, with
the firelight shining on the soft, restful greys and violets of her
dress, and Broona in her arms. Of course, if a woman is ever to be
lovely at all, it will be when she is holding a child. It is the oldest
of all old pictures, and the most beautiful, I believe, in a man's eyes.

"And do you notice that she and the doctor are beginning to speak more
freely of their past acquaintance?" I went on, looking up at Francesca,
who had dropped her work in her interest. "It is too amusing! Every hour
or two it is: 'Do you remember the day we went to Bunker Hill?' or,
'Do you recall that charming Mrs. Andrews, with whom we used to dine
occasionally?' or, 'What has become of your cousin Samuel?' and, 'Is
your uncle Thomas yet living?'... The other day, at tea, she asked, 'Do
you still take three lumps, Dr. La Touche? You had always a sweet tooth,
I remember.'... Then they ring the changes in this way: 'You were always
fond of grey, Miss Peabody.' 'You had a great fancy for Moore, in the
old days, Miss Peabody: have you outgrown him, or does the 'Anacreontic
little chap,' as Father Prout called him, still appeal to you?'... 'You
used to admire Boyle O'Reilly, Dr. La Touche. Would you like to see
some of his letters?'... 'Aren't these magnificent rhododendrons, Dr.
La Touche,--even though they are magenta, the colour you specially
dislike?' And so on. Did you chance to look at either of them last
evening, Francesca, when I sang 'Let Erin remember the days of old'?"

"No; I was thinking of something else. I don't know what there is about
your singing, Penny love, that always makes me think of the past and
dream of the future. Which verse do you mean?"

And, still painting, I hummed:--

     "'On Lough Neagh's banks, as the fisherman strays,
        When the cool, calm eve's declining,
      He sees the round towers of other days
        Beneath the waters shining.
         .   .   .   .   .   .
      Thus shall memory oft, in dreams sublime,
        Catch a glimpse of the days that are over,
      And, sighing, look thro' the waves of Time,
        For the long-faded glories they cover.'

"That is what our two dear middle-aged lovers are constantly doing
now,--looking at the round towers of other days, as they bend over
memory's crystal pool and see them reflected there. It is because he
fears that the glories are over and gone that Dr. Gerald is troubled.
Some day he will realise that he need not live on reflections, and he
will seek realities."

"I hope so," said Francesca philosophically, as she folded her work;
"but sometimes these people who go mooning about, and looking through
the waves of Time, tumble in and are drowned."



Chapter XXIX. Aunt David's garden.

     'O wind, O mighty, melancholy wind,
        Blow through me, blow!
      Thou blowest forgotten things into my mind
        From long ago.'
                            John Todhunter.

No one ever had a better opportunity than we, of breathing in, so far
as a stranger and a foreigner may, the old Celtic atmosphere, and of
reliving the misty years of legend before the dawn of history; when

     'Long, long ago, beyond the space
        Of twice two hundred years,
      In Erin old there lived a race
        Taller than Roman spears.'

Mr. Colquhoun is one of the best Gaelic scholars in Ireland, and Dr.
Gerald, though not his equal in knowledge of the language, has 'the full
of a sack of stories' in his head. According to the Book of Leinster, a
professional story-teller was required to know seven times fifty tales,
and I believe the doctor could easily pass this test. It is not easy to
make a good translation from Irish to English, for they tell us there
are no two Aryan languages more opposed to each other in spirit and
idiom. We have heard little of the marvellous old tongue until now,
but we are reading it a bit under the tutelage of these two inspiring
masters, and I fancy it has helped me as much in my understanding of
Ireland as my tedious and perplexing worriments over political problems.

After all, how can we know anything of a nation's present or future
without some attempt to revivify its past? Just as, without some slender
knowledge of its former culture, we must be for ever ignorant of its
inherited powers and aptitudes. The harp that once through Tara's halls
the soul of music shed, now indeed hangs mute on Tara's walls, but for
all that its echoes still reverberate in the listening ear.

