rest of his race are, but as foolish as the rest of his race are not.
As to his character, he would not intentionally hurt a fly.  Well, the
worthy Governor becomes aware of a petition laid before him by the
Sheep, stating that their skins are entirely torn off their backs by
the Wolves.

"Oh, rogues!" cries the Elephant, "what a crime!  Who gave you leave to
plunder?"

But the Wolves say:

"Allow us to explain, O father.  Did not you give us leave to take from
the Sheep a trifling contribution for our pelisses in winter?  It is
only because they are stupid sheep that they cry out.  They have only a
single fleece taken from each of them, but they grumble about giving
even that!"

"Well, well," says the Elephant, "take care what you do.  I will not
permit any one to commit injustice.  As it must be so, take a fleece
from each of them.  But do not take from them a single hair besides."



The Quartette

The tricksy Monkey, the Goat, the Ass, and bandy-legged Mishka the
Bear, determine to play a quartette.  They provide themselves with the
necessary pieces of music--with two fiddles, and with an alto and a
counter-bass.  Then they sit down on a meadow under a lime-tree,
prepared to enchant the world by their skill.  They work away at their
fiddlesticks with a will; and they make a noise, but there is no music
in it.

"Stop, brothers, stop!" cries the Monkey, "wait a little!  How can we
get our music right?  It's plain, you mustn't sit as you are.  You,
Mishka, with your counter-bass, face the alto.  I will sit opposite the
second fiddle.  Then a different sort of music will begin: we shall set
the very hills and forests dancing."

So they change places, and recommence; but the music is just as
discordant as before.

"Stop a little," exclaims the Ass; "I have found out the secret.  We
shall be sure to play in tune if we sit in a row."

They follow its advice, and form in an orderly line.  But the quartette
is as unmusical as ever.  Louder than before there arose among them
squabbling and wrangling as to how they ought to be seated.  It
happened that a Nightingale came flying that way, attracted by their
noise.  At once they all entreated it to solve their difficulty.

"Be so kind," they say, "as to bear with us a little, in order that our
quartette may come off properly.  Music we have; instruments we have:
tell us only how we ought to place ourselves."

But the Nightingale replies,

"To be a musician, one must have a quicker intelligence and a finer ear
than you possess.  You, my friends, may place yourselves just as you
like, but you will never become musicians."



Demian's Fish Soup

"Neighbour, light of mine eyes! do eat a little more!"

"Dear neighbour, I am full to the throat."

"No matter; just a little plateful.  Believe me, the soup is cooked
gloriously."

"But I've had three platefuls already."

"Well, what does that matter?  If you like it, and it does you good,
why not eat it all up?  What a soup it is!  How rich!  It looks as if
it had been sprinkled with amber.  Here is a bream; there a lump of
sterlet.  Take a little more, dear, kind friend.  Just another
spoonful.  Wife, come and entreat him!"

Thus does Demian feast his neighbour Phocas, not giving him a moment's
breathing time.

Phocas feels the moisture trickling down his forehead.  Still he takes
the soup, attacks it with all the strength he has left, and somehow
manages to swallow the whole of it.

"That's the sort of friend I like!" cries Demian.  "I can't bear people
who require pressing.  But now, dear friend, take just this one little
plateful more."

But, on hearing this, our poor Phocas, much as he liked fish soup,
catching hold of his cap and sash, runs away home, not once looking
behind him.

Nor from that day to this has he crossed Demian's threshold.



The Wolf and Its Cub

A Wolf, which had begun to accustom its Cub to support itself by its
father's profession, sent it one day to prowl about the skirts of the
wood.  At the same time it ordered it to give all its attention to
seeing whether it would not be possible, even at the cost of sinning a
little, for them both to make their breakfast or dinner at the expense
of some shepherd or other.  The pupil returns home, and says:

"Come along, quick! Our dinner awaits us: nothing could possibly be
safer.  There are sheep feeding at the foot of yon hill, each one
fatter than the other.  We have only to choose which to carry off and
eat; and the flock is so large that it would be difficult to count it
over again----"

"Wait a minute," says the Wolf.  "First of all I must know what sort of
a man the shepherd of this flock is.

"It is said that he is a good one--painstaking and intelligent.  But I
went round the flock on all sides, and examined the dogs: they are not
at all fat, and seem to be spiritless and indolent."

"This description," says the old Wolf, "does not greatly attract me to
the flock.  For, decidedly, if the shepherd is good, he will not keep
bad dogs about him.  One might very soon get into trouble there.  But
come with me: I will take you to a flock where we shall be in less
danger of losing our skins.  Over that flock it is true that a great
many dogs watch; but the shepherd is himself a fool.  And where the
shepherd is a fool there the dogs too are of little worth."



The Pike

An appeal to justice was made against the Pike, on the ground that it
had rendered the pond uninhabitable.  A whole cart-load of proofs was
tendered as evidence; and the culprit, as was beseeming, was brought
into court in a large tub.  The judges were assembled not far off,
having been set to graze in a neighbouring field.  Their names are
still preserved in the archives.  There were two Donkeys, a couple of
old Horses, and two or three Goats.  The Fox also was added to their
number, as assessor, in order that the business might be carried on
under competent supervision.

Now, popular report said that the Pike used to supply the table of the
Fox with fish.  However this might be, there was no partiality among
the judges; and it must also be stated that it was impossible to
conceal the Pike's roguery in the affair in question.  So there was no
help for it.  Sentence was passed, condemning the Pike to an
ignominious punishment.  In order to frighten others, it was to be hung
from a tree.

"Respected judges," thus did the Fox begin to speak, "hanging is a
trifle.  I should have liked to have sentenced the culprit to such a
punishment as has never been seen here among us.  In order that rogues
may in future live in fear, and run a terrible risk, I would drown it
in the river."

"Excellent!" cry the judges, and unanimously accept the proposition.

So the Pike was flung--into the river.



The Cuckoo and the Eagle

The Eagle promoted a Cuckoo to the rank of a Nightingale.  The Cuckoo,
proud of its new position, seated itself proudly on an aspen, and began
to exhibit its musical talents.  After a time, it looks round.  All the
birds are flying away, some laughing at it, others abusing it.  Our
Cuckoo grows angry, and hastens to the Eagle with a complaint against
the birds.

"Have pity on me!" it says.  "According to your command, I have been
appointed Nightingale to these woods, and yet the birds dare to laugh
at my singing."

"My friend," answers the Eagle, "I am a king, but I am not God.  It is
impossible for me to remedy the cause of your complaint.  I can order a
Cuckoo to be styled a Nightingale; but to make a Nightingale out of a
Cuckoo--that I cannot do."



The Peasant and the Sheep

A Peasant summoned a Sheep into courts charging the poor thing with a
criminal offence.  The judge was--the Fox.

The case was immediately in full swing.  Plaintiff and defendant were
equally adjured to state, point by point, and without both speaking at
once, how the affair took place, and in what their proof consisted.

Says the Peasant: "On such and such a day, I missed two of my fowls
early in the morning.  Nothing was left of them but bones and leathers;
and no one had been in the yard but the Sheep."

Then the Sheep depones that it was fast asleep all the night in
question, and it calls all its neighbours to testify that they had
never known it guilty either of theft or any roguery; and besides this,
it states that it never touches flesh-meat.

Here is the Fox's decision, word for word:

"The explanation of the Sheep cannot, under any circumstances, be
accepted, for all rogues are notoriously clever at concealing their
real designs; and it appears manifest, on due inquiry, that, on the
aforesaid night, the Sheep was not separated from the fowls.  Fowls are
exceedingly savoury, and opportunity favoured.  Therefore I decide,
according to my conscience, that it is impossible that the Sheep should
have forborne to eat the fowls.  The Sheep shall accordingly be put to
death.  Its carcass shall be given to the court, and its fleece be
taken by the Plaintiff."



The Elephant in Favour

Once upon a time the Elephant stood high in the good graces of the
Lion.  The forest immediately began to talk of the matter, and, as
usual, many guesses were made as to the means by which the Elephant had
gained such favour.

"It is no beauty," say the beasts to each other, "and it is not
amusing; and what habits it has! what manners!"

Says the Fox, whisking about his brush, "If it had possessed such a
bushy tail as mine, I should not have wondered."

"Or, sister," says the Bear, "if it had gotten into favour on account
of its claws, no one would have found the matter at all extraordinary;
but it has no claws at all, as we all know well."

"Isn't it its tusks that have gotten it into favour?" thus the Ox broke
in upon their conversation.  "Haven't they, perhaps, been mistaken for
horns."

"Is it possible," said the Ass, shaking its ears, "that you don't know
how it has succeeded in making itself liked, and in becoming
distinguished?  Why, I have guessed the reason!  If it hadn't been
remarkable for its long ears, it would never in the world have gotten
into favour."



The Sword-blade

The keen blade of a Sword, made of Damascus steel, which had been
thrown aside on a heap of old iron, was sent to market with the other
pieces of metal, and sold for a trifle to a Moujik.  Now, a Moujik's
ideas move in a narrow circle.  He immediately set to work to turn the
blade to account.  Our Moujik fitted a handle to the blade, and began
to strip lime-trees in the forest with it, of the bark he wanted for
shoes, while at home he unceremoniously splintered fir chips with it.
Sometimes, also, he would lop off twigs with it, or small branches for
mending his wattled fences, or would shape stakes with it for his
garden paling.  And the result was that, before the year was out, our
blade was notched and rusted from one end to the other, and the
children used to ride astride of it.  So one day a Hedgehog, which was
lying under a bench in the cottage, close by the spot where the blade
had been flung, said to it:

"Tell me, what do you think of this life of yours?  If there is any
truth in all the fine things that are said about Damascus steel, you
surely must be ashamed of having to splinter fir chips, and square
stakes, and of being turned, at last, into a plaything for children."

But the Sword-blade replied:

"In the hands of a warrior, I should have been a terror to the foe; but
here my special faculties are of no avail.  So in this house I am
turned to base uses only.  But am I free to choose my employment?  No,
not I, but he, ought to be ashamed who could not see for what I was fit
to be employed."



The Cuckoo and the Turtle-dove

A Cuckoo sat on a bough, bitterly complaining.

"Why art thou so sad, dear friend?" sympathizingly cooed the
Turtle-dove to her, from a neighbouring twig.  "Is it because spring
has passed away from us, and love with it; that the sun has sunk lower,
and that we are nearer to the winter?"

"How can I help grieving, unhappy one that I am?" replied the Cuckoo:
"thou shalt thyself be the judge.  This spring my love was a happy one,
and, after a while, I became a mother.  But my offspring utterly
refused even to recognize me.  Was it such a return that I expected
from them?  And how can I help being envious when I see how ducklings
crowd around their mother--how chickens hasten to the hen when she
calls to them.  Just like an orphan I sit here, utterly alone, and know
not what filial affection means."

"Poor thing!" says the Dove, "I pity you from my heart.  As for me,
though I know such things often occur, I should die outright it my
dovelets did not love me.  But tell me, have you already brought up
your little ones?  When did you find time to build a nest?  I never saw
you doing anything of the kind: you were always flying and fluttering
about."

"No, indeed!" says the Cuckoo.  "Pretty nonsense it would have been if
I had spent such fine days in sitting on a nest!  That would, indeed,
have been the highest pitch of stupidity!  I always laid my eggs in the
nests of other birds."

"Then how can you expect your little ones to care for you?" says the
Turtle-dove.



The Peasant and the Horse

A Peasant was sowing oats one day.  Seeing the work go on, a young
Horse began to reason about it, grumbling to himself:

"A pretty piece of work, this, for which he brings such a quantity of
oats here!  And yet they are all the time saying that men are wiser
than we are.  Can anything possibly be more foolish or ridiculous than
to plough up a whole field like this in order to scatter one's oats
over it afterward to no purpose.  Had he given them to me, or to the
bay there, or had he even thought fit to fling them to the fowls, it
would have been more like business.  Or even if he had hoarded them up,
I should have recognized avarice in that.  But to fling them uselessly
away--why, that is sheer stupidity!"

Meanwhile time passed; and in the autumn the oats were garnered, and
the Peasant fed this very Horse upon them all the winter.

There can be no doubt, Reader, that you do not approve of the opinions
of the Horse.  But from the oldest times to our own days has not man
been equally audacious in criticising the designs of a Providence of
whose means or ends he sees and knows nothing?



The Wolf and the Cat

A Wolf ran out of the forest into a village--not to pay a visit, but to
save its life; for it trembled for its skin.

The huntsmen and a pack of hounds were after it.  It would fain have
rushed in through the first gateway; but there was this unfortunate
circumstance against the scheme that all the gateways were closed.

The Wolf sees a Cat on a partition fence, and says pleadingly, "Vaska,
my friend, tell me quickly, which of the moujiks here is the kindest,
