
Cur sum ego tam miser et pauper et indignus, et tu tam dulcis et bona et
nobilis?

Si cogitabis de me ero beatus. Tu es sola puella quam amo, et semper
eris. Alias puellas non amavi. Forte olim amabis me, sed sum indignus.
Sine te sum miser, cum tu es prope mea vita omni est goddamn.

Vale, carissima, carissima puella!

De tuo fideli servo A.F.

My dear Emma:

Why dare I write to you a letter? You are to me a goddess! Always you
are in my heart. Again and again you are with me in dreams. Often I see
your locks of gold, your beautiful eyes like the sky, your cheeks, as
red roses in snow. Your voice is sweeter than the singing of birds or
the murmur of the stream in the mountains.

Why am I so wretched and poor and unworthy, and you so sweet and good
and noble?

If you will think of me I shall be happy. You are the only girl that I
love and always will be. Other girls I have not loved. Perhaps sometime
you will love me, but I am unworthy. Without you, I am wretched, when
you are near my life is all joy.

Farewell, dearest, dearest girl!

From your faithful slave A.F.

Emma Jane knew the letter by heart in English. She even knew it in
Latin, only a few days before a dead language to her, but now one filled
with life and meaning. From beginning to end the epistle had the effect
upon her as of an intoxicating elixir. Often, at morning prayers, or
while eating her rice pudding at the noon dinner, or when sinking off
to sleep at night, she heard a voice murmuring in her ear, "Vale,
carissima, carissima puella!" As to the effect on her modest,
countrified little heart of the phrases in which Abijah stated she was
a goddess and he her faithful slave, that quite baffles description; for
it lifted her bodily out of the scenes in which she moved, into a new,
rosy, ethereal atmosphere in which even Rebecca had no place.

Rebecca did not know this, fortunately; she only suspected, and waited
for the day when Emma Jane would pour out her confidences, as she always
did, and always would until the end of time. At the present moment
she was busily employed in thinking about her own affairs. A shabby
composition book with mottled board covers lay open on the table before
her, and sometimes she wrote in it with feverish haste and absorption,
and sometimes she rested her chin in the cup of her palm, and with the
pencil poised in the other hand looked dreamily out on the village, its
huddle of roofs and steeples all blurred into positive beauty by the
fast-falling snowflakes.

It was the middle of December and the friendly sky was softly dropping
a great white mantle of peace and good-will over the little town, making
all ready within and without for the Feast o' the Babe.

The main street, that in summer was made dignified by its splendid
avenue of shade trees, now ran quiet and white between rows of stalwart
trunks, whose leafless branches were all hanging heavy under their
dazzling burden.

The path leading straight up the hill to the Academy was broken only by
the feet of the hurrying, breathless boys and girls who ran up and down,
carrying piles of books under their arms; books which they remembered
so long as they were within the four walls of the recitation room, and
which they eagerly forgot as soon as they met one another in the living,
laughing world, going up and down the hill.

"It's very becoming to the universe, snow is!" thought Rebecca, looking
out of the window dreamily. "Really there's little to choose between the
world and heaven when a snowstorm is going on. I feel as if I ought to
look at it every minute. I wish I could get over being greedy, but it
still seems to me at sixteen as if there weren't waking hours enough
in the day, and as if somehow I were pressed for time and continually
losing something. How well I remember mother's story about me when I
was four. It was at early breakfast on the farm, but I called all meals
dinner' then, and when I had finished I folded up my bib and sighed: O,
dear! Only two more dinners, play a while and go to bed!' This was at
six in the morning--lamplight in the kitchen, snowlight outside!

     Powdery, powdery, powdery snow,
     Making things lovely wherever you go!
     Merciful, merciful, merciful snow,
     Masking the ugliness hidden below.

Herbert made me promise to do a poem for the January 'Pilot,' but I
mustn't take the snow as a subject; there has been too great competition
among the older poets!" And with that she turned in her chair and began
writing again in the shabby book, which was already three quarters
filled with childish scribblings, sometimes in pencil, and sometimes in
violet ink with carefully shaded capital letters."

* * * * *

Squire Bean has had a sharp attack of rheumatism and Abijah Flagg came
back from Limerick for a few days to nurse him. One morning the Burnham
sisters from North Riverboro came over to spend the day with Aunt
Miranda, and Abijah went down to put up their horse. ("'Commodatin'
'Bijah" was his pet name when we were all young.)

He scaled the ladder to the barn chamber--the dear old ladder that
used to be my safety valve!--and pitched down the last forkful of
grandfather's hay that will ever be eaten by any visiting horse. They
WILL be delighted to hear that it is all gone; they have grumbled at it
for years and years.

What should Abijah find at the bottom of the heap but my Thought Book,
hidden there two or three years ago and forgotten!

When I think of what it was to me, the place it filled in my life, the
affection I lavished on it, I wonder that I could forget it, even in
all the excitement of coming to Wareham to school. And that gives me
"an uncommon thought" as I used to say! It is this: that when we finish
building an air castle we seldom live in it after all; we sometimes even
forget that we ever longed to! Perhaps we have gone so far as to
begin another castle on a higher hilltop, and this is so
beautiful,--especially while we are building, and before we live in
it!--that the first one has quite vanished from sight and mind, like the
outgrown shell of the nautilus that he casts off on the shore and never
looks at again. (At least I suppose he doesn't; but perhaps he takes one
backward glance, half-smiling, half-serious, just as I am doing at my
old Thought Book, and says, "WAS THAT MY SHELL! GOODNESS GRACIOUS! HOW
DID I EVER SQUEEZE MYSELF INTO IT!")

That bit about the nautilus sounds like an extract from a school theme,
or a "Pilot" editorial, or a fragment of one of dear Miss Maxwell's
lectures, but I think girls of sixteen are principally imitations of the
people and things they love and admire; and between editing the "Pilot,"
writing out Virgil translations, searching for composition subjects, and
studying rhetorical models, there is very little of the original
Rebecca Rowena about me at the present moment; I am just a member of
the graduating class in good and regular standing. We do our hair alike,
dress alike as much as possible, eat and drink alike, talk alike,--I am
not even sure that we do not think alike; and what will become of the
poor world when we are all let loose upon it on the same day of June?
Will life, real life, bring our true selves back to us? Will love and
duty and sorrow and trouble and work finally wear off the "school stamp"
that has been pressed upon all of us until we look like rows of shining
copper cents fresh from the mint?

Yet there must be a little difference between us somewhere, or why does
Abijah Flagg write Latin letters to Emma Jane, instead of to me? There
is one example on the other side of the argument,--Abijah Flagg. He
stands out from all the rest of the boys like the Rock of Gibraltar in
the geography pictures. Is it because he never went to school until he
was sixteen? He almost died of longing to go, and the longing seemed to
teach him more than going. He knew his letters, and could read simple
things, but it was I who taught him what books really meant when I was
eleven and he thirteen. We studied while he was husking corn or cutting
potatoes for seed, or shelling beans in the Squire's barn. His beloved
Emma Jane didn't teach him; her father wold not have let her be friends
with a chore-boy! It was I who found him after milking-time, summer
nights, suffering, yes dying, of Least Common Multiple and Greatest
Common Divisor; I who struck the shackles from the slave and told him to
skip it all and go on to something easier, like Fractions, Percentage,
and Compound Interest, as I did myself. Oh! How he used to smell of the
cows when I was correcting his sums on warm evenings, but I don't regret
it, for he is now the joy of Limerick and the pride of Riverboro, and I
suppose has forgotten the proper side on which to approach a cow if you
wish to milk her. This now unserviceable knowledge is neatly inclosed in
the outgrown shell he threw off two or three years ago. His gratitude
to me knows no bounds, but--he writes Latin letters to Emma Jane! But as
Mr. Perkins said about drowning the kittens (I now quote from myself at
thirteen), "It is the way of the world and how things have to be!"

Well, I have read the Thought Book all through, and when I want to
make Mr. Aladdin laugh, I shall show him my composition on the relative
values of punishment and reward as builders of character.

I am not at all the same Rebecca today at sixteen that I was then,
at twelve and thirteen. I hope, in getting rid of my failings, that I
haven't scrubbed and rubbed so hard that I have taken the gloss off the
poor little virtues that lay just alongside of the faults; for as I read
the foolish doggerel and the funny, funny "Remerniscences," I see on the
whole a nice, well-meaning, trusting, loving heedless little creature,
that after all I'd rather build on than outgrow altogether, because she
is Me; the Me that was made and born just a little different from all
the rest of the babies in my birthday year.

One thing is alike in the child and the girl. They both love to set
thoughts down in black and white; to see how they look, how they sound,
and how they make one feel when one reads them over.

They both love the sound of beautiful sentences and the tinkle of
rhyming words, and in fact, of the three great R's of life, they adore
Reading and Riting, as much as they abhor 'Rithmetic.

The little girl in the old book is always thinking of what she is "going
to be."

Uncle Jerry Cobb spoiled me a good deal in this direction. I remember
he said to everybody when I wrote my verses for the flag-raising: "Nary
rung on the ladder o' fame but that child'll climb if you give her
time!"--poor Uncle Jerry! He will be so disappointed in me as time goes
on. And still he would think I have already climbed two rungs on the
ladder, although it is only a little Wareham ladder, for I am one of
the "Pilot" editors, the first "girl editor"--and I have taken a fifty
dollar prize in composition and paid off the interest on a twelve
hundred dollar mortgage with it.

     "High is the rank we now possess,
     But higher we shall rise;
     Though what we shall hereafter be
     Is hid from mortal eyes."

This hymn was sung in meeting the Sunday after my election, and Mr.
Aladdin was there that day and looked across the aisle and smiled at me.
Then he sent me a sheet of paper from Boston the next morning with just
one verse in the middle of it.

"She made the cleverest people quite ashamed; And ev'n the good with
inward envy groan, Finding themselves so very much exceeded, In their
own way by all the things that she did."

Miss Maxwell says it is Byron, and I wish I had thought of the last
rhyme before Byron did; my rhymes are always so common.

I am too busy doing, nowadays, to give very much thought to being.
Mr. Aladdin was teasing me one day about what he calls my "cast-off
careers."

"What makes you aim at any mark in particular, Rebecca?" he asked,
looking at Miss Maxwell and laughing. "Women never hit what they aim at,
anyway; but if they shut their eyes and shoot in the air they generally
find themselves in the bull's eye."

I think one reason that I have always dreamed of what I should be, when
I grew up, was, that even before father died mother worried about the
mortgage on the farm, and what would become of us if it were foreclosed.

It was hard on children to be brought up on a mortgage that way, but
oh! it was harder still on poor dear mother, who had seven of us then
to think of, and still has three at home to feed and clothe out of the
farm.

Aunt Jane says I am young for my age, Aunt Miranda is afraid that I will
never really "grow up," Mr. Aladdin says that I don't know the world any
better than the pearl inside of the oyster. They none of them know the
old, old thoughts I have, some of them going back years and years; for
they are never ones that I can speak about.

I remember how we children used to admire father, he was so handsome and
graceful and amusing, never cross like mother, or too busy to play with
us. He never did any work at home because he had to keep his hands nice
for playing the church melodeon, or the violin or piano for dances.

Mother used to say: "Hannah and Rebecca, you must hull the strawberries,
your father cannot help." "John, you must milk next year for I haven't
the time and it would spoil your father's hands."

All the other men in Temperance village wore calico, or flannel shirts,
except on Sundays, but Father never wore any but white ones with
starched bosoms. He was very particular about them and mother used to
stitch and stitch on the pleats, and press and press the bosoms and
collar and cuffs, sometimes late at night.

Then she was tired and thin and gray, with no time to sew on new dresses
for herself, and no time to wear them, because she was always taking
care of the babies; and father was happy and well and handsome. But
we children never thought much about it until once, after father had
mortgaged the farm, there was going to be a sociable in Temperance
village. Mother could not go as Jenny had whooping-cough and Mark had
just broken his arm, and when she was tying father's necktie, the last
thing before he started, he said: "I wish, Aurelia, that you cared a
little about YOUR appearance and YOUR dress; it goes a long way with a
man like me."

Mother had finished the tie, and her hands dropped suddenly. I looked at
her eyes and mouth while she looked at father and in a minute I was ever
so old, with a grown-up ache in my heart. It has always stayed there,
although I admired my handsome father and was proud of him because he
was so talented; but now that I am older and have thought about things,
my love for mother is different from what it used to be. Father was
always the favorite when we were little, he was so interesting, and
I wonder sometimes if we don't remember interesting people longer and
better than we do those who are just good and patient. If so it seems
very cruel.

As I look back I see that Miss Ross, the artist who brought me my
pink parasol from Paris, sowed the first seeds in me of ambition to do
something special. Her life seemed so beautiful and so easy to a child.
I had not been to school then, or read George Macdonald, so I did not
know that "Ease is the lovely result of forgotten toil."

Miss Ross sat out of doors and painted lovely things, and everybody said
how wonderful they were, and bought them straight away; and she took
care of a blind father and two brothers, and traveled wherever she
wished. It comes back to me now, that summer when I was ten and Miss
Ross painted me sitting by the mill-wheel while she talked to me of
foreign countries!

The other day Miss Maxwell read something from Browning's poems to the
girls of her literature class. It was about David the shepherd boy
who used to lie in his hollow watching one eagle "wheeling slow as in
sleep." He used to wonder about the wide world that the eagle beheld,
the eagle that was stretching his wings so far up in the blue, while he,
the poor shepherd boy, could see only the "strip twixt the hill and the
sky;" for he lay in a hollow.

I told Mr. Baxter about it the next day, which was the Saturday before
I joined the church. I asked him if it was wicked to long to see as much
as the eagle saw?

There was never anybody quite like Mr. Baxter. "Rebecca dear," he said,
"it may be that you need not always lie in a hollow, as the shepherd boy
did; but wherever you lie, that little strip you see 'twixt the hill
and the sky' is able to hold all of earth and all of heaven, if only you
have the right sort of vision."

I was a long, long time about "experiencing religion." I remember Sunday
afternoons at the brick house the first winter after I went there; when
I used to sit in the middle of the dining-room as I was bid, silent and
still, with the big family Bible on my knees. Aunt Miranda had Baxter's
"Saints' Rest," but her seat was by the window, and she at least could
give a glance into the street now and then without being positively
wicked.

Aunt Jane used to read the "Pilgrim's Progress." The fire burned low;
the tall clock ticked, ticked, so slowly and steadily, that the pictures
swam before my eyes and I almost fell asleep.

They thought by shutting everything else out that I should see God;
but I didn't, not once. I was so homesick for Sunnybook and John that
I could hardly learn my weekly hymns, especially the sad, long one
beginning:

     "My thoughts on awful subjects roll,
     Damnation and the dead."

It was brother John for whom I was chiefly homesick on Sunday
afternoons, because at Sunnybrook Farm father was dead and mother was
always busy, and Hannah never liked to talk.

Then the next year the missionaries from Syria came to Riverboro; and
at the meeting Mr. Burch saw me playing the melodeon, and thought I was
grown up and a church member, and so he asked me to lead in prayer.

I didn't dare to refuse, and when I prayed, which was just like thinking
out loud, I found I could talk to God a great deal easier than to Aunt
Miranda or even to Uncle Jerry Cobb. There were things I could say to
Him that I could never say to anybody else, and saying them always made
me happy and contented.

When Mr. Baxter asked me last year about joining the church, I told him
I was afraid I did not understand God quite well enough to be a real
member.

"So you don't quite understand God, Rebecca?" he asked, smiling.
"Well, there is something else much more important, which is, that
He understands you! He understands your feeble love, your longings,
desires, hopes, faults, ambitions, crosses; and that, after all, is what
counts! Of course you don't understand Him! You are overshadowed by His
love, His power, His benignity, His wisdom; that is as it should be!
Why, Rebecca, dear, if you could stand erect and unabashed in God's
presence, as one who perfectly comprehended His nature or His purposes,
