save herself from despair.  Sometimes, when she was scolded, she could
scarcely keep from smiling.

"If you only knew!" she was saying to herself.  "If you only knew!"

The comfort and happiness she enjoyed were making her stronger, and she
had them always to look forward to.  If she came home from her errands
wet and tired and hungry, she knew she would soon be warm and well fed
after she had climbed the stairs.  During the hardest day she could
occupy herself blissfully by thinking of what she should see when she
opened the attic door, and wondering what new delight had been prepared
for her.  In a very short time she began to look less thin.  Color came
into her cheeks, and her eyes did not seem so much too big for her face.

"Sara Crewe looks wonderfully well," Miss Minchin remarked
disapprovingly to her sister.

"Yes," answered poor, silly Miss Amelia.  "She is absolutely fattening.
She was beginning to look like a little starved crow."

"Starved!" exclaimed Miss Minchin, angrily.  "There was no reason why
she should look starved.  She always had plenty to eat!"

"Of--of course," agreed Miss Amelia, humbly, alarmed to find that she
had, as usual, said the wrong thing.

"There is something very disagreeable in seeing that sort of thing in a
child of her age," said Miss Minchin, with haughty vagueness.

"What--sort of thing?"  Miss Amelia ventured.

"It might almost be called defiance," answered Miss Minchin, feeling
annoyed because she knew the thing she resented was nothing like
defiance, and she did not know what other unpleasant term to use. "The
spirit and will of any other child would have been entirely humbled and
broken by--by the changes she has had to submit to. But, upon my word,
she seems as little subdued as if--as if she were a princess."

"Do you remember," put in the unwise Miss Amelia, "what she said to you
that day in the schoolroom about what you would do if you found out
that she was--"

"No, I don't," said Miss Minchin.  "Don't talk nonsense." But she
remembered very clearly indeed.

Very naturally, even Becky was beginning to look plumper and less
frightened.  She could not help it.  She had her share in the secret
fairy story, too.  She had two mattresses, two pillows, plenty of
bed-covering, and every night a hot supper and a seat on the cushions
by the fire.  The Bastille had melted away, the prisoners no longer
existed.  Two comforted children sat in the midst of delights.
Sometimes Sara read aloud from her books, sometimes she learned her own
lessons, sometimes she sat and looked into the fire and tried to
imagine who her friend could be, and wished she could say to him some
of the things in her heart.

Then it came about that another wonderful thing happened. A man came to
the door and left several parcels.  All were addressed in large
letters, "To the Little Girl in the right-hand attic."

Sara herself was sent to open the door and take them in. She laid the
two largest parcels on the hall table, and was looking at the address,
when Miss Minchin came down the stairs and saw her.

"Take the things to the young lady to whom they belong," she said
severely.  "Don't stand there staring at them.

"They belong to me," answered Sara, quietly.

"To you?" exclaimed Miss Minchin.  "What do you mean?"

"I don't know where they come from," said Sara, "but they are addressed
to me.  I sleep in the right-hand attic.  Becky has the other one."

Miss Minchin came to her side and looked at the parcels with an excited
expression.

"What is in them?" she demanded.

"I don't know," replied Sara.

"Open them," she ordered.

Sara did as she was told.  When the packages were unfolded Miss
Minchin's countenance wore suddenly a singular expression.  What she
saw was pretty and comfortable clothing--clothing of different kinds:
shoes, stockings, and gloves, and a warm and beautiful coat. There were
even a nice hat and an umbrella.  They were all good and expensive
things, and on the pocket of the coat was pinned a paper, on which were
written these words:  "To be worn every day. Will be replaced by others
when necessary."

Miss Minchin was quite agitated.  This was an incident which suggested
strange things to her sordid mind.  Could it be that she had made a
mistake, after all, and that the neglected child had some powerful
though eccentric friend in the background--perhaps some previously
unknown relation, who had suddenly traced her whereabouts, and chose to
provide for her in this mysterious and fantastic way? Relations were
sometimes very odd--particularly rich old bachelor uncles, who did not
care for having children near them. A man of that sort might prefer to
overlook his young relation's welfare at a distance.  Such a person,
however, would be sure to be crotchety and hot-tempered enough to be
easily offended. It would not be very pleasant if there were such a
one, and he should learn all the truth about the thin, shabby clothes,
the scant food, and the hard work.  She felt very queer indeed, and
very uncertain, and she gave a side glance at Sara.

"Well," she said, in a voice such as she had never used since the
little girl lost her father, "someone is very kind to you. As the
things have been sent, and you are to have new ones when they are worn
out, you may as well go and put them on and look respectable. After you
are dressed you may come downstairs and learn your lessons in the
schoolroom.  You need not go out on any more errands today."

About half an hour afterward, when the schoolroom door opened and Sara
walked in, the entire seminary was struck dumb.

"My word!" ejaculated Jessie, jogging Lavinia's elbow.  "Look at the
Princess Sara!"

Everybody was looking, and when Lavinia looked she turned quite red.

It was the Princess Sara indeed.  At least, since the days when she had
been a princess, Sara had never looked as she did now.  She did not
seem the Sara they had seen come down the back stairs a few hours ago.
She was dressed in the kind of frock Lavinia had been used to envying
her the possession of.  It was deep and warm in color, and beautifully
made.  Her slender feet looked as they had done when Jessie had admired
them, and the hair, whose heavy locks had made her look rather like a
Shetland pony when it fell loose about her small, odd face, was tied
back with a ribbon.

"Perhaps someone has left her a fortune," Jessie whispered. "I always
thought something would happen to her.  She's so queer."

"Perhaps the diamond mines have suddenly appeared again," said Lavinia,
scathingly.  "Don't please her by staring at her in that way, you silly
thing."

"Sara," broke in Miss Minchin's deep voice, "come and sit here."

And while the whole schoolroom stared and pushed with elbows, and
scarcely made any effort to conceal its excited curiosity, Sara went to
her old seat of honor, and bent her head over her books.

That night, when she went to her room, after she and Becky had eaten
their supper she sat and looked at the fire seriously for a long time.

"Are you making something up in your head, miss?"  Becky inquired with
respectful softness.  When Sara sat in silence and looked into the
coals with dreaming eyes it generally meant that she was making a new
story.  But this time she was not, and she shook her head.

"No," she answered.  "I am wondering what I ought to do."

Becky stared--still respectfully.  She was filled with something
approaching reverence for everything Sara did and said.

"I can't help thinking about my friend," Sara explained.  "If he wants
to keep himself a secret, it would be rude to try and find out who he
is.  But I do so want him to know how thankful I am to him--and how
happy he has made me.  Anyone who is kind wants to know when people
have been made happy.  They care for that more than for being thanked.
I wish--I do wish--"

She stopped short because her eyes at that instant fell upon something
standing on a table in a corner.  It was something she had found in the
room when she came up to it only two days before. It was a little
writing-case fitted with paper and envelopes and pens and ink.

"Oh," she exclaimed, "why did I not think of that before?"

She rose and went to the corner and brought the case back to the fire.

"I can write to him," she said joyfully, "and leave it on the table.
Then perhaps the person who takes the things away will take it, too. I
won't ask him anything.  He won't mind my thanking him, I feel sure."

So she wrote a note.  This is what she said:


I hope you will not think it is impolite that I should write this note
to you when you wish to keep yourself a secret.  Please believe I do
not mean to be impolite or try to find out anything at all; only I want
to thank you for being so kind to me--so heavenly kind--and making
everything like a fairy story.  I am so grateful to you, and I am so
happy--and so is Becky.  Becky feels just as thankful as I do--it is
all just as beautiful and wonderful to her as it is to me. We used to
be so lonely and cold and hungry, and now--oh, just think what you have
done for us!  Please let me say just these words.  It seems as if I
OUGHT to say them.  THANK you--THANK you--THANK you!

THE LITTLE GIRL IN THE ATTIC.


The next morning she left this on the little table, and in the evening
it had been taken away with the other things; so she knew the Magician
had received it, and she was happier for the thought. She was reading
one of her new books to Becky just before they went to their respective
beds, when her attention was attracted by a sound at the skylight.
When she looked up from her page she saw that Becky had heard the sound
also, as she had turned her head to look and was listening rather
nervously.

"Something's there, miss," she whispered.

"Yes," said Sara, slowly.  "It sounds--rather like a cat--trying to get
in."

She left her chair and went to the skylight.  It was a queer little
sound she heard--like a soft scratching.  She suddenly remembered
something and laughed.  She remembered a quaint little intruder who had
made his way into the attic once before.  She had seen him that very
afternoon, sitting disconsolately on a table before a window in the
Indian gentleman's house.

"Suppose," she whispered in pleased excitement--"just suppose it was
the monkey who got away again.  Oh, I wish it was!"

She climbed on a chair, very cautiously raised the skylight, and peeped
out.  It had been snowing all day, and on the snow, quite near her,
crouched a tiny, shivering figure, whose small black face wrinkled
itself piteously at sight of her.

"It is the monkey," she cried out.  "He has crept out of the Lascar's
attic, and he saw the light."

Becky ran to her side.

"Are you going to let him in, miss?" she said.

"Yes," Sara answered joyfully.  "It's too cold for monkeys to be out.
They're delicate.  I'll coax him in."

She put a hand out delicately, speaking in a coaxing voice--as she
spoke to the sparrows and to Melchisedec--as if she were some friendly
little animal herself.

"Come along, monkey darling," she said.  "I won't hurt you."

He knew she would not hurt him.  He knew it before she laid her soft,
caressing little paw on him and drew him towards her. He had felt human
love in the slim brown hands of Ram Dass, and he felt it in hers.  He
let her lift him through the skylight, and when he found himself in her
arms he cuddled up to her breast and looked up into her face.

"Nice monkey!  Nice monkey!" she crooned, kissing his funny head. "Oh,
I do love little animal things."

He was evidently glad to get to the fire, and when she sat down and
held him on her knee he looked from her to Becky with mingled interest
and appreciation.

"He IS plain-looking, miss, ain't he?" said Becky.

"He looks like a very ugly baby," laughed Sara.  "I beg your pardon,
monkey; but I'm glad you are not a baby.  Your mother COULDN'T be proud
of you, and no one would dare to say you looked like any of your
relations.  Oh, I do like you!"

She leaned back in her chair and reflected.

"Perhaps he's sorry he's so ugly," she said, "and it's always on his
mind.  I wonder if he HAS a mind.  Monkey, my love, have you a mind?"

But the monkey only put up a tiny paw and scratched his head.

"What shall you do with him?"  Becky asked.

"I shall let him sleep with me tonight, and then take him back to the
Indian gentleman tomorrow.  I am sorry to take you back, monkey; but
you must go.  You ought to be fondest of your own family; and I'm not a
REAL relation."

And when she went to bed she made him a nest at her feet, and he curled
up and slept there as if he were a baby and much pleased with his
quarters.



17

"It Is the Child!"


The next afternoon three members of the Large Family sat in the Indian
gentleman's library, doing their best to cheer him up.  They had been
allowed to come in to perform this office because he had specially
invited them.  He had been living in a state of suspense for some time,
and today he was waiting for a certain event very anxiously.  This
event was the return of Mr. Carmichael from Moscow.  His stay there had
been prolonged from week to week. On his first arrival there, he had
not been able satisfactorily to trace the family he had gone in search
of.  When he felt at last sure that he had found them and had gone to
their house, he had been told that they were absent on a journey.  His
efforts to reach them had been unavailing, so he had decided to remain
in Moscow until their return.  Mr. Carrisford sat in his reclining
chair, and Janet sat on the floor beside him.  He was very fond of
Janet. Nora had found a footstool, and Donald was astride the tiger's
head which ornamented the rug made of the animal's skin.  It must be
owned that he was riding it rather violently.

"Don't chirrup so loud, Donald," Janet said.  "When you come to cheer
an ill person up you don't cheer him up at the top of your voice.
Perhaps cheering up is too loud, Mr. Carrisford?" turning to the Indian
gentleman.

But he only patted her shoulder.

"No, it isn't," he answered.  "And it keeps me from thinking too much."

"I'm going to be quiet," Donald shouted.  "We'll all be as quiet as
mice."

"Mice don't make a noise like that," said Janet.

Donald made a bridle of his handkerchief and bounced up and down on the
tiger's head.

"A whole lot of mice might," he said cheerfully.  "A thousand mice
might."

"I don't believe fifty thousand mice would," said Janet, severely; "and
we have to be as quiet as one mouse."

Mr. Carrisford laughed and patted her shoulder again.

"Papa won't be very long now," she said.  "May we talk about the lost
little girl?"

"I don't think I could talk much about anything else just now," the
Indian gentleman answered, knitting his forehead with a tired look.

"We like her so much," said Nora.  "We call her the little un-fairy
princess."

"Why?" the Indian gentleman inquired, because the fancies of the Large
Family always made him forget things a little.

It was Janet who answered.

"It is because, though she is not exactly a fairy, she will be so rich
when she is found that she will be like a princess in a fairy tale. We
called her the fairy princess at first, but it didn't quite suit."

"Is it true," said Nora, "that her papa gave all his money to a friend
to put in a mine that had diamonds in it, and then the friend thought
he had lost it all and ran away because he felt as if he was a robber?"

"But he wasn't really, you know," put in Janet, hastily.

The Indian gentleman took hold of her hand quickly.

"No, he wasn't really," he said.

"I am sorry for the friend," Janet said; "I can't help it. He didn't
mean to do it, and it would break his heart.  I am sure it would break
his heart."

"You are an understanding little woman, Janet," the Indian gentleman
said, and he held her hand close.

"Did you tell Mr. Carrisford," Donald shouted again, "about the
little-girl-who-isn't-a-beggar?  Did you tell him she has new nice
clothes?  P'r'aps she's been found by somebody when she was lost."

"There's a cab!" exclaimed Janet.  "It's stopping before the door. It
is papa!"

They all ran to the windows to look out.

"Yes, it's papa," Donald proclaimed.  "But there is no little girl."

All three of them incontinently fled from the room and tumbled into the
hall.  It was in this way they always welcomed their father. They were
to be heard jumping up and down, clapping their hands, and being caught
up and kissed.

Mr. Carrisford made an effort to rise and sank back again.

"It is no use," he said.  "What a wreck I am!"

Mr. Carmichael's voice approached the door.

"No, children," he was saying; "you may come in after I have talked to
Mr. Carrisford.  Go and play with Ram Dass."

Then the door opened and he came in.  He looked rosier than ever, and
brought an atmosphere of freshness and health with him; but his eyes
were disappointed and anxious as they met the invalid's look of eager
question even as they grasped each other's hands.

"What news?"  Mr. Carrisford asked.  "The child the Russian people
adopted?"

"She is not the child we are looking for," was Mr. Carmichael's answer.
"She is much younger than Captain Crewe's little girl.  Her name is
Emily Carew.  I have seen and talked to her.  The Russians were able to
give me every detail."

How wearied and miserable the Indian gentleman looked!  His hand
dropped from Mr. Carmichael's.

"Then the search has to be begun over again," he said.  "That is all.
Please sit down."

Mr. Carmichael took a seat.  Somehow, he had gradually grown fond of
this unhappy man.  He was himself so well and happy, and so surrounded
by cheerfulness and love, that desolation and broken health seemed
pitifully unbearable things.  If there had been the sound of just one
