2. An hour ago the storm was here,
     The gleam was far behind;
   So will our joys and grief appear,
     When earth has ceased to blind.

3. Grief will be joy if on its edge
     Fall soft that holiest ray,
   Joy will be grief if no faint pledge
     Be there of heavenly day.



LXIV. SUPPOSED SPEECH OF JOHN ADAMS.

Daniel Webster (b. 1782, d. 1852) was born in Salisbury, N.H. He spent a
few months of his boyhood at Phillips Academy, Exeter, but fitted for
college under Rev. Samuel Wood, of Boscawen, N.H. He graduated from
Dartmouth College in 1801. He taught school several terms, during and
after his college course. In 1805, he was admitted to the bar in Boston,
and practiced law in New Hampshire for the succeeding eleven years. In
1812, he was elected to the United States House of Representatives. In
1816, he removed to Boston, and in 1827 was elected to the United States
Senate, which position he held for twelve years. In 1841, he was appointed
Secretary of State. He returned to the Senate in 1845. In 1850, he was
reappointed Secretary of State and continued in office until his death. He
died at his residence, in Marshfield, Mass. Mr. Webster's fame rests
chiefly on his state papers and speeches. As a speaker he was dignified
and stately, using clear, pure English. During all his life he took great
interest in agriculture, and was very fond of outdoor sports.

1. Sink or swim, live or die, survive or perish, I give my hand and my
heart to this vote. It is true, indeed, that, in the beginning, we aimed
not at independence. But

   "There's a divinity that shapes our ends."

The injustice of England has driven us to arms; and blinded to her own
interest, she has obstinately persisted, till independence is now within
our grasp. We have but to reach forth to it, and it is ours. Why then
should we defer the declaration? Is any man so weak as now to hope for a
reconciliation with England, which shall leave either safety to the
country and its liberties, or security to his own life and his own honor!
Are not you, sir, who sit in that chair, is not he, our venerable
colleague, near you, are you not both already the proscribed and
predestined objects of punishment and of vengeance? Cut off from all hope
of royal clemency, what are you, what can you be, while the power of
England remains, but outlaws?

2. If we postpone independence, do we mean to carry on, or to give up, the
war? Do we mean to submit, and consent that we shall be ground to powder,
and our country and its rights trodden down in the dust? I know we do not
mean to submit. We NEVER shall submit! Do we intend to violate that most
solemn obligation ever entered into by men, that plighting, before God, of
our sacred honor to Washington, when, putting him forth to incur the
dangers of war, as well as the political hazards of the times, we promised
to adhere to him in every extremity with our fortunes and our lives? I
know there is not a man here, who would not rather see a general
conflagration sweep over the land, or an earthquake sink it, than one jot
or tittle of that plighted faith fall to the ground. For myself, having
twelve months ago, in this place, moved you that George Washington be
appointed commander of the forces raised, or to be raised, for the defense
of American liberty; may my right hand forget her cunning, and my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I hesitate or waver in the support I
give him.

3. The war, then, must go on. We must fight it through. And if the war
must go on, why put off the Declaration of Independence? That measure will
strengthen us. It will give us character abroad. Nations will then treat
with us, which they never can do while we acknowledge ourselves subjects
in arms against our sovereign. Nay, I maintain that England herself will
sooner treat for peace with us on the footing of independence, than
consent, by repealing her acts, to acknowledge that her whole conduct
toward us has been a course of injustice and oppression. Her pride will be
less wounded by submitting to that course of things, which now
predestinates our independence, than by yielding the points in controversy
to her rebellious subjects. The former, she would regard as the result of
fortune; the latter, she would feel as her own deep disgrace. Why, then,
do we not change this from a civil to a national war? And since we must
fight it through, why not put ourselves in a state to enjoy all the
benefits of victory, if we gain the victory.

4. If we fail, it can be no worse for us. But we shall not fail. The cause
will raise up armies; the cause will create navies. The people--the
people, if we are true to them, will carry us, and will carry themselves,
gloriously through this struggle. I care not how fickle other people have
been found. I know the people of these colonies; and I know that
resistance to British aggression is deep and settled in their hearts, and
can not be eradicated. Sir, the Declaration of Independence will inspire
the people with increased courage. Instead of a long and bloody war for
the restoration of privileges, for redress of grievances, for chartered
immunities, held under a British king, set before them the glorious object
of entire independence, and it will breathe into them anew the spirit of
life.

5. Read this declaration at the head of the army; every sword will be
drawn, and the solemn vow uttered to maintain it, or perish on the bed of
honor. Publish it from the pulpit; religion will approve it, and the love
of religious liberty will cling around it, resolved to stand with it or
fall with it. Send it to the public halls; proclaim it there; let them see
it who saw their brothers and their sons fall on the field of Bunker Hill
and in the streets of Lexington and Concord, and the very walls will cry
out in its support.

6. Sir, I know the uncertainty of human affairs, but I see--I see clearly
through this day's business. You and I, indeed, may rue it. We may not
live to see the time this declaration shall be made good. We may die; die
colonists; die slaves; die, it may be, ignominiously and on the scaffold.
Be it so: be it so. If it be the pleasure of Heaven that my country shall
require the poor offering of my life, the victim shall be ready at the
appointed hour of sacrifice, come when that hour may. But while I do live,
let me have a country, or at least the hope of a country, and that a FREE
country.

7. But whatever may be our fate, be assured--be assured that this
Declaration will stand. It may cost treasure, and it may cost blood; but
it will stand, and it will richly compensate for both. Through the thick
gloom of the present I see the brightness of the future as the sun in
heaven. We shall make this a glorious, an immortal day. When we are in our
graves, our children will honor it. They will celebrate it with
thanksgiving, with festivity, with bonfires, and illuminations. On its
annual return they will shed tears,--copious, gushing tears; not of
subjection and slavery, not of agony and distress, but of exultation, of
gratitude, and of joy.

8. Sir, before God I believe the hour is come. My judgment approves the
measure, and my whole heart is in it. All that I have, and all that I am,
and all that I hope in this life, I am now ready here to stake upon it;
and I leave off as I began, that, live or die, survive or perish, I am for
the Declaration. It is my living sentiment, and, by the blessing of God,
it shall by my dying sentiment; independence now, and INDEPENDENCE
FOREVER.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Rec-on-cil-i-a'tion, renewal of friendship. Col'league
(pro. kol'leg), an associate in some civil office. Pro-scribed', doomed to
destruction, put out of the protection of the law. Pre-des'tined, decreed
beforehand. Clem'en-cy, mercy, indulgence.



Notes.--Mr. Webster, in a speech upon the life and character of John
Adams, imagines some one opposed to the Declaration of Independence to
have stated his fears and objections before Congress while deliberating on
that subject. He then supposes Mr. Adams to have replied in the language
above.

1. The quotation is from "Hamlet," Act V, Scene 2.

You, sir, who sit in that chair. This was addressed to John Hancock,
president of the Continental Congress. Our venerable colleague refers to
Samuel Adams. After the battles of Concord and Lexington, Governor Gage
offered pardon to all the rebels who would lay down their arms, excepting
Samuel Adams and John Hancock.



LXV. THE RISING.

Thomas Buchanan Read (b. 1822, d. 1872) was born in Chester County,
Pennsylvania. In 1839 he entered a sculptor's studio in Cincinnati, where
he gained reputation as a portrait painter. He afterwards went to New
York, Boston, and Philadelphia, and, in 1850, to Italy. He divided his
time between Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and Rome, in the latter years of
his life. Some or his poems are marked by vigor and strength, while others
are distinguished by smoothness and delicacy. The following selection is
abridged from "The Wagoner of the Alleghanies."

1. Out of the North the wild news came,
   Far flashing on its wings of flame,
   Swift as the boreal light which flies
   At midnight through the startled skies.

2. And there was tumult in the air,
     The fife's shrill note, the drum's loud beat,
   And through the wide land everywhere
     The answering tread of hurrying feet,
   While the first oath of Freedom's gun
   Came on the blast from Lexington.
   And Concord, roused, no longer tame,
   Forgot her old baptismal name,
   Made bare her patriot arm of power,
   And swelled the discord of the hour.

3. The yeoman and the yoeman's son,
     With knitted brows and sturdy dint,
   Renewed the polish of each gun,
     Recoiled the lock, reset the flint;
   And oft the maid and matron there,
   While kneeling in the firelight glare,
   Long poured, with half-suspended breath,
   The lead into the molds of death.

4. The hands by Heaven made silken soft
     To soothe the brow of love or pain,
   Alas! are dulled and soiled too oft
     By some unhallowed earthly stain;
   But under the celestial bound
   No nobler picture can be found
   Than woman, brave in word and deed,
   Thus serving in her nation's need:
   Her love is with her country now,
   Her hand is on its aching brow.

5. Within its shade of elm and oak
     The church of Berkley Manor stood:
   There Sunday found the rural folk,
     And some esteemed of gentle blood,
   In vain their feet with loitering tread
     Passed 'mid the graves where rank is naught:
     All could not read the lesson taught
   In that republic of the dead.

6. The pastor rose: the prayer was strong;
   The psalm was warrior David's song;
   The text, a few short words of might,--
   "The Lord of hosts shall arm the right!"

7. He spoke of wrongs too long endured,
   Of sacred rights to be secured;
   Then from his patriot tongue of flame
   The startling words for Freedom came.
   The stirring sentences he spake
   Compelled the heart to glow or quake,
   And, rising on his theme's broad wing,
     And grasping in his nervous hand
     The imaginary battle brand,
   In face of death he dared to fling
   Defiance to a tyrant king.

8. Even as he spoke, his frame, renewed
   In eloquence of attitude,
   Rose, as it seemed, a shoulder higher;
   Then swept his kindling glance of fire
   From startled pew to breathless choir;
   When suddenly his mantle wide
   His hands impatient flung aside,
   And, lo! he met their wondering eyes
   Complete in all a warrior's guise.

9. A moment there was awful pause,--
     When Berkley cried, "Cease, traitor! cease!
     God's temple is the house of peace!"
   The other shouted, "Nay, not so,
   When God is with our righteous cause:
     His holiest places then are ours,
     His temples are our forts and towers
   That frown upon the tyrant foe:
   In this the dawn of Freedom's day
   There is a time to fight and pray!"

10. And now before the open door--
      The warrior priest had ordered so--
    The enlisting trumpet's sudden soar
      Rang through the chapel, o'er and o'er,
    Its long reverberating blow,
    So loud and clear, it seemed the ear
    Of dusty death must wake and hear.
    And there the startling drum and fife
    Fired the living with fiercer life;
    While overhead with wild increase,
    Forgetting its ancient toll of peace,
      The great bell swung as ne'er before:
    It seemed as it would never cease;
    And every word its ardor flung
    From off its jubilant iron tongue
      Was, "WAR! WAR! WAR!"

11. "Who dares"--this was the patriot's cry,
      As striding from the desk he came--
      "Come out with me, in Freedom's name,
    For her to live, for her to die?"
    A hundred hands flung up reply,
    A hundred voices answered "I!"


DEFINITIONS.--l. Bo're-al, northern. 3. Yeo'man, a freeholder, a man
freeborn. Dint, stroke. 5. Man'or, a tract of land occupied by tenants.
Gen'tle (pro. jen'tl), well born, of good family.  7. Theme, a subject on
which a person speaks or writes. 8. Guise, external appearance in manner
or dress. 10. Soar, a towering flight.


NOTES.--2. Forgot her ... name. The reference is to the meaning of the
word "concord,"--harmony, union.

4. Celestial bound; i.e., the sky, heaven.

6. The pastor. This was John Peter Gabriel Muhlenberg, who was at this
time a minister at Woodstock, in Virginia. He was a leading spirit among
those opposed to Great Britain, and in 1775 he was elected colonel of a
Virginia regiment. The above poem describes his farewell sermon. At its
close he threw off his ministerial gown, and appeared in full regimental
dress. Almost every man in the congregation enlisted under him at the
church door. Muhlenberg became a well-known general in the Revolution, and
after the war served his country in Congress and in various official
positions.



LXVI. CONTROL YOUR TEMPER.

John Todd, D.D. (b. 1800, d. 1873), was born in Rutland, Vt. In 1842 he
was settled as a pastor of a Congregational Church, in Pittsfield, Mass,
In 1834, he published "Lectures to Children"; in 1835, "The Student's
Manual," a valuable and popular work, which has been translated into
several European languages; in 1836, "The Sabbath-School Teacher"; and in
1841, "The Lost Sister of Wyoming." He was one of the founders of the
Mount Holyoke Female Seminary.

1. No one has a temper naturally so good, that it does not need attention
and cultivation, and no one has a temper so bad, but that, by proper
culture, it may become pleasant. One of the best disciplined tempers ever
seen, was that of a gentleman who was naturally quick, irritable, rash,
and violent; but, by having the care of the sick, and especially of
deranged people, he so completely mastered himself that he was never known
to be thrown off his guard.

2. The difference in the happiness which is received or bestowed by the
man who governs his temper, and that by the man who does not, is immense.
There is no misery so constant, so distressing, and so intolerable to
others, as that of having a disposition which is your master, and which is
continually fretting itself. There are corners enough, at every turn in
life, against which we may run, and at which we may break out in
impatience, if we choose.

3. Look at Roger Sherman, who rose from a humble occupation to a seat in
the first Congress of the United States, and whose judgment was received
with great deference by that body of distinguished men. He made himself
master of his temper, and cultivated it as a great business in life. There
are one or two instances which show this part of his character in a light
that is beautiful.

4. One day, after having received his highest honors, he was sitting and
reading in his parlor. A roguish student, in a room close by, held a
looking-glass in such a position as to pour the reflected rays of the sun
directly in Mr. Sherman's face. He moved his chair, and the thing was
repeated. A third time the chair was moved, but the looking-glass still
reflected the sun in his eyes. He laid aside his book, went to the window,
and many witnesses of the impudence expected to hear the ungentlemanly
student severely reprimanded. He raised the window gently, and then--shut
the window blind!

5. I can not forbear adducing another instance of the power he had
acquired over himself. He was naturally possessed of strong passions; but
over these he at length obtained an extraordinary control. He became
habitually calm, sedate, and self-possessed. Mr. Sherman was one of those
men who are not ashamed to maintain the forms of religion in their
families. One morning he called them all together, as usual, to lead them
in prayer to God; the "old family Bible" was brought out, and laid on the
table.

6. Mr. Sherman took his seat, and placed beside him one of his children, a
child of his old age; the rest of the family were seated around the room;
several of these were now grown up. Besides these, some of the tutors of
the college were boarders in the family, and were present at the time
alluded to. His aged and superannuated mother occupied a corner of the
room, opposite the place where the distinguished judge sat.

7. At length, he opened the Bible, and began to read. The child who was
seated beside him made some little disturbance, upon which Mr. Sherman
paused and told it to be still. Again he proceeded; but again he paused to
reprimand the little offender, whose playful disposition would scarcely
permit it to be still. And this time he gently tapped its ear. The blow,
if blow it might be called, caught the attention of his aged mother, who
now, with some effort, rose from the seat, and tottered across the room.
At length she reached the chair of Mr. Sherman, and, in a moment, most
unexpectedly to him, she gave him a blow on the ear with all the force she
could summon. "There," said she, "you strike your child, and I will strike
mine."

8. For a moment, the blood was seen mounting to the face of Mr. Sherman;
but it was only for a moment, when all was calm and mild as usual. He
paused; he raised his spectacles; he cast his eye upon his mother; again
it fell upon the book from which he had been reading. Not a word escaped
him; but again he calmly pursued the service, and soon after sought in
prayer an ability to set an example before his household which would be
worthy of their imitation. Such a victory was worth more than the proudest
one ever achieved on the field of battle.



DEFINITIONS.--1. Con-trol', subdue, restrain, govern. Cul'ture,
cultivation, improvement by effort. Dis'ci-plined, brought under control,
trained.  2. In-tol'er-a-ble, not capable of being borne. 3. Def 'er-ence,
regard, respect. 4. Rep'ri-mand-ed, reproved for a fault. 6.
Su-per-an'nu-a-ted, impaired by old age and infirmity. 8. A-chieved',
gained.


NOTE.--Roger Sherman (b. 1721, d. 1793) was born at Newton Massachusetts,
and until twenty-two years of age was a shoemaker. He then removed to
New Milford, Connecticut, and was soon afterward appointed surveyor of
lands for the county. In 1754, he was admitted to the bar. At various
times he was elected a judge; sent to the Legislature, to the Colonial
Assembly, and to the United States Congress; made a member of the
governor's council of safety; and, in 1776, a member of the committee
appointed to draft the Declaration of Independence, of which he was one of
the signers.



LXVII. WILLIAM TELL.

James Sheridan Knowles (b. 1784, d. 1862), a dramatist and actor, was born
in Cork, Ireland. In 1792 his father removed to London with his family. At
the age of fourteen, Sheridan wrote an opera called "The Chevalier de
Grillon." In 1798 he removed to Dublin, and soon after began his career as
an actor and author. In 1835 he visited America. In 1839 an annual pension
of 200 Pounds was granted him by the British government. Several years
before his death he left the stage and became a Baptist minister. The best
known of his plays are "Caius Gracchus," "Virginius," "Leo, the Gypsy,"
"The Hunchback," and "William Tell," from the last of which the following
two lessons are abridged.

SCENE 1.--A Chamber in the Castle. Enter Gesler, Officers, and Sarnem,
with Tell in chains and guarded.

Sar. Down, slave! Behold the governor.
     Down! down! and beg for mercy.

Ges. (Seated.) Does he hear?

Sar. He does, but braves thy power.

Officer. Why don't you smite him for that look?

Ges. Can I believe
     My eyes? He smiles! Nay, grasps
     His chains as he would make a weapon of them
     To lay the smiter dead. (To Tell.)
     Why speakest thou not?

Tell. For wonder.

Ges. Wonder?

Tell. Yes, that thou shouldst seem a man.

Ges. What should I seem?

Tell. A monster.

Ges. Ha! Beware! Think on thy chains.

