
She racked her brain for some means of deliverance, but received no
inspiration. Again she drew out her watch. Then her eye rested for a
second on the little key that hung on her watch chain. It was the key to
the lean-to in which David kept his aeroplane. Like a flash the way was
revealed to her. But would she be able to carry out the daring design that
had sprung into her mind? She would try, at any rate. With an unconcern
that she was far from feeling, Grace walked carelessly toward the door of
the lean-to.

The demented man was beside her in a twinkling He clutched Grace by the
arm with a force that made her catch her breath.

"What are you trying to do!" he exclaimed, glaring at her savagely.
"Didn't I tell you that you couldn't go away!"

He held her at arm's length with one hand, and threateningly shook his
finger at her.

"Remember, once and for all, that I am your emperor and must be obeyed.
Disregard my commands and you shall pay the penalty with your life. What
is the life of one like you to me, when I hold the fate of nations in my
hands? Perhaps it would be better to put an end to you now. Women are ever
given over to intriguing and deception. You might betray me to my enemies.
Yet, I believed you loyal in the past. I----"

"Indeed I have always been loyal, my emperor," interrupted Grace eagerly.
"How can you doubt me?"

Her situation was becoming more precarious with every minute. She must
persuade this terrible individual that she was necessary to his plans, if
she wished to get away with her life.

"I have your welfare constantly at heart," she continued. "Have you ever
thought of flying to our beloved France? In the shed behind me is a
strange ship that flies through the air. Its sails are like the wings of
a bird, and it flies with the speed of the wind. It waits to carry us
across the sea. It is called an aeroplane."

"I have heard of such things," said Napoleon. "When I was in exile, a fool
who came to visit me showed me a picture of one. He told me it could fly
like a bird, but he lied. I believe you are lying, too," he added, looking
at her suspiciously.

"Let me prove to you that I am not," Grace answered, trying to appear
calm, though ready to collapse under the terrible strain of the part she
was being forced to play. "Do you see this key? It unlocks the door that
leads to the flying ship. Would you not like to look at it?" she said
coaxingly.

"Very well, but be quick about it I have already wasted too much time with
you. I must be off before my enemies find me."

"You must release my arm, or I cannot unlock the door," Grace said.

"Oh, yes, you can," rejoined Napoleon, not relaxing his grip for an
instant. "Do you think I am going to run any risk of losing you?"

As she turned the key he swung her to one side, and, opening the door,
peered cautiously in. For a moment he stood like a statue staring in
wonder at David's aeroplane, then with a loud cry that froze the blood in
Grace's veins, he threw up his arms and rushed madly into the shed,
shouting, "We shall fly, fly, fly!"

With a sob of terror Grace slammed the door and turned the key. She was
not an instant too soon. Napoleon Bonaparte reached it with a bound and
threw himself against it, uttering blood-curdling shrieks. The frightful
sounds came to Grace's ears as she tore across the field in the direction
of Oakdale. Terror lent wings to her feet. Every second was precious. She
did not know how long the door would stand against the frantic assaults of
the maniac.

She had reached the road, when, to her joy and relief, she beheld half a
dozen men approaching. Stumbling blindly toward them, she panted out: "The
crazy man--I--locked--him--in--the Omnibus House. Here--is--the key." She
gave a long, shuddering sigh, and for the first time in her life sturdy
Grace Harlowe fainted.

The men picked her up tenderly.

"Here, Hampton," said one of them, "take this child over to the nearest
house. She is all in. By George, I wonder whether she has locked that
lunatic up? Something has certainly upset her. We'd better get over there
right away and see what we can find out."

The man addressed as Hampton picked Grace up as though she had been a
baby and carried her to a house a little further up the road.

Meanwhile the men hurried on, arriving at the Omnibus House just as
Napoleon succeeded in breaking down the door. Before he could elude them,
he was seized by five pairs of stalwart arms. He fought like a tiger,
making it difficult to bind him. This was finally accomplished though they
were obliged to carry him, for he had to be tied up like a papoose to keep
him from doing damage. He raved continually over the duplicity of
Josephine, threatening dire vengeance when he should find her.

When Grace came to herself she looked about her in wonder. She was lying
on a comfortable couch in a big, cheerful sitting room. A kindly faced
woman was bathing her temples, while a young girl chafed her hands.

"Where am I?" said Grace feebly. "Did Napoleon get out?"

"Lie still and rest, my dear," said Mrs. Forrest, "Don't try to exert
yourself."

Grace sat up and looked about her. "Oh, I know what happened. I fainted.
How silly of me. I never did that in my life before. I had a terrible
scare, but I'm all right now."

The man who had carried her to the house came forward.

"My name is Hampton, miss. I am a guard over at the asylum. Those other
men you saw are employed there, too. We were looking for one of our people
who escaped night before last. He nearly killed his keeper. He's the worst
patient we have out there. Thinks he's Napoleon. Judging from your fright,
I guess you must have met him. Did you really lock him in that old house?"

"Indeed I did," answered Grace, who was rapidly recovering from the
effects of her fright. "He took me for the Empress Josephine." She related
all that had happened, ending with the way she locked his emperorship in.

"Well, all I've got to say is that you're the pluckiest girl I ever came
across," said the man admiringly, when Grace had finished.

But she shook her head.

"I never was so frightened in my life before. I shall never forget his
screams."

It was after eight o'clock when Grace Harlowe arrived at her own door. The
man Hampton had insisted on calling a carriage, so Grace rode home in
state. As she neared the house she saw that the lawn and porch were full
of people.

"What on earth is the matter!" she asked herself. As she alighted from the
carriage her mother rushed forward and took her in her arms.

"My darling child," she sobbed. "What a narrow escape you have had. You
must never, never wander off alone again."

"Why, mother, how did you know anything about it?"

"When you didn't come home to supper I felt worried, for you had not told
me that you were invited anywhere. Then Nora came down to see you, and
seemed surprised not to find you at home. She said you had gone on a
specimen hunt after school. I became frightened and sent your father out
at once to look for you. He met the keepers with that dreadful man," said
Mrs. Harlowe, shuddering, "and they described you, telling him where you
were and how they had met you. Your father went straight out to the
Forrests. I suppose you just missed him."

Grace hugged her mother tenderly. "Don't worry, mother. I'm all right.
What are all these people standing around for?"

"They came to see you, of course. The news is all over town. Everyone is
devoured with curiosity to hear your story."

"It looks as though I had become a celebrity at last," laughed Grace.

She was obliged to tell the story of her adventure over and over again
that night to her eager listeners. Her chums hung about her adoringly.
Hippy, Reddy and David were fairly beside themselves.

"Oh, you lunatic snatcher," cried Hippy, throwing up his hat to express
his feelings.

"You never dreamed that the little key you gave me would prove my
salvation," said Grace to David, as her friends bade her good night. "It
surely must have been fate."




CHAPTER XXIV

COMMENCEMENT


Examinations had ceased to be bug-bears and kill joys to the young idea of
Oakdale. The last paper had been looked over, and the anxious hearts of
the majority of the High School pupils had been set at rest. In most cases
there was general rejoicing over the results of the final test. Marks were
compared and plans for the next year's course of study discussed.

The juniors were about to come into their own. When the present seniors
had been handed their diplomas, and Miss Thompson and Mr. Cole had wished
them god-speed, the present juniors would start on the home stretch that
ended in commencement, and a vague awakening to the real duties of life.

The senior class stood for the time being in the limelight of public
attention. It was the observed of all observers. Teas were given in honor
of its various members, and bevies of young girls in dainty summer apparel
brightened the streets of Oakdale, during the long sunny afternoons.

It was truly an eventful week. Grace Harlowe gave a tea in honor of Ethel
Post, which was a marked social success. The two girls had become
thoroughly well acquainted over their golf and had received great benefit
from each other's society. Miss Post's calm philosophical view of life had
a quieting effect on impulsive Grace, while Grace's energy and
whole-hearted way of diving into things proved a stimulus to the older
girl.

It was Tuesday afternoon and class day. High School girls in gala attire
were seen hurrying up the broad walk leading to the main door of the
school building.

It was the day of all days, to those about to graduate. Of course,
receiving one's diploma was the most important feature, but class day lay
nearest the heart.

The exercises were to be held in the gymnasium.

The junior and senior classes had brought in half the woods to beautify
the big room, and Oakdale gardens had been ruthlessly forced to give up
their wealth of bud and bloom in honor of the occasion.

It was customary for the seniors to invite the junior class, who always
sat in a body at one side of the gymnasium; while the seniors sat on the
opposite side. The rest of the space was given up to the families of the
seniors and their friends. Lucky, indeed, were those who could obtain an
invitation to this most characteristic of class functions.

The four girl chums had been among the fortunate recipients of
invitations. A very pretty picture they made as they followed the usher,
one of the junior class, to their seats.

Grace wore a gown of pale blue organdie that was a marvel of sheer
daintiness. Jessica, a fetching little affair of white silk muslin
sprinkled with tiny pink rosebuds; while Anne and Nora were resplendent in
white lingerie gowns. Anne's frock was particularly beautiful and the
girls had exclaimed with delight over it when they first caught sight of
her.

It was a present from Mrs. Gray, Anne told them. She had fully expected to
wear her little white muslin, but the latter had grown rather shabby and
she felt ashamed of it. Then a boy appeared with a big box addressed to
her. Wrapped in fold after fold of tissue paper lay the exquisite new
gown. Pinned to one sleeve was a note from Mrs. Gray, asking her to accept
the gift in memory of the other Anne--Mrs. Gray's young daughter--who had
passed away years ago. There were tears in Anne's eyes as she told them
about it, the girls agreeing with her that there was no one in the world
quite so utterly dear as Mrs. Gray.

"I'm glad we're early," whispered Nora. "We can watch the classes come in.
See, that place is for the juniors. It is roped off with their colors and
the other side belongs to the seniors."

"How fine the gym. looks," remarked Anne. "They certainly must have worked
hard to fix it up so beautifully."

"Julia Crosby is largely responsible for it," answered Grace. "She has the
most original ideas about decorations and things. You know the juniors
always decorate for the seniors. It's a sacred duty."

"Did you know that Julia was elected president of her class?" asked
Jessica.

"Oh, yes," said Grace, "she told me about it the other day. Oh, girls,
here they come! Doesn't Ethel Post look sweet? There's Julia at the head
of her class."

"It is certainly great to be a graduate," sighed Nora.

"Speaking of graduation," said Grace, "did you know that David has put off
his graduation for another year! He wished to finish school with Hippy and
Reddy. They have planned to enter the same college. So our little crowd
will be together for one more year."

"How nice of him," cried the girls.

"Yes, isn't it! I'll be awfully sorry when my turn comes," responded
Grace. "I'm sure I shall never care for college as I do for this dear old
school."

"You can't tell until you've tried it," said Nora wisely.

The two classes had now seated themselves, and an expectant hush fell upon
those assembled. The first number on the program was a song by the senior
glee club. This was followed by the salutatory address, given by a tall
dignified senior. The class poem came next, and was received with
enthusiasm. The other numbers followed in rapid succession, each being
applauded to the echo. The class grinds were hailed with keen relish. Each
girl solemnly rose to take her medicine in the form of mild ridicule over
some past harmless folly.

The class prophecy provoked ripples of merriment from the audience.

Grace chuckled with glee at the idea of exclusive Ethel Post becoming the
proprietor of a moving-picture show at Coney Island. The futures
prophesied for the other members of the class were equally remarkable for
their impossibility.

At last nothing remained but the senior charge and the junior reply. The
president of the senior class rose, and facing the juniors poured forth
her final words of advice and counsel. She likened them to a baby in
swaddling clothes, and cautioned them to be careful about standing on
their feet too early. It was the usual patronizing speech so necessary to
class day.

Julia Crosby smiled a little as the senior exhorted her hearers to never
forget the dignity of their station. She was thinking of the day she
crashed into that young woman, in the corridor. The senior president had
manifested the dignity of her station then.

Julia straightened her face and stepped forward to make her reply. She
thanked the president for her solicitude and tender counsel. She humbly
acknowledged that the juniors were helpless infants, entirely innocent of
the wicked world. They realized that they needed proper nourishment and
exercise. There was one consolation however, they were daily growing
larger and wiser, and their lungs were strong. If all went well they hoped
to be healthy, well-grown seniors, capable of giving sage advice to those
who would follow them.

Grace's face was full of eager appreciation as she listened to Julia's
clever speech. How greatly she had changed, and what a power she would be
in her class during the senior year. Grace felt that her sophomore year,
though dark in the beginning, was about to end in a blaze of glory.

Julia sat down amid demonstrations of approval. Then the first notes of
"Auld Lang Syne" sounded on the piano, and the entire audience, led by the
senior glee club, rose to their feet to join in that sweetest of old songs
whose plaintive melody causes heart strings to tighten and eyes to fill.

The four chums silently joined hands as they sang, and mentally resolved
that with them "auld acquaintance" should never "be forgot."

There was a second's pause after the song was done. Then clear on the air
rose the senior class yell. That broke the spell. Those who had felt lumps
rising in their throats at the music, laughed. A buzz of conversation
began, and soon the graduates were surrounded by their families and
friends.

The gymnasium gradually cleared. The seniors hurried off to their banquet
on the lawn and one more class day glided off to find its place with those
of the past.

"Wasn't it perfectly lovely?" sighed Jessica, as they made their way out.

"I think commencement week has even more thrills in it than Christmas,"
Nora replied. "Wait till we have our class day. You shall write the class
poem, Anne, and Jessica the song."

"I speak for the class prophecy," said Grace.

"That leaves nothing for me but the grinds. But that job would be greatly
to my taste," said Nora.

"What about the rest of the class?" inquired Anne, smiling at this
monopoly of class honors. "Are we to carry off all the glory!"

