
Alice went to her own part of the room, which was full of order and
method. She opened a drawer, substituted a clean collar for the one she
had been wearing during the day, brushed out her satin-brown hair
neatly, put on her sailor-hat and a small black coat, snatched up a pair
of gloves, and ran downstairs. On the way she met Mrs. Tennant.

"Oh, mother," cried the girl, "where is Kathleen? I didn't find her in
her room, and I wondered what had become of her."

"Where is she?" said Mrs. Tennant. "I thought she was going with you. I
had a long talk with her. She did not say much, but she seemed quite
gentle and not at all cross. I kissed her and said that I would go with
her to London to see her aunt to-morrow, or that she might ask Miss
O'Flynn here."

"I am sorry you did that, mother."

"Well, darling, it seemed the only thing to do; and the child took it
very well. Isn't she going with you? She said she wouldn't be at all
long getting ready."

"She is not in her room, mother. I can't imagine what has happened to
her."

Mrs. Tennant ran upstairs in some alarm. Kathleen had certainly flown.
The disordered state of the room gave evidence of this; and then on a
nearer view Mrs. Tennant found a tiny piece of paper pinned in
conventional fashion to the pin-cushion. She took it up and read:

"Gone to London to Aunt Katie O'Flynn."

"Well, she is a naughty girl. How troublesome! I must follow her, of
course," said Mrs. Tennant. "Really this is provoking."

"Oh, mother, it isn't worth while fretting about her. She is quite
hopeless," said Alice. "But there! I must make the best of it to Miss
Ravenscroft, only I am sure she will be very angry with Kathleen."

Alice flew to the school. She was met by a teacher, who asked her where
she was going.

"To see Miss Ravenscroft," replied Alice. "I had a note asking me to
call at six o'clock. Do you know anything about it, Miss Purcell?"

"Perhaps she wants to question you about Miss O'Hara. There is some
commotion in the school in connection with her. She seems to be
displeasing some of those in authority."

"Kathleen had a note too, asking her to call."

"Then it must be about her. But where is she? Isn't she going with
you?"

Alice threw up her hands.

"Don't ask me," she said; "perhaps the less I say the better. I am late
as it is. I won't keep you now, Miss Purcell."

Alice ran the rest of the way. She entered the great school, and knocked
at the front entrance. This door was never opened except to the
head-mistress and her visitors. After a time an elderly servant answered
her summons.

"I am Alice Tennant," said the young girl, "and I have come at Miss
Ravenscroft's request to see her."

"Oh yes, miss, certainly. She said she was expecting two young ladies."

"Well, I am one of them. Can you let her know?"

"Step in here, miss."

Alice was shown into a small waiting-room. A moment later the servant
returned.

"Will you follow me, miss?" she said.

They went down a passage and entered a brightly and cheerfully furnished
sitting-room. There was a fire in the grate, and electric light made all
things as bright as day. A tall lady with jet-black hair combed back
from a massive forehead, and beautifully dressed in long, clinging
garments of deep purple, stood on the hearth. Round her neck was a
collar of old Mechlin lace; she wore cuffs of the same with ruffles at
the wrist. Her hands were small and white. She had one massive diamond
ring on the third finger. This lady was the great Miss Ravenscroft, the
head of the school, one of the most persuasive, most fascinating, and
most influential teachers in the whole realm of girlhood. Her opinion
was asked by anxious mothers and fathers and guardians. The girls whom
she took into her own house and helped with her own counsel were thought
the luckiest in England. Even Alice, who was reckoned a good girl as
good girls go, had never before come in personal contact with Miss
Ravenscroft. The head-mistress superintended the management of every
girl in the school, but she did not show herself except when she read
prayers in her deep musical voice morning after morning, or when
something very special occurred. Miss Ravenscroft did not smile when
Alice appeared, nor did she hold out her hand. She bowed very slightly
and then dropped into a chair, and pointed to another for the girl to
take.

"You are Alice Tennant?"

"Yes, madam."

"You are in the upper fifth?"

"Yes," said Alice again.

"I have had very good reports of you from Miss Purcell and Miss Dove and
others; you will probably be in the sixth next year."

"I hope so; it will be a very great delight to me."

Alice trembled and colored, looked down, and then looked up again. Miss
Ravenscroft was regarding her with kindly eyes. Hers was a sort of
veiled face; she seldom gave way to her feelings. Part of her power lay
in her potential attitudes, in the possibilities which she seldom,
except on very rare occasions, exhibited to their fullest extent. Alice
felt that she had only approached the extreme edge of Miss Ravenscroft's
nature. Miss Ravenscroft was silent for a minute; then she said gently:

"And your friend, Kathleen O'Hara? I wrote to her also. Why isn't she
here?"

"I am very sorry indeed," said Alice; "it isn't my fault."

"We won't talk of faults, if you please, Alice Tennant. I asked you why
your friend isn't here."

"I must explain. She isn't my friend. She lives with mother--I mean she
boards with mother."

"Why isn't she here?"

"She got your letter. I suppose she didn't understand; she is so new to
schools. She is not coming."

"Not coming? But I commanded."

"I know, I tried to explain, but she is new to school and--and spoilt."

"She must be."

Miss Ravenscroft was silent for a minute.

"We will defer the subject of Kathleen O'Hara until I have the pleasure
of speaking to her," she said then. "But now, as you are here, I should
like to ask you a few questions."

"Yes."

"What you say, Alice Tennant, will not be--I speak in judicial
phrase"--here Miss Ravenscroft gave vent to a faint smile--"used against
you. I should like to have what information you can give me. There is a
disturbing element in this school. Do you know anything about it?"

"Nothing absolutely."

"But you agree with me that there is a disturbing element?"

"I am afraid I do."

"It has been traced to Kathleen O'Hara."

Alice was silent.

"It is influencing a number of girls who can be very easily impressed,
and who form a very important part of this school. Special arrangements
were made more than a hundred years ago by the founders of the school
that they should receive an education in every way calculated to help
them in life; the influence to which I allude undermines these good
things. It must therefore be put a stop to, and the first way to put a
stop to anything of the sort is to discover all about it. It is
necessary that I should know all that is to be known with regard to the
unruly condition of the foundationers of the Great Shirley School. The
person who can doubtless tell me most is Kathleen O'Hara. The mere fact
of her defying my authority and refusing to come to see me when she is
summoned, shows that she is insubordinate as far as this school is
concerned."

Alice sat very still.

"She has not chosen to appear, and I wish to take quick and instant
steps. Can you help me?"

"I could," said Alice--"that is, of course, I live in the same house
with her--but I would much rather not."

"You will in no way be blamed, but it is absolutely essential that you
should give me your assistance. I am authorized to ask for it. I shall
see Kathleen O'Hara, but from what you say, and from what I have heard,
I am greatly shocked to have to say it, but I think it possible that she
may not be induced to tell the exact truth. If, therefore, you notice
anything--if anything is brought to your ears which I ought to know--you
must come to me at once. Do not suppose that I want you to be a spy in
this matter, but what is troubling the school must be discovered, and
within the next few days. Now you understand. Remember that what I have
said to you is said in the interest of the school, and absolutely behind
closed doors. You are not to repeat it to anybody. You can go now,
Alice Tennant. Personally I am pleased with you. I like your manner; I
hear good accounts of your attention to lessons. In pleasing me you will
please the governors of the school, and doubtless be able to help
yourself and your mother, a most worthy lady, in the long run."

"I am very much obliged to you," said Alice. "You have spoken kind words
to me; but what you have set me to do is not at all to my taste. It
seems scarcely fair, for I must say that I don't like Kathleen. She and
I have never got on. It seems scarcely fair that I should be the one to
run her to earth."

"The fairness or the unfairness of the question is not now to be
discussed," said Miss Ravenscroft.

She rose as she spoke.

"You are unfortunately in the position of her most intimate friend," she
continued, "for you and she live in the same house. Regard what you have
to do as an unpleasant duty, and don't consider yourself in any way
responsible for being forced into the position which one would not, as a
rule, advocate. The simplest plan is to get the girl herself to make a
full confession to me; but in any case, you understand, _I must know_."




CHAPTER XVI.

KATHLEEN TAKES RUTH TO TOWN.


When Kathleen ran upstairs her heart was bubbling over with the first
real fierce anger she had almost ever felt in her life. She was a
spirited, daring girl, but she also had a sweet temper. Now her anger
was roused. Her heart beat fast; she clenched one of her hands.

"Oh, if I had Alice here, wouldn't I give it to her?" she said to
herself. "If I had that detestable Miss Ravenscroft here, wouldn't I
give her a piece of my mind? How dare she order me about? Am I not
Kathleen O'Hara of Carrigrohane? Is not my father a sort of king in old
Ireland? And what is she? I'll prove to her that I defy her. I will go
to see Aunt Katie O'Flynn; nothing shall keep me back."

Carried away by the wild wave of passion which consumed her, Kathleen
dressed hastily for her expedition. She was indifferent now as to what
she wore. She put on the first head-dress which came to hand, buttoned a
rough, shabby-looking jacket over her velvet dress, snatched up her
purse which lay in a drawer, and without waiting for either gloves or
necktie, ran downstairs and out of the house.

"I will go. I haven't the slightest idea how I am to get there, but I
will go to Aunt Katie O'Flynn. I shall be in the train and far enough
away before they have discovered that I have gone," was her thought.

From Mrs. Tennant's house to the station was the best part of a mile,
but Kathleen was fleet of foot and soon accomplished the distance. She
was just arriving at the station when she saw Ruth Craven coming to meet
her. Ruth had enjoyed her hour with Miss Renshaw, and was altogether in
high spirits. Kathleen stopped for a minute.

"Oh, Ruth," she said, "will you come to town with me? It would be so
nice if you would. I am going to meet Aunt Katie O'Flynn. It would not
be a bit wrong of you to come. Do come--do, Ruthie."

"But I can't in this dress," said Ruth, who felt suddenly very much
tempted.

"Of course you can. Why, Aunt Katie is such a darling she'll take us out
if we want things and buy them on the spot. And what does dress matter?
We'll be back in no time. What time does your grandmother expect you
home?"

"Oh, I don't know. I told granny I did not exactly know what time I
should be back, but she certainly wouldn't expect me to be out late."

"Never mind; you are doing me a kindness. I must go to see Aunt Katie,
and it isn't convenient for the Tennants to go with me. If we go
together it won't be a bit remarkable. Do come, Ruthie. You hurt my
feelings awfully this morning; you needn't hurt them again."

"Very well," said Ruth. "I don't know London at all, and I should like
to go with you."

The two girls now turned into the railway station. Kathleen gave a
puzzled glance around her for a minute, then walked boldly up to a
porter, asked him to direct her to the proper place to book for London.
He showed her the right booking-office, and she secured two first-class
single tickets for herself and Ruth. The girls were directed to the
right platform, and in process of time found themselves in the train. It
so happened that they had a compartment to themselves. Kathleen had now
quite got over her burst of anger, and was in the highest spirits.

"This is fun," she said. "It is so awfully nice to have met you! Do you
know that Miss Ravenscroft--the Great Unknown, as we Wild Irish Girls
call her--had the cheek to send me a letter?"

Ruth looked attentive and grave.

"She wanted me to go and see her at six o'clock. Well, it is half-past
six now, and she will have to whistle for me. Ruth, darling, you don't
know how pretty you look; and even though you have deserted me, and
won't join my darling, beloved society, yet I shall always love you."

Here Kathleen seated herself near Ruth and flung one arm around her
waist.

"But," said Ruth, disentangling herself from Kathleen's embrace, "you
don't mean that Miss Ravenscroft--Miss _Ravenscroft_--wanted you to go
and see her and you didn't go?"

"No, I didn't go. Why should I go? Miss Ravenscroft has nothing whatever
to do with me."

"Oh, Kathleen! she is your mistress--the head-mistress of the Great
Shirley School."

"Well, and what about that? Aunty--my darling, my own dear, sweet aunt
Katie O'Flynn--sent me a telegram to meet her in town. She is at the
Hotel Metropole. Ruth, do you know where it is?"

"I haven't the most remote idea."

"Oh, well, we'll get there somehow. Never mind now; don't look so
worried. I shall be sorry I asked you to come with me if you look any
graver."

"But you make me feel grave, Kathleen," said Ruth. "Oh, Kathleen, I
can't tell how you puzzle me. Of course, I know that you are very pretty
and fascinating, and that lots and lots of girls love you, and will
always love you. You are a sort of queen in the school. Perhaps you are
not the greatest queen, but still you are a queen, and you could lead
the whole school."

"That would be rather fun," said Kathleen.

"But you'd have to change a good bit. You'd have to be just as
fascinating, just as pretty, but different somehow--I mean--"

"Oh, do tell me what you mean, and be quick. We'll be in London before
long."

"You wouldn't disobey Miss Ravenscroft if you were to be our real
queen."

"Then I'll not be your queen, darling, for I shall disobey Miss
Ravenscroft when it comes to a case of obliging her or dear, darling,
precious aunty."

Ruth said no more. In her heart of hearts she was very much distressed.
She was sorry for her own sake that she had met Kathleen, and that she
was going with her to London; but on the other hand she was glad that
she was with the girl, who by herself might have got into a serious
scrape.

Finally the two found themselves standing, very forlorn and slightly
frightened, on one of the big platforms at Charing Cross.

"Now what are we to do?" said Kathleen.

"We must ask the way, of course," was Ruth's answer. "Here is a porter
who looks kind."

She went up to the man.

"Have you any luggage in the van, miss?" was the immediate inquiry.

"No," she answered.

Ruth was quietly although shabbily dressed; but she had on gloves, a
neat hat, and a neat necktie. Kathleen had on a very shabby coat, a most
unsuitable cap of bright-blue velvet on her clustering masses of curls,
and no necktie and no gloves.

"What could be the matter with the pretty young lady?" thought the man.

Ruth spoke in her gentle tones.

"We want to go to see a lady at the Hotel Metropole," she said. "Which
is the Hotel Metropole?"

"Oh, miss, it is quite close. You have only to go out of the station,
take the second turning to your left, walk down Northumberland Avenue,
and you'll be there."

"But where is Northumberland Avenue? We don't know anything about
London," interrupted Kathleen.

"If you will allow me to put you two ladies into a cab, the cabman will
take you to the Hotel Metropole. It's only a step away, but you'd better
drive if you don't know your London."

"We have never been in our London before," said Kathleen in a voice of
intense pleasure.

They now tripped confidently along by the side of the porter. He took
them into the yard outside the station, and called a four-wheeler.

"No, no; one of those two-wheeled things," said the little girl.

A hansom was summoned, and the children were put in. The driver was
directed to take them to the Metropole, and they started off.

"Ah!" said Kathleen, looking with great appreciation around her--"ah!
the lights--aren't they just lovely? And see--see that water. That must
be the Thames. Oh, Ruth, mayn't we stand up in the hansom? We could see
ever so much better standing."
