"Who do you mean by 'they,' Dove?"

"The three young ladies, of course."

"Oh, I suppose so; but I neither know nor care--I wash my hands of
them from this day forward!"

"Well, then, look here, Mrs. Dove, my love," said the husband, "I
_don't_ wash my hands of them--no, not by no means. It's all right if
they're gone to Miss Egerton's--there are trap-doors in the roof at
Miss Egerton's; I know the build of the house. There are trap-doors in
the roof, and quarter-day is coming on, Mrs. Dove, my only love!"

"Law, Dove! you have a most startling way of saying them poetic
lines," answered his wife.




CHAPTER XXXI.

A "CONTINUAL READER."


A few days after the girls were comfortably settled in their new
quarters Primrose went out. She went out all alone, for by this time
London streets and London ways were familiar to her. Neatly and very
quietly dressed, with the usual serene light on her sweet face, and
that dignity about her whole bearing which prevented any one from ever
being rude to her, she went, not to her china-painting as usual, but
simply to take exercise in the London streets.

The fact was, Primrose wanted to be alone--she wanted to think out a
problem. She was beginning to be perplexed, and even slightly alarmed.
Her alarm was not caused at present by anything in connection with
Daisy, for Daisy seemed almost bright and well again; but money
matters were not too prosperous with the young housekeeper, the life
of independence she had hoped to attain for herself and her sisters
seemed to recede from her view day by day--the china-painting brought
in no apparent results; Mr. Jones never did anything except "all but"
get customers--the quarter's allowance from Mr. Danesfield looked
smaller and more inadequate to Primrose the more her experience in
expenses grew, and now something about Miss Egerton added to her
cares. It seemed to Primrose that Miss Egerton was holding back
something--she had always been frank and open with the girls, but when
Primrose asked her how much their furniture had cost, and whether she
had opened Mr. Danesfield's letter to pay for it the good lady's brow
had grown troubled, and she had replied--

"I am busy to-day--I will go fully into the matter presently,
Primrose;" but when morning after morning Miss Egerton was still too
busy to go into the question, Primrose began to have nameless little
fears, and had to scold herself for being fanciful and nervous.

On this afternoon she walked quickly, and without being herself aware
of it she presently found herself in the neighborhood of Regent's
Park, and at last not very far from Penelope Mansion. She was thinking
hard, and paying little attention to any of the objects that met her
eyes, when she was suddenly pulled up short by a round and hearty
voice, a fat hand was laid on her shoulder, and she found herself face
to face with Mrs. Dredge.

"Well, my dear, how are you, Miss Mainwaring? Oh, yes, I'm delighted
to see you. You did give us the slip, you and your pretty sisters. I
don't think Mrs. Flint quite liked it; we all questioned her, me, and
Miss Slowcum, and Mrs. Mortlock, and we said, 'At any rate give us
their address, Mrs. Flint--we take an interest in them--they are
pretty-spoken young ladies, and they were a credit to the
establishment.' But Mrs. Flint only frowned and bit her lips, and
colored. Then Mrs. Mortlock put her foot in it as far as Miss Slowcum
was concerned, for she said 'I'm sorry the girls from the country have
departed, and that they found us so disagreeable that they had to do
it unbeknown and quiet, for it was a real pleasure for ancient females
like ourselves to have young and bonny creatures about us.'

"Miss Slowcum got very stiff at this, for she apes youth, my dear, in
a way that's past belief, and Mrs. Mortlock had her little fling on
purpose. Well, dear, and how are you? You look thin to what you were,
and a bit pale. How is that pretty little sister of yours who wanted
the cheap lodgings, that was to be so clean you might eat on the
floor?"

"We are all fairly well, Mrs. Dredge," replied Primrose, when she
could edge in a word--for Mrs. Dredge was extremely voluble--"we are
fairly well, only Daisy has been suffering from cold. We have got
clean rooms too, thank you, Mrs. Dredge."

"Well now, dear, I'm glad to hear it; that pretty child amused me when
she spoke of cheapness and cleanliness going hand in hand. Bless her
little heart! little she knew.

"We have learned a great many things we knew nothing about six months
ago Mrs. Dredge," answered Primrose, a tinge of sadness in her voice.
"Yes, I am very glad to see you again--please, remember me to all the
ladies at Penelope Mansion."

"Oh, my dear, they'll be glad to hear I met you--even Miss Slowcum
will, though she's a little bitter on the subject of age; and as to
that poor Sarah Maria, or Sarah Martha--I forget which she is, only I
know she's Sarah, with something tacked to the end of it--why, she'll
be fairly skipping with delight. That poor girl, she just worships the
ground you three young ladies walk on."

"Oh, do give our dear love to Poppy," said Primrose tears springing to
her eyes.

Those sudden tears did not escape the notice of fat, good-humored Mrs.
Dredge.

"I hope you're getting on comfortably in every way, dear," she said,
"money matters and all. I had sore worries myself in the money line
until poor Dredge made his fortune in the chandlery business. My dear,
I was almost forgetting to tell you that we've had an affliction at
the Mansion."

"I'm very sorry," began Primrose.

"Yes, dear, and it's an affliction which is likely to continue, and to
grow heavier. It's poor Mrs. Mortlock, dear--I'm afraid she's losing
her sight, and very troublesome she'll be, and a worry to us all when
it's gone, for poor woman, she has a passion for politics that's
almost past bearing. Miss Slowcum and me, we take turns to read her
the papers now, but though our throats ache, and we're as hoarse as
ravens, we don't content her. Mrs. Mortlock is looking out for what
she is pleased to call a 'continual reader,' dear, and what I'm
thinking is that perhaps you or your sister would like to try for the
post--I believe you'd suit her fine, and she can pay well, for she's
fairly made of money."

Primrose colored. To read to Mrs. Mortlock was about the last
occupation she would have chosen, but the thought of the purse at home
which was getting so sadly light, and the feeling that after all her
efforts she might never do much in the china-painting line, caused her
to reflect anxiously.

"May I think about it and let you know, Mrs. Dredge?"

"No, no, my dear, not by any means, for she has advertised, and they
are pouring in. Poor Sarah Susan is almost off her head answering the
door to them. Stout readers and thin readers, old readers and young
readers, they're all flying to the post, as if there were nothing in
life so delightful as being 'continual reader' of politics to poor
Mrs. Mortlock. She ought to have been suited long ago, but I've a
strong hope that she isn't, for she's as fidgety and particular as if
she were a countess. Your best chance, dear, is to come straight home
with me--we'll see Mrs. Mortlock on the spur of the moment, and try
and arrange it all."

In this way Primrose obtained her first situation, for Mrs. Mortlock
was glad to feel her soft young hand, and her gentle and refined tones
had an instant and soothing effect on the poor lady's irritable
nerves.

"My dear," she said, "what with rasping voices, and piping voices, and
droning voices, to say nothing of voices that were more like growls
than anything else, I felt nearly demented. Yes, Miss Mainwaring, this
is a sore affliction that has befallen me, and I knew there was
nothing before me but the services of a 'continual reader,' for poor
Mrs. Dredge, though she did her best, was decidedly thick in her
utterance; and Miss Slowcum, oh dear! the affectations of Miss Slowcum
were quite beyond me, besides our differing altogether in politics--me
holding for Gladstone, and she fairly hating the poor man. You'll do
very well, Miss Mainwaring, and I hope you'll study your papers well
while you're at home, so that you may know what you are reading about,
and read intelligent accordingly. I always like both sides of the
question, which was my poor husband's habit, for he was a very
intelligent man, Miss Mainwaring. And then I like my bit of gossip and
my Court news. I adore my Queen, Miss Mainwaring, and it is a real
_bona fide_ pleasure to learn when and where she drives abroad. You'll
come, please, in the morning, and set to work at your continual
reading. Salary, fifteen shillings a week certain. Now, now, you
needn't hesitate at taking what I call a lofty salary, for it always
was my way to pay down handsome. There now, that's settled. Shake
hands, dear; good-bye till the morning. Sarah Maria, you needn't show
up no more of the 'continual readers,' for I believe I have made a
bargain with this young lady."

"Oh, Miss Primrose!" said poor Poppy, as she showed her out, "I am
more than thankful that you are coming here, miss--that's for my sake,
miss, though I'm dreadful afraid you'll suffer yourself. I'm awful
afraid you'll get muddled in your head, miss, for as to mine, it has
swam away long ago. I begin not to know in the least who I am, miss.
Poppy, why it ain't nowhere! only I'm Sarah, with all the other words
in the dictionary tacked on to it. I don't mind it now; they say folks
can get accustomed to anything, so I don't mind being Sarah, and
everything else too, only it has a very swimming effect on the head,
Miss Primrose. Oh, my darling young lady! do ask Miss Jasmine and Miss
Daisy to let me come and see them."

"Yes, Poppy, you shall come and see us all again, if you will only
keep our little secret, for just at present we don't want the people
at home to know where we are; and remember, Poppy dear, that you are
always Poppy to us three girls."

"I'll hold on to that," said poor Poppy, "when my head's fairly
reeling. I'll clutch on to it, and hold firm. Poppy, which means a
tare, I am, to my own dear young ladies. Oh dear! oh dear! they're
calling me--it's Sarah Matilda this time. Good-bye until to-morrow,
dear Miss Primrose."




CHAPTER XXXII.

JASMINE BEGINS TO SOAR.


When Primrose went home and told her sisters and Miss Egerton what she
had done, Jasmine's eyes had grown first bright, and then misty.

"To be continual reader to Mrs. Mortlock!" she exclaimed. "Oh,
Primrose, it is an act of self-denial to you--it is, isn't it? Own at
once that you were very brave to do it, darling."

"I don't think so," said Primrose; "there may be a certain little
amount of drudgery in it, and perhaps I would rather have orders to
paint beautiful roses and lilies on china plates, but you see,
Jasmine, this work has been sent to me--I think God sent it, and I
must not refuse it because perhaps I would like something else
better."

"That's bravely spoken, Primrose," said Miss Egerton who was sitting
by, for she often spent odd half-hours with the girls. "Look at
everything in the same spirit, my love; try to see God's hand in all
the little events, and you will have a brave life and a happy one."

"And a successful, I hope," added Jasmine. "Miss Egerton, how awful it
would be if we girls were to fail!"

"My Prince says," here interrupted Daisy, "that whenever we do a good
thing and a right thing, we bring something fresh and lovely into our
Palace Beautiful. Isn't it nice to think that dear old Primrose has
done this?"

"The money, too, will be of great help," added Primrose. "Why,
Jasmine, we may even be able to save a little."

Thus encouraged, Primrose commenced her duties, and though her throat
ached--and she certainly found the continual reading of politics,
interspersed with very sharp discussions on the part of Mrs. Mortlock,
anything but agreeable--she did not give way.

Miss Egerton was pleased to see Primrose so bright, and was glad to
know she was really earning something; and Jasmine and Daisy prepared
the cheeriest welcomes possible for her evening after evening on her
return.

Jasmine, however, by no means intended Primrose to be the only one who
was to bring assistance to the household purse.

Jasmine knew that they had all come up to London on purpose to be
educated, or to educate themselves, sufficiently to earn their
livings. She considered that six months' experience of the ups and
downs of London life might bear fruit in her case as well as in her
sister's.

Jasmine was supposed to be having her style formed by Miss Egerton's
daily tuitions, but Miss Egerton's words of encouragement over her
pupil's productions were decidedly meagre; and Jasmine, though she
loved her, had long ago confided to Daisy that she considered Miss
Egerton's manner had a damping effect on enthusiasm.

One bitterly cold March day Jasmine had been sitting for hours
scribbling away at her novel. Daisy petted the cat, looked over some
well-known picture-books, and finally sank back into the recesses of
one of the most comfortable chairs in the room and began to think
about the Prince.

"Don't go to sleep, Daisy," called out Jasmine presently. "I'm coming
over in a minute to consult you."

Nothing could possibly be more gratifying to Daisy than to know that
Jasmine wished to ask her advice. She accordingly roused herself,
ceased to think of the Prince, and said, in a very bright little
voice--

"I'll help you the best I can, Jasmine."

"It's just this," said Jasmine, dashing down her pen on the top of
her manuscript, and causing thereby a great blot--"it's just this,
Daisy; I've got to do something, and you have got to help me."

"Oh, I'm sure if I can," said little Daisy, still in that slightly
patronizing voice, for the little maid's head was almost turned by
being thus appealed to. "Is it to sew on buttons for you, Jasmine? for
though I don't like sewing on buttons, I'll do it, or even--even--I'll
darn your stockings, dear Jasmine."

Jasmine laughed.

"It's nothing of that kind, Eyebright; it's something much, much more
important. You know, Daisy, what we came up to London for--why, of
course you know why we left all our dear friends, and are living in
about the very dullest part of London--of course you know?"

"Was it?" said Daisy, looking dubious; "was it--I never could quite
make out--because Primrose did not like Mrs. Ellsworthy?"

"Oh, you silly, silly little thing! What a dreadful thing to get into
your head, Daisy-flower! I did think you knew why we came to town, and
gave everything up, and made ourselves so miserable."

"We did make ourselves miserable," sighed Daisy, "and I had to take
Mr. Dove for my friend. I like to have him for my friend, though. What
was the reason, please, Jasmine?"

"We came to London for the glorious privilege of being independent,"
chanted Jasmine, in a majestic voice. "Daisy, I'm going to be it. I'm
going to fling my shackles to the winds. I'm going to soar."

"It sounds lovely," said Daisy. "You always were a poet, Jasmine, and
I suppose poets do talk like that; but how are you going to be
independent, Jasmine?"

"I'm going to earn money, little woman. Miss Egerton has kept me in
shackles. I've worn them patiently, but now I burst the bonds. Daisy,
I have formed a little theory. I believe girls are sent into the world
with a strong bias in a particular direction. You see, it always did
seem to be meant that dear Primrose was to be a companion, or
secretary, of some sort; for Mrs. Ellsworthy wanted her to be Mr.
Ellsworthy's secretary, and to write his letters for him. She would
not be that, even though it was her bent, and now she's got to accept
something far worse; for it really must be dreadful to be 'continual
reader' to poor old Mrs. Mortlock. Now, Daisy, what I say is
this--there's no use in wasting time or money looking after things
which don't suit us. Primrose was meant to be a secretary or continual
reader, and so she has to be one; and I have always been meant to
belong to the rather higher order of novelist or poet, and there's no
use in my being damped any longer by Miss Egerton. I don't mean to be
conceited, but I know that I have got the flutterings of a poet's
wings in my soul, and soar I must."

Jasmine looked very pretty while she was speaking, and little Daisy
admired her high-flown words, and fully believed in her genius.

"Do soar, Jasmine, darling," she said; "I have not a notion how you
are to do it, but do begin at once. It will make these rooms more than
ever like a Palace Beautiful if you take to soaring in them."

"I've nearly finished my novel," said Jasmine; "and I've also written
a poem. It is called the 'Flight of the Beautiful,' and is in seven
parts. Each part would take up two or three pages of a magazine.
To-morrow, Daisy dear, I am going to take my novel and poem into the
market. I shall offer them to the highest bidders. I won't send them
by post, for I always notice in books that, when gifted authors send
their contributions by post, they are declined with thanks, because
they aren't read. I am going to take my own manuscripts to the
publishers, Daisy, and I shall propose to them to read aloud a few
extracts."

"You can't be at all shy if you do that, Jasmine," said Daisy, looking
in a rather awe-struck way at her sister.

"Shy?" echoed Jasmine. "If one feels it, one has only to get over it.
Is that the way to conquer difficulties, Daisy?--just to be baffled by
a little nervous feeling. No, I really want to fill the purse, and I
also wish to give the publishers what I am sure they must be always
looking for; for I have looked in vain, month after month, in several
magazines, and nowhere have I seen three or four pages of continual
blank verse. I suppose they can't get it, poor things! but they will
in my 'Flight of the Beautiful!'"

"_I_ think blank verse a little dull," said Daisy, softly, and half
under her breath; but, when Jasmine frowned, she added hastily, "Of
course you're splendidly brave, dear Jasmine; and who'll go with you
to the publisher's when you do go?"

"I've been considering that," said Jasmine; "and I think I'll take
Poppy. Poppy is to have a whole holiday on Tuesday next, because her
quarter's wages are due, and I'll ask her to come with me. She'd enjoy
it--Poppy would--and very likely in the evening I'll be able to tell
you and Primrose that I've made my first success. Oh, how happy and
how proud I shall be!"

A few minutes afterwards Jasmine went out, and Daisy wondered solemnly
if her bent in life was to keep on friendly terms with Mr. Dove.

