"I think," said Bowie, "that we'd better camp for the night in the clump
of trees that served you two so well, and, before it's dark, we'll look
around and see what spoil is to be had."

They found three rifles that had been dropped by slain or wounded
Lipans, and they were well pleased to get them, as rifles were about to
become the most valuable of all articles in Texas. They also recovered
Ned and Obed's horses, which the Indians had left in the valley,
evidently expecting to take them away, when they secured the scalps of
the two fugitives.

Ned, after the cold water and a little rest, fully recovered his
strength and poise, but the men would not let him do any work, telling
him that he had already done his share. So he sat on his log and watched
them as they prepared camp and supper. Besides being the Texans and his
own people, to whom he had come after the long journey of perils, they
made a wonderful appeal. These were the bold riders, the dauntless, the
fearless. He would not find here the pliancy, the cunning, the craft and
the dark genius of Santa Anna, but he would find men who talked
straight, who shot straight, and who feared nobody.

They were sixteen in number, and all were clad wholly in buckskin, with
fur caps upon their heads. They were heavily armed, every man carrying
at least a rifle, a pistol, and a formidable knife, invented by Bowie.
All were powerful physically, and every face had been darkened by the
sun. Ned felt that such a group as this was a match for a hundred
Mexicans or Lipans.

They worked dextrously and rapidly, unsaddling their horses and
tethering them where they could graze in the open, drawing up the dead
wood until it made a heap which was quickly lighted, and then cooking
strips of venison over the coals. There was so much life, so much
cheerfulness, and so much assurance of strength and invincibility that
Ned began to feel as if he did not have a care left. All the men already
called him Ned, and he felt that every one of them was his friend.

Karnes put a strip of venison on the sharp end of a stick, and broiled
it over the blaze. It gave out a singularly appetizing odor, and when it
was done he extended it to the boy.

"Here, Ned," he said, "take this on the end of your knife and eat it.
I'll wager that you haven't had any good warm victuals for a week, and
it will taste mighty well."

Ned ate it and asked for more. He would have done his own cooking, but
they would not let him. They seemed to take a pleasure in helping him,
and, used as they were to hardships and danger, they admired all the
more the tenacity and courage that had brought a boy so far.

"We can promise you one thing, Ned," said "Deaf" Smith. "We'll see that
you and Obed have a full night's good sleep and I guess you'll like
that about as much as a big supper."

"We certainly will," said Obed. "Sleep has got a lot of knitting to do
in my case."

"The same is true of me," said Ned, who had now eaten about all he
wanted, "but before I roll up in the blankets I want to say something to
you men."

His voice had suddenly become one of great gravity, and, despite his
youth, it impressed them. The darkness had now come, but the fire made a
center of light. They had put themselves in easy attitudes about it,
while the horses grazed just beyond them.

"I come from Texas myself," said Ned, "although I was born in Missouri.
My parents are dead, and I thought I could make my way in Texas. I met
Mr. Austin who is related to me, and he was good to me more than once.
When he went to Mexico to talk with the rulers there about our troubles
I went with him. I was a prisoner with him in the City of Mexico, and I
often saw the dictator, Santa Anna, and his brother-in-law, General
Cos."

Ned paused and a deep "Ah!" came from the men. They felt from his face
and manner that he was telling no idle tale.

"They said many fine words to Mr. Austin," said Ned, "and always they
promised that they were going to do great things for Texas. But much
time passed and they did nothing. Also they kept Mr. Austin a prisoner.
Then I escaped. I believed that they were preparing to attack Texas. I
was right. I was recaptured and both President Santa Anna and General
Cos told me so. They told me because they did not believe I could escape
again, as they sent me to one of the submarine dungeons under the castle
of San Juan de Ulua. But even under the sea I found a friend, Obed
here, and we escaped together. We have since seen the army of General
Cos, and it is marching straight upon Texas. Santa Anna means to crush
us and to execute all our leaders."

Again came that deep murmurous "Ah!" and now it was full of anger and
defiance.

"You say you saw the army of Cos?" asked Bowie.

"Yes," replied Ned, "I saw it before I was taken to the castle of San
Juan de Ulua and afterward in Northern Mexico, marching straight toward
Texas. It is a large force, cannon and lancers, horse and foot."

"And so Santa Anna has been lulling us with promises, while sending an
army to destroy us."

Bowie's tone, so gentle and mild before, grew hard and bitter. The
firelight flickered across his face and to Ned the blue eyes looked as
cold and relentless as death. He had heard strange stories of this man,
tales of desperate combats in Mississippi and Louisiana, and he believed
now that they were true. He could see the daring and determined soul
behind the blue eyes.

While Ned was talking "Deaf" Smith was leaning forward with his hand
behind his ear. When the story was finished the dark face grew still
darker, but he said nothing. The others, too, were silent but Ned knew
their minds. It was a singular little company drawn from different
American states, some from the far north, but all alike in their
devotion to the vague region then known as Texas.

"I think, Ned," said Bowie, "that you have served Texas well. We have
been divided among ourselves. Many have believed in propitiating Santa
Anna and Mexico, but how can you propitiate a tiger that is about to
devour you? We cannot trust Mexico, and we cannot trust Santa Anna.
Your message settles all doubt and gives us time to arm. Thank God we
refused to give up our rifles, because we are going to need them more
than anything else on earth. It was surely more than luck that brought
us this way. We came down here, Ned, on an expedition, half for hunting
and half for scouting, and we've found more than we expected. We must
start for Texas in the morning. Is it not so, boys?"

"Yes," they answered all together.

"Then, Ned," said Bowie, "you can tell your story to Sam Houston and all
our leaders, and I think I know what they will say. We are few, but
Santa Anna and all Mexico cannot ride over Texas. And now it's time for
you and Obed to go to sleep. I should think that after being chased
nearly a week you'd be glad to rest."

"We are," said Obed, answering for them both, "and once more we want to
thank you. If you hadn't come the Lipans would certainly have got us."

The night, as usual, was chilly, and Ned spread his blankets in front of
the fire. His saddle formed a pillow for his head, and with one blanket
beneath him, another above him, and the stalwart Texans all about him,
he felt a deep peace, nay more, a great surge of triumph. He had made
his way through everything. Santa Anna and Cos could not attack the
Texans, unwarned. Neither Mexicans nor Lipans, neither prisons nor
storms nor deserts had been able to stop him.

After the triumphant leap of his blood the great peace possessed him
entirely. His mind and body relaxed completely. His eyelids drooped and
the flames danced before him. The figures of the men became dusky.
Sometimes he saw them and sometimes he did not. Then everything
vanished, and he fell into a long and sound sleep.

While Ned and Obed slept, the Texans conferred earnestly. They knew that
every word Ned had told was true, and they felt that the trouble between
Texas and Mexico had now come to a head. It must be war. They were fully
aware of the fearful odds, but they did not believe the Texans would
flinch. Three or four rode a long distance around the camp and scouted
carefully. But, as they had expected, they saw no sign of the Lipans,
who undoubtedly were still fleeing southward, carrying in their hearts a
healthy fear of the long rifles of the Texans.

After the scouts came back most of the men went to sleep, but Bowie and
"Deaf" Smith watched all through the night. Ned moved a little toward
the morning and displaced the blanket that lay over him. Bowie gently
put it back.

"He's a good boy as well as a brave one," he said to Smith, "and we owe
him a lot."

"Never a doubt of that," said Smith, "and he'll be with us in the coming
struggle."

When Ned awoke the dawn was barely showing, but all the horses,
including his own, were saddled and ready. They ate a brief breakfast,
and then they galloped northward over a good country. They did not
trouble to look for the army of Cos, as they knew that it was coming and
it was their object to spread the alarm as soon as possible through all
the Texas settlements. Ned, refreshed and strong, was in the center of
the troop and he rode with a light heart. Obed was on one side of him,
and "Deaf" Smith on the other.

"To-night," said Smith, "we water our horses in the Rio Grande."

"And then ho for Texas!" said Obed.

On they sped, their even pace unbroken until noon, when they made a
short rest for food and water. Then they sped north once more, Bowie,
Smith and Karnes leading the way. They said very little now, but every
one in the group was thinking of the scattered Texans, of the women and
children in the little cabins beyond the Rio Grande, harried already by
Comanches and Lipans and now threatened by a great Mexican force. They
had come from different states and often they were of differing
counsels, but a common danger would draw them together. It was
significant that Smith, the New Yorker, and Bowie, the Georgian, rode
side by side.

All through the hot sun of the afternoon they rode on. Twilight found
them still riding. Far in the night they waded and swam the Rio Grande,
and the next morning they stood on the soil that now is Texas.




CHAPTER XIV

THE RING TAILED PANTHER


Texas was then a vague and undetermined name in the minds of many. It
might extend to the Rio Grande or it might extend only to the Nueces,
but to most the Rio Grande was the boundary between them and Mexico. So
felt Ned and all his comrades. They were now on the soil which might own
the overlordship of Mexico, but for which they, the Texans, were
spending their blood. It was strange what an attachment they had for it,
although not one of them was born there. Beyond, in the outer world,
there was much arguing about the right or wrong of their case, but they
knew that they would have to fight for their lives, and for the homes
they had built in the wilderness on the faith of promises that had been
broken. That to them was the final answer and to people in such a
position there could be no other.

The sight of Texas, green and fertile, with much forest along the
streams was very pleasant to Ned, and those rough frontiersmen in
buckskin who rode with him were the very men whom he had chosen. He had
been in a great city, and he had talked with men in brilliant uniforms,
but there everything seemed old, so far away in thought and manner from
the Texans, and he could never believe the words of the men in brilliant
uniforms. There, the land itself looked ancient and worn, but here it
was fresh and green, and men spoke the truth.

They rode until nearly noon, when they stopped in a fine grove of oaks
and pecans by the side of a clear creek. The grass was also rich and
deep here, and they did not take the trouble to tether their horses. Ned
was exceedingly glad to dismount as he was stiff and sore from the long
ride, and he was also as hungry as a wolf.

"Lay down on the grass, Ned, an' stretch yourself," said Karnes. "When
you're tired the best way to rest is to be just as lazy as you can be.
The ground will hold you up an' let your lungs do their own breathin'.
Don't you go to workin' 'em yourself."

Ned thought it good advice and took it. It was certainly a great luxury
to make no physical exertion and just to let the ground hold him up, as
Karnes had said. Obed imitated his example, stretching himself out to
his great thin length on the soft turf.

"Two are company and twenty are more so," he said, "especially if you're
in a wild country. My burden of care isn't a quarter as heavy since we
met Jim Bowie, and all the rest of these sure friends and sure shots.
This isn't much like San Juan de Ulua is it, Ned? You wouldn't like to
be back there."

The boy looked up at the vast blue dome of the heavens, then he listened
a moment to the sigh of the free wind which came unchecked a thousand
miles and he replied with so much emphasis that his words snapped:

"Not for worlds, Obed!"

Obed White laughed and rolled over in the grass.

"I do believe you mean that, Ned," he said, "and the sentiments that you
speak so well are also mine own."

Smith and Karnes went a little distance up the creek, and found some
buffalo feeding. They shot a young cow, and in an incredibly short space
tender steaks were broiling over a fire. After dinner all but two went
to sleep. They understood well the old maxim that the more haste the
less speed, and that the sleep and rest through the hours of the
afternoon would make them fit for the long riding that was yet before
them.

At five o'clock they were in the saddle again, and rode until midnight.
The next morning the party separated. The men were to carry the blazing
torch throughout the settlements, telling all the Texans that the
Mexicans were coming and that they were bringing war with them. But
Bowie, "Deaf" Smith and Karnes kept on with Ned and Obed.

"We're taking you to Sam Houston," said Bowie to Ned. "He's to be the
general of all the Texan forces, we think, and we want you to tell him
what you've told us."

They began now to see signs of settlements in the river bottoms where
the forests grew. There were stray little log cabins, almost hidden
among the oaks and pecans. Women and children came forth to see the
riders go by. The women were tanned like the men, and often they, too,
were clothed in buckskin. The children, bare of foot and head, seemed
half wild, but all, despite the sun, had the features of the Northern
races.

Ned could not keep from waving his hand to them. These were his people,
and he was thankful that he should have so large a part in the attempt
to save them. But he only had fleeting glimpses because they rode very
fast now. He was going to Sam Houston, famous throughout all the
Southwest, and Houston was at one of the little new settlements some
distance away. He would tell his story again, but he knew that the
Texans were already gathering. The messengers detached from the group
had now carried the alarm to many a cabin.

Several times at night they saw points of fire on the horizon and they
would pause to look at them.

"That's the Texans signaling to one another," said "Deaf" Smith.
"They're passing the word westward. They're calling in the buffalo
hunters and those who went out to fight the Comanches and Lipans."

Ned had alternations of hope and despondency. He saw anew how few the
Texans were. Their numbers could be counted only in thousands, while the
Mexicans had millions. Moreover, the tiny settlements were scattered
widely. Could such a thin force make a successful defense against the
armies of Cos and Santa Anna? But after every moment of despair, the
rebound came, and he saw that the spirit of the people was indomitable.

At last, they rode into a straggling little village by the side of a
wide and shallow river. All the houses were built of logs or rough
boards, and Ned and his companions dismounted before the largest. They
had already learned that Sam Houston was inside. Ned felt intense
curiosity as they approached. He knew the history of Houston, his
singular and picturesque career, and the great esteem in which he was
held by the Texans. A man with a rifle on his shoulder stood by the door
as guard, but he recognized Smith and Karnes, and held the door open for
the four, who went inside without a word.

Several men, talking earnestly were sitting in cane-bottomed chairs, and
Ned, although he had never seen him before, knew at once which was
Houston. The famous leader sat in the center of the little group. He was
over six feet high, very powerful of build, with thick, longish hair,
and he was dressed carefully in a suit of fine dark blue cloth. He rose
and saluted the four with great courtesy. Despite his long period of
wild life among the Indians his manners were distinguished.

"We welcome you, Smith and Karnes, our faithful scouts," he said, "and
we also welcome those with you who, I presume, are the two escaped from
the City of Mexico."

It was evident that the story of Ned and Obed had preceded them, but
Karnes spoke for them.

"Yes, General," he said. "They are the men, or rather the man and the
boy. These are Obed White and Ned Fulton, General Houston."

Houston's glance ran swiftly over them. Evidently he liked both, as he
smiled and gave each a hearty hand.

"And now for your story," he said.

Obed nodded toward Ned.

"He's the one who saw it all," he said, "and he's the one who brings the
warning."

Ned was a little abashed by the presence of Houston and the other
important Texans, but he told the tale once more rapidly and succinctly.
Every one listened closely. They were the chief members of the temporary
Texan government, but the room in which they met was all of the
frontier. Its floor was of rough boards. Its walls and ceilings were
unplastered. There was not a single luxury and not all of the
necessities.

When Ned finished, Houston turned to the others and said quietly:

"Gentlemen, we all know that this is war. I think there need be no
discussion of the point. It seems necessary to send out more messengers
gathering up every Texan who will fight. Do you agree with me?"

All said yes.

"I think, too," said Houston, "that Santa Anna may now send Mr. Austin
back to us. He does not know how well informed we are, and doubtless he
will believe that such an act will keep us in a state of blindness."

"And you, my brave and resourceful young friend, what do you want to
do?"

"Fight under you."

Houston laughed and put his hand affectionately on the boy's shoulder.

"I see that there is something of the courtier in you, too," he said.
"It is not a bad quality sometimes, and you shall have the chance that
you ask, later on. But meanwhile, you and Mr. White would better rest
here, a while. You may have some scouting and skirmishing to do first.
We must feel our way."

Ned and Obed now withdrew, and received the hospitality of the little
town which was great, at least so far as food was concerned. They longed
for action, but the rest was really necessary. Both body and spirit were
preparing for greater deeds. Meanwhile, Houston, the scouts and the
Texan government went away, but Ned and Obed stayed, awaiting the call.
They knew that the signals had now passed through all Texas and they did
not think that they would have to remain there long.

They heard soon that Houston's prediction in regard to Austin had come
true. Santa Anna had released him, and he had arrived in Texas. But he
had not been cajoled. His eyes had been opened at last to the designs of
the dictator and immediately upon his return to Texas he had warned his
countrymen in a great speech. Meanwhile, the army of Cos was approaching
San Antonio, preceded by the heralds of coming Texan ruin.

Ned and Obed sat under the shade of some live oaks, when a horseman came
to the little village. He was a strange man, great in size, dressed in
buckskin, very brown of countenance and with long hair, tied as the
western Indians would wear it. He was something of a genial boaster,
was this man, and he was known up and down the Texas border as the Ring
Tailed Panther although his right name was Martin Palmer. But he had
lived long among the Osage, Kiowa and Pawnee Indians, and he was
renowned throughout all the Southwestern country for his bravery, skill
and eccentricity. An Indian had killed a white man and eaten his heart.
He captured the Indian and compelled him to eat until he died. When his
favorite bear dog died he rode sixty miles and brought a minister to
preach a sermon over his body. A little boy was captured on the
outskirts of a settlement by some Comanche Indians. He followed them
alone for three hundred miles, stole the boy away from them in the
night, and carried him back safely to his father and mother.
