
"Which gives him a pow'ful sight uv freedom," said Long Jim.

"When he told them to stop they took away their balls and chain," said
Henry, "and sent me back here. Alvarez realized that he had gone too far,
but I think that he fears Father Montigny for other reasons, too. The
priest may put the Governor General on his guard."

"So we ain't alone," said Long Jim musingly. "Curious how you git help
when you ain't expectin' it. The wicked hev it their way fur a while, an'
then they don't. They don't ever seem able to finish up their work.
Sometimes I think the right is jest like a river flowin' on in its nateral
channel, an' boun' to git to the sea after a while, no matter what
happens. The wrong is all them dams, an' san' bars an' snags, and brush
an' drift-wood that people an' chance pile up in the way. They do choke up
the waters, an' send 'em around in other channels, an' make a heap uv
trouble, but by and by them waters git to the sea jest the same."

"I hope so, Jim," said Paul.

"Now thar ain't no doubt uv what I say," said Long Jim. "Take this case uv
ourn. Jest when we need it most fur a thousand miles uv river travel we
git a bee-yu-ti-ful boat, all fitted up with everything we want. Jest when
that Spaniard gits his paws on us, he don't git his paws on one uv us, an'
that's Shif'less Sol out thar in the woods. An' so long ez Shif'less Sol
is free out thar in the woods we're mighty nigh free ourselves. Then, when
this same Spaniard is ready to load irons on Henry in a way that no
free-born man kin stand, in pops a priest who likes us--an' we don't
belong to his church either--an' puts a stop to the whole thing."

While they were talking Francisco Alvarez also was busy with a kindred
theme, as he entertained a guest. That guest was Father Montigny, to whom
he had made up his mind to be courteous, although he would not condescend
to any further apology. He ordered that the priest should receive food and
attention, and that men should look after and replenish his canoe which
was now tied in the bayou. After all these orders were given, Alvarez sat
in the great room of Beaulieu and smoked the cigarro of his time.

There was a bitter drop in the well of his satisfaction. The coming of the
priest had been unforeseen and unfortunate. He knew Father Montigny, and
Father Montigny knew him. Now how much did Father Montigny know of his
plans? That was the important question.

While he was yet speaking, Father Montigny, whom a very little of rest and
food always sufficed, entered the room, his manner full of austerity.
Francisco Alvarez rose, all blandness and courtesy.

"Be seated, Father," he said. "It is a poor place that we have here, but
we give you of our best. Who would deserve it more than you, a man of such
long travels and such great hardships in the holiest of all causes?"

The face of the priest did not relax. He sat down upon one of the cane
chairs and gazed sternly at Alvarez. Truly, it is a terrible thing to meet
the accusing gaze of a man who fears neither torture, nor death, nor the
world to come! The accusation is likely to be true. Alvarez looked away.
Twice within one day he who, with reason, thought himself so courageous
had been forced to yield to the gaze of another, and his heart was full of
angry rebellion. But he knew that knowledge and power dwelt under the
simple black robe of this man.

"It seems," said Father Montigny, and there was a slight touch of irony in
his tone, "that I came at the right moment."

Francisco Alvarez compelled his face to smile, though his heart was
raging.

"I have already apologized, Father Montigny," he said, "for what I was
about to do. And yet the phrase 'about to do' is wrong. Even if you had
not come I should have repented of myself, and sent away the irons. I can
repeat, too, in my defense that I was provoked beyond endurance by this
youth's insolence."

His tone was silky, light, indolent, as if he would dismiss a trifle about
which too much had been said already. It might have been convincing to any
other man, but he felt the stern, reproving gaze of Father Montigny still
fixed upon him.

"And what of the ring and the professional swordsman?" said the priest.
"Are you to turn a youth to a gladiator, even as the blessed martyrs were
given to the lions and tigers by the Roman pagans! What of that, Francisco
Alvarez? Are such deeds to be done, here, in our day, in Louisiana, and to
pass unchallenged?"

The priest's voice rose and it cut like the sharp edge of a knife. Never
since his boyhood had Francisco Alvarez flushed more deeply, and he moved
uneasily on his cane chair.

"You give it a name that does not belong to it," he said. "It was play, or
not much more. Romildo, the swordsman, had orders not to hurt him much."

"That may or may not be true, Francisco Alvarez," said the priest,
speaking slowly and precisely. "But I have more to ask you. What of this
plot of yours to set the Indian tribes and a Spanish force with cannon
upon Kaintock? What of your plan to become Governor General in place of
Galvez? What of your intention to make distant war upon the rebel colonies
and therefore commit Spain to an alliance with England? Answer me,
Francisco Alvarez. What of these things?"

The priest rose from his seat, as he spoke, and lifted that stern,
accusing finger. Alvarez was as still as if struck by lightning. His great
plan known to this man, this man who feared not even torture, or death,
or the world to come! He shrank visibly both mentally and physically, but
then his courage came back under the spur of dreadful necessity.

"A priest can take great liberties," he said. "Sometimes I think it
scarcely fair that you of the Book may denounce us of the sword and that
we may say nothing in return, although we may be right and you may be
wrong. It is sufficient now for me to tell you that I do not know what you
are talking about. I, the Governor General! Any man may dream of that! I
have done so, and I have no doubt that many others have done the same. I
favor, too, an alliance with England, as do nearly all the Spanish
officers in Louisiana, but I am a faithful servant of His Majesty, the
King, and though I may hold my opinions, I know of no plot, either against
Bernardo Galvez or to make a war upon Kaintock."

"I have heard you, Francisco Alvarez," said the priest, "but it is for
your actions to prove the truth of your words. See to it, also, that there
is no further cruelty practised against these men from Kaintock."

"They are my prisoners," replied Alvarez, "and I mean to hold them. There
you cannot interfere, Father Montigny. They were taken in arms against us
upon our soil of Louisiana, and that they are my prisoners even you cannot
dispute."

"No," replied Father Montigny, "I do not dispute it; at least not for the
present. But if they are held as prisoners they should be sent to Bernardo
Galvez at New Orleans, and not be retained here."

He walked out without waiting for an answer, and Francisco Alvarez was
glad to see him go. Five minutes later the Spaniard sent for Braxton Wyatt
and the two remained long in consultation.

Meanwhile, something was stirring in the forest not far from Beaulieu. It
was a forest of magnolia, willow, and cypress, and of oaks, from which
hung great solemn festoons of moss. A deep still bayou cut across it, and
here and there were pools of stagnant water, in which coiling black forms
swam.

Night was deepening over the wilderness upon which the estate of Beaulieu
had made only a scratch. Pale moonlight fell over the drooping green
forest and across the deep waters of the bayou. The something that had
stirred resolved itself into the shadowy figure of a man who came out of
the heart of the forest toward its edge. He walked with a singularly agile
step. His moccasined feet made no noise when they touched the ground and
the bushes seemed to part for the passage of his body.

When the man reached the edge of the forest next to the Chateau of
Beaulieu, he paused for a long time, standing in the shadow of the trees.
Always he looked fixedly at a single building, the log hut, in which
Alvarez held his four prisoners from Kaintock. While he stood there, stray
rays of moonlight coming through the cypresses fell upon him, revealing a
tanned face, yellow hair, and a tall, athletic form. He did not look like
a Spaniard or an Acadian, or one of the Frenchmen who had emigrated from
Canada, or any kind of a West Indian. His was certainly an alien presence
in those regions.

The moon slid back behind a cloud, the silver rays failed, and the figure
of the man became more indistinct, almost a shadow, thin and impalpable.
Then he bent far over in a stooping position, passed rapidly through a
patch of scrub bushes, and came much nearer to the log prison.

At the edge of the bushes he stopped again and watched the prison for at
least a minute. Two soldiers were on watch in front of it before the
single door, two soldiers in Spanish uniform, who were suffering from
tedium, and who were quite sure, anyway that unarmed prisoners could not
escape from a one-room building of logs with but a single door, secured by
a huge, oak shutter, and two windows, each too small to admit the passage
of a boy's or man's body.

The two soldiers slouched in their walk, and presently, when their beats
met before the door, they let the butts of their guns rest on the ground,
and exchanged pleasant talk about pretty, dark girls that they had known
in far-away Spain. One boldly lighted a cigarrito and the other encouraged
by his example did likewise. Hark, what was that? "A lizard in the grass,"
said Carlos. "Yes, certainly," said Juan. They continued to smoke their
cigarritos blissfully, and talk of the pretty, dark girls that they had
known in far-away Spain.

As they smoked and talked, and found smoke, talk and company pleasant,
they did not see a shadow glide swiftly from the bushes and pass to the
rear of the log prison that they were guarding so well. Nor could they
see the shadow, since the building was now between them, resolve itself
again into the figure of a man, who stood upright against the wall, his
face at one of the little slits of windows.

Their own talk was so pleasant, and the sound of their voices was such a
cure for lonesomeness on a dark night, that they did not hear the man at
the little slit of a window utter a faint warning hiss. Nor did they hear
something a moment later fall with a slight metalic sound on the bark
floor of the prison. The sound was repeated in an instant, but still they
did not hear it, and then the figure of a man, melting back to a shadow,
glided away from the house and into the bushes and thence to the forest,
where it was lost.

Carlos and Juan chatted until their cigarritos were smoked out. Then they
shouldered their muskets and continued the watch that seemed to them so
easy. How could unarmed men escape through such a thickness of logs? The
shadow in the forest was lost to the sight of any possible Spaniard, but
not to the sight of another shadow that arose from the bushes and flitted
after it. The two shadows were now deep in the forest, but the second hung
close on the first, making no noise, and sinking quickly to the ground,
when the other looked back.

This second shadow, as it passed through a partially open space, also
revealed itself in the moonlight as a man, but a man ghastly and terrible
in appearance. He had a hideous, feline face, and he was naked, save a
breech-cloth at the waist. He carried but a single weapon, a knife in his
ready hand, but the eyes were those of the most utter savage expecting a
speedy prey.

The first shadow reached a little grove free from undergrowth and stopped.
He was about to lie down, rifle by his side, and seek sleep, but his ear,
attuned to the wilderness, caught a faint sound. It was not the wind among
the leaves, nor the gliding of a snake nor the chirp of an insect, but a
sound that was not a part of the night harmony. The sensitive ear had
given him warning, as the instinct of an animal warns that an enemy has
come.

The first shadow slid from the grove and into the undergrowth, sank low,
and, waiting, caught sight of the second shadow, the man who pursued. He
saw the naked figure, the feline face, and the ready knife in hand. The
skill and wonderful forest intuition of the second man had been matched by
those of the first.

The pursued, when he caught that glimpse of his pursuer, laid his rifle
carefully on the earth, because he did not wish a shot to be heard, and
drew his own knife. Slight as was the sound that he made the other heard
it, turned in a flash, and the two sprang at each other.

The moonlight streamed for a moment along their knife blades and then they
struck. One stepped back, and remained standing upright. The other swayed
a moment and then fell without a sound, lying upon his back.

He who lay staring with sightless eyes up at the moon was the man with the
feline face and the body naked save for the cloth at the waist. The other,
unharmed, stood, looking at him a moment or two, and then plunged deeper
into the forest.

Morning dawned. The sun swung up through a terrace of rosy clouds, and
Luiz brought the four their breakfast, _callas tous chauds_, other food of
La Louisiane, and milk and coffee. They ate and drank with a great
appetite, and it seemed to Luiz that they were quite cheerful, for which
he was truly glad, because one of these men had saved his life, and the
wounded youth who made an especial appeal to him had been subjected to
barbarous treatment. But Paul could use his injured arm already. His blood
was so healthy that the scratch of the sword healed fast.

Two or three hours later Francisco Alvarez and Braxton Wyatt entered the
prison. The renegade was not above showing by his looks that he rejoiced
in his triumph over his enemies, but the face of Alvarez was without
expression.

"I have come to tell you," said the Spaniard, "that you will be held here
subject to my will. But you will not be treated badly. At such time as I
think fit you may be taken to New Orleans."

"It seems that the words of Father Montigny were not to be despised," said
Henry maliciously.

"Father Montigny disposes of nothing here," said Alvarez. "This is to be
done because I think it best."

Then he and Wyatt went out, but that afternoon when Alvarez was sitting in
the cool shadow of the pillared portico, there came to him a man, dusty,
and riding fast, who delivered to him a document sealed with red seals,
and important in appearance.

When Alvarez read the paper he frowned, and then cursed under his breath.
It was written in plain letters and its meaning was plain, also. It stated
that Bernardo Galvez, the Governor General at New Orleans, had learned
that his brave and loyal captain, Don Francisco Louis Philip Ferdinand
Alvarez, held in his possession four prisoners from Kaintock, persons of
daring, whose presence in Louisiana might be of great significance.
Therefore His Excellency, Bernardo Galvez, Governor General of Louisiana,
commanded his trusty and loyal captain, Don Francisco Louis Philip
Ferdinand Alvarez, to bring the aforesaid four prisoners, from Kaintock,
to New Orleans at once.

"At once!" repeated Alvarez angrily to himself. "That means not next week
but now, and I am compelled to obey. To refuse or to evade would make a
breach too soon."

He sent for Braxton Wyatt and told him of the letter. The renegade was
startled, but he counseled immediate obedience from motives of policy.

"How could Galvez have known?" said Alvarez. "How could the news have
reached New Orleans so soon?"

"Perhaps the priest has told," suggested Wyatt.

"No, that is impossible. He came from up river, and I am glad to say that
he left again in his canoe this morning. Those Capuchins to whom he
belongs shall be well punished, if I gain the power in Louisiana. They
shall be expelled, every one of them, from New Orleans, and their old
rivals, the Jesuits, shall take their place. It's one of the first things
that I mean to do."

"It would be a wise thing to do," said Braxton Wyatt. He cared nothing for
either Capuchin or Jesuit, but he hated and feared Father Montigny, and
would be glad to know that he was driven from the country.

"We must start in the morning," said Alvarez. "It will not take us long to
reach New Orleans by the river, and I can spin a tale that will lull the
suspicions of Galvez."

"You can prove many things by me," said Braxton Wyatt significantly.

"Yes, Senor Wyatt, you are a good lieutenant," said Alvarez, and he meant
it. "We will make our preparations to-night and start with a strong force
in the morning. We need not bring the prisoners forth until we are ready."

Alvarez, slept peacefully that night. He had recovered his spirits, shaken
by the arrival of the King's messenger. Aided by the dexterous renegade,
Braxton Wyatt, he would soon persuade Bernardo Galvez that he had acted
for the best in the matter of the men from Kaintock.

He rose early the next morning and, as a mark of signal favor, invited
Braxton Wyatt to take breakfast with him. While they sat together Luiz
came in with a long face.

"Now what is it, my brave Luiz?" said Alvarez, who was in an exceeding
good humor, "why this saturnine countenance?"

"I beg to report, your Excellency," said Luiz, "that the Natchez Indian
whom they call The Cat had been found dead in the forest, of a knife
thrust that came out behind the shoulder."

"That is bad," said Alvarez. "Have they found out who did it?"

"No, Your Excellency. There were some signs of a struggle, and a few
traces of foot-steps, but the trail was gone before they had followed it a
dozen yards."

"We have lost a good man," said Alvarez, "a matchless spy and trailer, but
it cannot be helped. I suppose it was a quarrel with some savage like
himself. I would investigate the matter, but we have not time now. Come,
Luiz, we will take out the prisoners, and then to the boats."

He led the way across the grass to the log house,--two sentinels, again it
was Carlos and Juan--walked up and down in front of it--and the Spanish
captain was pleased at their vigilance. He gave them a very good morning
as they saluted respectfully.

"Unlock the door, Luiz," he said. "This is a strong prison and a close
one. I've no doubt our gallants from Kaintock, where there is much room,
will be glad to be outside again."

Luiz inserted the huge iron key, turned it in the lock, and threw wide the
door. Alvarez looked in, and then uttered a cry so charged with rage that
even Braxton Wyatt was startled. He pressed close up to his chief and
gazed over his shoulder.

The prison was empty!
