Many places afforded a landing, where they might have found temporary
shelter, but nothing was seen of the boat, and Haffgo ordered the
oarsmen to pass through the tunnel leading to the underground lake.

This was speedily effected, and the large boat debouched into the
wonderful body of water, so brilliantly illuminated by the glare from
the burning mountain on the western side.

Instinctively every eye was cast in that direction, but nothing
rewarded the scrutiny.  Then the vision swept along the shores, every
portion of which, as will be remembered, was in plain view.

Almost at the same moment; Ziffak uttered an excited exclamation, and
pointed to the northern shore.  As the gaze of every one was directed
thither, they caught sight of the craft for which they were so eagerly
hunting.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

WATCHING AND WAITING.

When Professor Ernest Grimcke realized that his desperate flight from
the besieged building had been attended with complete success, and that
he was standing among the dense shadows of the forest, with no enemy
near, he devoutly uncovered his head, and, looking upward, uttered his
fervent thanks to heaven for its amazing mercy.

"If ever a man was snatched from the jaws of death," he said, "I am
that man."

"And I am another," added Jared Long, who approached in the gloom.  "It
seems to me like a veritable miracle."

The New Englander explained that, after his furious dash for shelter
from the building, he did not believe his chances were any better than
those of the man he left behind him.  He started, with the intention of
making his way by a circuitous course to the river, but had not gone
far when he was struck by the baseness of his desertion of his friend.
He, therefore, turned about with the resolve to try to do something for
him, but had no more than caught sight of the structure again when he
descried the Professor coming like a whirlwind for the trees.

Long moved to the point at which he saw he was aiming, and held his
Winchester ready to open on any pursuers that might try to follow him.
He would have picked off a dozen or so, for he was cool and collected,
and fully determined to stand by his friend to the death.

Fortunately, however, for all parties concerned, none of the Murhapas
pursued the Professor, though, as has been told, a number under the
leadership of Ziffak dashed off in another direction, without
endangering the fugitives in the least.

It was a marvellous deliverance, indeed, for our friends, and they
understood the part the giant head chieftain had taken in extricating
them from the peril.  Their hearts glowed with gratitude to the savage,
whose friendship for them they could not understand, but who had proven
it in such a striking manner.

But it could not be said that they were yet free from danger; and there
was much to do before they could breathe freely.

It needed but a brief consultation to agree that after what had taken
place, it was the height of madness to attempt to push on to the
enchanted lake and burning mountain.  King Haffgo was so roused that
there was not the slightest chance of escape.  The only earthly
probability of accomplishing anything in that direction, was by
bringing a force strong enough to sweep the warlike Murhapas from their
path.

Thankful would the little party of explorers be if they were permitted
to get out of the Matto Grosso with their lives.

They waited in the margin of the wood until the return of Ziffak and
his baffled company.  It was easy to understand the clever trick played
by the chieftain upon his followers, and Grimcke and Long were
convinced that no further attempt, at least for a time, would be made
to capture them.

But being free to attend to their own safety, their thoughts naturally
turned to the missing members of the company, especially to Ashman, who
unquestionably was involved in the most imminent peril.

It was clear that his two friends could do nothing in his behalf.  They
did not know where to look for him, and such an attempt was sure to be
followed by disastrous consequences to themselves.

It was a singular conclusion to which Grimcke and Long arrived and yet
perhaps it was natural.  They believed that Ashman had escaped before
they did themselves, and that he was probably waiting at some point
down the Xingu for them.  They decided to pass in the same direction
and strive to open communication with him.

How little did they suspect that though he was for the time out of the
power of his enemies, yet the Princess Ariel was his companion, and
that instead of seeking to flee from the dangerous country, he had
actually penetrated farther into it.

After carefully reconnoitering their surroundings, therefore, the
Professor and Long approached the Xingu at a point a third of a mile
below the Murhapa village.  Everything seemed to be quiet and
motionless around them, with the exception of the river, yet they were
given precious little time for wonderment or speculation.

The first amazing sight on which their eyes rested was their own large
canoe drifting down stream.  They stood a moment, not knowing what to
make of it, but speedily reached the right conclusion: Ziffak had set
it free for their special benefit.

It was floating sideways near the middle of the Xingu, and showed there
was no one on board.

It was too invaluable to be allowed to get away from them, or to run
the risk of a passage through the rapids below.  Long decided to swim
out to it, but, before he could enter the water, the Professor showed
him that some one had anticipated them.  A short distance up the bank,
a native was in the act of entering the Xingu, while his companion
stood on the bank, evidently about to follow him.

The clear moonlight enabled the explorers to identify them as Bippo and
Pedros, the former being the one already in the water.

"Let them go," whispered the Professor, "they may as well do it for us."

Pedros was but a few strokes behind his friend, and the two were seen
to clamber over the side of the craft at the moment it came opposite
where the delighted white men were standing.

At this juncture, the Professor called to them in a guarded voice.
Their expressions of amazement were ludicrous, and it was only after
they had stared for several minutes and the call was repeated that they
comprehended that their friends were near.

Then the two showed their extravagant delight by leaping up and down
like a couple of children, and uttering cries that, to say the least,
were imprudent.

The Professor sternly ordered them to hold their peace and paddle the
boat to shore.  They set to work with a will and brought the craft to
land, only a short distance below, where the white men had reached the
river.  Instantly, they stepped on board, and with the exception of the
single absent member, our friends stood in the same situation as a
short time before.

It was Jared Long that in his flight from the beleaguered building took
the extra Winchester with him, so that the little party could not have
been better armed.  Luckily, too, there was an abundant supply of
ammunition on board, so that the old feeling of confidence came back to
the party when they once more felt they were masters of the boat and
all it contained.

Their desire now was to increase the distance between themselves and
the Murhapa village, from which all had had such a narrow escape.  When
Bippo timidly asked his masters whether they meant to return or attempt
to go any farther up the Xingu, they were assured that no such thought
was in the mind of either of the explorers.  They would only be
thankful if they could get back to the Amazon without ever meeting
another Murhapa.

This was enough for the natives, who were willing to jump overboard and
tow the boat faster than it was already going.  That, however, was
unnecessary, and they were told that they had only to obey orders as
cheerfully as they had done from the beginning and that undoubtedly
everything would come out well.

It was past midnight, when the roaring just below, which was increasing
every minute, warned them they were approaching the dangerous rapids.
Possibly the craft might have passed safely through but it would have
been imprudent to make the attempt for which no necessity existed.

Accordingly, the boat was once more run ashore and drawn against the
bank, with the view of raising it upon their shoulders to be
transported to the calmer waters below.

The four men were in the very act of lifting the craft, when to their
terror, fully a score of Aryks suddenly emerged from the wood and
surrounded them.  All were armed with the frightful javelins, a prick
from one of which was enough to cause almost instant death.

The whites could not have been caught at greater disadvantage, and
Bippo and Pedros were so overcome that they were unable to move.  Long
was on the point of opening a fusillade, when Professor Grimcke was
struck by the fact that no one of the Aryks offered to harm them.  They
chattered like a lot of magpies, and gathering round them made a
movement as if to take possession of their boat.

The New Englander would have showed fight, had not his companion said
in a low tone:

"They are friendly!  They mean to do us no harm!"

Such was the astounding truth, and it was easily explained.  Ziffak on
his way up the Xingu with his new friends had warned the Aryks that
they must do the whites no harm: they were on their way at that time to
the Murhapa village as friends, and the head chieftain told his allies
that any further hostility would be visited with the punishment of
death.

The Aryks were not likely to forget such a notice.  They had seen the
boat approaching; and, being totally unsuspicious of what had occurred
during the earlier part of the evening, were anxious to manifest their
good will by carrying the canoe around the rapids.

Jared Long could hardly credit the truth, and held himself ready for a
desperate fight; but, when the boat was lifted upon the shoulders of a
half dozen stalwart warriors who started down the shore with it, he
smiled grimly and admitted that the Professor was right.

The load was quite burdensome, but the carriers stepped off, highly
pleased with the privilege, while the rest of their party straggled
after them, the whites and their servants bringing up the rear.

Bippo and Pedros were not quite able to comprehend the extraordinary
condition of affairs, and kept close to the heels of their masters like
a couple of frightened dogs.

At the base of the rapids, the Aryks set down the boat, with great
care, saluted in their rude way, and turning about, disappeared in the
forest from which they had emerged.

"_If they only knew_," said Long when they were drifting down stream
once more.

"But they _don't_," replied the Professor, "and yet they will learn the
truth before long."

The boat was allowed to drift a half mile further, when, convinced they
had gone far enough, they ran into land, disembarked and carried it in
among the trees, where it was out of the sight of any one passing up or
down the Xingu.  Then they prepared to await the coming of Fred Ashman,
doubtful, however, whether he ever would come.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE CAVERN OF DIAMONDS.

Fred Ashman was greatly relieved when he had assisted Ariel down from
the high, rocky wall, and they had picked their way to the spot where
the little canoe had been left but a short time before.

He had felt a singular misgiving from the first about the boat, fearful
that in this region of enchantment, as it seemed to him, something
would cause it to disappear, and he and his lovely companion be left in
a most exposed and dangerous situation.

But it was found just where it had been left, and helping her in it, he
shoved it clear and then looked to her for directions as to what was to
be the next step.

The maiden now made a singular statement.  She said that some weeks
before, she had visited this place with no companion but her father.
They landed at a point which she indicated, and he ordered her to stay
on the shore until his return.  He was gone so long, however, that she
undertook a little exploration on her own account, and made a discovery
which she now hoped to turn to account.

The canoe touched at the spot she pointed out, and they stepped ashore.
She said that her parent strolled off to the left, toward a passage
which she showed, and which she had entered with him several times
before, but from which he seemed desirous to exclude her on the
occasion named.

It was while he was absent at that time, that Ariel walked some
distance to the right.  She clambered up the rocks a little way to a
clump of bushes.  She was examining a species of crimson berry, growing
upon them, when she observed a passage, which she followed far enough
to find that it led into a large cavern, whose full extent she did not
attempt to learn.  She withdrew, and, fearful of offending the king,
told him nothing about it when he returned and found her with the boat.

Ariel was confident that neither her parent nor any of her people knew
of her discovery, and she now proposed to Ashman that they should enter
the strange cavern, and remain until the present danger was over.  She
believed that if her friends or enemies, as they might be considered,
did not discover them soon, they would conclude that they had
voluntarily met death together, and would give up the hunt.

Ashman was struck with the sagacity of the lady, and eagerly agreed to
her suggestion.  It would never do to leave the canoe as a tell-tale,
and he gave it a shove which carried it far out on the lake.
Discovered in that situation, no one could tell what point on the shore
it had touched, and, being adrift, near the middle of the lake, it
would suggest the theory of suicide, which they were anxious to impress
upon their pursuers.

Carefully picking their way through the mass of brush and undergrowth
which showed remarkable vigor, considering that the revivifying
sunlight never touched it, Ashman readily found the opening described
by his companion.

It was just broad enough to allow the passage of their bodies, its
height being such that they could move by stooping slightly.  Holding
his Winchester in hand, he led the way with Ariel pressing him close.

The same fact was noticeable that struck him when paddling through the
tunnel connecting the outer and the underground lake.  The light
increased as they progressed until everything was seen with a
distinctness hardly less than that shown in the water they had just
left behind them.

Suddenly Ashman paused with an expression of amazement.  He had entered
a cavern so striking in appearance that it almost took away his wreath.

It was several acres in extent, with an arching, dome-like roof rising
fully two hundred feet above their heads.  Stalactites and stalagmites
dozens of feet in length were visible hanging from the roof and
obtruding from the floor, the latter being broken by chasms and
ravines, many of which seemed to have a depth that was fathomless.

No water was visible, but the proximity of the lake rendered it likely
that some of the abysses were filled at the bottom with the element.
It looked impossible for the lovers to advance beyond the entrance, and
yet while Ashman was standing motionless he observed that a ledge put
out on their right, along which they could make their way indefinitely,
its course being hidden by scores of intervening obstacles.

It looked like a scene of enchantment indeed, the wonderful cavern
illumined by the flood of crimson light, which was on every hand, while
the radiating point was invisible.

Ariel stood silent and waited for her companion to recover from his
astonishment.  She had viewed all this before and had witnessed so many
similar scenes that they produced less effect upon her imagination than
upon his.

By and by he looked around, and she smilingly nodded her head.  He
began picking his way along the ledge, carefully feeling his way, for a
misstep or a treacherous support was liable to precipitate him to the
fathomless depths below with the inevitable certainty of instant death.

It was while the young American was working forward in this guarded
manner, that he particularly noticed that the roof overhead, and all
parts of the walls were dotted with what seemed points of living fire.
While some were small, others were larger and gave out a light that was
dazzling to the point of blindness.

He supposed they were composed of a species of quartz or mineral, but
observing one of them within reach at his side, he reached upward with
his knife and extracted it from the shale in which it was imbedded.

Taking it in his hand he turned it over several times with increasing
curiosity.  It appeared to be a rough pebble, from which he brushed
away a portion of the dirt, so as to permit it to shine with a splendor
that would have been tenfold greater in the full light of the sun.

"Don't you know what it is?" asked Ariel with another smile at his
perplexed expression.

"I do not; can you tell me?"

"It is a diamond!"

"And," he asked, with a sweep of his arm, "are all those diamonds?"

"They are."

"Great heavens!" gasped the astounded Ashman; "we have entered a cavern
of diamonds."

"There can be no doubt of that," she calmly replied; "there are plenty
of them among the rocks along other portions of the lake, for that is
where the king has obtained them for years.  There is gold there too.
You know now the reason why he guards the approaches of the lake so
jealously.  I have seen our men digging for diamonds and they looked
just like what these seem around us."

Ashman had paused again and his eyes roved around the magnificent
scene, whose splendors were enough to turn the head of Solomon himself.
Thousands of the points were gleaming from all portions of the roof,
walls, and even on the ledge along which they were walking.  There was
enough wealth within his gaze to pay the national debt of his country
and to effect a revolution in any nation.

"I would be a fool," he reflected, "not to gather some of these while
the chance is mine, even though I may never live to carry them away."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

PURSUERS AND PURSUED.

It may be doubted whether the most cool-headed of men could find
himself in such a situation as that of Fred Ashman, without being
overwhelmed by the bewildering wealth surrounding him.  He forgot for
the time that the lives of himself and lovely companion were at stake,
and that, despite her assurance that they were the first persons who
had ever entered the wonderful cavern of diamonds, its existence might
be known or discovered by their vengeful pursuers.

With the aid of his hunting knife, he set himself to work picking out
the precious gems that were within his reach at all times.

Now and then, when some one of unusual size fell into his palm he
uttered an exclamation of delight, and turned and held it up for Ariel
