the tank, watching for the result; but in vain. The star-fish, looking
abjectly silly, lay with his white side up, without an effort to help
himself. As to the dragonet, he stuck out his nose, fixed his eyes, and
fell a-thinking. So I left them.

In Tank 38 are some Norwegian lobsters; red and white, very pretty, and
differing from the English ones in form as well as colour.

The green anemones in Tank 33 are very beautiful.

The arrangement of most of these tanks is temporary. As some
sea-gentlemen are much more rapacious than others, and as some prey upon
others, the arranging of them must have been very like the old puzzle of
the fox, the goose, and the bag of seed. Then when new creatures arrive
it necessitates fresh arrangements.

There is not much vegetation as yet in the tanks, which may puzzle some
people who have been accustomed to balance the animal and vegetable life
in their aquaria by introducing full-grown sea-weeds. But it has been
found that these often fail, and that it is better to trust to the weeds
which come of themselves from the action of light upon the invisible
seeds which float in all sea-water.

The pools are also kept healthy by the water being kept in constant
motion through the agency of pipes, steam-engines, and a huge reservoir
of sea-water.

It is not easy to speak with due admiration of the scientific skill, the
loving patience, the mindfulness of the public good which must have gone
to the forming of this Public Aquarium. With what different eyes must
innumerable "trippers" from the less-educated masses of our people look
into tide pools or crab holes, during their brief holiday at the
seaside, if they have previously been "trippers" to the Crystal
Palace, and visited the Great Aquarium.

Let us hope that it may stir up some sight-seers to be naturalists, and
some naturalists to devote their powers to furthering our too limited
friendship with the sea-gentry. How much remains to be done may be
gathered from the fact that we can as yet keep no deep-sea Merrows in
aquaria, only shore-dwellers will live with us, and not all of these.
And so insuperable, as yet, are the difficulties of transport, that
"distinguished foreigners" are rare indeed.

Still, as it stands, this Great Aquarium is wonderful--wonderful
exceedingly. There is a still greater one at Brighton, holding greater
wonders--a baby alligator amongst them--and we are very glad to hear
that one is to be established in Manchester also.

It has been well said that a love of nature is a strong characteristic
even of the roughest type of Britons. An Englishman's first idea of a
holiday is to get into the country, even if his second is apt to be a
search for the country beer-house.

Of birds, and beasts, and trees, and flowers, there is a good deal even
of rustic lore. Of the wonders of the deep we know much less.

Thousands of us can sing with understanding,

    O Lord, how manifold are thy works!
    In wisdom hast thou made them all.
    The earth is full of Thy riches.

Surely hereafter more of us shall swell the antiphon,

    So is the great and wide sea also,
    Wherein are things creeping innumerable,
    Both small and great beasts.

       *       *       *       *       *

     NOTE.--A Great Aquarium (and something more) is being made
     at Naples by a young German naturalist--Dr. Dohrn, of Stettin--at
     an expense of between L7000 and L8000, nearly all of which comes
     out of his own pocket. The ground-floor of the building (an area of
     nearly eight thousand square feet) is to hold the Great Aquarium.
     It is hoped that the money obtained by opening this to the public
     will both support the Aquarium itself, and do something towards
     defraying the expenses of the upper story of the Zoological
     Station, as it is called. This will contain a scientific library,
     including Dr. Dohrn's own valuable private collection, and tables
     for naturalists to work at, furnished with necessary appurtenances,
     including tanks supplied with a constant stream of sea-water.
     Sea-fishing and dredging will be carried on in connection with the
     establishment, to supply subjects for study. Dr. Dohrn proposes to
     let certain of these tables to governments and scientific
     societies, who will then have the privilege of giving certificates,
     which will enable their naturalists to enjoy all the benefits of
     the institution.

     Surely some new acquaintances will be made among the sea-gentry in
     this paradise of naturalists!





TINY'S TRICKS AND TOBY'S TRICKS.

TINY.


[Illustration]

"Oh Toby, my dear old Toby, you portly and princely Pug!

"You know it's bad for you to lie in the fender:--Father says that's
what makes you so fat--and I want you to come and sit with me on the
Kurdistan rug.

"Put your lovely black nose in my lap, and I'll count your great velvet
wrinkles, and comfort you with kisses.

"If you'll only keep out of the fender--Father says you'll have a fit if
you don't!--and give good advice to your poor Little Missis.

"Father says you are the wisest creature he knows, and you are but eight
years old, and three months ago I was six.

"And yet Mother says I'm the silliest little girl that she ever met
with, because I am always picking up tricks.

[Illustration]

"She does not know where I learnt to stand on one leg (unless it was
from a goose), but it has made one of my shoulders stick out more than
the other.

"It wasn't the goose who taught me to whistle up and down-stairs. I
learnt that last holidays from my brother.

"The baker's man taught me to put my tongue in my cheek when I'm writing
copies, for I saw him do it when he was receipting a bill.

"And I learnt to wrinkle my forehead, and squeeze up my eyes, and make
faces with my lips by imitating the strange doctor who attended us when
we were ill.

"It was Brother Jack himself who showed me that the way to squint is to
look at both sides of your nose.

"And then, Toby--would you believe it?--he turned round last holidays
and said--'Look here, Tiny, if the wind changes when you're making that
face it'll stay there, and remember you can't squint properly and keep
your eye on the weathercock at the same time to see how it blows.'

"But boys are so mean!--and I catch stammering from his school
friend--'_Tut-tut-tut-tut-Tom_,' as we call him--but I soon leave it off
when he goes.

"I did not learn stooping and poking out my chin from any one; it came
of itself. It is so hard to sit up; but Mother says that much my worst
trick

"Is biting my finger nails; and I've bitten them nearly all down to the
quick.

"She says if I don't lose these tricks, and leave off learning fresh
ones, I shall never grow up like our pretty great-great-grandmamma.

"Do you know her, dear Toby? I don't think you do. I don't think you
ever look at pictures, intelligent as you are!

"It's the big portrait, by Romney, of a beautiful lady, sitting
beautifully up, with her beautiful hands lying in her lap.

"Looking over her shoulder, out of lovely eyes, with a sweet smile on
her lips, in the old brocade Mother keeps in the chest, and a pretty
lace cap.

"I should very much like to be like her when I grow up to that age;
Mother says she was twenty-six.

"And of course I know she would not have looked so nice in her picture
if she'd squinted, and wrinkled her forehead, and had one shoulder out,
and her tongue in her cheek, and a round back, and her chin poked, and
her fingers all swollen with biting;--but, oh, Toby, you clever Pug! how
am I to get rid of my tricks?

"That is, if I must give them up; but it seems so hard to get into
disgrace

"For doing what comes natural to one, with one's own eyes, and legs, and
fingers, and face."


TOBY.

"Remove your arms from my neck, Little Missis--I feel unusually
apoplectic--and let me take two or three turns on the rug,

"Whilst I turn the matter over in my mind, for never was there so
puzzled a Pug!

"I am, as your respected Father truly observes, a most talented
creature.

"And as to fit subjects for family portraits and personal
appearance--from the top of my massive brow to the tip of my curly
tail, I believe myself to be perfect in every feature.

"And when my ears are just joined over my forehead like a black velvet
cap, I'm reckoned the living likeness of a late eminent divine and once
popular preacher.

[Illustration]

"Did your great-great-grandmamma ever take a prize at a show? But let
that pass--the real question is this:

"How is it that what I am most highly commended for, should in your
case be taken amiss?

"Why am I reckoned the best and cleverest of dogs? Because I've picked
up tricks so quickly ever since I was a pup.

"And if I couldn't wrinkle my forehead and poke out my chin, and grimace
at the judges, do you suppose I should ever have been--Class Pug. First
Prize--Champion and Gold Cup?

"We have one thing in common--I do _not_ find it easy to sit up.

"But I learned it, and so will you. I can't imagine worse manners than
to put one's tongue in one's cheek; as a rule, I hang mine gracefully
out on one side.

"And I've no doubt it's a mistake to gnaw your fingers. I gnawed a good
deal in my puppyhood, but chewing my paws is a trick that I never tried.

"How you stand on one leg I cannot imagine; with my figure it's all I
can do to stand upon four.

"I balance biscuit on my nose. Do you? I jump through a hoop (an
atrocious trick, my dear, after one's first youth--and a full meal!)--I
bark three cheers for the Queen, and I shut the dining-room door.

"I lie flat on the floor at the word of command--In short, I've as many
tricks as you have, and every one of them counts to my credit;

"Whilst yours--so you say--only bring you into disgrace, which I could
not have thought possible if you had not said it.

"Indeed--but for the length of my experience and the solidity of my
judgment--this would tempt me to think your mamma a very foolish person,
and to advise you to disobey her; but I do _not_, Little Missis, for I
know

"That if you belong to good and kind people, it is well to let them
train you up in the way in which they think you should go.

"Your excellent parents trained me to tricks; and very senseless some of
them seemed, I must say:

"But I've lived to be proud of what I've been taught; and glad too that
I learned to obey.

"For, depend upon it, if you never do as you're told till you know the
reason why, or till you find that you must;

"You are much less of a Prize Pug than you might have been if you'd
taken good government on trust."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Take me back to your arms, Little Missis, I feel cooler, and calmer in
my mind.

"Yes, there can be no doubt about it. You must do what your mother
tells you, for you know that she's wise and kind.

"You must take as much pains to _lose your_ tricks as I took to _learn
mine_, long ago;

"And we may all live to see you yet--'Class, Young Lady. First Prize.
Gold Medal--of a Show.'"


TINY.

"Oh, Toby, my dear old Toby, you wise and wonderful Pug!

"Don't struggle off yet, stay on my knee for a bit, you'll be much
hotter in the fender, and I want to give you a great, big hug.

"What are you turning round and round for? you'll make yourself giddy,
Toby. If you're looking for your tail, it is there, all right.

"You can't see it for yourself because you're so fat, and because it is
curled so tight.

"I dare say you could play with it, like Kitty, when you were a pup, but
it must be a long time now since you've seen it.

"It's rather rude of you, Mr. Pug, to lie down with your back to me, and
a grunt, but I know you don't mean it.

"I wanted to hug you, Toby, because I do thank you for giving me such
good advice, and I know every word of it's true.

"I mean to try hard to follow it, and I'll tell you what I shall do.

"Nurse wants to put bitter stuff on the tips of my fingers, to cure me
of biting them, and now I think I shall let her.
