
The sorrow for the dead is the only sorrow from which we refuse to be
divorced. Every other wound we seek to heal; every other affliction, to
forget; but this wound we consider it a duty to keep open. This affliction
we cherish, and brood over in solitude. Where is the mother who would
willingly forget the infant that has perished like a blossom from her
arms, though every recollection is a pang? Where is the child that would
willingly forget a tender parent, though to remember be but to lament?
Who, even in the hour of agony, would forget the friend over whom he
mourns?

No, the love which survives the tomb is one of the noblest attributes of
the soul. If it has its woes, it has likewise its delights: and when the
overwhelming burst of grief is calmed into the gentle tear of
recollection; when the sudden anguish and the convulsive agony over the
present ruins of all that we most loved, is softened away into pensive
meditation on all that it was in the days of its loveliness, who would
root out such a sorrow from the heart? Though it may, sometimes, throw a
passing cloud over the bright hour of gayety, or spread a deeper sadness
over the hour of gloom; yet, who would exchange it even for the song of
pleasure, or the burst of revelry? No, there is a voice from the tomb
sweeter than song. There is a remembrance of the dead, to which we turn
even from the charms of the living.

Oh, the grave! the grave! It buries every error, covers every defect,
extinguishes every resentment! From its peaceful bosom spring none but
fond regrets and tender recollections. Who can look down upon the grave
even of an enemy, and not feel a compunctious throb, that he should have
warred with the poor handful of earth that lies moldering before him? But
the grave of those we loved--what a place for meditation! There it is that
we call up, in long review, the whole history of virtue and gentleness,
and the thousand endearments lavished upon us, almost unheeded in the
daily intercourse of intimacy; there it is that we dwell upon the
tenderness, the solemn, awful tenderness of the parting scene; the bed of
death, with all its stifled griefs, its noiseless attendance, its mute,
watchful assiduities! the last testimonies of expiring love! the feeble,
fluttering, thrilling,--oh! how thrilling!--pressure of the hand! the last
fond look of the glazing eye turning upon us, even from the threshold of
existence! the faint, faltering accents, struggling in death to give one
more assurance of affection!

Ay, go to the grave of buried love, and meditate! There settle the account
with thy conscience for every past benefit unrequited; every past
endearment unregarded, of that departed being, who can never--never--
never return to be soothed by thy contrition! If thou art a child, and
hast ever added a sorrow to the soul, or a furrow to the silvered brow of
an affectionate parent; if thou art a husband, and hast ever caused the
fond bosom that ventured its whole happiness in thy arms to doubt one
moment of thy kindness or thy truth; if thou art a friend, and hast ever
wronged, in thought, or word, or deed, the spirit that generously confided
in thee; if thou hast given one unmerited pang to that true heart, which
now lies cold and still beneath thy feet; then be sure that every unkind
look, every ungracious word, every ungentle action, will come thronging
back upon thy memory, and knocking dolefully at thy soul; then be sure
that thou wilt lie down sorrowing and repentant on the grave, and utter
the unheard groan, and pour the unavailing tear; more deep, more bitter,
because unheard and unavailing.

Then weave thy chaplet of flowers, and strew the beauties of nature about
the grave; console thy broken spirit, if thou canst, with these tender,
yet futile, tributes of regret: but take warning by the bitterness of
this, thy contrite affliction over the dead, and henceforth be more
faithful and affectionate in the discharge of thy duties to the living.
                                                             --Irving.



LXVI. THE EAGLE. (251)

James Gates Percival, 1795-1856, was born at Berlin, Connecticut, and
graduated at Yale College in 1815, at the head of his class. He was
admitted to the practice of medicine in 1820, and went to Charleston,
South Carolina. In 1824 he was appointed Professor of Chemistry at West
Point, a position which he held but a few months. In 1854 he was appointed
State Geologist of Wisconsin, and died at Hazel Green, in that state. Dr.
Percival was eminent as a geographer, geologist, and linguist. He began to
write poetry at an early age, and his fame rests chiefly upon his writings
in this department. In his private life, Percival was always shy, modest,
and somewhat given to melancholy. Financially, his life was one of
struggle, and he was often greatly straitened for money.
###

Bird of the broad and sweeping wing!
  Thy home is high in heaven,
Where the wide storms their banners fling,
  And the tempest clouds are driven.
Thy throne is on the mountain top;
  Thy fields, the boundless air;
And hoary peaks, that proudly prop
  The skies, thy dwellings are.

Thou art perched aloft on the beetling crag,
  And the waves are white below,
And on, with a haste that can not lag,
  They rush in an endless flow.
Again thou hast plumed thy wing for flight
  To lands beyond the sea,
And away, like a spirit wreathed in light,
  Thou hurriest, wild and free.

Lord of the boundless realm of air!
  In thy imperial name,
The hearts of the bold and ardent dare
  The dangerous path of fame,
Beneath the shade of thy golden wings,
  The Roman legions bore,
From the river of Egypt's cloudy springs,
  Their pride, to the polar shore.

For thee they fought, for thee they fell,
  And their oath on thee was laid;
To thee the clarions raised their swell,
  And the dying warrior prayed.
Thou wert, through an age of death and fears,
  The image of pride and power,
Till the gathered rage of a thousand years,
  Burst forth in one awful hour.

And then, a deluge of wrath, it came,
  And the nations shook with dread;
And it swept the earth, till its fields were flame,
  And piled with the mingled dead.
Kings were rolled in the wasteful flood,
  With the low and crouching slave;
And together lay, in a shroud of blood,
  The coward and the brave.

NOTES.--Roman legions. The Roman standard was the image of an eagle. The
soldiers swore by it, and the loss of it was considered a disgrace.

One awful hour. Alluding to the destruction of Rome by the northern
barbarians.



LXVII. POLITICAL TOLERATION. (253)

Thomas Jefferson, 1743-1826, the third President of the United States, and
the author of the Declaration of Independence, was born in Albemarle
County, Virginia. He received most of his early education under private
tutors, and at the age of seventeen entered William and Mary College,
where he remained two years. At college, where he studied industriously,
he formed the acquaintance of several distinguished men, among them was
George Wythe, with whom he entered on the study of law. At the age of
twenty-four he was admitted to the bar, and soon rose to high standing in
his profession. In 1775 he entered the Colonial Congress, having
previously served ably in the legislature of his native state. Although
one of the youngest men in Congress, he soon took a foremost place in that
body. He left Congress in the fall of 1776, and, as a member of the
legislature, and later as Governor of Virginia, he was chiefly
instrumental in effecting several important reforms in the laws of that
state,--the most notable were the abolition of the law of primogeniture,
and the passage of a law making all religious denominations equal. From
1785 to 1789 he was Minister to France. On his return to America he was
made Secretary of State, in the first Cabinet. While in this office, he
became the leader of the Republican or Anti-Federalist party, in
opposition to the Federalist party led by Alexander Hamilton. From 1801 to
1809 he was President. On leaving his high office, he retired to his
estate at "Monticello," where he passed the closing years of his life, and
died on the 4th of July, just fifty years after the passage of his famous
Declaration. His compatriot, and sometimes bitter political opponent, John
Adams, died on the same day.

Mr. Jefferson, who was never a ready public speaker, was a remarkably
clear and forcible writer; his works fill several large volumes. In
personal character, he was pure and simple, cheerful, and disposed to look
on the bright side. His knowledge of life rendered his conversation highly
attractive. The chief enterprise of his later years was the founding of
the University of Virginia, at Charlottesville.
###


During the contest of opinion through which we have passed, the animation
of discussions and of exertions has sometimes worn an aspect which might
impose on strangers, unused to think freely and to speak and to write what
they think; but this being now decided by the voice of the nation,
announced according to the rules of the constitution, all will, of course,
arrange themselves under the will of the law, and unite in common efforts
for the common good.

All, too, will bear in mind this sacred principle, that, though the will
of the majority is, in all cases, to prevail, that will, to be rightful,
must be reasonable; that the minority possess their equal rights, which
equal laws must protect, and to violate which would be oppression. Let us
then, fellow-citizens, unite with one heart and one mind.

Let us restore to social intercourse that harmony and affection, without
which liberty, and even life itself, are but dreary things; and let us
reflect, that, having banished from our land that religious intolerance
under which mankind so long bled and suffered, we have gained little if we
countenance a political intolerance as despotic, as wicked, and capable of
as bitter and bloody persecutions.

During the throes and convulsions of the ancient world; during the
agonizing spasms of infuriated man, seeking, through blood and slaughter,
his long-lost liberty; it was not wonderful that the agitation of the
billows should reach even this distant and peaceful shore; that this
should be more felt and feared by some, and less by others, and should
divide opinions as to measures of safety.

But every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle. We have
called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all
Republicans; we are all Federalists. If there be any among us who would
wish to dissolve this Union, or to change its republican form, let them
stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion
may be tolerated when reason is left free to combat it.

I know, indeed, that some honest men fear that a republican government can
not be strong; that this government is not strong enough. But would the
honest patriot, in the full tide of successful experiment, abandon a
government which has so far kept us free and firm, on the theoretic and
visionary fear that this government, the world's best hope, may, by
possibility, want energy to preserve itself? I trust not; I believe this,
on the contrary, the strongest government on earth.

I believe it to be the only one where every man, at the call of the law,
would fly to the standard of the law, and would meet invasions of the
public order as his own personal concern. Sometimes it is said that man
can not be trusted with the government of himself. Can he, then, be
trusted with the government of others, or have we found angels, in the
form of kings, to govern him? Let history answer this question. Let us,
then, with courage and confidence, pursue our own federal and republican
principles; our attachment to union and representative government.

NOTE.--At the time of Jefferson's election, party spirit ran very high. He
had been defeated by John Adams at the previous presidential election, but
the Federal party, to which Adams belonged, became weakened by their
management during difficulties with France; and now Jefferson had been
elected president over his formerly successful rival. The above selection
is from his inaugural address.



LXVIII. WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE? (255)

Sir William Jones, 1746-1794, was the son of an eminent mathematician; he
early distinguished himself by his ability as a student. He graduated at
Oxford, became well versed in Oriental literature, studied law, and wrote
many able books. In 1783 he was appointed Judge of the Supreme Court of
Judicature in Bengal. He was a man of astonishing learning, upright life,
and Christian principles.
###


  What constitutes a state?
Not high-raised battlement or labored mound,
  Thick wall or moated gate;
Not cities proud with spires and turrets crowned;
  Not bays and broad-armed ports,
Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride;
  Not starred and spangled courts,
Where low-browed baseness wafts perfume to pride.

  No:--men, high-minded men,
With powers as far above dull brutes endued
  In forest, brake, or den,
As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude,--
  Men who their duties know,
But know their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain,
  Prevent the long-aimed blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain:
  These constitute a state;
And sovereign Law, that state's collected will,
  O'er thrones and globes elate,
Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill.


LXIX. THE BRAVE AT HOME. (256)

Thomas Buchanan Read, 1822-1872, an American poet and painter, was born in
Chester County, Pennsylvania. At the age of seventeen he entered a
sculptor's studio in Cincinnati. Here he gained reputation as a painter of
portraits. From this city he went to New York, Boston, and Philadelphia,
and soon after to Florence, Italy. In the later years of his life, he
divided his time between Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and Rome. His complete
poetical works fill three volumes. Several of his most stirring poems
relate to the Revolutionary War, and to the late Civil War in America.
Many of his poems are marked by vigor and a ringing power, while
smoothness and delicacy distinguish others, no less.
###


The maid who binds her warrior's sash,
  And, smiling, all her pain dissembles,
The while beneath the drooping lash,
  One starry tear-drop hangs and trembles;
Though Heaven alone records the tear,
  And fame shall never know her story,
Her heart has shed a drop as dear
  As ever dewed the field of glory!

The wife who girds her husband's sword,
  'Mid little ones who weep and wonder,
And bravely speaks the cheering word,
  What though her heart be rent asunder;--
Doomed nightly in her dreams to hear
  The bolts of war around him rattle,--
Has shed as sacred blood as e'er
  Was poured upon the field of battle!

The mother who conceals her grief,
  While to her breast her son she presses,
Then breathes a few brave words and brief,
  Kissing the patriot brow she blesses;
With no one but her loving God,
  To know the pain that weighs upon her,
Sheds holy blood as e'er the sod
  Received on Freedom's field of honor!


NOTE.--The above selection is from the poem entitled "The Wagoner of the
Alleghanies."



LXX. SOUTH CAROLINA. (257)

Robert Young Hayne, 1791-1840, was born in Colleton District, South
Carolina, and studied and practiced law at Charleston. He was early
elected to the State Legislature, and became Speaker of the House and
Attorney-general of the state. He entered the Senate of the United States
at the age of thirty-one. He was Governor of South Carolina during the
"Nullification" troubles in 1832 and 1833. Mr. Hayne was a clear and able
debater, and a stanch advocate of the extreme doctrine of "State Rights."
In the Senate he opposed the Tariff Bill of 1828; and, out of this
struggle, grew his famous debate with Daniel Webster in 1830. The
following selection is an extract from Mr. Hayne's speech on that
memorable occasion.
###


If there be one state in the Union, Mr. President, that may challenge
comparison with any other, for a uniform, zealous, ardent, and
uncalculating devotion to the Union, that state is South Carolina. Sir,
from the very commencement of the Revolution, up to this hour, there is no
sacrifice, however great, she has not cheerfully made; no service she has
ever hesitated to perform.

She has adhered to you in your prosperity; but in your adversity she has
clung to you with more than filial affection. No matter what was the
condition of her domestic affairs; though deprived of her resources,
divided by parties, or surrounded by difficulties, the call of the country
has been to her as the voice of God. Domestic discord ceased at the sound;
every man became at once reconciled to his brethren, and the sons of
Carolina were all seen, crowding to the temple, bringing their gifts to
the altar of their common country.

What, sir, was the conduct of the South, during the Revolution? Sir, I
honor New England for her conduct in that glorious struggle. But great as
is the praise which belongs to her, I think at least equal honor is due to
the South. Never were there exhibited, in the history of the world, higher
examples of noble daring, dreadful suffering, and heroic endurance, than
by the whigs of Carolina, during the Revolution. The whole state, from the
mountains to the sea, was overrun by an overwhelming force of the enemy.
The fruits of industry perished on the spot where they were produced, or
were consumed by the foe.

The plains of Carolina drank up the most precious blood of her citizens.
Black, smoking ruins marked the places which had been the habitation of
her children. Driven from their homes into the gloomy and almost
impenetrable swamps, even there the spirit of liberty survived, and South
Carolina, sustained by the example of her Sumters and her Marions, proved,
by her conduct, that though her soil might be overrun, the spirit of her
people was invincible.


NOTES.--Thomas Sumter (b. 1734, d. 1832) was by birth a Virginian, but
during the Revolution commanded South Carolina troops. He was one of the
most active and able of the Southern generals, and, after the war, was
prominent in politics. He was the last surviving general of the
Revolution.

Francis Marion (b. 1732, d. 1795), known as the "Swamp Fox," was a native
South Carolinian, of French descent. Marion's brigade became noted during
the Revolution for its daring and surprising attacks. See Lesson CXXXV.



LXXI. MASSACHUSETTS AND SOUTH CAROLINA. (259)

Daniel Webster, 1782-1852. This celebrated American statesman and orator
was born in Salisbury, New Hampshire. His father, Ebenezer Webster, was a
pioneer settler, a soldier in the Old French War and the Revolution, and a
man of ability and strict integrity, Daniel attended the common school in
his youth, and fitted for college under Rev. Samuel Wood, of Boseawen,
graduating at Dartmouth in 1801. He spent a few months of his boyhood at
"Phillips Academy," Exeter, where he attained distinction as a student,
but was so diffident that he could never give a declamation before his
class. During his college course, and later, he taught school several
terms in order to increase his slender finances. He was admitted to the
bar in Boston in 1805. For the next eleven years, he practiced his
profession in his native state. In 1812 he was elected to the United
States House of Representatives, and at once took his place as one of the
most prominent men of that body. In 1816 he removed to Boston; and in 1827
he was elected to the United States Senate, where he continued for twelve
years. In 1841 he was made Secretary of State, and soon after negotiated
the famous "Ashburton Treaty" with England, settling the northern boundary
of the United States. In 1845 he returned to the Senate; and in 1850 he
was re-appointed Secretary of State, and continued in office till his
death. He died at his country residence in Marshfield, Massachusetts.

Mr. Webster's fame rests chiefly on his state papers and his speeches in
Congress; but he took a prominent part in some of the most famous law
cases of the present century. Several of his public addresses on
occasional themes are well known, also. As a speaker, he was dignified and
stately, using clear, straightforward, pure English. He had none of the
tricks of oratory. He was large of person, with a massive head, a swarthy
complexion, and deep-set, keen, and lustrous eyes. His grand presence
added much to his power as a speaker.
###


The eulogium pronounced on the character of the State of South Carolina by
the honorable gentleman, for her Revolutionary and other merits, meets my
hearty concurrence. I shall not acknowledge that the honorable member goes
before me, in regard for whatever of distinguished talent or distinguished
character South Carolina has produced. I claim part of the honor; I
partake in the pride of her great names. I claim them for countrymen, one
and all--the Laurenses, the Rutledges, the Pinckneys, the Sumters, the
Marions--Americans all--whose fame is no more to be hemmed in by state
lines than their talents and patriotism were capable of being
circumscribed within the same narrow limits.

In their day and generation, they served and honored the country, and the
whole country, and their renown is of the treasures of the whole country.
Him whose honored name the gentleman himself bears,--does he suppose me
less capable of gratitude for his patriotism, or sympathy for his
suffering, than if his eyes had first opened upon the light in
Massachusetts, instead of South Carolina? Sir, does he suppose it in his
power to exhibit in Carolina a name so bright as to produce envy in my
bosom? No, sir,--increased gratification and delight rather. Sir, I thank
God that, if I am gifted with little of the spirit which is said to be
able to raise mortals to the skies, I have yet none, as I trust, of that
other spirit which would drag angels down.

When I shall be found, sir, in my place here in the Senate, or elsewhere,
to sneer at public merit because it happened to spring up beyond the
little limits of my own state or neighborhood; when I refuse for any such
cause, or for any cause, the homage due to American talent, to elevated
patriotism, to sincere devotion to liberty and the country; or if I see an
uncommon endowment of Heaven; if I see extraordinary capacity or virtue in
any son of the South; and if, moved by local prejudice, or gangrened by
state jealousy, I get up here to abate a tithe of a hair from his just
character and just fame, may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth!

Mr. President, I shall enter on no encomium upon Massachusetts. She needs
none. There she is; behold her, and judge for yourselves. There is her
history; the world knows it by heart. The past, at least, is secure. There
is Boston, and Concord, and Lexington, and Bunker Hill; and there they
will remain forever. And, sir, where American Liberty raised its first
voice, and where its youth was nurtured and sustained, there it still
lives, in the strength of its manhood, and full of its original spirit. If
discord and disunion shall wound it; if party strife and blind ambition
shall hawk at and tear it; if folly and madness, if uneasiness under
salutary restraint, shall succeed to separate it from that Union, by which
alone its existence is made sure, it will stand, in the end, by the side
of that cradle in which its infancy was rocked; it will stretch forth its
arm, with whatever of vigor it may still retain, over the friends who
gathered around it; and it will fall at last, if fall it must, amid the
proudest monuments of its glory and on the very spot of its origin.


NOTES.--The Laurenses were of French descent. Henry Laurens was appointed
on the commission with Franklin and Jay to negotiate the treaty of peace
at Paris at the close of the Revolution. His son, John Laurens, was an aid
and secretary of Washington, who was greatly attached to him.

The Rutledges were of Irish descent. John Rutledge was a celebrated
statesman and lawyer. He was appointed Chief Justice of the United States,
but the Senate, for political reasons, refused to confirm his appointment.


Edward Rutledge, brother of the preceding, was Governor of South Carolina
during the last two years of his life.

The Pinckneys were an old English family who emigrated to Charleston in
1687. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and his brother Thomas were both active
participants in the Revolution. The former was an unsuccessful candidate
for the presidency of the United States, in 1800.

Thomas was elected governor of South Carolina in 1789. In the war of 1812
he served as major-general.

Charles Pinckney, a second cousin of the two already mentioned, was four
times elected governor of his state.



LXXII. THE CHURCH SCENE FROM EVANGELINE. (262)

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 1807-1882, the son of Hon. Stephen Longfellow,
an eminent lawyer of Portland, Maine, was born in that city. He graduated,
at the age of eighteen, at Bowdoin College. He was soon appointed to the
chair of Modern Languages and Literature in that institution, and, to fit
himself further for his work, he went abroad and spent four years in
Europe. He remained at Bowdoin till 1835, when he was appointed to the
chair of Modern Languages and Belles-lettres in Harvard University. On
receiving this appointment, he again went to Europe and remained two
years. He resigned his professorship in 1854, and after that time resided
in Cambridge, pursuing his literary labors and giving to the public, from
time to time, the fruits of his pen. In 1868 he made a voyage to England,
where he was received with extraordinary marks of honor and esteem. In
addition to Mr. Longfellow's original works, both in poetry and in prose,
he distinguished himself by several translations; the most famous is that
of the works of Dante.

Mr. Longfellow's poetry is always elegant and chaste, showing in every
line traces of his careful scholarship. Yet it is not above the popular
taste or comprehension, as is shown by the numerous and varied editions of
his poems. Many of his poems treat of historical themes; "Evangeline,"
from which the following selection is taken, is esteemed by many as the
most beautiful of all his longer poems; it was first published in 1847.
###


So passed the morning away. And lo! with a summons sonorous
Sounded the bell from its tower, and over the meadows a drumbeat.
Thronged erelong was the church with men. Without, in the churchyard,
Awaited the women. They stood by the graves, and hung on the headstones
Garlands of autumn leaves and evergreens fresh from the forest.
Then came the guard from the ships, and marching proudly among them
Entered the sacred portal. With loud and dissonant clangor
Echoed the sound of their brazen drums from ceiling and casement,--
Echoed a moment only, and slowly the ponderous portal
Closed, and in silence the crowd awaited the will of the soldiers.

Then uprose their commander, and spake from the steps of the altar,
Holding aloft in his hands, with its seals, the royal commission.
"You have convened this day," he said, "by his Majesty's orders.
Clement and kind has he been; but how you have answered his kindness,
Let your own hearts reply! To my natural make and my temper
Painful the task is I do, which to you I know must be grievous.
Yet must I bow and obey, and deliver the will of our monarch;
Namely, that all your lands, and dwellings, and cattle of all kinds
Forfeited be to the crown; and that you yourselves from this province
Be transported to other lands. God grant you may dwell there
Ever as faithful subjects, a happy and peaceable people!
Prisoners now I declare you; for such is his Majesty's pleasure!"

As, when the air is serene in the sultry solstice of summer,
Suddenly gathers a storm, and the deadly sling of the hailstones
Beats down the farmer's corn in the field and shatters his windows,
Hiding the sun, and strewing the ground with thatch from the house roofs,
Bellowing fly the herds, and seek to break their inclosure;
So on the hearts of the people descended the words of the speaker.
Silent a moment they stood in speechless wonder, and then rose
Louder and ever louder a wail of sorrow and anger,
And, by one impulse moved, they madly rushed to the doorway.

Vain was the hope of escape; and cries and fierce imprecations
Rang through the house of prayer; and high o'er the heads of the others
Rose, with his arms uplifted, the figure of Basil the blacksmith,
As, on a stormy sea, a spar is tossed by the billows.
Flushed was his face and distorted with passion; and wildly he shouted,--
"Down with the tyrants of England! we never have sworn them allegiance!
Death to these foreign soldiers, who seize on our homes and our harvests!"
More he fain would have said, but the merciless hand of a soldier
Smote him upon the mouth, and dragged him down to the pavement.

In the midst of the strife and tumult of angry contention,
Lo! the door of the chancel opened, and Father Felician
Entered, with serious mien, and ascended the steps of the alter.
Raising his reverend hand, with a gesture he awed into silence
All that clamorous throng; and thus he spake to his people;
Deep were his tones and solemn; in accents measured and mournful
Spake he, as, after the tocsin's alarum, distinctly the clock strikes.

"What is this that ye do, my children? what madness has seized you?
Forty years of my life have I labored among you, and taught you,
Not in word alone, but in deed, to love one another!
Is this the fruit of my toils, of my vigils and prayers and privations?
Have you so soon forgotten all the lessons of love and forgiveness?
This is the house of the Prince of Peace, and would you profane it
Thus with violent deeds and hearts overflowing with hatred?
Lo! where the crucified Christ from his cross is gazing upon you!
See! in those sorrowful eyes what meekness and holy compassion!
Hark! how those lips still repeat the prayer, 'O Father, forgive them!'
Let us repeat that prayer in the hour when the wicked assail us,
Let us repeat it now, and say, 'O Father, forgive them.' "

Few were his words of rebuke, but deep in the hearts of his people
Sank they, and sobs of contrition succeeded the passionate outbreak,
While they repeated his prayer, and said, "O Father, forgive them!"


