steered off in another direction and out of hearing.

"What a mean bully he is getting to be!" said Fred. "It seems to me he
is much worse than he was when I first came to the Hall."

"He is slowly but surely losing his grip here and that is souring him,"
answered Jack. "Before he knows it he won't have a friend in the world.
As it is, about the only fellow who is really friendly with him is
Coulter. Paxton doesn't have much to do with him, and Mumps merely
toadies to him the same as he toadies to Dan Baxter and some of the
rest."

"Where shall we go now?" asked Fred.

"Anywhere you please," came from the others.

"Shall we take a run up to Point View?" and Fred looked quizzically at
first one and then another of his friends.

"Might do that," answered Jack. "But the Lodge is shut up, you know; the
Fords are at their city home for the winter."

"Well, we can run up that way anyway," said Pepper. "One place is as
good as another."

The course of the iceboat was slightly changed, and in less than a
quarter of an hour they swept up to the dock attached to Point View
Lodge. The sails were lowered and they went ashore to stretch their
legs, for sitting on the iceboat rather cramped them.

"Might as well take a look around the Lodge while we are here,"
suggested Jack.

"Is there a caretaker here?" asked Andy.

"I don't think so, but there may be."

The four youths walked through the snow in the direction of the mansion,
which was set among some heavy trees.

"Hello, what is that, an animal track?" asked Jack, pointing to a trail
among the trees.

"Looks more like human footprints to me," replied Pepper.

"Then somebody must be here."

"Funny the trail leads from the side fence," came from Andy. "If it was
some person who belonged here why wouldn't he come from the road or the
dock?"

"Maybe it was easier to come that way than by the road, right after the
snow fell," suggested Pepper.

They walked forward to the mansion and saw that the trail led to the
back door and then around to a side window.

"Hello! I don't like this!" exclaimed Jack. "What would a person be
doing at the side window?"

"Try the window?" suggested Fred. They had already tried the door, to
find it locked.

Jack stood on a flat rock that was handy and took hold of the lower
sash. Much to his surprise it went up with ease.

"It's open!" he exclaimed. "Do you know what I think? I think somebody
came here and got into the house by this window!"

"A tramp, perhaps," said Fred.

"Or a burglar!" vouchsafed Andy.

"Do you think he is in the house now?" asked Pepper.

"That is something for us to find out. If he is, we must catch him and
turn him over to the authorities!"

"Have we a right to enter the house?" questioned Andy.

"I am sure Mr. Ford would want us to do so, Andy."

"I guess you are right. But be careful, Jack, that fellow, whoever he
is, may be a desperate character."

"Perhaps he isn't here now," said Fred. "He may have looted the place
and skipped."

"I'll soon see," cried Jack. "Pepper, do you want to go in with me? You
other fellows might stay on guard."

"Sure, I'll go in," answered The Imp.

In a moment more the two cadets stood in the sitting-room of the
mansion.

"Better not make too much noise," whispered Jack. "If he is here we may
be able to take him unawares."

As the sky was overcast that afternoon it was rather dark in the
mansion, and the cadets could see but little as they made their way from
one room to another. They were just entering the dining-room when
Pepper's foot struck something and sent it spinning across the floor.

"What's that?" asked his chum.

"I don't know--sounded like a spoon or a fork," was the reply. Pepper
walked forward, bent down, and felt around. "Yes, it's a silver fork!"

"It made as much noise as if it was a dozen of 'em!" murmured his chum.

"Hark!"

Pepper put up his hand and both listened intently. They had heard a
noise, as of footsteps overhead.

"Somebody is up there!" whispered Jack.

"It must be the fellow we are after!" returned Pepper. "What shall we do
next, go after him?"

"Yes, but we had better try to arm ourselves."

"I've got the fork."

"I'll take this," said Jack, picking up a bronze ornament from the
mantelpiece.

Hardly daring to breathe, the two cadets stole from the dining-room to
the hall and prepared to mount the stairs. As they did this they heard
more footsteps, this time in the rear of the upper floor of the mansion.

"There he goes, Jack!"

"Sounds as if he was going to try to get out the back way!"

"Hi, there, stop!" called Pepper, at the top of his voice. "Stop, you
rascal!"

"Don't you try to stop me!" was the reply from the upper hallway. "If
you do, it will be the worse for you!"

"Who is he?" asked Pepper, quickly. "I've heard that voice before."

"I think I know," answered his chum. "Come on, and we'll soon see if I
am right."




CHAPTER XXVI

WHAT THE CONSTABLE THOUGHT


Up the stairs went the two cadets, Jack leading the way. On the upper
landing they paused, for the sounds of footsteps had suddenly ceased.

"Which way did he go?" whispered Pepper.

"I don't know, Pepper. Go slow now, we don't want to walk into any
trap."

With caution the chums made their way to the back end of the hall. As
they did this a door close by came open and a cold draught of air met
the lads.

"This way!" cried Jack. "He has opened a window! That air comes from
outside!"

He rushed through the open door, to find himself in a bedroom. In an
alcove was a window and this was wide open. Beyond the window was the
top of a back porch, with a trellis reaching to the ground.

"There he goes!" exclaimed Jack, pointing down among the trees.

"Stop! stop!" came in a cry from the side of the mansion, and a moment
later Andy appeared, followed by Fred.

"Stop the rascal!" shouted Jack, and bounced out on the porch with all
speed. Down the trellis he came, with Pepper following.

By this time the fleeing individual had gained the shelter of a number
of trees. Beyond these was a hedge, and he dove through this and then
into some brushwood that lined the highway.

"Can you catch him, Andy?" asked Jack.

"I can try!" was the answer.

"Keep back, unless you want to get shot!" roared the man, and he raised
something he held in his hand. It was too dark to see if it was a
pistol.

Andy came to a halt, and in a few moments his companions joined him. By
this time the fellow was out of sight. The cadets strained their ears,
but in the snow no sounds of footsteps reached them.

"I guess we have lost him," murmured Fred.

"Sorry I didn't keep after him," grumbled Andy.

"He might have shot you."

"Come on, let us make a hunt for him!" cried Jack, and this was done.
But though they searched the vicinity for the best part of half an hour
they failed to locate the man who had fled.

"Jack, who do you think it was?" questioned Pepper, as the four boys
gathered in the mansion and lit one of the lamps, for it was now quite
dark.

"I may be mistaken, but to me his voice sounded like that of the man
Reff Ritter met in Cedarville, Cameron Smith."

"Just what I think!" cried The Imp. "Did you get a look at his face?"

"Not a close look, and it was too dark to see much. But that Smith had a
queer catch in his voice and this fellow had the same thing."

"Yes, I remember that."

"Was that the fellow Reff met?" demanded Andy.

"We are not sure, Andy, but we think so."

"What was he doing here?" asked Fred.

"That remains for us to find out," answered Pepper. "Certainly the man
had no right here, otherwise he wouldn't have run away as he did."

"Let us take a look through the house," suggested Pepper.

A hand-lamp was lit and the boys began a systematic inspection of the
Lodge. They found nothing disturbed in most of the rooms, but when they
inspected the library all set up a shout.

"The safe!"

"It has been blown open!"

"Yes, and look, the contents are scattered all over the floor!"

It was true, the small safe that was located under a bend of the stairs
had been drilled and the door blown asunder. On the floor of the library
lay the shattered door and likewise several bundles of papers and
legal-looking documents. They also saw a case that had contained
silverware.

"Wonder how much he took?" said Pepper.

"He took something, that is sure," answered Jack.

"We must have come in right after he blew the safe open," said Andy.

"Boys, I think we ought to notify the authorities at once, and also
notify the Fords," cried Jack. "This is a serious piece of business."

"Let us go to the nearest farmhouse and tell the folks," suggested Andy.

He hardly uttered the words when a loud ring at the front door of the
mansion made every cadet jump.

"There is somebody now!" cried Fred.

"I'll see who it is," said Pepper, and went off, followed by Jack.

When they opened the door they found themselves confronted by a farmer
named Fasick, who lived in that vicinity.

"Hello!" cried the farmer, on noticing the uniforms the boys wore. "What
are you cadets doing here?"

"Who are you?" questioned Jack.

"I'm Isaac Fasick, and I own the farm down the road a spell. I saw the
lights here, and as Mr. Ford asked me to keep an eye on his property I
made up my mind I'd come over and see what it meant. Is he here on a
visit?"

"Not that we know of, Mr. Fasick," answered Jack. "Come in out of the
cold, and we'll tell you something."

The burly farmer entered, and the cadets quickly related what had
occurred. When Mr. Fasick saw the shattered safe he was all but stunned.

"The pesky rascal!" he ejaculated. "Did he run away with much?"

"That we don't know, for we have no idea what was in the safe," replied
Jack.

"He must have taken some of the silver spoons, and knives and forks,"
put in Pepper. "Here is the empty silverware case, and I found a loose
silver fork on the floor of the dining-room."

"The Fords will be the only ones to tell just what was taken," said
Andy. "And the sooner we notify them the better."

"I don't know if they are in the city or not," said Isaac Fasick "I
know they meant to travel some this winter."

"They are at their city home just now; I got a letter day before
yesterday," answered the former major of the school battalion. He did
not deem it necessary to say the letter was from Laura Ford.

"Let us telegraph to them," said Pepper. "But what about the thief? We
ought to get right after him."

"We can tell Jed Plodders," said the farmer. "He's the Cedarville
constable and pretty smart, too."

"Jed will never catch that fellow," answered Jack. "He'll be miles and
miles away before the constable gets his badge pinned on to go after
him."

"Oh, Jed is smart," cried the farmer. "He's my wife's second cousin, and
the whole family is mighty cute."

"All right, let him catch the thief," answered Pepper.

Matters were talked over for several minutes, and the boys decided to
separate, Andy and Pepper to remain on guard at the Lodge and Fred and
Jack to run the iceboat to Cedarville and take Isaac Fasick along.

"Now, don't you run into no air-holes!" cried the farmer, as he took a
seat on the _Skimmer_. "I don't want to drown just yet, not me!"

"We'll be on our guard," answered the owner of the craft.

"The wind is just right," said Jack, as the mainsail was hoisted. This
was true, and the run to the village took but a few minutes. While the
boys went off to send their message to the Fords, Isaac Fasick hunted up
the constable and related what had occurred.

"Ha! a robbery, eh?" cried the constable, looking highly important.

"That's it, Jed."

"And you caught the boys in the house all alone?" went on the constable,
trying to look very wise.

"Why, yes; I did."

"Maybe they did the robbery, Isaac."

"By gum! I didn't think of that, Jed!" exclaimed the farmer.

"It would be an easy way of tryin' to look innercent," went on the
constable. "They fixed it all up--blow open the safe, hide the silver
an' other valerables, an' then, when you surprise 'em, they try to put
the crime off on sumbuddy else."

"Say, Jed, do you think that's so?" asked the farmer, his suspicions
aroused.

"Don't it look reasonable, Isaac?"

"It sure does, Jed. But to think them boys would do sech a terruble
deed!"

"Some o' them boys at boardin'-school spend a fierce sight o' money.
Some of 'em drink an' gamble. They ain't above gittin' money by hook or
crook, ef they need it. Yes, they may be guilty," and the constable
swelled out with his own importance.

"Perhaps you better question 'em," suggested the farmer, timidly.

"Question 'em?" snorted the constable. "Yes, I will; an' I'll do
more--I'll hold 'em until this mysterious case is cleared up!"




CHAPTER XXVII

LOOKING FOR CLUES


Having sent their message to the Fords, the two cadets turned in the
direction where the farmer had said the constable lived.

"I don't think old Plodders will be able to do a thing," said Jack.
"He'll look wise and ask a lot of questions, and that's all."

A block had been covered when they saw the farmer and the constable
approaching. On his breast Jed Plodders had pinned a bright, silver
star, and he carried a policeman's club in his hand.

"There they are!" cried Isaac Fasick.

"Is them the cadets?" queried the guardian of the peace.

"That's two of 'em. The other two said they'd stay an' watch the house."

"Stop!" cried the constable, and pointed his club at the cadets.

"Are you Constable Plodders?" questioned Jack.

"That's who I be," was the stern reply. "Now then, out with it, young
fellers. You broke into Mr. Ford's house, didn't you? Now, don't try to
fool me, fer it won't wash! You broke into the house, and Mr. Fasick
ketched you at it, didn't he?" And the constable cast what was meant for
an eagle eye on Jack and then on Fred. He had made up his mind that he
would surprise both of the boys into a confession.

The two cadets stared in wonder at the constable, and then a smile came
into Jack's face. The situation was so ludicrous he felt like laughing.
Jed Plodders saw the smile and frowned deeply.

"This ain't no laughing matter, you scamp!" he bellowed. "You broke into
the Ford house an' tried to steal the silverware! Now don't try to deny
it, or it will be the wuss fer you! You done it now, didn't you?" And he
pointed his club at first one cadet and then the other.

"No, we didn't do it!" burst out Fred. "You are a great big chump to
think we did!"

"Hi! hi! don't you talk to me like that!" roared the guardian of the
peace.

"Then don't you accuse us of any crime," came quickly from Jack.

"Didn't Mr. Fasick find you at the house?" demanded the constable.

"He did, but we didn't go there to steal; we went there to see if
everything was all right. He went there for the same purpose."

"Say, don't you go for to mix me up in this robbery," interrupted Isaac
Fasick, hastily. "I didn't have a thing to do with it."

"No more had we," answered Fred. "We just sailed to the place on my
