"Well, p'w'aps so," answered Diana. "We has an awfu' lot to do this
afternoon, Orion, 'cos Aunt Jane has got to be shotted, and I's
thinking of having Miss Wamsay shotted too."

"But do you mean," said Orion, "that you'll really shoot 'em both?"

"Yes," replied Diana. "It has to be done; it's ter'ble, but it must be
done. What would be the good if they wasn't shotted dead? Yes, they'll
be shotted, and they'll have a public funeral, and after that we'll
have a lovely time. Uncle William isn't half bad, and 'stead of doing
howid lessons every morning we'll just go into the garding and eat
stwawberries and cherries, and he'll play with us. He'll love to, for
he don't like writing sermins a bit, and we'll blindfold him and he'll
wun after us. He's k'ite a nice old man, and if Aunt Jane and Miss
Wamsay is shotted--why, we'll have a jolly time. Now, let's wun and
fetch the big bow and arrows."

Orion had always a great respect for his younger sister Diana. "Well,"
he said, "if you're a grand lady, don't forget that I'm a big giant,
and that I've got a belt and a sword. There's Simpson, you know; she's
rather a bother, and I can run my sword into her, if you really wish
it, Diana."

"I'll think about it," answered Diana. "I don't want to have three
persons deaded wight off; it might be sort of troublesome. I'll think
what's best to be done with Simpson. Now, let's start at once."

Mrs. Dolman was under the supposition that the children had gone to
play in the back garden. The greater part of that somewhat neglected
domain was laid out in shrubbery, and there were shady trees and
swings and see-saws, and other sources of amusement for the little
Dolmans during their brief hours of play. Miss Ramsay also thought
that Diana and Orion would go to the shrubbery. She went up,
therefore, to the schoolroom quite contented. Mr. Dolman retired to
his study, where he went to sleep, and Mrs. Dolman ordered the pony
chaise, and went off to see a distant parishioner, who was very ill.

The house was wonderfully quiet, and nothing occurred to disturb Mr.
Dolman in his deep slumber. The manuscript pages which were to be
covered by his neatly written sermon lay in virgin purity before him.
In his sleep he dreamt of little Diana, and awoke presently with a
queer sense of uneasiness with regard to her. But he was by nature a
very lazy man, and it did not occur to him to inquire as to her
present whereabouts. "She's a fine little soul," he said to himself.
"I do wish Jane had not taken such a dislike to her. It is useless to
drive that sort of child; she must be led, and led gently. 'Pon my
word, I did have an entertaining morning with the little mite, and
what a lot of strawberries she made me eat! I wonder Jane did not
remark at dinner how poor my appetite was--I was dreadfully afraid she
would do so. Certainly Jane is an active woman, an excellent woman,
but just a little bit stern."

Meanwhile Diana, holding Orion by the hand, had started running up the
long avenue. The little pair soon reached the lodge gates. Diana and
her brother went out through the postern door which was at the side,
and the next moment found themselves on the highroad. This road led in
the direction of the shady woods where Apollo had hidden the bow and
arrows a few weeks ago. It was a pretty road, a couple of miles in
length, and well shaded by trees, a kind of outgrowth of the forest
itself. As she was not likely to meet any of the Dolman family on the
road, Diana did not wear her sun-bonnet, but kept it hanging on her
arm. "It is nice to be out," she said, as she tripped along. "I love
hot sun; I love twees; I love blue sky; I love dust."

"I don't," replied Orion; "this road is horrid dusty, and it gets into
my shoes. I have only my house shoes on, you know, Diana."

"Oh, never mind!" answered Diana. "If you is a giant, you isn't going
to g'umble. What is the use of g'umbling? You be all wight soon. We'll
be in the wood soon, and we'll have got the bow and arrows, and then
we'll have to pwactice shooting. Oh, I say, there's a turnstile and a
path, and I believe the path leads stwaight to the wood. Let's leave
the woad and go to the wood that way."

"All right," replied Orion. He always did say "all right" to every
single thing Diana asked him to do.

The children now found themselves in a shady lane, between high
hedgerows. It was a pretty lane, only very sultry at this time of day;
but Diana, seeing butterflies flying about, began to give chase to
them. She also stopped many times to pick flowers. Orion shouted as he
ran, and neither of the little pair minded, for a time at least, the
fact that the sun was pouring on their heads, and that their small
faces were getting redder and redder.

"I's stweaming down with hotness," said Diana, at last. "I must stop
a bit or I'll melt away. I don't want to melt till I has shotted my
enemies. Is you stweaming with hotness, Orion?"

"Yes," said Orion.

They stood still, took out their handkerchiefs, mopped their faces
vigorously, and then continued their walk. The time seemed to drag all
of a sudden; they were both very tired. How glad they were when they
finally reached the friendly shelter of the Super-Ashton woods. Here
it was deliciously cool, and here Diana, thoroughly exhausted, threw
herself on her face and hands, and, before Orion could say a word, had
dropped off into sound sleep. He thought she looked very comfortable,
and it occurred to him that he could not do better than follow her
example. Accordingly, he also stretched himself on the ground, and,
with his head resting on one of Diana's fat little legs, also visited
the land of dreams. For two hours the children slept. When they awoke
at last they found that the sun was no longer high in the heavens; it
was veering rapidly towards the west, and was sending slanting and
very beautiful rays of light through the wood. Diana rubbed her eyes
and looked around her.

"I's awfu' hung'y," she said. "How does you feel, Orion?"

"My tumtum's empty," answered Orion.

"We'll pick berries in the wood," said Diana; "that'll sat'sfy us.
Berries is wight for wunaway sildrens. Do you 'member what we has come
here for, Orion?"

"To amuse ourselves, I suppose," replied Orion.

Diana gave him an angry flash from her black eyes.

"What a silly little boy you is!" she said. "We has come for most
solemn, 'portant business. I is Diana--the gweat Diana what lived
years and years ago--and you is Orion. I is the gweatest huntwess in
all the world, and I's going to shoot Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay. Now,
come 'long, Orion, and let's look for the bow and arrow."

The children searched and searched, and after a long time did actually
discover the crooked and badly made bow and the blunt arrow.

"Here they is, the darlin's!" cried Diana. "My own bow, my own
arrow--how I loves 'em! Now, Orion, I is going to shoot you--for
pwactice, you know, and then you shall shoot me for pwactice too. You
stand up there against the twee, and I'll make good shots. You don't
mind if I does hurt you a bit, does you?"

"But I don't want to be shotted down dead," replied Orion.

"No, I won't go as far as that. It's only Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay
who is to be shotted dead; but you'll have to be shotted, 'cos I must
pwactice how to do it."

"But couldn't you practice against the tree without me standing
there?" said Orion, who had no fancy to have even this very blunt
arrow directed at his face.




CHAPTER XV.

MOTHER RODESIA.


After some very slight persuasion Diana induced Orion to put his back
up against an oak tree and to allow her to shoot at him. He quickly
discovered that he had little or no cause for fear. Diana's arrows,
wielded with all the cunning she possessed, from the crooked bow,
never went anywhere near him. They fell on the grass and startled the
birds, and one little baby rabbit ran quite away, and some squirrels
looked down at the children through the thick trees; but Orion had
very little chance of getting hurt.

"It's awfu' difficult," said Diana, whose face grew redder and redder
with her efforts. "If it don't shoot pwoper, Aunt Jane won't get
shotted to-night. What is to be done? Suppose you was to twy for a
bit, Orion?"

Orion was only too anxious to accede to this proposition. He took the
bow and arrow and made valiant efforts, but in the course of his
endeavors to shoot properly, the badly made bow suddenly snapped in
two, and Diana, in her discomfiture, and the dashing to the ground of
her hopes, burst into tears.

"You is bad boy," she cried. "See what you's done. Back we goes to
slav'ry--to Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay. You is a bad, howid boy."

"I aren't," said Orion, who had a very easily aroused temper. "It's
you that's a horrid little girl."

"Come, children; what's all this noise about?" said a voice in their
ears.

They turned abruptly, forgetting on the instant their own cause of
quarrel, and saw a tall, swarthy-looking woman coming towards them. By
this time it was beginning to get dark in the wood, but they could see
the figure of the woman quite distinctly. She came close to them, and
then, putting her arms akimbo, surveyed them both with a certain queer
expression on her face.

"Well, my little dears," she said, "and what may you two be doing in
this part of the wood?"

"We is pweparing to have our enemies shotted," answered Diana, in a
calm, but sturdy, voice. "What's your name, gweat big woman?"

"Mother Rodesia Lee," replied the woman, "and I'm fond of little
children. I like to meet them in the wood. I often come into the wood,
and when I see little strange children I love 'em at once. I'm a sort
of mother to all little strangers who get into the woods without
leave." Here she flashed a pair of black eyes full into Diana's face.
But Diana met their gaze without a vestige of shrinking, with eyes as
black.

"We has not come without leave," she said; "you is naughty to talk
that way. We has got a whole holiday to-day from our Uncle William. He
didn't say nothing 'bout not going into the woods, and we has been
here for lots of hours. We is going home now 'cos we is hung'y, and
'cos my bow has got bwoke. We is awfu' unhappy--we is mis'ble, but we
is going home. Good-night, woman; don't keep us talkin' any longer."

"I aint going to keep you," said the woman; "only, p'r'aps, if you
two are so hungry, p'r'aps I could give you a bit of supper."

"Oh, yes, Diana! Do let her," said Orion.

"What sort of supper?" asked Diana, who never allowed herself to be
taken unawares. "Would it be stwawberries and k'eam, or would it be
cake and milk?"

"Strawberries and cream, and milk and cake, plenty and plenty," said
the woman. "And what do you say to delicious soup and honey, p'r'aps?
Oh, come along, my little loves; I'll give you something fine to eat."

"Do let's go," said Orion; "my tumtum's so empty it feels like a big
hole."

"I know," said the woman, in a very sympathetic voice. "I have had it
myself like that at times. It's sort of painful when it's like that;
aint it?"

"Yes," answered Orion. He went up to his sister, and took her hand.
"Come along, Di," he said. "Do let this nice woman give us our
supper."

"You may be sure I won't give it," said the woman, "unless both you
little children ask me in a very perlite voice. You must say, 'Please,
Mother Rodesia.'"

"I can't say that keer sort of name," said Diana.

"Well, then, call me mother without anything else. They often does
that at home--often and often. All the little kids is desp'ate fond of
me. I dote so on little children. My heart runs over with love to
'em."

"You would not let a little girl be beated?" said Diana.

"Be beaten?" replied the woman. "No, that I wouldn't; it would be
downright cruel."

"I was beated to-day," said Diana; "it was an enemy did it, and I'm
going to have her shotted."

"Oh, I wouldn't do that!" said the woman. "You might be hanged up for
that."

"What's being hanged up?" asked Diana.

"It's something very bad--I need not tell you now; but there are laws
in this country, and if you shoot your enemies you are hanged up for
it. You are not allowed to do those sort of things in this country."

"Yes, I are," answered Diana, "'cos I are the gweat Diana. You
underland, don't you?"

"I don't know that I do; but, anyhow, I have no time to stand talking
now. Come along, and you can tell me afterwards. I have got such a
nice supper--plenty of strawberries and cream, plenty of milk and
cake."

"Oh, my tumtum," said Orion, pressing his hand to that part of his
little body with great solemnity.

"How soon will the supper be over? and how soon can we get back home?"
asked Diana.

"That depends on where your home is, my pretty little dear," said
Mother Rodesia.

"It's at Wectory, stoopid woman."

"I don't know that place, miss."

"Don't you know my Uncle William Dolman?"

"What! the rector?" said the woman. "And so you come from the
_Rectory_?" She looked frightened for a moment, and her manner became
hesitating. "Are you one of the rector's children, my little love?"
she asked.

"No; he's only an uncle; he belongs to an aunt. I hate aunts. He's not
a bad sort his own self; but I hate aunts!"

"Then you wouldn't mind if you was to leave her?"

"No. But I can't leave Uncle William, and I can't leave Iris, and I
can't leave Apollo. We would like some supper 'cos we is hung'y, and
it's past our tea hour; but then we must go stwaight home."

"All right, my little love; everything can be managed to your
satisfaction. My son has got a pony and cart, and he'll drive you over
to the Rectory in a twinkling, after your appetites are satisfied. I
can't abear to see little children real hungry. You come along with me
this minute or the supper will be eat up."

Diana hesitated no longer. She carried her broken bow on one arm, and
she slung her arrow, by a string, round her neck; then, taking one of
Mother Rodesia's large brown hands, and Orion taking the other, the
two children trotted deeper into the dark wood. They all three walked
for over a mile, and the wood seemed to get darker and denser, and the
children's little feet more and more tired. Orion also began to
complain that the hole inside him was getting bigger and bigger; but
Mother Rodesia, now that she had got them to go with her, said very
few words, and did not take the least notice of their complaints. At
last, when they suddenly felt that they could not go another step, so
great was their fatigue, they came out on an open clearing in the
wood, in the center of which a great big tent was pitched. Several
smaller tents were also to be seen in the neighborhood of the big one,
and a lot of children, very brown and ugly, and only half-dressed,
were lying about on the grass, squabbling and rolling over one
another. Some dogs also were with the children, and an old woman, a
