cachalot, actually involved in them. The turns were off my body, but I
was able to twist a couple of turns round my arms, which, in case of his
sounding, I could readily let go. Then all was lost in roar and rush, as
of the heart of some mighty cataract, during which I was sometimes
above, sometimes beneath, the water, but always clinging, with every
ounce of energy still left, to the line. Now, one thought was
uppermost--"What if he should breach?" I had seen them do so when in
flurry, leaping full twenty feet in the air. Then I prayed.

Quickly as all the preceding changes had passed, came perfect peace.
There I lay, still alive, but so weak that, although I could feel the
turns slipping off my arms, and knew that I should slide off the slope
of the whale's side into the sea if they did, I could make no effort to
secure myself. Everything then passed away from me, just as if I had
gone to sleep. I do not at all understand how I kept my position, nor
how long, but I awoke to the blessed sound of voices, and saw the second
mate's boat alongside.

FRANK T. BULLEN: "The Cruise of the Cachalot."




THE MAPLE


    All hail to the broad-leaved Maple!
      With her fair and changeful dress--
    A type of our youthful country
      In its pride and loveliness;
    Whether in Spring or Summer,
      Or in the dreary Fall,
    'Mid Nature's forest children,
      She's fairest of them all.

    Down sunny slopes and valleys
      Her graceful form is seen,
    Her wide, umbrageous branches
      The sunburnt reaper screen;
    'Mid the dark-browed firs and cedars
      Her livelier colours shine,
    Like the dawn of the brighter future
      On the settler's hut of pine.

    She crowns the pleasant hilltop,
      Whispers on breezy downs,
    And casts refreshing shadows
      O'er the streets of our busy towns;
    She gladdens the aching eyeball,
      Shelters the weary head,
    And scatters her crimson glories
      On the graves of the silent dead.

    When winter's frosts are yielding
      To the sun's returning sway,
    And merry groups are speeding
      To sugar-woods away;
    The sweet and welling juices,
      Which form their welcome spoil,
    Tell of the teeming plenty,
      Which here waits honest toil.

    When sweet-toned Spring, soft-breathing,
      Breaks Nature's icy sleep,
    And the forest boughs are swaying
      Like the green waves of the deep;
    In her fair and budding beauty,
      A fitting emblem, she,
    Of this our land of promise,
      Of hope, of liberty.

    And when her leaves, all crimson,
      Droop silently and fall,
    Like drops of life-blood welling
      From a warrior brave and tall;
    They tell how fast and freely
      Would her children's blood be shed,
    Ere the soil of our faith and freedom
      Should echo a foeman's tread.

    Then hail to the broad-leaved Maple!
      With her fair and changeful dress--
    A type of our youthful country
      In its pride and loveliness;
    Whether in Spring or Summer,
      Or in the dreary Fall,
    'Mid Nature's forest children,
      She's fairest of them all.

H. F. DARNELL




DAMON AND PYTHIAS


In Syracuse there was so hard a ruler that the people made a plot to
drive him out of the city. The plot was discovered, and the king
commanded that the leaders should be put to death. One of these, named
Damon, lived at some distance from Syracuse. He asked that before he was
put to death he might be allowed to go home to say good-bye to his
family, promising that he would then come back to die at the appointed
time.

The king did not believe that he would keep his word, and said: "I will
not let you go unless you find some friend who will come and stay in
your place. Then, if you are not back on the day set for execution, I
shall put your friend to death in your stead." The king thought to
himself: "Surely no one will ever take the place of a man condemned to
death."

Now, Damon had a very dear friend, named Pythias, who at once came
forward and offered to stay in prison while Damon was allowed to go
away. The king was very much surprised, but he had given his word; Damon
was therefore permitted to leave for home, while Pythias was shut up in
prison.

Many days passed, the time for the execution was close at hand, and
Damon had not come back. The king, curious to see how Pythias would
behave, now that death seemed so near, went to the prison.

"Your friend will never return," he said to Pythias.

"You are wrong," was the answer. "Damon will be here if he can possibly
come. But he has to travel by sea, and the winds have been blowing the
wrong way for several days. However, it is much better that I should die
than he. I have no wife and no children, and I love my friend so well
that it would be easier to die for him than to live without him. So I am
hoping and praying that he may be delayed until my head has fallen."

The king went away more puzzled than ever.

The fatal day arrived but Damon had not come. Pythias was brought
forward and led upon the scaffold. "My prayers are heard," he cried. "I
shall be permitted to die for my friend. But mark my words. Damon is
faithful and true; you will yet have reason to know that he has done his
utmost to be here!"

Just at this moment a man came galloping up at full speed, on a horse
covered with foam! It was Damon. In an instant he was on the scaffold,
and had Pythias in his arms. "My beloved friend," he cried, "the gods be
praised that you are safe. What agony have I suffered in the fear that
my delay was putting your life in danger!"

There was no joy in the face of Pythias, for he did not care to live if
his friend must die. But the king had heard all. At last he was forced
to believe in the unselfish friendship of these two. His hard heart
melted at the sight, and he set them both free, asking only that they
would be his friends, also.

CHARLOTTE M. YONGE




    Honour and shame from no condition rise;
    Act well your part, there all the honour lies.

POPE




THE WRECK OF THE ORPHEUS


    All day, amid the masts and shrouds,
      They hung above the wave;
    The sky o'erhead was dark with clouds,
      And dark beneath, their grave.
    The water leaped against its prey,
      Breaking with heavy crash,
    And when some slack'ning hands gave way,
      They fell with dull, low splash.

    Captain and man ne'er thought to swerve;
      The boats went to and fro;
    With cheery face and tranquil nerve,
      Each saw his brother go.
    Each saw his brother go, and knew,
      As night came swiftly on,
    That less and less his own chance grew--
      Night fell, and hope was gone.

    The saved stood on the steamer's deck,
      Straining their eyes to see
    Their comrades clinging to the wreck
      Upon that surging sea;
    And still they gazed into the dark
      Till, on their startled ears,
    There came from that swift-sinking bark
      A sound of gallant cheers.

    Again, and yet again it rose;
      Then silence round them fell--
    Silence of death--and each man knows
      It was a last farewell.
    No cry of anguish, no wild shriek
      Of men in agony--
    No dropping down of watchers weak,
      Weary and glad to die,

    But death met with three British cheers--
      Cheers of immortal fame;
    For us the choking, blinding tears--
      For them a glorious name.
    Oh England, while thy sailor-host
      Can live and die like these,
    Be thy broad lands or won or lost,
      Thou'rt mistress of the seas!

C. A. L.




THE TIDE RIVER


      Clear and cool, clear and cool,
    By laughing shallow, and dreaming pool;
      Cool and clear, cool and clear,
    By shining shingle, and foaming weir;
    Under the crag where the ouzel sings,
    And the ivied wall where the church-bell rings,
      Undefiled, for the undefiled;
    Play by me, bathe in me, mother and child.

      Dank and foul, dank and foul,
    By the smoky town in its murky cowl;
      Foul and dank, foul and dank,
    By wharf and sewer and slimy bank;
      Darker and darker the further I go,
      Baser and baser the richer I grow;
        Who dare sport with the sin defiled?
    Shrink from me, turn from me, mother and child.

      Strong and free, strong and free,
    The flood-gates are open, away to the sea;
      Free and strong, free and strong,
    Cleansing my streams as I hurry along
    To the golden sands, and the leaping bar,
    And the taintless tide that awaits me afar;
    As I lose myself in the infinite main,
    Like a soul that has sinned and is pardoned again.
      Undefiled, for the undefiled,
      Play by me, bathe in me, mother and child.

KINGSLEY




The best result of all education is the acquired power of making
yourself do what you ought to do, when you ought to do it, whether you
like it or not.

HUXLEY

[Illustration: ONTARIO AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE]




WISDOM THE SUPREME PRIZE


    My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD;
    Neither be weary of his reproof:
    For whom the LORD loveth he reproveth;
    Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

      Happy is the man that findeth wisdom,
      And the man that getteth understanding.
      For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver,
      And the gain thereof than fine gold.
      She is more precious than rubies:
      And none of the things thou canst desire are to be compared unto her.

      Length of days is in her right hand;
      In her left hand are riches and honour.
      Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
      And all her paths are peace.
      She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her:
      And happy is every one that retaineth her.

    The LORD by wisdom founded the earth;
    By understanding he established the heavens.
    By his knowledge the depths were broken up,
    And the skies drop down the dew.

PROVERBS, III.




THE ORCHARD


    There's no garden like an orchard,
      Nature shows no fairer thing
    Than the apple trees in blossom
      In these late days o' the spring.

    Here the robin redbreast's nesting,
      Here, from golden dawn till night,
    Honey bees are gaily swimming
      In a sea of pink and white.

    Just a sea of fragrant blossoms,
      Steeped in sunshine, drenched in dew,
    Just a fragrant breath which tells you
      Earth is fair again and new.

    Just a breath of subtle sweetness,
      Breath which holds the spice o' youth,
    Holds the promise o' the summer--
      Holds the best o' things, forsooth.

    There's no garden like an orchard,
      Nature shows no fairer thing
    Than the apple trees in blossom
      In these late days o' the spring.

JEAN BLEWETT
