
"Not it," said Peter; "you didn't go because you were brave, but because
Bobbie and I aren't skunks. Now where's the nearest house, I wonder? You
can't see anything here for the trees."

"There's a roof over there," said Phyllis, pointing down the line.

"That's the signal-box," said Peter, "and you know you're not allowed to
speak to signalmen on duty. It's wrong."

"I'm not near so afraid of doing wrong as I was of going into that
tunnel," said Phyllis. "Come on," and she started to run along the line.
So Peter ran, too.

It was very hot in the sunshine, and both children were hot and
breathless by the time they stopped, and bending their heads back to
look up at the open windows of the signal-box, shouted "Hi!" as loud
as their breathless state allowed. But no one answered. The signal-box
stood quiet as an empty nursery, and the handrail of its steps was hot
to the hands of the children as they climbed softly up. They peeped
in at the open door. The signalman was sitting on a chair tilted back
against the wall. His head leaned sideways, and his mouth was open. He
was fast asleep.

"My hat!" cried Peter; "wake up!" And he cried it in a terrible voice,
for he knew that if a signalman sleeps on duty, he risks losing his
situation, let alone all the other dreadful risks to trains which expect
him to tell them when it is safe for them to go their ways.

The signalman never moved. Then Peter sprang to him and shook him. And
slowly, yawning and stretching, the man awoke. But the moment he WAS
awake he leapt to his feet, put his hands to his head "like a mad
maniac," as Phyllis said afterwards, and shouted:--

"Oh, my heavens--what's o'clock?"

"Twelve thirteen," said Peter, and indeed it was by the white-faced,
round-faced clock on the wall of the signal-box.

The man looked at the clock, sprang to the levers, and wrenched them
this way and that. An electric bell tingled--the wires and cranks
creaked, and the man threw himself into a chair. He was very pale,
and the sweat stood on his forehead "like large dewdrops on a white
cabbage," as Phyllis remarked later. He was trembling, too; the children
could see his big hairy hands shake from side to side, "with quite
extra-sized trembles," to use the subsequent words of Peter. He drew
long breaths. Then suddenly he cried, "Thank God, thank God you come in
when you did--oh, thank God!" and his shoulders began to heave and his
face grew red again, and he hid it in those large hairy hands of his.

"Oh, don't cry--don't," said Phyllis, "it's all right now," and she
patted him on one big, broad shoulder, while Peter conscientiously
thumped the other.

But the signalman seemed quite broken down, and the children had to
pat him and thump him for quite a long time before he found his
handkerchief--a red one with mauve and white horseshoes on it--and
mopped his face and spoke. During this patting and thumping interval a
train thundered by.

"I'm downright shamed, that I am," were the words of the big signalman
when he had stopped crying; "snivelling like a kid." Then suddenly he
seemed to get cross. "And what was you doing up here, anyway?" he said;
"you know it ain't allowed."

"Yes," said Phyllis, "we knew it was wrong--but I wasn't afraid of doing
wrong, and so it turned out right. You aren't sorry we came."

"Lor' love you--if you hadn't 'a' come--" he stopped and then went on.
"It's a disgrace, so it is, sleeping on duty. If it was to come to be
known--even as it is, when no harm's come of it."

"It won't come to be known," said Peter; "we aren't sneaks. All the
same, you oughtn't to sleep on duty--it's dangerous."

"Tell me something I don't know," said the man, "but I can't help it.
I know'd well enough just how it 'ud be. But I couldn't get off. They
couldn't get no one to take on my duty. I tell you I ain't had ten
minutes' sleep this last five days. My little chap's ill--pewmonia, the
Doctor says--and there's no one but me and 'is little sister to do for
him. That's where it is. The gell must 'ave her sleep. Dangerous? Yes, I
believe you. Now go and split on me if you like."

"Of course we won't," said Peter, indignantly, but Phyllis ignored the
whole of the signalman's speech, except the first six words.

"You asked us," she said, "to tell you something you don't know. Well,
I will. There's a boy in the tunnel over there with a red jersey and his
leg broken."

"What did he want to go into the blooming tunnel for, then?" said the
man.

"Don't you be so cross," said Phyllis, kindly. "WE haven't done anything
wrong except coming and waking you up, and that was right, as it
happens."

Then Peter told how the boy came to be in the tunnel.

"Well," said the man, "I don't see as I can do anything. I can't leave
the box."

"You might tell us where to go after someone who isn't in a box,
though," said Phyllis.

"There's Brigden's farm over yonder--where you see the smoke a-coming
up through the trees," said the man, more and more grumpy, as Phyllis
noticed.

"Well, good-bye, then," said Peter.

But the man said, "Wait a minute." He put his hand in his pocket and
brought out some money--a lot of pennies and one or two shillings and
sixpences and half-a-crown. He picked out two shillings and held them
out.

"Here," he said. "I'll give you this to hold your tongues about what's
taken place to-day."

There was a short, unpleasant pause. Then:--

"You ARE a nasty man, though, aren't you?" said Phyllis.

Peter took a step forward and knocked the man's hand up, so that the
shillings leapt out of it and rolled on the floor.

"If anything COULD make me sneak, THAT would!" he said. "Come, Phil,"
and marched out of the signal-box with flaming cheeks.

Phyllis hesitated. Then she took the hand, still held out stupidly, that
the shillings had been in.

"I forgive you," she said, "even if Peter doesn't. You're not in your
proper senses, or you'd never have done that. I know want of sleep sends
people mad. Mother told me. I hope your little boy will soon be better,
and--"

"Come on, Phil," cried Peter, eagerly.

"I give you my sacred honour-word we'll never tell anyone. Kiss and be
friends," said Phyllis, feeling how noble it was of her to try to make
up a quarrel in which she was not to blame.

The signalman stooped and kissed her.

"I do believe I'm a bit off my head, Sissy," he said. "Now run along
home to Mother. I didn't mean to put you about--there."

So Phil left the hot signal-box and followed Peter across the fields to
the farm.

When the farm men, led by Peter and Phyllis and carrying a hurdle
covered with horse-cloths, reached the manhole in the tunnel, Bobbie
was fast asleep and so was Jim. Worn out with the pain, the Doctor said
afterwards.

"Where does he live?" the bailiff from the farm asked, when Jim had been
lifted on to the hurdle.

"In Northumberland," answered Bobbie.

"I'm at school at Maidbridge," said Jim. "I suppose I've got to get back
there, somehow."

"Seems to me the Doctor ought to have a look in first," said the
bailiff.

"Oh, bring him up to our house," said Bobbie. "It's only a little way by
the road. I'm sure Mother would say we ought to."

"Will your Ma like you bringing home strangers with broken legs?"

"She took the poor Russian home herself," said Bobbie. "I know she'd say
we ought."

"All right," said the bailiff, "you ought to know what your Ma 'ud like.
I wouldn't take it upon me to fetch him up to our place without I asked
the Missus first, and they call me the Master, too."

"Are you sure your Mother won't mind?" whispered Jim.

"Certain," said Bobbie.

"Then we're to take him up to Three Chimneys?" said the bailiff.

"Of course," said Peter.

"Then my lad shall nip up to Doctor's on his bike, and tell him to come
down there. Now, lads, lift him quiet and steady. One, two, three!"

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Thus it happened that Mother, writing away for dear life at a story
about a Duchess, a designing villain, a secret passage, and a missing
will, dropped her pen as her work-room door burst open, and turned to
see Bobbie hatless and red with running.

"Oh, Mother," she cried, "do come down. We found a hound in a red jersey
in the tunnel, and he's broken his leg and they're bringing him home."

"They ought to take him to the vet," said Mother, with a worried frown;
"I really CAN'T have a lame dog here."

"He's not a dog, really--he's a boy," said Bobbie, between laughing and
choking.

"Then he ought to be taken home to his mother."

"His mother's dead," said Bobbie, "and his father's in Northumberland.
Oh, Mother, you will be nice to him? I told him I was sure you'd want us
to bring him home. You always want to help everybody."

Mother smiled, but she sighed, too. It is nice that your children should
believe you willing to open house and heart to any and every one who
needs help. But it is rather embarrassing sometimes, too, when they act
on their belief.

"Oh, well," said Mother, "we must make the best of it."

When Jim was carried in, dreadfully white and with set lips whose red
had faded to a horrid bluey violet colour, Mother said:--

"I am glad you brought him here. Now, Jim, let's get you comfortable in
bed before the Doctor comes!"

And Jim, looking at her kind eyes, felt a little, warm, comforting flush
of new courage.

"It'll hurt rather, won't it?" he said. "I don't mean to be a coward.
You won't think I'm a coward if I faint again, will you? I really
and truly don't do it on purpose. And I do hate to give you all this
trouble."

"Don't you worry," said Mother; "it's you that have the trouble, you
poor dear--not us."

And she kissed him just as if he had been Peter. "We love to have you
here--don't we, Bobbie?"

"Yes," said Bobbie--and she saw by her Mother's face how right she had
been to bring home the wounded hound in the red jersey.



Chapter XIII. The hound's grandfather.


Mother did not get back to her writing all that day, for the
red-jerseyed hound whom the children had brought to Three Chimneys had
to be put to bed. And then the Doctor came, and hurt him most horribly.
Mother was with him all through it, and that made it a little better
than it would have been, but "bad was the best," as Mrs. Viney said.

The children sat in the parlour downstairs and heard the sound of the
Doctor's boots going backwards and forwards over the bedroom floor. And
once or twice there was a groan.

"It's horrible," said Bobbie. "Oh, I wish Dr. Forrest would make haste.
Oh, poor Jim!"

"It IS horrible," said Peter, "but it's very exciting. I wish Doctors
weren't so stuck-up about who they'll have in the room when they're
doing things. I should most awfully like to see a leg set. I believe the
bones crunch like anything."

"Don't!" said the two girls at once.

"Rubbish!" said Peter. "How are you going to be Red Cross Nurses, like
you were talking of coming home, if you can't even stand hearing me say
about bones crunching? You'd have to HEAR them crunch on the field of
battle--and be steeped in gore up to the elbows as likely as not, and--"

"Stop it!" cried Bobbie, with a white face; "you don't know how funny
you're making me feel."

"Me, too," said Phyllis, whose face was pink.

"Cowards!" said Peter.

"I'm not," said Bobbie. "I helped Mother with your rake-wounded foot,
and so did Phil--you know we did."

"Well, then!" said Peter. "Now look here. It would be a jolly good thing
for you if I were to talk to you every day for half an hour about broken
bones and people's insides, so as to get you used to it."

A chair was moved above.

"Listen," said Peter, "that's the bone crunching."

"I do wish you wouldn't," said Phyllis. "Bobbie doesn't like it."

"I'll tell you what they do," said Peter. I can't think what made him so
horrid. Perhaps it was because he had been so very nice and kind all the
earlier part of the day, and now he had to have a change. This is called
reaction. One notices it now and then in oneself. Sometimes when one has
been extra good for a longer time than usual, one is suddenly attacked
by a violent fit of not being good at all. "I'll tell you what they do,"
said Peter; "they strap the broken man down so that he can't resist or
interfere with their doctorish designs, and then someone holds his head,
and someone holds his leg--the broken one, and pulls it till the bones
fit in--with a crunch, mind you! Then they strap it up and--let's play
at bone-setting!"

"Oh, no!" said Phyllis.

But Bobbie said suddenly: "All right--LET'S! I'll be the doctor, and
Phil can be the nurse. You can be the broken boner; we can get at your
legs more easily, because you don't wear petticoats."

"I'll get the splints and bandages," said Peter; "you get the couch of
suffering ready."

The ropes that had tied up the boxes that had come from home were all
in a wooden packing-case in the cellar. When Peter brought in a trailing
tangle of them, and two boards for splints, Phyllis was excitedly
giggling.

"Now, then," he said, and lay down on the settle, groaning most
grievously.

"Not so loud!" said Bobbie, beginning to wind the rope round him and the
settle. "You pull, Phil."

"Not so tight," moaned Peter. "You'll break my other leg."

Bobbie worked on in silence, winding more and more rope round him.

"That's enough," said Peter. "I can't move at all. Oh, my poor leg!" He
groaned again.

"SURE you can't move?" asked Bobbie, in a rather strange tone.

"Quite sure," replied Peter. "Shall we play it's bleeding freely or
not?" he asked cheerfully.

"YOU can play what you like," said Bobbie, sternly, folding her arms and
looking down at him where he lay all wound round and round with cord.
"Phil and I are going away. And we shan't untie you till you promise
never, never to talk to us about blood and wounds unless we say you may.
Come, Phil!"

"You beast!" said Peter, writhing. "I'll never promise, never. I'll
yell, and Mother will come."

"Do," said Bobbie, "and tell her why we tied you up! Come on, Phil. No,
I'm not a beast, Peter. But you wouldn't stop when we asked you and--"

"Yah," said Peter, "it wasn't even your own idea. You got it out of
Stalky!"

Bobbie and Phil, retiring in silent dignity, were met at the door by the
Doctor. He came in rubbing his hands and looking pleased with himself.

"Well," he said, "THAT job's done. It's a nice clean fracture, and it'll
go on all right, I've no doubt. Plucky young chap, too--hullo! what's
all this?"

His eye had fallen on Peter who lay mousy-still in his bonds on the
settle.

"Playing at prisoners, eh?" he said; but his eyebrows had gone up a
little. Somehow he had not thought that Bobbie would be playing while in
the room above someone was having a broken bone set.

"Oh, no!" said Bobbie, "not at PRISONERS. We were playing at setting
bones. Peter's the broken boner, and I was the doctor."

The Doctor frowned.

"Then I must say," he said, and he said it rather sternly, "that's it's
a very heartless game. Haven't you enough imagination even to faintly
picture what's been going on upstairs? That poor chap, with the drops
of sweat on his forehead, and biting his lips so as not to cry out, and
every touch on his leg agony and--"

"YOU ought to be tied up," said Phyllis; "you're as bad as--"

"Hush," said Bobbie; "I'm sorry, but we weren't heartless, really."

"I was, I suppose," said Peter, crossly. "All right, Bobbie, don't you
go on being noble and screening me, because I jolly well won't have it.
It was only that I kept on talking about blood and wounds. I wanted to
train them for Red Cross Nurses. And I wouldn't stop when they asked
me."

"Well?" said Dr. Forrest, sitting down.

"Well--then I said, 'Let's play at setting bones.' It was all rot. I
knew Bobbie wouldn't. I only said it to tease her. And then when she
said 'yes,' of course I had to go through with it. And they tied me up.
They got it out of Stalky. And I think it's a beastly shame."

He managed to writhe over and hide his face against the wooden back of
the settle.

"I didn't think that anyone would know but us," said Bobbie, indignantly
answering Peter's unspoken reproach. "I never thought of your coming in.
And hearing about blood and wounds does really make me feel most awfully
funny. It was only a joke our tying him up. Let me untie you, Pete."

"I don't care if you never untie me," said Peter; "and if that's your
idea of a joke--"

"If I were you," said the Doctor, though really he did not quite know
what to say, "I should be untied before your Mother comes down. You
don't want to worry her just now, do you?"

"I don't promise anything about not saying about wounds, mind," said
Peter, in very surly tones, as Bobbie and Phyllis began to untie the
knots.

"I'm very sorry, Pete," Bobbie whispered, leaning close to him as she
