flourishy letters underneath. The whole of this had now been protected
with a sheet of glass and enclosed by a frame. A table in the room, an
easy chair, and a gas-fire seemed to point to its occasional occupation.

"You actually haven't had this changed!" exclaimed Ingred. "I thought it
must all have been swept away by now!"

"No. You see, Father took me over the house when first he decided to
come here, and when he was arranging what papers to choose. I fell in
love with this dear wee room just as it was, and begged that it mightn't
be touched. Father let me have it for my very own. It was so different
from all other rooms. I liked the pictures pasted on the walls, and the
bits of poker-work nailed up. I knew some other girls must have been
here, and it gave me a homely feeling, as if you had only gone away for
a few minutes, and might come back any time and talk to me. Then there
was your portrait. I wondered who 'Ingred' was! The name struck my fancy
immensely, and so did the face. You remember we removed to Rotherwood at
the end of July, and all the rest of the summer I wondered about the
portrait. I used to come up here and sit when I felt very lonely, and it
seemed company, somehow. You can't think how fond I got of it. I suppose
I was rather silly and absurd, but I knew nobody in Grovebury then, and
Mother was ill in her room, and Father away all day--anyhow I got into
the habit of talking to it as if it were a girl friend, and showing it
my paintings, and my pressed flowers, and everything I was doing. I
pretended it liked to see them. Sometimes I even brought up my violin
and played to it. That was nicer than being quite by myself. It grew to
be as dear to me as the little sister I had always longed to have.

"Then in September I went to the College. You can imagine what a start
it gave me when somebody called you 'Ingred.' I looked at you, and I saw
at once that you were the 'Ingred' of my picture, only grown older. I
was absolutely thrilled. It was very foolish of me, but I thought
somehow you'd understand. Of course you didn't! How could you? It was
idiotic of me to expect it. The 'Ingred' on the wall was simply the
friend of my fancy."

"And the real one was just hateful to you!" said Ingred sorrowfully. "I
know I was a perfect beast! I was ashamed of myself all the time, only I
wouldn't confess it. Lispeth used to slate me sometimes for my
nastiness. She called me 'a jealous blighter,' and so I was! The girl of
your fancy is a great deal nicer than I am, or ever can be, but I'll try
to live up to her as well as I can, Bess, if you'll let me!"

"Let you!" echoed Bess, linking her arm affectionately in that of her
friend. "You're a perfect dear nowadays."

The girls tore themselves away quite regretfully from the little attic
studio, but time was passing only too quickly, and they wished to try a
game of tennis before Ingred returned to the hostel.

"So you like the house in its new dress?" asked Bess as they walked down
the steps into the garden. "Father thinks it's beautiful. He says Mr.
Saxon is the best architect he knows. He's simply put every thing in
exactly the right place. Does he only design houses, or does he go in
for anything bigger?"

"He would if he got the chance," replied Ingred. "What sort of things do
you mean?"

"Oh, a church, or a museum, or an art gallery."

"I know he's done most splendid designs for these, but he's never had
the luck to get them accepted. There's generally so much influence
needed to get your plans taken for a big public building like that. At
least, that's what Dad says. If you have a relation on the City Council,
it makes a vast difference to your chances. We've no friends at Court."

"Oh!" said Bess, rather abstractedly, and the subject dropped.

The girls had only time for one game of tennis, when the stable-clock,
chiming half-past six, reminded Ingred that if she wished to do her
preparation that evening she must rush back to the hotel. She bade Bess
a reluctant good-by.

"You'll come and see me again?" asked the latter.

"Rather! And I'll send thought-waves to animate my portrait, and let it
talk for me in my absence," laughed Ingred. "Perhaps you'll get more
than you bargain for--I'm an awful chatter-box."

"You'll never talk too much for me," said Bess, as she kissed her
good-by.




CHAPTER XIX

The Nun's Walk


The Saxon family agreed that whatever might be the drawbacks of
Wynch-on-the-Wold in wintry weather, it was an idyllic spot in the month
of May. The wall-flowers which Ingred had transplanted were now in their
prime, the apple trees were in blossom, clumps of lilies were pushing up
fast, and pink double daisies bordered the front walk. The woods in the
combe below the moor were a mass of bluebells, and here and there those
who searched might find rarer flowers, orchises, lily of the valley, and
true lover's knot. Friends who had shirked the journey while the winds
blew cold, now began to drop in at the bungalow and take tea under the
apple trees. Ingred, returning home on Friday afternoons, would find
bicycles stacked by the gate and visitors seated in the garden. She
greeted them with enthusiasm or the reverse, according to her individual
tastes.

"Really, Ingred, they don't seem to teach manners at the College now!"
said Quenrede one day.

"The way you scowled at Mrs. Galsworthy and Gertrude was most uncivil.
You didn't look in the very least pleased to see them."

"I wasn't! They're the most stupid people on the face of the earth! And
they stayed such ages. I thought they'd never go. Just when I wanted a
nice private talk with you and Mother before the boys came back. Why
should you look glad to see a person when you're not?"

"For the sake of manners, my dear!"

"Then manners really mean humbug," declared Ingred, who loved to argue.
"To say you're glad to see people, when you're not, is telling
deliberate fibs. Most hypocritical, I call it! Why can't people tell the
truth?"

"Because it would generally be offensive and unkind to do so," put in
Mother, who happened to overhear. "There's another side to the question,
too. When you say--against your will--that you are glad to see somebody,
you mean that all the _best_ part of you is glad--the kind, generous
part that likes to give pleasure, not the selfish lower part that only
thinks of its own convenience. So you are not really telling a fib, but
being true to your nobler self. A great deal of what people call 'plain
speaking' is simply giving rein to their most uncharitable thoughts. As
a rule, I say Heaven defend me from those ultra-truthful souls who enjoy
'speaking their minds.'"

"But are we to gush over every bore?" asked Ingred.

"There are limits, of course. We can't let all our time be frittered
away by idle friends, but we can generally manage tactfully without
offending them. Don't look so woe-begone, childie! Nobody else is coming
to-night, and I promise you tea in the woods to-morrow."

"By ourselves?"

"Unless anyone very nice comes over to join us," put in Quenrede
quickly.

"You girls shall give the invitations. I won't bring any middle-aged
people," laughed Mother, with a sly glance at Quenrede.

The party in the bluebell woods on Saturday was entirely a family one,
with the exception of Mr. Broughten, who rode over on a motor-bicycle
ostensibly to lend some microscopic slides to Athelstane, though Ingred
suspected there was another attraction in the visit. Quenrede, who
professed great surprise, gave him a guarded welcome.

"After all the fuss you made about my manners yesterday, you might have
seemed more glad to see him," sniffed Ingred critically.

"Might I? Well, really, I think I'm going to hang a label round my neck:
'Pleased to meet you! Let 'em all come!' It would save trouble. Stick
tight to me when we're gathering bluebells. Three's better company
sometimes than two. Don't I like him? Oh yes, he's all right, but I'm
not keen on a _tete-a-tete_."

After which hint, Ingred, who had some acquaintance with the perversity
of Quenrede's feminine mind, did exactly the opposite, and, abandoning
her basket to the custody of Mr. Broughten, left him helping her sister
to gather bluebells, and took herself off with Hereward.

"He's not half bad!" she ruminated laughingly. "Not of course a fairy
prince exactly, or even a Member of Parliament, but the bubbles on the
pool by the whispering stones certainly came to 'J,' and his name is
'John,' for I asked Athelstane. There's the finger of fate about it, and
Queenie had better make up her mind."

With Ingred, however, school matters were at present much more
interesting than speculating about her sister's possible future. It was
an interesting term at the College. Cricket and tennis were in full
swing, and she took an active part in both. The best of being at the
hostel was that the boarders had the benefit of the tennis courts in the
evening, and so secured an advantage in the matter of practice over any
girls who did not possess a private court at home. So far the College
had not competed in tournaments, but Blossom Webster was hopeful that
later on in the term some champions might be chosen who would not
disgrace the Games Club. Meantime she urged everybody to practice, and
coached her favorites with the eye of an expert. Nora was particularly
marked out for future distinction. She had made tremendous strides
lately, and her swift serves were the terror of her opponents. The
hostel felt justly proud of her achievements, and would collect in the
evening, after prep., to watch her play a set of singles with Susie
Wakefield, who, though older and taller, almost invariably lost.

Susie had good points of her own, however, and with Nora as partner
could beat even Blossom and Aline occasionally. No doubt the future
credit of the school was in their hands.

One evening it happened that Nora was in a particularly slashing and
reckless mood, and she sent no less than three balls flying straight
over the wall that bordered the tennis courts. They fell into the
premises of old Dr. Broadfield, whose garden adjoined that of the
school. They were not the first that had done so, indeed so many balls
had gone over lately that the loss was growing serious. At one time the
girls had been wont to ring Dr. Broadfield's front-door bell and beg
permission to pick up their property, but they had been received so
sourly by his elderly housekeeper, that they hardly dared to ask again.

"Three good balls gone in half an hour!" grieved Verity. "There'll soon
be none left at this rate. I believe there must be a dozen at least
lying on the grass over there, only that stingy old thing won't throw
them back. It's really too bad."

"How could we possibly get them?" ruminated Doreen.

"Sham ill, get Dr. Broadfield to attend, and coax them out of him,"
suggested Fil.

Doreen shook her head.

"He's not the school doctor, unfortunately. When Millie sprained her
ankle, Miss Burd sent for Dr. Harrison. We might fish for them with a
butterfly net tied to the end of a drilling pole, if they're anywhere
near enough."

"They're not. I peeped over the wall and they've rolled quite a long way
off."

"How weak! What are we to do?"

"There's nothing for it," said Ingred slowly, "but to make a sally into
the enemy's trenches and fetch them back!"

"Oh! I dare say! But who's going to do the sallying business?"

"_I_ will, if you like."

"_You!_"

"Yes; I don't mind a scrap."

"You heroine!"

"Don't mensh!"

"But suppose you're caught?"

"I shall have to risk that, of course. I'll reconnoiter carefully
first."

The boundary between the College premises and the property of Dr.
Broadfield was part of the old Abbey wall. The mortar had crumbled away
from the stones, leaving large interstices, so it was quite easy to
climb. With a little boosting from Verity and Nora, Ingred successfully
reached the top, and peered over into the neighboring garden. Just below
her was a rockery, which offered not only an easy means of descent, but
a quick mode of egress in the case of the necessity of beating a hasty
retreat.

Beyond the flower-bed, and lying on the lawn, were no less than seven
tennis balls, marked with the unmistakable blue cross that claimed them
for the College. The sight was enough to spur on the faintest heart.
Apparently there was nobody in this part of the garden, and no watchful
face peered from any of the windows. It was certainly an opportunity
that ought not to be missed. Ingred slipped first one foot and then the
other over the wall, and dropped on to the rockery. It was the work of a
minute to pick up the balls and throw them back to rejoicing friends. If
she herself had followed immediately there would have been no sequel to
the episode. But happening to look under the bushes, she noticed another
ball, and went in quest of it. It seemed a shame to return until she had
found any that might have strayed farther afield, so she dived under the
rhododendron bushes, and was rewarded with two more balls. She had
issued out on to another part of the lawn, and was on the very point of
retreating, when she suddenly heard voices on the path between the
bushes. To run to the wall would be to cross open country, so, with an
instinctive desire to seek cover, she dived into a summer-house close
by, and shut the door. The footsteps came nearer. Were they going to
follow her into her retreat, and catch her? It would be too ignominious!
Peeping warily through a small window of the summer-house, she saw two
young people, apparently much interested in each other, strolling
leisurely up. To her immense relief they did not attempt to enter, but
sat down on a seat outside the window. They were so near that she could
perforce hear every word, and was an unwilling but compulsory
eavesdropper.

At first the conversation consisted mostly of tender nothings: "He"
certainly called her "Darling!"; "She" replied: "Oh, Donald, don't!" and
a sound followed so suspiciously like a kiss that Ingred, only a few
feet away from them, almost giggled aloud. She wondered how long they
were going to keep her a prisoner. It might be very pleasant for
themselves to sit "spooning" in the garden on a mild May evening, but if
they prolonged their enjoyment beyond eight o'clock, the hostel
supper-bell would ring, and any girl not in her place at the table would
lose a mark for punctuality.

"He" on the other side of the window, was waxing sentimental about old
times and bygone days.

"I'm glad you're not a nun, darling!" he remarked fatuously. "If you had
lived in the ancient Abbey, I shouldn't have been able to walk about the
garden with you, should I?"

"I suppose not," she ventured, "especially if you'd been a monk."

"I dare say some of them _did_ manage to do a little love-making
sometimes, though. What's that story about the ghost?"

"The White Nun, do you mean? The one that haunts the College gardens?"

(Ingred pricked up her ears at this).

"Yes. Isn't there some legend or other about her?"

"I believe there is, but I've forgotten it. I only know she walks on
moonlight nights, down the steps by the sun-dial, and then disappears
into the wall near the Abbey. At least she's supposed to. I've never met
anybody who's seen her. Don't talk of such shuddery things! You make me
feel creepy!"

Apparently he offered masculine protection, for another suggestive sound
was followed by a giggle and a remonstrance. The hostel bell was
ringing, and the Abbey clock was striking eight. Were they going to stay
talking all night? Ingred was growing desperate. She wondered how she
was going to explain her absence to Mrs. Best. She even debated whether
it would be advisable to open the summer-house door, bolt across the
lawn, and trust to luck that the matter was not reported at the College.
She had her hand on the latch when the feminine voice outside remarked:

"It's getting chilly, Donald!"

"Don't catch cold, darling!" with tender solicitude. "Would you rather
go indoors?"

"Hooray!" triumphed Ingred inwardly, though she did not dare to utter a
sound.

It took a little while for the lovers to get under way and finally
stroll back along the path among the bushes. Ingred gave them time to
walk out of sight and hearing, then made a dash for the rockery,
scrambled over the wall, tore across the tennis courts, and entered the
dining-room nearly ten minutes late for supper. Mrs. Best looked at her
reproachfully, and Doreen, who was monitress for the month, took a
notebook from her pocket and made an entry therein. Nora and Verity and
Fil went on eating sago blanc-mange with stolid countenances that
betrayed no knowledge of their room-mate's doings, but that night, when
The Foursomes met in the privacy of Dormitory 2, they demanded an
account of her adventure.

She certainly had a piece of interesting news to confide.

"Did you know that a ghost haunts the garden?"

"No! Oh, I say, where?"

"That part by the sun-dial. I've heard it called 'The Nun's Walk!'"

"So have I; but I never knew there was a ghost!"

"It's supposed to walk on moonlight nights."

"How fearfully thrillsome!"

"I've never seen a ghost!" shivered Fil.

"No more have I--and I've never met anyone who exactly has. It's
generally their cousin's cousin who's told them about it."

"There's a moon to-night," remarked Nora.

"So there is!"

The four girls looked at one another, hair brushes in hand. Each had it
on the tip of her tongue to make a suggestion.

"I _dare_ you to go!" said Verity at last.

"Not alone?"

Fil was clutching already at Nora's hand.

"Well, no! Hardly alone. I vote we all go together and try if we can see
anything."

"It would be rather spooksomely jinky!"

"Well, look here, don't let's undress properly, but get into bed, and
cover ourselves up until Nurse has been her rounds, then we'll slip
downstairs and out through the side door into the garden. Are you game?"

"Who's afraid?" said Ingred valiantly.

