blame you, had you required until tomorrow to complete your
preparations, your promptitude will gratify him; and he will, I am
sure, be still more pleased at seeing that you have so well laid out
his gift. He gave you no orders on the subject, and had you appeared
in the dresses you wore this morning, he would, doubtless, have
instructed me to provide you with more suitable attire. The fact that
you have so laid out the money will show that you have an
understanding of the honour of being appointed to the Palace, and a
proper sense of fitness. The sultan himself dresses plainly and, save
for a priceless gem in his turban, and another in his sword hilt,
there is nothing in his attire to lead a stranger to guess at his
rank. But while he does this himself, he expects that all others in
the Palace should do justice to his generosity.

"And now, you had best return to your room, and remain there until
sent for. If he does not think of it himself, I shall, if opportunity
occurs, inform him that you have already arrived."

They had some difficulty in finding their way back to their room, and
had, indeed, to ask directions of attendants they met before they
discovered it. A native was squatting at the door. He rose and
salaamed deeply, as they came up.

"Your slave is appointed to be your attendant, my lords," he said.
"Your servant's name is Ibrahim."

"Good," Surajah said, as he passed him and entered the room. "Now,
Ibrahim, tell us about the ways of the Palace, for of these we are
altogether ignorant. In the first place, about food. Do we provide
ourselves, or how is it?"

"All in the Palace are fed from the sultan's kitchen. At each meal,
every officer has so many dishes, according to his rank. These vary
from three to twelve. In the early morning, I shall bring you bread
and fruit and sherbet; at ten o'clock is the first meal; and at seven
there is supper. At one o'clock the kitchens are open, and I can fetch
you a dish of pillau, kabobs, a chicken, or any other refreshment that
you may desire. At present, I have no orders as to how many dishes
your Excellencies will receive, at the two meals."

"We shall not be particular about that," Surajah said. "It is evident
we shall fare well, at any rate."

"I am told to inform you, my lords, that the sultan has ordered two
horses to be placed at your service. A ghorrawalla has been appointed
to take charge of them. His name is Serfojee. If you ask for him at
the stable, you will be directed to him, and he will show you the
horses.

"In an hour supper will be served, but this evening I shall only be
able to bring you three dishes each. Such is always the rule, until
the sultan's pleasure has been declared."

Ibrahim then proceeded to light two lamps, hanging from the ceiling,
for it was now getting dusk; and then, finding that his masters had no
further need of his services, he retired.

"So far, so good, Surajah. We are certainly in clover, as far as
comfort is concerned, and the only drawback to the situation is
Tippoo's uncertain temper. However, we must try our best to satisfy
him. We have every reason to stand well with him, and if he sees that
we are really anxious to please him, we ought to be able to avoid
falling into disgrace, even when he is in his worst moods."

Their attendant presently brought up the six portions of food, and
they enjoyed their meal heartily. Each had an ample portion of a
pillau of rice and chicken, a plate of stew, which Dick thought was
composed of game of some kind, and a confection in which honey was the
predominating flavour. With this they drank water, deliciously cooled
by being hung up in porous jars.

Surajah ate his food with the dexterity of long habit, but Dick had
not yet learned to make his bread fulfil the functions of spoon and
fork, for at his uncle's table European methods of eating were
adopted.

Half an hour after they had finished, an officer presented himself at
the door, and said that he was ordered to conduct them to the sultan.
Tippoo had supped in the harem, and was now seated on a divan, in a
room of no great size, but richly hung with heavy silken curtains, and
carpeted with the richest rugs. Two or three of his chief officers
were seated beside him. Seven or eight others were standing on either
side of the room. A heavy glass chandelier, of European manufacture,
hung from the richly carved ceiling, and the fifty candles in it
lighted up the room.

The chamberlain met them at the door, and advanced with them towards
Tippoo.

"Great Sultan," he said, "these are the young men whom it has pleased
your Highness to appoint officers in the Palace."

The two lads salaamed until their turbans touched the ground.

"Truly they are comely youths," Tippoo said, "and one would scarcely
deem them capable of performing such a feat as that they accomplished
this morning.

"Well, my slayers of tigers, you have found everything fitly
provided?"

"Far more so than our deeds merit, your Highness," Surajah replied.
"We have found everything that heart could desire, and only hope for
an opportunity to show ourselves worthy of your favours."

"You have done that beforehand," Tippoo said graciously, "and I am
glad to see, by your attire, that you are conscious that, as my
officers, it is fitting you should make a worthy appearance. It shows
that you have been well brought up, and are not ignorant of what is
right and proper.

"At present, you will receive orders from Fazli Ali, and will act as
assistant chamberlains, until I decide in what way your services can
be made most useful.

"Now, follow me. There are others who wish to see you."

Rising, Tippoo led the way through a door with double hangings, into a
room considerably larger than that which they had just left. The
chandeliers, at the end of the room where they stood, were all
lighted, while the other end was in comparative darkness.

Leaving them standing alone, Tippoo walked towards the other end, and
clapped his hands. Immediately, a number of closely veiled figures
entered, completely filling the end of the room.

"These are the young men," Tippoo said to them. "It is the one on the
right to whom it is chiefly due that the tiger did not commit havoc
among you. It was he who climbed up the balcony, and fired twice at
the beast. You owe your lives to him and his companion, for among all
my officers and guards there was not one who was quick-witted enough
to move as much as a finger."

There was a faint murmur of surprise, among the veiled figures, at the
youth of their preserver.

"Hold your heads fully up," Tippoo went on, for Dick and his
companion, after making a deep salaam, had stood with bent heads and
with eyes fixed upon the ground.

Then two of the attendants, girls of thirteen or fourteen years old,
came forward from behind the others, each bearing a casket.

"These are presented to you, with my permission, by the ladies whose
lives you saved," Tippoo said; "and should you at any time have a
favour to ask, or even should you fall under my displeasure, you can
rely upon their good offices in your behalf."

There was another low murmur from the other end of the hall. Then
Tippoo clapped his hands, and the women moved out, as noiselessly as
they had entered.

"You can retire now," Tippoo said, as he moved towards the door into
the other room. "Be faithful, be discreet, and your fortune is
assured."

He pointed to another door, and then rejoined his councillors.

Dick and his companion stood in an attitude of deep respect, until the
hanging had fallen behind the sultan, and then went out by the door he
had pointed to, and made their way back to their own room.

"Truly, Surajah, fortune is favouring us mightily. This morning, we
walked the streets in fear of being questioned and arrested. This
evening we are officers of the Palace, favoured by Tippoo, and under
the protection of the harem.

"I wonder what the ladies have given us."

They opened the caskets, which were of considerable size. As they
examined the contents, exclamations of surprise broke from them. Each
contained some thirty or forty little parcels, done up in paper; and
on these being opened, they were found to contain trinkets and jewels
of all kinds. Some were very costly and valuable. All were handsome.

It was evident that every one of the ladies who had been in the room,
when the tiger burst in, had contributed a token of her gratitude.
Many of the more valuable gems had been evidently taken from their
settings, as if the donors did not care that jewels they had worn
should be exposed to view. One parcel contained twenty superb pearls,
another a magnificent diamond and ten rubies, and so on, down to the
more humble gifts--although these were valuable--of those of lower
rank.

Dick's presents were much more costly than those of his companion, and
as soon as this was seen to be the case, Dick proposed that they
should all be put together, and divided equally. This, however,
Surajah would not hear of.

"The whole thing is due to you," he said. "It would never have
occurred to me to interfere at all. I had no part in the matter,
beyond aiding to kill a wounded tiger, and it was no more than I have
done, many times, among our hills, and thought nothing of. These
jewels are vastly more than I deserve, for my share in the affair. I
do not know much about the value of gems, but they must be worth a
large sum, and nothing will induce me to take any of those that you
have so well earned."

"I wonder whether Tippoo knows what they have given us," Dick said,
after in vain trying to alter his companion's decision.

"I don't suppose he troubled himself about it," Surajah replied. "No
doubt he was asked for permission for each to make a present to us.
The jewels in the harem must be of enormous value, as, for the last
fifteen years, Tippoo has been gathering spoil from all southern
India, having swept the land right up to the gates of Madras. They say
that his treasures are fabulous, and no doubt the ladies of his harem
have shared largely in the spoils. The question is, what had we best
do with these caskets? We know that, in the course of our adventures,
it may very well happen that we shall be closely searched, and it
would never do to risk having such valuables found upon us."

"No; I should say that we had best bury them somewhere. Some of these
merchants here may be honest enough for us to leave the jewels in
their care, without anxiety; but as they themselves may, at any
moment, be seized and compelled to give up their last penny, these
things would be no safer with them than with us.

"As to Pertaub, I have absolute faith in him, but he himself is liable
to be seized at any moment. However, I should say we had better
consult him. If we were to bury them, say, under the floor of his
house, we might leave them there for a time. If we saw any chance of
this place being, someday, captured by our people, we could wait till
then for their recovery. But the war may not be renewed for years.
Possibly Pertaub may be able to arrange to send them down, only
entrusting a portion at a time to a messenger, so that, if he got into
trouble, we should only lose what he had upon him.

"We will put the caskets into our box, and lock it up for the present,
and take them down to Pertaub tomorrow evening, after it gets dark. It
will be as well to get them off our minds, as soon as possible, for
although just at present we are in high favour, there is no saying how
long it may last, or when it may be necessary for us to move."



Chapter 13: Officers Of The Palace.


The next morning, just as they had finished their early breakfast,
they were sent for by Fazli Ali.

"You had better accompany me on my rounds," he said. "I shall not
commit any special duties to you, until I see whether the sultan
intends that you shall remain with me, or whether, as is far more
likely, he assigns other work to you. Were you placed in separate
charges in the Palace, I should have to fill your places if you left.
Therefore I propose that, at present, you shall assist me in general
supervision.

"We will first go to the kitchens. These give me more trouble than any
other part of my duties. In the first place, one has to see that the
contractors do their work properly, that the number of carcases sent
in is correct, the flesh of good quality, and that the list of game is
correct. Then one has to check the amount of rice and other grain sent
in from the storehouses, the issue of spices, and other articles of
that kind. These matters do not require doing every day. The kitchen
officers are responsible for them, but once or twice a week I take
care to be present, to see that all is right. Then I ascertain that
everything is in good and proper order in the kitchen, listen to
complaints, and decide disputes.

"When we have done there, we will see that the requisitions from the
harem are properly complied with, and that the sweetmeats, perfumes,
silks, and muslins, as required, are furnished.

"The payment of salaries does not come into my department. That is one
of the functions of the treasurer of the Palace, who also discharges
all accounts, upon my signature that they are correct.

"Then I take a general tour of the Palace, to see that the attendants
have done their duties, and that everything is clean and in order. As
a rule, I have finished everything before the morning meal is served.
The details of making up the accounts are, of course, done by clerks.

"After that, my duties depend entirely upon the sultan. If there is
any state ceremonial in the Palace, I summon those whose duty it is to
attend, and see that everything is properly arranged and in order. If
not, I am generally at his Highness's disposal.

"Unless you receive any instructions from me, you will be free to
occupy yourselves as you like. You will, of course, take part in all
public ceremonials. You will be among the officers who accompany the
sultan, when he goes out, and will be liable to be summoned to attend
him at all times. Therefore, although free to go into the town, or
ride beyond the island, it is well that you should never be long
absent; and that, if you wish to be away for more than two hours at a
time, you should first let me know, as I may be able to tell you if
the sultan is likely to require you. He has fixed your pay at four
hundred rupees a month."

Dick, as he accompanied the chamberlain on his tour through the
Palace, was struck with the order and method that prevailed in every
department, and the chamberlain told him that Tippoo, himself,
inquired closely into details, and that, large as was the daily
expenditure, no waste of any kind was allowed.

The splendour of some of the apartments was surprising, especially the
throne room. The throne itself was of extraordinary magnificence. It
was of gold, thickly inlaid with gems. On the apex stood a jewelled
peacock, covered entirely with diamonds, emeralds, and rubies, with
pendants of pearls. In front of it stood a golden tiger's head, which
served as a footstool. On either side were standards of purple silk,
having a sun with gold rays in the centre. The spear heads were of
gold, set with jewels.

When the work of inspection was finished, they went back to their
room, where their attendant soon afterwards, with an air of great
exultation, brought their meal, which consisted of nine dishes each, a
proof of the high favour with which Tippoo regarded them. After this
meal was eaten they went down to the stables, and were pleased,
indeed, with the mounts provided for them. They were fine animals,
with handsome saddles and trappings, and Dick and Surajah at once
mounted, and rode through the town to the other extremity of the
island. As they wore scarves that had been furnished them by Fazli
Ali, showing that they were officers of the Palace, they were
everywhere greeted with deep salaams.

"I hope," Dick said, as they returned from their ride, "that Tippoo
will not be long before he finds us some other duties. There is
nothing very interesting in counting carcases, or seeing rice
measured."

"That is true enough," Surajah agreed. "But we must not be impatient.
Fortune has befriended us marvellously, and I have great faith that it
will continue to do so. We must be content to wait."

"Yes, I know that, Surajah, but I think it is all the more difficult
to do so, because we have done so much in a short time. It seems as if
one ought to go on at the same rate."

That evening they went down, as they had arranged, with ordinary wraps
round their gay attire, to Pertaub's, taking with them the caskets of
gems. The Hindoo received them warmly.

"I saw you ride through the streets this morning, although you did not
notice me. Truly, you made a good appearance, and were well mounted. I
have heard from one of our people, who is a servant in the Palace,
that you stand in high favour."

"We have brought you down these two caskets of gems," Dick said. "They
were given us by the ladies of the harem, and many of the stones,
Surajah thinks, are very valuable. We don't know what to do with them,
and wanted to know whether you could arrange to send them down to
Tripataly for us."

"I would not undertake to do so, if they are valuable," Pertaub said.
"The prospects of fresh troubles are stronger every day, and the roads
are so closely watched, especially those through the passes, that it
would be running a terrible risk to trust valuables to anyone."

"In that case, Pertaub, we thought you might bury them in the ground
under your house. But first, look at some of the stones, and tell us
what you think of them."

The Hindoo opened Surajah's casket, and undid many of the little
parcels.

"Assuredly they are valuable," he said. "Some of them much more so
than others; but if all are like these that I have opened, they must
be worth at least fifty thousand rupees."

"Now look at this casket, Pertaub."

The Hindoo uttered an exclamation of surprise, as he opened some of
the packets, and, taking out some of the larger gems, he examined them
by the light of his lamp.

"I could not place a value on these," he said at last. "The ladies
must, indeed, have felt that they owed their lives to you. The gems
are a fortune. Doubtless they are the spoils of a score of districts,
and Tippoo must have distributed them lavishly among his wives, or
they could never have made such rich presents. I would bury them,
Sahib, for surely they could not be entrusted even to the most
faithful messengers, in times like these. But though, if you like, I
will hide them here, I think it would be far safer for you to take
them across the river, and bury them in a wood, marking well the
trees, that you may know the place again; for although methinks
Tippoo's agents believe that they have squeezed the last rupee from
me, one can never tell--I might again be tortured, and none can say
that they are brave enough to bear the agonies that Tippoo's
executioners inflict.

"I will bury them for tonight; but I pray you give me notice the first
time you cross the river. I will be at the other side of the ford,
with the jewels hidden in a sack on an ass. This I will drive forward,
when I see you crossing the ford. You will follow me, till I enter a
wood. I will have the tools, and when you join me, you can go on a
short distance and bury them. I do not wish to see where you hide
them, but will move about, to make sure that none come near you when
so engaged.

"You had best take out a few small stones, which you will find as good
as money, and much more easily concealed, for in every town or large
village you will find a jeweller, who will give you silver for them."

"I think that will be a very good plan, Pertaub, and will certainly
carry it out."

A month passed, without any change in their work. They rode, with
other officers, behind Tippoo's palanquin when he went out, which he
did almost every day, to inspect the progress of the fortifications;
and were among the brilliant circle behind his throne, when he gave
orders.

By this time, they had come to know most of the other Court officials,
and were able to inquire cautiously about the prisons. They could
learn nothing, however, of any English prisoners in Seringapatam, save
those they had seen in the hut in the fort.

Six weeks after their appointment as Palace officers, Dick and Surajah
were sent for by Tippoo.

"I am about to employ you," the sultan said, when they appeared before
him, "on a mission. You are strangers here, and are unconnected with
any of my officers; and I can, therefore, place greater reliance on
your reports, than upon those of men who have other interests than my
own to serve. I desire you to go and inspect the hill forts, to see
how the repairs of the fortifications injured by the English are
progressing, and to make sure that the cannon are in good order, and
the supply of ammunition plentiful. You have shown that you are quick
sighted and sharp. Look round the defences, and if you see aught that
can be done to strengthen them, confer with the governors, learn their
opinions on the subject, and if they agree with you, they will be
authorised to take men from the country round to strengthen the
fortifications, and I will forward, at once, such guns and stores as
may be required.

"After the inspection of each fort, you will despatch a mounted
messenger to me with your report; and you will state which fort you
will next visit, in order that I may despatch there any order that I
may have to give you.

"Do your duty well, and I shall know how to reward you. In order that
your authority may be increased, you are both named colonels in the
army. Fazli will furnish you with a written copy of the orders I have
given you, and with authority, under my seal, to enter and inspect all
fortresses, and to consult with the governors as to everything
considered, by them, as necessary for their better defence.

"The last time the English came, they captured Nundidroog, and other
hill fortresses that we had regarded as impregnable, simply because
the governors were overconfident, and the defences had been neglected.
This must not occur again, and if there is failure in the defences, I
shall hold you responsible. Therefore, take care that you do not
neglect, not only to see that the repairs are being well carried out,
but to recommend additions to the fortifications, wherever it seems to
you that there is even a possibility of an enemy making his way up.

"You will take with you twenty troopers as an escort, but these are
not to enter any of the fortresses with you, for treachery is always
possible; and no one, save the garrisons, must be acquainted with the
defences of the hill forts."

Surajah expressed his thanks to the sultan for entrusting them with
the mission, and assured him that their inspection of the forts should
be careful and complete, and that they would start in an hour's time.

When they reached their own room, Dick threw up his turban in delight.

"Was there ever such a stroke of good fortune?" he exclaimed. "The
tiger business was as nothing to this. Tippoo has given us the
mission, of all others, that will enable us to carry out our search.
Our work is as good as done.

"That is to say," he added, more gravely, "we are at least pretty sure
to find my father out, if he is alive. Besides, we may get information
that will be of great use, if the war is renewed.

"Now we had better, in the first place, go and see Fazli and get our
instructions. We will order our horses to be in readiness to start, as
soon as we have had our meal--we may not get another chance of eating
today.

"I should like to take Ibrahim with us. He is a capital servant, and a
strong, active fellow. I believe he is fond of us, and we shall want
someone who can cook for us, and buy things, and so on. I will speak
to Fazli about it."

The chamberlain looked up, as they entered the room where he was
engaged in dictating to a clerk.

"I congratulate you on your mission," he said. "It will involve a
great deal of hard work, but as you have told me how you longed for
some duty outside the Palace, you will not mind that. Tippoo consulted
me before sending for you. I told him you were diligent in the
service, and I felt sure you would do your best in the present matter;
and that, as you were accustomed, in the pursuit of game, to ascend
mountains and scale precipices, you were far more likely to find the
weak spots in the forts than an old officer, who would be likely to
take everything for granted.

"There is no doubt that many of the garrisons are very far from being
efficient. They have been stationed in the forts for many years.
Discipline, both among officers and men, is sure to have become lax,
and there will be much that young men, going freshly into the matter,
will see needs amendment. That the walls are often weak, and the
cannon so old as to be almost useless, I am well aware; for sometimes
