you to my care. We shall sup in half an hour."

"I shall not be sorry," Roger replied, "for though I broke my fast on
black bread and small beer, down in the village, 'tis but poor
nourishment for a man who has travelled far, and who has a large frame
to support."

"But how come you to be here?"

Roger again repeated his story.

"It would have been shorter for you to have travelled down through
Berwick, brother."

"The difference was not great," Roger replied; "and I had to carry a
message to Edinburgh, and from there it was shorter to keep west of the
Pentlands, and come down to Lanark, and thence through Moffat."

"Yes, I suppose it is as short. And you had no trouble on your way?"

Roger shook his head.

"No; I generally join some traveller or other, and that makes the
journey pass all the quicker. I came down here today with a stout young
fellow, who overtook me this side of Moffat. He was somewhat out at
elbow, and I looked askance at him at first; but he turned out a blithe
companion, and we got on well together. He could troll a good song, and
my own voice is not wanting in power. It was curious that he also was
from Dunbar, though not immediately; having, it would seem, wandered
for some time, on the lookout for service."

"What was he, a cattle drover?"

"No, he had been a man-at-arms, of George of Dunbar--at least, so I
understood--and when the earl fled, and Douglas took possession of
Dunbar, he lost his living. He told me that he had made his way down
here in hopes of finding employment on the border, where blows were
common, and a good blade was of more use than it was farther north. I
said that he might have found employment under Albany, or under some
other great lord; but he said that he had seen the Earl of March a
fugitive, and that he cared not to enter the service of another noble,
who might, in turn, be ousted from his place and lose his life; but as
for Albany, he thought, from what he heard, that he would rather serve
him than any other master.

"I said, 'Why not Rothesay, who would be King of Scotland?'

"He laughed lightly, and said as Rothesay had managed to get upon ill
friendship, not only with the Earl of March but with Douglas, and, as
he heard, with Albany, he thought that his chances of becoming King of
Scotland were not worth considering."

"He must be a bold varlet, thus to speak irreverently of great ones."

"I think not that he was bold," Roger said, "but only a merry,
thoughtless young fellow, who in such company as mine let his tongue
loose, and said what first came into his head. As to the matter,
methought he spoke not without warrant."

"And he came from the north, now?"

"I know not whence he came last, but I think that he was at Edinburgh,
and had taken service there, when the English king sat down before it;
but, as you know, nought came of the siege."

At this moment a horn blew.

"There is supper," the priest said. "We will go down."

The meal was laid in the hall; which, however, was not large enough to
contain more than the ordinary retainers of the hold. These, and the
men who had come in at the summons of Baird, were provided for in the
courtyard, the table being occupied entirely by members of the Baird
family, and others who always acted with them. These had not yet taken
their seats, when the priest entered with his companion, whom he at
once took up to Sir William Baird.

"By Saint Andrew! Monk, I have seen no finer figure, for many a day. A
pity that a monk's gown should clothe such limbs as yours."

"That has always been mine own opinion," Roger said, with a heartiness
that raised a smile on the hard faces of the men standing round.

"You look as if you had carried arms."

"I did so, in my wild youth," Roger said, "and had no thought of ever
donning monk's hood; but I was grievously wounded, in a foray in
Northumberland, and when I reached my home at Lauder, I well nigh died
of the fever of the wound; and I swore that, if my life was saved, I
would become a monk. I got well, and I kept my vow; but methinks, had I
but known how dull the life was, I would rather have died of the
fever."

As this story was perfectly true, save the name of his birthplace,
Roger spoke so heartily that no one doubted his story.

"And your monastery is at Dunbar?

"You have been at Dunbar, Rotherglen. Ask him where the convent stood."

As Roger had stayed there, when with Oswald he was at Dunbar, he was
able to answer this, and other questions, satisfactorily. The party
then took their places at table, the priest and Roger sitting at the
bottom of it. The conversation at the upper end naturally turned on the
foray, and a general disbelief was expressed, as to the chance of the
Armstrongs retaliating.

"'Tis out of the question," one of the Bairds said, "they could not
raise fifty men. Doubtless they will send a complaint to Douglas, but
he has his hands well full; and is not likely to quarrel with us about
such a trifle, when he may want our aid, at any moment, either against
Albany or against the English."

"What do you intend to do with the girls?"

"I have not settled yet," William Baird said, shortly. "At any rate,
for the present I shall hold them as hostages. I don't think that
anything is likely to come of the affair; but if we should hear of any
force approaching, likely to give us trouble, we could send word to
them that, if an arrow is loosened at our walls, we will hang the girls
out as marks for their archers. I fancy that will send them trooping
off again, at once."

As soon as the meal was over, and the carousal began, the priest rose
and, accompanied by Roger, retired to his chamber.



Chapter 13: Escape.


Oswald, who was thoroughly fatigued with the events of the last
thirty-six hours, slept soundly, on an armful of rushes that his host
threw down in a corner of the room for him. At eight o'clock, the man
who had spoken to him on the previous evening came in.

"I have spoken to William Baird," he said. "I told him that you seemed
a likely fellow. He called down the monk, and asked him several
questions about you; and he told me, at last, that I could bring you up
to see him. So come along, at once."

"Thanks, comrade," Oswald said, as he slung his long two-handed sword
from his shoulder.

"A likely-looking young fellow, indeed," Baird said to Rotherglen, whom
he had sent for to be present; "over six feet and, I should fancy, has
not attained his full width.

"So you would fain take service with me?" he said.

"I want a master," Oswald replied, "and from what I hear, I am more
likely to see fighting, under you, than under any other on the border."

"And you were with George Dunbar?"

"I was," Oswald replied. "But indeed, the service was not altogether to
my taste, for we were always pent up in Dunbar; and, save in a street
broil, there was no need to draw a sword. I was glad enough to leave
his service, though in truth, I have fared but badly, since."

"Now do you question him, Rotherglen."

A number of questions were put to Oswald, concerning the names of the
streets, the direction, the name of the principal inns, and the
approaches to the castle. All these were satisfactorily replied to.

"He knows Dunbar, there is no question about that.

"And you can use your arms?"

"I think so."

"We will have a trial," Baird said. "A man is no use to me, who cannot
use his weapon. Send Robert here."

In a minute, one of the young Bairds entered. He was a man of about
twenty-five, tall and sinewy, and was accounted the best swordsman of
his family.

"Cousin Robert," William Baird said, "this young fellow would enter our
service; but before I take him, I must see that he knows his business.
Do you take a turn with the sword with him.

"No, no, not a two-handed sword; I don't want him to be slain. Take a
couple of swords from the wall. Give him another steel cap, and full
body armour. That of his own would not keep out a good, downright
stroke."

By the time that Oswald was armed, a number of the Bairds and their
friends had assembled in the hall, hearing of what was going to take
place.

"A fine young fellow, truly," Rotherglen said. "In height and width, he
matches Robert well, though of course your cousin must be the more
powerful, seeing that he is some four or five years older than this
young fellow; who, when he reaches his age, bids fair to be well-nigh
as strong a man as that monk."

Roger had just entered, with the priest.

"Well, monk," Baird said, "we are going to try the mettle of your
companion of yesterday."

"I answer not for his mettle," Roger said; "but if he fights as well as
he talks, he will not do discredit to himself."

As they took their places, facing each other, the lookers on, men well
qualified to judge of strength and sinew, murmured to each other that
it would be difficult to find a better-matched pair. They were about
the same height, both stood lightly on their feet, and their figures
seemed full of life and activity. Both were smiling, Robert Baird with
a smile of confidence, and of assurance in his skill; while Oswald's
face expressed only good temper and, as the others took it, a belief
that he would, at any rate, be able to make such a defence as would
assure his being taken into the Bairds' service.

The first rally, indeed, proved more than this. Robert Baird had at
once taken the offensive, and showered his blows heavily down, while
springing backwards and forwards with wonderful quickness and activity;
but Oswald's blade ever met his, and he did not give way an inch, even
when Baird most fiercely attacked him. Then suddenly he adopted the
same tactics as his opponent, and pressed him so hotly that he was,
several times, obliged to give ground. Oswald could twice have got in a
heavy blow, but he abstained from doing so. He could see that his
antagonist was a favourite among his kinsmen, and felt that, were he to
discomfit him, he would excite a feeling of hostility against himself.
Both, panting from their exertions, drew a step backwards and lowered
their swords.

"Enough!" William Baird said, "The matter need be pushed no further.
'Tis long since I have seen so good a bout of swordplay. This young
fellow has learned his business, and if, in other respects, he does as
well, he will make a good recruit, indeed.

"What say you, lad? Will you join us for a month, till you see whether
you like our service, and we can judge how your service will suit us?
For that time you will have your living here, and drink money. After
that, if we agree, you can either be a retainer here, or we will give
you a holding on the moor, build you a shelter, give you a horse, and,
after our next foray, a clump of cattle."

"That will suit me well," Oswald said; "and I like well the month of
trial you propose."

"I will take him, if you will let me, Uncle, as my own man," Robert
Baird said. "If, at the end of the month, he chooses service with us,
and likes better to follow a master, with half a dozen men, than to
live alone on the moors. Methinks he would make a cheery companion, and
one I could take to, heartily; and indeed, during the long winters,
'tis no slight thing to have one merry fellow, who can keep one alive,
and of whose mettle and skill you are well assured."

"So let it be, then, Robert. You have tried him, and yours should be
the advantage. But for the month he shall remain here, under Malcolm's
eye."

Oswald went down with the man, who was Baird's right hand in the hold.

"What will be my duties?" he asked.

"To keep your arms and armour ready for service."

"That will be an easy task, methinks; for I see that instead of being
polished and bright, as were ours at Dunbar, the others keep their
steel caps and back pieces painted a sombre colour."

The other nodded.

"Yes, our arms are for use and not for show; and when we ride by
moonlight, we care not to have our presence shown, miles away, by the
glint of the moon on our armour.

"You will do your turn of keeping watch and ward. Just at present there
will be a good deal of that, for we have been stirring up a wasps'
nest, and mayhap they may come and try to sting. When you are off duty,
you will be your own master, save that you had best be within sound of
the warder's horn.

"I will hand over a horse to you. For the present, it is at that croft
on the opposite hill. Each of the tenants keeps two or three at our
service. We have only the Bairds' own horses kept in the hold. It would
be too much trouble to gather forage for those of the twenty men who
always live here, and indeed, we have no room for such number.

"Mind that you drink not too much, over in the village there; for
though the Bairds care not, on feast days, if the whole garrison gets
drunk, so that there are enough sober to keep watch and ward, they set
their faces against it at other times, seeing that it leads to broils
and quarrels."

"I will take care. I like my cup, occasionally; and can drink with
others, without my head getting addled, but as a rule I care not
overmuch for it."

After being roughly introduced to several of the retainers as a new
comrade, Oswald was left to follow his own devices. Presently, Roger
came out into the courtyard.

"So you have got service, comrade," he said, in a voice that could be
heard by any of those standing near. "You had better fortune than I had
expected."

"That have I," he replied. "Still, I thought that it would be hard, if
one who could use his sword indifferently well, and puts no great value
on his life, could not find service on the border. How long do you stay
here?"

This was a question that had been arranged, for had they been seen
speaking privately together, it might have aroused suspicion.

"Methinks I shall stay here two days, to get rid of my leg weariness. I
am not so accustomed to long marching as you are."

The real meaning of the question, as arranged, was, "Have you found out
where the prisoners are kept?"

The answer meant "Yes, and it will not be difficult to get at them."

The evening before, indeed, when he returned with the priest to his
chamber, they had broached a bottle together. The priest, on his part,
had asked many questions as to the state of things in Edinburgh, and
Dunbar; what were the opinions of people with regard to the Duke of
Albany, and the Prince; and what would probably come of the coldness
that was said to exist between them.

Roger was able to conceal his ignorance of these matters by saying that
he knew little of what was passing, for that he had been the cellarer
in the convent, and went out but little. Nevertheless, he had kept his
ears open; as they rode north to Jedburgh, he had heard a good deal of
talk and speculation, and was able to give various pieces of news that
had not before reached the ears of the priest. He was not long in
discovering that the latter was ill satisfied with his present
position, and was ambitious to take part in more important affairs, and
he presently said:

"I wonder, father, that a man of your ability should be content to
remain as chaplain in a border hold, when there are so many
opportunities beyond, for one like you, to make his way in the church."

"In truth," the priest said, "I have had such thoughts myself; and
hope, some day, to see a little more of the world.

"By the way, can you read and write, brother?" he asked suddenly.

"Assuredly," Roger replied.

He guessed, at once, that the question had been put at the instigation
of William Baird; who perhaps still had some doubts whether he was
really a monk, and an affirmative answer would be an almost conclusive
proof that he was so, for very few outside the walls of the convents,
even among the nobles and knights, possessed any knowledge of letters.

"I have a missal here," the priest said carelessly, "that has somewhat
troubled me, being written in a cramped hand. Perhaps you could read it
for me," and, getting up, he took a roll from a closet.

Roger smiled quietly, as he turned it over. By a private mark upon it,
he knew that it had been written at Alnwick, and was doubtless the
proceed of some foray upon a monastery across the border. He ran his
eye over it; and then, in a sonorous voice, proceeded to read it aloud.

"I thank you," the priest said, when he had finished. "Truly you are an
admirable reader, and well skilled in deciphering. I wonder that you
held not some more important post than that of cellarer."

Roger laughed.

"I might have done so," he said, "but in truth, I am not strict enough
in matters of discipline to suit our prior, and am somewhat over fond
of the wine cup. More than once, when it seemed that I might have been
chosen as reader to the monastery, I fell into disgrace, and lost my
chance; and indeed, I was far better pleased with my post, there, than
if they had appointed me sub-prior."

Any vestige of doubt there might have been in the priest's mind had
vanished, as Roger read; for he was conscious that he, himself, could
not have picked up a manuscript and have deciphered it so easily and
fluently.

"It must be trying to you, good father," Roger went on, "to be among
men who, if reports speak truly, are somewhat lawless, and hold even
the church in but slight respect. Surely, among them there can be but
little scope for your abilities?"

"'Tis true, brother; but they are, you know, kinsmen of mine. They have
many foes across the border, and some on this side, and are forced to
hold their own as they may. It was but two days ago that they were
obliged to punish a family that have long been at feud with them, and
who might well have fallen upon their holds, if they marched into
England with Douglas. However, they have brought off two hostages for
the good behaviour of these people."

"Yes, I heard a chance word, in the village, that a party had just
returned from a foray, and had brought back a number of prisoners."

"Not a number, brother, but two girls."

"I have seen no women in the castle," Roger said.

"No. William Baird lost his wife years ago, and cares not to have women
in the hold. There is not a married man among the garrison. If a man
takes him a wife, he must go and settle on the lands.

"The women are in a safe place of keeping. They are overhead. There are
wild young fellows among the Bairds, and the girls are good looking;
therefore he thought it best to place them in my charge, and that is
why you see two sentries marching on the battlements, one on each side
of this turret. He himself keeps the key of their chamber, handing it
over to me every morning, and receiving it again at night--a precaution
wholly unnecessary, methinks."

"Surely, surely," Roger said. "I wonder that you are not offended."

"I told him that it was strange he could not trust me, a priest, with
the charge of them; but he laughed and said, 'As a priest you are well
enough, Father Kenelm, but remember also that you are a Baird. Though a
priest, I would trust you to ride with me on a foray across the border;
but as a Baird, I would not entrust you with the custody of women. You
may take it as a compliment that I have trusted you as far as I do.'"

Roger's answer to Oswald had been eminently satisfactory to the latter.
Still more pleased was he when, later on in the day, Roger repeated, as
he passed him, "They are lodged in the turret, over my chamber."

Oswald was scarcely surprised, for he had noticed that two sentries
were on the wall on that side, although it was the one farthest removed
from the direction in which any foes were likely to appear. He had,
moreover, just before dinner, observed one of the kitchen men go up,
with two dishes in his hand, by the steps leading to the top of the
wall, on that side. There was no hindrance to the men going freely in
and out of the hold, and as no duty had been assigned to him that
evening, he strolled out of the gate when it became dusk, soon after
six o'clock, for it was now the beginning of April, 1401, and walked
down through the village; and then, taking off his armour and steel
cap, and laying them down under a bush by the roadside, set off at the
top of his speed in the direction of Parton. He did the ten miles in
under an hour, and nearly ran against a man who was standing in the
middle of the road, a short distance from the little town.

"Is that you, Fergus?"

"No, I am John, master. Fergus will take the watch tomorrow evening."

"Good. Keep the horses saddled at this time, every evening; and hold
them in readiness all night. Things are going on well, and I may be
here any night. Which is the house?"

"That is it, master, where you see the light, a quarter of a mile
farther up the hill."

"Where are you sleeping?"

"In the stables, with the horses. It is some ten yards off the right of
the house."

"Then you must keep watch through the night, by turns, and get your
sleep in the daytime. I hope we shall get them away without waiting for
a force to come. The hold is a very strong one, and a strict watch is
kept at night; and, before we could carry it, we should have all the
Bairds on the countryside down upon us.

"Can you get me a rope? I want a long and a strong one."

"There are some ropes in the stable, master, but they are in use, and
would be missed."
