doctor pulled off part of Frank's disguise, for the next words I heard
were, '_Digby_, this is _intolerable_!' uttered in the doctor's most
magnificent anger--'What is the meaning of this?' Frank said something
about _a wager_ and _a little fun, meaning no harm_, et cetera; and
Fudge gave him such a lecture, finishing off by declaring, that 'if he
persisted in perpetrating such senseless follies he should find some
other place to do so in than his house.' All the little boys were
laughing, but doctor stopped them all with a thundering 'SILENCE!' and
then he asked what Frank had in that cup. 'Cold tea, sir,' said Digby,
quite meekly. 'And what's this at the bottom?' 'Sugar, sir,' I saw the
doctor's face--it was not one to be trifled with, but there seemed
a sort of grim smile there, too, when he gave the cup to Frank and
insisted upon his drinking it all up; and Digby did it, too--he dared
not refuse."

Another peal of laughter rang through the room, in which Hamilton
joined heartily.

"Then," continued Salisbury, "doctor said he hoped he would feel
a little better for his dose--and, becoming as grave as before, he
desired he would return Mrs. Guppy's things, and beg her pardon for
his impertinence."

"He didn't do so, surely?" said Jones.

"He did, though," replied Salisbury; "and I wouldn't have been him if
he'd been obstinate; but he added--I wondered how even _he_ dared--_I've
saved you a little trouble, ma'am, there are six of them in bed_."

"Oh! oh! disgraceful!" exclaimed Hamilton.

"What did Fudge say?" asked Smith.

"'THIS TO MY FACE, SIR!' and then, what he was going to do I don't know,
but Frank was quite frightened, and begged pardon so very humbly that
at last Fudge let him off with five hundred lines of Virgil to be done
before Wednesday evening, and then sent him to bed--and there he is,
for he was too much alarmed to play any more tricks."

"I'd have given something to have seen it," cried one, when the laugh
was a little over.

"I think," said Jones, "all things considered, that the doctor was
tolerably lenient."

"Oh! Digby's a little bit of a favorite, I fancy," said Meredith.

"Not a bit," said Reginald. "What do you say, Hamilton?"

"Nothing," said Hamilton, shortly.

"One would think you never liked a joke, Hamilton," said Peters.

"Nor do I, when it is so low as to be practical," said Hamilton.
"I feel no sympathy whatever with him."

The event furnished idle conversation enough for that evening, and it
was long before it was forgotten; and, in spite of Frank's reiterated
boast that he did not care, and his apparent participation in the
mirth occasioned by his failure, it required the utmost exercise of
his habitual good-humor to bear equally the untiring teasing of his
school-fellows, and the still more trying coldness and sarcasm of
his master, whose manner very perceptibly altered towards him for
some time after. Casson took care that no one in the lower school
should be ignorant of Frank's defeat, and stimulated the little boys
to tease him--but this impertinence, being an insult to the dignity of
the seniors, was revenged by them as a body, and the juvenile tormentors
were too much awe-struck and alarmed to venture on a repetition of their
offence.




CHAPTER XVI.


During Louis' frequent walks with Hamilton, it must not be supposed
that his home and home-doings were left out of the conversation; before
very long, Hamilton had made an intimate mental acquaintance with all
his little friend's family, their habits of life, and every other
interesting particular Louis could remember. Hamilton was an excellent
listener, and never laughed at Louis' fondness for home, and many were
the extracts from home-letters with which he was favored; nay, sometimes
whole letters were inflicted on him.

Among the many delightful topics of home history, Louis dwelt on few
with more pleasure and enthusiasm than the social musical evenings,
and said so much on them, that Hamilton's curiosity was at length
aroused, after hearing Louis sing two or three times, to wonder what
a madrigal could be like. Louis tried to satisfy this craving by
singing the treble part, and descanting eloquently on the manner in
which the other parts ought to come in; but all in vain he repeated,
"There now, Hamilton, you see this is the _contralto_ part; and when
this bit of the _soprano_ is sung, it comes in so beautifully, and the
bass is crossing it, and playing hide and seek with the tenor."

Hamilton was obtuse, but at length, by fagging very hard with one
or two boys in the school-room, and getting one of the ushers, who
generally performed a second in all the musical efforts in the school,
to make some kind of bass, Louis presented his choir one evening in the
playground, and made them sing, to the great rapture of the audience.

After this exhibition, the whole school seemed to have a fever for
madrigals; nothing was heard about the playground but scraps of that
which Louis had taken pains to drill into his party; and one or two
came to Louis and Reginald to learn to take a second part. In play-hours,
nothing seemed thought of but part-singing, and suddenly the propriety
of giving a grand public concert was started; and after a serious debate,
a singing-class was established, Louis being declared president, or
master of the choir.

We will not say how fussy Louis was on the occasion; but he went about
very busily trying the voices of his school-fellows for a day or two
after his appointment, and picking out the best tones for his pupils.
Casson owned a very fine singing voice, though it was one of the most
rude in speaking, and having been partially initiated in the mystery
before, by Louis was declared a treasure. Frank Digby was another
valuable acquisition; for, joined to an extremely soft, full _contralto_
voice, he possessed, in common with his many accomplishments, a refined
ear and almost intuitive power of chiming in melodiously with any thing.
Salisbury was a very respectable bass, as things went; and Reginald, who
was certainly incapacitated for singing treble, declared his intention of
assisting him, being quite confident that his voice would be a desirable
adjunct. The members of the class having at last been decided on, a
subscription was raised, and Hamilton was commissioned to purchase what
was necessary, the first convenient opportunity; and accordingly, the
next half-holiday, he obtained leave for Louis to accompany him, and
set off on his commission. He had scarcely left the school-room when
Trevannion met him, and volunteered to accompany him.

"I shall be very glad of your company," said Hamilton; "I am going to
choose the music. You may stare when I talk of choosing music--it is
well I have so powerful an auxiliary, or I am afraid I should not give
much satisfaction to our committee of taste."

"What powerful auxiliary are you depending on?" said Trevannion;
"I shall be a poor one."

"You--oh, yes!" exclaimed Hamilton; "a very poor one, I suspect.
I was speaking of Louis Mortimer; he is going with me."

"Indeed," said Trevannion, coldly; "you will not want me, then!"

"Why not?" asked Hamilton. "We shall, I assure you, be very glad of
your company."

"So will Hutton and Salisbury," said Trevannion; "and I can endure my
own company when I am not wanted;" as he spoke, he walked away.

Hamilton turned, and looked after his retreating figure, as, drawn up
to its full height, it quickly disappeared in the crowd of boys, who
were chaffering with the old cake-man. His puzzled countenance soon
resumed its accustomed gravity, and with a slight curl of the lip,
he laid his hand on Louis' arm, and drew him on.

"Trevannion is offended," said Louis.

"He's welcome," was the rejoinder.

"But it is on my account, Hamilton," said Louis, anxiously;
"I cannot bear that you should quarrel with him for me."

"I have not quarrelled," said Hamilton, coldly. "If he chooses
to be offended, I can't help it."

"But he is an older friend than I am in two senses--let me go after
him and tell him I am not going. I can go with you another afternoon."

Louis drew his arm away as he spoke, and was starting off, when
Hamilton seized him quite roughly, and exclaimed in an angry tone,
"You shall do no such thing, Louis! Does he suppose I am to have no
one else but himself for my friend--_friend_, indeed!" he repeated.
"It's all indolence, Louis."

Louis looked up half alarmed, startled at his vehemence.

"Perhaps," said Hamilton, relaxing his hold, and laughing as he spoke,
"perhaps if I had not been so lazy, I should have found a more suitable
friend before; as it is, I do not yet find Trevannion indispensable--by
no means," he added, scornfully.

"Dear Hamilton," said Louis, "I shall be quite unhappy if I think I am
the cause of your thinking ill of Trevannion. You used to be such great
friends."

"None the worse, perhaps, because we are aware of a common absence
of perfection in each other," replied Hamilton, whose countenance had
gradually regained its calmness. "It is foolish to be angry, Louis,
but I was; and now let there be an end of it--I don't mean to forsake
you for all the Trevannions in Christendom."

They had by this time reached the playground gates, and were here
overtaken by Frank Digby, who had before engaged to be one of the
party.

"Better late than never," said Louis, in reply to his breathless
excuses. "I had my doubts whether your pressing engagements with
Maister Dunn would allow you to accompany us."

"Why, I got rid of him pretty soon," said Frank; "only just as I had
wedged myself out of the phalanx, who should appear but Thally."

"_Who?_" said Louis.

"Tharah," repeated Frank.

"Sally Simmons, the boot-cleaner, Louis," said Hamilton;
"you are up to nothing yet."

"She's a queer stick," said Frank.

"What a strange description of a woman!" remarked Louis.
"It is as clear as a person being a brick."

"And so it is," replied Frank; "only it's just the reverse."

"Up comes Thally with my Sunday boots as bright as her fair hands
could make them, and wanted me to look at a hole she had scraped in
them, nor, though I promised to give her my opinion of her handiwork
when I came back, was I allowed to depart till she had permission
to take them to her 'fayther.'"

Nothing worthy of record passed during the walk to Bristol till
the trio reached College Green. Here Louis began to look out for
music-shops, while Frank entertained his companions with a running
commentary on the shops, carriages, and people. It was a clear, bright
day, and Clifton seemed to have poured itself out in the Green.

"Look there, Hamilton, there's a whiskered don! What a pair of
moustaches! Hamilton, where is your eye-glass? Here's Trevannion's
shadow--was there ever such a Paris! Good gracious! as the ladies say,
what a frightful bonnet! Isn't that a love of a silk, Louis? Now,
Hamilton, did you ever see such a guy?"

Hamilton was annoyed at these remarks, made by no means in a low tone,
and, in his eagerness to change the conversation and get further from
Frank, he unfortunately ran against a lady who was getting out of a
carriage just drawn up in front of a large linen-draper's shop, much
to the indignation of a young gentleman who attended her.

Hamilton begged pardon, with a crimson face; and, as the lady kindly
assured him she was not hurt, Louis recognized in her his quondam
friend, Mrs. Paget, and darted forward to claim her acquaintance.

[Illustration: The meeting with Mrs. Paget.]

"What, Louis! my little Master Louis!" exclaimed the lady;
"I did not expect to see you. Where have you come from?"

"I am at school, ma'am, at Dr. Wilkinson's, and I had leave to come
out with Hamilton this afternoon. This is Hamilton, ma'am--Hamilton,
this is Mrs. Paget."

"Our rencontre, Mr. Hamilton," said the lady, "has been most fortunate;
for without this contretemps I should have been quite ignorant of Master
Louis' being so near--you must come and see me, dear. Mr. Hamilton, I
must take him home with me this afternoon."

"It is impossible, ma'am," said Hamilton, bluntly; "I am answerable
for him, and he must go back with me."

"Can you be so inexorable?" said Mrs. Paget. "Will you come, too, and
Mr. Francis Digby--I beg your pardon, Mr. Frank, I did not see you."

"I beg yours, ma'am," replied the affable Frank, with a most engaging
bow; "for I was so taken up with the tempting display on the green this
afternoon, that I only became aware this moment of my approximation to
yourself."

"The shops are very gay, certainly; but I should have thought that
you young gentlemen would not have cared much for the display. Now,
a tailor's shop would have been much more in your taste."

"Indeed, ma'am, we came out with the express purpose of buying a silk
for the Lady Louisa."

"I wonder any lady should commission you to buy any thing for her."

"Oh!" replied Frank, "I am renowned for my taste; and Hamilton is
equally well qualified. Can you recommend us a good milliner, ma'am?"

"I am going to look at some bonnets," said the lady. "But, Mr. Frank, I
half suspect you are quizzing. What Lady Louisa are you speaking of?"

Frank had drawn up his face into a very grave and confidential twist,
when Mrs. Paget's equerry, the young gentleman before mentioned, offered
his arm, and, giving Frank a withering look, warned the lady of the time.

"You are right. It is getting late," she said. "Good-bye, dear boy.
Where are you now? Dr. Williams?"

"Dr. Wilkinson's, Ashfield House," said Louis.

"Henry, will you remember the address?" said the lady.

The young gentleman grunted some kind of acquiescence; and,
after due adieus, Mrs. Paget walked into the shop.

"Frank, I'm ashamed of you," said Hamilton.

"I am sure," replied Frank, "I've been doing all the work;
I'm a walking exhibition of entertainment for man and beast."

Hamilton would not laugh, and, finding all remonstrances
unavailing, he quickened his pace and walked on in silence
till they reached the music-seller's, where, after some
deliberation, they obtained the requisite music, and, after
a few more errands, began to retrace their steps.

The walk home was very merry. Louis, having unfastened the bundle,
tried over some of the songs, and taught Frank readily the contralto
of two. Then he wanted to try Hamilton, but this in the open air
Hamilton stoutly resisted, though he promised to make an effort at
some future time. After Frank and Louis had sung their duets several
times over to their own satisfaction while sitting under a hedge,
all the party grew silent: there was something so beautiful in the
stillness and brightness, that none felt inclined to disturb it.
At last, Louis suddenly began Eve's hymn:

    "How cheerful along the gay mead
       The daisy and cowslip appear!
     The flocks, as they carelessly feed,
       Rejoice in the spring of the year;
     The myrtles that shade the gay bowers,
       The herbage that springs from the sod,
     Trees, plants, cooling fruits, and sweet flowers,
       All rise to the praise of my God.

    "Shall man, the great master of all,
       The only insensible prove?
     Forbid it, fair gratitude's call!
       Forbid it, devotion and love!
     THEE, Lord, who such wonders canst raise,
       And still canst destroy with a nod,
     My lips shall incessantly praise,
       My soul shall be wrapped in my God."
                                            DR. ARNE.

Frank joined in the latter part of the first verse, but was silent
in the second.

"Why did you not go on, Frank?" asked Hamilton.

"It was too sweet," said Frank. "Louis, I envy you your thoughts."

"Do you?" said Louis, looking up quickly in his cousin's face, with
a bright expression of pleasure.

"When you began that song," continued Frank, "I was thinking of
those lines,

    'These are Thy glorious works, Parent of good,
     Almighty, Thine this universal frame,
     Thus wondrous fair; Thyself how wondrous then!'"

"'Thyself how wondrous then!'" repeated Hamilton, reverentially.

"I don't know how it is, Louis," said Frank; "in cathedrals, and
in beautiful scenery, when a grave fit comes over me, I sometimes
think I should like to be religious."

Louis squeezed his hand, but did not speak.

"Take care, Frank," said Hamilton with some emotion. "Be very, very
careful not to mistake sentiment for religion. I am sure it is so easy
to imagine the emotion excited by beauty of sight or sound, religious,
that we cannot, be too careful in examining the _reason_ of such
feelings."

"But how, Hamilton?" said Frank. "You would not check such impressions?"

"No; it is better that our thoughts should be carried by beauty to the
source of all beauty; but to a poetical, susceptible imagination this
is often the case where there is not the least vital religion, Frank.
The deist will gaze on the splendid landscape, and bow in reverence
to the God of nature, but a Christian's thoughts should fly to his
God at all times; the light and beauty of the scenes of nature should
be within himself. When a person's whole religion consists in these
transient emotions, he ought to mistrust it, Digby."

"But, dear Hamilton," said Louis, after a few minutes' silence,
"we ought to be thankful when God gives us the power of enjoying
the beautiful things He has made. Would it not be ungrateful to
check every happy feeling of gratitude and joy for the power to see,
and hear, and enjoy, with gladness and thankfulness, the loveliness
and blessings around?"

"The height of ingratitude, dear Louis," said Hamilton, emphatically.
"But I am sure you understand me."

"To be sure," said Louis. "Many good gifts our Almighty Father has
given us, and one perfect gift, and the good gifts should lead us to
