"I will not promise yet."

"Then you shall remain here, a prisoner."

"For how long?"

"Until you come to your senses and agree to do as I wish."

A few words more passed, and then Dr. Mackey made our hero a prisoner
again, and took up the canteen and the knapsack.

"You may have to remain alone for a long time," he said, on departing.
"But if you get lonely and hungry, remember it is your own fault."

"I think you are a brute!" cried Jack after him. Then he listened and
heard the surgeon's footsteps receding rapidly. Soon all became quiet.

Hour after hour went by, and nobody came near our hero. It was indeed
lonely, and as the time passed his heart sank within him.

Then Jack heard the faint patter of footsteps over the dry leaves
surrounding the cabin. The sounds came closer.

"Perhaps it's a dog," he thought. "I hope it is one from our plantation,
on the hunt for me."

At last a shadow fell across the open cabin doorway and the figure of a
strange creature came slowly into view. At the sight Jack could not
suppress a scream. The visitor was a mountain wild cat!




CHAPTER XXVII.

COLONEL STANTON'S TALE.


Two days after being brought to the plantation Colonel Stanton's fever
went down, and the surgeon who came to attend him pronounced the officer
much better.

"But he must remain where he is for some time," said the medical man.

"He can remain as long as he pleases," declared Mrs. Ruthven. "I have no
wish to hurry his departure."

She was anxious to learn the truth concerning the colonel's past, yet
realized that she must move with caution, otherwise he might be thrown
into another fever.

"Colonel Stanton," she said, seating herself at his side, "were you ever
in the neighborhood before--I mean some ten or eleven years ago?"

At this question Colonel Stanton became immediately interested, and his
wide-open eyes showed it.

"I do not know if I was in this neighborhood," he answered slowly.

"You do not know? Surely you must remember where you were at the time I
mention."

"The time you speak about was a very bitter one to me, madam," was his
slow answer.

"And you do not wish to speak about it?" she said softly, seeing the
pain in his face.

"I have spoken to nobody about it for years, madam. Yet I would not mind
speaking to you--you are so kind to me. During the time you mention I
took an ocean voyage which was very disastrous to me and mine. The ship
went down with all on board, including my wife and child."

"Did the ship go down on this coast?"

"She struck somewhere along the coast; where, I am not exactly sure."

"May I ask the name of the vessel?"

"She was the _Nautilus_."

Mrs. Ruthven's breast began to heave. "It must be true!" she murmured.

"What must be true, madam?"

"The _Nautilus_ was wrecked on our coast here, not over half a mile
from this plantation."

"You are sure of this?"

"I am. The wreck is still on the rocks in the bay."

"And were you living here at the time?"

"I was, and I know all about the wreck, and so does Old Ben, the negro
who has the boathouse on the shore."

The wounded officer's interest increased.

"I would like to visit that wreck some time, if it is still intact," he
said. "I left some valuable papers in a secret closet. It is possible
they are still on board."

"Do you know who was saved from the wreck?"

"Saved? No one was saved."

"You are mistaken--a lady and her child were saved. The lady died two
days later, but the child still lives."

"What was the name of that lady? Tell me, quick?" gasped the officer,
and tried to sit up, but fell back through weakness.

"Do not excite yourself, Colonel Stanton, I beg of you!" pleaded Mrs.
Ruthven, in alarm, fearful of the patient's agitation.

"But tell me the name of that lady--and was the child a boy?"

"I do not know the name of the lady, for she was badly hurt and could
not give it. The boy's name was Jack."

"Jack! My child's name was Jack. And you say he still lives?"

"He does. The child is our Jack, for my husband and I adopted him."

"Your Jack? That fine, manly fellow? Oh, Mrs. Ruthven, send him to me at
once!"

"I cannot do that just now, Colonel Stanton."

"If only we can prove he is my son! Have you nothing belonging to the
lady?"

"Yes, I have her clothing, also the little boy's, and some jewelry."

"Bring them to me," and now the colonel sank back, too weak to say more.

As much agitated as her patient, Mrs. Ruthven hurried from the room, and
presently returned with the clothing, the lace handkerchief, and the
wedding ring.

"They were my darling Laura's!" murmured Colonel Stanton, as he gazed at
the things. "And this was little Jack's dress. Mrs. Ruthven, beyond a
doubt Jack is my son!"

"I suspected as much two days ago, Colonel Stanton. When you had a fever
you spoke of a shipwreck and of the loss of your wife and son Jack. Yes,
Jack must be your son. But how were you saved?"

"It is a strange tale, madam. As you know, my wife and my son were
washed ashore. I thought them drowned. Hours after I found myself, I
scarcely know how, clinging to a spar, tossing up and down on the dreary
waste of waters, far out to sea."

"And you were picked up?"

"Not for twenty-four hours or more. Then those on a passing ship espied
me, and sent out a small boat to my rescue. I can remember how they
hauled me in, and how I shrieked with joy, and then fell to the deck
unconscious."

"The exposure was too much for you."

"Yes, and it not only affected my body, but likewise my mind, for it is
only in a dim, uncertain way that I remember being taken on a voyage of
several weeks' duration, and then finding myself in a strange-looking
hospital. There I remained for two months, and was then transferred to
an insane asylum."

"An insane asylum! Colonel Stanton, how you must have suffered!" cried
Mrs. Ruthven sympathetically.

"That was not the worst of it, madam. At the asylum I was treated most
brutally by a good-for-nothing physician, who did his best to pry into
my family affairs."

"And who was that physician, Colonel Stanton? Excuse my curiosity, but I
have a strong motive for wanting to know."

"He was a tall, wicked-looking fellow, who went by the name of
Mackenzie, although I have since learned that his real name is Mackwell
or Mackey."

"Dr. Mackey! He has been here."

"Here?"

"Exactly, and he claims Jack as his son!"

"The vile impostor!" cried the wounded officer wrathfully. "He is a
villain to his very finger tips. It is to him that I owe my long term in
the insane asylum. Where is he now?"

"That I cannot tell you. I refused to give Jack up, for I did not like
the looks of the man, and moreover Jack did not wish to go with him. I
told him he would have to prove his claim at court."

"That was right. If I can get my hands on him, I will either shoot him
or place him behind the bars."

"He certainly deserves arrest for plotting to take Jack."

"I presume he is scheming to obtain the property which is rightfully
mine. During my lucid intervals at the asylum he got me to tell him my
story. There was property in England coming to me, and also an estate in
Virginia coming to my wife. The trip on the ocean was taken to obtain
the property coming to Laura. He drew from me all the details he could,
and then drugged me, so that for a long time I knew scarcely anything of
what happened. When I regained my own mind, I learned that he had left
the asylum several weeks before, and departed for parts unknown."

"And were you kept at the asylum?"

"I was, for years, for this rascal had put me on the books as being
incurable, and subject to attacks of great violence."

"Of course he did this to obtain possession of the property."

"Undoubtedly."

"It is strange he did not put in an appearance before."

"You must remember he knew no more than I about the exact fate of the
_Nautilus_. How he found out the vessel was wrecked here I do not
know."

"He has paid the wreck a visit--Old Ben rowed him over to it!" cried
Mrs. Ruthven, struck with a sudden idea.

"Did he bring anything away with him?"

"Old Ben thought he brought with him a tin box."

"It must have been my box--the one I placed in the secret closet! I must
get it away from him. But tell me of Jack. When will he be back?"

"I--I cannot say, Colonel Stanton."

"Did you send him away on an errand?"

"I--I did not."

"But he is not here. Tell me, is he--is he missing--shot?"

"He is missing, yes. I do not believe he has been shot."

"It must be more of Dr. Mackey's work," muttered the wounded officer,
and then sank down. The conversation had exhausted him utterly, and it
was a long while before he spoke again.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

IN THE HANDS OF THE GUERRILLAS.


Our hero knew only too well how dangerous a wild cat can be, and as he
gazed at the beast looking in through the open doorway of the lonely
cabin his heart was filled with dread.

"A wild cat!" he muttered. "Scat! go away!" he yelled.

The sudden cry caused the beast to retreat a few steps, and for the
instant Jack breathed easier. But then the beast approached once more.

"Go away! scat!" he repeated, but now the wild cat stood its ground, its
eyes gleaming fiercely and its mouth half open, showing its sharp teeth.
It was tremendously hungry, and this had caused it to find its way to
the habitation.

"Go away, I say," repeated Jack, and then, as the wild cat took a
noiseless step forward, he let out a scream: "Help! Help!"

The wild cat now prepared to leap upon him. It crouched low, shaking its
short tail from side to side. The leap was about to be taken when, of a
sudden, bang! went a gun, and the beast rolled over on its side.

"A good shot, Ben!" came in the voice of Columbus Washington. "I rackon
ye killed him."

"Ben!" cried Jack, in great joy, as the face of the faithful old negro
showed itself at the doorway. "You came in the nick of time!"

"Dat's so," answered Old Ben, as he came forward and poked the wild cat
with his gun barrel. "Dead, are ye? Well, Old Ben will make suah," and
he hit the wild cat's skull a blow that crushed it completely.

"Ben, you saved my life," went on Jack joyfully. "I was certain I was
going to be chewed up."

"Wot fo' is yo' a prisoner yeah?" asked Columbus Washington, as he gazed
at Jack's bonds curiously.

"Dr. Mackey made me a prisoner."

"What, dat man!" ejaculated Old Ben.

"Yes, Ben; he had me taken from the stable, where I had gone to watch
that guerrilla."

"And where am de guerrilla?"

"Dr. Mackey helped him to escape."

The faithful old colored man shook his head doubtfully.

"Massah Jack, do yo' dun t'ink dat doctor am your fadder?" he asked.

"No, Ben; I think nothing of the kind."

"Neider do I. He is a-plottin' against yo'."

"That is what I think, Ben. If I could manage it, I would have him
arrested. Then we could get at the bottom of this affair."

Jack was speedily released, and the party of three left the lonely
mountain cabin and started across the country for the Ruthven
plantation.

"Yo' mudder will be tickled to see yo'," remarked Old Ben, as they
trudged along. "She was worried to death ober yo' absence."

"After this I will see to it that they don't get me again," replied our
hero.

Half a mile was covered when, on turning a point in the trail, they came
unexpectedly upon a company of Confederate guerrillas who were taking it
easy, lying in the grass.

"Hullo! who are you?" demanded one of the guerrillas as he leaped up and
drew up his gun.

"Friends!" answered Jack.

Just then he caught sight of the men who had marched him away from the
stable, and also of Pete Gendron, who was lying on some blankets in the
shade.

"Friends, are you!" cried one of the men who had marched him off. "Up
with your hands, sonny!"

There was no help for it, and Jack put up his hands, and his negro
companions did likewise.

"I reckon as how we cotched ye nicely," went on the man with the gun.
"Whar did ye come from--thet cabin up the mountain?"

"Yes."

"Whar is Dr. Mackey?"

"I do not know."

"Did he let ye go?"

"Of course he didn't let the boy go," growled Pete Gendron. "The niggers
must have released him."

"Is that true, sonny?"

"That is none of your business," answered Jack, not knowing what else to
say.

"Aint it, though? All right, ride yer high hoss, if yer want to. But
throw down them arms fust."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean all of yer are prisoners, thet's wot I mean," drawled the
guerrilla.

"You have no right to hold me up in this fashion."

"Ye forgit, sonny, thet might makes right in most cases. Come, hand over
them firearms."

Jack had been provided with a pistol by Old Ben, and this he was
compelled to surrender, and his companions were also disarmed. The
guerrillas numbered fully a score, so resistance would have been
foolhardy.

"What do you intend to do with me?" asked our hero, after he had been
made a prisoner by having his hands bound behind him.

"We'll hold ye till Dr. Mackey comes back."

"When will that be?"

"Can't say."

This ended the talk, and presently the guerrillas moved up the mountain
side to where there was a fair-sized cave.

They marched our hero into this cave, and tied him and his companions
fast to some jagged rocks in the rear.

A fire was started up and the outlaws--for the guerrillas were nothing
less--proceeded to make themselves comfortable by lying around,
drinking, smoking, and playing cards.

Gendron was not badly wounded, and sat up to look on at the
card-playing.

So the hours wore away. Toward night a scout went out to learn what the
armies were doing, and he did not come back until the next day.

Two days were spent by Jack and his companions in the cave. During that
time the guerrillas treated them brutally, and gave them hardly
sufficient food to keep them from starving.

Gendron was particularly bitter against Jack, and insulted our hero upon
every possible occasion.
