
A few minutes after his conversation with Jim the party started,
following the broad track through the grass along the foot of the
hill. Reuben informed Mr. Blount of what Jim had told him.

"By Jove, I think he is right," the settler said. "The track is as
broad as it was, but it is nothing like so much trampled down; but
if your fellow says the main body have gone over the hill, why are
you following this track?"

Reuben gave his reasons, and said that his man had, before, had
suspicions that the trackers were in communication with the wild
blacks.

"He thinks that's why it is that they have so frequently failed,
here, to catch any of these fellows."

"I shouldn't be at all surprised," Mr. Blount said savagely. "The
best thing would be to put a bullet into each of the rascals'
heads."

"I think Jim's idea is best," Reuben said. "Now that we have once
got our eyes open, they won't be able to do us any more harm; and
my black fellow will see we follow the trail right. I don't want
them to see we have any suspicions of them, as that would put them
on their guard; and by keeping our eye upon them, we may be able to
turn the tables."

"That is so," Mr. Blount agreed. "What are you going to do, then?"

"I will call to them, in a minute or two, and tell them that it is
your opinion that only a small portion of the flock have come this
way. Then we will have a consultation and, no doubt, some of your
friends will notice that the ground is not much trampled. Then we
will decide to ride back to the point from which we started, and
will follow the other trail."

"Yes, that will do very well," the settler agreed.

Reuben at once called to the trackers, who were trotting on ahead,
and then ordered a halt. The two blacks came back.

"Joe," Reuben said, "Mr. Blount thinks that the main body of the
flock have not come this way. He says he thinks only a hundred or
two have come. The ground does not look to me anything like so much
trampled as it was before we halted."

"I tink most of dem hab come along here," the tracker said
sullenly.

"What do you think?" Reuben asked the other settlers, who had
gathered round.

"I did not notice it before," Dick Caister said; "but now Blount
has pointed it out, I agree with him entirely. There are nothing
like the full number of sheep have passed along here. I should say
that they have not gone along more than two or three deep."

There was a general chorus of assent.

"You can't have been keeping your eyes open," Reuben said to the
trackers, sharply. "If you don't look sharp in future, we shall
quarrel.

"Come, gentlemen, let us ride back to the halting place, and see if
we cannot find out which way the main body have gone."

Ten minutes' riding took them back to their starting place.

"They must have gone over the hill," Reuben said. "They certainly
have not kept along at the foot, or we should see their tracks in
this long grass."

The trackers had exchanged a few words in a low tone, and they now
moved up the hill, and began to examine the ground carefully.

"Some of dem have gone this way, captain."

"Of course they have," Mr. Blount said. "A blind man might see
that."

The marks of the sheep were indeed plain enough to all, when their
attention had once been drawn to the subject. On getting beyond the
crest the trackers turned to the left, and Reuben saw that they
felt it would be hopeless to attempt, further, to mislead a party
containing several settlers who were perfectly capable of following
the trail.

Jim had, since speaking to his master, remained in the rear of the
troop. After three miles' riding across the downs, they again came
down upon a flat country, thickly covered with brush. Here and
there pieces of wool sticking to thorns were visible, and the
trackers went steadily on for some little time. Then their pace
became slower, and finally they stopped.

"Trail ended, captain."

"What do you mean by the trail ended?" Reuben asked angrily. "Why,
I can see a piece of wool, on there ahead."

"Dat so, captain; but only a few sheep hab passed here."

Some of the settlers dismounted and, having examined the ground
carefully, declared that they were of the same opinion as the
trackers.

"Very well," Reuben said; "then in that case, we must go back again
to the foot of the hill. They were all together there, and we must
take up the trail afresh."

On reaching the foot of the hill, Jim and some of the settlers
joined the trackers, and penetrated the bush in all directions.
Each returned bringing in pieces of wool.

"It is plain enough," Reuben said, "what they have done. They have
broken up into small parties, and have scattered. The question is,
'What are we to do now?'

"What do you think, Mr. Blount? You have had more experience than
anyone here, and you are the most interested in our overtaking
these rascals. What do you recommend?"

"I don't know what to recommend," the settler said. "They have no
doubt done it to confuse us, in case we should follow so far, and
avoid being thrown off the scent the other side of the hill. The
band may really have scattered, and gone off in small parties to
different parts of the bush; or again, they may have scattered with
the understanding that they will meet again, at some given spot,
which may be ten and may be fifty miles ahead."

"The worst of it is," Reuben said, "I fear now that there is an end
of all chance of coming up with them, today; and now the question
of water comes in. If we could have caught them before nightfall,
the horses, having had a good drink at that stream, could have done
very well till we'd gone another thirty miles; but as that seems
hopeless, now, we must consider seriously what we had best do,
before we go any further. Does anyone here know anything of the
country ahead?"

There was a general silence.

"The horses can do very well, tomorrow, without water," Mr. Blount
said. "They will chew the leaves of this scrub; and can, if
pressed, hold on for even two or three days upon it."

"In that case," Reuben said, "let us go on. We will break up into
three parties. One shall go straight forward, the other two moving
to the right and left, each following the tracks as well as they
can. We will not go much beyond a walk. We have five more hours of
daylight yet, and the horses can manage another fifteen miles. I
will halt, an hour before it gets dark, and light a fire. The smoke
will be a guide to the other two parties, who should not be more
than a couple of miles to the right and left, and they will then
close in.

"If you can suggest any better plan than that, Mr. Blount, please
do so. Of course, I see the objection that the blacks may make out
the smoke, and will know that they are being followed."

"Yes, that is an objection," Mr. Blount said; "but the chances are
that they will know it without your telling them. It is more than
probable that some of them have remained behind, on the watch; and
that they will have signalled our coming, long ago."

"Dey have done that, sar," Jim, who was standing close to Reuben's
elbow, put in. "Jim saw smoke curl up from the top of de hill, just
when we turned, when we lost the trail."

"Why didn't you tell me before, Jim?" Reuben asked.

"De captain didn't ask Jim any question. Jim thought de captain see
it for sure."

"I didn't see it, Jim. I don't think any of us saw it. We were all
too much occupied looking for the trail. Another time, you tell me
what you see without my asking.

"Well in that case, Mr. Blount, there can be no harm in my making a
smoke, as they know already that they are pursued. Will you take
charge of the right hand party? Sergeant O'Connor will take command
of the left. Do you each take a tracker with you. I will take my
boy. Three constables will go with each of your parties, and four
with me.

"Will you gentlemen please to divide up, so as to make seven
altogether in each party, without the natives?"

"I need not tell you to keep a sharp lookout, Captain Whitney. We
know the blacks are a very strong party and, now they know that
they are pursued they may, as likely as not, make a stand."

"Yes, that is quite possible," Reuben agreed. "Will you please be
careful that neither of your parties get more than two miles, at
the outside, away from mine? We can hear the sound of rifles, at
that distance. If either party fires, the others will of course
hurry to their assistance. Now, let us move forward."

With Jim in advance, Reuben's party moved on, the black carefully
examining the ground and bushes as he went; and occasionally,
somewhat to Reuben's surprise, rising from the stooping position in
which he was walking, and looking back over his shoulder. The
motive was explained when Jim exclaimed:

"Dere, captain, dere are de signals again."

Reuben turned in the saddle. On the crest of the hill behind him
were three columns of smoke. Scarcely had he looked at them when
the smoke ceased to ascend, as if the fires had been suddenly put
out.

"That's to tell them that we have divided in three parties?" Reuben
asked the black.

Jim nodded, and proceeded on his way again.

"That's awkward," Reuben said, "I must warn the other two parties."

So saying, he at once ordered two of the constables to ride right
and left and warn the others, who were not as yet more than a
quarter of a mile on either hand, that the natives were aware that
they had broken up, and that the greatest caution must, therefore,
be observed. In ten minutes the two constables returned, having
performed their mission.

Although he had no reason to believe that the blacks were within
ten miles of him, Reuben now took the precaution of sending one
constable out on each flank, to a distance of fifty yards. A third
was directed to keep with Jim, fifty yards ahead of the main body;
consisting of Reuben himself, a constable, and two colonists.
Occasionally Reuben rode forward to question Jim.

"How many sheep do you think have gone along the track you are
following?"

"About thirty sheep, and three black fellow."

"How do you know there are three black fellows, Jim? I can see
marks, sometimes, of the sheep's feet; but I have not seen a man's
footprint at all."

"Jim see 'em, captain, plain enough. When dey all follow sheep, not
very plain to see; but sometimes, when de sheep want to scatter,
Jim see one footmark on one hand and one on the other, and sure to
be one man behind."

"How far are the sheep ahead, Jim, have you any idea?"

"Six, eight hours, sar, when dey pass here; but dere's no saying
how far they are, now. May be long way on, may be only little way.
Me tink dat they hab not gone so berry far; dat smoke berry thin,
not see him more than ten miles."

"I wish you had said that before, Jim," Reuben said. "We would have
kept together and have galloped on, and taken our chance of finding
them."

"Might have found four or five of dem," Jim replied, "but de others
all scattered. No good to find dem, till dey come together again."

"No, you are right there, Jim. We must catch them all together, if
we can. There are some twelve hundred sheep, somewhere ahead. Mr.
Blount said there were about fifteen hundred driven off. We have
come upon a hundred dead ones, and two or three hundred may have
taken that turn to the right. As you say, it would be no good
coming upon thirty."

For four hours the party continued their journey.

"It is six o'clock," Reuben said, looking at his watch. "We will
halt, now, and light that fire."

Two of the constables were told off to keep watch, some fifty yards
in front; and the others dismounted, and gathered together
materials for a fire. This was soon done, and the smoke mounted
straight and clear, a signal to the other two parties to close in.

Suddenly a cry was heard from one of the sentries. The men stooping
round the fire leaped to their feet, just in time to see one of the
constables struck from his horse by a boomerang, while a dozen
spears whizzed through the air at the other. He fell forward on his
horse, which carried him up to the fire; as he fell from the
saddle, as it stopped, he was caught by two of the others. Three
spears had pierced him.

"Stand to your arms. Steady, for your lives," Reuben shouted.

"Jim, throw the horses at once, and fasten their legs.

"We must defend ourselves here," he continued, turning to the
others, "until help comes."

Not a moment was lost. The little party threw themselves down in a
circle, each taking shelter behind a bush; and Jim speedily got the
eight horses down in the centre, for each party had with it three
of the spare animals. The whole time, from the first alarm until
all was ready to receive the natives, did not occupy two minutes.

The horses of the sentries had galloped wildly on, both having been
struck by spears; and Jim had no difficulty with the remainder,
which were all standing in a group when the alarm was given, the
owners not yet having removed their saddles.

All was done without flurry or excitement, although the yells of
the natives rose from the bush all round them. The bush was
fortunately not very thick at the point where they had halted,
Reuben having selected it for that very reason; but the bushes were
sufficiently near to each other to enable an enemy to creep up,
within thirty yards or so, without being seen.

"Don't throw away a shot," Reuben called out; "but pick off the
blacks, as they stand up to throw their spears.

"Ah!"

The exclamation was accompanied by a shot from his rifle, as a
native rose suddenly from the bush and hurled his spear. It missed
Reuben by an inch or two only; but, as his rifle flashed out, the
black threw up his hands and fell back in the bush.

"Here, sah, dis make good shelter;" and Jim propped up his saddle,
almost in front of him.

"That's a good idea, Jim; help the others in the same way."

[Illustration: A Fight with the Black Fellows.]

The five men were all engaged now. The spears whizzed fast over and
among them, but most of them were thrown almost at random; for the
blacks soon learned that to raise themselves above the bushes, to
take aim, was to court sudden death. Jim, after distributing the
saddles to their owners, had lain down by the side of his master;
and loaded his rifle as fast as he discharged it, Reuben using his
pistols as effectually as the rifle, in the intervals.

Fortunately all the party were provided with these weapons. Had it
not been so, each man would have been liable to be rushed by the
blacks every time he discharged his rifle. As far as possible they
fired by turns; so that each man, while loading, was covered by the
fire of those on his right and left.

For half an hour the fight continued. Many of the blacks had
fallen, but they continued the assault as vigorously as before, and
all the defenders had received more or less serious wounds from the
spears.

"The others ought to have been here, long before this," Reuben
said, "if they had followed my instructions. I only hope they have
not been attacked, too; but as we don't hear any firing, that can
hardly be so."

"I hope they will be up before dusk," Dick Caister said. "It will
be dark in another half an hour. These fellows are only waiting for
that to make a rush. If they do, it is all up with us."

"They will find it a tough job, even then," Reuben said; "but the
others must be here long before that. I told them to keep within
two miles of us. They have had time to ride double that distance,
since we made the smoke for them."

Another ten minutes elapsed.

"Hurrah!" Reuben exclaimed, "I can hear the trampling of horse's
hoofs. The moment they arrive, make a rush for your horses and
charge."

"I am afraid the horses are killed," Dick said ruefully.

"In that case," Reuben said, "we must get to our feet, and pick off
the blacks as they run. They will get up like a covey of partridge,
as the horsemen come among them."

A loud cheer was heard, and the little party, with an answering
shout, sprang to their feet and, rifle to shoulder, stood expecting
the blacks to rise; but the ears of the natives were sharper than
those of the whites, and they had begun to crawl away before the
latter heard the approaching horsemen.

Finding this to be the case, the party ran to their horses. Four
exclamations of wrath and grief were heard, for seven of the horses
were completely riddled with spears.

Tartar, however, at his master's voice, struggled to rise to his
feet. Reuben, aided by Jim, quickly threw off the hobbles; and
leaped on to its back as it rose to its feet, just as Mr. Blount,
with his party, rode up.

"Keep close together," Reuben exclaimed, as he dashed forward, "we
may find some of the scoundrels."

But the chase was in vain. It was already growing dusk, and there
was no saying in which direction the natives had crawled away in
the bush. After riding for a mile, Reuben reined in his horse.

"It is no use," he said; "we may as well get back to the fire.

"What made you so late, Mr. Blount? We were fighting for three
