met Cyril at Deweshurst. Bell, like Dora, would feel her heart soften
and warm to Cyril in his misfortunes. She would think of Ned, and hurry
up to Ned's old playfellow and chum, to tell him the last news from
Yorkshire, and ask what message from him she should send to Ned in her
next letter. Dora was tempted to go on and wonder whether Cyril's heart
would not be touched in turn by the cordial recognition of his Rector's
daughter, who had, on the whole, kept her position better than he, with
his advantages, had kept his, whose frank greeting had become a kind of
credential of gentle birth and breeding afforded to him in full sight of
the natives of Deweshurst. If he felt all that, he must recognize how
womanly and sweet Bell was, though she was not pretty and not one bit
clever, and be full of gratitude to her. And gratitude combined with
considerable isolation on the one hand, and on the other the constantly
present possibility of agreeable encounters with a loyal old friend,
might lead to anything--to a good deal more than Dora cared to say even
to herself, feeling frightened at the length to which she had gone on
the spur of the moment in this most recklessly unworldly match-making.
Yet was it reckless, when Bell would be such a good poor man's wife, and
when marriage with a woman like Bell might make another man of Cyril
Carey?

However, the Careys' adversity, with its reaction on their old
associates, approached a climax shortly after Cyril left. His father
grew so much more helpless an invalid that it was found absolutely
necessary to have a resident nurse for him. Then Mrs. Carey, though she
continued the nurse-in-chief, stated clearly and dispassionately that
she was now sufficiently disengaged to look after her house and give her
single servant what assistance she required. Therefore, as it was high
time that Phyllis should be doing something for herself, Mrs. Carey
proposed to put her at once into "Robinson's," under Miss Franklin, if
Mr. Robinson would receive Phyllis for an apprentice.

It was in vain that Phyllis cried and implored her mother to take back
her resolution, and that all her friends apprised of the proposed step
remonstrated; Dr. Millar even called expressly to enter his protest.

Mrs. Carey would hear of no objections. Phyllis must do something for
herself, and she was not clever or qualified in any way to be a
governess. Mrs. Carey had every confidence in "Robinson's" as an
excellent shop, conducted on the best principles. She had a great
respect for both Mr. Robinson and Miss Franklin--she would never find a
more desirable place for Phyllis. As to cutting her off from all her
connections and the circumstances of her birth and education, that had
been done already pretty effectually. The sooner everybody found his or
her level the better for the world in general. If Mrs. Carey was not
much mistaken, more girls than Phyllis would have to learn that lesson
before these hard times were over. No, it was not Phyllis who was to be
cut off from her connections--from those who ought to be nearest and
dearest to her. It was poor Ella who was separated from the rest of the
family, and condemned to gilded exile. Mrs. Carey was doing her best to
keep Phyllis, not only for her mother and her poor father, but for her
brothers, who must all start in life in a humble way, by putting the
girl into "Robinson's," since Mr. Robinson had reluctantly consented to
have her.

Dr. Millar retired from the field beaten.

The unheard-of destination of her friend Phyllis played the most
extraordinary pranks with May Millar's mind. The fact was, there were
two Mays dwelling side by side in one goodly young tabernacle of flesh.
There was the May with the exceptional scholarly proclivities. She had
a life of her own into which none of the family except her father
possessed so much as the tools to penetrate. She cherished dreams of
Greece and Rome, with the mighty music of the undying voices of their
sages and poets, and the rich treasures of learning, among which a poor
little English girl, far far down in the centuries, could only walk with
reverend foot and bated breath.

And there was the other May, hanging about her mother, running to bring
her father's slippers, sitting on his knee to this day, taking
possession of Dora, ordering her about like a young tyrant, adoring
Tray--the most guileless, helpless, petted simpleton of a child-woman
that ever existed. The second May was at the present date the more
prominent and prevailing of the two, so much so that all the
sharp-tongued, practical-minded ladies in Redcross made a unanimous
remark. Dr. and Mrs. Millar's youngest daughter was the most
disgracefully spoilt, badly brought-up, childish creature for her years
whom the critics knew. It was a poor preparation in view of her having
to work to maintain herself. They could not tell what was to become of
her.

At first May lamented, day and night, over the fate of Phyllis Carey, to
have to stand behind counters, sort drawers full of ribands, tape, and
reels of cotton, and wait on her townswomen! May could think of no
fitting parallel unless the pathetic one of that miserable young
princess apprenticed to the button-maker, dying with her cheek on an
open Bible, at the text, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest."

Then, as Phyllis accommodated herself to the new yoke, and found it not
so galling as she had expected it to be, her friend May altered her tone
with sympathetic quickness, and reflected Phyllis's change of mood
almost before the mood was established. Phyllis was in mental
constitution like her father, single-hearted and submissive--not bright
any more than Bell Hewett was bright, but contented and trustful as long
as she was suffered to be so. She had been enduring harder and harder
lines at home. She found existence actually brightening instead of
darkening round her when she was transferred to "Robinson's." For
everybody, knowing all about her and her father and mother, with their
altered circumstances, began, at least, by treating her with kindly
respect and forbearance, in spite of Mrs. Carey's austere request that
she should be dealt with exactly like the other shop-girls.

Shop-work, in which Phyllis was to be gradually trained, felt
comparatively easy to a girl who had been taken from school and
launched into the coarsest drudgery of house-work under an
inexperienced, flurried, over-burdened maid-of-all-work. Mrs. Carey was
sufficiently just to exact no more home-work from Phyllis, and to
arrange that she should have her time to herself, like other shop-girls,
after "Robinson's" was closed, while the master of "Robinson's" was
inflexible in setting his face against late hours, except for the elder
hands on one evening in the week. Everybody was good to Phyllis, who, in
truth, just because she was enough of a little lady to be free from
arrogance and assumption, while she was willing to do her best to oblige
her neighbours, provoked no harsh treatment. Above all Tom Robinson for
one person could not be too considerate to her.

Miss Franklin looked on Phyllis Carey as a godsend, a harbinger of other
better-class girls going into trade. The woman not only took the girl
under her wing, she fell back instinctively and inevitably on Phyllis
for companionship, with a selection flattering in a woman to a girl.

Then a complete revolution was wrought in May's opinions and wishes.
Nothing would serve her but that she too must go as a shop-girl to
"Robinson's," and share the fortunes of her friend.

May did not yet confide her purpose to her father and mother, but she
poured it in daily and nightly outbursts into the startled ears of
Dora, to whom the hallucination sounded like a mocking retribution on
the young Millars' old scornful estimate of shopkeepers and shops. May
stuck to her point with a tenacity which, touching as it did a tender,
trembling chord in Dora's heart, threatened also to subvert her
judgment, that was at once sounder and more matured than May's.

The vibrating chord lay in the knowledge that May too was destined to
quit Redcross at no distant day, with the aching reluctance of Dora to
give her up, and to find herself in the position that domineering,
selfish girls sometimes covet--that of being the only girl at home,
having none to share with her in the rights and privileges of the
daughter of the house.

A sort of feverish anxiety, which was in itself ominous, had taken hold
of Dr. Millar to see all he had projected accomplished in so far as it
was still possible. That is, he would fain set in motion, at least, the
wheels which would carry out his purpose. Perhaps he had reason to
distrust his health and life; perhaps it was simply that he was not
insensible to the fact, that money had a trick of running through his
fingers and those of Mrs. Millar like water, though they did their best
to catch it up and arrest it in its rapid course. Mrs. Millar's little
private income was still in part free, and not engulfed in the needs of
the household at Redcross, as it might not long continue. Rose had only
sixty pounds of it, and Annie fifteen for pocket-money till she should
have passed her probation and be in a position to receive her nurse's
salary, which would be as soon as she had completed her first year in
the hospital. There were seventy-five pounds remaining, which might
serve to keep May at Thirlwall Hall in St. Ambrose's with the chance of
her gaining a scholarship and partly maintaining herself for the rest of
her stay in college. "Little May's" maintaining herself in any degree
was a notion half to laugh at, half to cry over, while it took
possession of Dr. Millar's imagination just as serving in "Robinson's"
along with Phyllis Carey had hold of May's.

Another year (who knew?) it might not be in the Millars' power to afford
May the opportunity of growing up a scholar, on which her father had set
his heart. That consciousness, and the sense of the value which her
husband put on May's abilities and their culture, brought round Mrs.
Millar. She began to contemplate with something like composure what she
would otherwise have strongly objected to, the sending forth of her
youngest darling--the child who so clung to her and to home--into an
indifferent or hostile world.

Truth to tell, it was May herself who was the great obstacle. She was
not cast in the heroic mould of Annie and Rose. It was like tearing up
her heart-strings to drag her away from her father and mother, Dora,
Tray, the Old Doctor's House, Redcross itself. She had enough perception
of what was due to everybody concerned--herself included--and just
sufficient self-control not to disgrace herself and vex her father by
openly opposing and actively fighting against his plans for her welfare.
But she threw all the discouraging weight of a passive resistance and
dumb protest into the scale.




CHAPTER XV.

TOM ROBINSON TAKEN INTO COUNSEL.


At last May, in the innocence of her heart, took a rash step. She heard
her father say it was good, showery, fishing weather, and she was aware
Tom Robinson often fished in the Dewes; what was to hinder her from
making a detour by the river on her way home from school, and if she saw
Tom near the old bridge--the pools below were specially patronized by
fishers--she might go up to him and ask him frankly if he had an opening
for her services, along with those of Phyllis Carey, in his shop? If he
had, would he do her the great favour to speak to her father and mother,
and ask them not to send her away to be a scholar at St. Ambrose, but to
let her stay and be a shop-woman in Redcross?

Tom Robinson, at the first word of her appeal, put up his fishing-rod,
slung his basket, in which there were only a couple of fish, on his
back, shouldered her books, and turned and walked back with her, as if
it was he who was seeking her company and not she his. How else was he
to make the little girl who might have been his pet sister see that
there was any harm in the irregular course she had pursued? How,
otherwise, was she to understand that she was big enough--nearly a head
taller than her sister Dora--and old enough with her seventeen years,
though she was still the child of the family, to render it indecorous
for her to come, out of her own head, without the knowledge of anybody,
to have a private interview with him on the banks of the Dewes?

"'Robinson's' is highly honoured," he told her, in a tone partly
bantering, partly serious, and wholly friendly, "and I too should, and
do, thank you for the trust in me which your proposal implies, but I am
afraid it would not do, Miss May."

May's fair young face fell.

"Oh! I am so sorry," she said simply; "but, please, may I know why you
have Phyllis and will not have me?"

"The case is altogether different. Mrs. Carey made up her mind that Miss
Phyllis should go into a shop--mine or another's. Phyllis was not happy
at home; she is not a clever, studious girl, though she is your friend
and is very nice--of course all young ladies are nice. There is no
comparison between you and her."

"But why shouldn't clever people go and work in shops?" persisted May,
in her half-childish way--"not that I mean I am clever; that would be
too conceited. But I am sure it would be a great deal better for shops
if they had the very cleverest people to work in them."

"It depends on the kind of cleverness," he told her. "With regard to one
sort you are right, of course; with respect to another it would not
answer, and it would be horrible waste."

She opened her brown eyes wide. "Why do you waste your abilities and
college education?" she asked him naively--"not that everybody calls it
a waste; some people say 'Robinson's' is the high-class shop it is,
because its masters have not only been respectable people, they have
always been educated men and gentlemen."

"I ought to say for myself and my predecessors that I am much obliged to
'some people' for acknowledging that," he remarked coolly.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Robinson," said May humbly. "I know I have been
very rude--I am constantly saying stupid things."

"Not at all; and though you did, never mind--say them to me if you
like," he gave her _carte blanche_ to comfort her. "But look here, Miss
May, I don't wish you to make mistakes. Indeed it is my duty, since I am
a great deal older than you--old enough to be, well, your uncle I
should say--to prevent it if I can."

"I don't see how you could be my uncle," said May bluntly, "when you are
not more than five or six years older than Annie--I have heard her say
so--you are more like my brother."

The instant she mentioned the relationship to which he had aspired in
vain, she felt the blood tingling to her finger-tips, and she could see
him redden under the shade of his soft felt hat.

May groaned inwardly. "Oh! I am a blundering goose; I wonder anybody can
be so infatuated as to think me clever."

"I have not said what I wished to say," he resumed, for somehow, in
spite of her forgetfulness and lack of tact, he could talk well enough
to May. "I must set you right. I have not a grain of the scholar in me
such as you have, neither do I believe that those who went before me
had; we could never have been more than fair students. We did not go out
of our way to get learning. We did what our associates and
contemporaries did, that was all. I fancy I may take the small credit to
us of saying that we had no objection to learn what the ancients
thought, saw, and did, after we had been lugged through the Latin
grammar and caned into familiarity with Greek verbs. We were like other
men who had the same advantages. I honestly believe if we had anything
special and individual about us it was a turn for trade. That is the
only manner in which I can account for our sticking to the shop, unless
we were mere money-grubbers. But all that signifies very little; what
does signify is that you are not quite like other girls. What, May, do
you pretend that you do not prize the roll of a sonorous passage, or the
trip of an exquisite phrase in Latin or Greek? That it does not tickle
your ears, cling to your memory, and haunt you as a theme in music
haunts a composer? Do you not care to go any deeper in Plato or in the
dramatists? Is it a fact that you can bear to have heard the last of
Antigone, and Alcestis, and Electra?"

May hung her head like one accused of gross unfaithfulness, with some
show of reason.

"No, I cannot say that, Mr. Robinson," she owned, "I shall think and
dream of them all my life. They are so grand and persecuted and sad. But
there--if I do not turn my back on them and my books, I must go to St.
Ambrose's, there is no choice," ended May disconsolately.

"But why not go to St. Ambrose's?"

"Oh! you do not know, Mr. Robinson," protested May with fresh energy.
"In the first place you are a man and cannot understand. In the second,
I suppose it is because I am so silly and childish and cowardly," she
went on incoherently. "Annie always said it was cowardly; she and Rose
went away quite bravely and cheerfully, keeping up their own and
everybody's spirits to the last. But Dora and I could not do it, yet I
do not know that anybody ever thought of calling our Dora cowardly
exactly, or silly, and childish. She was not a bit cowardly with the
horrid big dog and dear little Tray, you remember?--she would not let me
interfere, but she would have stoned the dog herself."

"Which would have been very foolish of her," said Tom Robinson with
decision. "I should say she was timid, not cowardly--there is a broad
distinction between the two conditions."

"It is just that we cannot leave home for any length of time, Dora and
I," said May piteously.

