There being very few new boys this term compared with last, he found
himself by no means neglected in his walks abroad, and it required all
his wariness to elude the gins and pitfalls prepared for him.  Indeed,
his very wariness got him into trouble.

After chapel on his second morning Swinstead came to him and said--

"Youngster, you are to go to the Doctor at half-past nine."

"Oh, ah!" said Coote to himself, knowingly.  "I know what that means."

"Do you hear?" asked Swinstead.

"I suppose you think I'm green," said the new boy.

Swinstead laughed.

"What on earth should make me think that?" said he.

Coote chuckled merrily to himself as he saw the senior depart.

"I'm getting over the worst of it," said he to himself.  "They'll soon
give up trying it on me.  Ha, ha!"

And he went off to find his chums, who took him for a stroll in the
Fields.

"Well, young 'un," said Dick, patronisingly, "getting used to it?  Worn
your flannels lately?"

"You're a beastly cad, Dick," said Coote; "but you don't catch me like
that again."

"No, you're getting too knowing," said Georgie.

Coote laughed.

"I'm not quite as green as some fellows think," said he.  "A fellow came
to me this morning and told me to go to the Doctor at 9:30.  A nice fool
he thought he'd make of me.  Ha, ha!"

"What fellow was he?" said Dick, looking rather serious.

"I don't know his name," said Coote.  "The fellow who marked the names
in chapel, I believe."

"What, Swinstead?  Did he tell you to go?"

"Rather; and I told him I wasn't such a fool as I looked--I mean as he
thought."

"By Jove!--you young ass!  You've got yourself into a mess, if you
like."

"How do you mean?" inquired the new boy, beginning to be alarmed at the
concerned looks of his two friends.

"Why, he's Chapel usher," said Dick.  "Do you mean to say you didn't go
to the Doctor?"

"Rather not.  I--"

"What's the time?" said Dick.

"A quarter to ten."

Without more ado they took the unhappy Coote between them and rushed him
frantically back to the school, where they shot him in at the Doctor's
door just as that gentleman was about to dismiss his new boys' class.

"How is this, Coote?" demanded the Head Master, sternly, as the
breathless boy entered.  "Were you not told to be here at half-past
nine?"

"Yes, sir; I--I made a mistake.  I'm very sorry, sir."

The genuine terror in his face procured his reprieve this time.  Dr
Winter may have been used to "mistakes" of this kind.  At any rate, he
contented himself with cautioning the new boy against unpunctuality
generally, and, by way of punishment, gave him an examination all to
himself, which resulted, much to his comfort, in his being placed in the
upper third, of which Dick and Heathcote were already shining lights.

While he was thus engaged, Dick and Heathcote were holding a secret, and
by no means cheerful, consultation over a recent number of the
_Templeton Observer_.

"I made sure it was all blown over," said the latter, dejectedly.

"What a cad the fellow must be!" said the former.

"I think newspapers are a regular nuisance!" said Georgie.

"All I know is, he robbed us of all we had, and if we'd informed he'd
have been in Botany Bay or somewhere this minute!" said Dick, working
himself up into a passion.

The extract from the _Templeton Observer_ which gave rise to this duet
of wrath was as follows, dated some ten days before the close of the
holidays:--

  *The recent mysterious disappearance of a Templeton boat*.--Up to the
  present time nothing has been heard of the _Martha_, which, as our
  readers will remember, disappeared from the Templeton beach, on the
  4th June last.  The supposed clue with which the police professed to
  be provided has, so far, failed to bring the perpetrators of the
  outrage to justice; although the hope is by no means abandoned of
  tracing the missing lad.  The matter is somewhat seriously complicated
  by the discovery that Thomas White, the reputed owner of the boat, was
  at no time its actual proprietor.  The _Martha_ was the joint property
  of White and three other men, one of them skipper of the brig _Julia_,
  and the other two well-known fishermen, of this town.  It appears that
  an arrangement was made, whereby White should be the nominal owner of
  the boat, he undertaking to hand over monthly three quarters of the
  profits to his partners.  In May last, during the absence of his other
  partners, White pawned the _Martha_ representing her to be his sole
  property, and appropriated the whole proceeds of the transaction.  For
  this act of fraud (which the recent loss of the boat and the return of
  its joint owners has brought to light) we understand a writ has been
  issued against White, and that he will be arrested immediately on his
  return to Templeton from his present cruise with the Fishing Fleet in
  the high seas.

"Tom White's a regular bad one," said Dick.

"Yes.  It was a jolly mean trick to pawn what didn't belong to him."

"The thing is, who did it belong to when we--when it got adrift?"

"The pawnbroker, I suppose," said Heathcote.  "Most likely Nash."

"No wonder Tom White didn't seem much cut up about losing her."

"No; he made a good thing by it.  It's a comfort to think he'll get
nabbed at last."

"Of course, we've nothing to do with his row," said Dick.

"Of course not.  We had nothing to do with pawning the boat."

And yet, they concluded, if the _Martha_ had never gone adrift, no one
would have known of Tom White's fraud, and he might have been able to
make money enough with her to clear himself.

It seemed unfair to rake up an old sore like this at the very beginning
of the term, especially when, as they persuaded themselves, over and
over again, the whole affair had very little to do with them.

"I vote we don't look at this wretched paper any more," said Heathcote,
crumpling up the offending _Observer_ into a ball, and giving it a punt
across the path.

"Why not?  We may as well see what becomes of Tom White," said Dick.
"Young Aspinall can fetch us up a copy once a week."

And so one of the events of the new term was that the _Templeton
Observer_ had a new subscriber, and increased its circulation by two new
and very diligent readers.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE NEW CAPTAIN DRAWS A STRAIGHT LINE.

Mansfield returned to Templeton like a man who knows that his work is
cut out for him, and who means to do it, _coute qui coute_, as the
French say.

Any one else might have been afraid of the task before him, and doubtful
of success.  Mansfield was neither; at any rate, as far as any one else
could see.  He set himself up neither for a Hercules nor a Galahad.  It
never occurred to him what he was.  But it did occur to him that
Templeton wanted reform, and that the Captain of Templeton ought to
reform it.  And with that one clear purpose before him, Mansfield was
the sort of fellow to go straight through thick and thin to reach it, or
perish in the attempt.

They say that when a certain Russian Emperor wanted a railway made
between the two chief cities of his dominion, and was asked what route
it should take, so as to benefit the largest number of intervening towns
and villages, he called for a map and ruler, and drawing a straight line
between the two places, said, "Let it go that way."

That was pretty much the style of Mansfield.  He didn't understand
turning to right or left to give anybody a lift on the way.  All he knew
was that Templeton was not up to the mark, and that Templeton must be
brought up to the mark.  Between those points he ruled his straight
line, and that way he meant to go.

If the line cut a snug little set of chums in half, if it turned one or
two settled school customs out of house and home, if it sent one or two
waverers hopelessly over to the wrong side--well, so be it.  It was a
pity, especially if the innocent had to suffer with the guilty.  But the
good of Templeton was at stake, and woe to the traitor who thought
anything more important than that!

Dear old Ponty, whom Templeton had never loved so much as when it missed
him, had curled his line about in snug, comfortable ins-and-outs, so as
not to disturb anybody.  Mansfield didn't think himself better than
Ponty, whom he loved as a brother.  But Mansfield couldn't draw curling
in-and-out lines.  He only knew one line, and that was a straight one;
and so, for better or worse, Mansfield called for his map and his ruler,
and dashed into his task.

"Give the little chaps a chance," Ponty had said, in his last will and
testament, and the new Captain of Templeton was willing to make one
little curve, in order to carry out his friend's wish.

On the fourth evening of the term, as the Den was assembled in full
session, for the purpose of swearing in Coote and denouncing the powers
that be, that honourable fraternity was startled out of its never
superabundant wits by an apparition far more terrible than the Templeton
Ghost.

Dick was in the chair at the time, and Heathcote was in the act of
moving a resolution, "That this Den considers all the monitors ought to
be hanged, and hopes they will be," when the Captain of Templeton
suddenly entered the room.

Then fell there a silence on the Den, like to the silence of a kennel of
dogs when the whip of the master cracks!  The word "hanged" died half-
uttered on the lips of Heathcote, and Dick slipped aghast from his
eminence.  The tongue of Coote clave to the roof of his mouth, and even
Gosse's heart turned to stone in the midst of a "swop."  Never did
condemned criminals stand more still, or wax-works more dumb.

Mansfield closed the door behind him, and marched straight to the top of
the room, where stood Dick's vacant chair.  Was he going to drive them
out single-handed?  Was he going to arrest their leader?  Or was he
going to make a speech?

As soon as they perceived he was going to do neither the first nor the
second, and knew he was going to do the last, they groaned.  They could
have endured a stampede round the Quad; they could have brought
themselves to see their leader immolated in a good cause; but to have to
stand still and hear Jupiter speak--what had they done to deserve that?

"Look here, you youngsters," began Mansfield, needing not even a motion
of his hand to command silence, "I've not come as an enemy, but a
friend."

"What will it be like," mused Coote, "when he comes as an enemy?"

"And I've only a very few words to say to you."

Was it a sigh of relief or disappointment that escaped the Den?
Mansfield didn't know; he wasn't well up in sighs.

"There's a great deal goes on in the Den that isn't right.  Some of you
youngsters think the only use of school rules is to break them, and that
it's a fine thing to disobey the monitors.  You're wrong, and, unless
you give up that sort of thing, you'll find it out.  The school rules
are made to be kept, and the monitors are appointed to see they _are_
kept; and any boy that says otherwise is an enemy to Templeton, and he
will be treated accordingly.  Some of you don't approve of all that goes
on here, and yet you don't like to stand up against it.  That's not
right.  You can't be neutral.  If you mean to be steady, you are bound
to stand out and have nothing to do with the bad lot.  I want you all to
understand this once for all, and not say you've had no warning.  I warn
you now.  Rules are made to be kept, and you must keep them.
Pontifex--"

The Captain had to stop; for the Den, which had stood in breathless
silence thus far, sprang, at the mention of the name, into a cheer which
spoke quite as much for the tension of their own feelings at this moment
as for their affection for the old Captain.

Mansfield let them have it out; he liked them none the worse for their
love to his friend, and what he had to say would by no means spoil by
keeping till the cheers were over.

They were over at last.  The sight of the Captain there, tall, upright,
determined, with his dark eyes bent on them, cut them short and brought
the Den back to silence as deep as that which had just been broken.

"Pontifex was fond of you youngsters.  He said to me a day or two before
he went, 'Give the little chaps a chance.'"

They could not help it; Captain or no Captain, they must cheer again.
And again Mansfield waited patiently and ungrudgingly till it was over.

"This is why I've come here to-night.  You have your chance.  Let
everybody choose for himself, and don't let any one say he didn't know
what to expect.  There's to be a Captain's levee on Thursday.  I don't
want any one to come to it who is not prepared to stand by Templeton
rules this term.  Those who are prepared will do well to show up."

So ended Jupiter's speech to the Den.  He stalked down the room and out
of the door amid a solemn silence, which was not broken until his firm
footsteps died away down the passage.

Then the Den looked at one another as much as to say--

"What do you think of that?"

"Pretty warm!" said Dick, relieving the general embarrassment by
speaking first.

"Think he means it?" said one.

"Looks like it!" said Dick, gloomily.

There was a pause.  The Den knew, somehow, it was no joke.

It was a case of life or death, war or peace, liberty or servitude, and
they hesitated on the brink.

"I don't mean to knuckle under to him!" said Heathcote, speaking with
the mantle of Pledge upon him.  "It's all a dodge to curry favour with
Winter."

The Den was thankful for the suggestion, and revived wonderfully under
its influence.

"Catch me doing more for him than for old Ponty!" cried Gosse, who had
never done anything for Ponty.

The reference was a popular one, and the Den took it up also.  It fell
to extolling Ponty to the very heavens, and abasing Mansfield to the
opposite extremity, while it held up its hands in horror at the man who
could seek to make the good order of Templeton the price of his favour
with the Head Master.

But, when the little outburst had subsided, the awkward question still
remained--What was to be done?

"Of course nobody will be cad enough to go to the levee after what he
said," said Heathcote, who, warmed by the admiring glances of Coote and
the success of his last observation, felt called upon to speak for the
assembly in general.

"Rather not!  You won't go, will you, Dick?" said Pauncefote.

"Don't know," said that hero, shortly.

The Den was startled.  What did Dick mean by "Don't know"?  Was he going
to knuckle in after all and join the "saints?"

The uncertainty had a very depressing effect on Heathcote's enthusiasm,
which had calculated all along on the countenance of his leader.  Coote,
too, cautiously separated himself from Gosse, who was shouting sedition
at the top of his voice, and drew off to more neutral territory.  Smith
and Pauncefote kept up their cheers for Ponty, but gradually dropped the
groans for Mansfield, and altogether the howls of the Den toned down to
the roar of a sucking dove as it got whispered abroad that Dick
Richardson "didn't know."

The two days that followed were days of suspense to the Den.

"Is Dick going?" was the question every one asked.

"He doesn't know," was the invariable answer.

Under these circumstances, it will be understood, but little enthusiasm
could be called up over the rival toilets of the fraternity.  Culver's
dress-coat had been returned to its lawful owner long since, and for
that reason, if for no other, he determined not to attend.  Heathcote's
choker and white gloves were the worse for wear, so he was not anxious;
and Coote, whose one strong point was a watered ribbon watch-chain, was
rumoured to be weak in collars, and, on the whole, not a "hot man" at
all, or likely to show up.

As to Dick, opinions were divided as to what he could do if he went.  It
was known his "dicky" had fallen off, but, on the other hand, he had
brought back a pair of patent leather pumps, which might make him feel
it his duty to attend.

"Look here, old man," asked Heathcote, for about the hundredth time, the
evening before the levee, "are you going, or are you not?"

"Don't know," replied Dick.  "Are you?"

What a question for a leader to ask his lieutenant!  Dick knew it was
ridiculous, but he guessed shrewdly it might choke off further inquiry.
And it did.

Heathcote, however, had other counsellors besides Dick, who were neither
doubtful nor sparing in their advice on the great question.  A hasty
meeting of the "Select Sociables" was summoned, by means of Braider,
that very evening, to take into consideration the action of the Club at
the forthcoming levee, at which it was agreed unanimously that, after
the Captain's threat, no member of that honourable body should, on any
account, show up.

Heathcote held up his hand for the resolution with the others, and felt
sure, in his own mind, Dick would have done the same.

"Mind, nobody shows up, on any pretext," said Spokes, as the meeting
separated.  "We're on our honour, and, of course, no one mentions the
Club out-of-doors."

Of course, nobody would think of such a thing.

Heathcote felt a good deal concerned as the evening went on, and still
no sign came from Dick.  It wasn't exactly kind to keep a fellow in
suspense like this.  The only thing was to take the bull by the horns,
and announce what _he_ was going to do.  Then, possibly, Dick might show
his hand.

"I've decided not to show up at the levee," said Georgie, on the morning
of the eventful day.

"Have you?" said Dick, with a most provoking indifference.

"Yes," said the cunning Georgie.  "I tell you what, Dick; while it's
going on, you and I can get the top court and play off our heat for the
handicap.  What do you say?"

"Don't know."

Whereupon, Heathcote wished that two words in the English language could
be suspended, and went off to see if any comfort was going in the Den.
But no.

"What's Dick going to do?" asked almost everybody.

"He doesn't know," groaned Heathcote.

Whereupon, the Den, as well as Georgie, wished ill to those two unlucky
words.

The morning passed, and still no ray of light illumined the doubters.
Dick got twenty lines from Pledge for jumping over the geranium bed in
the Quad, and knocking off a flower in the act; and every one guessed
this would decide him against the levee.

But at dinner-time a rumour spread, on the authority of Coote, that he
had put on a clean collar since morning school, and public opinion
immediately veered round to the opposite direction.  No sooner, however,
was dinner done than he was seen to fetch his tennis racket from his
study; and once more it was surmised that he was going, after all, to
play off his heat with Georgie instead of attending the ceremony.  And
that supposition was in turn dashed to the ground, when it was
discovered that he had got the bat in order to give it to a messenger
from Splicers, the racket maker, to be tightened up in the top cord.

Afternoon school dragged tediously on, and the Den grew desperate.
Fellows went off to dress.  But what was the use of Heathcote putting on
his choker, or Smith and Pauncefote parting their hairs, when they
didn't know whether they were going to the levee or not?

Heathcote made one final effort to "draw" the Sphinx.
