chasing butterflies and gathering flowers. And there also was the winter
child--the child of extreme desolation--shivering on a doorstep in one
of London's streets. There were other children, too--saintly
children--St. Agnes and her lamb, St. Elizabeth, St. Ursula; and, above
all, there were photographs of the famous pictures of the Child of all
children, the Child of Bethlehem.

The windows of the room were shaded by soft curtains of pale blue. A
cheerful fire burned in the grate, and a child lay, half-sitting up, in
a bed covered by a silken eider-down.

The child looked quite content in his little bed, and a trained nurse
who was in the room went softly out by another door as Mrs. Anderson and
the preacher entered.

"Hasn't Connie come back?" asked Ronald.

"No, dear," said Mrs. Anderson; "she's not able to do so just yet."

"I want her," said Ronald, suppressing a sigh.

"I have brought this gentleman to see you, Ronald."

"What?"

The boy cast a quick glance at the somewhat ungainly figure of Father
John. Another disappointment--not the father he was waiting for. But the
luminous eyes of the preacher seemed to pierce into the boy's soul. When
he looked once, he looked again. When he looked twice, it seemed to him
that he wanted to look forever.

"I am glad," he said; and a smile broke over his little face.

Father John sat down at once by the bedside, and Mrs. Anderson went
softly out of the room.

"Waiting for something, little man?" said the street preacher.

"How can you tell?" asked Ronald.

"I see it in your eyes," said the preacher.

"It's father," said Ronald.

"Which father?" asked the preacher.

"My own," said Ronald--"my soldier father--the V. C. man, you know."

"Yes," said Father John.

"I want him," said Ronald.

"Of course you do."

"Is he likely to come soon?" asked Ronald.

"If I could tell you that, Ronald," said the street preacher, "I should
be a wiser man than my Father in heaven means me to be. There is only
one Person who can tell you when your earthly father will come."

"You mean Lord Christ," said Ronald.

"I mean Christ and our Father in heaven."

Ronald shut his eyes for a minute. Then he opened them.

"I want my father," he said. "I'm sort o' starving for him."

"Well," said Father John, "you have a father, you know--you have two
fathers. If you can't get your earthly father down here, you're certain
safe to get him up there. A boy with two fathers needn't feel starved
about the heart, need he, now?"

"I suppose not," said Ronald.

"He need not, of course," said Father John. "I'll say a bit of a prayer
for you to the Heavenly Father, and I know that sore feeling will go out
of your heart. I know it, Ronald; for He has promised to answer the
prayers of those who trust in Him. But now I want to talk to you about
something else. I guess, somehow, that the next best person to your
father to come to see you now is your little friend Connie."

"Yes, yes!" said Ronald. "I've missed her dreadful. Mrs. Anderson is
sweet, and Nurse Charlotte very kind, and I'm beginning not to be quite
so nervous about fire and smoke and danger. It's awful to be frightened.
I'll have to tell my father when he comes back how bad I've been and how
unlike him. But if I can't get him just now--and I'm not going to be
unpatient--I want Connie, 'cos she understands."

"Of course she understands," said the preacher. "I will try and get her
for you."

"But why can't she come back?"

"She can't."

"But why--why?"

"That is another thing I can't tell you."

"And I am not to be unpatient," said Ronald.

"You're to be patient--it's a big lesson--it mostly takes a lifetime to
get it well learned. But somehow, when it is learned, then there's
nothing else left to learn."

Ronald's eyes were so bright and so dark that the preacher felt he had
said enough for the present. He bent down over the boy.

"The God above bless thee, child," he said; "and if you have power and
strength to say a little prayer for Connie, do. She will come back when
the Heavenly Father wills it. Good-bye, Ronald."




CHAPTER XX.

CAUGHT AGAIN.


When Connie awoke the next morning, it was to see the ugly face of Agnes
bending over her.

"Stylites is to 'ome," she said briefly. "Yer'd best look nippy and come
into the kitchen and 'ave yer brekfus'."

"Oh!" said Connie.

"You'll admire Stylites," continued Agnes; "he's a wery fine man. Now
come along--but don't yer keep him waiting."

Connie had not undressed. Agnes poured a little water into a cracked
basin for her to wash her face and hands, and showed her a comb, by no
means specially inviting, with which she could comb out her pretty hair.
Then, again enjoining her to "look slippy," she left the room.

In the kitchen a big breakfast was going on. A quantity of bacon was
frizzling in a pan over a great fire; and Freckles, the boy who had let
Connie and Agnes in the night before, was attending to it. Two men with
rough faces--one of them went by the name of Corkscrew, and the other
was known as Nutmeg--were standing also within the region of the warm
and generous fire. But the man on whom Connie fixed her pretty eyes,
when she softly opened the door and in all fear made her appearance, was
of a totally different order of being.

He was a tall man, quite young, not more than thirty years of age, and
remarkably handsome. He had that curious combination of rather fair hair
and very dark eyes and brows. His face was clean-shaven, and the
features were refined and delicate without being in the least
effeminate; for the cruel strength of the lower jaw and firmly shut lips
showed at a glance that this man had a will of iron. His voice was
exceedingly smooth and gentle, however, in intonation.

When he saw Connie he stepped up to her side and, giving her a gracious
bow, said:

"Welcome to the kitchen, young lady."

"It's Stylites--bob yer curtsy," whispered Agnes in Connie's ear.

So Connie bobbed her curtsy. Was this the man she was to be so
dreadfully afraid of? Her whole charming little face broke into a smile.

"I'm so glad as you're Stylites!" she said.

The compliment, the absolutely unexpected words, the charm of the smile,
had a visible effect upon the man. He looked again at Connie as though
he would read her through and through; then, taking her hand, he led her
to the breakfast-table.

"Freckles," he said, "put a clean plate and knife on the table. That
plate isn't fit for a young lady to eat off."

Freckles grinned from ear to ear, showing rows of yellow teeth. He
rushed off to wash the plate in question, and returned with it hot and
shining to lay again before Connie's place. Simeon Stylites himself
helped the little girl to the choicest pieces of bacon, to delicate
slices of white bread, and to any other good things which were on the
table. As he did this he did not speak once, but his eyes seemed to be
everywhere. No one dared do a thing on the sly. The rough-looking men,
Corkscrew and Nutmeg, were desired in a peremptory tone to take their
mugs of tea to another table at the farther end of the great room. One
of them ventured to grumble, and both cast angry glances at Connie.
Stylites, however, said, "Shut that!" and they were instantly mute as
mice.

The boy Freckles also took his breakfast to the other table; but Agnes
sat boldly down, and pushing her ill-favored face forward, addressed
Simeon in familiar style:

"I nabbed her--yer see."

"Shut that!" said Stylites.

Agnes flushed an angry red, gave Connie a vindictive look, but did not
dare to utter another word. Connie ate her breakfast with wonderful
calm, and almost contentment. During the night which had passed she had
gone through terrible dreams, in which Simeon Stylites had figured
largely. He had appeared to her in those dreams as an ogre--a monster
too awful to live. But here was a gracious gentleman, very goodly to
look upon, very kind to her, although rude and even fierce to the rest
of the party.

"He'll let me go 'ome," thought Connie; "he 'ave a kind 'eart."

The meal came to an end. When it did so Corkscrew came up and inquired
if the young "amattur" were "goin' to 'ave her first lesson in
perfessional work."

"Shut that!" said Stylites again. "You go into cellar No. 5 and attend
to the silver, Corkscrew.--Nutmeg, you'll have the other jewelry to put
in order this morning. Is the furnace in proper order?"

"Yus, sir."

"Get off both of you and do your business. We're going out this
evening."

"When, sir?"

"Ten o'clock--sharp's the word."

"On wot, sir?"

"No. 17's the job," said Simeon Stylites.

"And wot am I to do?" said Agnes.

"Stay indoors and mend your clothes."

"In this room, sir?"

"No; your bedroom."

"Please, Simeon Stylites, yer ain't thanked me yet for bringin' Connie
along."

For answer Stylites put his hand into his pocket, produced half-a-crown,
and tossed it to Agnes.

"Get into your room, and be quick about it," he said.

"May I take Connie along, please, sir?"

"Leave the girl alone. Go!"

Agnes went.

"Come and sit in this warm chair by the fire, dear," said Stylites.

Connie did so. The smile round her lips kept coming and going, going and
coming. She was touched; she was soothed; she had not a scrap of fear;
this great, strong, kind man would certainly save her. He was so
different from dreadful Mammy Warren.

"Freckles," said the chief, "wash the breakfast things; put them in
order; take them all into the pantry. When you have done, go out by the
back door, being careful to put on the old man's disguise to-day. Fasten
the wig firmly on, and put a patch over your eye. Here's five shillings;
get food for the day, and be here by twelve o'clock sharp. Now go."

"Yus, sir."

Freckles had an exceedingly cheerful manner. He knew very little fear.
The strange life he led gave him a sort of wild pleasure. He winked at
Connie.

"Somethin' wery strange be goin' to 'appen," he said to himself. "A
hamattur like this a-brought in by private horders, an' no perfessional
lesson to be tuk." He thought how he himself would enjoy teaching this
pretty child some of the tricks of the trade. Oh, of course, she was
absolutely invaluable. He didn't wonder that Mammy had brought in such
spoil when Connie was there. But even Freckles had to depart, and Connie
presently found herself alone with the chief.

He stood by the hearth, looking taller and more exactly like a fine
gentleman, and Connie was more and more reassured about him.

"Please, sir----" she began.

"Stop!" he interrupted.

"Mayn't I speak, sir?"

"No--not now. For God's sake don't plead with me; I can't stand that."

"Why, sir?"

But Connie, as she looked up, saw an expression about that mouth and
that jaw which frightened her, and frightened her so badly that all the
agony she had undergone in Mammy Warren's house seemed as nothing in
comparison. The next minute, however, the cruel look had departed.
Simeon Stylites drew a chair forward, dropped into it, bent low, and
looked into Connie's eyes.

"Allow me," he said; and he put his hand very gently under her chin, and
raised her little face and looked at it.

"Who's your father?" he asked.

"Peter Harris."

"Trade?"

"Blacksmith, sir."

"Where do you live?"

"Adam Street, sir; and----"

"Hush! Only answer my questions."

Stylites removed his hand from under the girl's chin, and Connie felt a
blush of pain sweeping over her face.

"How long were you with that woman Warren?"

"Dunno, sir."

"What do you mean by answering me like that?"

