"I have no thought of going back to New Mexico."

"Where, then, brother?"

"In the very opposite direction--to the United States.  Don Francisco
advises me to do so; and I have yielded to his counsel."

Adela seems less disposed to offer opposition.  She no longer protests
against the change of residence.

"Dear sister," he continues, "we cannot do better.  There seems little
hope of our unfortunate country getting rid of her tyrants--at least,
for some time to come.  When the day again arrives for our patriots to
pronounce, I shall know it in time to be with them.  Now, we should only
think of our safety.  Although I don't wish to alarm you, I've never
felt it quite safe here.  Who knows, but that Uraga may yet discover our
hiding-place?  He has his scouts searching in all directions.  Every
time Manuel makes a visit to the settlements, I have fear of his being
followed back.  Therefore, I think it will be wiser for us to carry out
our original design, and go on to the American States."

"Do you intend accompanying Don Francisco?"

She listens eagerly for an answer.

"Yes; but not now.  It will be some time before he can return to us."

"He is going home first, and will then come back?"

"Not home--not to his home."

"Where, then?"

"That is the news I thought might be painful.  He has resolved upon
going on to our country for reasons already known to you.  We suspect
Uraga of having been at the head of the red robbers who have plundered
him and killed his people.  He is determined to find out and punish the
perpetrators of that foul deed.  It will be difficult; nay, more, there
will be danger in his attempting it--I've told him so."

"Dear brother, try to dissuade him!"

If Hamersley could but hear the earnest tone in which the appeal is
spoken it would give him gratification.

"I have tried, but to no purpose.  It is not the loss of his property--
he is generous, and does not regard it.  His motive is a nobler, a
holier one.  His comrades have been murdered; he says he will seek the
assassins and obtain redress, even at the risk of sacrificing his own
life."

"A hero!  Who could not help loving him?"

Adela does not say this aloud, nor to her brother.  It is a thought,
silent within the secret recesses of her own heart.

"If you wish," continues the colonel, "I will see him, and again try to
turn him from this reckless course; though I know there is little hope.
Stay! a thought strikes me, sister.  Suppose you speak to him.  A
woman's words are more likely to be listened to; and I know that yours
will have great weight with him.  He looks upon you as the saviour of
his life, and may yield to your request."

"If you think so, Valerian--"

"I do.  I see him coming this way.  Remain where you are.  I shall send
him in to you."

With a heart heaving and surging, Hamersley stands in the presence of
her, the sole cause of its tumultuous excitement.  For he has been
summoned thither in a manner that somewhat surprises him.  "Don
Francisco, my sister wishes a word with you," is the speech of Colonel
Miranda, an invitation promptly responded to.

What is to be the import of his interview, unexpected, unsought,
apparently commanded?

He asks himself this question as he proceeds towards the place where she
stands waiting to receive him.  Coming up to her, he says,--

"Senorita, your brother has told me you wish to speak with me?"

"I do," she replies, without quail in her look or quiver in her voice.

In returning her glance Hamersley feels as if his case is hopeless.
That very day he had thought of proposing to her.  It almost passes from
his mind.  So cool, she cannot care for him.  He remains silent, leaving
her to proceed.

"Senor, it is about your going to the Rio del Norte.  My brother tells
me such is your intention.  We wish you not to go, Don Francisco.  There
is danger in your doing it."

"It is my duty."

"In what respect?  Explain yourself!"

"My brave comrades have been slain--assassinated.  I have reason to
believe that in the town of Albuquerque I may discover their assassins--
at all events their chief, and perhaps bring him to justice.  I intend
trying, if it costs me my life."

"Do you reflect what your life is worth?"

"To me not much."

"It may be to others.  You have at home a mother, brothers, and sisters.
Perhaps one dearer?"

"No--not at home."

"Elsewhere, then?"

He is silent under this searching inquisition.

"Do you think that danger to your life would be unhappiness to her's--
your death her life's misery?"

"My dishonour should be more, as it would to myself.  It is not
vengeance I seek against those who have murdered my men, only to bring
them to justice.  I must do that, or else proclaim myself a poltroon--I
feel myself one--a self-accusation that would give me a life-long
remorse.  No, Senorita Adela.  It is kind of you to take an interest in
my safety.  I already owe you my life; but I cannot permit you to save
it again, at the sacrifice of honour, of duty, of humanity."

Hamersley fancies himself being coldly judged and counselled with
indifference.  Could he know the warm, wild admiration struggling in the
breast of her who counsels him, he would make rejoinder in different
fashion.

Soon after he talks in an altered tone, and with changed understanding.
So also does she, hitherto so difficult of comprehension.

"Go!" she cries.  "Go and get redress of your wrongs, justice for your
fallen comrades; and if you can, the punishment of their assassins.  But
remember! if it brings death to you, there is one who will not care to
live after."

"Who?" he asks, springing forward, with heart on fire and eyes aflame.
"Who?"

He scarce needs to put the question.  It is already answered by the
emphasis on her last words.

But it is again replied to, this time in a more tranquil tone; the long,
dark lashes of the speaker veiling her eyes as she pronounces her own
name,--

"_Adela Miranda_!"

From poverty to riches, from a dungeon to bright daylight, from the
agonising struggle of drowning to that confident feeling when the feet
stand firm upon terra firma--all these are sensations of a
pleasantly-exciting kind.  They are dull in comparison with that
delirious joy, the lot of the despairing lover on finding that his
despair has been all a fancy, and that his passion is reciprocated.

Such a joy thrills through Hamersley's breast as he hears the name
pronounced.  It is like a cabalistic speech, throwing open to him the
portals of Paradise.



CHAPTER FORTY FOUR.

A MYSTERIOUS MESSAGE.

As is known, Hamersley's suspicions about the treachery of the peon are
not without cause.  On the contrary, they might seem second-sight.  For,
almost at the moment he is communicating them to Colonel Miranda, the
native is telling his tale to Uraga.

Nor does the latter lose much time in acting upon the information
gained--only that short interlude given to exultation as he stepped up
to the portrait of Adela Miranda, and stood triumphantly regarding the
likeness of her he now looks upon as sure to be his.  He has no hope to
get possession of her by fair means; foul are alone in his thoughts.

After delivering his half-frenzied apostrophe to the painted image, he
returns to the table, beside which Roblez has already taken a seat.

They re-fill their glasses, and drink the toasts specified, with a
ceremony in strange contrast to the hellish glee sparkling in the eyes
of the Lancer-Colonel.  His countenance beams with triumph, such as
might be shown by Satan over the ruin of innocence.  For he now feels
sure of his victims--alike that of his love as well as those of his
revenge.

Not long does he remain over his cups in the company of his subordinate.
He has an important matter upon his mind which calls for reflection--in
silence and by himself.

Though often admitting his adjutant to a share in his criminal schemes,
the participation is only in their profits and the act of execution.
Despotic even in his villainies, he keeps the planning to himself, for
he has secrets even Roblez must not know.  And now an idea has dawned
upon his mind, a purpose he does not care to communicate to the
subaltern till such time as may be necessary or seem fit to him.  Not
that he dreads treachery on the part of his fellow freebooter.  They are
mutually compromised, and long have been; too much to tell tales about
one another.  Besides, Roblez, though a man of undoubted courage, of the
coarse, animal kind, has, neverthless, a certain moral dread of his
commanding officer, and fears to offend him.  He knows Gil Uraga to be
one whose hostility, once provoked, will stop short at nothing, leave no
means untried to take retribution--this of a terrible kind.  Hence a
control which the colonel holds over him beyond that drawn from his
superior military rank.  Hence, also, his receiving but a small share in
the proceeds of their various robberies, and his being satisfied with
this, or, at all events, seeming so.

On his side, Uraga has several motives for not letting his subordinate
into the knowledge of all his complicated schemes; among them one
springing from a moral peculiarity.  He is of a strangely-constituted
nature, secretive to the last degree--a quality or habit in which he
prides himself.  It is his delight to practice it whenever the
opportunity offers; just as the thief and detective officer take
pleasure in their respective callings beyond the mere prize to be
derived from their exercise.

The intelligence just received from the traitorous mule-driver,
unexpected as pleasing, has opened to him the prospect of a grand
success.  It may enable him to strike a _coup_ covering all--alike
giving gratification to his love, as his hate.

But the blow must needs be dealt deftly.  There are circumstances to be
considered and precautions taken, not only to prevent its failing, but
secure against a publicity that might cause scandal to himself, to say
naught of consequent danger.

And it must be struck soon--at once.  It is too ticklish a matter to
admit of delay, either in the design or execution.

Already has the matter flitted before his mind in its general outlines;
almost soon as receiving the report of the peon.

It is only the details that remain for consideration; and these he
intends considering alone, without any aid from his adjutant.

As time is an object, he speedily terminates his carousal with the
subaltern; who, dismissed, returns to the military _cuartel_.

Soon as he is gone the colonel again seats himself, and lighting a fresh
cigar, continues smoking.  For several minutes he remains silent, his
eyes turned upwards, and his features set in a smile.  One might fancy
him but watching the smoke of his cigar as it rises in spiral wreaths to
the ceiling.  He is occupied with no such innocent amusement.  On the
contrary, his grim smile betokens meditation deep and devilish.  He is
mentally working out a problem, a nefarious scheme, which will ere long
bear evil fruit.

As the cigar grows shorter he seems to draw nearer to his conclusions.
And when at length there is only the stump between his teeth, he spits
it out; and, taking a hand-bell from the table, rings until a domestic
appears in the doorway in answer to the summons.

"Call in the guard-corporal!" is the order received by the servant, who
withdraws without saying a word.

Soon the soldier shows himself, saluting as he enters the door.

"_Cabo_!  Bring your prisoner before me."

The corporal retires, and shortly after returns, having the Indian in
charge.  He is commanded to leave the latter, and himself remain waiting
without.  Directed also to close the door; which he does on getting
outside.

Thus closeted with the peon--still wondering why he has been made a
prisoner--Uraga submits him to a process of examination, which elicits
from the scared creature everything he seeds to know.  Among the rest,
he makes himself acquainted with the situation of the valley, where the
exiles have found temporary asylum; the direction, distance, and means
of access to it--in short, its complete topography.

With all the Indian is familiar, can correctly describe it, and does so.
In that imposing presence he dare not attempt deception, even if
inclined.  But he is not.  Between questioner and questioned the aim and
end are similar, if not the same.  Besides, the peon's blood has again
been warmed up, and his tongue set loose, by a fresh infusion of
aguardiente--so that his confessions are full as free.  He tells about
the life led by the Mexican refugees, as also their American guests--all
he knows, and this is nearly everything.  For trusted, unsuspected, he
has had every opportunity to learn.  The only thing concealed by him is
his own love affair with Conchita and its disastrous ending, through the
intrusion of the Texan Ranger.

This, if told, would give his listener slight concern, alongside the
grave impressions made upon him by another affair; some particulars of
which the peon communicates.  These points refer to tender relations
existing between the young prairie trader and Adela Miranda, almost
proving their existence.  Confirmed or not, on hearing of them Gil Uraga
receives a shock which sends the blood rushing in quick current through
his veins; while upon his countenance comes an expression of such bitter
malignity, that the traitor, in fear for his own safety, repents having
told him.

But Uraga has no spite against him--no motive for having it.  On the
contrary, he intends rewarding him, after he gets out of him certain
other services for which he is to be retained.

When his cross-questioning is at length brought to a close, he is once
more committed to the charge of the guard-corporal, with orders to be
returned to the prison.  At the same time a hint is given him that his
incarceration is only precautionary, with a promise it will not be for
long.

Immediately after his removal, Uraga seats himself before an escritoire,
which stands on one side of the room.  Laying open the lid, he spreads a
sheet of paper upon it, and commences to write what appears an epistle.

Whatever it is, the composition occupies some considerable time.
Occasionally he stops using the pen, as though pondering what to put
down.

When it is at length completed, apparently to his satisfaction, he folds
the sheet, thrusts a stick of wax into the flame of a candle, and seals
the document, but without using any seal-stamp.  A small silver coin
taken from his pocket makes the necessary impression.  There does not
appear to be any name appended to the epistle, if one it is; and the
superscription shows only two words, without any address.  The words are
"El Barbato."

Again ringing the bell, the same servant answers it.

"Go to the stables," commands his master, "or the corral, or wherever he
may be, and tell Pedrillo I want him.  Be quick about it!"

The man bows and disappears.

"It will take them--how many days to reach the Tenawas' town, and how
many back to the Pecos?" soliloquises Uraga, pacing the floor, as he
makes his calculations.  "Three, four, five.  No matter.  If before them
we can wait till they come.  Pedrillo!"

Pedrillo has put in an appearance.  He is an Indian of the tame sort,
not greatly differing from the man Manuel, with a countenance quite as
forbidding.  But we have seen Pedrillo before; since he was one of the
two muleteers who conducted the _atajo_ transporting the spoil from the
caravan of the prairie traders.

"Pedrillo," directs the Colonel, "catch a couple of the best roadsters
in the corral--one for yourself, the other for Jose.  Have them saddled,
and get yourselves ready for a journey of two weeks, or so.  Make all
haste with your preparations.  When ready, come here, and report
yourself."

The muleteer disappears, and Uraga continues to pace the floor,
apparently yet busied with a mental measurement of time and distance.
At intervals he stops before the portrait on the wall, and for a second
or two gazes at it.  This seems to increase his impatience for the man's
reappearance.

He has not a great while to wait.  The scrip and staff of a New Mexican
traveller of Pedrillo's kind is of no great bulk or complexity.  It
takes but a short time to prepare it.  A few _tortillas_ and _frijoles_,
a head or two of _chile Colorado_, half a dozen onions, and a bunch of
_tasojo_--jerked beef.  Having collected these comestibles, and filled
his _xuaje_, or water gourd, Pedrillo reports himself ready for the
road, or trail, or whatever sort of path, and on whatever errand, it may
please his master to despatch him.

"You will go straight to the Tenawa town--Horned Lizard's--on the south
branch of the Goo-al-pah.  You can find your way to the place, Pedrillo.
You've been there before?"

The Indian nods an affirmative.

"Take this."  Here Uraga hands him the sealed paper.  "See you show it
to no one you may chance to meet passing out from the settlements.  Give
it to Barbato, or hand it to the Horned Lizard himself.  He'll know who
it's for.  You are to ride night and day, as fast as the animals can
carry you.  When you've delivered it you needn't wait, but come back--
not here, but to the Alamo.  You know the place--where we met the
Tenawas some weeks ago.  You will find me there.  _Vaya_!"

On receiving these instructions Pedrillo vanishes from, the room; a
strange sinister glance in his oblique Indian eyes telling that he knows
himself to be once more--what he has often been--an emissary of evil.

Uraga takes another turn across the floor, then, seating himself by the
table, seeks rest for his passion-tossed soul by drinking deep of the
_mescal_ of Tequila.



CHAPTER FORTY FIVE.

THE STAKED PLAIN.

The elevated table-land known as Llano Estacado is in length over three
hundred miles, with an average width of sixty or seventy.  It extends
longitudinally between the former Spanish provinces of New Mexico and
Texas; their respective capitals, Santa Fe and San Antonia de Bejar,
being on the opposite side of it.  In the days of vice-royal rule, a
military road ran across it, connecting the two provincial centres, and
mule trains of traders passed to and fro between.  As this road was only
a trail, often obliterated by the drifting sands of the desert, tall
stakes were set up at intervals to indicate the route.  Hence the name
"Llano Estacado"--literally, Staked Plain.

In those days Spain was a strong, enterprising nation, and her Mexican
colonists could travel over most parts of their vast territory without
fear of being assaulted by the savages.  At a later period, when Spanish
power began to decline, all this became changed.  Cities fell to ruin,
settlements were deserted, mission establishments abandoned, and in the
provinces of Northern Mexico white travellers had to be cautious in
keeping to the most frequented roads, in some districts not daring even
to venture beyond the walls of their haciendas or towns.  Many of these
were fortified against Indian attack, and are so to this day.

Under these circumstances the old Spanish trail across the Staked Plain
fell into disuse; its landmarks became lost, and of late years only
expeditions of the United States army have traversed it for purposes of
exploration.

In physical aspect it bears resemblance to the table lands of Abyssinia
and Southern Arabia, and at its northern end many outlying spurs and
detached _mesas_ remind the traveller of the Abyssinian hills--known as
_ambas_.  A portion of this singular territory belongs to the great
gypsum formation of the south-western prairies, perhaps the largest in
the world; while a highly-coloured sandstone of various vivid hues,
often ferruginous, forms a conspicuous feature in its cliffs.  Along its
eastern edge these present to the lower champaign of Texas a precipitous
escarpment several hundred feet sheer, in long stretches, tending with
an unbroken facade, in other places showing ragged, where cleft by
canons, through which rush torrents, the heads of numerous Texan
streams.  Its surface is, for the most part, a dead horizontal level,
sterile as the Sahara itself, in places smooth and hard as a macadamised
road.  Towards its southern end there is a group of _medanos_
(sandhills), covering a tract of several hundred square miles, the sand
ever drifting about, as with _dunes_ on the seashore.  High up among
their summits is a lakelet of pure drinking water, though not a drop can
be found upon the plateau itself for scores of miles around.  Sedge and
lilies grow by this tarn so singularly situated.

Here and there the plain is indented by deep fissures (_barrancas_),
apparently the work of water.  Often the traveller comes upon them
without sign or warning of their proximity, till, standing on the edge
of a precipitous escarpment, he sees yawning below a chasm sunk several
hundred feet into the earth.  In its bed may be loose boulders piled in
chaotic confusion, as if cast there by the hands of Titans; also trunks
of trees in a fossilised state such as those observed by Darwin on the
eastern declivity of the Chilian Andres.

Nearly all the streams that head in the Staked Plain cut deep channels
in their way to the outer world.  These are often impassable, either
transversely or along their course.  Sometimes, however, their beds are
worn out into little valleys, or "coves," in which a luxuriant
vegetation finds shelter and congenial soil.  There flourish the pecan,
the hackberry, the black walnut, the wild china, with evergreen oaks,
plums, and clustering grapevines; while in the sterile plain above are
only seen those forms of the botanical world that truly indicate the
desert--various species of cactaceae, agaves, and yuccas--the palmilla
and lechuguilla, dwarf-cedars, and mezquites, artemisia, and the
strong-smelling larrea, or "creosote plant."

Animals are rare upon the Llano Estacado, although the prong-horn
antelope--true denizen of the desert--is there found, as also its enemy,
the Mexican jackal, or coyote.  To the rattlesnake and horned lizard
(_agama_) it is a congenial home; and the singular snake-bird
(_paisano_) may frequently be seen running over the arid waste, or
skulking through the tortuous stems of the nopals.  In the canons of the
stream the grizzly bear makes his haunt, and in times not long gone by
it was ascended and traversed by the unwieldy buffalo.  The wild horse
(_musteno_) still occasionally courses across it.

Of all the living things it is least frequented by man.  Even the Indian
rarely strays into its solitudes; and the white man, when necessitated
to enter them, does so with fear and trembling, for he knows there is
