Free-will.  Through that portal the powers of darkness must enter if
they gained admittance at all.  Elsewhere the walls were high as heaven,
deeper than hell, for, except at this point, the fortress was
impregnable.

Yet, although David Bright knew not the power nor the number of the
mighty forces that were marshalling, he was not entirely ignorant of the
war that was going on.  There had been some skirmishing already, in
front of the gate, in which he had come off victorious.  The demon Habit
had assaulted him more than once, and had pressed him sore; for a
terrible thirst--such, it is said, as only confirmed drunkards
understand--had more than once tormented him.  When the first attack was
made, the sturdy fisherman stood quietly on his deck with hands in
pockets and eyes on the horizon, looking as if nothing were going on,
and he smiled grimly as he muttered to himself rather than to the demon:
"Lucky for me that I made Billy heave it overboard!"

"Oh! but," said the demon, "you were a weak fool when you did that.
There's the Coper alongside now; go, get another keg.  It is cheap, and
you can just take a little drop to relieve that desperate craving.
Come, now, be a man, and show that you have powers of self-restraint.
You have always boasted of the strength of your will, haven't you?  Show
it now."

"Ay, an' prove the strength of my will," replied David, with another
grim smile, "by givin' in to _your_ will.  No, devil!  I _am_ a fool,
but not quite such a fool as that comes to."

The demon fell back at that and left him.

On the next attack the skipper was worn-out with fatigue and watching.
They had had a long spell of dirty weather.  Work of the hardest kind--
even for a hardy frame--had been done, and there was still work to do,
and David's great physical powers were well-nigh used up.  The gear was
down, and a stiff nor'-west breeze not only drove the smack over the
surging waves, but caused her to plunge into them like a wild horse
bridled and held back.

"You can't hold out much longer at this rate," whispered the demon.
"Take a drop just by way of a medicine to keep you awake and tide you
over this bout; and, by good luck, your man Gunter has some grog left in
that bottle he got yesterday from the Coper."

"Billy," said David, in a quiet voice, without deigning a reply to his
foe, "Billy, my lad, you fetch me a pot o' coffee or tea--whatever's
ready, an' let it be hot."

"Yes, father," said Billy, hastening smartly to obey, for he had a very
slight suspicion of the conflict that was raging, though his conceptions
were far, far short of the reality.

The demon received a staggering blow that time, and he slunk away
scowling when he noted the gleam of satisfaction on the victor's face as
he handed back the empty pot to his son.

Warfare! yes, little do those who are "dead in trespasses and sins," and
those who swim gaily with the current of self-indulgence, know of the
ferocious fights, the raging storms, that are going on all round them on
battle-grounds which, to all outward appearance, are calm and
undisturbed.

But we have said that this was merely skirmishing outside the gate.

It was not till the afternoon referred to at the beginning of this
chapter that the grand assault was made.

On that day the skipper of the _Evening Star_ had been subjected to more
than ordinary troubles.  In the first place, he had brought up a dead
man in his net along with the fish--a by no means unknown incident in
trawl-fishing experience, for bodies of men who have been washed out of
vessels in gales, or drowned in other ways, are sometimes entangled in
the gear and brought to the surface.  At other times bales and boxes--
goods that have been cast away or wrecked--are fished up in this way.

Being in a depressed state of mind, the sight of the dead man made David
uncomfortable for a time, but, having thrown the corpse overboard again,
he soon forgot it.  The next thing that happened was the fishing up of
an enormous mass of wreckage, which tore the net almost to pieces, and
compelled him to bend on a new one.  This was not only a heavy loss of
itself, but entailed the loss of the fish that would otherwise have been
in the net and poor David Bright, already at zero in his spirits, sank
considerably below that point.

But the final disaster was reserved for a later hour.  The new net had
been shot, and one of the best banks of the fishing-ground had been gone
over.  The breeze which had carried the fleet along was just beginning
to die down when the Admiral made the signal to haul up.

To work they went, therefore--all through the fleet--to hoist in the
harvest of the deep.

It was slow and weary work, as well as hard, that hauling in of the
great cable with its gear.  Between two or three hours they laboured and
toiled at it, while the thick veins stood out like cords on the men's
necks, and beads of perspiration trickled down their brows.

"It's goin' to be a big haul, father," said Billy, as the crew stopped
for a few moments to rest.

"P'r'aps another lump of wreck," replied the skipper, somewhat bitterly.

"I hope not," returned Billy, in a cheery voice, resuming his work of
passing the warp down below as it came off the capstan.

At last the end of the bridle came inboard, and the fishermen knew that
their toil, for that time at least, was drawing to a close.  Excitement
of a mild type began to arise in the enthusiastic and hopeful among
them.

"Now, boys, heave away," said Joe Davidson, setting the example.

"It seems unwillin' to come, don't it," growled Gunter.

"Dat's 'cause him full ob fishes," said Zulu; "heave away, boys--
altogidder!"

He strained with all his might.  So did the rest of the crew.  Round
went the capstan, and in a few minutes the great forty-eight feet beam
appeared.  This was soon hoisted up by means of tackle, and made fast to
the side, and then began the hauling in--we might almost say clawing
in--of the net, hand over hand, until the cod-end was visible near the
surface.  It now became evident that a grand haul had indeed been made,
and that it had been the mere weight of the fish that had delayed them
so long.

Great was the anxiety of course to secure the prize, and energetic the
action displayed.  Zulu, being the most active and cat-like, was ordered
to pass a rope round the net to which a powerful double block was
applied.

"Haul away now, boys," said the skipper, whose spirits were somewhat
revived by the sight.

Soon the great balloon-shaped cod-end with its solid mass of fish rose
slowly into the air, and some of the men laid hold to be ready to swing
it inboard and deposit it on the deck, when, suddenly, the stout rope
that bound the lower end of the bag gave way.  The entire mass of fish
dropped back into the sea, and sank to the bottom!

For a few seconds dead silence ensued, while the men glanced at the
empty cod-end, and at each other.  Then a terrible oath burst from John
Gunter, and a sort of sigh broke from some of the others, as if words
were incapable of expressing their feelings--as, indeed, they were!  The
skipper was standing by the companion-hatch at the moment with a
handspike in his grasp.  A deep-toned curse issued from his lips when
the fish went down, and he dashed the handspike to the deck with fearful
violence.

Once again, at this critical moment, the demon ventured to raise his
head.

"The Coper's close on the port bow!" he whispered; "go, drown it all in
grog, man, and be jolly!"

Jolly!  How many men have cast away their souls, for the sake of what is
implied in that little word!

And now, alas! the gate of man's Free-will was creaking on its hinges.
No created power above or below could have moved that gate save the
power of David Bright himself.

"Shove out the boat!" shouted the miserable man, with a fierceness of
expression and tone that there was no misunderstanding.  Poor Billy
understood it well enough.

"Oh! no, father!  Don't do it father!" he cried in an entreating voice;
but already the little boat was dancing on the waves alongside, with
John Gunter in her.

"Jump in, Luke," said Joe Davidson, hastily, for he was anxious that at
least one trusty man should be of the party.

Luke jumped in at once, and was instantly followed by Billy.  The
painter was cast off, and they pulled towards the floating grog-shop.

The tempter received them with a hearty salute.

"Cheap spirits an' cheap baccy!" said John Gunter, as he sat on the rail
of the Coper drinking the one and smoking the other, "that's what I
likes, an' plenty of both."

"That's so, John," returned David Bright, who sat beside him, and,
having already drained several bumpers of the fiery fluid, had quite got
over his troubles.  "You an' I are of the same mind, John; nevertheless
you're a great sulky-faced humbug for all that!"

"What d'ee mean by that?" demanded Gunter, who was becoming rapidly
drunk and quarrelsome.

"What do I mean? why, I mean that you're the best man in the smack, out
o' sight, an' it's a rare pity that your mother hasn't got half-a-dozen
more like you.  If she had I'd man the _Evening Star_ with your whole
family.  Here, give us a hold o' your grapplin'-iron, old man."

He seized Gunter's fist as he spoke, and gave it a shake so hearty and
powerful, that he almost hurled that lover of cheap grog and baccy
overboard.

"Hold on, skipper!" growled the fisherman, who was for a moment
uncertain whether to return the friendly grasp or fight; but the fierce,
wild, contemptuous laugh with which David Bright concluded the speech
decided him.

"Y'you--you're a jolly good fellow," he stammered; "here, fill up
again."

The poor skipper filled up again, and again, until his speech began to
grow thick and unsteady.

"Yesh," continued Gunter, doubling his fist and smiting his knee, "I do
like sheap grog an' sheap baccy, an' the Coper's the place to get 'em
both.  Ain't it?"

He looked up sharply at the owner of the Coper, who stood in front of
him, and who of course assented cheerfully to the question.

"Ain't it?" he repeated still more sharply, turning to Luke Trevor, who
sat close to him with a grave, anxious look.  "Why don't you drink?" he
added.

"Because I don't want to," returned Luke, quietly.

"D-do-don't want to," returned Gunter, angrily--for it takes little to
make some drunk men angry--"You don't want to spend your money, you
young miser--that's what you m-mean.  An' yet it's sheap enough, I'm
sure.  You'll not git anything in the fleet so sheap as you will in the
Coper."

"There you are wrong," returned Luke, decidedly.  "You'll get things
cheaper aboard the mission-ship, for they'll give you physic, an' books,
an good advice, and help as far as they can, all for nothing--which is
cheaper than the Coper's wares."

"Right you are, Luke.  Pitch into him," cried David Bright who was fast
drinking himself into a state of madness.

"Father," whispered Billy, with an anxious look, "don't you think you've
had enough?"

The reply to this was a tremendous cuff on the ear which sent the poor
boy staggering backwards, so that he nearly fell.  Recovering himself he
retired behind the Coper's boat and tried to crush down the sobs that
rose in his throat.  He was to some extent successful, but a few tears
that could not be restrained hopped over his sunburnt cheeks.

It was not pain, nor even the indignity, that drew forth those tears and
choking sobs, but the thought that the father he was so fond of had
dealt the blow.

Meanwhile Luke Trevor, who felt that matters had reached a dangerous
point, rose and went to the place where the boat's painter had been
tied.  David Bright was sitting close to the spot.

"Don't you think it is time we were going, skipper?" he said,
respectfully, as he laid his hand on the rope.

"No, I don't," replied the skipper, sharply.  "Leave go that rope."

Luke hesitated.  Instantly the enraged skipper leaped up and struck him
a blow on the chest which knocked him down.  At the same moment,
observing that Gunter looked on with a leer of drunken amusement, he
transferred his wrath to him, flung the remains of the spirits he had
been drinking in the man's face, and made a rush at him.  Fortunately
Gunter, who had risen, staggered and fell, so that the skipper missed
his aim and tumbled over him.  In a moment Gunter had regained his feet
and prepared for combat, but his adversary's head had struck on the side
of the vessel, and he lay stunned and helpless on the deck.

Luke, who had recovered almost immediately, now assisted Gunter and
Billy to raise the prostrate man.  It was not an easy matter to handle
one whose frame was so heavy, but with the assistance of the owner of
the Coper they managed it.

"It's only a slight cut," said Billy, looking anxiously round at Trevor.

"Ay, lad, it ain't the cut or the blow as keeps him down, but the grog.
Come, we must git him aboard sharp.  Haul up the boat Gunter, while I
stop the leak in his skull."

With a kerchief, Luke soon bound up the slight wound that the wretched
man had received, and then they tried to rouse him, but the effort was
in vain.  David did indeed recover sufficient intelligence to be able to
bellow once or twice for more grog, but he could not be brought to the
condition of helping himself in any way.

"What'll we do, Luke?" asked Billy, in a tone and with a look of deep
distress, as the huge form of his father lay, a scarcely animate mass,
on the deck at his feet.  "We _must_ get him aboard somehow."

"Never fear, Billy, my boy," said Luke, cheerfully, "we'll get him
aboard somehow.  It's not the first time I've had to do it.  Come along,
Gunter, lend a hand."

"Not I!" said Gunter, with a drunken swagger.  "_I'm_ not goin' for an
hour or more."

"Oh yes, you are," returned Luke, dipping one of the Coper's buckets
over the side and pulling it up full of water.

"No, I ain't.  Who'll make me?"

"I will," said Luke, and he sent the contents of the bucket straight
into his comrade's face.

"Hooray!" shouted Billy, convulsed at once with delight and surprise at
the suddenness of the act to say nothing of its violence.  "Give it 'im,
Luke--polish 'im off!"

Luke did not however, take the pugnacious boy's advice; instead of
awaiting the attack of the enraged Gunter, he ran laughing round the
capstan and defied him to catch him.  Gunter soon found, after bruising
his shins and elbows, and stumbling over ropes, etcetera, that the
effort was hopeless, and gave it up.

"But I'll pay you off w'en I gits a hold of 'ee, Luke.  You make sure o'
that," he growled as he gave up the chase.

"All right, Gunter; I'll give you a chance to-morrow, lad, if you'll
only bear a hand wi' the skipper just now."

Without another word Gunter, who was somewhat sobered by the cold bath,
went to where the skipper lay, and attempted to raise him.  Being joined
by the others the skipper was rolled to the side of the vessel, and then
lifted in a half-sitting position on to the rail, where he was held in
the grasp of Gunter and the Coper's skipper, while Luke and Billy,
jumping into the boat, hauled it close under the spot.

There was what Billy called a "nasty jobble of a sea on," so that many
difficulties met in the job they had in hand.  These may be best stated
by the actors themselves.

"Now then, boy, haul up a bit--ever so little, there; too much; ease off
a bit.  Hold on!"

"All right Luke, but she pitches about so, that a feller can't hit the
exact spot."

"Look out now, Gunter," said Luke; "let 'im go so as he'll come plump
into my arms.  Not too soon, else you'll stand a chance o' sendin' us
both through the bottom of the boat."

"No, nor yet too late," cried the anxious Billy, "else he'll go flop
into the sea!"

It was nervous work, for if he should go flop into the sea he would have
been certain to go down like a stone.

One or two attempts were made.  The boat, rising up from a hollow in the
sea to a height of several feet, surged close to where the men with
their drunken burden stood.

"Look out!" cried Luke, with arms extended and ten fingers in a
claw-like position.

