rescue, to which her father listened with profound attention, not
unmingled with surprise.  Then he reverted to the aspect of the
surrounding country.

"It's a pretty place you live in here, Tot, an' a nice house.  It's
there the lady lives, I suppose who has the strange fancy to keep her
wealth in a box on the sideboard?  Well, it _is_ curious, but there's no
accountin' for the fancies o' the rich, Tot.  An' you say she keeps no
men-servants about her?  Well, that's wise, for men are dangerous
characters for women to 'ave about 'em.  She's quite right.  There's a
dear little dog too, she keeps, I'm told.  Is that the only one she
owns?"

"Yes, it's the only one, and such a darlin' it is, and _so_ fond of me!"
exclaimed Tottie.

"Ah, yes, wery small, but wery noisy an' vicious," remarked Mr Bones,
with a sudden scowl, which fortunately his daughter did not see.

"O no, father; little Floppart ain't vicious, though it _is_ awful noisy
w'en it chooses."

"Well, Tot, I'd give a good deal to see that dear little Floppart, and
make friends with it.  D'you think you could manage to get it to follow
you here?"

"Oh, easily.  I'll run an' fetch it; but p'r'aps you had better come to
the house.  I know they'd like to see you, for they're _so_ kind to me."

Mr Bones laughed sarcastically, and expressed his belief that they
wouldn't like to see him at all.

Just at that moment Miss Stivergill came round the turn of the lane and
confronted them.

"Well, little Bones, whom have you here?" asked the lady, with a stern
look at Mr Bones.

"Please, ma'am, it's father.  He 'appened to be in this neighbourhood,
and came to see me."

"Your father!" exclaimed Miss Stivergill, with a look of surprise.
"Indeed!"

"Yes, ma'am," said Bones, politely taking off his hat and looking her
coolly in the face.  "I 'ope it's no offence, but I came a bit out o' my
way to see 'er.  She says you've bin' wery kind to her."

"Well, she says the truth.  I mean to be kind to her," returned Miss
Stivergill, as sternly as before.--"Take your father to the cottage,
child, and tell them to give him a glass of beer.  If you see Miss
Lillycrop, tell her I've gone to the village, and won't be back for an
hour."  So saying, Miss Stivergill walked down the lane with masculine
strides, leaving Tottie pleased, and her father smiling.

"I don't want no beer, Tot," said the latter.  "But you go to the
cottage and fetch me that dear little dog.  I want to see it; and don't
forget the lady's message to Miss Lillycrop--but be sure you don't say
I'm waitin' for you.  Don't mention me to nobody.  D'ee understand?"

Poor Tottie, with a slight and undefined misgiving at her heart,
professed to understand, and went off.

In a few minutes she returned with the little dog--a lively poodle--
which at first showed violent and unmistakable objections to being
friendly with Mr Bones.  But a scrap of meat, which that worthy had
brought in his pocket, and a few soothing words, soon modified the
objection.

Presently Mr Bones pulled a small muzzle from his pocket.

"D'you think, now, that Floppart would let you put it on 'er, Tot?"

Tot was sure she would, and soon had the muzzle on.

"That's right; now, hold 'er fast a moment--just a--there--!"

He sprang at and caught the dog by the throat, choked a snarling yelp in
the bud, and held it fast.

"Dear, dear, how wild it has got all of a sudden!  W'y, it must be ill--
p'r'aps mad.  It's well you put that muzzle on, Tot."

While he spoke Abel Bones thrust the dog into one of the capacious
pockets of his coat.

"Now, Tot," he said, somewhat sternly, "I durstn't let this dog go.  It
wants a doctor very bad.  You go back to the 'ouse and tell 'em a man
said so.  You needn't say what man; call me a philanthropist if you
choose, an' tell 'em I'll send it back w'en it recovers.  But you
needn't tell 'em anything until you're axed, you know--it might get me
into trouble, d'ee see, an' say to Miss Stivergill it wasn't your father
as took the dog, but another man."

He leaped over a low part of the hedge and was gone, leaving poor Tottie
in a state of bewildered anxiety on the other side.

Under the influence of fear Tottie told the lies her father had bid her
tell, and thereafter dwelt at Rosebud Cottage with an evil conscience
and a heavy heart.

Having gained the high-road, Mr Bones sauntered easily to the railway
station, took a third-class ticket for Charing Cross, and in due time
found himself passing along the Strand.  In the course of that journey
poor little Floppart lay on its back in the bottom of its captor's
pocket, with a finger and thumb gently pressing her windpipe.  Whenever
she became restive, the finger and thumb tightened, and this with such
unvarying regularity that she soon came to understand the advantage of
lying still.  She did, however, make sundry attempts to escape--once
very violently, when the guard was opening the carriage-door to let Mr
Bones enter, and again almost as violently at Charing Cross, when Mr
Bones got out.  Indeed, the dog had well-nigh got off, and was restored
to its former place and position with difficulty.

Turning into Chancery Lane, and crossing over to Holborn, Abel Bones
continued his way to Newgate, where, appropriately enough, he stopped
and gazed grimly up at the massive walls.

"Don't be in a 'urry," said a very small boy, with dirt and daring in
equal proportions on his face, "it'll wait for you."

Mr Bones made a tremendous demonstration of an intention to rush at the
boy, who precipitately fled, and the former passed quietly on.

At St. Martin's-le-Grand he paused again.

"Strange," he muttered, "there seems to be some sort o' fate as links me
wi' that Post-Office.  It was here I began my London life as a porter,
and lost my situation because the Postmaster-General couldn't see the
propriety of my opening letters that contained coin and postage-stamps
and fi'-pun' notes, which was quite unreasonable, for I had a special
talent that way, and even the clargy tell us that our talents was given
us to be used.  It wasn't far from here where I sot my little nephy
down, that time I got rid of him, and it was goin' up these wery steps I
met with the man I'm tryin' my best to bring to grief, an' that same man
wants to marry one of the girls in the Post-Office, and now, I find, has
saved my Tot from bein' burnt alive!  Wery odd!  It was here, too,
that--"

Floppart at this moment turned the flow of his meditations by making a
final and desperate struggle to be free.  She shot out of his pocket and
dropped with a bursting yell on the pavement.  Recovering her feet
before Bones recovered from his surprise she fled.  Thought is quick as
the lightning-flash.  Bones knew that dogs find their way home
mysteriously from any distance.  He knew himself to be unable to run
down Floppart.  He saw his schemes thwarted.  He adopted a mean device,
shouted "Mad dog!" and rushed after it.  A small errand-boy shrieked
with glee, flung his basket at it, and followed up the chase.  Floppart
took round by St. Paul's Churchyard.  However sane she might have been
at starting, it is certain that she was mad with terror in five minutes.
She threaded her way among wheels and legs at full speed in perfect
safety.  It was afterwards estimated that seventeen cabmen, four
gentlemen, two apple-women, three-and-twenty errand-boys--more or
less,--and one policeman, flung umbrellas, sticks, baskets, and various
missiles at her, with the effect of damaging innumerable shins and
overturning many individuals, but without hurting a hair of Floppart's
body during her wild but brief career.  Bones did not wish to recapture
her.  He wished her dead, and for that end loudly reiterated the calumny
as to madness.  Floppart circled round the grand cathedral erected by
Wren and got into Cheapside.  Here, doubling like a hare, she careered
round the statue of Peel and went blindly back to St. Martin's-le-Grand,
as if to add yet another link to the chain of fate which bound her
arch-pursuer to the General Post-Office.  By way of completing the
chain, she turned in at the gate, rushed to the rear of the building,
dashed in at an open door, and scurried along a passage.  Here the crowd
was stayed, but the policeman followed heroically.  The passage was cut
short by a glass door, but a narrow staircase descended to the left.
"Any port in a storm" is a proverb as well known among dogs as men.
Down went Floppart to the basement of the building, invading the
sanctity of the letter-carriers' kitchen or _salle-a-manger_.  A dozen
stalwart postmen leaped from their meals to rush at the intruder.  In
the midst of the confusion the policeman's truncheon was seen to sway
aloft.  Next instant the vaulted roof rang with a terrible cry, which
truth compels us to state was Floppart's dying yell.

None of those who had begun the chase were in at the death--save the
policeman,--not even Abel Bones, for that worthy did not by any means
court publicity.  Besides, he felt pretty sure that his end was gained.
He remembered, no doubt, the rule of the Office, that no letters or
other things that have been posted can be returned to the sender, and,
having seen the dog safely posted, he went home with a relieved mind.

Meanwhile the policeman took the remains of poor Floppart by the tail,
holding it at arm's-length for fear of the deadly poison supposed to be
on its lips; and left the kitchen by a long passage.  The men of the
Post-Office returned to their food and their duties.  Those who manage
the details of her Majesty's mails cannot afford to waste time when on
duty.  The policeman, left to himself, lost himself in the labyrinth of
the basement.  He made his way at last into the warm and agreeable room
in which are kept the boilers that drive the engine that works the
lifts.  He was accosted by a stalwart stoker, whose appearance and air
were as genial as the atmosphere of his apartment.

"Hallo!" said he, "what 'ave you got there?"

"A mad dog," answered the policeman.--"I say, stoker, have you any
ashpit where I could bury him?"

"Couldn't allow 'im burial in our ashpit," replied the stoker, with a
decided shake of the head; "altogether out of the question."

The policeman looked at the dead dog and at the stoker with a perplexed
air.

"I say, look here," he said, "couldn't we--ah--don't you think that we
might--"

He paused, and cast a furtive glance at the furnaces.

"What! you don't mean--cremate 'im?"

The policeman nodded.

"Well, now, I don't know that it's actooally against the rules of the
GPO," replied the stoker, with a meditative frown, "but it seems to me a
raither unconstitootional proceedin'.  It's out o' the way of our usual
line of business, but--"

"That's right," said the policeman, as the stoker, who was an obliging
man, took up a great shovel and flung open the furnace-door.

A terrific glare of intense heat and light shot out, appearing as if
desirous of licking the stoker and policeman into its dreadful embrace.

"I don't half like it," said the stoker, glancing in; "the
Postmaster-General might object, you know."

"Not a bit of it, he's too much of a gentleman to object--come," said
the policeman encouragingly.

The stoker held up the shovel.  The body of Floppart was put thereon,
after the removal of its collar.  There was one good swing of the
shovel, followed by a heave, and the little dog fell into the heart of
the fiery furnace.  The stoker shut the great iron door with a clang,
and looked at the policeman solemnly.  The policeman returned the look,
thanked him, and retired.  In less probably than three minutes
Floppart's body was reduced to its gaseous elements, vomited forth from
the furnace chimney, and finally dissipated by the winds of heaven.

Thus did this, the first recorded and authentic case of cremation in the
United Kingdom, emanate--as many a new, advantageous, and national
measure has emanated before--from the prolific womb of the General
Post-Office.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

TOTTIE AND MRS. BONES IN DIFFICULTY.

The descent of George Aspel became very rapid in course of time.  As he
lost self-respect he became reckless and, as a natural consequence, more
dissipated.  Remonstrances from his friend Mr Blurt, which were
repelled at first with haughty disdain, came to be received with sullen
indifference.  He had nothing to say for himself in reply, because, in
point of fact, there was nothing in his case to justify his taking so
gloomy and despairing a view of life.  Many men, he knew, were at his
age out of employment, and many more had been crossed in love.  He was
too proud to condescend to false reasoning with his lips, though he
encouraged it in his heart.  He knew quite well that drink and bad
companionship were ruining him, and off-hand, open-hearted fellow though
he was said to be, he was mean enough, as we have already said, to
growlingly charge his condition and his sins on Fate.

At last he resolved to give up the business that was so distasteful to
him.  Unable to give a satisfactory reason for so doing, or to say what
he meant to attempt next, and unwilling or ashamed to incur the
remonstrances and rebut the arguments of his patron, the bold descendant
of the sea-kings adopted that cowardly method of departure called taking
French leave.  Like some little schoolboy, he ran away!  In other words,
he disappeared, and left no trace behind him.

Deep was Mr Enoch Blurt's regret, for he loved the youth sincerely, and
made many fruitless efforts to find him--for lost in London means lost
indeed!  He even employed a detective, but the grave man in grey--who
looked like no class of man in particular, and seemed to have no
particular business in hand, and who talked with Mr Blurt, at their
first meeting, in a quiet, sensible, easy way, as though he had been one
of his oldest friends--could find no clue to him, for the good reason
that Mr Bones had taken special care to entice Aspel into a distant
locality, under pretence of putting him in the way of finding
semi-nautical employment about the docks.  Moreover, he managed to make
Aspel drunk, and arranged with boon companions to strip him, while in
that condition, of his garments, and re-clothe him in the seedy garb
peculiar to those gentlemen who live by their wits.

"Very strange," muttered Aspel, on recovering sufficiently to be led by
his friend towards Archangel Court,--"very strange that I did not feel
the scoundrels robbing me.  I must have slept very soundly."

"Yes, you slep' wery sound, and they're a bad lot, and uncommon sharp in
that neighbourhood.  It's quite celebrated.  I tried to get you away,
but you was as obstinate as a mule, an' kep' on singing about some sort
o' coves o' the old times that must have bin bigger blackguards than we
'ave about us now-a-days, though the song calls 'em glorious."

"Well, well," said Aspel, shrinking under the public gaze as he passed
through the streets, "don't talk about that.  Couldn't you get into some
by-lanes, where there are not so many people?  I don't like to be seen,
even by strangers, in this disreputable guise.  I wish the sun didn't
shine so brightly.  Come, push on, man."

"W'y, sir," said Bones, becoming a little more respectful in spite of
himself, "you've no need to be ashamed of your appearance.  There's not
'alf a dozen people in a mile walk in London as would look twice at you
whatever appearance you cut--so long as it was only disreputable."

"Never mind--push on," said Aspel sternly; "I _am_ ashamed whether I
have need to be or not.  I'm a fool.  I'm more--I'm a brute.  I tell you
what it is, Bones, I'm determined to turn over a new leaf.  I'll write
to Mr Blurt and tell him where I am, for, of course, I can't return to
him in such clothes as these, and--and--I'll give up drink."

Bones met this remark with an unexpected and bitter laugh.

"What d'you mean?" demanded Aspel, turning fiercely upon him.

"I mean," replied Bones, returning his stare with the utmost coolness,
"that you _can't_ give up drink, if you was to try ever so much.  You're
too far gone in it.  I've tried it myself, many a time, and failed,
though I've about as strong a will as your own--maybe stronger."

"We shall see," returned Aspel, as they moved on again and turned into
the lane which led to the wretched abode of Bones.

"Bring me pen, ink, and paper!" he exclaimed, on entering the room, with
a grand air--for a pint of ale, recently taken, had begun to operate.

Bones, falling in with his friend's humour, rummaged about until he
found the stump of a quill, a penny inkbottle, and a dirty sheet of
paper.  These he placed on a rickety table, and Aspel wrote a scrawly
note, in which he gave himself very bad names, and begged Mr Blurt to
come and see him, as he had got into a scrape, and could by no means see
his way out of it.  Having folded the note very badly, he rose with the
intention of going out to post it, but his friend offered to post it for
him.

Accepting the offer, he handed him the note and flung himself down in a
heap on the straw mattress in the dark corner, where he had first become
acquainted with Bones.  In a few seconds he was in a deep lethargic
slumber.

"What a wretched spectacle!" exclaimed Bones, touching him with his toe,
and, in bitter mockery, quoting the words that Aspel had once used
regarding himself.

He turned to leave the room, and was met by Mrs Bones.

"There's a friend o' yours in the corner, Molly.  Don't disturb him.
I'm goin' to post a letter for him, and will be back directly."

Bones went out, posted the letter in the common sewer, and returned
home.

During the brief interval of his absence Tottie had come in--on a visit
after her prolonged sojourn in the country.  She was strangling her
mother with a kiss when he entered.

