
This was evident, for when the lanterns were held up to the faces of the
brave fellows it was seen that several of the less robust among them
were deadly pale from sheer exhaustion and fatigue.  They indignantly
protested, however, that they were still "game for another bout"; but
the coxswain firmly, though kindly, insisted that the cork belts should
be taken off two or three of them and given to the stoutest of at least
a dozen volunteers who eagerly stepped forward.

The boat was then relaunched, and after a careful search, and another
sharp struggle with the angry sea, returned with six saved men and a
woman, besides several apparently dead bodies, which were instantly
removed to a neighbouring cottage, to be treated according to the rules
laid down by the Royal Humane Society for the recovery of those who are
apparently drowned.  [See Note 2.]

After the back of the ship was broken, and the wreck overwhelmed, the
rocket apparatus of course became useless, as the mast to which the
ropes were attached broke off close to the deck, and the ropes
themselves became so entangled with the wreck as to be unmanageable; but
before this catastrophe occurred good service had been done, for no
fewer than sixty of the passengers of the ill-fated "Trident" had been
saved by this means alone.  The lifeboat had been the means of saving
one hundred and twenty lives; and fifteen men, who succeeded in swimming
to the beach, were rescued with the utmost difficulty by the people on
shore.

Among these last was the captain, who, with that heroic self-devotion
which seems to be a common characteristic of British seamen, had made up
his mind to be the last man to quit the ship.  This intention was
frustrated by the breaking up of the vessel.  In the confusion he was
swept beyond the reach of the lifeboat, and gained the beach he scarce
knew how.  Here he was launched on the shingle by a billow, and washed
high up on the beach.  He grasped the loose pebbles with the energy of
despair, but the cataract of white water that rushed back as the wave
retired, swept him with irresistible force into the sea.  Again this
happened and as he dug his fingers into the moving gravel, and felt how
hopeless was his case, a cry of anguish burst from him.

The cry was heard by Guy Foster, who, with a rope round his waist, had
been for the last half-hour engaged in rescuing men and women from the
fatal grasp of these retiring waves.

"This way, lads, fetch the lantern, look alive!" he shouted, and sprang
towards the part of the shore whence the cry had proceeded, followed by
a crowd of seamen who had assisted him by holding the rope.

Guy was much exhausted.  Six times already had he plunged into the
boiling surf and been dragged out with a fellow-creature in his arms.
He had removed the loop of the rope for a few minutes, and now held it
in his hand as he ran along the beach looking anxiously at the surf.

Once again the captain was hurled on the beach, but in so exhausted a
condition that he could make no effort to save himself.  He rolled so
near to Guy's feet that the latter dropped the rope in his haste as he
leaped towards the drowning man.  He caught him round the waist just as
the broken billow began to rush back.  For one moment Guy stood firm,
but as the retiring water gathered force his limbs quivered, the gravel
rolled from beneath his feet, and he was swept off his legs!

Before he was engulfed in the surf, and almost before the cry of alarm
had burst from his companions on the beach, a boy flung the loop of the
rope over his shoulders, plunged headlong into the sea, and, catching
Guy round the neck with both arms, held to him like a vice.  It was
Tommy Bogey!  The men hauled gently on the rope at first, fearing to
tear the little fellow from his grasp, but they need not have been so
careful.  Tommy's grip was an uncommonly firm one.  In half a minute the
three were pulled beyond the reach of the waves--the captain still
breathing, Guy able to walk, though much exhausted, and Tommy Bogey none
the worse for his heroic and successful exertions.

This was the last incident worthy of note that occurred.  Of the two
hundred and fifty souls who had rejoiced that night in the prospect of a
safe and speedy termination to their long voyage, fifty-five were
drowned and one hundred and ninety-five were saved.  Of these last the
fifteen men who swam ashore would have been the sole survivors, in all
human probability, if there had been no lifeboat or rocket apparatus on
the coast.

For the service thus rendered, each man who risked his life that night
in the lifeboat received 2 pounds from the Royal Lifeboat Institution.
Others who had assisted in saving life on the beach received rewards
proportioned to their services, and Bax, Guy, and Tommy Bogey were each
awarded the gold medal of the Society for the distinguished gallantry
displayed, and the great risks voluntarily encountered by them on this
occasion.  It was suggested that Denham, Crumps, and Company should give
something to the men of the lifeboat in acknowledgment of their
services, but Denham, Crumps, and Company did not act on the suggestion!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  In order to give those of our readers who happen to be
interested in this subject a better idea of the manner of using the
Rocket apparatus, we subjoin the Instructions given by the Board of
Trade to masters and seamen in regard to it:--

In the event of your vessel stranding within a short distance of the
United Kingdom, and the lives of the crew being placed in danger,
assistance will, if possible, be rendered from the shore in the
following manner, namely:

1.  A rocket or shot with a thin line attached will be fired across your
vessel.  Get hold of this line as soon as you can, and when you have
secured it let one of the crew be separated from the rest, and, if in
the daytime, wave his hat or his hand, or a flag or handkerchief; or if
at night let a rocket, a blue light, or a gun be fired, or let a light
be shown over the side of the ship, and be again concealed, as a signal
to those on shore.

2.  When you see one of the men on shore, separated from the rest, wave
a red flag, or (if at night) show a red light and then conceal it, you
are to haul upon the rocket line until you get a tailed block with an
endless fall rove through it.

3.  Make the tail of the block fast to the mast about 15 feet above the
deck, or if your masts are gone, to the _highest secure_ part of the
vessel; and when the tail block is made fast, and the rocket line unbent
from the whip, let one of the crew, separated from the rest, make the
signal required by Article 1 above.

4.  As soon as the signal is seen on shore a hawser will be bent to the
whip line, and will be hauled off to the ship by those on shore.

5.  When the hawser is got on board, the crew should at once make it
fast to the same part of the ship as the tailed block is made fast to,
only about 18 inches _higher_, taking care that there are no turns of
the whip line round the hawser.

6.  When the hawser has been made fast on board, the signal directed by
Article 1 above is to be repeated.

7.  The men on shore will then pull the hawser taut, and by means of the
whip line will haul off to the ship a sling life-buoy fitted with
petticoat breeches.  The person to be hauled ashore is to get into this
sling, thrusting his legs through the breeches, and resting his armpits
on the lifebuoy.  When he is in and secure, one of the crew must be
separated from the rest, and again signal to the shore as directed in
Article I above.  The people on shore will then haul the person in the
sling to the shore, and when he has landed will haul back the empty
sling to the ship for others.  This operation will be repeated to and
fro until all persons are hauled ashore from the wrecked vessel.

8.  It may sometimes happen that the state of the weather and the
condition of the ship will not admit of the hawser being set up, in
which case the sling will be hauled off instead, and the persons to be
rescued will be hauled in it through the surf instead of along the
hawser.

Masters and crews of wrecked vessels should bear in mind that the
success in landing them may in a great measure DEPEND UPON THEIR
COOLNESS AND ATTENTION TO THE RULES HERE LAID DOWN; and that by
attending to them many lives are annually saved by the Mortar and Rocket
Apparatus on the coasts of the United Kingdom.

The system of signalling must be strictly adhered to; and all women,
children, passengers, and helpless persons should be landed before the
crew of the ship.--BOARD OF TRADE, 22nd _December_ 1859.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 2.  It is of immense importance that every man in the kingdom
should possess some degree of knowledge on the subject of the
restoration of persons apparently drowned, for no one can tell at what
moment he may be called upon, in the absence of medical aid, to act in a
case of this nature.  We therefore make no apology for here giving in
full the rules which have been adopted by the National Lifeboat
Institution.  They run as follows:

I.  Send immediately for medical assistance, blankets, and dry clothing,
but proceed to treat the patient _instantly_ on the spot, in the open
air, with the _face downwards_, whether on shore or afloat; exposing the
face, neck, and chest to the wind, except in severe weather, and
removing all tight clothing from the neck and chest, especially the
braces.

The points to be aimed at are--first and _immediately_, the RESTORATION
OF BREATHING; and secondly, _after_ breathing is restored, the PROMOTION
OF WARMTH AND CIRCULATION.

The efforts to _restore breathing_ must be commenced immediately and
energetically, and persevered in for one or two hours, or until a
medical man has pronounced that life is extinct.  Efforts to promote
_warmth_ and _circulation_ beyond removing the wet clothes and drying
the skin must _not_ be made _until_ the first appearance of natural
breathing.  For if circulation of the blood be induced before breathing
has recommenced, the restoration to life will be endangered.

II.  TO RESTORE BREATHING.

TO CLEAR THE THROAT.--Place the patient on the floor or ground with the
face _downwards_, and one of the arms under the forehead, in which
position all fluids will more readily escape by the mouth, and the
tongue itself will fall forward, leaving the entrance into the windpipe
free.  Assist this operation by wiping and cleansing the mouth.

If satisfactory breathing commences, use the treatment described below
to promote warmth.  If there be only slight breathing, or no breathing,
or if the breathing fail, then:--

TO EXCITE BREATHING--Turn the patient well and instantly on the side,
supporting the head, and excite the nostrils with snuff, hartshorn, and
smelling salts or tickle the throat with a feather, etcetera, if they
are at hand.  Rub the chest and face warm, and dash cold water, or cold
and hot water alternately, on them.

If there be no success, lose not a moment, but instantly:--

TO IMITATE BREATHING--Replace the patient on the face, raising and
supporting the chest well on a folded coat or other article of dress.

Turn the body very gently on the side and a little beyond, and then
briskly on the face, back again; repeating these measures cautiously,
efficiently, and perseveringly about fifteen times in the minute, or
once every four or five seconds, occasionally varying the side.

[_By placing the patient on the chest the weight of the body forces the
air out; when turned on the side this pressure is removed, and air
enters the chest_.]

On each occasion that the body is replaced on the face make uniform but
efficient pressure with brisk movement, on the back between and below
the shoulder-blades or bones on each side, removing the pressure
immediately before turning the body on the side.  During the whole of
the operations let one person attend solely to the movements of the
head, and of the arm placed under it.

[_The first measure increases the expiration, the second commences
inspiration_.]

The result is _respiration_ or _natural breathing_, and, if not too
late, _life_.

Whilst the above operations are being proceeded with, dry the hands and
feet; and as soon as dry clothing or blankets can be procured, strip the
body and cover, or gradually re-clothe it, but taking care not to
interfere with the efforts to restore breathing.

III.  Should these efforts not prove successful in the course of from
two to five minutes, proceed to imitate breathing by Dr Silvester's
method, as follows:--

Place the patient on the _back_ on a flat surface, inclined a little
upwards from the feet; raise and support the head and shoulders on a
small firm cushion or folded article of dress placed under the
shoulder-blades.

Draw forward the patient's tongue, and keep it projecting beyond the
lips; an elastic band over the tongue and under the chin will answer
this purpose, or a piece of string or tape may be tied round them, or by
raising the lower jaw the teeth may be made to retain the tongue in that
position.  Remove all tight clothing from about the neck and chest,
especially the braces.

TO IMITATE THE MOVEMENTS OF BREATHING.--Standing at the patient's head,
grasp the arms just above the elbows, and draw the arms gently and
steadily upwards above the head, and _keep them stretched_ upwards for
two seconds.  (_By this means air is drawn into the lungs_.)  Then turn
down the patient's arms, and press them gently and firmly for two
seconds against the sides of the chest.  (_By this means air is pressed
out of the lungs_.)

Repeat these measures alternately, deliberately, and perseveringly about
fifteen times in a minute, _until a spontaneous effort to respire is
perceived_, immediately upon which cease to imitate the movements of
breathing, and proceed to INDUCE CIRCULATION AND WARMTH.

IV.  TREATMENT AFTER NATURAL BREATHING HAS BEEN RESTORED--TO PROMOTE
WARMTH AND CIRCULATION.

Commence rubbing the limbs upwards, with firm grasping pressure and
energy, using handkerchiefs, flannels, etcetera: [_by this measure the
blood is propelled along the veins towards the heart_.]

The friction must be continued under the blanket or over the dry
clothing.

Promote the warmth of the body by the application of hot flannels,
bottles or bladders of hot water, heated bricks, etcetera, to the pit of
the stomach, the arm-pits, between the thighs, and to the soles of the
feet.

If the patient has been carried to a house after respiration has been
restored, be careful to let the air play freely about the room.

On the restoration of life a teaspoonful of water warm should be given;
and then, if the power of swallowing have returned, small quantities of
wine, warm brandy and water, or coffee, should be administered.  The
patient should be kept in bed, and a disposition to sleep encouraged.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

The above treatment should be persevered in for some hours, as it is an
erroneous opinion that persons are irrecoverable because life does not
soon make its appearance, persons having been restored after persevering
for many hours.

APPEARANCES WHICH GENERALLY ACCOMPANY DEATH.--Breathing and the heart's
action cease entirely, the eyelids are generally half-closed, the pupils
dilated, the jaws clenched, the fingers semi-contracted; the tongue
approaches to the under edges of the lips, and these, as well as the
nostrils, are covered with a frothy mucus.  Coldness and pallor of
surface increase.

CAUTIONS.--Prevent unnecessary crowding of persons round the body,
especially if in an apartment.

Avoid rough usage, and do not allow the body to remain on the back
unless the tongue is secured.

_Under no circumstances_ hold the body up by the feet.

_On no account_ place the body in a warm bath, unless under medical
direction, and even then it should only be employed as a momentary
excitement.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE MORNING AFTER THE STORM.

On the fifth morning that succeeded the breaking of the storm, described
in the last chapter, the sun rose in gorgeous splendour and shone upon a
sea that was clear and burnished like a sheet of glass.  The wind had
ceased suddenly, and a perfect calm prevailed; but although no breath of
air ruffled the surface of the deep, the long swell rose and fell as if
the breast of ocean were still throbbing from its recent agitation.

All along the east coast of England this swell met the shore in a
succession of slow-rolling waves, which curled majestically over, and
appeared almost to pause for a moment ere they fell, with deep solemn
roar, in a magnificent burst of foam.

Everywhere the effects of the storm were painfully evident.  Wrecks
could be counted by the dozen from some of the bold headlands that
commanded an extensive view of the shore.  The work of destruction was
not yet over.  The services of our lifeboats could not yet be dispensed
with although the fury of the winds had ceased.
