"Yes, sir, there is certainly a breeze stirring, down to the
south," he shouted, from aloft.

"That will just suit us," the captain said. "We must be twenty
miles off the coast at least and, even if they had noticed us from
above the town, we are too far off for them to make us out, at all;
so it will be safe for us to run in to the land.

"We shall rely upon you, Bob, if we are hailed."

"I will do my best to throw dust in their eyes, captain. You must
tell me, beforehand, all particulars; so that I can have the story
pat."

"We will wait till we see what sort of craft is likely to hail us.
A tale may be good enough, for the skipper of a coaster, that might
not pass muster with the captain of a gunboat."

"What are the coasters likely to be laden with?"

"There is never any saying. Mostly fruit and wine, grain and
olives. Then some of them would be taking goods, from the large
ports, to the small towns and villages along the coast. Some of the
coasters are well worth picking up; but of course, the craft we
shall be chiefly on the lookout for will be those from abroad. Some
of these have very valuable cargoes. They bring copper and lead,
and sometimes silver from the mines of Mexico and South America.
Some of them carry a good lot of silver, but it is too much to hope
that we should run across such a prize as that. They bring over
hides, too; they are worth money. Then, of course, there are ships
that have been trading up the Mediterranean with France and Italy
or the Levant.

"So, you see, there is a considerable variety in the chances of
what we may light upon. Coasters are, of course, the staple, so to
speak. If we have anything like luck, we shall not do badly, with
them. The others we must look upon as the prizes in the lottery."

Before the sun set the breeze came up to them, and the brig was at
once headed for the land. At ten o'clock the lights of Malaga were
made out on the port beam, and the brig bore away a little to the
east. Two hours later the land was looming, not far ahead.

Sail was got off her, and a man placed in the chains, and soundings
taken. This was continued until the water shoaled to eight fathoms,
when the brig was brought up, head to wind, and the anchor let go.
Then an anchor watch of four men was set, and the rest of the crew
allowed to turn in.

At daybreak the officers were out again, and it was found that the
brig was lying within a quarter of a mile of the land, in a slight
indentation of the coast. The wind had died away, and the sails
were loosed, and suffered to fall against the masts.

"It could not be better," Captain Lockett said. "We look, now, as
if we had been trying to make up or down the coast, and had been
forced to come to anchor here. Fortunately there don't seem to be
any villages near, so we are not likely to have anyone coming out
to us."

"How far do you think we are from Malaga, captain?"

"About ten miles, I should say, Bob. Why do you ask?"

"I was only thinking whether it would be possible for me to make my
way there, and find out what vessels there are in harbour, and
whether any of them are likely to be coming this way. But if it is
ten miles, I am afraid it is too far. I should have to pass through
villages; and I might be questioned where I came from, and where I
was going. I don't know that my Spanish would pass muster, if I
were questioned like that.

"I should be all right, if I were once in a seaport. No one would
be likely to ask me any questions. Then I could stroll about, and
listen to what was said and, certainly, I could talk quite well
enough to go in and get a meal, and all that sort of thing."

"I couldn't let you do that, Bob," the captain said. "It is a very
plucky idea, but it wouldn't be right to let you carry it out. You
would get hung as a spy, if you were detected."

"I don't think there is the least fear in the world of my being
detected, in a seaport," Bob said, "and I should think it great
fun; but I shouldn't like to try to cross the country. Perhaps we
may have a better chance, later on."

The captain shook his head.

"You might go on board some ship, if one brings up at anchor
anywhere near us, Bob. If you got detected, there, we would take
her and rescue you. But that is a different thing to letting you go
ashore."

Presently the sails of two fishing boats were seen, coming out from
beyond a low point, three miles to the east.

"I suppose there is a fishing village, there," the mate said. "I am
glad they are no nearer."

He examined the boats with a glass.

"They are working out with sweeps. I expect they hope to get a
little wind, when they are in the offing."

Just as they were at breakfast the second mate, who was on deck,
called down the skylight:

"There are three craft to the west, sir. They have just come out
from behind the point there. They are bringing a little breeze with
them."

"What are they like, Mr. Crofts?"

"One is a polacre, another a xebec, and the third looks like a
full-rigged craft; but as she is end on, I can't say for certain."

"All right, Mr. Crofts! I will be up in five minutes. We can do
nothing until we get the wind, anyhow."

Breakfast was speedily finished, and they went on deck. The Spanish
flag was already flying from the peak. The three craft were about
two miles away.

"How are they sailing, Mr. Crofts?"

"I fancy the xebec is the fastest, sir. She was astern just now,
and she is abreast of the polacre now, as near as I can make out.
The ship, or brig--whichever it is--seems to me to be dropping
astern."

"Heave away at the anchor, Joe. Get in all the slack, so as to be
ready to hoist, as soon as the breeze reaches us. I don't want them
to come up to us. The line they are taking, now, will carry them
nearly half a mile outside us, which is fortunate. Run in six of
the guns, and throw a tarpaulin over the eighteen pounder. Three
guns, on each side, are about enough for us to show."

The breeze caught them when the three Spanish craft were nearly
abeam.

"They have more wind, out there, than we shall have here," the
captain said; "which is an advantage, for I don't want to run away
from them.

"Now, get up the anchor, Joe. Don't take too many hands."

The watch below had already been ordered to sit down on the deck,
and half the other watch were now told to do the same.

"Twelve or fourteen hands are quite enough to show," the captain
said.

"The anchor's up, sir," Joe shouted.

"Let it hang there. We will get it aboard, presently.

"Now haul that fore-staysail across, ease off the spanker sheet.

"Now, as she comes round, haul on the braces and sheets, one by
one. Do it in as lubberly a way as you can."

The brig, which had been riding with her head to the west, came
slowly round; the yards being squared in a slow fashion, in strong
contrast to the active way in which they were generally handled.
The captain watched the other craft, carefully.

"The xebec and polacre are gaining on us, but we are going as fast
through the water as the three master. When we get the wind a
little more, we shall have the heels of them all.

"Get a sail overboard, Joe, and tow it under her port quarter.
Don't give her too much rope, or they might catch sight of it, on
board the ship. That will bring us down to her rate of sailing.

"I want to keep a bit astern of them. We dare not attack them in
the daylight; they mount too many guns for us, altogether. That big
fellow has got twelve on a side, the polacre has eight, and the
xebec six, so between them they have fifty-two guns. We might try
it, if they were well out at sea; but it would never do, here.
There may be galleys or gunboats within hearing, so we must bide
our time.

"I think we are in luck, this time, Joe. That ship must have come
foreign; at least, I should say so by her appearance, though she
may be from Cadiz. As to the other two, they may be anything. The
xebec, no doubt, is a coast trader. The polacre may be one thing,
or another, but I should hardly think she has come across the
Atlantic. Likely enough she is from Bilbao or Santander. The ship
is the fellow to get hold of, if we get a chance. I shall be quite
content to leave the others alone."

"I should think so," Joe agreed. "The ship ought to be a valuable
prize, wherever she comes from. If she is sound, and pretty new,
she would fetch a good sum, if we can get her into an English
port."

The wind continued to hold light, and the four vessels made but
slow progress through the water. The two leaders, however,
gradually improved their position. They were nearly matched, in
point of sailing; and their captains were evidently making a race
of it, hoisting every stitch of canvas they were able to show. By
the afternoon they were fully two miles ahead of the ship, which
was half a mile on the starboard bow of the brig.

The wind died away to nothing, as the sun set. The three Spanish
vessels had all been edging in towards shore, and the polacre
anchored just before sunset. The ship held on for another hour, but
was a mile astern of the other two when she, also, dropped her
anchor.

The sail, that had been towing overboard from the brig, had been
got on board again when the wind began to drop; and she had come up
to within little more than a quarter of a mile of the ship. The
anchor was let go, as soon as it was seen that the crew of the ship
were preparing to anchor, so that the brig should be first to do
so. Whether there had been any suspicions, on board the Spaniards,
as to the character of the brig, they could not tell but, watching
her closely, Captain Lockett saw that the order to anchor was
countermanded, as soon as it was seen that the brig had done so.

A few minutes after the men again went forward, and the anchor was
dropped; for the vessel was making no way whatever, through the
water.

"Well, Joe, there we are, close to her, now. The question is, what
are we to do next? If there was any wind, it would be simple
enough. We would drop alongside, in the middle watch; and carry her
by boarding, before the Dons had time to get out of their hammocks.
But as it is, that is out of the question and, of course, we can't
think of towing her up. On such a still night as this will be, they
would hear the slightest noise."

"We might attack her in the boats," the mate said.

"Yes, that would be possible; but their watch would hear the oars,
the instant we began to row. You see, by the number of guns she
carries, she must be strongly manned."

"I expect most of them are small," Joe said, "and meant for show,
rather than use. It is likely enough she may have taken half of
them on board at Cadiz, or Malaga, so as to give her a formidable
appearance, in case she should fall in with any craft of our
description. If she has come across the Atlantic, she would never
have carried anything like that number of guns, for Spain was not
at war with anyone."

"No; but craft flying the black flag are still to be found in those
waters, Joe, and she might carry her guns for defence against them.
But it is not a question of guns, at present, it is a question of
the crew. It isn't likely that she carries many more than we do
and, if we could but get alongside her, there would be no fear
about it, at all; but I own I don't like the risk of losing half my
men, in an attack on a craft like that, unless we can have the
advantage of a surprise."

"What do you say to my swimming off to her, as soon as it gets
quite dark, captain?" Bob said. "I am a very good swimmer. We used
to bathe regularly at Putney, where I was at school; and I have
swum across the Thames and back, lots of times. There is sure to be
a little mist on the water, presently, and they won't be keeping a
very sharp lookout till it gets later. I can get hold of a cable
and climb up; and get in over the bow, if there is no lookout
there, and see what is going on. There is no danger in the thing
for, if I am discovered, I have only got to dive and swim back
again. There is no current to speak of, here; and there wouldn't be
the least chance of their hitting me, in the dark. I should
certainly be able to learn something, by listening to their talk."

"It would be a very risky thing, Bob," Captain Lockett said,
shaking his head. "I shouldn't like to let you do it; though of
course it would be a great thing, if we could learn something about
her. I own I don't like her appearance, though I can't say why.
Somehow or other, I don't think she is all right. Either all those
guns are a mere pretence, and she is weak handed, or she must carry
a very big crew."

"Well, I don't see there can be any possible harm in my trying to
get on board her, captain. Of course, if I am hailed as I approach
her, I shall turn and come back again. The night will be dark, but
I shall have no difficulty in finding her, from the talking and
noise on board.

"Well, Joe, what do you think?" the captain said, doubtfully.

"I think you might let Bob try," Joe said. "I should not mind
trying at all but, as I can't speak Spanish, I should be able to
learn nothing. They are not likely to be setting a watch, and
keeping a sharp lookout, for some time; and I should think that he
might, possibly, get on board unobserved. If they do make him out,
he has only to keep on diving and, in the dark, there would be
little chance of their hitting him. Besides, they certainly
couldn't make out that it was a swimmer. If they noticed a ripple
in the water, they would be sure to think it was a fish of some
sort."

Bob continued to urge that he should be allowed to try it and, at
last, Captain Lockett agreed to his doing so. It was already almost
dark enough for the attempt to be made, and Bob prepared at once
for the swim. He took off his coat, waistcoat, and shirt; and put
on a dark knitted jersey, fastened a belt tightly round his waist,
over his breeches, and took off his shoes.

"If I am seen," he said, "you are sure to hear them hailing, or
shouting; and then please show a lantern over the stern," for,
slight as the current was, it sufficed to make the vessel swing
head to west.

A rope was lowered over the side and, by this, he slipped down
quietly into the water, which was perfectly warm. Then he struck
off noiselessly, in the direction of the ship. He kept the two
masts of the brig in one, as long as he could make them out but,
owing to the mist on the water, he soon lost sight of her; but he
had no difficulty in keeping a straight course, as he could plainly
hear the sound of voices, ahead of him. Taking the greatest pains
to avoid making the slightest splash, and often pausing to listen,
Bob swam on until he saw a dark mass looming up in front of him.

Illustration: Bob swims off to the Spanish Warship.

He now did little more than float, giving a gentle stroke,
occasionally, and drifting towards it until he grasped the cable.

He now listened intently. There were voices on the fo'castle, above
him; and he determined, before trying to climb up there, to swim
round the vessel--keeping close to her side, so that he could not
be seen, unless someone leaned far over the bulwark. Halfway along
he came upon a projection and, looking up, saw that slabs of wood,
three inches wide, were fixed against the side, at intervals of a
foot apart; so as to form an accommodation ladder, when it was not
considered necessary to lower a gangway. Two hand ropes hung by the
side of it.

His way was now easy. He drew himself out of the water by the
ropes, and ascended the ladder; then crawled along outside the
bulwark until he came to a porthole, from which a gun projected;
then he crawled in there, and lay under the cannon.

Two or three lanterns were suspended above the deck and, by their
light, Bob could at once see that he was on board a ship of war.
Groups of sailors were sitting on the deck, among the guns; and he
saw that most of these were run in, and that they were of heavy
calibre, several of them being 32-pounders.

As the captain and Joe had both agreed that the guns were only
14-pounders, Bob had no difficulty in arriving at the fact that
these must have been mere dummies, thrust out of the portholes to
deceive any stranger as to her armament. He lay listening, for some
time, to the talk of the sailors; and gathered that the ship had
been purposely disguised, before putting out from Malaga, in order
to deceive any English privateers she might come across as to her
strength. He learned also that considerable doubts were
entertained, as to the brig; and that the xebec and polacre had
been signalled to go on ahead, so as to induce the brig--if she
should be an enemy--to make an attack.

The reason why she had not been overhauled, during the day, was
that the captain feared she might escape him in a light wind; for
the watch had been vigilant, and had made out that she was towing
something, to deaden her way. It was considered likely that, taking
the ship for a merchantman, an attack would be made in boats during
the night; and the men joked as to the surprise their assailants
would get. Boarding pikes were piled in readiness; shot had been
placed in the racks, ready to throw down into the boats as they
came alongside; and the ship's boats had been swung out, in
readiness for lowering--as it was intended to carry the brig, by
boarding, after the repulse and destruction of her boats.

"We have had a narrow escape of catching a tartar," Bob said, to
himself. "It is very lucky I came on board to reconnoitre. The
Spaniards are not such duffers as we thought them. We fancied we
were taking them in, and very nearly fell into a trap, ourselves."

Very quietly he crawled back under the porthole, made his way along
outside the bulwark until his hand touched the rope, and then slid
down by it into the water. As he knew there was more chance of a
sharp watch being kept, in the eyes of the ship, than elsewhere, he
swam straight out from her side until she became indistinct, and
then headed for the brig. The lights on board the Spaniard served
as a guide to him, for some time; but the distance seemed longer to
him than it had before, and he was beginning to fancy he must have
missed the brig, when he saw her looming up on his right. In three
or four minutes he was alongside.

"The brig there!" he hailed. "Drop me a rope overboard."

There was a stir overhead, at once.

"Where are you, Bob?" Captain Lockett asked, leaning over the side.

"Just below you, sir."

A rope was dropped. Bob grasped it, and was hauled up.

"Thank God you are back again!" the captain said. "I have been
blaming myself, ever since you started; though, as all was quiet,
we felt pretty sure they hadn't made you out. Well, have you any
news? Did you get on board?"

"You will get no prize money this time, captain. The Spaniard is a
ship of war, mounting twenty-four guns; none of them smaller than
eighteens, and ten of them thirty-twos."

"Impossible, Bob! We could not have been so mistaken. Joe and I
were both certain that they were fourteens."

"Yes, sir; but those things you saw were dummies. The guns,
themselves, are almost all drawn in. All the thirty-twos are, and
most of the eighteens. She has been specially disguised, at Malaga,
in hopes of tempting a craft like yours to attack her and, what is
more, she has a shrewd suspicion of what you are;" and he related
the whole of the conversation he had heard, and described the
preparations for repulsing a boat attack and, in turn, carrying the
brig in the ship's boats.

Captain Lockett was thunderstruck.

"The Spanish officer who commands her must be a smart fellow," he
said, "and we have had a narrow escape of running our head into a
noose--thanks to you, Bob; for Joe and I had quite made up our
minds to attack her, in the middle watch.

"Well, the only thing for us to do is to get away from here, as
soon as we can. If she finds we don't attack her, tonight, she is
sure to send a boat to us, in the morning; and then, if we have an
engagement, we could hardly hope to get off without losing some of
our spars--even if we were not sunk--with such heavy metal as she
carries. We should have the other two craft down on us, too, and
our chances of getting away would be worth nothing.

"Well, I suppose, Joe, our best plan will be to tow her away?"

"I should think so, sir. When they hear us at it, they may send
their boats out after us, but we can beat them off; and I should
hardly think that they would try it, for they will be sure that, if
we are a privateer, we have been playing the same game as they
have, and hiding our guns, and will guess that we carry a strong
crew."

"Send the crew aft, Joe. I will tell them how matters stand.

"We have had a narrow escape of catching a tartar, my lads," he
said, when the men went aft. "You all know Mr. Repton swam off, an
hour ago, to try and find out what the ship was like. Well, he has
been on board, and brings back news that she is no trader, but a
ship of war, disguised; and that she carries twenty-four
guns--eighteen-pounders and thirty-twos. If we met while out at
sea, we might make a fight of it; but it would never do, here,
especially as her two consorts would be down upon us. She suspects
what we are, although she is not certain; and everything is in
readiness to repel a boat attack--her captain's intention being, if
we tried, to sink or cripple the boats, and then to attack us with
her guns.

"So you may thank Mr. Repton that you have had a narrow escape of
seeing the inside of a Spanish prison.

"Now, what I propose to do is to tow her out. Get the four boats in
the water, as quietly as you can. We have greased the falls,
already. We will tow her straight ahead, at any rate for a bit.
That craft won't be able to bring any guns to bear upon us, except
perhaps a couple of bow chasers; and as she won't be able to see
us, there is not much chance of our being hit. Pass the hawser
along, from boat to boat, and row in a line ahead of her. The hull
will shelter you. Then lay out heartily; but be ready, if you are
hailed, to throw off the hawser and get back on board again, as
soon as you can, for they may send their boats out after us. We
shall get a start anyhow for, when they hear you rowing, they will
think you are putting off to attack them; and it will be some
minutes before they will find out their mistake.

"Joe, do you go in charge of the boats. I will take the helm. You
must cut the cable. They would hear the clank of the windlass."

The operation of lowering boats was conducted very silently. Bob
had taken his place at the taffrail, and stood listening for any
