To the first of these was added, not long after the death of their
respective fathers, Edward Quintal and Catherine McCoy.  To John Adams,
also, a daughter was born, whom he named Hannah, after a poor girl who
had been in the habit of chucking him under the chin, and giving him
sugar-plums when he was an arab in the streets of London--at least so he
jestingly remarked to his spouse on the day she presented the new baby
to his notice.

On the day of which we write, Young and Adams found the square
above-mentioned in possession of the infantry, under command of their
self-elected captain, Otaheitan Sally, who was now, according to John
Adams, "no longer a chicken."  Being in her eleventh year, and, like her
country-women generally at that age, far advanced towards big girlhood,
she presented a tall, slight, graceful, and beautifully moulded figure,
with a sweet sprightly face, and a smile that was ever disclosing her
fine white teeth.  Her profusion of black hair was gathered into a knot
which hung low on the back of her pretty round head.  She was crowned
with a wreath of wild-flowers, made and presented by her troops.  It is
needless to say that every one of these, big and little, was
passionately attached to Sally.

Chief among her admirers now, as of old, was Charlie Christian, who,
being about eight years of age, well grown and stalwart like his father,
was now almost as tall as his former nurse.

Charlie had not with years lost one jot of that intensely innocent and
guileless look of childhood, which inclined one to laugh while he merely
cast earnest gaze into one's face; but years had given to him a certain
gravity and air of self-possession which commanded respect, even from
that volatile imp, his contemporary, Dan McCoy.

Thursday October Christian, who was less than a year younger than Sally,
had also shot up into a long-legged boy, and bade fair to become a tall
and sturdy man.  He, like his brother, was naturally grave and earnest,
but was easily roused to action, and if he did not himself originate
fun, was ever ready to appreciate the antics and mild wickedness of Dan
McCoy, or to burst into sudden and uproarious laughter at the tumbles or
ludicrous doings of the sprawlers, who rolled their plump-made forms on
the soft grass.

Not one of the band, however, had yet attained to the age which renders
young people ashamed of childish play.  When Young and Adams appeared on
the scene, Sally, her hair broken loose and the wreath confusedly
mingled with it, was flying round the square with Dolly Young on her
shoulder, and chased by Charlie Christian, who pretended, in the most
obvious manner, that he could not catch her.  Toc was sitting on the
fence watching them, and perceiving his brother's transparent hypocrisy,
was chuckling to himself with great delight.

Matt Quintal and Dan McCoy, at the head of two opposing groups, were
engaged in playing French and English, each group endeavouring to pull
the other over a rope laid on the grass between them.

Several of the others, being too little, were not allowed to join in the
game, and contented themselves with general scrimmaging and skylarking,
while Edward Quintal, Catherine McCoy, and Hannah Adams, the most recent
additions to the community, rolled about in meaningless felicity.

"Hold on hard," shouted Dan McCoy, whose flushed face and blue eyes
beamed and flashed under a mass of curling yellow hair, and who was the
foremost boy of the French band.

"I'm holdin' on," cried Matt Quintal, who was intellectually rather
obtuse.

"Tight," cried Dan.

"Tight," repeated Matt.

"There, don't let go--oh! hup!"

The grasp of Dan suddenly relaxed when Matt and his Englishmen were
straining their utmost.  Of course they went back on the top of each
other in a wild jumble, while Dan, having put a foot well back, was
prepared, and stood comparatively firm.

"You did that a-purpose," cried Matt, springing up and glaring.

"I know you did it a-purpose," retorted Dan.

"But--but I said that--that _you_ did it a-purpose," stammered Matt.

"Well, an' didn't I say that you said that I said _you_ did it
a-purpose?"

A yell of delight followed this reply, in which, however, Matt did not
join.

Like his father, Matt Quintal was short in the temper--at least, short
for a Pitcairn boy.  He suddenly gave Dan McCoy a dab on the nose with
his fist.  Now, as every one must know, a dab on the nose is painful;
moreover, it sometimes produces blood.  Dan McCoy, who also inherited a
shortish temper from his father, feeling the pain, and seeing the blood,
suddenly flushed to the temples, and administered to Matt a sounding
slap on the side of the head, which sent him tumbling on the grass.  But
Matt was not conquered, though overturned.  Jumping up, he made a rush
at Dan, who stood on the defensive.  The other children, being more
gentle in their natures, stood by, and anticipated with feelings of awe
the threatened encounter; but Thursday October Christian, who had
listened with eager ears, ever since his intelligence dawned, to the
conversations of the mutineers, here stepped between the combatants.

"Come, come," said he, authoritatively, in virtue of his greater age and
superior size, "let's have fair play.  If you must fight, do it
ship-shape, an', accordin' to the articles of war.  We must form a ring
first, you know, an' get a bottle an' a sponge and--"

An appalling yell at this point nearly froze the marrow in everybody's
bones.  It was caused by a huge pig, which, observing that the gate had
been left open, had entered the square, and gone up to snuff at one of
the nude babies, who, seated like a whitey-brown petrifaction, gazed
with a look of horror in the pig's placid face.

If ever a pig in this sublunary sphere regretted a foolish act, that
Pitcairn pig must have been steeped in repentance to the latest day of
its life.  With one howl in unison, the entire field, _minus_ the
infants, ran at that pig like a human tornado.  It was of no avail that
the pig made straight for the gate by which it had entered.  That gate
had either removed or shut itself.  In frantic haste, the unhappy
creature coursed round the square, followed by its pursuers, who soon
caught it by the tail, then by an ear, then by the nose and the other
ear, and a fore leg and two hind ones, and finally hurled it over the
fence, amid a torrent of shrieks which only a Pitcairn pig could utter
or a Pitcairn mind conceive.  It fell with a bursting squeak, and
retired in grumpy silence to ruminate over the dire consequences of a
too earnest gaze in the face of a child.

"Well done, child'n!" cried John Adams.  "Sarves him right.  Come, now,
to grub, all of you."

Even though the Pitcairn children had been disobedient by nature, they
would have obeyed that order with alacrity.  In a few brief minutes a
profound silence proclaimed, more clearly than could a trumpet-tongue,
that the inhabitants of the lonely island were at dinner.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE LAST MAN.

One morning John Adams, instead of going to work in his garden, as was
his wont, took down his musket from its accustomed pegs above the door,
and sallied forth into the woods behind the village.  He had not gone
far when he heard a rustling of the leaves, and looking back, beheld the
graceful form of Sally bounding towards him.

"Are you going to shoot, father?" she said, on coming up.

The young people of the village had by this time got into the habit of
calling Adams "father," and regarded him as the head of the community;
not because of his age, for at this time he was only between thirty and
forty years, but because of his sedate, quiet character, and a certain
air of elderly wisdom which distinguished him.  Even Edward Young, who
was about the same age, but more juvenile both in feeling and
appearance, felt the influence of his solid, unpretending temperament,
and laughingly acknowledged him King of Pitcairn.

"No, dear, I'm not goin' to shoot," said Adams, in reply, "I'm only
going up to Christian's outlook to try if I can find somethin' there,
an' I always like to have the old blunderbuss with me.  It feels sort of
company, you know, an' minds me of old times; but you'll not understand
what I mean, Sall."

"No, because I've no old times to mind about," said Sally, with a
peculiar smile.  "May I go with you, father?"

"Of course you may.  Come along, lass."

Adams held out his strong hand.  Sally put her peculiarly small one into
it, and the two went slowly up the mountain-track together.

On reaching the top of a little knoll or plateau, they stopped, and
turned to look back.  They could see over the tops of the palm-groves
from that place.  The track by which they had ascended was visible here
and there, winding among the flowering shrubs and trees.  The village
lay far below, like a gem in a setting of bright green, which contrasted
pleasantly with the warm clouds and the blue sea beyond.  The sun was
bright and the air was calm--so calm that the voices of the children at
play came up to them distinctly in silvery ripples.

"How comes it, Sall, that you've deserted your post to-day?"

"Because the guard has been relieved; same as you say they do on board a
man-of-war.  I left the sprawlers in charge of Bessy Mills, and the
staggerers are shut into the green.  You see, I'm feeling a little tired
to-day, and thought I would like to have a quiet walk in the woods."

She finished this explanation with a little sigh.

"Dear, dear me!" exclaimed Adams, with a look of amused surprise,
"you're not becomin' sentimental are you, Sally?"

"What is sentimental, father!"

"Why, it's a--it's a sort of a feelin'--a sensation, you know, a kind of
all-overishness, that--d'ye see--"

He stopped short and stared with a perplexed air at the girl, who burst
into a merry laugh.

"That's one of your puzzlers, I think," she said, looking up slyly from
the corners of her eyes.

"Well, Sall, that _is_ a puzzler," returned Adams, with a
self-condemning shake of the head.  "I never before felt so powerfully
the want o' dictionary knowledge.  I'll be shot if I can tell you what
sentimental is, though I _know_ what it is as well as I know what
six-water grog or plum-duff is.  We must ask Mr Young to explain it.
He's bin to school, you know, an' that's more than I have--more's the
pity."

"Well," said Sally, as they proceeded on their way, "whatever senti--
senti--"

"Mental," said Adams.

"Whatever sentimental is, I'm not that, because I'm just the same as
ever I was, for I often want to be quiet and alone, and I often am quiet
and alone in the bush."

"And what do you think about, Sall, when you're alone in the bush?" said
the seaman, looking down with more interest than usual at the innocent
face beside him.

"Oh, about heaps and heaps of things.  I couldn't tell you in a month
all I think about; but one thing I think most about is a man-of-war."

"A man-of-war, Sall?"

"Yes; I would give anything to see a man-of-war, what you've so often
told us about, with all its masts and sails, and bunks and guns and
anchors, and officers and men.  I often wonder _so_ much what new faces
would be like.  You see I'm so used to the faces of yourself and Mr
Young, and Mainmast and Susannah, and Toc and Matt and Dan and--"

"Just say the rest o' the youngsters, dear," interrupted Adams.
"There's no use in goin' over 'em all by name."

"Well, I'm so used to them that I can't fancy how any other faces can be
different, and yet I heard Mr Young say the other day that there's no
two faces in the world exactly alike, and you know there must be
hundreds and hundreds of faces in the world."

"Ay, there's thousands and thousands--for the matter o' that, there's
millions and millions of 'em--an it's quite true that you can't ever
pick out two that would fit into the same mould.  Of course," continued
Adams, in an argumentative tone, "I'm not goin' for to say but that you
could find a dozen men any day with hook noses an' black eyes an' lanky
hair, just as you can find another dozen with turn-up noses an' grey
eyes an' carroty hair; but what I mean to say is, that you won't find no
two of 'em that han't got a difference of some sort somewheres.  It's
very odd, but it's a fact."

"Another puzzler," said Sally, with a laugh.

"_Just_ so.  But what else do you think about, Sall?"

"Sometimes I think about those fine ladies you've told us of, who drive
about in grand carriages with horses.  Oh, these horses; what I would
give to see horses!  Have they got tails, father?"

"Tails!" cried Adams, with a laugh, "of course they have; long hairy
ones, and manes too; that's hair down the back o' their necks, dear.
See here, fetch me that bit of red stone and I'll draw you a horse."

Sally brought the piece of red stone, and her companion, sitting down
beside a smooth rock, from which he wiped the dust with the sleeve of
his shirt, began, slowly and with compressed lips, frowning eyebrows,
and many a hard-drawn sigh, to draw the portrait of a horse.

Adams was not an artist.  The drawing might have served almost equally
well for an ass, or even for a cow, but Sally watched it with intense
interest.

"You see, dear," said the artist, commenting as the work proceeded,
"this is his head, with a turn-up--there--like that, for his nose.  A
little too bluff, no doubt, but no matter.  Then comes the ears, two of
'em, somewhat longish--so, not exactly fore an' aft, as I've made 'em,
but ath'ort ships, so to speak, only I never could understand how
painters manage to make one thing look as if it was behind another.  I
can't get behind the one ear to put on the other one nohow."

"A puzzler!" ejaculated Sally.

"Just so.  Well, you have them both, anyhow, only fore an' aft, as I
said before.  Well, then comes his back with a hollow--so, for people to
sit in when they go cruisin' about on shore; then here's his legs--
somethin' like that, the fore ones straight an' the aft ones crooked."

"Has he only two legs," asked Sally, in surprise, "one before an' one
behind?"

"No, dear, he's got four, but I've the same difficulty wi' them that I
had wi' the ears--one behind the other, you know.  However, there you
have 'em--so, in the fore-an'-aft style.  Then he's got hoofs at the end
o' the legs, like the goats, you know, only not split up the middle,
though why they're not split is more than I can tell; an' there's a sort
o' curl behind, a little above it--the fetlock I think they call it, but
that's far beyond my powers o' drawin'."

"But you've forgot the tail," said Sally.

"So I have; think o' that now, to forget his tail!  He'd never do that
himself if he was alive.  It sticks out from hereabouts.  There you have
it, flowin' quite graceful down a'most to his heels.  Now, Sally, that's
a horse, an' not much to boast of after all in the way of a likeness,
though I say it that shouldn't."

"How I _should_ like to see a real one!" said the girl, gazing intently
at the wild caricature, while her instructor looked on with a benignant
smile.

"Then I often think of the poor people Mr Young is so fond of telling
us stories about," continued Sally, as they resumed their upward path,
"though I'm much puzzled about them.  Why are they poor?  Why are they
not rich like other people?"

"There's a many reasons why, dear," continued Adams, whose knowledge of
political economy was limited; "some of 'em don't work, an' some of 'em
won't work, and some of 'em can't work, an' what between one thing an'
another, there's a powerful lot of 'em everywhere."

Sally, whose thirst for knowledge was great, continued to ply poor John
Adams with questions regarding the poor, until he became so involved in
"puzzlers" that he was fain to change the subject, and for a time they
talked pleasantly on many themes.  Then they came to the steep parts of
the mountains, and relapsed into silence.  On reaching another plateau
or flat knoll, where they turned to survey the magnificent panorama
spread out before them, Sally said, slowly--

"Sometimes when I'm alone in the bush I think of God.  Mr Young has
been talking to me about Him lately, and I am wondering and wanting to
know more about Him.  Do you know anything about Him, father?"

John Adams had looked at his simple interrogator with surprise and not a
little perplexity.

"Well, to tell you the honest truth," said he, "I can't say that I do
know much about Him, more shame to me; an' some talks I've had lately
with Mr Young have made me see that I know even less than I thought I
did.  But we'll ask Mr Young to explain these matters to us when we
return home.  As it happens.  I've come up here to search for the very
book that tells us about God--His own book, the Bible.  Mr Christian
used to read it, an' kept it in his cave."

Soon afterwards the man and child reached the cave referred to.  On
entering, they were surprised to find Young himself there before them.
He was reading the Bible, and Adams could not help recalling his
previous visit, when he had found poor Fletcher Christian similarly
occupied.

