old friend the Frenchman!  _Parlez-vous francais_, _Monsieur_?"

"Spies!" cried another.

"Arrest them!" shouted a sergeant of the guard, at the moment coming up
with a patrol, and we were both jumped upon and held by about a dozen
men.

In vain Raoul protested our innocence, declaring that we were only two
poor fishermen, who had wet our clothes in drawing the nets.

"It's not a fisherman's costume, Monsieur," said one.

"Fishermen don't usually wear diamonds on their knuckles," cried
another, snatching a ring from my finger.

On this ring, inside the circlet, were engraven my name and rank!

Several men, now coming forward, recognised Raoul, and stated, moreover,
that he had been missing for some days.

"He must, therefore," said they, "have been with the Yankees."

We were soon handcuffed and marched off to the guard-prison.  There we
were closely searched, but nothing further was found, except my purse
containing several gold eagles--an American coin that of itself would
have been sufficient evidence to condemn me.

We were now heavily chained to each other, after which the guard left us
to our thoughts.  They could not have left us in much less agreeable
companionship.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

HELP FROM HEAVEN.

"I would not care a _claco_ for my own life," said Raoul, as the gate
closed upon us, "but that you, Captain--_helas! helas_!" and the
Frenchman groaned and sank upon the stone bench, dragging me down also.

I could offer no consolation.  I knew that we should be tried as spies;
and, if convicted--a result almost certain--we had not twenty hours to
live.  The thought that I had brought this brave fellow to such a fate
enhanced the misery of my situation.  To die thus ingloriously was
bitter indeed.  Three days ago I could have spent my life recklessly;
but now, how changed were my feelings!  I had found something worth
living to enjoy; and to think I should never again--"Oh!  I have become
a coward!"  I cursed my rashness bitterly.

We passed the night in vain attempts at mutual consolation.  Even our
present sufferings occupied us.  Our clothes were wet through, and the
night had become piercingly cold.  Our bed was a bench of stone; and
upon this we lay as our chains would allow us, sleeping close together
to generate warmth.  It was to us a miserable night; but morning came at
last, and at an early hour we were examined by the officer of the guard.

Our court-martial was fixed for the afternoon, and before this tribunal
we were carried, amidst the jeers of the populace.  We told our story,
giving the name of the boy Narcisso, and the house where he was lodged.
This was verified by the court, but declared to be a _ruse_ invented by
my comrade--whose knowledge of the place and other circumstances
rendered the thing probable enough.  Raoul, moreover, was identified by
many of the citizens, who proved his disappearance coincident with the
landing of the American expedition.  Besides, my ring and purse were
sufficient of themselves to condemn us--and condemned we were.  We were
to be _garrotted_ on the following morning!

Raoul was offered life if he would turn traitor and give information of
the enemy.  The brave soldier indignantly spurned the offer.  It was
extended to me, with a similar result.

All at once I observed a strange commotion among the people.  Citizens
and soldiers rushed from the hall, and the court, hastily pronouncing
our sentence, ordered us to be carried away.  We were seized by the
guard, pulled into the street, and dragged back towards our late prison.
Our conductors were evidently in a great hurry.  As we passed along we
were met by citizens running to and fro, apparently in great terror--
women and children uttering shrieks and suddenly disappearing behind
walls and battlements.  Some fell upon their knees, beating their
breasts and praying loudly.  Others, clasping their infants, stood
shivering and speechless.

"It is just like the way they go in an earthquake," remarked Raoul, "but
there is none.  What can it be, Captain?"

Before I could reply, the answer came from another quarter.

Far above, an object was hissing and hurtling through the air.

"A shell from ours!  Hurrah!" cried Raoul.

I could scarcely refrain from cheering, though we ourselves might be the
victims of the missile.

The soldiers who were guarding us had flung themselves down behind walls
and pillars, leaving us alone in the open street!

The bomb fell beyond us, and, striking the pavement, burst.  The
fragments went crashing through the side of an adjoining house; and the
wail that came back told how well the iron messengers had done their
work.  This was the second shell that had been projected from the
American mortars.  The first had been equally destructive; and hence the
extreme terror of both citizen and soldier.  Every missile seemed
charged with death.

Our guard now returned and dragged us onward, treating us with increased
brutality.  They were enraged at the exultation visible in our manner;
and one, more ferocious than the rest, drove his bayonet into the fleshy
part of my comrade's thigh.  After several like acts of inhumanity, we
were thrown into our prison and locked up as before.

Since our capture we had tasted neither food nor drink, and hunger and
thirst added to the misery of our situation.

The insult had maddened Raoul, and the pain of his wound now rendered
him furious.  He had not hands to touch it or dress it.  Frenzied by
anger and pain to a strength almost superhuman, he twisted off his iron
manacles, as if they had been straws.  This done, the chain that bound
us together was soon broken, and our ankle "jewellery" followed.

"Let us live our last hours, Captain, as we have our lives, free and
unfettered!"

I could not help admiring the spirit of my brave comrade.

We placed ourselves close to the door and listened.

We could hear the heavy cannonade all around, and now and then the
distant shots from the American batteries.  We would wait for the
bursting of the bombs, and, as the hoarse thunder of crumbling walls
reached our ears, Raoul would spring up, shouting his wild, half-French,
half-Indian cries.

A thought occurred to me.

"We have arms, Raoul."  I held up the fragments of the heavy chain that
had yoked us.  "Could you reach the trap on a run, without the danger of
mistaking your way?"

Raoul started.

"You are right, Captain--I can.  It is barely possible they may visit us
to-night.  If so, any chance for life is better than none at all."

By a tacit understanding each of us took a fragment of the chain--there
were but two--and sat down by the door to be ready in case our guards
should open it.  We sat for over an hour, without exchanging a word.  We
could hear the shells as they burst upon the housetops, the crashing of
torn timbers, and the rumbling of walls rolling over, struck by the
heavy shot.  We could hear the shouts of men and the wailing of women,
with now and then a shriek louder than all others, as some missile
carried death into the terror-struck crowd.

"_Sacre_!" said Raoul; "if they had only allowed us a couple of days,
our friends would have opened these doors for us.  _Sacr-r-r-e_!"

This last exclamation was uttered in a shriek.  Simultaneously a heavy
object burst through the roof, tearing the bricks and plaster, and
falling with the ring of iron on the floor.

Then followed a deafening crash.  The whole earth seemed to shake, and
the whizzing of a thousand particles filled the air.  A cloud of dust
and lime, mixed with the smoke of sulphur, was around us.  I gasped for
breath, nearly suffocated.  I endeavoured to cry out, but my voice,
husky and coarse, was scarcely audible to myself.  I succeeded at length
in ejaculating:

"Raoul!  Raoul!"

I heard the voice of my comrade, seemingly at a great distance.  I threw
out my arms and groped for him.  He was close by me, but, like myself,
choking for want of air.

"It was a shell," said he, in a wheezing voice, "Are you hurt, Captain?"

"No," I replied; "and you?"

"Sound as a bell--our luck is good--it must have struck every other part
of the cell."

"Better it had not missed us," said I, after a pause; "we are only
spared for the _garrotte_."

"I am not so sure of that, Captain," replied my companion, in a manner
that seemed to imply he had still hopes of an escape.

"Where that shell came in," he continued, "something else may go out.
Let us see--was it the roof?"

"I think so."

We groped our way hand in hand towards the centre of the room, looking
upwards.

"_Peste_!" ejaculated Raoul; "I can't see a foot before me--my eyes are
filled--_bah_!"

So were mine.  We stood waiting.  The dust was gradually settling down,
and we could perceive a faint glimmer from above.  _There was a large
hole through the roof_!

Slowly its outlines became defined, and we could see that it was large
enough to pass the body of a man; but it was at least fourteen feet from
the floor, and we had not timber enough to make a walking-stick!

"What is to be done?  We are not cats, Raoul.  We can never reach it!"

My comrade, without making a reply, lifted me up in his arms, telling me
to climb.  I mounted upon his shoulders, balancing myself like a
Bedouin; but with my utmost stretch I could not touch the roof.

"Hold!" cried I, a thought striking me.  "Let me down, Raoul.  Now, if
they will only give us a little time."

"Never fear for them; they've enough to do taking care of their own
yellow carcases."

I had noticed that a beam of the roof formed one side of the break, and
I proceeded to twist our handcuffs into a clamp, while Raoul peeled off
his leather breeches and commenced, tearing them into strips.  In ten
minutes our "tackle" was ready, and, mounting upon my comrade's
shoulders, I flung it carefully at the beam.  It failed to catch, and I
came down to the floor, my balance being lost in the effort.  I repeated
the attempt.  Again it failed, and I staggered down as before.

"_Sacre_!" cried Raoul through his teeth.  The iron had struck him on
the head.

"Come, we shall try and try--our lives depend upon it."

The third attempt, according to popular superstition, should be
successful.  It _was_ so with us.  The clamp caught, and the string hung
dangling downwards.  Mounting again upon my comrade's shoulders, I
grasped the thong high up to test its hold.  It was secure; and,
cautioning Raoul to hold fast lest the hook might be detached by my
vibration, I climbed up and seized hold of the beam.  By this I was
enabled to squeeze myself through the roof.

Once outside I crawled cautiously along the azotea, which, like all
others in Spanish houses, was flat, and bordered by a low parapet of
mason-work.  I peeped over this parapet, looking down into the street.
It was night, and I could see no one below; but up against the sky, upon
distant battlements, I could distinguish armed soldiers busy around
their guns.  These blazed forth at intervals, throwing their sulphureous
glare over the city.

I returned to assist Raoul, but, impatient of my delay, he had already
mounted, and was dragging up the thong after him.

We crawled from roof to roof, looking for a dark spot to descend into
the street.  None of the houses in the range of our prison were more
than one story high, and, after passing several, we let ourselves down
into a narrow alley.  It was still early, and the people were running to
and fro, amidst the frightful scenes of the bombardment.  The shrieks of
women were in our ears, mingled with the shouts of men, the groans of
the wounded, and the fierce yelling of an excited rabble.  The constant
whizzing of bombs filled the air, and parapets were hurled down.  A
round-shot struck the cupola of a church as we passed nearly under it,
and the ornaments of ages came tumbling down, blocking up the
thoroughfare.  We clambered over the ruins and went on.  There was no
need of our crouching into dark shadows.  No one thought of observing us
now.

"We are near the house--will you still make the attempt to take him
along?" inquired Raoul, referring to the boy Narcisso.

"By all means!  Show me the place," replied I, half-ashamed at having
almost forgotten, in the midst of our own perils, the object of our
enterprise.

Raoul pointed to a large house with portals and a great door in the
centre.

"There, Captain--there it is."

"Go under that shadow and wait.  I shall be better alone."

This was said in a whisper.  My companion did as directed.

I approached the great door and knocked boldly.

"_Quien_?" cried the porter within the _saguan_.

"_Yo_," I responded.

The door was opened slowly and with caution.

"Is the Senorito Narcisso within?"  I inquired.

The man answered in the affirmative.

"Tell him a friend wishes to speak with him."

After a moment's hesitation the porter dragged himself lazily up the
stone steps.  In a few seconds the boy--a fine, bold-looking lad, whom I
had seen during our trial--came leaping down.  He started on recognising
me.

"Hush!"  I whispered, making signs to him to be silent.  "Take leave of
your friends, and meet me in ten minutes behind the church of La
Magdalena."

"Why, Senor," inquired the boy without listening, "how have you got out
of prison?  I have just been to the governor on your behalf, and--."

"No matter how," I replied, interrupting him; "follow my directions--
remember your mother and sisters are suffering."

"I shall come," said the boy resolutely.

"_Hasta luego_!"  (Lose no time then).  "_Adios_!"

We parted without another word.  I rejoined Raoul, and we walked on
towards La Magdalena.  We passed through the street where we had been
captured on the preceding night, but it was so altered that we should
not have known it.  Fragments of walls were thrown across the path, and
here and there lay masses of bricks and mortar freshly torn down.

Neither patrol nor sentry thought of troubling us now, and our strange
appearance did not strike the attention of the passengers.

We reached the church, and Raoul descended, leaving me to wait for the
boy.  The latter was true to his word, and his slight figure soon
appeared rounding the corner.  Without losing a moment we all three
entered the subterranean passage, but the tide was still high, and we
had to wait for the ebb.  This came at length, and, clambering over the
rocks, we entered the surf and waded as before.  After an hour's toil we
reached Punta Hornos, and a little beyond this point I was enabled to
hail one of our own pickets, and to pass the lines in safety.

At ten o'clock I was in my own tent--just twenty-four hours from the
time I had left it, and, with the exception of Clayley, not one of my
brother officers knew anything of our adventure.

Clayley and I agreed to "mount" a party the next night and carry the boy
to his friends.  This we accordingly did, stealing out of camp after
tattoo.  It would be impossible to describe the rejoicing of our new
acquaintances--the gratitude lavishly expressed--the smiles of love that
thanked us.

We should have repeated our visits almost nightly; but from that time
the guerilleros swarmed in the back-country, and small parties of our
men, straggling from camp, were cut off daily.  It was necessary,
therefore, for my friend and myself to chafe under a prudent impatience,
and wait for the fall of Vera Cruz.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

A SHOT IN THE DARK.

The "City of the True Cross" fell upon the 29th of March, 1847, and the
American flag waved over the castle of San Juan de Ulloa.  The enemy's
troops marched out upon parole, most of them taking their way to their
distant homes upon the table-lands of the Andes.

The American garrison entered the town, but the body of our army
encamped upon the green plains to the south.

Here we remained for several days, awaiting the order to march into the
interior.

A report had reached us that the Mexican forces, under the celebrated
Santa Anna, were concentrating at Puente Nacional; but shortly after it
was ascertained that the enemy would make his next stand in the pass of
the Cerro Gordo, about half-way between Vera Cruz and the mountains.

After the surrender of the city we were relieved from severe duty, and
Clayley and I, taking advantage of this, resolved upon paying another
stolen visit to our friends.

Several parties of light horse had been sent out to scour the country,
and it had been reported that the principal guerilla of the enemy had
gone farther up towards the Puente Nacional.  We did not, therefore,
anticipate any danger from that source.

We started after nightfall, taking with us three of our best men--
Lincoln, Chane, and Raoul.  The boy Jack was also of the party.  We were
mounted on such horses as could be had.  The major had kept his word
with me, and I bestrode the black--a splendid thoroughbred Arab.

It was a clear moonlight, and as we rode along we could not help
noticing many changes.

War had left its black mark upon the objects around.  The ranchos by the
road were tenantless--many of them wrecked, not a few of them entirely
gone; where they had stood, a ray of black ashes marking the outline of
their slight walls.  Some were represented by a heap of half-burned
rubbish still smoking and smouldering.

Various pieces of household furniture lay along the path torn or
