couldn't help it."

"True, little one, but it was God who made you to--`couldn't help it.'"

Letta was puzzled by this reply.  She raised her bright eyes inquiringly
into Robin's honest face, and said, "But you've promised to take me to
her, you know."

"Yes, dear little one, but you must not misunderstand me," replied the
youth somewhat sadly.  "I promise that, God helping me, I will do the
best I can to find out where your mother is; but you must remember that
I have very little to go on.  I don't even know your mother's name, or
the place where you were taken from.  By the way, an idea has just
occurred to me.  Have you any clothes at the cave?"

"Of course I have," answered Letta, with a merry laugh.

"Yes; but I mean the clothes that you had on when you first came here."

"I don't know; Meerta knows.  Why?"

"Because your name may be marked on them.  Come, let us go back at once
and see.  Besides, we are wasting time, for you know I was sent out to
shoot some ducks for dinner."

Rising as he spoke, Robin shouldered the shotgun which had been supplied
from the robbers' armoury, and, descending with his little companion
towards the lake, soon began to stalk the birds as carefully as if he
had been trained to the work by a Red Indian.  Stooping low, he glided
swiftly through the bushes, until he came within a hundred yards of the
margin of the lakelet, where a group of some thirty or forty fat ducks
were feeding.  Letta had fallen behind, and sat down to watch.

The distance being too great for a shot, and the bushes beyond the spot
which he had reached being too thin to conceal him, Robin lay flat down,
and began to advance through the long grass after the fashion of a
snake, pushing his gun before him.  It was a slow and tedious process,
but Robin's spirit was patient and persevering.  He screwed himself, as
it were, to within sixty yards of the flock, and then fired both barrels
almost simultaneously.  Seven dead birds remained behind when the
affrighted flock took wing.

"It is not very scientific shooting," said Robin, apologetically, to his
fair companion, as she assisted him to tie their legs together; "but our
object just now is food, not sport."

On the way back to the cavern they had to pass over a narrow ledge, on
one side of which a precipice descended towards the valley, while the
other side rose upwards like a wall.  It was not necessarily a dangerous
place.  They had passed it often before in safety, none of the party
being troubled with giddiness; but at this time Robin had unfortunately
hung his bundle of ducks on the side which had to brush past the rocky
wall.  As he passed, the bunch struck a projection and threw him off his
balance.  In the effort to recover himself he dislodged a piece of rock
under his left foot, and, without even a cry, went headlong over the
precipice!

Poor Letta stood rooted to the spot, too horrified to scream.  She saw
her friend, on whom all her hopes were built, go crashing through the
foliage immediately below the precipice edge, and disappear.  It was the
first terrible shock she had ever received.  With a convulsive shudder
she ran by a dangerously steep route towards the foot of the precipice.

But Robin had not yet met his doom, although he had descended full sixty
feet.  His fall was broken by several leafy trees, through which he went
like an avalanche; and a thick solid bush receiving him at the foot,
checked his descent entirely, and slid him quietly off its boughs on to
the grass, where he lay, stunned, indeed, but otherwise uninjured.

Poor Letta of course was horrified, on reaching the spot, to find that
Robin could not speak, and was to all appearance dead.  In an agony of
terror she shrieked, and shook him and called him by name--to awaken
him, as she afterwards said; but Robin's sleep was too deep at that
moment to be dispelled by such measures.  Letta therefore sprang up and
ran as fast as she could to the cavern to tell the terrible news and
fetch assistance.

Robin, however, was not left entirely alone in his extremity.  It so
chanced that a remarkably small monkey was seated among the boughs of a
neighbouring tree, eating a morsel of fruit, when Letta's first scream
sounded through the grove.  Cocking up one ear, it arrested its little
hand on the way to its lesser mouth, and listened.  Its little black
face was corrugated with the wrinkles of care--it might be of fun, we
cannot tell.  The only large features of the creature were its eyes, and
these seemed to blaze, while the brows rose high, as if in surprise.

On hearing the second scream the small monkey laid hold of a bough with
its tail, swung itself off, and caught another with its feet, sprang
twenty feet, more or less, to the ground, which it reached on its hands,
tumbled a somersault inadvertently, and went skipping over the ground at
a great rate in the direction of the cries.

When it reached the spot, however, Letta had fled, but Robin still lay
motionless on his back.  It was evident that the small monkey looked on
the prostrate youth with alarm and suspicion, yet with an intense
curiosity that no sense of danger could restrain.  It walked slowly and
inquiringly round him several times, each time drawing closer, while its
crouched back and trailing tail betokened abject humility.  Then it
ventured to put out a small black hand and touch him, drawing it back
again as if it had got an electric shock.  Then it ventured to touch him
again, with less alarm.  After that it went close up, and gazed in his
face.

Familiarity, says the proverb, breeds contempt.  The truth of proverbs
can be verified by monkeys as well as men.  Seeing that nothing came of
its advances, that small monkey finally leaped on Robin's chest, sat
down thereon, and stared into his open mouth.  Still the youth moved
not, whereupon the monkey advanced a little and laid its paw upon his
nose!  Either the touch was more effective than Letta's shaking, or time
was bringing Robin round, for he felt his nose tickled, and gave way to
a tremendous sneeze.  It blew the monkey clean off its legs, and sent it
shrieking into a neighbouring tree.  As Robin still lay quiet, the
monkey soon recovered, and returned to its former position, where,
regardless of consequences, it again laid hold of the nose.

This time consciousness returned.  Robin opened his eyes with a stare of
dreamy astonishment.  The monkey replied with a stare of indignant
surprise.  Robin's eyebrows rose still higher.  So did those of the
monkey as it leaped back a foot, and formed its mouth into a little O of
remonstrance.  Robin's mouth expanded; he burst into an uncontrollable
fit of laughter, and the monkey was again on the eve of flight, when
voices were heard approaching, and, next instant, Letta came running
forward, followed at some distance by Sam and the others.

"Oh! my dear, sweet, exquisite darling!" exclaimed Letta.

It did much for the poor youth's recovery, the hearing himself addressed
in such endearing terms, but he experienced a relapse when the monkey,
responding to the endearments, ran with obvious joy into the child's
bosom, and submitted to a warm embrace.

"Oh, you darling!" repeated Letta; "where have you been? why did you go
away?  I thought you were dead.  Naughty thing!"

Recollecting Robin with a shock of self-reproach, she dropped the monkey
and ran to him.

"It is an old friend, I see," he said with a languid smile, as she came
up.

"Yes, yes; an old pet.  I had lost him for a long time.  But you're not
killed?  Oh!  I'm _so_ glad."

"Killed!" repeated Sam, who was down on his knees carefully examining
the patient; "I should think not.  He's not even bruised--only stunned a
little.  Where did you fall from, Robin--the tree top?"

"No; from the edge of the precipice."

"What! from the ledge sixty or seventy feet up there?  Impossible!  You
would certainly have been killed if you had fallen from that."

"So I certainly should," returned Robin, "if God had not in his mercy
grown trees and shrubs there, expressly, among other purposes, to save
me."

In this reply Robin's mind was running on previous conversations which
he had had with his friend on predestination.

The idea of shrubs and trees having been expressly grown on an island of
the Southern Seas to save an English boy, seemed doubtful to Sam.  He
did not, however, express his doubts at the time, but reserved the
subject for a future "theological discussion."

Meanwhile, Slagg, Stumps, and Johnson, having spread some palm branches
on a couple of stout poles, laid our hero thereon, and bore him in
safety to the pirates' cave, where, for several days, he lay on one of
the luxurious couches, tenderly nursed by Letta and the old woman, who,
although she still pathetically maintained that the "roberts an pyrits
wasn't all so bad as each oder," was quite willing to admit that her
present visitors were preferable, and that, upon the whole, she was
rather fond of them.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

VARIOUS SUBJECTS TREATED OF, AND A GREAT FIGHT DETAILED.

It was the habit of Robin and his friends at this time, the weather
being extremely fine and cool, to sit at the mouth of their cavern of an
evening, chatting about the events of the day, or the prospects of the
future, or the experiences of the past, while old Meerta busied herself
preparing supper over a fire kindled on the ground.

No subject was avoided on these occasions, because the friends were
harmoniously minded, in addition to which the sweet influences of
mingled star-light and fire-light, soft air, and lovely prospect of land
and sea--to say nothing of the prospect of supper--all tended to induce
a peaceful and forbearing spirit.

"Well, now," said Robin, continuing a subject which often engaged their
intellectual powers, "it seems to me simple enough."

"Simple!" exclaimed Johnson, with a half-sarcastic laugh, "w'y, now, you
an' the doctor 'ave tried to worrit that electricity into my brain for
many months, off an' on, and I do believe as I'm more muddled about it
to-night than I was at the beginnin'."

"P'r'aps it's because you hain't got no brains to work upon," suggested
Slagg.

"P'r'aps it is," humbly admitted the seaman.  "But look here, now,
doctor," he added, turning to Sam with his brow knotted up into an agony
of mental endeavour, and the forefinger of one hand thrust into the palm
of the other,--"look here.  You tells me that electricity ain't a
substance at all."

"Yes, that's so," assented Sam with a nod.

"Wery good.  Now, then, if it ain't a substance at all, it's nothin'.
An' if it's nothin', how can you go an' talk of it as somethin' an' give
it a name, an' tell me it works the telegraph, an' does all manner of
wonderful things?"

"But it does not follow that a thing must be nothing because it isn't a
substance.  Don't you see, man, that an idea is something, yet it is not
a substance.  Thought, which is so potent a factor in this world, is not
a substance, yet it cannot be called nothing.  It is a condition--it is
the result of brain-atoms in action.  Electricity is sometimes described
as an `invisible imponderable fluid,' but that is not quite correct,
because a fluid is a substance.  It is a better definition to say that
electricity is a _manifestation of energy--a result of substance in
action_."

"There, I'm muddled again!" said Johnson, with a look of hopeless
incapacity.

"Small blame to you, Johnson," murmured Slagg who had done his best to
understand, while Stumps sat gazing at the speakers with an expression
of blank complacency.

"Look here, Johnson," said Sam, "you've often seen men shaking a carpet,
haven't you?"

"In coorse I have."

"Well, have you not observed the waves of the carpet that roll along it
when shaken!"

"Yes, I have."

"What are these waves?"

"Well, sir, I should say they was the carpet," replied Johnson.

"No, the waves are not the carpet.  When the waves reach the end of the
carpet they disappear.  If the waves were the carpet, the carpet would
disappear.  The same waves in a whip, soft and undulating though they
be, result in a loud crack, as you know."

"Muddled again," said Johnson.

"Ditto," said Slagg.

"Why, I'm not muddled a bit!" suddenly exclaimed Stumps, with a
half-contemptuous laugh.

"Of coorse you're not," retorted Slagg.  "Brainless things never git
into that state.  You never heard of a turnip bein' muddled, did you?"

Stumps became vacant, and Sam went on.

"Well, you see, the waves are not substance.  They are a condition--a
result of atoms in motion.  Now, when the atoms of a substance are
disturbed by friction, or by chemical action, they get into a state of
violent commotion, and try wildly to fly from, or to, each other.  This
effort to fly about is energy.  When the atoms get into a very intense
state of commotion they have a tendency to induce explosion, unless a
way of escape is found--escape for the energy, not for the atoms.  Now,
when you cause chemical disturbance in an electric battery, the energy
thus evolved is called electricity, and we provide a conductor of escape
for it in the shape of a copper or other metal wire, which we may carry
to any distance we please, and the energy runs along it, as the wave
runs along the carpet, as long as you keep up the commotion in the
battery among the excited atoms of copper and zinc."

"Mud--no, not quite.  I have got a glimmer o' su'thin'," said Johnson.

"Ditto," said Slagg.

"Supper," said old Meerta.

"Ha! that's the battery for me," cried Stumps, jumping up.

"Not a bad one either," said Robin, as they entered the cave; "alternate
plates of beef and greens, steeped in some such acid as lemonade, cause
a wonderful commotion in the atoms of the human body."

"True, Robin, and the energy thereby evolved," said Sam, "sometimes
bursts forth in brilliant sparks of wit--to say nothing of flashes of
absurdity."

"An' thunderin' stoopidity," added Slagg.

Further converse on the subject was checked at that time by what Sam
termed the charging of the human batteries.  The evening meal went on in
silence and very pleasantly for some time, but before its close it was
interrupted in an alarming manner by the sudden entrance of Letta with
wild excitement in her eyes.

"Oh!" she cried, pointing back to the entrance of the cave, "a ship!--
pirate-ship coming!"

A bombshell could scarcely have produced greater effect.  Each
individual leaped up and darted out, flushing deep red or turning pale,
according to temperament.  They were not long in verifying the
statement.  A ledge of rocks concealed the entrance to the cavern from
the sea.  Over its edge could be seen the harbour in which they had
found the vessel whose total destruction has been described; and there,
sure enough, they beheld a similar vessel, though considerably smaller,
in the act of furling her sails and dropping anchor.  There could be no
doubt as to her character, for although too distant to admit of her crew
being distinguished by star-light, her rig and general appearance
betrayed her.

"Not a moment to be lost, Robin," said Sam Shipton hurriedly, as he led
the way back to the tavern, where old Meerta and blind Bungo, aided by
Letta, had already cleared away all evidence of the late feast, leaving
only three tin cups and three pewter plates on the table, with viands
appropriate thereto.

"Ha! you're a knowing old lady," exclaimed Sam, "you understand how to
help us, I see."

"Me tink so!" replied Meerta, with an intelligent nod.  "On'y us t'ree
here.  All de pyrits gone away.  Dem sinners on'y come here for a feed--
p'r'aps for leetil poodre.  Soon go away."

"Just so," said Sam, "meanwhile we will hide, and return after they are
gone, or, better still, if you, Letta, and Bungo will come and hide with
us, I'll engage to lay a train of powder from the barrels inside to
somewhere outside, and blow the reptiles and the whole mountain into the
sea!  There's powder enough to do it."

"You tink me one divl?" demanded the old woman indignantly.  "No, some
o' dem pyrits not so bad as each oder.  You let 'em alone; me let you
alone."

This gentle intimation that Meerta had their lives in her hand, induced
Sam to ask modestly what she would have him do.

"Go," she replied promptly, "take rifles, swords, an' poodre.  Hide till
pyrits go 'way.  If de finds you--fight.  Better fight dan be skin
alive!"

"Unquestionably," said Sam, with a mingled laugh and shudder, in which
his companions joined--as regards the shudder at least, if not the
laugh.

Acting promptly on the suggestion, Sam armed himself and his comrades
each with a good breech-loading rifle, as much ammunition as he could
conveniently carry, and an English sword.  Then, descending the mountain
on the side opposite to the harbour they disappeared in the dark and
tangled underwood of the palm-grove.  Letta went a short distance with
them.
