easily, however it treated him; but he had a warm and sympathizing heart
for the sufferings of others, and he felt that he was in a position to
befriend his old associates, and encourage them to higher aims and a
better mode of life.

"You're a good fellow, Dick," said Fosdick. "It isn't everybody that is
so charitable to the faults of others."

"I know one," said Dick, smiling.

"You mean me; but I'm afraid you are mistaken. I can't say I feel very
well disposed towards Micky Maguire."

"Maybe Micky'll reform and turn out well after all."

"It would be a wonderful change."

"Haven't both of us changed wonderfully in the last eighteen months?"

"You were always a good fellow, even when you were Ragged Dick."

"You say that because you are my friend, Fosdick."

"I say it because it's true, Dick. You were always ready to take the
side of the weak against the strong, and share your money with those who
were out of luck. I had a hard time till I fell in with you."

"Thank you," said Dick; "if I ever want a first-rate recommendation I'll
come to you. What a lot of friends I've got! Mr. Gilbert offered to get
me another place if I'd only resign my situation at Rockwell &
Cooper's."

"He's a very disinterested friend," said Fosdick, laughing. "Do you
think of accepting his offer?"

"I'm afraid I might not be suited with the place he'd get me," said
Dick. "He thinks I'm best fitted to adorn the office of a boot-black.
Maybe he'd appoint me his private boot-black; but I'm afraid I shouldn't
be able to retire on a fortune till I was two or three hundred, if I
accepted the situation."

"What shall we wear to the party, Dick?"

"We've got good suits of clothes. We can carry them to a tailor's and
have them pressed, and they will look well enough. I saw a splendid
necktie to-day at a store on Broadway. I'm going to buy it."

"You have a weakness for neckties, Dick."

"You see, Fosdick, if you have a striking necktie, people will look at
that, and they won't criticise your face."

"There may be something in that, Dick. I feel a little nervous though.
It is the first fashionable party I ever attended."

"Well," said Dick, "I haven't attended many. When I was a boot-black I
found it interfered with my business, and so I always declined all the
fashionable invitations I got."

"You'd have made a sensation," said Fosdick, "if you had appeared in the
costume you then wore."

"That's what I was afraid of. I don't want to make a sensation. I'm too
modest."

In fact both the boys, though they were flattered by Ida's invitation,
looked forward rather nervously to the evening of the party. For the
first time they were to meet and mingle on terms of equality with a
large number of young people who had been brought up very differently
from themselves. Dick could not help remembering how short a time had
elapsed since, with his little wooden box strapped to his back, he used
to call out, "Black your boots?" in the city park. Perhaps some of his
old customers might be present. Still he knew that he had improved
greatly, and that his appearance had changed for the better. It was
hardly likely that any one seeing him in Mr. Greyson's drawing-room,
would identify him as the Ragged Dick of other days. Then there was
another ground for confidence. Ida liked him, and he had a sincere
liking for the little girl for whom he had a feeling such as a brother
has for a cherished younger sister. So Dick dressed himself for the
party, feeling that he should "get through it somehow."

I need not say, of course, that his boots shone with a lustre not to be
surpassed even by the professional expert of the Fifth Avenue Hotel. It
was very evident that Dick had not forgotten the business by which he
once gained his livelihood.

When Dick had arranged his necktie to suit him, which I am bound to
confess took at least quarter of an hour, had carefully brushed his
hair, and dusted his clothes, he certainly looked remarkably well. Dick
was not vain, but he was anxious to appear to advantage on his first
appearance in society. It need not be added that Fosdick also was neatly
dressed, but he was smaller and more delicate-looking than Dick, and not
likely to attract so much attention.

As the boys were descending the stairs they met Miss Peyton.

"Really, Mr. Hunter," said that young lady, "you look quite dazzling
this evening. How many hearts do you expect to break this evening?"

"I'm not in that line of business," said Dick. "I leave all that to
you."

"You're too bad, really, Mr. Hunter," said Miss Peyton, highly pleased,
nevertheless. "I never think of such a thing."

"I suppose I must believe you," said Dick, "but why is it that Mr.
Clifton has looked so sad lately?"

"Mr. Clifton would not think of poor me," said Miss Peyton.

"If you only knew what he said about you the other day."

"Do tell me."

"I couldn't."

"If you will, I'll give you--"

"Thank you," interrupted Dick, gravely; "but I never accept kisses from
ladies over six years old."

"How can you say so, Mr. Hunter?"

"I'm sorry to disappoint you, Miss Peyton, but I really couldn't."

"As if I ever thought of such a thing!" said Miss Peyton, in affected
horror.

"I appeal to my friend Fosdick."

"Did I say so, Mr. Fosdick?"

Fosdick smiled.

"You mustn't appeal to me, Miss Peyton. You and Mr. Hunter are so
brilliant that I don't pretend to understand you."

"Then you won't tell me what Mr. Clifton said. It is too bad. I shan't
sleep to-night for thinking of it."

"Suppose you ask Mr. Clifton."

"I don't know but I will."

Miss Peyton went into the parlor, her heart fluttering with the thought
that she had made a conquest of the gentleman referred to. As Mr.
Clifton was a clerk on a small salary, continually in debt, and with no
expectations, he could not be considered a very brilliant match; but
Miss Peyton was not very particular, and she would have readily changed
her name to Clifton if the chance should present itself. As we may not
have occasion to refer to her again, it may be as well to state that Mr.
Clifton's pecuniary affairs came to a crisis some months afterwards. He
had always been in the habit of laughing at Miss Peyton; but in his
strait he recollected that she was mistress of a few thousand dollars
over which she had absolute control. Under these circumstances he
decided to sacrifice himself. He accordingly offered his heart and hand,
and was promptly accepted. Miss Peyton informed him that he was "the
object of her heart's tenderest affection, her first and only love." Mr.
Clifton expressed no doubt of this, though he was aware that Miss Peyton
had been laying her snares for a husband for nearly ten years.

The marriage took place at the boarding-house, Dick and Fosdick being
among the invited guests.

Mr. Clifton with his wife's money bought a partnership in a retail store
on Eighth Avenue, where it is to be hoped he is doing a good business.
Any one desirous of calling upon him at his place of business is
referred to the New York City Directory for his number. Whether Mr. and
Mrs. Clifton live happily I cannot pretend to say, not being included in
the list of their friends; but I am informed by my friend Dick, who
calls occasionally, that Mrs. Clifton is as fascinating now as before
her marriage, and very naturally scorns the whole sisterhood of old
maids, having narrowly escaped becoming one herself.




CHAPTER XXI.

IDA GREYSON'S PARTY.


When Dick and his friend reached Mr. Greyson's house, two carriages
stood before the door, from each of which descended young guests, who,
like themselves, had been invited to the party. One of these brought two
young girls of twelve, the other two boys of twelve and fourteen, and
their sister of ten. Entering with this party, the two boys felt less
embarrassed than if they had been alone. The door was opened by a
servant, who said, "Young ladies' dressing-room, second floor, left-hand
room. Young gentlemen's dressing-room opposite."

Following directions, the boys went upstairs and entered a spacious
chamber, where they deposited their outer garments, and had an
opportunity to arrange their hair and brush their clothes.

"Is your sister here this evening?" asked one of the boys, addressing
Dick.

"No," said Dick, soberly; "she couldn't come."

"I'm sorry for that. She promised to dance with me the first Lancers."

"Wouldn't I do as well?" asked Dick.

"I don't think you would," said the other, laughing. "But I'll tell you
what,--you shall dance with my sister."

"I will, with pleasure," said Dick, "if you'll introduce me."

"Why, I thought you knew her," said the other, in surprise.

"Perhaps I did," said Dick; "but I exchanged myself off for another boy
just before I came, and that makes a difference, you know. I shouldn't
have known you, if you hadn't spoken to me."

"Do you know me now?" asked the other boy, beginning to understand that
he had made a mistake.

"You live on Twenty-First Street,--don't you?"

"Yes," was the unexpected reply, for Dick had by a curious chance
guessed right. "You're Henry Cameron, after all."

"No," said Dick; "my name is Richard Hunter."

"And mine is Theodore Selden; but I suppose you knew that, as you knew
where I live. If you're ready, we'll go downstairs."

"Come, Fosdick," said Dick.

"We're going to have the Lancers first," said Theodore. "Ida told my
sister so. Have you a partner engaged?"

"No."

"Then I'll introduce you to my sister. Come along."

I may explain here that Dick, and Fosdick also, had several times danced
the Lancers in the parlor at the boarding-house in the evening, so that
they felt reasonably confident of getting through respectably. Still his
new friend's proposal made Dick feel a little nervous. He was not
bashful with boys, but he had very little acquaintance with girls or
young ladies, and expected to feel ill at ease with them. Still he could
not think of a good reason for excusing himself from the promised
introduction, and, after going up to Ida in company with his new friend,
and congratulating her on her birthday (he would not have known how to
act if Theodore had not set him an example), he walked across the room
to where one of the young ladies who had entered at the time he did was
seated.

"Alice," said Theodore, "this is my friend Mr. Hunter, who would like to
dance with you in the first Lancers."

Dick bowed, and Alice, producing a card, said, "I shall be most happy.
Will Mr. Hunter write his name on my card?"

Dick did so, and was thankful that he could now write a handsome hand.

"Now," said Theodore, unceremoniously, "I'll leave you two to amuse each
other, while I go off in search of a partner."

"I'm in for it," thought Dick, seating himself on the sofa beside Alice.
"I wish I knew what to say."

"Do you like the Lancers?" inquired the young lady.

"Yes, I like it," said Dick, "but I haven't danced it much. I'm afraid I
shall make some mistakes."

"I've no doubt we shall get along well," said Alice. "Where did you
learn?"

"I learned at home," said Dick.

"I thought I had not met you at Dodworth's. I attended dancing school
there last winter."

"No," said Dick; "I never took lessons."

"Don't you like Ida Greyson?" inquired Alice.

"Yes, I like her very much," said Dick, sincerely.

"She's a sweet girl. She's a very intimate friend of mine. Who is that
boy that came into the room with you?"

"His name is Henry Fosdick."

"He's going to dance with Ida. Come, let us hurry and get in the same
set."

Dick offered his arm, and, as the sets were already being formed, led
his partner to the upper end of the room, where they were just in time
to get into the same set with Ida.

Theodore, with a girl about his own age, had already taken his position
opposite Dick. Fosdick and Ida were the first couple, and opposite them
Isaac and Isabella Selden, cousins of Theodore and Alice.

They had scarcely taken their places when the music struck up. Dick felt
a little flustered, but determined to do his best. Being very quick in
learning figures, and naturally gracefully in his movements, he got
through very creditably, and without a mistake.

"I thought you expected to make mistakes," said Alice Selden, as Dick
led her back to her seat. "I think you dance very well."

"It was because I had such a good partner," said Dick.

"Thank you for the compliment," said Alice, courtesying profoundly.

"Seems to me you're very polite, Alice," said Theodore, coming up.

"Mr. Hunter was paying me a compliment," said Alice.

"I wish you'd tell me how," said Theodore to Dick.

"I wish he would," interrupted Alice. "All your compliments are of the
wrong kind."

"It isn't expected that brothers should compliment their sisters," said
Theodore.

Mrs. Greyson came into the room during the dancing, and was pleased to
see that Dick and Henry Fosdick, instead of sitting awkwardly in the
corner, were taking their part in the evening's amusement. Dick made an
engagement with Alice for another dance later in the evening, but danced
the second with Ida Greyson, with whom, by this time, he felt very well
acquainted.

[Illustration]

"I didn't know you knew Alice Selden," said Ida. "Where did you meet
her?"

"Her brother Theodore introduced me this evening. I did not know her
before."

"You haven't been here lately, Dick," said Ida, familiarly.

"No," said he. "It's because I've been very busy."

"You don't work in the evening,--do you?"

"I study in the evening."

"What do you study, Dick?"

"French, for one thing."

"Can you speak French?"

"A little. Not much."

"I'm going to try you '_Comment vous portez-vous, monsieur?_'"

"'_Tres bien, mademoiselle. Et vous?_'"

"That's right," said Ida, gravely. "I can't talk much yet myself. Who
teaches you?"

"I have a private teacher."
