before all the class and draw a copy of her portrait on the board.
Flora kept trying to make it pretty, and she said:--

"`Look at your copy, please, Flora; the nose goes to a point, and is
_inches_ larger!'  Flora was _purple_ with embarrassment, and so were we
all."

Guy Seton: "I was wondering if you would care to follow with us on
Monday, Miss Saxon?  We'd take good care of you.  My cousin is a very
careful rider, and you need not be at all nervous of being led into
awkward places.  We could turn back as soon as you were tired."

Dreda's gasp of dismay sounded clearly through the room, but Guy Seton
was apparently deaf to the sound.  Rowena had raised her head from her
embroidery, revealing a face of almost startling beauty--cheeks as pink
as a wild rose, eyes deeply, darkly blue, lips curving into the sweetest
and shyest of smiles.

"Thank you so much.  I should love to go.  I should not be at all
afraid."

"That's settled, then!" cried Mr Seton, and breathed a sigh of relief.
The air of restraint which he had worn since entering the room gave
place to his usual genial, happy manner.  He turned to Dreda, questioned
her about her work and games, joked and teased, recalled his own
experiences, was everything that was kind and friendly, but never a word
did he say about the promised "mount"--not a hint that she also might
like to attend the meet!  Verily it was a world of grief and
disappointment.

Gurth opined that it was a "beastly fag" having no horses, but saw no
reason why the younger members of the party should not follow on
bicycles.  Dreda protested haughtily that if she could not go properly
she would not go at all; but when the day of the meet arrived and she
saw the little party complacently preparing to start, pride gave way
before the thought of a long, dull day alone; she rushed to get ready,
and pedalled down the drive looking her old complacent self.

Rowena led the cavalcade on Mr Seton's brown hunter, with her fair
locks coiled tightly at the back and her hat pressed down on her
forehead.  She was not quite so pretty, perhaps, as in ordinary attire,
but she looked delightfully trim and business-like, and her young
brothers and sisters were proud of her and made favourable comparisons
between her and the other lady riders assembled in the square.  It was a
picturesque sight to see the motley collection of vehicles drawn up by
the kerbstones, the riders pacing to and fro, greeting fresh arrivals,
who kept trotting in from every direction, the pink coats of the men
making welcome touches of colour, and finally the appearance of the
hounds themselves, preceded by the huntsmen in their velvet caps and
smart white breeches.

A long table was laid out in front of the village inn, on which were set
refreshments for those who had driven from a distance.  The Saxon
quartette strolled up and down, wheeling their bicycles as they went,
exchanging greetings with acquaintances, and quizzing the peculiarities
of strangers, after the merciless fashion of youth.  It was just as they
reached the farthest corner of the square, and were about to turn back,
that Dreda's glance came into contact with a pair of eyes fixed upon her
with a coldly antagonistic gaze with which she was painfully familiar.

Norah!  By all that was inexplicable, Norah West herself, standing
calmly in the midst of Newstead Market Square, more than a hundred miles
distant from her home, to which she had travelled a short week before!

Dreda gazed back in stupefied amazement, and even as she looked a second
figure detached itself from the crowd and advanced towards her.

"Dreda!  I didn't expect to meet you here.  I was going to write!"

"Susan!  What is Norah doing with you?  Don't tell me you have asked her
to _stay_!"

"I didn't--but she _is_ here, all the same.  Her brother came home ill
from school, and the others had all to be sent off at once in case it
was something infectious.  She telegraphed to know if she might come to
us."

"Like her cheek!"

"Oh, Dreda, it was horrid for her, too.  Just think if you missed your
holidays at home!  And she had often invited me there."

"Oh, of course, she adores you, so you enjoy having her company.  Don't
let me interfere!  It's delightful that you are so well entertained.  I
congratulate you, I'm sure."

Susan's lips quivered.  Her face was pinched by the chill wind, which
gave increased pathos to her look.

"Dreda, I always tell you the truth; it's horrid of me--but I'm _not_
glad!  I didn't want her one bit.  I thought you and I would be often
together, and now that she is here that can't be, I'm afraid.  But--poor
Norah!  None of the girls like her very much; there were so few places
she could go to, and just because she isn't--isn't _quite_ what one
would wish, there is all the more reason why one should be nice to her.
You remember what you said yourself."

"What did I say?"

"It wasn't about Norah exactly, but one day we were talking about people
we didn't like, and you said the best way was to be perfectly sweet
oneself, and to behave always as if we loved them, and expected only
good things from them, and so elevate them in spite of themselves.  I
thought it was such a beautiful idea.  I've never forgotten it, and now
I'm trying to put _it_ into practice."

"Oh-h!" exclaimed Dreda blankly.  She herself had forgotten her fine
sentiments almost as soon as they were uttered, and was not pleased to
be reminded of them at the moment.  "Oh-h!  Well, if you want to
experiment, you must; but I do think it's a little inconsiderate to
choose Norah as your subject, and in the Christmas holidays, too!  Where
do I come in, please?  Really, Susan, you are too appallingly
inconsiderate!"

Susan smiled her sweet, illuminating little smile.

"I know I am; dear; but be patient with me, please, because I'm
disappointed, too, and you'd have done the same yourself if you'd been
in my place.  You may rage and storm, but you _never_ refuse to do a
good turn!  I'll keep Norah out of your way!"

For this morning at least the promise could not be kept; for, once
having joined forces, it was difficult to separate again, and throughout
the exciting chase which followed Norah made herself so agreeable that
Harold and Gurth pronounced her "a ripping girl, worth a dozen of that
mumpy little Susan Webster."

"Now they'll want her asked over on every occasion.  We shall be
_saturated_ with Norah!  Miserable wretch that I am!  Misfortunes dog my
footsteps!" sighed Dreda to herself.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

The first three hours of the hunt passed somewhat slowly as the hounds
sought in vain for a scent, or "found," only to be rewarded by a short,
illusive chase.  The waits were so frequent that the riders had little
chance of growing fatigued, and the Saxon contingent, being refreshed
with pocketed stores of biscuits and chocolate, boldly announced its
intention of following to the bitter end.

At last the longed-for baying of excitement sounded from within a
spinney which was being drawn, while the field waited in scattered
groups to right and left.  The next moment the long-looked-for fox
dashed swiftly across the meadow, making for the nearest woodland, and,
presto! all was excitement and bustle.  Led by the huntsmen and hounds,
the horsemen went streaming across country in a long, irregular line,
leaping lightly across intervening barriers, while the less fortunate
riders on wheels were obliged to follow the _detours_ of the road.

Dreda felt an almost unbearable impatience as she watched Rowena's
graceful figure swaying lightly in her saddle beside Guy Seton in his
picturesque pink coat.  Hateful to come to a meet if you couldn't come
properly!  Hateful of Guy Seton to have forgotten his promise!  Hateful
to follow a mile behind and be out of all the fun.  She set her teeth,
and decided that she would not condescend to follow meekly in the wake
of her companions, but, by taking a short cut in the shape of a ploughed
road which led across three meadows, would cut off a corner a good half-
mile in length.  The path was rough, exceedingly rough--but, granted
that it was a trifle dangerous, what else could you expect at a hunt?
No sooner thought than done.  Dreda deliberately slackened pace until
Hereward and Gurth had passed on ahead, then turned in at the opened
gate, and after a few minutes' painful wobbling to and fro found a deep
rut along which her wheels could make a fairly easy progress.  The sound
of agitated puffings and pantings from behind made her aware that
another rider had been rash enough to follow her lead; but she dared not
turn her head to see who it might be.  The road grew worse instead of
better, and the different ruts seemed to merge together in the most
annoying fashion.  The bicycle bumped and strained, and only by the most
careful steering could be kept upright at all.  She was a good and
fearless rider, but, to judge from the gasps and groans which sounded
from behind, her follower was not equally skilful, and Dreda began to
realise a fresh danger in her nearness.  She determined to cross to the
far side of the road, chose what seemed to be the smoothest passage, and
swerved violently to the right.  What exactly happened it would be
difficult to say, as it is always difficult to account for any accident
after the event.  It was impossible to decide whether the second rider
was too close on Dreda's heels, and so volleyed into her at the first
sideways movement or whether Dreda's front wheel struck against a rut,
and in so doing blocked the way.  The only thing that was certain was
that the two machines came violently into contact, and that their
respective riders were thrown headlong to the ground.

A moment of stunned surprise, and then Dreda sat up slowly; very red,
very angry, conscious of a sore elbow, a dusty skirt, and a hat screwed
rakishly to one side.  She was convinced that she had not been to blame,
and that her downfall was absolutely and entirely the fault of that
stupid other person who had followed too quickly behind; but on the
point of declaiming reproaches, she was suddenly silenced by two
startling discoveries: first, that the other person was none other than
Norah West, and secondly, that she was lying very still, with her head
falling limply to one side.

Dreda felt a sudden chilling of the blood.  Her heart pounded against
her side, and an inner voice cried in her ear: "Norah is dead!  You were
saying horrid things about her an hour ago, and now she is dead.  You
led the way along this dangerous path, and she followed and got killed,
and it is _your_ fault!  Norah is dead, and it is you who have killed
her!"

She crawled forward on hands and knees, and peered fearfully at the
still face.  The spectacles had fallen off Norah's nose.  The freckles
looked browner than ever against the pallor of the skin.  Her face
looked pinched and wan, but she was not dead: the breath came faintly
from between the parted lips, the cheeks were warm to the touch.  Dreda
gave a great sigh of relief, and seating herself in the middle of the
road, lifted Norah's head with her strong young arms until it lay
pillowed on her knee.  She searched for her handkerchief, wiped the dust
from the unconscious face, and stroked back the heavy hair, crooning
over her the while in tones of fondest affection.

"Norah!  Norah dear!  Norah, wake up!  I'm here.  Dreda's with you,
dear!"

Hitherto Dreda had felt no affection for Norah West; there had been
little sympathy between them, and the rivalry for Susan's favour had
been a constant cause of friction; but at this moment it seemed the most
important thing in life that Norah should open her eyes and speak once
more.

In the silent tension of those waiting moments Dreda had a flash of rare
insight into the feelings of another.  Poor old Norah!  She had been
snappy at times, but what wonder!  It must have been hateful to have a
new girl come to school and become the chosen chum of the girl you
wanted for yourself; to see her take the lead, while you remained in
your insignificant corner.  Norah was neither pretty, clever, nor
amusing; she was not popular in the school; but, indeed, she had never
striven after popularity.  The one thing she had desired above all
others was Susan's friendship, and that she had failed to gain.  Dreda
had been accustomed to jeer at the limitations of others; but now, for
the first time in her life, she felt a pang of whole-hearted sympathy
towards the girl who was so much less fortunate than herself.  "It's no
credit to me that I'm pretty, but I should have hated to be plain.  It
would have warped my disposition to look in the glass every day and see
nothing but freckles and glittering gold specs.  Perhaps it warped
Norah's.  I ought to have been sorry, instead of proud and superior.
And I'm not clever, either--I thought I was--and it was dreadful finding
out.  I expect she hated it, too.  Norah!  Oh, Norah, I have behaved
like a blind, self-satisfied bat.  If you go and die now I shall be
miserable all my life--bowed down with remorse!  Oh, Norah, do, _do_
open your eyes!"

But Norah lay quiet and unresponsive.  Where and how had she been
injured?  There was no sign of blood, no cut or bruise on the still
white face.  Dreda gently moved each arm, but still without awakening
any sign of consciousness.  Then, leaning forward, she tried to
straighten out the twisted legs.  Instantly there came a flinch and a
groan, the heavy lids rolled upward, and two startled eyes searched her
face.

"What is it?  Where am I?  What has happened?  Oh--the pain! the pain!"

"You are quite safe, dear.  You fell from your bicycle.  I am afraid you
have hurt your leg; but I'm here.  I'll take care of you.  You know me,
don't you?  You know Dreda Saxon?"

Norah gave a moan of acquiescence.  The consciousness of Dreda's near
neighbourhood did not appear to be especially soothing, for she turned
her head restlessly from side to side, and tried to lift herself on her
elbow.  The effort failed, and she was obliged to lie back in the same
position, pillowed against Dreda's knee, shivering with mingled cold and
pain.

"My leg!  I can't move it.  Don't move!  Don't shake me!  The least
movement is torture.  Oh! how shall I ever get home?"

The same thought was beginning to agitate Dreda's mind.  Far off, over
the distant fences, the heads of a few riders could be seen bobbing away
out of sight, as the field swept across the sloping meadows.  As well
call to the trees themselves as seek to attract their attention!  The
cross road was too rough and muddy to be much used in winter; it was
quite possible that not a soul might pass by for the rest of the day.
Dreda shivered at the thought of the long hours of the afternoon during
which Norah might be obliged to lie--cold, cramped, suffering, waiting
for the help which never came; of the horror of darkness falling over
the land.

"I must go for help.  There are some farmhouses about half a mile away.
I could get men to carry you back.  Could you let me lift you--very,
very gently--and lay you down on the bank?"

But Norah was terrified to face the slightest movement.  So long as she
lay perfectly still, hardly daring to breathe, the pain was bearable;
but the moment that she attempted to stir such a darting torture seized
her in its grip that she was ready to face any waiting, any darkness,
rather than allow herself to be moved.  She gripped Dreda's hand and the
tears welled up in her eyes.

"No, no!  You mustn't!  You mustn't!  I should go mad.  Let me lie
still.  Some one will come.  If they don't, let me just die quietly
here.  Don't move!  _Don't_ shake me!  I can't bear it.  I shall die
straight off."

There seemed nothing to be done but to soothe and sympathise, sitting as
still as possible, stroking Norah's hair, and striving to shield her
from the biting wind.  The short-sighted eyes looked quite different
bereft of their glittering glasses.  The aggressive expression had given
place to one of pitiful appeal.  Norah had never before experienced
severe physical pain; it seemed to her like some savage monster lying in
wait to grip her with its claws.  She lay with her eyes strained on
Dreda's face, feeling herself in Dreda's power, terrified lest Dreda
should fail her in her need.

"Dreda, am I heavy?  Does it tire you to hold me?  I've read that people
get cramped sitting in one position--that it hurts like a real pain.
Oh, Dreda, but it can't be like my pain!  Something terrible has
happened to my leg.  It is broken--or fractured.  You can't imagine how
it feels.  The least movement seems to stab through my whole body.  Even
if you _do_ get cramped, Dreda, will you promise me to sit still--not to
move or shake me until some one comes?"

Dreda hesitated miserably.

"I'll try, Norah.  I _will_ try!  I can't bear to say no when you ask
me, but I feel as if it were wrong to promise.  It _can't_ be good for
you to _lie_ here in the cold and the damp.  And you ought to see a
doctor at once.  You will have to be moved some time, and it is bound to
hurt.  Couldn't you make up your mind and be very, very brave, and let
me put you down and run for help _now_?  Indeed, indeed it would be
best!"

But poor Norah did not feel at all brave.  She shuddered and cried, and
clutched Dreda tight with her trembling hands, so that it seemed
impossible to deny her request.

The time seemed terribly slow, the wind grew colder and colder, and a
thin grey mist began to spread over the meadows.  Dreda turned up the
collar of her coat, but even that slight movement brought a groan of
pain from Norah's lips and a piteous plea to keep still.  She set her
teeth hard in the effort to refrain from trembling.  Her feet were
alternately numb and tingling with "pins and needles," but still no sign
of a living creature could be seen.  After an hour had passed by Dreda
was almost more miserable than Norah, who had passed into a dull stupor
from which she was aroused only by occasional darting pains.  She lay
with closed eyes, refusing to speak, but clutching with both hands at
Dreda's dress as if even in her semi-unconsciousness the terror of
movement still remained, and the cold mist crept nearer and nearer,
shutting out the landscape like a heavy screen.  Dreda looked at the
little watch strapped round her wrist, and saw that the hands pointed to
three o'clock.  In these short winter days it was often necessary to
ring for lamps before four o'clock--only another hour of daylight, and
then!  What would happen if no help came within the next hour?  Would
they have to spend the night together--Norah and she?  Out in that
lonely path?  Would they be found lying cold and stark when at last the
searchers came with the morning light?

Dreda was beginning to feel a little dazed herself.  Even before the
accident had happened she had been feeling somewhat tired and chilled,
and the mental and physical sufferings of the past two hours had been
severe.  Perhaps she had been weak in submitting to Norah's entreaties;
perhaps it would have been truer kindness to have inflicted the
momentary torture, so as to have gone in search of aid; but be that as
