dread the force of the big fellow's heavy shoe, given with the full
swing of his leg.

Blackall heeded him not, and would have executed his barbarous purpose,
had he not that instant felt a heavy load fall down on his back, and a
pair of arms encircling his neck.  He had once before been treated much
in the same manner, but who or what his present assailant was he could
not tell.  The nails were long, and the hands not a little grimy, while
the knees of his assailant kept pressing his ribs in a most unpleasant
manner.  Blackall's look of horror showed that he fully believed that he
had been seized by a big baboon, or some monster who might strangle him.

"Now at him again, Tom, and don't let him go till he has promised never
to attack you more," said a voice, which Blackall recognised as that of
Gregson.

However, Tom was this time too much hurt to get up, and he lay moaning
on the grass, anxiously wishing that some one would come to his rescue.
Gregson had, it appears, been up in a tree hunting for young squirrels
and various insects.  He had remained a spectator of the fight for some
time, thinking that he could not do much good by his interference.
When, however, he saw how hard it was going with Tom, he resolved to go
to his help.  Descending a tree, he climbed along one of the lower
branches, from the end of which he had easily dropped down on the
bully's back.  There he clung, like the old man of the sea who clung to
the back of Sinbad the sailor.  But, as I have said, Blackall was a very
powerful fellow, and after he had got over his terror at this sudden
assault, he used every means to get rid of his assailant.  He could not
shake him off; and Gregson did not flinch from all the pinches and blows
behind his back which he received.  At last, Blackall bethought him of
backing against a tree.  Unfortunately for the young naturalist, one
with some stout branches grew near, and Blackall backed up to it, till
he bumped it with such force that he very nearly broke both his back and
his head, and he was very soon fain to let go.  No sooner was he on the
ground than the bully vented all his fury on him, and knocking him over
with a blow of his ox-like fist, kicked and cuffed him till he was even
in a worse condition than Bouldon.

"I'll teach you to play your pranks on me, you young scoundrel," he
exclaimed.  "However, you could not have chosen a better place, for
there is no one likely to come here to interfere with us, and I intend
to pay you both off in a way you will not fancy, let me tell you that.
My fists are rather heavy, so I do not intend to use them, lest I should
kill you outright, but I have a colt about me, of which you shall now
have a taste."  Saying this, the bully pulled out of his pocket a piece
of hard rope, covered from one end to the other with hard knots.
Seizing poor Gregson, who lay on the grass even more hurt than Bouldon,
Blackall dragged him along, and placed him near his friend, and then
flourishing his formidable colt, was about to make it descend first on
the back of one and then on that of the other of his victims, when a
loud shout arrested his arm, and, looking up, he saw from both ends of
the glade a strong body of boys, in military order, advancing towards
him.

"Hold your hand, you big coward.  If you dare strike either of those
fellows, well not leave a particle of skin on the flesh of your back,
let me tell you," shouted a voice in a loud tone.

One of the parties was led by Buttar, the other by Bracebridge.  The
latter had spoken.  Buttar uttered a similar caution; but Blackall,
seeing that only younger boys composed the approaching bands, and
fancying that they would not venture to interfere with him, resolved for
very pride not to desist from his purpose, and down came his weapon on
the backs of the two prostrate victims of his tyranny.  It was
equivalent to a declaration of war to the knife.

"On, on, on," shouted Bracebridge and Buttar.

Their followers required no second appeal.

"Remember what I told you," shouted Ernest--"Each man to his duty."

The bully turned round and gazed, first on one side and then on the
other, at the approaching bands.  He was observed to turn pale, even
though he flourished his colt above his head, and uttered loud threats
of vengeance against any who might dare to approach him.  A scornful
laugh was the only answer he received, as the two bands advancing in
double quick time completely surrounded him, and then with a shout threw
themselves upon him.  Some seized his neck, others his arms, and others
his legs, in spite of his kicks and blows, while others passing a rope
round his body he was speedily tripped up and hauled down to the ground.
He swore, and shouted, and threatened more loudly than ever.

"Gag him, gag him," suggested Buttar.  "Don't let the fellow talk
blasphemy."

"I'll half murder you some day for this, you Buttar, you," cried the
bully, glaring fiercely at him.

"Pooh, pooh," was all Buttar deigned to reply.  "Here, quick, a
handkerchief, and that piece of wood."

The materials for the gag were handed to Buttar, and though the bully
made several attempts to bite his fingers, he succeeded in most
effectually fixing a gag in his mouth.  Still Blackall struggled
furiously; but though not one of his assailants was half his size, they
succeeded in dragging him to a tree, to the trunk of which they secured
him with the rope they had passed round his waist.  Then they lashed his
hands as if he was clasping the tree, with his face to the trunk, while
his ankles were placed in a still more uncomfortable position.

"He cannot abuse us, or kick, or strike, but he can see," suggested some
one.

The hint was forthwith taken, and he was quickly blindfolded.

"We will draw lots to settle who is to colt him," said Ernest.  "You
understand, my friends, that it will be better he should not know who
have been his executioners."

Lots were forthwith drawn with some ceremony.  Four boys were chosen,
and they, nothing very loth, began to flourish the very weapon with
which he had just been striking their friends.

When Ernest and his party came up they found Bouldon and Gregson on the
ground, both of them so much hurt as to be scarcely able to rise.
Ernest with two or three other boys, having seen Blackall safely
secured, went to attend to them.  They got water from the pond and
bathed their temples, and undid their shirt collars, and in a little
time set them up on their legs.  As may be supposed, the first use they
made of their restored strength was to go and watch the proceedings
taking place with regard to Blackall.  Their feelings revolted at the
thought of thrashing one who had been so lately ill-treating them.  They
felt that had they done so, they would naturally be accused of being
influenced by vindictive feelings; whereas they wished that he should
understand that; the thrashing he was receiving was a lawful punishment
for the cruelty he had so long inflicted on others.  The boys who had
been selected as executioners set to work very much in the fashion of
young boatswain's mates on board of a man-of-war.  After one had given
five or six strokes another came on, till at last some one declared that
he had fainted.  So he had, but it was chiefly through rage and
indignation.  However, they took the gag out of his mouth, but the first
use he made of his restored power of speech was to abuse and threaten
them so dreadfully, that they came behind him and again clapped the gag
into his mouth.  In vain he struggled.  He was too securely bound to get
free.  Ernest had learned, as every boy should, how to knot and splice
properly, and was unlikely to allow any slip knots to be made.  When
Blackall showed that he was completely recovered, the boys who had been
appointed to flog him, once more made ready to go on with the operation,
but Ernest stopped them.  His feelings revolted at thus punishing a
school-fellow, however richly he might have deserved punishment, who had
been rendered so utterly helpless.

"Stay," he cried out.  "He has had enough to show him what we have the
power of doing, and the pain he has suffered may teach him in future not
to inflict pain on others.  Take the gag out of his mouth, and let us
hear if he will promise to behave properly in future towards all the
younger boys of the school, to beg pardon of Bouldon for his
unwarrantable attack on him, and especially that he will promise to
abandon his absurd attempt to fag any of the boys of the school.  You
hear what has been said, Blackall.  Will you consent to these terms?
Take the gag out of his mouth and let him answer."

Blackall had heard every word that was said, and had he been wise, he
would have yielded to the force of circumstances; but instead of that,
he began as before to abuse and threaten Ernest and Buttar, and all the
boys whose voices he recognised, and to declare that he had a perfect
right to fag one and all of them if he chose.

"The gag! the gag!  Treason! treason!" was the reply, accompanied by
loud laughter from all the party.

The gag was quickly produced; but as Blackall found it being adjusted,
his courage, or rather his obstinacy, gave way.

"What is it, do you say, that you want of me, you fellow?" he asked, in
a very much humbled tone.

Ernest repeated the terms he had before proposed.

"As to that, I do not mean to say that I am not ready to agree to your
terms," he replied; "only just mark me, you fellows.  I don't think that
I am a greater bully than others, and if you fancy that I am going to
agree not to lick a fellow who is impudent, you are mistaken.  I'm not
going to promise any such thing.  Fagging is not in vogue, so I'll give
that up for the present, but I don't know what other big fellows will
do."

This speech of the once formidable bully was received with loud shouts
by most of the younger boys, but Ernest, who knew something more than
they did of human nature, did not put much confidence in what had been
said, still he saw that it would be politic to release him while he
remained in that humbled humour.

"Very well, Blackall," said Ernest; "we are all glad to hear what you
say, and we intend to rely on your promise; but remember that we are all
united to resist aggression, and that the moment you break your promise,
we shall take steps to punish you.  Now release him."

In obedience to the orders of their leader, some of the boys cast off
the lashings which secured their prisoner to the tree, but they wisely
took care to keep him blindfolded to the last, that he might be unable
to injure them.  His hands and legs being set free, they all hurried
back to their ranks, where they stood in two compact bodies as before,
bidding defiance to any attack he might venture to make on them.

"You may take your handkerchief off your eyes and go free," said Ernest.

Hearing this, the humbled bully began pulling away at the handkerchief
round his eyes, much to the amusement of the lookers-on, for he had
considerable difficulty in untying the knot, and getting it off his
head.  His first movement showed clearly that he was much inclined to
break the articles of peace, but when he saw the formidable array of
boys drawn up on either side of him, with Bracebridge at the head of one
party, and Buttar at that of the other, discretion prevailed, and with a
sulky, downcast look, he turned round and walked away across the fields
in an opposite direction to that which he saw the hostile armies were
taking.  Ernest suppressed the commencement of a cheer in which his
supporters very naturally showed an inclination to indulge.

"Let him go, and treat him with the silent contempt he deserves," he
observed.  "He has got a lesson which he will not easily forget; but at
the same time we shall all do well not to trust him.  He will not let
the matter pass without trying to revenge himself on some of us."

Blackall heard the first part of Ernest's remarks.  He turned round as
if to give vent to his feelings; but not finding words to express
himself, he stamped with his foot, and continued on in the direction he
was going.

"I wonder whether he will go and complain to the Doctor of the thrashing
we have given him," exclaimed Bouldon, as they were marching homeward.
"I certainly did not expect to see him take it so tamely.  I expected
that he would have fought and struggled to the last, like the rover's
crew the song talks about.  Instead of that, he struck his colours in a
wonderfully short space of time."

"Oh, those bullies are always white-livered rogues," observed Buttar,
"so are nearly all the tyrants one reads about in history.  Conscience
makes cowards of them all.  Depend on it that he will hold his tongue,
and neither tell the Doctor nor any of his own special chums."

It was to be seen whether Buttar was right.  The boys who had not united
with Ernest were surprised to see so many of his friends marching about
in order the whole afternoon; and even when tea was over, never less
than five or six of them were together.  They looked about for Blackall,
but he did not make his appearance.  The elder boys were excused from
coming in to tea on half-holidays, so there was nothing remarkable in
this, and none of his friends seemed to notice his absence.  Of one
thing all Ernest's companions felt certain, that no attempt to fag them
would succeed while he remained at school.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

BLACKALL'S REVENGE AND ITS RESULTS.

Everybody remarked the sullen angry expression which Blackall's
countenance bore after the event I have just described.  When any of his
associates talked to him about fagging, he frowned, and, putting out his
lips, declared that there was no use attempting to coerce the young
scamps, for that the advantage to be gained was not worth the trouble it
would cost.  This was very true, but at the same time it was not an
opinion anybody would have expected from him.  Whenever he met
Bracebridge, he always looked at him with an expression of intense
dislike, which he was at no pains to conceal.

The Christmas holidays were now approaching, and a long course of bad
weather kept the boys in more than usual.  They consequently amused
themselves with their indoor exercises.  Their broadswords and foils
were constantly in their hands during their play-hours.

One day Ernest and Buttar were fencing together.  They had been at first
equally matched, but Ernest was never content unless he was perfect in
every exercise he took up, and so he had practised and practised, and
thought the matter over, till he could beat his friend thoroughly.
Buttar took his defeats very good-naturedly.

"I cannot manage as you do, old fellow," he used to observe.  "You
always contrive to send my foil flying out of my hand when I fancy that
I am going to play you some wonderful trick at which I have been
practising away for the whole of the last week."

A match was just over when Blackall entered the fencing-room.  His eye
fell on Ernest.  Just then something called Buttar out of the room, and
Ernest was left without an antagonist.

"Come, young gentleman, you are both good fencers.  Try a pass of arms
together," said Mr Strutt, the fencing-master.  "Oh, you must not draw
back; I shall fancy you are afraid of each other if you do.  Come, take
your foils and begin."

Blackall hesitated.  He had not exchanged a word with Ernest since the
day he had received his flogging, and he hoped never to have to speak to
him again.

"Perhaps Blackall would rather not fence with me, sir," observed Ernest
to the fencing-master.

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense.  Take up your foil and begin," was the answer
he received.

"I am ready to fence with you.  Come here in this corner of the room,
out of the way," said Blackall suddenly.

Ernest followed him.  He remarked that there was a peculiarly evil look
in his eye.  He did not, however, unfortunately, observe what he was
about with his foil in the corner.

"Now, young gentlemen, attention," cried Mr Strutt to some of his
pupils, whose exercise he was superintending, and the words Quarte,
Tierce, Seconde, Demi-circle, Contre de Quarte, Contre de Tierce, and so
on, were heard resounding through the room.

"Come, let us begin, and have no child's play," exclaimed Blackall with
vehemence, throwing himself into the attitude to engage.  He made
several rapid passes, which Ernest parried dexterously.  As he did so,
he observed that his adversary's foil had no button on it.  Still he
thought that it was the result of accident; and as he had very little
fear of Blackall's hitting him, he did not deign at first to take notice
of it.  Something, however, he observed in the expression of his
opponent's eye made him doubt the wisdom of this delicacy.

"Blackall," he cried out, parrying a desperate thrust at his breast,
your foil has no button.  "Were you to hit me, you might injure me very
much."

"What care I?" answered Blackall.  "I'll pay my debts, depend on that.
Take that--and that--and that!"  As he spoke he lunged rapidly at
Ernest, who as rapidly turned aside the point of his weapon.  Still
Blackall was no bad fencer, and Ernest had the greatest difficulty in
