
"I mean that if the torngak you were going to get for me is no better
than your own, he is a fool, and I would rather not have him."

This unexpected rebellion of the worm which he had so often twisted
round his finger was too much for Ujarak in his then irascible
condition.  He flew into a violent rage, grasped the handle of his
knife, and glared fiercely at his pupil.

Ippegoo returned the look with a quiet smile.

This was perplexing.  There are few things more trying to passionate men
than uncertainty as to how their bursts of anger will be received.  As a
rule such men are merely actors.  No doubt their rage may be genuine,
but the manner in which they will display their anger depends very much
on who are their witnesses, and what their opponents.  Rage which fumes
at some trifling insult, and tears off the coat, resolved on fighting,
when a timid wife seeks to soothe, is likely to assume a very different
appearance and follow some other course of action when a prize-fighter
pulls the nose, and invites it to "do its worst."

If Ippegoo had winced, or stood on the defensive, or stepped back, or
shown the slightest sign of fear, it is probable that the strong and
lawless man would have stabbed him to the heart in the first impulse of
his anger, for the poor youth was well acquainted with all his secrets
and most of his bad intentions.  But the motionless figure and the
smiling face not only surprised--it alarmed--Ujarak.  It seemed so
unnatural.  What powers of sudden onslaught might not lie hidden within
that calm exterior? what dynamitic capacities of swift explosion might
not underlie that fearless expression?

"Ippegoo," he said, stifling his anger with a painful effort, "are you
going to turn against your best friend?"

"My mother is my best friend," answered the youth stoutly.

"You are right; I made a mistake."

"Why does your torngak let you make so many mistakes?"

Again a rush of anger prompted the wizard to sacrifice his quondam
pupil, and once more the youth's imperturbable coolness overawed him.
Bad as he was, Ujarak could not kill a smiling victim.

"Ippegoo," said the wizard, suddenly changing his tone, and becoming
intensely earnest, "I see what is the matter.  Angut and the Kablunet
have bewitched you.  But now, I tell my torngak to enter into your
heart, and unbewitch you.  Now, do you not feel that he has done it?"

The youth, still smiling, shook his head.

"I knew it," continued the wizard, purposely misunderstanding the sign.
"You are all right again.  Once more I lay my commands on you.  Listen.
I want you to go at once and tell Nunaga that _Angut_ wants to see her
alone."

"Who?" asked Ippegoo in surprise.

"Angut."

"What! your rival?"

"Yes; my rival.  My torngak tells me that Angut wants to meet her--
alone, mind--out on the floes at Puffin Island this afternoon."

"Are--are you sure your torngak has made no mistake?" asked the youth,
with something of his old hesitancy.

"Quite sure," replied Ujarak sternly.  "Now, will you give her my
message?"

"Angut's message, you mean."

"Yes, yes; I mean Angut's message," said the wizard impatiently.
"You'll be _sure_ to do what I tell you, won't you?"

"Quite sure," replied Ippegoo, the smile again overspreading his visage
as he turned and quitted the spot.

Half an hour later he entered Okiok's hut in quest of Nunaga, but only
her mother was there.  She told him that the girl had gone off with a
sledge along the coast to Moss Bay to fetch a load of moss to stuff
between the logs of the hut where they required repairing, and that she
had taken Kabelaw as well as Tumbler and Pussi with her.

"That's good," said Ippegoo, "then she can't and won't go to Puffin
Island.  I said I would tell her that Angut wants to meet her there
alone."

"Who told you to tell her that?" asked Nuna.

"A fool," answered Ippegoo, promptly.

"He must indeed have been a fool," returned Nuna, "for Angut has just
been helping Nunaga to harness the dogs, and he is now with my husband
in his own hut."

This information caused the messenger to shut his eyes, open his mouth,
and laugh silently, with evident enjoyment.

"I intended to deliver my message," he said, on recovering composure,
"for I promised to do so; and I also meant to tell Nunaga that the
message was a _big lie_."

At this amazing depth of slyness on his part, Ippegoo fell into another
hearty though inaudible laugh, after which he went off to communicate
his news to Okiok and Angut, but these worthies having gone out to visit
some snares and traps, no one knew whither, he was obliged to seek
counsel of Simek.

On hearing of the plot that seemed to be hatching, that jovial hunter at
once ordered his sledge to be got ready, and started off, with two
stalwart sons and his nephew Arbalik, for Moss Bay, to warn Nunaga of
her enemy's intentions, and to fetch her home.  But alas! for even the
best laid of human plans.

It so happened that one of the Eskimo youths, who was rather inclined to
tease Nunaga, had set a snow-trap for Arctic foxes about two miles from
the village.  As the spot was not much out of the way, the girl resolved
to turn aside and visit the trap, take out the fox, if one chanced to be
caught, and in any case set the trap off, or put a bit of stick into it
by way of fun.  The spot chanced to be only a short distance beyond the
place where the wizard had met Ippegoo, but the sea-shore there was so
covered with hummocks of ice that Nunaga had approached without being
observed by either the wizard or the pupil.  It was not more than a few
minutes after Ippegoo had left on his errand to herself that she came
suddenly in sight of Ujarak.  He was seated, as if in contemplation, on
a rock at the base of the cliff.

Suspecting no evil, Nunaga stopped her team of dogs.  It was her
father's best team, consisting of the swiftest and most enduring animals
in the village.  The wizard observed this as he rose up and approached,
rejoicing to think that Fortune had favoured him.  And truly Fortune--or
rather, God--was indeed favouring the wicked man at that time, though
not in the way that he imagined.

In a few moments Ujarak's plans were laid.  The opportunity was too good
to be lost.

"Where goes Nunaga to-day?" he asked quietly, on reaching the sledge.

"To Moss Bay," answered Nunaga.

"Has Nunaga forgotten the road?" asked Ujarak, with a slight look of
surprise.  "This is not the way to Moss Bay."

"It is not far out of the way," said Kabelaw, who was the more
self-assertive of the two lying sisters; "we go to visit a trap, and
have no time to waste with _you_."

As she spoke she seized the heavy Eskimo whip out of Nunaga's hand, and
brought it smartly down on the backs of the whole team, which started
off with a yelp, and also with a bound that well-nigh left Tumbler and
Pussi behind.  But she was not quick enough for Ujarak, who exclaimed
with a laugh, as he leaped on to the sledge and assumed the place of
driver--

"I too am fond of trapping, and will go with you."

He took the whip from Kabelaw, and guided the team.

A few minutes, at the speed they were going, brought them close to a
point or cape which, in the form of a frowning cliff two or three
hundred feet high, jutted out into the sea.  To round this, and place
the great cape between them and the village, was Ujarak's aim.  The ice
was comparatively smooth and unbroken close to the land.

"See!" exclaimed Nunaga, pointing towards the bushes on shore; "the trap
is there.  That is the place."

Ujarak paid no heed to her.  The die was cast.  He had taken the first
step, and must now go through with it at all hazards.  Plying the cruel
whip, so as to make the dogs run at their utmost speed, he drove on
until the other side of the cape was gained.  Then he relaxed the speed
a little, for he knew that no shriek, however loud, could penetrate the
cliffs that lay between him and the Eskimo village.

Taking up a walrus-line with a running noose on it that lay on the
sledge beside him, the wizard turned, dropped the noose suddenly over
Kabelaw, and drew it tight, so as to pin her arms to her sides.  Almost
before she could realise what had occurred, he took a quick turn of the
same line round Nunaga, drew the girls together, and fastened them to
the sledge.  They knew now full well, but too late, that Ujarak meant
mischief.  Screaming at the utmost pitch of their voices, they struggled
to free themselves, but were too well secured for that.

The wizard now glanced at the children.  For a few moments he was
perplexed.  They could be of no use on a long journey, and might be
troublesome--besides, they would have to be fed.  There was one sure and
easy method of getting rid of them.  He grasped his knife-handle.

The women observed the movement, and became instantly silent with
horror.

But the bold free air of Tumbler and the soft innocent look of Pussi
were too much for the wizard.  He abandoned the half-formed thought,
and, turning to the women, said in a low, stern voice--

"If you cry or struggle again, these shall die."

This was enough.  The poor creatures remained perfectly silent and still
after that, while the wizard guided the dogs out upon the floes on a
totally different route from that which led to Moss Bay.

Coming to a place where the ice had been cut up into many tracks by the
Eskimos' sledges during the winter work of traffic to and from the
hunting-grounds, Ujarak availed himself of the opportunity to lose, as
it were, his own track among the others, so that, in the sure event of
pursuit, the pursuers might be effectually baffled.  The only point he
had to consider after that was the necessity of diverging from the track
with such care that the point of divergence should be impossible to
find.

In this he was again favoured by circumstances.  Having driven at full
speed straight out from the land in a westerly direction, he came to a
place where the ice had been considerably broken up, so that the old
tracks ended abruptly in many places where lanes of water had opened up.
A sharp frost had set these lanes and open spaces fast again, and the
new ice was just strong enough to bear a sledge.  There was some risk in
venturing on it, but what of that?  Nothing bold can be successfully
carried out in this world without more or less of risk!  At a spot where
the confusion of tracks was very great, he turned at a sharp angle, got
upon a sheet of new ice, and went off at greater speed than ever towards
the far-south.

His aim was to travel some hundreds of miles, till he reached the
Kablunet settlements on the south-western shores of Greenland, in regard
to which, various and strange reports had reached the northern Eskimos
from time to time.  He said nothing, however, to his captives, but after
driving some twenty miles or so--which he did in a couple of hours--he
cast off their bonds, and bade them make themselves comfortable.  The
poor creatures were only too glad to avail themselves of the permission,
for, although spring had set in, and the cold was not very severe, their
constrained position had benumbed their limbs.

Tumbler and Pussi, after gazing for a considerable time at each other in
a state of blank amazement at the whole proceedings, had finally dropped
off to sleep on a pile of deerskins.  Nunaga and Kabelaw, wrapping
themselves in two of these, leaned against each other and conversed in
low whispers.

And now the wizard began in good earnest a journey, which was destined
to lead him, in more ways than one, far beyond the point at which he
originally aimed.

He plied the whip with vigour, for well did he know that it was a race
for life.  If any of the men of his tribe should overtake him, he felt
assured that death would be his portion.

The dogs, as we have said, were splendid animals.  There were ten of
them, resembling wolves both in size and appearance, each being fastened
to the sledge by a single independent line.  The vehicle itself was
Okiok's hunting-sledge, having spears, bow and arrows, lines, bladders,
etcetera, attached to it, so that, although there were no provisions on
it except one small seal, which its owner had probably thought was not
worth removing, the wizard knew that he possessed all the requisites for
procuring a supply.  The women, being also well aware of this, were
filled with anxiety, for their one hope of rescue lay in their friends
discovering their flight and engaging in instant and hot pursuit.

Never since the commencement of his career had Ujarak displayed such
anxiety to increase the distance between himself and his tribe.  Never
since that long-lashed, short-handled, heavy whip was made, had it given
forth such a rapid series of pistol-like reports, and never since they
were pups had those ten lanky wolfish dogs stretched out their long legs
and scampered over the Arctic sea as they did on that occasion.  The old
ice was still sufficiently firm and smooth to afford a good road, and
the new ice was fortunately strong enough to bear, for the pace was
tremendous.  With "the world before him where to choose," and death, as
he imagined, on the track behind, the wizard's spirit had risen to the
point of "neck or nothing."  Mile after mile was passed at highest speed
and in perfect silence, except when broken by the crack of whip and yelp
of dogs.  Occasional roughnesses in the way were crashed over.  Small
obstructions were taken in flying leaps, which rendered it necessary for
the poor women to cling to each other, to the sledge, and to the
children, to prevent their being hurled off.  Once or twice a hummock
which it seemed possible to leap turned out to be too high, and obliged
the driver to turn aside with such violence that the sledge went for a
few seconds on one runner, and all but turned over.  This at last
induced some degree of caution, for to break the vehicle at the
beginning of the journey would have been almost certainly fatal to the
enterprise.

And oh! how earnestly Nunaga longed for a spill!  In her despair, poor
thing, it did not occur to her that at such a pace an upset might break
the necks of the whole party.

Towards sunset they rounded a high cape, beyond which was a deep and
wide bay.  On this the sun shone apparently on what appeared to be open
water.  For one moment a look of alarm flitted over the wizard's face,
as he glanced quickly shoreward to see whether the ground-ice was
passable; but it was only for a moment, for immediately he perceived
that the light had dazzled and deceived him.  It was not water, but new
ice--smooth and refulgent as a mirror.  The fringe of old ice on shore
was disrupted and impassable.  There was therefore only one course open
to him.

Knitting his brows and clenching his teeth, Ujarak resolved to take it
at all hazards.  Bringing the cruel lash to bear with extreme violence,
he sent the dogs howling out upon the glassy surface.  At first they
slipped and sprawled a good deal, but soon gathered themselves well
together.  They were accustomed to such work, and the friction of the
sledge being reduced, they skimmed along with ease.

Although strong enough to bear, the ice undulated terribly as they swept
over it, and sent forth rending sounds, which cannot be conceived by
those whose experience of young ice has been derived chiefly from
lakelets and ponds.  Dogs in such circumstances are apt to become
terrified and to stop, in which case immersion is almost certain.  But
Ujarak gave his team no time to think.  With lash and voice he urged
them on until they were nearly frantic.  The undulations became greater
as they advanced, and the rending sounds continuous.  Still the wizard
plied his whip and shouted.  Indeed it was his only chance.  At the
other side of the bay the old ice still adhered to the shore.  If that
could be reached, they would be safe.  Eagerly the women strained their
eyes, and even stretched out their hands as if to grasp the shore, for
the fear of instant death had banished all other thoughts.  A few
minutes more, and Ujarak, standing up in his eagerness, flourishing the
great whip, and shouting at the pitch of his voice, drove the yelling
dogs off the crackling sheet of ice to a place of safety on the solid
floe.

It did not require the wizard's altered tone to inform the sagacious
animals that the danger was past.  Down they flopped at once to rest,
panting vehemently, and with tongues out; but they were not permitted to
rest long, Ujarak's fear of pursuit was so great.  Even while securing
on the sledge the articles that had been disarranged, he could not help
casting frequent suspicious glances in the direction from which they had
come, for guilt is ever ready to anticipate retribution even when it is
far distant.  As soon as the fastenings were arranged he prepared to
continue the flight.

"Where do you take us to?" asked Kabelaw, in a tone of humility which
was very foreign to her nature.

"You shall know that in time," was the stern reply.

Nunaga was too much frightened to speak, but little Tumbler was not.

"Bad--bad man!" he exclaimed, with a fierce look that caused the wizard
for a moment to smile grimly.

Little Pussi was so horrified at the reckless presumption of the remark,
that she hid her face in Nunaga's lap and did not venture to look up for
some time.

Getting on the sledge without another word, the wizard gave a hint to
the dogs which was so unmistakable that they sprang up and resumed their
journey at full gallop.  Slowly the sun went down, and sea and berg and
snow-clad cliff grew grey in the light of departing day.  Still the
panting team sped on over the frozen sea.  Soon it became too dark to
travel with safety.  The pace was slackened.  The run became a canter,
then a trot, and then a walk.  At last the driver stopped, jumped off
the sledge, and ordered the women to get out the seal and feed the dogs.
He also gave them permission to help themselves, but as there was no
lamp or fire, it was evident that he meant them to eat their supper raw.

Leaving them while thus engaged, he walked away out of sight.

"I won't have raw seal," said Tumbler, in that tone of petulant resolve
which tells of spoilt-childism.

"An' me won't too," said Pussi, profiting by example.

"But there's nothing else," said Nunaga, gently.

"Yes, there is.  I have got some cold seal in my boots--from this
morning's breakfast," said Kabelaw, extracting a goodly-sized morsel; "I
never go on a journey, however short, without a bit of cooked meat."

Lest the reader should be perplexed here, we may explain that some
Eskimo ladies often make the wide tops of their long sealskin boots do
duty for pockets.

The party was still engaged in discussing the delicacy referred to, and
commenting in pitiable tones on their situation, when Ujarak returned,
bade them resume their places, jumped on the sledge, and continued to
advance.  In half an hour the moon rose in a clear sky.  The stars shone
brightly, and to add to the beauty of the scene, the aurora borealis
played and shot about vividly overhead, enabling them to resume a rapid
gallop.

It was not till the night was far advanced, and his dogs were nearly
worn-out, and full sixty miles lay between him and his native village,
