not shake off, even in the hour of his humiliation, and, besides, he had
never been an adept at treading the western wilderness with the care
which the red man finds needful in order to escape from, or baffle, his
foes.

"'Tis as well marked, a'most" said Drake, pausing to survey the trail,
"as if he'd bin draggin' a toboggan behind him."

"Yet a settlement man wouldn't see much of it," remarked little Trevor;
"eh!  Buckie?"

The Indian boy nodded gravely.  He emulated his father in this respect,
and would have been ashamed to have given way to childish levity on what
he was pleased to consider the war-path, but he had enough of the
humorous in his nature to render the struggle to keep grave in Tolly's
presence a pretty severe one.  Not that Tolly aimed at being either
witty or funny, but he had a peculiarly droll expression of face, which
added much point to whatever he said.

"Ho!" exclaimed the trapper, after they had gone a little farther;
"here's a trail that even a settlement man could hardly fail to see.
There's bin fifty men or more.  D'ye see it Tolly?"

"See it?  I should think so.  D'you suppose I carry my eyes in my
pocket?"

"Come now, lad," said Drake, turning to Leaping Buck, "you want to walk
in your father's tracks, no doubt.  Read me this trail if ye can."

The boy stepped forward with an air of dignity that Drake regarded as
sublime and Tolly thought ludicrous, but the latter was too fond of his
red friend to allow his feelings to betray themselves.

"As the white trapper has truly said," he began, "fifty men or more have
passed this way.  They are most of them white men, but three or four are
Indians."

"Good!" said Drake, with an approving nod; "I thought ye'd notice that.
Well, go on."

"They were making straight for my father's camp," continued the lad,
bending a stern look on the trail, "but they turned sharp round, like
the swallow, on coming to the trail of the white man Brixton, and
followed it."

"How d'ye know that, lad?" asked the trapper.

"Because I see it" returned the boy, promptly, pointing at the same time
to a spot on the hill-side considerably above them, where the
conformation of the land at a certain spot revealed enough of the trail
of the "fifty men or more," to show the change of direction.

"Good again, lad.  A worthy son of your father.  I didn't give 'e credit
for sharpness enough to perceive that.  Can you read anything more?"

"One man was a horseman, but he left his horse behind on getting to the
rough places of the hills and walked with the rest.  He is Paul Bevan's
enemy."

"And how d'ye know all _that_?" said Drake, regarding the little fellow
with a look of pride.

"By the footprints," returned Leaping Buck.  "He wears boots and spurs."

"Just so," returned the trapper, "and we've bin told by Paul that
Stalker was the only man of his band who wouldn't fall in wi' the ways
o' the country, but sticks to the clumsy Jack-boots and spurs of old
England.  Yes, the scoundrel has followed you up, Tolly, as Paul Bevan
said he would, and, havin' come across Brixton's track, has gone after
him, from all which I now come to the conclusion that your friend Mister
Tom is a prisoner, an' stands in need of our sarvices.  What say you,
Tolly?"

"Go at 'em at once," replied the warlike Trevor, "an' set him free."

"What! us three attack fifty men?"

"Why not?" responded Tolly, "We're more than a match for 'em.  Paul
Bevan has told me oftentimes that honest men are, as a rule, ten times
more plucky than dishonest ones.  Well, you are one honest man, that's
equal to ten; an' Buckie and I are two honest boys, equal, say, to five
each, that's ten more, making twenty among three of us.  Three times
twenty's sixty, isn't it? so, surely that's more than enough to fight
fifty."

"Ah, boy," answered the trapper, with a slightly puzzled expression, "I
never could make nothin' o' 'rithmetic, though my mother put me to
school one winter with a sort o' half-mad parson that came to the head
waters o' the Yellowstone river, an' took to teachin'--dear me, how long
ago was it now?  Well, I forget, but somehow you seem to add up the
figgurs raither faster than I was made to do.  Howsever, we'll go an'
see what's to be done for Tom Brixton."

The trapper, who had been leaning on his gun, looking down at his bold
little comrades during the foregoing conversation, once more took the
lead, and, closely following the trail of the robber-band, continued the
ascent of the mountains.

The Indian village was by that time far out of sight behind them, and
the scenery in the midst of which they were travelling was marked by
more than the average grandeur and ruggedness of the surrounding region.

On their right arose frowning precipices which were fringed and crowned
with forests of pine, intermingled with poplar, birch, maple, and other
trees.  On their left a series of smaller precipices, or terraces,
descended to successive levels, like giant steps, till they reached the
bottom of the valley up which our adventurers were moving, where a
brawling river appeared in the distance like a silver thread.  The view
both behind and in advance was extremely wild, embracing almost every
variety of hill scenery, and in each case was shut in by snow-capped
mountains.  These, however, were so distant and so soft in texture as to
give the impression of clouds rather than solid earth.

Standing on one of the many jutting crags from which could be had a wide
view of the vale lying a thousand feet below, Tolly Trevor threw up his
arms and waved them to and fro as if in an ecstasy, exclaiming--"Oh, if
I had only wings, _what_ a swoop I'd make--down there!"

"Ah, boy, you ain't the first that's wished for wings in the like
circumstances.  But we've bin denied these advantages.  P'r'aps we'd
have made a bad use of 'em.  Sartinly we've made a bad use o' sich
powers as we do possess.  Just think, now, if men could go about through
the air as easy as the crows, what a row they'd kick up all over the
'arth!  As it is, when we want to fight we've got to crawl slowly from
place to place, an' make roads for our wagins, an' big guns, an'
supplies, to go along with us; but if we'd got wings--why, the first
fire eatin' great man that could lead his fellows by the nose would only
have to give the word, when up would start a whole army o' men, like
some thousand Jack-in-the-boxes, an' away they'd go to some place they'd
took a fancy to, an' down they'd come, all of a heap, quite onexpected--
take their enemy by surprise, sweep him off the face o' the 'arth, and
enter into possession."

"Well, it would be a blue lookout," remarked Tolly, "if that was to be
the way of it.  There wouldn't be many men left in the world before
long."

"That's true, lad, an' sitch as was left would be the worst o' the race.
No, on the whole I think we're better without wings."

While he was talking to little Trevor, the trapper had been watching the
countenance of the Indian boy with unusual interest.  At last he turned
to him and asked--

"Has Leaping Buck nothin' to say?"

"When the white trapper speaks, the Indian's tongue should be silent,"
replied the youth.

"A good sentiment and does you credit, lad.  But I am silent now.  Has
Leaping Buck no remark to make on what he sees?"

"He sees the smoke of the robber's camp far up the heights," replied the
boy, pointing as he spoke.

"Clever lad!" exclaimed the trapper, "I know'd he was his father's son."

"Where?  I can see nothing," cried Tolly, who understood the Indian
tongue sufficiently to make out the drift of the conversation.

"Of course ye can't; the smoke is too far off an' too thin for eyes not
well practised in the signs o' the wilderness.  But come; we shall go
and pay the robbers a visit; mayhap disturb their rest a little--who
knows!"

With a quiet laugh, Mahoghany Drake withdrew from the rocky ledge, and,
followed by his eager satellites, continued to wend his way up the
rugged mountain-sides, taking care, however, that he did not again
expose himself to view, for well did he know that sharp eyes and ears
would be on the _qui vive_ that night.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

When Tom Brixton sternly set his face like a flint to what he believed
to be his duty, he wandered, as we have said, into the mountains, with a
heavy heart and without any definite intentions as to what he intended
to do.

If his thoughts had taken the form of words they would probably have run
somewhat as follows:--

"Farewell for ever, sweet Rose of Oregon!  Dear Betty!  You have been
the means, in God's hand, of saving at least one soul from death, and it
would be requiting you ill indeed were I to persuade you to unite
yourself to a man whose name is disgraced even among rough men, whose
estimate of character is not very high.  No! henceforth our lives
diverge wider and wider apart.  May God bless you and give you a good
hus--give you happiness in His own way!  And now I have the world before
me where to choose.  It is a wide world, and there is much work to be
done.  Surely I shall be led in the right way to fill the niche which
has been set apart for me.  I wonder what it is to be!  Am I to hunt for
gold, or to become a fur-trader, or go down to the plains and turn
cattle-dealer, or to the coast and become a sailor, or try farming?  One
thing is certain, I must not be an idler; must not join the ranks of
those who merely hunt that they may eat and sleep, and who eat and sleep
that they may hunt.  I have a work to do for Him who bought me with His
precious blood, and my first step must be to commit my way to Him."

Tom Brixton took that step at once.  He knelt down on a mossy bank, and
there, with the glorious prospect of the beautiful wilderness before
him, and the setting sun irradiating his still haggard countenance, held
communion with God.

That night he made his lonely bivouac under a spreading pine, and that
night while he was enjoying a profound and health-giving slumber, the
robber-chief stepped into his encampment and laid his hand roughly on
his shoulder.

In his days of high health Tom would certainly have leaped up and given
Stalker a considerable amount of trouble, but starvation and weakness,
coupled with self-condemnation and sorrow, had subdued his nerves and
abated his energies, so that, when he opened his eyes and found himself
surrounded by as disagreeable a set of cut-throats as could well be
brought together, he at once resigned himself to his fate, and said,
without rising, and with one of his half-humorous smiles--

"Well, Mister Botanist, sorry I can't say it gives me pleasure to see
you.  I wonder you're not ashamed to return to the country of the great
chief Unaco after running away from him as you did."

"I'm in no humour for joking," answered Stalker, gruffly.  "What has
become of your friend Paul Bevan?"

"I'm not aware that anything particular has become of him," replied Tom,
sitting up with a look of affected surprise.

"Come, you know what I mean.  Where is he?"

"When I last saw him he was in Oregon.  Whether he has now gone to
Europe or the moon or the sun I cannot tell, but I should think it
unlikely."

"If you don't give me a direct and civil answer I'll roast you alive,
you young puppy!" growled Stalker.

"If you roast me dead instead of alive you'll get no answer from me but
such as I choose to give, you middle-aged villain!" retorted Tom, with a
glare of his eyes which quite equalled that of the robber-chief in
ferocity, for Tom's nature was what we may style volcanic, and he found
it hard to restrain himself when roused to a certain point, so that he
was prone to speak unadvisedly with his lips.

A half-smothered laugh from some of the band who did not care much for
their chief, rendered Stalker furious.

He sprang forward with a savage oath, drew the small hatchet which he
carried in his belt, and would certainly then and there have brained the
rash youth with it, if his hand had not been unexpectedly arrested.  The
gleaming weapon was yet in the air when the loud report of a rifle close
at hand burst from the bushes with a sheet of flame and smoke, and the
robber's right arm fell powerless at his side, hit between the elbow and
shoulder.

It was the rifle of Mahoghany Drake that had spoken so opportunely.

That stalwart backwoodsman had, as we have seen, followed up the trail
of the robbers, and, with Tolly Trevor and his friend Leaping Buck, had
lain for a considerable time safely ensconced in a moss-covered crevice
of the cliff that overlooked the camping-place.  There, quietly
observing the robbers, and almost enjoying the little scene between Tom
and the chief, they remained inactive until Stalker's hatchet gleamed in
the air.  The boys were almost petrified by the suddenness of the act.

Not so the trapper, who with rapid aim saved Tom's life, as we have
seen.

Dropping his rifle, he seized the boys by the neck and thrust their
faces down on the moss: not a moment too soon, for a withering volley
was instantly sent by the bandits in the direction whence the shots had
come.  It passed harmlessly over their heads.

"Now, home like two arrows, and rouse your father, Leaping Buck,"
whispered the trapper, "and keep well out o' sight."

Next moment, picking up his empty rifle, he stalked from the fringe of
bushes that partially screened the cliff, and gave himself up.

"Ha!  I know you--Mahoghany Drake!  Is it not so?" cried Stalker,
savagely.  "Seize him, men.  You shall swing for this, you rascal."

Two or three of the robbers advanced, but Drake quietly held up his
hand, and they stopped.

"I'm in your power, you see," he said, laying his rifle on the ground.
"Yes," he continued, drawing his tall figure up to its full height and
crossing his arms on his breast, "my name is Drake.  As to Mahoghany,
I've no objection to it though it ain't complimentary.  If, as you say,
Mister Stalker, I'm to swing for this, of course I must swing.  Yet it
do seem raither hard that a man should swing for savin' his friend's
life an' his enemy's at the same time."

"How--what do you mean?"

"I mean that Mister Brixton is my friend," answered the trapper, "and
I've saved his life just now, for which I thank the Lord.  At the same
time, Stalker is my enemy--leastwise I fear he's no friend--an' didn't I
save _his_ life too when I put a ball in his arm, that I could have as
easily put into his head or his heart?"

"Well," responded Stalker, with a fiendish grin, that the increasing
pain of his wound did not improve, "at all events you have not saved
your own life, Drake.  As I said, you shall swing for it.  But I'll give
you one chance.  If you choose to help me I will spare your life.  Can
you tell me where Paul Bevan and his daughter are?"

"They are with Unaco and his tribe."

"I could have guessed as much as that.  I ask you _where_ they are!"

"On the other side of yonder mountain range, where the chief's village
lies."

Somewhat surprised at the trapper's readiness to give the information
required, and rendered a little suspicious, Stalker asked if he was
ready and willing to guide him to the Indian village.

"Surely.  If that's the price I'm to pay for my life, it can be easily
paid," replied the trapper.

"Ay, but you shall march with your arms bound until we are there, and
the fight wi' the redskins is over," said the robber-chief, "and if I
find treachery in your acts or looks I'll blow your brains out on the
spot.  My left hand, you shall find, can work as well as the right wi'
the revolver."

"A beggar, they say, must not be a chooser," returned the trapper.  "I
accept your terms."

"Good.  Here, Goff," said Stalker, turning to his lieutenant, "bind his
hands behind him after he's had some supper, and then come an' fix up
this arm o' mine.  I think the bone has escaped."

"Hadn't we better start off at once," suggested Drake, "an' catch the
redskins when they're asleep?"

"Is it far off?" asked Stalker.

"A goodish bit.  But the night is young.  We might git pretty near by
midnight, and then encamp so as to git an hour's sleep before makin' the
attack.  You see, redskins sleep soundest just before daybreak."

While he was speaking the trapper coughed a good deal, and sneezed once
or twice, as if he had a bad cold.

"Can't you keep your throat and nose quieter?" said the chief, sternly.

"Well, p'r'aps I might," replied Drake, emitting a highly suppressed
cough at the moment, "but I've got a queer throat just now.  The least
thing affects it."

After consultation with the principal men of his band, Stalker
determined to act on Drake's advice, and in a few minutes the trapper
was guiding them over the hills in a state of supreme satisfaction,
despite his bonds, for had he not obtained the power to make the robbers
encamp on a spot which the Indians could not avoid passing on their way
to the rescue, and had he not established a sort of right to emit sounds
which would make his friends aware of his exact position, and thus bring
both parties into collision before daybreak, which could not have been
the case if the robbers had remained in the encampment where he found
them?

Turn we now to Leaping Buck and Tolly Trevor.  Need it be said that
these intelligent lads did not, as the saying is, allow grass to grow
under their feet?  The former went over the hills at a pace and in a
manner that fully justified his title; and the latter followed with as
much vigour and resolution, if not as much agility, as his friend.

In a wonderfully short space of time, considering the distance, they
burst upon the Indian village, and aroused it with the startling news.

Warfare in those regions was not the cumbrous and slow affair that it is
in civilised places.  There was no commissariat, no ammunition wagons,
no baggage, no camp-followers to hamper the line of march.  In five or
ten minutes after the alarm was given about two hundred Indian braves
marched out from the camp in a column which may be described as
one-deep--i.e. one following the other--and took their rapid way up the
mountain sides, led by Unaco in person.  Next to him marched Paul Bevan,
who was followed in succession by Fred Westly, Paddy Flinders, Leaping
Buck, and Tolly.

For some time the long line could be seen by the Rose of Oregon passing
swiftly up the mountain-side.  Then, as distance united the individuals,
as it were, to each other, it assumed the form of a mighty snake
crawling _slowly_ along.  By degrees it crawled over the nearest ridge
and disappeared, after which Betty went to discuss the situation with
Unaco's old mother.

It was near midnight when the robber-band encamped in a wooded hollow
which was backed on two sides by precipices and on the third by a deep
ravine.

"A good spot to set a host at defiance," remarked Stalker, glancing
round with a look that would have expressed satisfaction if the wounded
arm had allowed.

"Yes," added the trapper, "and--" A violent fit of coughing prevented
the completion of the sentence, which, however, when thought out in
Drake's mind ran--"a good spot for hemming you and your scoundrels in,
and starving you into submission!"

A short time sufficed for a bite of cold supper and a little whiff, soon
after which the robber camp, with the exception of the sentinels, was
buried in repose.

Tom Brixton was not allowed to have any intercourse whatever with his
friend Drake.  Both were bound and made to sleep in different parts of
the camp.  Nevertheless, during one brief moment, when they chanced to
be near each other, Drake whispered, "Be ready!" and Tom heard him.

Ere long no sound was heard in the camp save an occasional snore or
sigh, and Drake's constant and hacking, but highly suppressed, cough.
Poor fellow!  He was obviously consumptive, and it was quite touching to
note the careful way in which he tried to restrain himself, giving vent
to as little sound as was consistent with his purpose.

Turning a corner of jutting rock in the valley which led to the spot,
Unaco's sharp and practised ear caught the sound.  He stopped and stood
like a bronze statue by Michael Angelo in the attitude of suddenly
arrested motion.  Upwards of two hundred bronze arrested statues
instantly tailed away from him.

Presently a smile, such as Michael Angelo probably never thought of
reproducing, rippled on the usually grave visage of the chief.

"M'ogany Drake!" he whispered, softly, in Paul Bevan's ear.

"I didn't know Drake had sitch a horrid cold," whispered Bevan, in
reply.

Tolly Trevor clenched his teeth and screwed himself up internally to
keep down the laughter that all but burst him, for he saw through the
device at once.  As for Leaping Buck, he did more than credit to his
sire, because he kept as grave as Michael Angelo himself could have
desired while chiselling his features.

"Musha! but that is a quare sound," whispered Flinders to Westly.
