


CHAPTER XXIII. THE EARLY BIRD


WHEN Diamond got home he found his father at home already, sitting by
the fire and looking rather miserable, for his head ached and he felt
sick. He had been doing night work of late, and it had not agreed with
him, so he had given it up, but not in time, for he had taken some
kind of fever. The next day he was forced to keep his bed, and his wife
nursed him, and Diamond attended to the baby. If he had not been ill,
it would have been delightful to have him at home; and the first day
Diamond sang more songs than ever to the baby, and his father listened
with some pleasure. But the next he could not bear even Diamond's sweet
voice, and was very ill indeed; so Diamond took the baby into his own
room, and had no end of quiet games with him there. If he did pull
all his bedding on the floor, it did not matter, for he kept baby very
quiet, and made the bed himself again, and slept in it with baby all the
next night, and many nights after.

But long before his father got well, his mother's savings were all but
gone. She did not say a word about it in the hearing of her husband,
lest she should distress him; and one night, when she could not help
crying, she came into Diamond's room that his father might not hear
her. She thought Diamond was asleep, but he was not. When he heard her
sobbing, he was frightened, and said--

"Is father worse, mother?"

"No, Diamond," she answered, as well as she could; "he's a good bit
better."

"Then what are you crying for, mother?"

"Because my money is almost all gone," she replied.

"O mammy, you make me think of a little poem baby and I learned out of
North Wind's book to-day. Don't you remember how I bothered you about
some of the words?"

"Yes, child," said his mother heedlessly, thinking only of what she
should do after to-morrow.

Diamond began and repeated the poem, for he had a wonderful memory.

            A little bird sat on the edge of her nest;
               Her yellow-beaks slept as sound as tops;
            That day she had done her very best,
               And had filled every one of their little crops.
            She had filled her own just over-full,
               And hence she was feeling a little dull.

            "Oh, dear!" she sighed, as she sat with her head
               Sunk in her chest, and no neck at all,
            While her crop stuck out like a feather bed
               Turned inside out, and rather small;
            "What shall I do if things don't reform?
            I don't know where there's a single worm.

            "I've had twenty to-day, and the children five each,
               Besides a few flies, and some very fat spiders:
            No one will say I don't do as I preach--
               I'm one of the best of bird-providers;
            But where's the use?  We want a storm--
               I don't know where there's a single worm."

            "There's five in my crop," said a wee, wee bird,
               Which woke at the voice of his mother's pain;
            "I know where there's five." And with the word
               He tucked in his head, and went off again.
            "The folly of childhood," sighed his mother,
            "Has always been my especial bother."

            The yellow-beaks they slept on and on--
               They never had heard of the bogy To-morrow;
            But the mother sat outside, making her moan--
               She'll soon have to beg, or steal, or borrow.
            For she never can tell the night before,
            Where she shall find one red worm more.

            The fact, as I say, was, she'd had too many;
               She couldn't sleep, and she called it virtue,
            Motherly foresight, affection, any
               Name you may call it that will not hurt you,
            So it was late ere she tucked her head in,
            And she slept so late it was almost a sin.

            But the little fellow who knew of five
               Nor troubled his head about any more,
            Woke very early, felt quite alive,
               And wanted a sixth to add to his store:
            He pushed his mother, the greedy elf,
            Then thought he had better try for himself.

            When his mother awoke and had rubbed her eyes,
               Feeling less like a bird, and more like a mole,
            She saw him--fancy with what surprise--
               Dragging a huge worm out of a hole!
            'Twas of this same hero the proverb took form:
            'Tis the early bird that catches the worm.


"There, mother!" said Diamond, as he finished; "ain't it funny?"

"I wish you were like that little bird, Diamond, and could catch worms
for yourself," said his mother, as she rose to go and look after her
husband.

Diamond lay awake for a few minutes, thinking what he could do to catch
worms. It was very little trouble to make up his mind, however, and
still less to go to sleep after it.




CHAPTER XXIV. ANOTHER EARLY BIRD


HE GOT up in the morning as soon as he heard the men moving in the yard.
He tucked in his little brother so that he could not tumble out of bed,
and then went out, leaving the door open, so that if he should cry his
mother might hear him at once. When he got into the yard he found the
stable-door just opened.

"I'm the early bird, I think," he said to himself. "I hope I shall catch
the worm."

He would not ask any one to help him, fearing his project might meet
with disapproval and opposition. With great difficulty, but with the
help of a broken chair he brought down from his bedroom, he managed to
put the harness on Diamond. If the old horse had had the least objection
to the proceeding, of course he could not have done it; but even when it
came to the bridle, he opened his mouth for the bit, just as if he had
been taking the apple which Diamond sometimes gave him. He fastened the
cheek-strap very carefully, just in the usual hole, for fear of choking
his friend, or else letting the bit get amongst his teeth. It was a job
to get the saddle on; but with the chair he managed it. If old Diamond
had had an education in physics to equal that of the camel, he would
have knelt down to let him put it on his back, but that was more than
could be expected of him, and then Diamond had to creep quite under him
to get hold of the girth. The collar was almost the worst part of the
business; but there Diamond could help Diamond. He held his head very
low till his little master had got it over and turned it round, and
then he lifted his head, and shook it on to his shoulders. The yoke was
rather difficult; but when he had laid the traces over the horse's neck,
the weight was not too much for him. He got him right at last, and led
him out of the stable.

By this time there were several of the men watching him, but they would
not interfere, they were so anxious to see how he would get over the
various difficulties. They followed him as far as the stable-door, and
there stood watching him again as he put the horse between the shafts,
got them up one after the other into the loops, fastened the traces, the
belly-band, the breeching, and the reins.

Then he got his whip. The moment he mounted the box, the men broke into
a hearty cheer of delight at his success. But they would not let him go
without a general inspection of the harness; and although they found it
right, for not a buckle had to be shifted, they never allowed him to do
it for himself again all the time his father was ill.

The cheer brought his mother to the window, and there she saw her little
boy setting out alone with the cab in the gray of morning. She tugged at
the window, but it was stiff; and before she could open it, Diamond, who
was in a great hurry, was out of the mews, and almost out of the street.
She called "Diamond! Diamond!" but there was no answer except from Jack.

"Never fear for him, ma'am," said Jack. "It 'ud be only a devil as would
hurt him, and there ain't so many o' them as some folk 'ud have you
believe. A boy o' Diamond's size as can 'arness a 'oss t'other Diamond's
size, and put him to, right as a trivet--if he do upset the keb--'ll
fall on his feet, ma'am."

"But he won't upset the cab, will he, Jack?"

"Not he, ma'am. Leastways he won't go for to do it."

"I know as much as that myself. What do you mean?"

"I mean he's a little likely to do it as the oldest man in the stable.
How's the gov'nor to-day, ma'am?"

"A good deal better, thank you," she answered, closing the window in
some fear lest her husband should have been made anxious by the news
of Diamond's expedition. He knew pretty well, however, what his boy
was capable of, and although not quite easy was less anxious than
his mother. But as the evening drew on, the anxiety of both of them
increased, and every sound of wheels made his father raise himself in
his bed, and his mother peep out of the window.

Diamond had resolved to go straight to the cab-stand where he was best
known, and never to crawl for fear of getting annoyed by idlers. Before
he got across Oxford Street, however, he was hailed by a man who wanted
to catch a train, and was in too great a hurry to think about the
driver. Having carried him to King's Cross in good time, and got a good
fare in return, he set off again in great spirits, and reached the stand
in safety. He was the first there after all.

As the men arrived they all greeted him kindly, and inquired after his
father.

"Ain't you afraid of the old 'oss running away with you?" asked one.

"No, he wouldn't run away with me," answered Diamond. "He knows I'm
getting the shillings for father. Or if he did he would only run home."

"Well, you're a plucky one, for all your girl's looks!" said the man;
"and I wish ye luck."

"Thank you, sir," said Diamond. "I'll do what I can. I came to the old
place, you see, because I knew you would let me have my turn here."

In the course of the day one man did try to cut him out, but he was a
stranger; and the shout the rest of them raised let him see it would not
do, and made him so far ashamed besides, that he went away crawling.

Once, in a block, a policeman came up to him, and asked him for his
number. Diamond showed him his father's badge, saying with a smile:

"Father's ill at home, and so I came out with the cab. There's no fear
of me. I can drive. Besides, the old horse could go alone."

"Just as well, I daresay. You're a pair of 'em. But you are a rum 'un
for a cabby--ain't you now?" said the policeman. "I don't know as I
ought to let you go."

"I ain't done nothing," said Diamond. "It's not my fault I'm no bigger.
I'm big enough for my age."

"That's where it is," said the man. "You ain't fit."

"How do you know that?" asked Diamond, with his usual smile, and turning
his head like a little bird.

"Why, how are you to get out of this ruck now, when it begins to move?"

"Just you get up on the box," said Diamond, "and I'll show you. There,
that van's a-moving now. Jump up."

The policeman did as Diamond told him, and was soon satisfied that the
little fellow could drive.

"Well," he said, as he got down again, "I don't know as I should be
right to interfere. Good luck to you, my little man!"

"Thank you, sir," said Diamond, and drove away.

In a few minutes a gentleman hailed him.

"Are you the driver of this cab?" he asked.

"Yes, sir" said Diamond, showing his badge, of which, he was proud.

"You're the youngest cabman I ever saw. How am I to know you won't break
all my bones?"

"I would rather break all my own," said Diamond. "But if you're afraid,
never mind me; I shall soon get another fare."

"I'll risk it," said the gentleman; and, opening the door himself, he
jumped in.

He was going a good distance, and soon found that Diamond got him over
the ground well. Now when Diamond had only to go straight ahead, and had
not to mind so much what he was about, his thoughts always turned to the
riddle Mr. Raymond had set him; and this gentleman looked so clever that
he fancied he must be able to read it for him. He had given up all hope
of finding it out for himself, and he could not plague his father about
it when he was ill. He had thought of the answer himself, but fancied it
could not be the right one, for to see how it all fitted required some
knowledge of physiology. So, when he reached the end of his journey, he
got down very quickly, and with his head just looking in at the window,
said, as the gentleman gathered his gloves and newspapers:

"Please, sir, can you tell me the meaning of a riddle?"

"You must tell me the riddle first," answered the gentleman, amused.

Diamond repeated the riddle.

"Oh! that's easy enough," he returned. "It's a tree."

"Well, it ain't got no mouth, sure enough; but how then does it eat all
day long?"

"It sucks in its food through the tiniest holes in its leaves," he
answered. "Its breath is its food. And it can't do it except in the
daylight."

"Thank you, sir, thank you," returned Diamond. "I'm sorry I couldn't
find it out myself; Mr. Raymond would have been better pleased with me."

"But you needn't tell him any one told you."

Diamond gave him a stare which came from the very back of the north
wind, where that kind of thing is unknown.

"That would be cheating," he said at last.

"Ain't you a cabby, then?"

"Cabbies don't cheat."

"Don't they? I am of a different opinion."

"I'm sure my father don't."

"What's your fare, young innocent?"

"Well, I think the distance is a good deal over three miles--that's two
shillings. Only father says sixpence a mile is too little, though we
can't ask for more."

"You're a deep one. But I think you're wrong. It's over four miles--not
much, but it is."

"Then that's half-a-crown," said Diamond.

"Well, here's three shillings. Will that do?"

"Thank you kindly, sir. I'll tell my father how good you were to
me--first to tell me my riddle, then to put me right about the distance,
and then to give me sixpence over. It'll help father to get well again,
it will."

"I hope it may, my man. I shouldn't wonder if you're as good as you
look, after all."

As Diamond returned, he drew up at a stand he had never been on before:
it was time to give Diamond his bag of chopped beans and oats. The men
got about him, and began to chaff him. He took it all good-humouredly,
until one of them, who was an ill-conditioned fellow, began to tease old
Diamond by poking him roughly in the ribs, and making general game of
him. That he could not bear, and the tears came in his eyes. He undid
the nose-bag, put it in the boot, and was just going to mount and drive
away, when the fellow interfered, and would not let him get up. Diamond
endeavoured to persuade him, and was very civil, but he would have his
fun out of him, as he said. In a few minutes a group of idle boys had
assembled, and Diamond found himself in a very uncomfortable position.
Another cab drew up at the stand, and the driver got off and approached
the assemblage.

"What's up here?" he asked, and Diamond knew the voice. It was that of
the drunken cabman.

"Do you see this young oyster? He pretends to drive a cab," said his
enemy.

"Yes, I do see him. And I sees you too. You'd better leave him alone. He
ain't no oyster. He's a angel come down on his own business. You be off,
or I'll be nearer you than quite agreeable."

The drunken cabman was a tall, stout man, who did not look one to take
liberties with.

"Oh! if he's a friend of yours," said the other, drawing back.

Diamond got out the nose-bag again. Old Diamond should have his feed out
