"Yes; I heard from him yesterday."

"And he sent you some money?"

"Yes; he reports that he is doing well."

"Did he send you thirty dollars?"

"Rather more than that," said Mark Nelson, not caring to gratify the
curiosity of his creditor.

"I think you had better keep your money, and leave Whiteface with me,"
said Squire Hudson, after a pause.

"I would rather not, squire. The fact is, Whiteface is a sort of pet at
home, and we all want her back."

Squire Hudson was disconcerted. He had not expected that Mr. Nelson
would be able to redeem the cow, and he was reluctant to give her up.
But there was no excuse for retaining her. His agreement stood in the
way.

"Neighbor Nelson," he said, after a pause, "I don't mind giving you five
dollars over and above what you owe me for Whiteface. Come, that's a
good offer."

Mark Nelson shook his head.

"She's worth more than that," he said. "But that's neither here nor
there. I raised the animal, and it was sorely against my will that I
parted with her six weeks ago. Now that I have the money to pay you I
want her back."

"I think you are standing in your own light, Mr. Nelson," said the
squire. "I have taken a fancy to the cow, and am willing to pay more for
her than she is worth. I will say ten dollars."

Mark Nelson shook his head.

"I'd rather have Whiteface than the money," he said.

"If she comes into my possession again," said Squire Hudson, "I shall
not be willing to grant you the privilege of redeeming her. It won't be
many months before another payment becomes due."

"I hope to be ready to meet it, squire," said the farmer, not appearing
at all anxious.

"He seems very independent," thought the squire, watching, moodily, the
cow driven away by her former owner. "He may sing another tune on
interest day. I wonder how much the boy sent home."

Had he known that Mr. Nelson had in his pocket enough money to pay the
whole of the next accruing interest, he would have felt more doubtful
about recovering the cow which he now coveted more than ever.

"Well, Abner, I've lost her," said the squire, hurrying to his
assistant; "but she'll be back here some day, mark my words!"

"I thought you bought her, squire," said Abner, in surprise.

"Well, not exactly. I took her for a debt; but Nelson had the right of
redeeming her, and he has done it. His boy sent him the money."

"That Tom Nelson is a smart boy," said Abner, who, though in the
squire's employ, was friendly to our hero.

"Well, so-so," remarked the squire, indifferently. "I helped him to go
to California; but I am not sure whether it was a wise step. I let my
feelings get the better of my judgment."

"Then it is the first time," was Abner's unspoken comment.

"It may turn out for the best," he said aloud.

"I doubt if I shall ever see my money again," said the squire; but he
did not seem to take it to heart, judging from his manner and tone.

"Didn't you have security for the loan?" asked Abner.

"Well, ye-es," answered the squire, slowly; "but not very good. The farm
was already mortgaged for its full value."

"The squire is getting benevolent," thought Abner, "or he wants me to
think so; but I'm inclined to think he has some object under it all.
What is it?"

A few weeks later Farmer Nelson's heart was gladdened by the receipt of
another remittance this time sent by John Miles, out of the profit of
the business in which Tom was his partner. The amount this time was
seventy-five dollars. It made him feel quite rich.

"Mary," he said, "we all need some new clothes, and I propose to use
this money for that purpose. Now I want you to consider how we can spend
it to the best advantage. To begin with, you must buy a new dress. You
have long needed one."

Mrs. Nelson demurred a little, but was forced to admit that the dress
was needed. So the purchases were made at once. It is wonderful how far
seventy-five dollars will go in an economical family of plain tastes. It
was soon apparent to the neighbors that the Nelsons were exhibiting
signs of prosperity.

"It must be Tom," they decided.

Efforts were made to ascertain just how much our hero had sent home; but
on this point the Nelsons would not speak definitely. They reported in
general terms that Tom was doing well.

Of course Squire Hudson was not ignorant of the apparent improvement in
the fortunes of his debtor. Strange to say, he seemed rather annoyed. He
was pleased, however, by the outlay for dress.

"They're getting extravagant, Abner," he said, cheerfully. "I thought
Mark Nelson was a man of more sense. Because his son has sent home a
little money, he must rig out the whole family in new clothes. 'A fool
and his money are soon parted.'"

"Mark Nelson is no fool," said Abner, stoutly.

"He is in this instance," said the squire, sharply. "However, I don't
object to it, if he likes to violate the rules of prudence. It strikes
me, however, that it would be well for him to pay up the money I
advanced for Tom's expenses, before buying new clothes wholesale."

Abner repeated this to Mr. Nelson.

The farmer answered quietly, "The squire is not wholly wrong. It is good
doctrine to pay your debts before you spend money for what you don't
need. In this case, however, we did need the clothes we bought. Now that
we are provided, I hope, before very long, if Tom is prospered, to pay
back the two hundred dollars the squire advanced for him."

"I hope you will, I'm sure," said Abner. "That's a smart boy of yours,
and I always said so."

"He is a good boy, and I am sure he will do what is right."

"He's a blamed sight better than the squire's boy. Sinclair is a
stuck-up jackanapes, and it would do me good to kick him."

"It might not do him any good."

"I am not sure about that; I think he needs it."




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE NEW DIGGINGS.


Meanwhile Tom and his party, pursuing their journey by easy stages, for
they sensibly determined not to overtask their strength, reached at last
the spot of which Russell had spoken. Ferguson and Tom soon found that
he had not exaggerated. The new diggings were certainly far richer than
those at River Bend. It was, in fact, the bed of a dead river upon which
Russell had stumbled without knowing it. My readers are probably aware
that in the beds of rivers or creeks the early miners found their first
harvest of gold, and, that, where practicable, these were mined by
turning the stream in the dry season, when the water was low. As it may
not be so well understood what is meant by a dead river, I quote a
passage from an article in the "Overland Monthly," as found in the pages
of the "Pacific Coast Mining Review," for the year 1878-79:--

"A dead river is one which formerly existed, but exists no longer. In
volcanic regions it sometimes happens that the liquid lava, seeking the
lowest ground, fills up the beds of the rivers which die and are
replaced by water-courses running in other channels and in different
directions. These dead streams are so few, and of so little importance
elsewhere, that, as yet, I believe, no class name has been given to
them; but in California they are among the chief source of its mineral
wealth, and among the most remarkable features of its geological
formation. They take us back to a remote era, before the time of Rome,
of Greece, or of Egypt; far back beyond the origin of history or
tradition, before our coast had taken its present shapes; before Shasta,
and Lassen, and Castle Peaks had poured out their lava floods; before
the Sacramento river had its birth; and while, if not before, the
mastodon, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the horse, the mammoth bull, the
tapir, and the bison lived in the land. They are indeed among the most
remarkable discoveries of the age, and among the greatest wonders of
geology. They deserve some common name, and we have to choose between
'extinct' and 'dead.' We speak of 'extinct volcanoes,' and of 'dead
languages,' and, as the latter is Saxon and short, we prefer it. They
have been called 'old channels;' but this name does not convey the
proper idea, since a channel is not necessarily a river, and an old
channel is not necessarily a dead one. A dead river is a channel
formerly occupied by a running stream, but now filled up with earthy or
rocky matter, and is not to be confounded with a channel that is open
and remains dry during the greater part of the year because of a lack of
water, or that has been abandoned by the stream for a deeper channel
elsewhere. A dry river-bed is not a dead river.

"The dead rivers of California, so far as are known, are on the western
slope of the Sierra Nevada, from five hundred to seven thousand feet
above the level of the sea. They are all gold-yielding, and therefore
they have been sought and examined. They have yielded probably _three
hundred millions_ in all; they now produce perhaps eight million dollars
annually. They are not less interesting to the miner than to the
geologist, not less important to the statesman than to the antiquarian."

At the risk of being considered tedious by some of my boy-readers, I
will transcribe the writer's explanation of the existence of these dead
rivers. For the reason we must go back to a remote geological epoch:
"The main cause must have been the subsequent rise of the Sierra Nevada.
Suppose that a range of mountains, seven thousand feet high, were
upheaved thirty miles east of the Mississippi; that the bed of that
stream were on the mountain side, three thousand feet above the sea, and
that thirty miles west the country maintained its present level; the
result would be that the present Mississippi would soon be a dead river;
it would be cut across by streams running down the mountain side, and
flowing into a new Mississippi, thirty miles or more west of the present
one. We know that the Sierra Nevada has been upheaved; that a large
stream ran on what is now the mountain side, and that it has been
succeeded by a new river farther west, and we must infer that the death
of the old and the birth of the new river were caused by the upheaval."

Reference is here made to the Big Blue Lead, the largest dead river
known in California, which has been traced for a distance of sixty-five
miles, from Little Grizzly, in Sierra County, to Forest Hill, in Placer
County. The original river, however, is thought to have run for many
hundreds of miles. Eventually traces of its existence may be found
elsewhere.

It is not to be supposed that Tom and his friends knew anything about
dead rivers, or troubled themselves as to how the rich deposits had been
made, or how long they had been waiting discovery. They were chiefly
engaged with more practical considerations. They found a rich harvest in
the ravines, and they went to work energetically.

The work was monotonous, and a detailed account of their progress would
be tiresome. What we chiefly care about is results, and these may be
gathered from a conversation which took place some five months later.

Under a tent, at night-fall, reclined the three friends. They looked
contented, and on good terms with the world; but, though prosperous,
they certainly did not look it. In fact, they were all three
exceedingly, almost disreputably, shabby. They looked more like tramps
than respectable gold-miners.

"Tom, you are looking very ragged," said Dick Russell, surveying our
hero critically.

"I know it, Dick. I feel as though I had just come out of a rag-bag. I
can't say that you look much better, nor Ferguson either."

"This rough work is hard on clothing," said Russell. "I wish there were
a ready-made clothing store near by."

"So do I. I would pay a high price for a good suit."

"If our friends at home could see us, what would they think, eh, Tom?"

"That we were candidates for the poor-house."

"That's so. I've been into several poor-houses in the course of my life,
but I never saw any of the inmates quite so poorly clad as we are."

"You are right," said Ferguson; "but there are generally compensations.
I was taking account of stock, and I estimate that I have from sixteen
to eighteen hundred dollars' worth of gold-dust."

"I have nearly as much," said Tom.

"My pile won't vary far from Tom's," said Russell.

"That is a pretty good showing for five months, my friend," said the
Scotchman.

"It will make up for the old clothes," said Tom.

"I have been thinking," said Ferguson, "that we need a vacation. What do
you say to starting next week for San Francisco?"

"I agree," said Russell, promptly.

"And I," said Tom. "I should like to see John Miles."

"Very well. We will continue our work about a week longer, and then
start."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A RICH DEPOSIT.


About the middle of the next forenoon Tom suddenly stopped work.

"What's the matter, Tom? Are you tired?"

"No, but I feel like exploring a little. Who goes with me?"

"Not I," answered Ferguson. "Let well enough alone."

"I'll go with you," said Russell. "I should like a holiday. Besides, we
may discover something."

"'A rolling stone gathers no moss,'" said Ferguson.

"True, but there's another proverb: 'All work and no play makes Jack a
dull boy.' Tom and I will try a little play."

The two friends sauntered away in an idle mood; yet, combining business
with pleasure, they watched carefully the surface indications, ready to
avail themselves of any that were favorable.

"It's a strange life we are leading, Tom," said Russell. "It is free,
and independent, and healthful; but I shouldn't like to live so all my
life."

"Nor I," answered Tom. "No amount of gold would repay me."

"Because gold is only valuable for what it will bring. Here it brings
nothing."

"Except the hope of future ease and comfort," suggested Tom.

"Of course; that is what we are working for. We have made a good
beginning."

"Yes, Dick. I have almost accomplished what I have had in view ever
since I left home."

"I know. You mean paying off your father's mortgage."

"That's it. It amounts to twenty-two hundred dollars, and I have but a
few hundred dollars more to earn. I would stay here a month or two
longer, if my clothes would hold together; but I can't risk it."

"You need rest, at any rate, Tom, leaving clothes out of the question."

As he spoke, Tom, without special thought, drove his pick into the
