most splendid girl I have ever met. She came, and showed not a scrap of
fear, even though that child--that terrible child--took her into the
middle of the stream, just where she took you, you poor thing!"

"Don't speak of it. Don't mention it," began poor Miss Carter, trembling
all over.

"Well, she took Rosamund there, and Rosamund was strong and got the
upper hand with her at once, and from that hour Irene has been
different. It is true she has done terrible things. She behaved almost
as badly to me as she did to you."

"Shall we walk down this shrubbery?" said Miss Carter. "The children are
all quite happy. Every one who comes to the Rectory is happy, and you
can hear by the shouts of the village children that they are in the very
acme of bliss. Shall we walk down here and talk together? I have always
been so amazed at your remaining on at The Follies, Miss Frost."

"I have a little sister called Agnes, and a little brother Hugh, and
they are the dearest little children. They are only my step-brother and
sister, of course; but they are to me just as though they were my very
own. They depend on me altogether for their maintenance. I buy
everything for them. I spend my holidays with them, and they love me. My
darlings! They are like my own children. Were I to give up so good a
situation my little ones would starve. You understand, Miss Carter, do
you not, that under such circumstances one would endure a great deal?"

"But even under such circumstances," said Miss Carter, in astonishment,
"I do not think people would put up with Irene Ashleigh as she used to
be. Oh, never, never shall I forget how the boat dashed against the
rocks! I thought my last moment had come."

"How did you escape drowning, dear?" said Miss Frost. "I never heard
that part."

"It is more than I can tell you myself. I suppose I lost consciousness.
When I came to myself I was on dry land, and Irene was dragging me back
to the house; and then I had a terrible--most terrible--interview with
Lady Jane. I told her that I would go at once, that nothing would induce
me to stay. She was nearly in despair, and, metaphorically speaking,
went on her knees to me. But I remembered my promise to that dreadful
child, and stuck to my word. Go I would. I never saw Lady Jane in a
temper before, but she was then. She refused to let me have a carriage.
She said Irene's conduct was past bearing, and that I ought to stay if
only to support her. But I couldn't, for my nerves were frightfully
shattered. I went away as quickly as ever I could that very afternoon,
intending to send a porter from the railway station for my luggage.
Before I got half-way there I nearly fainted, and the dear, kind rector
found me on the road. I told him my story, and he brought me home--yes,
home, for this is indeed a complete and absolute home to me. I cannot
tell you how kind they have been."

"I have lived through _my_ horrors too; but I will not speak about them
to-day," said Miss Frost. "Irene is immensely improved. I believe as
long as Rosamund remains with her she will be a really good girl. She
is making great efforts."

"She is; that is the astonishing part of it," said Miss Carter. "She
came up to my room--I will confess to you that I was hiding from her,
absolutely hiding, and shaking from head to foot, scarcely knowing what
to do--and she came in as bold as brass, and yet with a new sort of
humility about her, and she said to me, 'Will you forgive me? And if you
forgive me, will you come downstairs and let me put my hand inside your
arm?' And somehow, although it was the very last thing on earth that I
wanted to do, I did it; and now here I am, and I don't feel nearly so
much afraid of her as I used."

"It is all owing to Rosamund," said Miss Frost again. "She is the most
wonderful girl I have ever met. I know one of her objects now is that
you and I, Irene, herself, and the Singletons should be friends. She
means Irene to invite you all over to The Follies to-morrow or the next
day, and I hope you will have the courage to come."

"Indeed I don't know how I can. It is one thing to have Irene here; it
is another thing to look at that terrible lake and reflect that the boat
is at hand. Oh, of course, she will excuse me."

"But I don't think she will. If you come I will look after you, and we
will both firmly refuse to go in the boat. It wouldn't hold us all, so
there is no fear of that."

"But she is very ingenious. There is no end to her resources."

"At present her mood is different. You and I, who are so much older,
ought to try to encourage her; for, after all, she has been a most sadly
mismanaged child, allowed even from her earliest days to see that people
were afraid of her, and thus the spirit of cruelty gained a strong
hold; but there is a great deal of good in her nature."

Miss Carter was called loudly by Maud, who requested her to help the
little ones to play Puss-in-the-corner. The group broke up into
different detachments, and by-and-by the time came when Rosamund
whispered to Irene that it was necessary to order the governess-cart so
that they might go home.

"But I am so happy," said Irene, who had been helping some of the little
girls to climb up and tumble down cocks of hay, and otherwise disport
themselves. "I didn't know other children could be so nice; but I find
poor children are much nicer than rich ones. They have no manners, which
I detest, and just say what they think. They have been telling me some
home-truths, and I have been laughing like anything. I didn't know I was
such an ogre; but it is great fun to hear it from the lips of the
children."

"We must go home; it is time," said Rosamund. "But before we go, Irene,
will you kindly ask the Singletons to come to see us on Thursday? They
might come to lunch, and spend the time until after tea. Thus we should
have a long afternoon."

"But if they must come, why not to-morrow?" said Irene. "I didn't know
that other children could be so charming."

"They can't come to-morrow. We have our music lessons with Mr. Fortescue
to-morrow."

"Can't we put him off?"

"Of course we can't. His time is all engaged. Ask them for Thursday, or,
if you prefer it, for Saturday. Anyhow, will you ask them?"

"Oh yes, I'll ask them, and for Thursday."

Irene's flushed face, her speaking eyes, her lips apart in smiles,
looked such a different creature from the somewhat pale, queerly dressed
little inmate of the woods, that Mr. Singleton, who came out at that
moment, did not know her.

"Who is this little lady?" he said, going straight up to her and holding
out his hand.

"I am the ogre," was Irene's instant response.

This answer amazed Mr. Singleton, but he kept looking at her and
smiling.

"I am sure, my dear, that is not your name. You look more like an angel
than an ogre."

"But I am the ogre--the ogre of the whole place. I am Irene Ashleigh."

The clergyman's astonishment was seen now on his face. Rosamund hastened
to interpose.

"Irene is my friend," she said, "and I think she is going to turn into a
very fine sort of woman, if not into an angel. Anyhow, here she is, and
I hope you bid her welcome."

"I do most heartily," said Mr. Singleton. "You must come and see us
often. I am very glad you have broken the ice at last. What good news,"
he continued, turning to Rosamund, "this is about your young friend! It
is such a relief to the Merrimans that she is getting on so well."

"And a great relief to me," said Rosamund.

Irene moved away to talk to three little red-haired girls, who made a
charming group, standing under an oak-tree. She soon had them in fits of
laughter; and Mr. Singleton, just glancing at her, spoke again to
Rosamund.

"What a miracle you have performed!" he said. "She is a changed
creature. But I suppose there is a great deal of the old Adam in her
still."

"Yes; but she will change still more. The fact is, she was so terribly
naughty because people used to be afraid of her."

"And you are not?"

"I certainly am not."

"My dear, there is something I want to say to you. Do you know that I
have had a conversation with Professor Merriman, and he gave me a very
queer account of your conduct? He seemed greatly distressed at the way
you have behaved."

Rosamund shrugged her shoulders.

"The Merrimans did not suit me," she said. "Life at The Follies does
suit me. At the Merrimans' I was growing to be a very naughty girl
myself. I could not stand Lucy, although I liked the Professor; and I
liked Laura Everett and one or two of the other girls. But at The
Follies, you see for yourself, rector, I have done no harm."

"Harm! Indeed, you have done most blessed good. I never could have
believed in such a change in any one. Why, that child is quite lovely."

"And by-and-by she will have a lovely mind," said Rosamund. "But, Mr.
Singleton, it is only right to tell you that I am practically expelled
from the Merrimans' school."

"That is a very grave matter. It ought not to be allowed," said the
rector. "The Professor cannot understand. His eyes must be blinded. You
have done a noble work."

"But I don't mind; and, besides, I could not go back."

"But you could if it were just and right, could you not?"

"I don't really think I could."

Just then the pony-cart came round. The rector said no more for the time
being; and a few minutes later, the young Singletons and Miss Carter
having promised to arrive at The Follies on Thursday, Irene, Rosamund,
and Miss Frost took their leave.

"Well, now, wasn't I a darling? Didn't I behave well?" said Irene.
"Aren't you pleased with me, Rose--dearest, sweetest, red, red Rose?"

"Yes, on the whole, I am quite pleased with you," said Rosamund; but she
leaned back in her seat. She felt tired and sad. She had done a good
work, and she knew it, and yet she had injured her reputation; and her
mother would be annoyed, and her father displeased. What was to be done?

There was some one else who was very much troubled on Rosamund's behalf,
and that was the Rev. John Singleton. It was not his habit to consult
any of his children, not even Maud, whom he relied on almost as he had
relied on his wife; but he went straight over that very evening to the
Merrimans' house; and although he could not go inside for fear of
infection, he had a conversation with the Professor in the garden. There
he spoke with such verve and enthusiasm with regard to Rosamund, and the
marvelous change she had already wrought in the naughtiest girl in the
entire district, that he induced that gentleman to change his mind.

"If you think it absolutely necessary, I will give her a chance."

"You must give her a chance. It would be culpable to allow such a girl
to enter on the world with such a stigma as being expelled from school
would mean. You must give her a chance, sir. I hope you will not
hesitate to do so."

Professor Merriman explained that his pupils would not return for at
least another fortnight, that Jane would be sent away in a little over a
week, that the house would be thoroughly disinfected, and the school
would continue.

"Perhaps it would be best for Rosamund to remain where she is for the
present," he said, "and come back to us at the beginning of next term. I
acknowledge that she is a fine girl; very good-looking, too, and with a
most taking way. But she must learn obedience. She would not obey when
she was with us. It was for the sin of disobedience that I dismissed
her. She also broke her word of honor."

"Give her a chance. Believe me, there are circumstances which overcome
all ordinary conditions," said the good clergyman; and he went away
feeling assured that Professor Merriman would keep his word.




CHAPTER XVII.

NEW RESPONSIBILITIES.


This was the beginning of July. Towards the end the school would break
up and the holidays would begin. The young Singletons were going to the
seaside, and every one was about to have a merry-making of one sort or
another.

In the past Irene and her mother had lived on in a dull sort of fashion
at The Follies. Lady Jane had never the heart to leave home, therefore
Irene knew nothing of the delights of traveling. But as the time
approached for the holidays Rosamund spoke once or twice of the fun
which ought to be before them.

"Where would you like to go?" she said to her young friend. "There are
ever so many places where you can have amusement--you and Lady Jane."

"You want to tame me down," said Irene. "I don't think I can be
altogether tamed. There is something in me here"--and she put her hand
on her breast--"a wild sort of thing that will assert itself now and
then. I can't help myself. I can't, for instance, sit still in a
drawing-room, or be a very good little girl in church, finding out the
hymns and the lessons for the day, and the right psalms. I could not
teach in the Sunday-school--no, I couldn't, for all the world. I could
do none of those things, because I have a wild living creature that
seems to be inside me. I don't know what it means; I don't understand it
myself. It is rampant when you are not here; but when you are present
it stays quiet mostly, just because I love you. That is the whole
reason."

"Aren't you very much happier since I came to you?" said Rosamund.

The two girls were pacing up and down in front of the lake, about a week
before the holidays were to begin.

Meanwhile, at Sunnyside, school had recommenced. It is true that Jane,
far too delicate to resume her lessons, was away at the seaside; but
Lucy, Laura, Annie Millar, Phyllis Flower, and Agnes Sparkes had all
returned to their studies. Miss Archer and Mademoiselle Omont were also
very much to the fore. The kind Bretts had found rooms for the two
governesses at Dartford; but they could not manage to take them in
themselves. The girls had therefore gone, after a certain manner,
through their lessons; but now the holidays were approaching.

"What a queer term it has been!" said Rosamund, talking to Irene as they
walked by the water-side. "I, who belonged to the Merrimans' party,
spending all my time with you; you working hard at your daily lessons
and enjoying them; Miss Frost and Miss Carter the best of friends, and
meeting Sunday after Sunday; and you having quite a fancy--yes, and more
than a fancy--for Maud Singleton!"

"I am fond of her," said Irene, "just because she is like yourself, so
brave. I wanted brave people. I never came across a brave person until I
met you."

"Well, now we have to think of the holidays," said Rosamund. "I have
something to tell you, Irene. You have been good--very good; but all our
goodness is worth nothing until it has been tried. Yours has not been
tried yet."

"What do you mean by that?" said Irene, in some terror, raising her
lovely, wild, bright eyes to Rosamund's face.

"Well, it hasn't, darling--has it?"

"I don't understand. I can't tell you what an effort it has been not to
collect worms and toads, and frogs and newts, and wasps and bees, and
blue-bottles and spiders. I did so adore frightening the servants,
particularly James; and there are such heaps of darling wasps this
season. I just longed to stick one down his neck; but I refrained when I
looked at you."

"You ought not even to speak of these things; they mean downright
cruelty, and aren't the least bit funny."

"Aren't they, now? Are you sure? They used to seem very funny to me--the
way James used to start at table; because I generally managed, when he
attended, to put a spider on my plate when I handed it to him. I used to
keep a little collection of them in my handkerchief, and generally
popped one on my plate; and he used always to say 'Oh!' and he would
generally drop and break the plate, which was a valuable china one, and
mother was quite annoyed."

"Well, all those things are past. We needn't talk of them any more. I
want to know what you are going to do in the holidays."

"What are you going to do, Rose?"

"I am very sorry, Irene, but I am afraid I must go away from you. I have
to visit my parents; and there is something else they want me to do.
They want me to go back to the Merrimans' school in the autumn, and stay
there for at least a term. They say that in no other way can I get over
the disgrace of having, as it were, run away from school. I don't mind a
bit having done that, for I know that you wanted me; but I think I ought
to go back to the Merrimans' for at least a term."

"Even with Lucy, odious creature?"

"Well, now, you don't know her."

"But you do; and do you like her?"

"I can't honestly say that I do."

"It is Sunday to-morrow; can't we both go to church, and then I can look
at Lucy in the distance and see what I think of her?"

"You ought not to go to church in that spirit."

"Well, perhaps something else will happen. Maud Singleton is always
asking me to go to church. I think I will, if you will come with me. We
can go to the evening service. I have never been. Maud says I wouldn't
feel so like a changeling if I could pray like other people, and sing
hymns like other people. But then I'm sure I can't. May we sit near the
door, and if I feel it impossible to remain quiet any longer, do you
mind if I rush out?"

"We will certainly go to church, and we can sit near the door, and you
shall rush out if you feel inclined, and I will come with you," said
Rosamund. "But this is rather starting away from our question. What do
you want to do during the holidays? You wouldn't, for instance, think of
