you are in Cleveland. I thought you were in New York."

"I've been back to the farm for a couple of days--on business and
pleasure combined. Aren't you in Buffalo and Niagara Falls any more?"

"Oh, yes, a law case brought me here. How are you doing?"

"Very well indeed."

"I am glad to hear it."

"You were awfully good to give me that hundred dollars," continued Nat,
earnestly, "I never expected it."

"I hope it did you lots of good, Nat."

"It did and it didn't."

"What do you mean?"

"The money was stolen from me--or rather I was swindled out of it. That
opened my eyes to the fact that I was not as smart as I had imagined
myself to be." And then our hero related the experience he had had with
Nick Smithers, alias Hamilton Dart.

"That was too bad," said Paul Hampton. "I trust you locate this Smithers
some day."

"So do I."

"What are you doing?"

"I am with a real estate broker. I am learning shorthand and
typewriting, and I am to become his private secretary."

"Then you are on the right road, and I congratulate you. The real estate
business is an excellent one, especially in a large city like New York."

Paul Hampton walked to the depot with Nat and saw him on the cars. Soon
our hero was off. The trip back to the metropolis was made without
anything out of the ordinary happening.

"So you are back," said John Garwell, when our hero presented himself at
the office. "I hope you enjoyed the trip."

"I did, very much, Mr. Garwell."

"How did your uncle treat you?"

"Finely, sir."

"Did you find any papers of value?" went on the real estate broker.

"I found half a dozen which I wish you would look over." And Nat brought
forth the documents.

"I am anxious to close that real estate deal," went on John Garwell.
"Others are getting wind of it, including that fellow Shanley from
Brooklyn. He is doing his best to make me lose on the deal."

"Is Rufus Cameron in with him?"

"I believe he is. Both of them are very bitter."

"I suppose they are bitter against me too," observed Nat soberly.

"It is more than likely. But that can't be helped, Nat. In business a
man is bound to make more or less of enemies."

John Garwell was very busy, and said he would look over the documents
the next day. But on the following morning he was called out of town,
so the documents were not examined until some days later.

As soon as he returned to the office, Nat went to work with vigor for
over a week, to make up for the lost time. He had a great deal of
writing on hand, and one evening he remained at the place until after
nine o'clock.

As Nat had been indoors nearly all day, he resolved to walk home, just
for the physical exercise and to get the fresh air. He started up
Broadway, and was soon as far as Tenth Street. Here he attempted to
cross the thoroughfare, but was stopped by a jam of cars and other
vehicles.

"Let me alone!" he heard a boy not far off say. "Let me alone! I won't
give you my money!"

"You've got to pay for the papers, country!" cried another boy. "Come,
fork over the fifteen cents."

"It's all I've got."

"I don't care. Fork over, or I'll--I'll mash you!"

The voice of one of the boys sounded familiar, and stepping to a dark
doorway, from whence the voices proceeded, Nat was amazed to find Fred
Guff, and a New York newsboy who was a stranger.

"Fred!"

"Why, if it ain't Nat!" cried the farm boy. "Where did you spring from?"

"I think I had better ask you that question."

"I want me money!" came from the newsboy.

"Help me, Nat. He wants to get my money from me. It's the last fifteen
cents I've got!" pleaded Fred.

"What do you want of the money?" demanded Nat, of the newsboy.

"Oh, it ain't none o' your business."

"I tried to help him sell papers," said Fred. "But I couldn't sell those
he gave me, and now he wants me to pay for them, anyway."

"Did you agree to pay for them?"

"I said I'd pay for them if I sold them."

"Then you don't get any money," said Nat, sharply, to the newsboy. "Now
let this boy alone, do you hear?"

"Ah! wait till I catch him alone," muttered the newsboy, and ran off
around the corner.




CHAPTER XXVI

FRED GIVES UP CITY LIFE


"Now then, Fred, tell me how it is that you are in New York," said Nat,
when the newsboy had departed.

"I--I ran away from home."

"Did you have the carfare to this city?"

"No, I stole a ride to Cleveland on a freight train, and then I stole
another ride on two trains to New York. I was kicked off of one train."

"And what have you been doing since you landed here?"

"Selling papers, and doing odd jobs. I couldn't get anything steady."

"Did you try to find me?"

"No," and the gawk of a boy hung his head.

"Why not?"

"Because I--I wanted to make my own way, same as you are doing. But, oh,
Nat, it's awfully hard."

"Where have you been staying nights?"

"One night I slept in a doorway, and last night I slept in a park until
a policeman came and chased me away."

Fred looked so forlorn and hungry that Nat could not help but pity him.
Coming to the city to earn his living had evidently hit Fred hard.

"Had any supper?" he asked, kindly.

"I had a--a bun."

"Is that all?"

"Yes."

"How much money have you?"

"Fifteen cents, and I wanted to make that last just as long as I could."

"Come with me, and I'll get you something to eat," said our hero.

Fred was willing enough, and seated at a table in a restaurant he fairly
devoured the beef and beans, bread and coffee set before him.

"Have a piece of lemon pie?" asked Nat.

"Can you afford it, Nat?"

"I guess so," and our hero ordered the pie, and also ate a piece, and
drank a glass of milk, to keep Fred company.

"It costs a terrible pile to live in the city," sighed Fred. "You've got
to pay for everything. When I landed, a man made me pay ten cents for
crossing a torn-up street."

"He swindled you, Fred."

"Maybe he did. I know he ran off as soon as he got the money."

"Where were you going to stop to-night?"

"I--I don't know."

"You had better come with me."

"I--I can't pay for regular lodging," and again the boy from the farm
hung his head.

"Well, I'll do the paying."

"Will you?" Fred's face brightened. "Say, Nat, you're real good! I'm
sorry I treated you so meanly when you paid us a visit."

"We'll let that pass. Now, you are here, the question is, what are you
going to do?"

"Can't I find a job? I'm willing to do anything."

"We'll see about that."

They walked to Mrs. Talcott's place, and here Nat explained the
situation, and Fred was placed in a room that chanced to be vacant. He
was exceedingly tired and dropped to sleep almost instantly.

"I'm going to telegraph to Brookville that you are here and safe," said
Nat, the next morning. "I don't want your mother to worry about you."
And the telegram was sent off before our hero went to the office. Nat
gave Fred a dollar, and told him to try his best that day to find
something to do.

"I'll get something," said Fred, but that night he came back greatly
disheartened.

"I couldn't get a thing," he declared. "I tried about fifty places. In
one place a man kicked me out, and in another place a lot of boys called
me 'Hayseed,' and threw lumps of dirt at me. I--I guess I'll go back to
the farm."

"Don't you want to try it for another day?" asked Nat. "I'll pay your
way." He knew the experience would do Fred good. The boy from the
country consented; but at night he returned more discouraged than ever.

"I was a big fool to leave the farm," he sighed. "The city is no place
for me. The noise makes my head ache, and I get lost every time I turn a
corner. I wish I was back to Brookville."

"Very well, you shall start back to-morrow," answered Nat.

"But I ain't got the carfare, and I hate to try riding on the freight
cars again."

"I'll get you a railroad ticket," answered Nat, and he did so, and also
gave Fred some change for his meals. Fred was more than thankful, and
actually cried on parting.

"You're the best boy in the world, Nat," he sobbed. "The very best! Just
wait till you come back to the farm! I'll show you how I can treat
you!" And then he was off for home, a sadder but a wiser youth.

"To go back to the farm was the best thing that fellow could do," was
Dick's comment. "Why, he wouldn't amount to shucks here, even if he
stayed a year."

"We can't all be city folks," said Mrs. Talcott. "Some men must remain
farmers."

"The trouble with Fred is, he doesn't like to work," said Nat. "But this
may teach him a lesson."

On the day that Fred left, Nat was called to the office by John Garwell.

"Nat, I want you to go to Springfield, Massachusetts, immediately," said
the real estate broker. "See when you can catch a train."

"A train leaves the Grand Central Depot at eleven-thirty," was our
hero's answer, after consulting a time-table.

"Then you have plenty of time. Take this document and turn it over to
Mr. Perry Robertson."

"Yes, sir."

"Don't give it to anybody else."

"Shall I wait for Mr. Robertson, if he isn't in when I call?"

"Yes."

"All right, sir."

No more was said, and Nat prepared for the trip without further delay.
He wished to ask his employer about the documents found in the trunk,
but saw that Mr. Garwell was too busy to be interrupted.

Nat was getting used to taking short trips to various cities, so the
ride to Springfield was no great novelty. He put in part of his time at
reading a newspaper, and the balance at studying shorthand from a book
which he carried with him.

Arriving at Springfield, Nat found he would have to wait until evening
before he could see Mr. Perry Robertson. This made him stay in the city
overnight, and he did not arrange to go back to New York until ten
o'clock the next morning.

He had just paid his bill at the hotel, and was passing the smoking
room, when he saw a man who looked familiar, get up from reading a
newspaper, and walk toward him.

"Hamilton Dart!" gasped our hero, and rushing forward he caught the
swindler by the arm.




CHAPTER XXVII

A SCENE AT THE HOTEL


The fellow who had posed as a broker and commission merchant was taken
completely by surprise when confronted by Nat, and for the moment did
not know what to say.

"I guess you didn't expect to see me again," said our hero, after a
pause, during which Nick Smithers--to use his real name--glared fiercely
at the youth.

"Excuse me, boy, but I don't know you!" said the swindler, at last. "You
have made a strange mistake."

"Oh, no, I haven't," answered Nat. "You are Hamilton Dart, alias Nick
Smithers."

"My dear young friend you are in error. My name is Josiah Garfield, and
I am from Concord, Massachusetts."

"I am not mistaken. You are Nick Smithers, and you are the rascal who
swindled me in New York City."

"Boy, you must be mad!" burst out Nick Smithers, in assumed
indignation. "I a swindler! Preposterous!"

"It's the plain truth, and there is no use of your denying it."

By this time a small crowd was gathering around. Soon a clerk of the
hotel came up hastily.

"What's the trouble here?" he questioned, anxiously.

"This boy is crazy," said Nick Smithers.

"No, I am not. This man is a swindler, and I want him arrested," came
from Nat. He made up his mind, come what might, he would stand up for
his rights.

"I am an honest man--well-known in Concord, where I keep a jewelry
establishment," puffed Nick Smithers. "This is an insult to me." He
turned to the hotel clerk. "I shall hold your hotel responsible for
this."

"I--this looks as if you were making a mistake," said the clerk to Nat.
"This gentleman has been stopping here for over a week. He is registered
on our book as Josiah Garfield."

"He has half a dozen names," said Nat. "I tell you he is a swindler."

"And I say the boy is crazy. Boy, if you say another word, I'll have you
locked up."

Nick Smithers thought Nat was so green that he would back down, but for
once he made a mistake.

"Call a policeman, please," he said to the clerk. "We can talk this over
when we get to the police headquarters."

"Are you sure of what you are doing?" asked the clerk.

"Yes, I am sure of it. I can prove beyond any doubt whatever that this
fellow is a confidence man and a swindler. He swindled me out of a
hundred dollars in New York, and he swindled several others out of the
same amount. Just help me to lock him up and I'll get all the witnesses
necessary."

"That's straight talk," came from a commercial traveler standing nearby.
"If the boy can prove what he says this man ought to be arrested by all
means."

"He can't prove a thing," answered Nick Smithers, but he began to grow
hot and cold, for he realized that Nat meant business and was not to be
overawed as easily as he had imagined.

"I'll call a cop!" piped in a newsboy who had drifted into the room. "I
see one on de corner a minit ago," and away he ran to execute his
errand.

"The police will have to settle this," said the hotel clerk. "If you
