and when arbitration was spoken of, said we had nothing to arbitrate.
This was, in the main, President Roosevelt's view of the matter, yet, as
things grew more disturbed, he realized, as a good business man, that
something must be done. We did not wish to fight Canada and England for
the strip of land, and neither did they wish to fight, so at last a
Board of Arbitration was agreed upon, and the claims of both parties
were carefully investigated. In the end nearly every point claimed by
the United States was granted to us. It was a great satisfaction to have
this long-standing dispute settled; and how much better it was to do it
by arbitration than by going to war.

The regular session of Congress came to an end on March 4, 1903, but
President Roosevelt had already called an extra session, to consider a
bill for reciprocity in our dealing with the new government of Cuba and
to ratify a treaty with Colombia concerning the Panama Canal.

There was a great deal of debating at this session of Congress. The bill
concerning Cuba caused but little trouble, but many wanted the canal
placed in Nicaragua instead of Panama, and did not wish to pay the forty
millions of dollars asked for the work already accomplished by the old
French Canal Company. But in the end the bill passed the United States
Senate by a vote of seventy-three to five, with the proviso that should
we fail to make a satisfactory arrangement about the Panama Canal, then
the government should build the canal through Nicaragua. President
Roosevelt was enthusiastic over a canal at the isthmus, and lost no time
in arranging to push the work further.

The people of the far West were very anxious to meet the chief ruler of
our nation, and early in the year it was arranged that President
Roosevelt should leave Washington on April 1 for a tour to last until
June. In that time he was to visit more than twenty States, and make
over one hundred stops. The people in the West awaited his coming with
much pleasure.

The President was justly entitled to this outing, for the nation was now
at peace with the entire world, and never had business been so
prosperous. More than this, our affairs with other nations had been so
handled that throughout the entire civilized world no ruler was more
popular than was Theodore Roosevelt. In England he was spoken of with
the highest praise, and the regards of the Germans had already been
shown in the visit of Prince Henry to this country. He was known to be
vigorous to the last degree, but it was likewise realized that he was
thoroughly honest and straight-forward.

The first stop of the President in his trip West was made at Chicago,
where during the day he laid the corner-stone of the new law building of
the University of Chicago, which university conferred upon him the
degree of LL.D. (Doctor of Laws). In the evening he addressed an
unusually large crowd at the Auditorium building, speaking upon the
Monroe Doctrine.

From Chicago the President journeyed to Milwaukee, and then to St. Paul
and Minneapolis. At the first-named city he made a forceful address on
the trusts, giving his hearers a clear idea of how the great
corporations of to-day were brought into existence, and what may be done
to control them, and in the last-named city he spoke on the
ever-important question of tariff.

It was an eventful week, and when Sunday came the Chief Magistrate was
glad enough to take a day of rest at Sioux Falls, South Dakota. From
there he journeyed to Gardiner, Montana, one of the entrances to that
greatest of all American wonderlands, Yellowstone Park.

It was understood that President Roosevelt wished to visit the Park
without a great following of the general public, and this wish was
carried out to the letter. Mr. Roosevelt had with him the well-known
naturalist, Mr. John Burroughs, and for about two weeks he enjoyed
himself to his heart's content, visiting many of the spots of interest
and taking it easy whenever he felt so disposed. It was not a hunting
trip, although big game is plentiful enough in the Park. It was just
getting "near to nature's heart," and Mr. Roosevelt afterward declared
it to be one of the best outings he had ever experienced.

[Illustration:

CORTELYOU. PAYNE. MOODY. HAY. ROOSEVELT. HITCHCOCK. ROOT. SHAW. WILSON.
KNOX.

PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AND CABINET, 1903.]




CHAPTER XXIX

DEDICATION OF THE FAIR BUILDINGS AT ST. LOUIS--CONTINUATION OF THE TRIP
TO SAN FRANCISCO--UP IN THE FAR NORTH-WEST--BACK IN WASHINGTON--THE
POST-OFFICE SCANDALS--THE NEW REPUBLIC OF PANAMA--A CANAL AT
LAST--PROCLAMATION REGARDING THE WAR BETWEEN JAPAN AND RUSSIA--OPENING
OF THE GREAT FAIR


After the refreshing tour of Yellowstone Park, President Roosevelt
journeyed across Nebraska to Omaha, then across Iowa to Keokuk, and from
the latter city to St. Louis.

As before, he delivered a number of addresses, and wherever he spoke
great crowds came to see and to hear him. In these crowds were people of
all political tendencies, but it made no difference if they were
Republicans, Democrats, or Populists, all were equally glad to greet the
President of the United States and the hero of San Juan Hill.

On this trip he frequently met some of the Rough Riders, and they
invariably did all in their power to make him feel at home. On the
other hand he showed that he had not forgotten them.

"By George, I am glad to see you!" he would exclaim, catching an old
comrade by the hand. And his tone of voice would show that he meant just
what he said.

For a long time the people of St. Louis had been preparing for a grand
fair, to be known as the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, to commemorate
the purchasing from France of all that vast territory of the United
States which lies between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains
and the Gulf of Mexico and British America. The purchase was made in
1803 for fifteen millions of dollars, and it was hoped to hold the
exposition on the one hundredth anniversary, in 1903, but matters were
delayed, and so the fair was postponed until 1904.

The dedication of the fair buildings at the Exposition Grounds was held
on April 30, 1903, and was made a gala occasion by those interested.
President Roosevelt was invited to speak, and also Ex-President
Cleveland, and both made addresses of remarkable interest. Following the
dedication exercises a grand banquet was given at which the scene of
good-fellowship was one not readily forgotten. The President wished the
exposition well, and promised to do all in his power to make it a
success.

Although the President had already travelled many miles, the greater
part of his western trip still lay before him.

From St. Louis he went to Kansas City and to Topeka, where the citizens
were as anxious to meet him as anywhere. He stopped at Sharon Springs
over Sunday, and then went to Denver, and to various towns in Colorado
and in New Mexico. While in New Mexico he became interested in the
systems of irrigation there, and told the people what they might do if
their systems of watering the ground were increased.

Having passed through the Grand Canon, the second week in May found him
in southern California. He visited Los Angeles, reviewing the annual
floral parade, and many other points, and at Claremont addressed a great
gathering of school children in a beautiful park filled with shrubs and
flowers. The children were decidedly enthusiastic over the meeting, and
when Mr. Roosevelt went away, some pelted him with flowers, which
bombardment he took in good part.

President Roosevelt's visit to Leland Stanford Jr. University in
California came next, and here the students cheered him with vigor. He
visited many of the more important buildings, and was entertained by
members of the faculty.

His face was now set toward the Golden Gate, and San Francisco was all
alive to give him an ovation. It was his first official visit to the
Pacific coast, and all whom he met vied with each other to do him honor,
while they listened with great attention to what he had to say.

Three days were spent in San Francisco and vicinity, and three days more
in a tour of the Yosemite Valley. President Roosevelt was particularly
anxious to see some of the big trees of the State, and was driven to
several that are well known.

The steps of the Chief Magistrate were now turned northward, to Oregon,
and a week was spent at Portland, and in the towns and cities of the
Puget Sound territory, and beyond. Here he saw much that was new and
novel in the lumber trade and in the salmon industry, and was received
with a warmth that could not be mistaken.

"He is a President for the whole country, no mistake about that," said
more than one.

"He makes you feel he is your friend the minute you lay eyes on him,"
would put in another. To many in this far corner of our country, this
visit of the President will ever remain as a pleasant memory. They could
never hope to get to Washington, more than three thousand miles away,
and to have him come out to see them was worth remembering.

The journey eastward was made through Montana to Salt Lake City and then
to Cheyenne, where additional addresses were delivered. From the latter
point a fast train bore him homeward, and by the next Sunday he was back
in the White House once more, as fresh and hearty as ever, and well
prepared to undertake whatever important work might come to hand.

And work was there in plenty. Among the first things taken up by the
President was a scandal in the Post-Office Department. Without loss of
time President Roosevelt ordered Postmaster General Payne to make a
thorough investigation, with the result that many contracts which were
harmful to our post-office system were annulled, and some wrong-doers
were brought to justice.

Toward the end of July there was considerable disturbance in the
Government Printing Office at Washington because a certain assistant
foreman, who had been discharged, was reinstated. All of the bookbinders
were on the point of striking because they did not want the man
returned, as he did not belong to their union. But President Roosevelt
was firm in the matter; and in the end the man went back, and there was
no strike. This affair caused an almost endless discussion in labor
circles, some claiming that the union should have been upheld, while
others thought differently.

During the summer, as was his usual habit, President Roosevelt, with his
family, spent part of his time at his country home at Oyster Bay. This
time the visit to the old homestead was of unusual interest, for, on
August 17, the North Atlantic Fleet of the navy visited that vicinity,
for review and inspection by the President.

It was a gala occasion, and the fleet presented a handsome appearance
as it filed past and thundered out a Presidential salute. Many
distinguished guests were present, and all without exception spoke of
the steady improvement in our navy as a whole. President Roosevelt was
equally enthusiastic, and well he might be, for he had used every means
in his power to make our navy all it should be.

Late in September President Roosevelt returned to Washington, and on
October 15 delivered the principal address at the unveiling of a statue
of that grand military hero, General Sherman. Here once more he was
listened to with tremendous interest, delivering a speech that was
patriotic to the core and full of inspiration.

For some time past matters in Colombia had been in a very mixed-up
condition. The United States were willing to take hold of the Panama
Canal, as already mentioned, but although a treaty had been made to that
effect, the Colombian government would not ratify the agreement.

On November 3, the trouble in Colombia reached its culminating point. On
that day the State of Panama declared itself free and independent. The
people of that State wanted the canal built by the United States, and
were very angry when the rest of the Colombian States would not agree to
the treaty which had been made.

At once there were strong rumors of war, and a few slight attacks were
really made. The United States forbade the transportation of soldiers on
the Panama railroad, and a few days later recognized Panama as an
independent republic. The new republic was likewise recognized by
France, and, later still, by England. On November 9, Panama appointed a
commission to negotiate a canal treaty with our country, and this treaty
was signed and sealed at Washington by Secretary of State Hay, acting
for the United States, and M. Bunau-Varilla, acting for Panama.

The President's next message to Congress went at great length into the
question of the Panama Canal, and in defence of the recognition of the
new republic. It also told of what the new Department of Commerce and
Labor had accomplished, especially the branch devoted to corporations.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT SPEAKING AT THE UNVEILING OF THE
STATUE OF GENERAL SHERMAN.

(_Photograph by Clinedinst, Washington, D.C._)]

"We need not be over-sensitive about the welfare of corporations
which shrink from the light," wrote Mr. Roosevelt. And in this statement
every one who had the best interests of our nation at heart agreed. To
accomplish great works great corporations are often necessary, but they
must conduct business in such a fashion that they are not ashamed to
show their methods to the public at large.

At the opening of the year 1904 there were strong rumors of a war
between Japan and Russia, over the occupation of Korea, and this war
started early in February by a battle on the sea, wherein the Russian
fleet lost several war-ships. This contest was followed by others of
more or less importance, and it looked as if, sooner or later, other
nations might become involved in the struggle.

"We must keep our hands off," said President Roosevelt, and at once
issued a proclamation, calling on all good citizens to remain strictly
neutral, and warning those who might take part that they could hope for
no aid from the United States should they get into trouble personally or
have any property confiscated. This proclamation was followed by some
excellent work of our State Department, whereby it was agreed among the
leading nations that the zone of fighting should be a limited one,--that
is, that neither Japan nor Russia should be allowed to carry it beyond a
certain defined territory.

For many weeks Congress had debated the Panama Canal treaty and the
action of President Roosevelt regarding the new republic of Panama. On
February 23, 1904, a vote was taken in the Senate, and the Panama Canal
treaty was ratified in all particulars. Without delay some United States
troops were despatched to Panama, to guard the strip of land ten miles
wide through which the canal is to run, and preparations were made to
push the work on the waterway without further delay.

On Saturday, April 30, the great World's Fair at St. Louis was formally
opened to the public. It had cost over fifty millions of dollars and was
designed to eclipse any fair held in the past. The opening was attended
by two hundred thousand visitors, all of whom were more than pleased
with everything to be seen.

It had been arranged that President Roosevelt should formally open the
Exposition by means of telegraphic communications from the White House
to the fair grounds. A key of ivory and gold was used for the purpose,
and as soon as it was touched a salute of twenty-one guns roared forth
in the Exposition's honor. Around the President were assembled the
members of his Cabinet and representatives of many foreign nations.
Before touching the key which was to set the machinery of the wonderful
fair in motion, President Roosevelt spoke as follows:--

"I have received from the Exposition grounds the statement that the
management of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition awaits the pressing of
the button which is to transmit the electric energy which is to unfurl
the flag and start the machinery of the Exposition.

"I wish now to greet all present, and especially the representatives of
the foreign nations here represented, in the name of the American
people, and to thank these representatives for the parts their several
countries have taken in being represented in this centennial anniversary
of the greatest step in the movement which transformed the American
Republic from a small confederacy of States lying along the Atlantic
seaboard into a continental nation.

"This Exposition is one primarily intended to show the progress in the
industry, the science, and the art, not only of the American nation, but
of all other nations, in the great and wonderful century which has just
closed. Every department of human activity will be represented there,
and perhaps I may be allowed, as honorary president of the athletic
association which, under European management, started to revive the
memory of the Olympic games, to say that I am glad that, in addition to
paying proper heed to the progress of industry, of science, of art, we
have also paid proper heed to the development of the athletic pastimes
which are useful in themselves as showing that it is wise for nations to
be able to relax.

"I greet you all. I appreciate your having come here on this occasion,
and in the presence of you, representing the American government and the
governments of the foreign nations, I here open the Louisiana
Exposition."




CHAPTER XXX

PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THEODORE ROOSEVELT--THE PRESIDENT'S
FAMILY--LIFE AT THE WHITE HOUSE--OUR COUNTRY AND ITS FUTURE


In reading over the foregoing pages the question may occur to some of my
young readers, How is it possible for President Roosevelt to accomplish
so much and still have time in which to occasionally enjoy himself by
travelling or by going on a hunting tour?

The answer is a very simple one. Mr. Roosevelt works systematically, as
do all who want their labor to amount to something. Years ago, when he
was physically weak, he determined to make himself strong. He persisted
in vigorous exercise, especially in the open air, and in the end
attained a bodily health which any ordinary man may well envy.

The President does each day's work as it comes before him. He does not
borrow trouble or cross a bridge before he comes to it. Whatever there
is to do he does to the very best of his ability, and he allows future
complications to take care of themselves. If a mistake is made, he does
not worry continually over it, but keeps it in mind, so that a like
mistake shall not occur again. When once his hand is on the plough, he
does not believe in turning back. He has unlimited faith in the future
of our glorious country, and a like faith in the honor and courage of
his fellow-citizens.

Any man to be an intelligent worker cannot be dissipated, and the
President is a good illustration of this. He has a good appetite, but
eats moderately, and does not depend upon stimulants or tobacco to
"brace him up" when the work is extra heavy. He goes out nearly every
day for a walk, a ride on horseback, or a drive with some members of his
family, and as a result of this, when night comes, sleeps soundly and
arises the next morning as bright and fresh as ever.

This is the first time that a President with a large family has occupied
