up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time his
form and pressure. Now, this overdone or come tardy
off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make
the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one                    25
must, in your allowance, o'erweigh a whole theatre of
others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and
heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it
profanely, that neither having the accent of Christains
nor the gait of Christain, pagan, nor man, have so                    30
strutted and bellowed, that I have thought some of
nature's journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

      --_Shakespeare_


  MOUTH, TOWN-CRIER, TAME, JOURNEYMEN. Why are these words
  emphatic? (Introduction, p. 30.)

  Explain FROM THE PURPOSE OF PLAYING, COME TARDY OFF, THE
  CENSURE OF THE WHICH ... OTHERS. What are the emphatic
  words in each?

  TORRENT, TEMPEST, WHIRLWIND. Observe the Climax.

  Give other examples of Climax from this selection and
  show how the Emphasis is employed. (Introduction, p.
  31.)

  Select parenthetical clauses and show how they are
  subordinated. (Introduction, p. 24.)

  Read the last two sentences with a view to Perspective.
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

       *       *       *       *       *


ROSABELLE

  From "The Lay of the Last Minstrel"


    O listen, listen, ladies gay!
      No haughty feat of arms I tell;
    Soft is the note, and sad the lay
      That mourns the lovely Rosabelle.

  "Moor, moor the barge, ye gallant crew!
    And, gentle ladye, deign to stay!
  Rest thee in Castle Ravensheuch,
    Nor tempt the stormy firth to-day.

  "The blackening wave is edged with white;
    To inch and rock the sea-mews fly;
  The fishers have heard the Water-Sprite,
    Whose screams forebode that wreck is =nigh=.

  "Last night the gifted Seer did view
    A wet shroud swathed round ladye gay;
  Then stay thee, Fair, in Ravensheuch;
    Why cross the gloomy firth to-day?"--

  "'Tis not because Lord Lindesay's heir
    To-night at Roslin leads the ball,
  But that my ladye-mother there
    Sits lonely in her castle-hall.

  "'Tis not because the ring they ride,
    And Lindesay at the ring rides well,
  But that my sire the wine will chide
    If 'tis not fill'd by Rosabelle."--

  O'er Roslin all that dreary night
    A wondrous blaze was seen to gleam;
  'Twas broader than the watch-fire's light,
    And redder than the bright moonbeam.

  It glared on Roslin's castled rock,
    It ruddied all the copse-wood glen;
  'Twas seen from Dryden's groves of oak,
    And seen from cavern'd Hawthornden.

  Seem'd all on fire that chapel proud,
    Where Roslin's chiefs uncoffin'd lie,
  Each Baron, for a sable shroud,
    Sheathed in his iron panoply.

  Seem'd all on fire within, around,
    Deep sacristy and altar's pale;
  Shone every pillar foliage-bound,
    And glimmer'd all the dead men's mail.

  Blazed battlement and pinnet high,
    Blazed every rose-carved buttress fair--
  So still they blaze, when fate is nigh
    The lordly line of high Saint Clair.

  There are twenty of Roslin's barons bold
    Lie buried within that proud chapelle;
  Each one the holy vault doth hold--
    But the sea holds lovely Rosabelle!

  And each Saint Clair was buried there
    With candle, with book, and with knell;
  But the sea-caves rung, and the wild winds sung
    The dirge of lovely Rosabelle!

      --_Sir Walter Scott_


  PREPARATORY.--Describe the scene suggested by the first
  stanza.

  Make three scenes of the rest of the poem, and give a
  descriptive title to each.

  Articulation. (Appendix A, 1, 3, and 6.)

  Stanza i. How is the ellipsis in l. 3 indicated?

  Stanza ii. What is the difference between the way the
  speaker addresses the crew and that in which he
  addresses the lady?

  Stanzas iii-iv. How does the reader make prominent the
  four different arguments of the speaker in ll. 9-15, at
  the same time showing that each is a stronger warning
  than the last? (Introduction, pp. 24, 25, and 31.)

  Stanzas v-vi. What is the Inflection on the negative
  statements in the first two lines of each stanza?

  Stanzas vii-xi. What feeling pervades the description of
  the ominous light over Roslyn? What Quality of voice is
  the natural outcome? (Introduction, p. 34.)

  What are the central ideas in stanzas vii, ix, and x?

  How is the break in the thought after FAIR, (stanza xi)
  shown? (Introduction, pp. 8, 9, and 25.)

  Stanzas xii-xiii. What phrases contrast the burial of
  the Saint Clairs with that of Rosabelle? What contrast
  of feeling?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ISLAND OF THE SCOTS

December, 1697


  The Rhine is running deep and red, the island lies before,--
  "Now is there one of all the host will dare to venture o'er?
  For not alone the river's sweep might make a brave man quail;
  The foe are on the further side, their shot comes fast as hail.
  God help us, if the middle isle we may not hope to win;              5
  Now is there any of the host will dare to venture in?"
  "The ford is deep, the banks are steep, the island-shore lies wide;
  Nor man nor horse could stem its force, or reach the further side.
  See there! amidst the willow-boughs the serried bayonets gleam;
  They've flung their bridge,--they've won the isle; the foe have
    cross'd the stream!                                               10
  Their volley flashes sharp and strong,--by all the saints! I trow
  There never yet was soldier born could force that passage now!"

  So spoke the bold French Mareschal with him who led the van,
  Whilst rough and red before their view the turbid river ran.
  Nor bridge nor boat had they to cross the wild and swollen Rhine, 15
  And thundering on the other bank far stretch'd the German line.
  Hard by there stood a swarthy man was leaning on his sword,
  And a sadden'd smile lit up his face as he heard the Captain's word.
  "I've seen a wilder stream ere now than that which rushes there;
  I've stemm'd a heavier torrent yet and never thought to dare.       20
  If German steel be sharp and keen, is ours not strong and true?
  There may be danger in the deed, but there is honour too."

  The old lord in his saddle turn'd, and hastily he said,
  "Hath bold Duguesclin's fiery heart awaken'd from the dead?
  Thou art the leader of the Scots,--now well and sure I know,        25
  That gentle blood in dangerous hour ne'er yet ran cold nor slow,
  And I have seen ye in the fight do all that mortal may:
  If honour is the boon ye seek, it may be won this day,--
  The prize is in the middle isle, there lies the adventurous way,
  And armies twain are on the plain, the daring deed to see,--        30
  Now ask thy gallant company if they will follow thee!"

  Right gladsome look'd the Captain then, and nothing did he say,
  But he turn'd him to his little band, O, few, I ween, were they!
  The relics of the bravest force that ever fought in fray.
  No one of all that company but bore a gentle name,                  35
  Not one whose fathers had not stood in Scotland's fields of fame.
  All they had march'd with great Dundee to where he fought and fell,
  And in the deadly battle-strife had venged their leader well;
  And they had bent the knee to earth when every eye was dim,
  As o'er their hero's buried corpse they sang the funeral hymn;      40
  And they had trod the Pass once more, and stoop'd on either side.
  To pluck the heather from the spot where he had dropp'd and died;
  And they had bound it next their hearts, and ta'en a last farewell
  Of Scottish earth and Scottish sky, where Scotland's glory fell.
  Then went they forth to foreign lands like bent and broken men,     45
  Who leave their dearest hope behind, and may not turn again.

  "The stream," he said, "is broad and deep, and stubborn is
    the foe,--
  Yon island-strength is guarded well,--say, brothers, will ye go?
  From home and kin for many a year our steps have wander'd wide,
  And never may our bones be laid our fathers' graves beside.         50
  No children have we to lament, no wives to wail our fall;
  The traitor's and the spoiler's hand have reft our hearths of all.
  But we have hearts, and we have arms, as strong to will and dare
  As when our ancient banners flew within the northern air.
  Come, brothers! let me name a spell shall rouse your souls again, 55
  And send the old blood bounding free through pulse and heart
    and vein.
  Call back the days of bygone years,--be young and strong once more;
  Think yonder stream, so stark and red, is one we've cross'd before.

  Rise, hill and glen! rise, crag and wood! rise up on either hand,--
  Again upon the Garry's banks, on Scottish soil we stand!            60
  Again I see the tartans wave, again the trumpets ring;
  Again I hear our leader's call: 'Upon them for the King!'
  Stay'd we behind that glorious day for roaring flood or linn?
  The soul of Graeme is with us still,--now, brothers, will ye in?"

  No stay,--no pause. With one accord, they grasp'd each
    other's hand,                                                     65
  Then plunged into the angry flood, that bold and dauntless band.
  High flew the spray above their heads, yet onward still they bore,
  Midst cheer, and shout, and answering yell, and shot,
    and cannon-roar,--
  "Now, by the Holy Cross! I swear, since earth and sea began,
  Was never such a daring deed essay'd by mortal man!"                70
  Thick blew the smoke across the stream, and faster flash'd
    the flame:
  The water plash'd in hissing jets as ball and bullet came.
  Yet onward push'd the Cavaliers all stern and undismay'd,
  With thousand armed foes before, and none behind to aid
  Once, as they near'd the middle stream, so strong
    the torrent swept,                                                75
  That scarce that long and living wall their dangerous footing kept.
  Then rose a warning cry behind, a joyous shout before:
  "The current's strong,--the way is long,--they'll never reach
    the shore!
  See, see! they stagger in the midst, they waver in their line!
  Fire on the madmen! break their ranks, and whelm them
   in the Rhine!"                                                     80

  Have you seen the tall trees swaying when the blast is sounding
    shrill,
  And the whirlwind reels in fury down the gorges of the hill?
  How they toss their mighty branches struggling with
    the tempest's shock;
  How they keep their place of vantage, cleaving firmly to the rock?
  Even so the Scottish warriors held their own against the river;     85
  Though the water flashed around them, not an eye was seen to quiver;
  Though the shot flew sharp and deadly, not a man relax'd his hold;
  For their hearts were big and thrilling with the mighty thoughts
    of old.
  One word was spoken among them, and through the ranks it spread,--
  "Remember our dead Claverhouse!" was all the Captain said.          90
  Then, sternly bending forward, they wrestled on a while,
  Until they clear'd the heavy stream, then rush'd toward the isle.

  The German heart is stout and true, the German arm is strong;
  The German foot goes seldom back where armed foemen throng.
  But never had they faced in field so stern a charge before,         95
  And never had they felt the sweep of Scotland's broad claymore.
  Not fiercer pours the avalanche adown the steep incline,
  That rises o'er the parent springs of rough and rapid Rhine,--
  Scarce swifter shoots the bolt from heaven than came
    the Scottish band
  Right up against the guarded trench, and o'er it sword in hand.    100
  In vain their leaders forward press,--they meet the deadly brand!

  O lonely island of the Rhine,--where seed was never sown,
  What harvest lay upon thy sands, by those strong reapers thrown?
  What saw the winter moon that night, as, struggling through
    the rain,
  She pour'd a wan and fitful light on marsh, and stream,
    and plain?                                                       105
  A dreary spot with corpses strewn, and bayonets glistening round;
  A broken bridge, a stranded boat, a bare and batter'd mound;
  And one huge watch-fire's kindled pile, that sent its
    quivering glare
  To tell the leaders of the host the conquering Scots were there.

  And did they twine the laurel-wreath, for those who fought
    so well?                                                         110
  And did they honour those who liv'd, and weep for those who fell?
  What meed of thanks was given to them let aged annals tell.
  Why should they bring the laurel-wreath,--why crown the cup
    with wine?
  It was not Frenchmen's blood that flow'd so freely on the Rhine,--
  A stranger band of beggar'd men had done the venturous deed:       115
  The glory was to France alone, the danger was their meed.
  And what cared they for idle thanks from foreign prince and peer?
  What virtue had such honey'd words the exiled heart to cheer?
  What matter'd it that men should vaunt and loud and fondly swear,

  That higher feat of chivalry was never wrought elsewhere?          120
  They bore within their breasts the grief that fame
    can never heal,--
  The deep, unutterable woe which none save exiles feel.
  Their hearts were yearning for the land they ne'er might
    see again,--
  For Scotland's high and heather'd hills, for mountains,
    loch and glen--
  For those who haply lay at rest beyond the distant sea,            125
  Beneath the green and daisied turf where they would gladly be!

  Long years went by. The lonely isle in Rhine's tempestuous flood
  Has ta'en another name from those who bought it with their blood:
  And, though the legend does not live,--for legends lightly die--
  The peasant, as he sees the stream in winter rolling by,           130
  And foaming o'er its channel-bed between him and the spot
  Won by the warriors of the sword, still calls that deep
    and dangerous ford
  The Passage of the Scot.

      --_William Edmondstoune Aytoun_


  PREPARATORY.--Narrate briefly the events of this poem,
  and show by a blackboard diagram the situation of the
  island, the position of the armies, etc.

  Into how many dramatic scenes can the poem be divided?
  Describe each one, showing what part of the poem it
  covers.

  For exercise in dramatic rendering, see notes on
  _Highland Hospitality_, pp. 153 and 154.

  In what state of mind are the first two speakers?
  Compare their speeches in this respect with the first
  speech of the Scottish Captain--"I'VE SEEN A WILDER,"
  ETC. What is the difference in Time, Pitch, and Stress?

  3. RIVER'S SWEEP, FOE. Which is more emphatic? Compare
  MAN and HORSE, l. 8.

  10-12. Give some examples of Climax in the second stanza
  and show how the Force and the Pitch are affected.

  24. "HATH BOLD DUGUESCLIN'S," ETC. Supply the
  undercurrent of thought between the first line of this
  speech and the second. How is this suggested in reading?
  (Introduction, p. 14.)

  33. HE TURNED HIM TO HIS LITTLE BAND--O FEW, ETC. How
  can the break in the thought be indicated?
  (Introduction, pp. 8, 9, and 25.)

  33-46. O FEW I WEEN ... NOT TURN AGAIN. What two
  feelings predominate?

  Compare the first part of the Captain's speech with the
  second part from the standpoint of energy. What is the
  difference in Force and Pitch? (Introduction, pp. 23 and
  26.)

  65. NO STAY,--NO PAUSE, ETC. What part does spontaneous
  Imitation play here, and in the following stanza?
  (Introduction, pp. 4 and 5.)

  69. NOW, BY THE HOLY CROSS! ETC. Where should the
  longest Pause be made in this line?

  78. THE CURRENT'S STRONG, ETC. What are the Pitch,
  Force, and Stress? (Introduction, pp. 22, 26, and 29.)

  93. THE GERMAN HEART, ETC. Emphasis. (Introduction, p.
  31.)

  96. AND NEVER HAD THEY FELT, ETC. Note Grouping and
  Pause.

  99. SCARCE SWIFTER, ETC. What is the Stress? Why?
  (Introduction, p. 28.)

  101. IN VAIN. Note the transition at this line.
  (Introduction, pp. 8, 9, and 25.)

  113. WHY SHOULD THEY BRING, ETC. How does the voice
  indicate the insincerity of thought in these lines?
  (Introduction, pp. 21, 22, and 30.)

  What Inflection is used on the various questions in this
  and the preceding stanzas? (Introduction, pp. 18 and
  19.)

  127-133. Note the Grouping and the Shading.
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

       *       *       *       *       *


CRANFORD SOCIETY

From "Cranford"

