
Henry heard no more.  These words did indeed whet his curiosity to the
utmost, but the shame of acting the part of an "eavesdropper" was so
great that, by a strong effort of will, he drew back and pondered for a
moment what he ought to do.  The unexpected tone and tenor of Gascoyne's
remark had softened him slightly; but, recalling the undoubted proofs
that he had had of his really being a pirate, he soon steeled his heart
against him.  He argued that the mere fact of the man giving his mother
credit for a character which everybody knew she possessed, was not
sufficient to clear him of the suspicions which he had raised against
himself.  Besides, it was impertinence in any man to tell his mother his
opinion of her to her face.  And to call him "poor Henry," forsooth!
This was not to be endured!

Having thus wrought himself up to a sufficient degree of indignation,
the young man went straight to the door, making considerable noise in
order to prepare those within for his advent.  He had expected to find
it locked.  In this he was mistaken.  It yielded to a push.

Throwing it wide open, Henry strode into the middle of the apartment,
and, pointing the pistol at Gascoyne's breast, exclaimed--"Pirate
Durward, I arrest you in the king's name!"  At the first sound of her
son's approach, Mrs Stuart bent forward over the table with a groan,
buried her face in her hands.

Gascoyne received Henry's speech at first with a frown and then with a
smile.

"You have taken a strange time and way to jest, Henry," said he,
crossing his arms on his broad chest and gazing fixedly in the youth's
face.

"You will not throe me off my guard thus," said Henry, sternly.  "You
are my prisoner.  I know you to be a pirate.  At any rate you will have
to prove yourself to be an honest man before you quit this hut a free
man.  Mother, leave this place that I may lock the door upon him."

The widow did not move, but Gascoyne made a step towards her son.

"Another step and I will fire.  Your blood shall be on your own head,
Gascoyne."

As Gascoyne still advanced, Henry pointed the pistol straight at his
breast and pulled the trigger, but no report followed--the priming,
indeed, flashed in the pan but that was all!

With a cry of rage and defiance, Henry leaped upon Gascoyne like a young
lion.  He struck at him with the pistol, but the latter caught the
weapon in his powerful hand, wrenched it from the youth's grasp and
flung it to the other end of the apartment.

"You shall not escape me," cried Henry; aiming a tremendous blow with
his fist at Gascoyne's face.  It was parried, and the next moment the
two closed in a deadly struggle.

It was a terrible sight for the widow to witness, these two Herculean
men exerting their great strength to the utmost in a hand-to-hand
conflict in that small hut like two tigers in a cage.

Henry, although nearly six feet in height, and proportionally broad and
powerful, was much inferior to his gigantic antagonist; but to the
superior size and physical force of the latter he opposed the lithe
activity and the fervid energy of youth, so that to an unpractised eye
it might have seemed doubtful at first which of the two men had the best
chance.

Straining his powers to the utmost, Henry attempted to lift his opponent
off the ground and throw him.  In this he was nearly successful.
Gascoyne staggered, but recovered himself instantly.  They did not move
much from the centre of the room, nor was there much noise created
during the conflict.  It seemed too close--too full of concentrated
energy--of heavy, prolonged straining--for much violent motion.  The
great veins in Gascoyne's forehead stood out like knotted cords; yet
there was no scowl or frown on his face.  Henry's brows, on the
contrary, were gathered into a dark frown.  His teeth were set, and his
countenance flushed to deep red by exertion and passion.

Strange to say, the widow made no effort to separate the combatants;
neither did she attempt to move from her seat or give any alarm.  She
sat with her hands on the table clasped tightly together, gazing
eagerly, anxiously, like a fascinated creature, at the wild struggle
that was going on before her.

Again and again Henry attempted, with all the fire of youth, to throw
his adversary by one tremendous effort, but failed.  Then he tried to
fling him off, so as to have the power of using his fists or making an
overwhelming rush.  But Gascoyne held him in his strong arms like a
vice.  Several times he freed his right arm and attempted to plant a
blow, but Gascoyne caught the blow in his hand, or seized the wrist and
prevented its being delivered.  In short, do what he would, Henry Stuart
could neither free himself from the embrace of his enemy nor conquer
him.  Still he struggled on, for as this fact became more apparent the
youth's blood became hotter from mingled shame and anger.

Both men soon began to shew symptoms of fatigue.  It was not in the
nature of things that two such frames, animated by such spirits, could
prolong so exhausting a struggle.  It was not doubtful now which of the
two would come off victorious.  During the whole course of the fight
Gascoyne had acted entirely on, the defensive.  A small knife or
stiletto hung at his left side, but he never attempted to use it, and he
never once tried to throw his adversary.  In fact it now became evident,
even to the widow's perceptions, that the captain was actually playing
with her son.

All along, his countenance, though flushed and eager, exhibited no sign
of passion.  He seemed to act like a good-humoured man who had been
foolishly assaulted by a headstrong boy, and who meant to keep him in
play until he should tire him out.

Just then the tinkling of a bell and other sounds of the people of the
establishment beginning to move about were heard outside.  Henry noticed
this.

"Hah!" he exclaimed, in a gasping voice, "I can at least hold you until
help comes."

Gascoyne heard the sounds also.  He said nothing, but he brought the
strife to a swift termination.  For the first time he bent his back like
a man who exerts himself in earnest and lifted Henry completely off the
ground.  Throwing him on his back, he pressed him down with both arms so
as to break from his grasp.  No human muscles could resist the force
applied.  Slowly but surely the iron sinews of Henry's arms straightened
out, and the two were soon at arm's length.

But even Gascoyne's strength could not unclasp the grip of the youth's
hands, until he placed his knee upon his chest; then, indeed, they were
torn away.

Of course, all this was not done without some violence, but it was still
plain to the widow that Gascoyne was careful not to hurt his antagonist
more than he could help.

"Now, Henry, my lad," said he, holding the youth down by the two arms,
"I have given you a good deal of trouble this morning, and I mean to
give you a little more.  It does not just suit me at present to be tried
for a pirate, so I mean to give you a race.  You are reputed one of the
best runners in the settlement.  Well, I'll give you a chance after me.
If you overtake me, boy, I'll give myself up to you without a struggle.
But I suspect you'll find me rather hard to catch!"

As he uttered the last words he permitted Henry to rise.  Ere the youth
had quite gained his footing, he gave him a violent push and sent him
staggering back against the wall.  When Henry recovered his balance,
Gascoyne was standing in the open doorway.

"Now, lad, are you ready?" said he, a sort of wild smile lighting up his
face.

Henry was so taken aback by this conduct, as well as by the rough
handling which he had just received, that he could not collect his
thoughts for a few seconds; but when Gascoyne nodded gravely to his
mother and walked quietly away, saying, "Goodbye, Mary," the exasperated
youth darted through the doorway like an arrow.

If Henry Stuart's rush may be compared to the flight of an arrow from a
bow, not less appropriately may Gascoyne's bound be likened to the leap
of the bolt from a cross-bow.  The two men sprang over the low fences
that surrounded the cottage, leapt the rivulet that brawled down its
steep course behind it, and coursed up the hill like mountain hares.

The last that widow Stuart saw of them, as she gazed eagerly from the
doorway of the hut, was, when Gascoyne's figure was clearly defined
against the sky as he leaped over a great chasm in the lava high up the
mountain side.  Henry followed almost instantly, and then both were
hidden from view in the chaos of rocks and gorges that rose above the
upper line of vegetation.

It was a long and a severe chase that Henry had undertaken, and ably did
his fleet foot sustain the credit which he had already gained.  But
Gascoyne's foot was fleeter.  Over every species of ground did the
sandal-wood trader lead the youth that day.  It seemed, in fact, as if a
spirit of mischief had taken possession of Gascoyne, for his usually
grave face was lighted up with a mingled expression of glee and
ferocity.  It changed, too, and wore a sad expression, at times, even
when the man seemed to be running for his life.

At last, after running until he had caused Henry to shew symptoms of
fatigue, Gascoyne turned suddenly round, and, shouting "Good-bye, Henry,
my lad!" went straight up the mountain and disappeared over the dividing
ridge on the summit.

Henry did not give in.  The insult implied in the words renewed his
strength.  He tightened his belt as he ran, and rushed up the mountain
almost as fast as Gascoyne had done, but when he leaped upon the ridge
the fugitive had vanished!

That he had secreted himself in one of the many gorges or caves with
which the place abounded was quite clear, but it was equally clear that
no one could track him out in such a place unless he were possessed of a
dog's nose.  The youth did indeed attempt it, but, being convinced that
he was only searching for what could not by any possibility be found, he
soon gave it up and returned, disconsolate and crest-fallen, to the
cottage.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

MYSTERIOUS CONSULTATIONS AND PLANS--GASCOYNE ASTONISHES HIS FRIENDS, AND
MAKES AN UNEXPECTED CONFESSION.

"A pretty morning's work I have made of it, mother," said Henry, as he
flung himself into a chair in the cottage parlour, on his return from
the weary and fruitless chase which has just been recorded.

The widow was pale and haggard, but she could not help smiling as she
observed the look of extreme disappointment which rested on the
countenance of her son.

"True, Henry," she replied, busying herself in preparing breakfast, "you
have not been very successful, but you made a noble effort."

"Pshaw! a noble effort, indeed!  Why, the man has foiled me in the two
things in which I prided myself most--wrestling and running.  I never
saw such a greyhound in my life."

"He is a giant, my boy; few men could hope to overcome him."

"True, as regards wrestling, mother; I am not much ashamed of having
been beaten by him at that; but running--that's the sore point.  Such a
weight he is, and yet he took the north gully like a wild cat, and you
know, mother, there are only two of us in Sandy Cove who can go over
that gully.  Ay, and he went a full yard farther than ever I did.  I
measured the leap as I came down.  Really it is too bad to have been
beaten so completely by a man who must be nearly double my age.  But,
after all, the worst of the whole affair is, that a pirate has escaped
me after I actually had him in my arms! the villain!"

"You do not _know_ that he is a villain," said the widow in a subdued
tone.

"You are right, mother," said Henry, looking up from the plate of bacon,
to which he had been devoting himself with much assiduity, and gazing
earnestly into his mother's face; "you are right, and, do you know, I
feel inclined to give the fellow the benefit of the doubt, for to tell
you the truth I have a sort of liking for him.  If it had not been for
the way in which he has treated you, and the suspicious character that
he bears, I do believe I should have made a friend of him."

A look of evident pleasure crossed the widow's face while her son spoke,
but as that son's eyes were once more riveted on the bacon, which his
morning exercise rendered peculiarly attractive, he did not observe it.

Just then the door opened, and Mr Mason entered.  His face wore a
dreadfully anxious expression.

"Ha!  I'm glad to see you, Henry," said he; "of course you have not
caught your man.  I have been waiting anxiously for you to consult about
our future proceedings.  It is quite evident that the pirate schooner
cannot be far off.  Gascoyne must either have swam ashore, or been
landed in a boat.  In either case the schooner must have been within the
reef at the time, and there has been little wind since the squall blew
itself out yesterday."

"Quite enough, how ever, to blow such a light craft pretty far out to
sea in a few hours," said Henry, shaking his head.

"No matter," replied Mr Mason, with a sigh, "_something_ must be done
at any rate, I have borrowed the carpenter's small cutter, which is
being now put in order for a voyage.  Provisions and water for a few
days are already on board, and I have come to ask you to take command of
her, as you know something of navigation.  I will go, of course, but
will not take any management of the little craft, as I know nothing
about the working of vessels."

"And where do you mean to go?" asked Henry.

"That remains to be seen.  I have some ideas running in my head, of
course, but before letting you know them I wish to hear what you would
advise."

"I would advise, in the first place, that you should provide one or two
thorough sailors to manage the craft.  By the way, that reminds me of
Bumpus.  What of him?  Where is he?  In the midst of all this bustle I
have not had time for much thought, and it has only just occurred to me
that if this schooner is really a pirate, and if Gascoyne turns out to
be Durward, it follows that Bumpus is a pirate too, and ought to be
dealt with accordingly."

"I have thought of that," said Mr Mason, with a perplexed look, "and
intended to speak to you on the subject, but events have crowded so fast
upon each other of late that it has been driven out of my mind.  No
doubt, if the _Foam_ and the _Avenger_ are one and the same vessel, as
seems too evident to leave much room for doubt, then Bumpus is a pirate,
for he does not deny that he was one of the crew.  But he acts strangely
for a pirate.  He seems as much at his ease amongst us as if he were the
most innocent of men.  Moreover, his looks seem to stamp him a
thoroughly honest fellow.  But, alas! one cannot depend on looks."

"But where is the man?" asked Henry.

"He is asleep in the small closet off the kitchen," said Mrs Stuart,
"where he has been lying ever since you returned from the heathen
village.  Poor fellow, he sleeps heavily, and looks as if he had been
hurt during all this fighting."

"Hurt! say you?" exclaimed Henry, laughing; "it is a miracle that he is
now alive after the flight he took over the north cliff into the sea."

"Flight! over the north cliff!" echoed Mrs Stuart in surprise.

"Ay, and a fearful plunge he had."  Here Henry detailed poor Jo's
misadventure.  "And now," said he, when he had finished, "I must lock
his door and keep him in.  The settlers have forgotten him in all this
turmoil; but depend upon it if they see him they will string him up for
a pirate to the first handy branch of a tree without giving him the
benefit of a trial; and that would not be desirable."

"Yet you would have shot Gascoyne on mere suspicion without a thought of
trial or justice," said Mrs Stuart.

"True, mother, but that was when I was seizing him, and in hot blood,"
said Henry, in a subdued voice.  "I was hasty there, no doubt.  Lucky
for us both that the pistol missed fire."

The widow looked as if she were about to reply, but checked herself.

"Yes," said Mr Mason, recurring to the former subject, "as we shall be
away a few days, we must lock Bumpus up to keep him out of harm's way.
Meanwhile--"

The missionary was interrupted here by the sudden opening of the door.
An exclamation of surprise burst from the whole party as they sprang up,
for Gascoyne strode into the room, locked the door, and taking out the
key handed it to Henry, who stood staring at him in speechless
amazement.

"You are surprised to see me appear thus suddenly," said he, "but the
fact is that I came here this morning to fulfil a duty; and although
Master Henry there has hindered me somewhat in carrying out my good
intentions, I do not intend to allow him to frustrate me altogether."

"I do not mean to make a second attempt, Gascoyne, after what has
occurred this morning," said Henry, seating himself doggedly on his
chair.  "But it would be as well that you should observe that Mr Mason
is a stout man, and, as we have seen, can act vigorously when occasion
offers.  Remember that we are two to one now."

"There will be no occasion for vigorous action, at least as regards me,
if you will agree to forget your suspicions for a few minutes, and
listen to what I have got to say.  Meanwhile, in order to shew you how
thoroughly in earnest I am, and how regardless of my personal safety, I
render myself defenceless--thus."

Gascoyne pulled a brace of small pistols from their place of concealment
beneath the breast of his shirt, and, drawing the knife that hung at his
girdle, hurled them all through the open window into the garden.  He
then took a chair, planted it in the middle of the room, and sat down.
The sadness of his deep voice did not change during the remainder of
that interview.  The bold look which usually characterised this peculiar
man had given place to a grave expression of humility, which was
occasionally varied by a troubled look.

"Before stating what I have come for," said Gascoyne, "I mean to make a
confession.  You have been right in your suspicions--_I am Durward the
pirate_!  Nay, do not shrink from me in that way, Mary.  I have kept
this secret from you long, because I feared to lose the old friendship
that has existed between us since we were children.  I have deceived you
in _this thing only_.  I have taken advantage of your ignorance to make
you suppose that I was merely a smuggler, and that, in consequence of
being an outlaw, it was necessary for me to conceal my name and my
movements.  You have kept my secret, Mary, and have tried to win me back
to honest ways, but you little knew the strength of the net I had
wrapped around me.  You did not know that I was a pirate!"

Gascoyne paused, and bent his head as if in thought.  The widow sat with
clasped hands, gazing at him with a look of despair on her pale face.
But she did not move or speak.  The three listeners sat in perfect
silence until the pirate chose to continue his confession.

"Yes, I have been a pirate," said he, "but I have not been the villain
that men have painted me."  He looked steadily in the widow's face as he
said these words deliberately.

"Do not try to palliate your conduct, Gascoyne," said Mr Mason,
earnestly.  "The blackness of your sin is too great to be deepened or
lightened by what men may have said of you.  You are a pirate.  Every
_pirate is a murderer_."

"I am not a murderer," said Gascoyne, slowly, in reply, but still fixing
his gaze on the widow's face, as if he addressed himself solely to her.

