not been a wee bit self-conscious and forced to suppress from her voice
the satisfaction that echoed in it when she observed in off-hand
fashion:

"Oh, by the way, I had a letter to-day from my brother who is in
China."

China! It was a name to conjure with. What a medley of visions it
brought to the imagination!

And if you could not go to China, as none of Mulberry Court ever
expected to do, think of having a relative who did! And if you were not
blessed with such an illustrious connection why the next best thing was
to know some one who was. Even to know some one who had a brother in
China and who sent home letters from that magic realm imparted a
certain glory.

There was no denying the McGregors' foreign correspondence lent
prestige to Mulberry Court. Perhaps a Manila postmark was cut out and
bestowed on Mrs. Murphy, who tucked it away in a cracked cup and
displayed it on occasions to a visitor; or maybe the letter heading
from a Genoa hotel was given to Mrs. O'Dowd and furnished her with
conversation for a week. In outbursts of great generosity stamps or
postcards were donated to especially favored individuals.

Hence when on this particular morning the postman pressed Mrs.
McGregor's bell and she hastened down four flights to open her mail-box
a head protruded from almost every door as she made her way back
upstairs and there was ample opportunity for her to observe to
interested spectators, "I seem to have a letter from England. Judging
from the postmark, my brother must be in Liverpool."

In this case the admiration with which the name was repeated might not
have found so ringing an echo in Mrs. McGregor's voice. She had been to
Liverpool. For all that, however, she maintained a dignified front and
bore the letter upstairs, sinking with delight into the first chair
that blocked her path when she arrived and calling to her children:

"I've a letter from your Uncle Frederick, Timmie. Think of that! It
comes all the way from Liverpool with King George neat as a pin smiling
out of the corner of it. Yes, you may take the envelope, Carl, but
don't let the baby be fingering and tearing it. Show Martin the King's
picture. He's old enough now to learn how he looks. Mercy on us! What a
ream your Uncle Frederick has written. One would think it was a book! I
never knew him to write such a long letter in all my life. I hope he
isn't sick. Don't hang over my shoulder, Mary; it makes me nervous. And
don't let Nell come climbing up into my lap while I'm reading. Go to
Mary, like a good girl, darling; mother's reading a letter that came
all the way from England."

Thus did Mrs. McGregor preface the perusal of the document she held in
her hand. But when she had spread out the voluminous sheets and was
preparing to read them she was again interrupted:

"Now, Timmie, don't you and Carl start quarreling the first thing about
the stamp. You ought to be ashamed of yourselves. Who had the last one?
Carl? Then this one goes to you and there must be no more bickering
about it. If there is I shall keep it myself. One would think you boys
were a pair of Kilkenny cats the way you squabble with each other! Now
are you going to be quiet and listen to what Uncle Frederick has to say
or are you not? Then don't let me hear another yip out of either of
you."

Instantly the room was so still you could have heard a pin drop and to
an accompaniment of crisply crackling paper Mrs. McGregor began:

    LIVERPOOL, January 29, 1924.

    DEAR SISTER NELLIE--,

    Well, here I am in England with the Atlantic rolling between me and
    Baileyville. We had a splendid voyage with the sea as smooth as the
    top of your sewing-machine. (Ain't that like your Uncle Frederick
    to joke about the ocean! He's crossed it that number of times it's
    no more to him than the pond in the park. Well, I'm glad he had a
    smooth trip, anyway.)

    At Liverpool, where we docked, we ran into our first trouble, for
    there was a longshoremen's strike on and not a soul could he found
    to unload our cargo or lend a hand in loading us up again. For
    three days we were tied plumb to the wharf with nothing to do but
    twirl our thumbs. So having business at Manchester I decided to go
    up there and stay with a Scotchman who was my first mate years ago.
    (Now wasn't that nice!) Old Barney turned the town inside out he
    was so glad to see me (I'll wager he was!) and among other things
    took me through some big cotton mills where a nephew of his was
    working. For the benefit of the children I'm going to write a bit
    about them. I could not but wish on top of what we all talked about
    that they might have been with me to see how wonderful the spinning
    machinery is. Were it actually alive it could not work with more
    brains. (Your Uncle Frederick always will have his joke!)

    Indeed, the man who took us about told me that the self-acting mule
    of to-day, founded on the invention of Crompton, is a product of
    hundreds of minds and I can well believe it. It isn't the principle
    that is new, for apparently no one has ever improved on Crompton's
    idea; but since that time this machinist and that has added his bit
    to make the device more perfect. (Now ain't you glad you read about
    Crompton, Carl? This letter would have been Greek to you if you
    hadn't.) We saw mules as long as a hundred and twenty feet, and
    from nine to ten feet wide carrying some twelve or thirteen hundred
    spindles, and turning out about two yards of thread in a quarter of
    a minute. How is that? And all this clicking, humming, whirling
    machinery was operated by a man and a couple of boys. Carl, Tim and
    I could have run the thing had we known how.

    (Your Uncle Frederick don't forget you boys, you see!)

    They told me it was Richard Roberts, a Manchester man, who in 1830
    improved the self-acting mule and brought it to its present state
    of practical working order. I take off my hat to him and to those
    on whose ideas he built up this marvelous invention. The thing does
    everything but talk, and maybe it's as well off without doing that.
    Lots of folks would be.

    (I must read Julie O'Dowd that; it will make her laugh. It sounds
    so like your uncle you'd think him in the room this minute.)

    It draws out the carded cotton, puts in the necessary twist, and
    spins the thread, easy as rolling off a log, levers, wheels,
    springs, and a friction clutch all doing their part. I couldn't
    help thinking if each of us humans played his role as well, and did
    the thing given him to do as faithfully, how much better a world we
    should have. We don't begin to pull together for a result the way
    those wheels and pulleys did. Instead, each of us goes his own way
    never cooperating with his neighbor and in consequence we have a
    helter-skelter universe. (How true that is!)

    Nevertheless in spite of us--not because of us--the world advances.
    I sometimes wonder how it does it. Crompton, for instance, would
    scarcely have recognized his old mule that gave subsequent
    inventors their inspiration. Nor would Arkwright know his water
    frame could he see what has happened to it. (Mark you, Carl, how he
    speaks of Arkwright. All that would slide off you hadn't you read
    that book!)

    Of course there is a lot of rivalry between English and American
    spinning machinery and I found that some of the mills here have
    both.

    The reeling of the yarn after it is spun is done chiefly by women.
    I do not mean they make it up into skeins by hand; they operate the
    machinery that winds it; also that which makes it up into packages
    for the market. This process is also interesting to see. Strings
    are put in to separate the laps of the yarn; cardboards hold it in
    place; it is pressed flat; the bundle is tied; and the paper
    wrapper bearing the name of the manufacturer as well as any printed
    advertising he wishes to circulate, is whisked about it.

    I was a little surprised to find they made no spool cotton on any
    of these machines. Up to date no machine has been invented that
    will directly spin thread strong enough for sewing. All that has to
    be a separate process and therefore the yarn is taken to other
    machines where it is drawn finer and where several of the fine
    threads can be twisted into one. The spinners know just how many
    fine threads to put together to get certain sizes of cotton. To
    make number twelve, for example, they put together four strands of
    what is called 48's that have been doubled, or perhaps 50's, since
    the twist contracts the yarn.

    After this has been twisted the proper number of times the thread
    is passed over flannel-covered boards to be cleaned. Next it
    travels through a small, round hole something like the eye of a
    needle so that any knots or rough places can be detected. If the
    threads are found to be strong and without flaws two to half a
    dozen of them are put together in a loose skein and they are
    twisted in a doubling machine. Afterward the thread is polished,
    cleaned, and run off on spools or bobbins. That is the road
    Mother's spools of cotton have to travel before they get to her.
    How seldom we think of this or are grateful for it!

    There are in addition other ways of preparing cottons for
    embroidery, crocheting, or knitting, not to mention methods used to
    finish cotton yarn so that it will look like woolen, linen, or silk
    fiber. Because cotton is a cheaper material than any of these it is
    often mixed with them to produce cheaper goods. You would be amazed
    to see how ingenious manufacturers have become in turning out such
    imitations. Cotton, for example, is mercerized by passing it very
    rapidly through a gassing machine not unlike the flame of a Bunsen
    burner. Here all the fuzz protruding from it is burned away, and
    when polished and finished it looks so much like silk you would
    have trouble in telling whether it was or not. This sort of yarn is
    used to make imitation silk stockings and many other articles.

    Now I have told you quite a story, haven't I? And no doubt I have
    wasted good ink and paper doing it, for I presume Hal Harling could
    have told you the same thing quite as well if not a deal better.
    You read him this document and ask him to fill in the gaps. But at
    least even if Hal can improve on my tale I have demonstrated one
    thing and that is that I have remembered you whenever I have seen
    anything I thought you would be interested in.

    I send much love to each of the family. Tell Mary, Carl, and Tim to
    take good care of Mother and the babies. Be sure to greet for me
    the Harlings, O'Dowds, Murphys, and all the neighbors at Mulberry
    Court. We leave Liverpool for the Mediterranean next week and I
    will write you from Gibraltar or Naples. In the meantime do not
    forget the good ship _Charlotte_ or your affectionate

    FREDERICK.

"As if we could forget him!" whispered Mrs. McGregor, folding up the
many sheets and replacing them in their envelope. "It isn't all
children have the kind uncle you have. Carl, maybe you'd like to be
stepping over to the Harlings with this letter. Grandfather Harling
would delight to read it, I know. The days are long ones for him and
I'm sure he must miss your Uncle Frederick dropping in to bring him the
news."

Only too ready to comply with her request Carl rose.

"You can leave the letter until they all have seen it; then Hal or
Louise can bring it back. I want Mrs. O'Dowd to have it next. She's
mentioned by name in it and it will please her to read the words
herself."

Thus did Mulberry Court share its blessings!




CHAPTER XVI

A RELUCTANT ALTRUIST


As spring came and Carl was more out of doors playing ball and tramping
the open country his watchful eyes were continually scanning passing
motors for a possible glimpse of the mysterious red racing car and its
genial owner. The boy had never forgotten this delightful stranger or
quite abandoned the hope that he might sometime see him again. But,
alas, day succeeded day and never did any of the fleeting vehicles his
glance followed contain the person he sought. Neither was the search
for the sender of the Christmas baskets rewarded.

Spasmodically since mid-winter the Harlings and McGregors had cudgeled
their brains to discover this elusive good fairy until at length,
exhausted by fruitless effort, they agreed to inter Louise's
philanthropic Mr. X in a nameless grave. Despite that fact, however, he
was not forgotten and tender thoughts clustered about his memory.

In the meantime May followed on April's heels and presently June, with
her greenery and wealth of roses arrived, and then the startling
tidings buzzed through Baileyville that Mr. John Coulter was to be
married. The news thrilled young and old alike for was not young Mr.
Coulter the junior partner of Davis and Coulter; and was not Davis and
Coulter the heart and soul of Baileyville? Davis and Coulter meant the
mills and the mills meant the town itself. Without them there would
have been no village at all. Boys and girls, men and women toiled year
in and year out in the factories as their fathers and mothers, often
their grandfathers and grandmothers had done before them. If you were
not connected with Davis and Coulter's you were not of Baileyville's
aristocracy.

Hence it followed that the prospective marriage of Mr. John Coulter
could not but be an event concerning which the entire community
gossiped with eager and kindly interest. The lady was from New York,
people said, and Mr. John had met her while doing war work in France.
Both of them had large fortunes. But the fact that appealed to the
villagers far more than this was the intelligence that the wedding was
to take place at the old Coulter homestead and be followed by a fete to
which all the mill people and their families were to be invited. How
exciting that was! And how exultant were those whose connection with
the mills insured them a card to this mammoth festivity!

Rumor whispered there were to be gigantic tents with games and dancing;
bands of music; fireworks; and every imaginable dainty to eat. Some
even went so far as to assert there would be boats on the miniature
lake and a Punch and Judy show. Oh, it was to be a fete indeed!

For weeks the town talked of nothing else; and as Carl McGregor
listened to these stories his regrets at not being numbered among Davis
and Coulter's elect waxed keener and keener. One did not enjoy being
left out of a function of such magnitude, a party to which everybody
else was going. Not only did it make you feel lonely and stranded but
it mortified you to be obliged to own you were not of the happy band
included in so magnificent a celebration.

"Now if you'd only have let me take a job at the mills as I wanted to,
Ma, we might have been going to Mr. Coulter's party along with the rest
of the world," Carl bemoaned. "I always told you I ought to go into
those mills the way the other fellows do. But you wouldn't hear to it.
Now see what's come of it. We are left high and dry. I'll bet we are
the only people in Baileyville who are not invited to that party.
Everybody is to be there. If even one member of a family works at the
mill that lets in the bunch."

"Like the garden parties great families used to give their tenants in
the old country," Mrs. McGregor murmured reminiscently.

"I don't know about the old country," replied Carl ungraciously, "but
that is what Mr. Coulter is going to do--ask whole families. Gee, but
it makes me sore!"

"If your father had lived we would have been there," said the boy's
mother sadly. "Your father used to be very good friends with old Mr.
Coulter and he would have seen to it that none of this household was
left out. But Mr. John we never knew. He was always away
studying--first at school, then at college, and then in Europe. Later
he started in to be a lawyer in New York and but for the war and his
father's death he'd most likely be doing that now. But when the old
gentleman died Mr. John gave up everything else and came home to take
his place in the firm as his father had wished he should. Folks say
that in spite of not caring much for the mills at first he has
persisted at his job until he has become genuinely interested in them.
I honor him for it, too, for a business life wasn't his real choice. Of
course being away so much as he has he is little known among the mill
people yet; but evidently he means to settle down here and is anxious
to get better acquainted. This wedding party shows that."

"Well, there are some he won't get acquainted with," lamented Carl.

"If you mean us I reckon he can worry along without," Mrs. McGregor
retorted, with a twinkle in her eye. "He's managed to up to now."

"We're just as good as anybody else," her son blazed.

"Undoubtedly we are," was the good-humored answer. "Nevertheless we
won't be missed in a crowd like that."

"Don't you _want_ to go to the party, Ma?"

"Why, to tell the truth, I haven't had time to think much about it,
sonny--that is, not to be disappointed. I'm not pretending, though,
that so many parties come my way that a fine one such as this wouldn't
be a treat. I can't remember the day I've been to anything of the
sort. It's a quarter of a century or more, certainly--not since I was
a girl and went to the balls the gentry gave in Scotland."

"Oh, I do so wish we were going to Mr. Coulter's," Carl repeated.

"I'll not deny I'd like to," confessed his mother a bit wistfully.
"Still, were we to go what a stew we'd be in! It would mean days of
washing and ironing; new neckties and maybe shoes for you boys; and
hair ribbons and folderols for Mary and Nell. Before we were all
properly equipped it would cost a pretty penny. We'd have no right to
go without looking decent and being a credit to your father and to Mr.
Coulter who was good enough to ask us. So, you see, there are
advantages in everything. If we are not invited we shall have none of
the trouble and expense of it," concluded the woman philosophically.

"I wouldn't mind the trouble, Mother," burst out Carl. "I wouldn't
even care if I didn't have new shoes. Why, I'd go in my bathing suit."

Nodding her head his mother regarded him with withering censure.

"Yes, I believe you would," she agreed, "I believe you would--if you
were permitted. But how lucky it is you have a mother. Without me
you'd be disgracing your name, Mr. Coulter, Baileyville, and Mulberry
Court."

Carl grinned in sickly fashion.

"I'd be having the time of my life!" announced he, undaunted.

"Going to an affair like that in your bathing suit, you mean? I'm not
so sure about that. You are always begging to be allowed to wear that
costume or grumbling because you cannot wear it. Once, I recall, you
actually suggested wearing it to church on a hot Sunday. I'm sorely
tempted sometime to let you have your way and see what would come of
it. Think, for instance, of your sailing into Mr. John Coulter's
wedding party in a get-up like that. You'd be ducked in the pond in a
second."

"I'd be ready for it," was the provoking answer.

"Well, you aren't going to the Coulter party, as it happens, so
there'll be no question of what you'll wear," returned Mrs. McGregor
grimly.

"I know I'm not; but you don't have to rub it in, Ma," Carl answered.

"I didn't mean to rub it in, dear," was the gentle response. "I was
merely stating facts. Maybe it's as well, too, that we're not going
ourselves, for with the Sullivans, Murphys, and O'Dowds all invited
we'll have as much as we can do to get them all creditably rigged out.
I shall let Julie wear my black skirt--it just fits her; and Mrs.
Sullivan my best hat. My waist Mrs. Murphy shall take if I can get it
washed in time. Most likely, too, the O'Dowds will need your clothes
and Timmie's."

"Need my clothes!" Carl shouted.

"Certainly. Julie can't hope to provide things for all that big family
to appear in at once. Somebody will have to turn to and lend a helping
hand."

"But what'll I do while the O'Dowd boys wear my clothes?" wailed Carl.

"Why, you can stay in the house. It won't hurt either you or Tim to
take an afternoon of rest," came stoically from his mother.

"But I don't want to take an afternoon of rest," Carl protested
wrathfully. "Not on that day of all others. I'm going up to Coulters
to hang round outside and watch the fun. If I'm not invited I can at
least do that."

"Carl McGregor! You'll do nothing of the sort. Hang round outside,
indeed! Haven't you any pride at all? If you're not asked to the
party I should hope you'd have the good taste to keep out of the way of
it. Hang round outside! You ought to be ashamed even to suggest such a
thing," said Mrs. McGregor with scorn. "No, you'll do no lingering on
the outskirts of Mr. John's reception, you can make up your mind to
that. You'll stay politely at home as the rest of us plan to do and
keep under cover so folks won't be asking you why you're not up at
