slaughtered by thousands, and are eaten not only when fresh killed, but
they are salted in large quantities, and so preserved for winter use,
when fresh ones can no longer be procured.  Of course, both Indian and
white hunters use all their art in killing or capturing them; and to
effect this they employ many different methods, as decoying, snaring,
netting, and shooting them: but Cousin Norman here could give a better
description of all these things than I.  Perhaps he will favour us with
some account of them."

"The Indians," said the young trader, taking up the subject without
hesitation, "usually snare them.  Their most common way is to make a
number of hedges or wattle fences projecting into the water at right
angles to the edge of the lake, or, it may be, river.  These fences are
two or three yards apart, and between each two there is, of course, an
opening, into which the birds swim, as they make towards the shore for
their food.  In these openings, then, the snares are set and tied so
firmly to a post stuck in the bottom, that the birds, whether ducks,
geese, or swans, when caught, may not be able to drag it away.  To keep
the snare in its place, it is secured to the wattles of the fence with
tender strands of grass, that of course give way the moment the fowl
becomes entangled.  The snares are made out of deer sinews, twisted like
packthread, and sometimes of thongs cut from a `parchment' deerskin,
which, as you know, is a deerskin simply dried, and not tanned or
dressed.  The making of the fences is the part that gives most trouble.
Sometimes the timber for the stakes is not easily had; and even when it
is plenty, it is no easy matter to drive the stakes into the bottom and
wattle them, while seated in a vessel so crank as a birch canoe.
Sometimes, in the rivers where the water-fowl most frequent, the current
is swift, and adds to this trouble.  Where the lakes and rivers are
shallow, the thing becomes easier; and I have seen small lakes and
rivers fenced in this way from shore to shore.  In large lakes this
would not be necessary, as most of the water-birds--such as the swans
and geese--and all the ducks that are not of the diving kinds, are sure
to come to the shore to feed, and are more likely to be taken close in
to land than out in the open water.

"The Indians often snare these birds upon the nest, and they always wash
their hands before setting the snare.  They have a notion--I don't know
whether true or not--that if their hands are not clean, the birds can
smell the snare, and will be shy of going into it.  They say that all
these birds--and I believe it's true of all fowls that make their nests
upon the ground--go into the nest at one side, and out at the opposite.
The Indians knowing this, always set their snares at the side where the
bird enters, and by this they are more sure of catching them, and also
of getting them some hours sooner.

"Besides snaring the water-fowl," continued Norman, "the Indians
sometimes catch them in nets, and sometimes on hooks baited with
whatever the birds are known to eat.  They also shoot them as the white
hunters do, and to get near enough use every sort of cunning that can be
thought of.  Sometimes they decoy them within shot, by putting wooden
ducks on the water near their cover, where they themselves are
stationed.  Sometimes they disguise their canoes under brushwood, and
paddle to the edge of the flock; and when the moulting season comes
round, they pursue them through the water, and kill them with sticks.
The swans, when followed in this way, often escape.  With their strong
wings and great webbed feet, they can flap faster over the surface than
a canoe can follow them.  I have heard of many other tricks which the
Indians of different tribes make use of, but I have only seen these ways
I have described, besides the one we have just witnessed."

Norman was one of your practical philosophers, who did not choose to
talk much of things with which he was not thoroughly acquainted.

Lucien now took up the thread of the conversation, and gave some further
information about the different species of American ducks.

"One of the most celebrated," said he, "is the `eider-duck' (_Anas
mollissima_).  This is prized for its down, which is exceedingly soft
and fine, and esteemed of great value for lining quilts and making beds
for the over-luxurious.  It is said that three pounds' weight of `eider
down' can be compressed to the size of a man's fist, and yet is
afterwards so dilatable as to fill a quilt of five feet square.  The
down is generally obtained without killing the bird, for that which is
plucked from dead birds is far inferior, and has lost much of its
elasticity.  The mode of procuring it is to steal it from the nest, in
the absence of the birds.  The female lines the nest with down plucked
from her own breast.  When this is stolen from her, by those who gather
the commodity, she plucks out a second crop of it, and arranges it as
before.  This being also removed, it is said that the male bird then
makes a sacrifice of his downy waistcoat, and the nest is once more put
in order; but should this too be taken, the birds forsake their nest
never to return to it again.  The quantity of `eider down' found in a
single nest is sufficient to fill a man's hat, and yet it will weigh
only about three ounces.

"The eider-duck is about the size of the common mallard, or wild duck
proper.  Its colour is black below, and buff-white on the back, neck,
and shoulders, while the forehead is bluish black.  It is one of the
`sea-ducks,' or _fuligulae_, as the naturalists term them, and it is
rarely seen in fresh water.  Its food is principally the soft mollusca
common in the Arctic seas, and its flesh is not esteemed except by the
Greenlanders.  It is at home only in the higher latitudes of both
Continents, and loves to dwell upon the rocky shores of the sea; but in
very severe winters, it makes its appearance along the Atlantic coast of
the United States, where it receives different names from the gunners--
such as `black-and-white coot,' `big sea-duck,' `shoal-duck,' and
`squaw-duck;' and under these titles it is often sold in the markets of
American cities.  Some suppose that the eider-duck could be easily
domesticated.  If so, it would, no doubt, prove a profitable as well as
an interesting experiment; but I believe it has already been attempted
without success.  It is in the countries of Northern Europe where the
gathering of the eider down has been made an object of industry.  On the
American Continent the pursuit is not followed, either by the native or
white settler.

"Another species common to the higher latitudes of both Continents is
the `king-duck,' so called from its very showy appearance.  Its habits
are very similar to the `eider,' and its down is equally soft and
valuable, but it is a smaller bird.

"A still smaller species, also noted for its brilliant plumage, inhabits
the extreme north of both continents.  This is the `harlequin-duck;' or,
as the early colonists term it, the `lord.'

"But the `wood-duck' (_Anas sponsa_) is perhaps the most beautiful of
all the American species, or indeed of all ducks whatever--although it
has a rival in the _mandarin duck_ of China, which indeed it very much
resembles both in size and markings.  The wood-duck is so called from
the fact of its making its nest in hollow trees, and roosting
occasionally on the branches.  It is a freshwater duck, and a Southern
species--never being seen in very high latitudes; nor is it known in
Europe in a wild state, but is peculiar to the Continent of America.  It
is one of the easiest species to domesticate, and no zoological garden
is now without it; in all of which its small size--being about that of a
widgeon--its active movements and innocent look, its musical
_peet-peet_, and, above all, its beautiful plumage, make it a general
favourite.

"Besides these, there are many others of the American ducks, whose
description would interest you, but you would grow tired were I to give
a detailed account of them all; so I shall only mention a few that are
distinguished by well-known peculiarities.  There is the `whistler'
(_Anas clangula_), which takes its trivial name from the whistling sound
of its wings while in flight; and the `shoveller,' so called from the
form of its bill; and the `conjuring,' or `spirit' ducks of the Indians
(_Anas vulgaris_ and _albeola_), because they dive so quickly and
dexterously, that it is almost impossible to shoot them either with bow
or gun.  There is the `old wife,' or `old squaw' (_Anas glacialis_), so
called from its incessant cackle, which the hunters liken to the
scolding of an ill-tempered old wife.  This species is the most noisy of
all the duck tribe, and is called by the voyageurs `caccawee,' from its
fancied utterance of these syllables; and the sound, so often heard in
the long nights of the fur countries, has been woven into and forms the
burden of many a voyageur's song.  In some parts of the United States
the caccawee is called `south-southerly,' as its voice is there thought
to resemble this phrase, while at the time when most heard--the autumn--
these ducks are observed flying in a southerly direction.

"Besides these," continued Lucien, "there are the teals--blue and
green-winged--and the coots, and the widgeon--slightly differing from
the widgeon of Europe--and there is the rare and beautiful little ruddy
duck (_Anas rubida_), with its bright mahogany colour--its long upright
tail and short neck--that at a distance give it the appearance of a duck
with two heads.  And there is the well-known `pintail,' and the
`pochard' or `red-head;' and the `mallard,' from which comes the common
domestic variety, and the `scoter,' and `surf,' and `velvet,' and
`dusky,' ducks--these last four being all, more or less, of a dark
colour.  And there are the `shell-drakes,' or `fishers,' that swim low
in the water, dive and fly well, but walk badly, and feed altogether on
fish.  These, on account of their toothed bills, form a genus of
themselves--the `mergansers,'--and four distinct species of them are
known in America."

The approach of night, and the necessity of landing, to make their night
camp, brought Lucien's lecture to a close.  Indeed Francois was glad
when it ended, for he was beginning to think it somewhat tedious.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE SHRIKE AND THE HUMMING-BIRDS.

The picturesque scenery of the Elk appeared to be a favourite resort
with the feathered creation.  Here our voyageurs saw many kinds of
birds; both those that migrate into the fur countries during summer, and
those that make their home there in the cold, dark days of winter.
Among the former were observed,--the beautiful blue bird of Wilson
(_Sialia Wilsoni_) which, on account of its gentle and innocent habits,
is quite as much esteemed in America as the "robin" in England.  Another
favourite of the farmer and the homestead, the purple martin, was seen
gracefully wheeling through the air; while, among the green leaves,
fluttered many brilliant birds.  The "cardinal grosbeak" (_Pitylus
cardinalis_) with his bright scarlet wings; the blue jay, noisy and
chattering; the rarer "crossbill" (_Loxia_) with its deep crimson
colour; and many others, equally bright and beautiful, enlivened the
woods, either with their voice or their gaudy plumage.  There was one
bird, however, that had neither "fine feathers" nor an agreeable voice,
but that interested our travellers more than any of the others.  Its
voice was unpleasant to the ear, and sounded more like the grating of a
rusty hinge than anything else they could think of.  The bird itself was
not larger than a thrush, of a light grey colour above, white
underneath, and with blackish wings.  Its bill resembled that of the
hawks, but its legs were more like those of the woodpecker tribe; and it
seemed, in fact, to be a cross between the two.  It was neither the
colour of the bird, nor its form, nor yet its song, that interested our
travellers, but its singular habits; and these they had a fine
opportunity of observing at one of their "noon camps," where they had
halted to rest and refresh themselves during the hot midday hours.  The
place was on one of the little islets, which was covered with underwood,
with here and there some larger trees.  The underwood bushes were of
various sorts; but close to the spot where they had landed was a large
thicket of honeysuckle, whose flowers were in full bloom, and filled the
air with their sweet perfume.

While seated near these, Francois' quick eye detected the presence of
some very small birds moving among the blossoms.  They were at once
pronounced to be humming-birds, and of that species known as the
"ruby-throats" (_Trochilus rolubris_), so called, because a flake of a
beautiful vinous colour under the throat of the males exhibits, in the
sun, all the glancing glories of the ruby.  The back, or upper parts,
are of a gilded green colour; and the little creature is the smallest
bird that migrates into the fur countries, with one exception, and that
is a bird of the same genus,--the "cinnamon humming-bird" (_Trochilus
rufus_).  The latter, however, has been seen in the Northern regions,
only on the western side of the Rocky Mountains; but then it has been
observed even as far north as the bleak and inhospitable shores of
Nootka Sound.  Mexico, and the tropical countries of America, are the
favourite home of the humming-birds; and it was, for a long time,
supposed that the "ruby-throats" were the only ones that migrated
farther north than the territory of Mexico itself.  It is now known,
that besides the "cinnamon humming-bird," two or three other species
annually make an excursion into higher latitudes.

The "ruby-throats" not only travel into the fur countries, but breed in
numbers upon the Elk River, the very place where our travellers now
observed them.

As they sat watching these little creatures, for there were several of
them skipping about and poising themselves opposite the flowers, the
attention of all was attracted to the movements of a far different sort
of bird.  It was that one we have been speaking of.  It was seated upon
a tree, not far from the honeysuckles; but every now and then it would
spring from its perch, dash forward, and after whirring about for some
moments among the humming-birds, fly back to the same tree.

At first the boys watched these manoeuvres without having their
curiosity excited.  It was no new thing to see birds acting in this
manner.  The jays, and many other birds of the fly-catching kind
(_Muscicapae_), have this habit, and nothing was thought of it at the
moment.  Lucien, however, who had watched the bird more narrowly,
presently declared to the rest that it was catching the humming-birds,
and preying upon them--that each time it made a dash among the
honeysuckles, it carried off one in its claws, the smallness of the
victim having prevented them at first from noticing this fact.  They all
now watched it more closely than before, and were soon satisfied of the
truth of Lucien's assertion, as they saw it seize one of the
ruby-throats in the very act of entering the corolla of a flower.  This
excited the indignation of Francois, who immediately took up his
"double-barrel," and proceeded towards the tree where the bird, as
before, had carried this last victim.  The tree was a low one, of the
locust or _pseud-acacia_ family, and covered all over with great thorny
spikes, like all trees of that tribe.  Francois paid no attention to
this; but, keeping under shelter of the underwood, he crept forward
until within shot.  Then raising his gun, he took aim, and pulling
trigger, brought the bird fluttering down through the branches.  He
stepped forward and picked it up--not that he cared for such unworthy
game, but Lucien had called to him to do so, as the naturalist wished to
make an examination of the creature.  He was about turning to go back to
camp, when he chanced to glance his eye up into the locust-tree.  There
it was riveted by a sight which caused him to cry out with astonishment.
His cry brought the rest running up to the spot, and they were not less
astonished than he, when they saw the cause of it.  I have said that the
branches of the tree were covered with long thorny spikes that pointed
in every direction; but one branch in particular occupied their
attention.  Upon this there were about a dozen of these spines pointing
upward, and upon each spike _was impaled a ruby-throat_!  The little
creatures were dead, of course, but they were neither torn nor even much
ruffled in their plumage.  They were all placed back upwards, and as
neatly spitted upon the thorns as if they had been put there by human
hands.  On looking more closely, it was discovered that other creatures,
as well as the humming-birds, had been served in a similar manner.
Several grasshoppers, spiders, and some coleopterous insects were found,
and upon another branch two small meadow-mice (_Arvicolae_) had been
treated to the same terrible death!

To Basil, Norman, and Francois, the thing was quite inexplicable, but
Lucien understood well enough what it meant.  All these creatures, he
informed them, were placed there by the bird which Francois had shot,
and which was no other than the "shrike" (_Lanius_) or "butcher-bird"--a
name by which it is more familiarly known, and which it receives from
the very habit they had just observed.  Why it follows such a practice
Lucien could not tell, as naturalists are not agreed upon this point.
Some have asserted that it spits the spiders and other insects for the
purpose of attracting nearer the small birds upon which it preys; but
this cannot be true, for it preys mostly upon birds that are not
insect-eaters, as the finches: besides, it is itself as fond of eating
grasshoppers as anything else, and consumes large quantities of these
insects.  The most probable explanation of the singular and apparently
cruel habit of the butcher-bird is, that it merely places its victims
upon the thorns, in order to keep them safe from ground-ants, rats,
mice, raccoons, foxes, and other preying creatures--just as a good cook
would hang up her meat or game in the larder to prevent the cats from
carrying it off.  The thorny tree thus becomes the storehouse of the
shrike, where he hangs up his superfluous spoil for future use, just as
the crows, magpies, and jays, make their secret deposits in chinks of
walls and the hollows of trees.  It is no argument against this theory,
that the shrike sometimes leaves these stores without returning to them.
The fox, and dog, as well as many other preying creatures, have the
same habit.

Wondering at what they had seen, the voyageurs returned to their camp,
and once more embarked on their journey.



