such a pace that, as I have said, he _all but_ ran into my arms and
knocked me down."

"Dreadful!" exclaimed Milly, turning her back still more to the light
and working mysteriously with her kerchief.

"Yes, dreadful indeed!  And when I naturally taxed him with his
cowardice and meanness, he did not seem at all penitent, but went on
like a lunatic; and although what he said was civil enough, his way of
saying it was very impolite and strange; and after we had parted, I
heard him give way to fiendish laughter.  I could not be mistaken, for
the cliffs echoed it in all directions like a hundred hyenas!"

As this savoured somewhat of a joke, Milly availed herself of it, set
free the safety-valve, and, so to speak, saved the boiler!

"Why do you laugh so much, child?" asked the old lady, when her daughter
had transgressed reasonable limits.

"Well, you know, mother, if you _will_ compare a man's laugh to a
hundred hyenas--"

"I didn't compare the man's voice," interrupted Mrs Moss; "I said that
the cliffs--"

"That's worse and worse!  Now, mother, don't get into one of your
hypercritical moods, and insist on reasons for everything; but tell me
about this wicked--this dreadful young man.  What was he like?"

"Like an ordinary sportsman, dear, with one of those hateful guns in his
hand, and a botanical box on his back.  I could not see his face very
well, for he wore one of those ugly pot-caps, with a peak before and
behind; though what the behind one is for I cannot imagine, as men have
no eyes in the back of their heads to keep the sun out of.  No doubt
some men would make us believe they have! but it was pulled down on the
bridge of his nose.  What I did see of his face seemed to be handsome
enough, and his figure was tall and well made, unquestionably, but his
behaviour--nothing can excuse that!  If he had only said he was sorry,
one might have forgiven him."

"Did he _not_ say he was sorry?" asked Milly in some surprise.

"Oh, well, I suppose he did; and begged pardon after a fashion.  But
what truth could there be in his protestations when he went away and
laughed like a hyena."

"You said a hundred hyenas, mother."

"No, Milly, I said the cliffs laughed; but don't interrupt me, you
naughty child!  Well, I was going to tell you that my heart softened a
little towards the young man, for, as you know, I am not naturally
unforgiving."

"I know it well, dear mother!"

"So, before we parted, I told him that if he had any explanations or
apologies to make, I should be glad to see him at Kinlossie House.  Then
I made up my mind to forgive him, and introduce him to you as the man
that ran me down in London!  This was the little surprise I had in store
for you, but the ungrateful creature has never come."

"No, and he never will come!" said Milly, with a hearty laugh.

"How do you know that, puss?" asked Mrs Moss, in surprise.

Fortunately the dinner-bell rang at that moment, justifying Milly in
jumping up.  Giving her mother a rather violent hug, she rushed from the
room.

"Strange girl!" muttered Mrs Moss as she turned, and occupied herself
with some mysterious--we might almost say captious--operations before
the looking-glass.  "The mountain air seems to have increased her
spirits wonderfully.  Perhaps love has something to do with it!  It may
be both!"

She was still engaged with a subtle analysis of this question--in front
of the glass, which gave her the advantage of supposing that she talked
with an opponent--when sudden and uproarious laughter was heard in the
adjoining room.  It was Barret's sitting-room, in which his friends were
wont to visit him.  She could distinguish that the laughter proceeded
from himself, Milly, and Giles Jackman, though the walls were too thick
to permit of either words or ordinary tones being heard.

"Milly," said Mrs Moss, severely, when they met a few minutes later in
the drawing-room, "what were you two and Mr Jackman laughing at so
loudly?  Surely you did not tell them what we had been speaking about?"

"Of course I did, mother.  I did not know you intended to keep the
matter secret.  And it did so tickle them!  But no one else knows it, so
I will run back to John and pledge him to secrecy.  You can caution Mr
Jackman, who will be down directly, no doubt."

As Barret had not at that time recovered sufficiently to admit of his
going downstairs, his friends were wont to spend much of their time in
the snug sitting-room which had been apportioned to him.  He usually
held his levees costumed in a huge flowered dressing-gown, belonging to
the laird, so that, although he began to look more like his former self,
as he recovered from his injuries, he was still sufficiently disguised
to prevent recognition on the part of Mrs Moss.

Nevertheless, the old lady felt strangely perplexed about him.

One day the greater part of the household was assembled in his room when
Mrs Moss remarked on this curious feeling.

"I cannot tell what it is, Mr Barret, that makes the sound of your
voice seem familiar to me," she said; "yet not exactly familiar, but a
sort of far-away echo, you know, such as one might have heard in a
dream; though, after all, I don't think I ever did hear a voice in a
dream."

Jackman and Milly glanced at each other, and the latter put the
safety-valve to her mouth while Barret replied--

"I don't know," he said, with a very grave appearance of profound
thought, "that I ever myself dreamt a voice, or, indeed, a sound of any
kind.  As to what you say about some voices appearing to be familiar,
don't you think that has something to do with classes of men?  No man, I
think, is a solitary unit in creation.  Every man is, as it were, the
type of a class to which he belongs--each member possessing more or less
the complexion, tendencies, characteristics, tones, etcetera, of his
particular class.  You are familiar, it may be, with the tones of the
class to which I belong, and hence the idea that you have heard my voice
before."

"Philosophically put, Barret," said Mabberly; "I had no idea you thought
so profoundly."

"H'm!  I'm not so sure of the profundity," said the little old lady,
pursing her lips; "no doubt you may be right as regards class; but then,
young man, I have been familiar with all classes of men, and therefore,
according to your principle, I should have some strange memories
connected with Mr Jackman's voice, and Mr Mabberly's, and the laird's,
and everybody's."

"Well said, sister; you have him there!" cried the laird with a guffaw;
"but don't lug me into your classes, for I claim to be an exception to
all mankind, inasmuch as I have a sister who belongs to no class, and is
ready to tackle any man on any subject whatever, between metaphysics and
baby linen.  Come now, Barret, do you think yourself strong enough to go
out with us in the boat to-morrow?"

"Quite.  Indeed, I would have begged leave to go out some days ago, but
Doctor Jackman there, who is a very stern practitioner, forbids me.
However, I have my revenge, for I compel him to sit with me a great
deal, and entertain me with Indian stories."

"Oh!" exclaimed Junkie, who happened to be in the room, "he hasn't told
you yet about the elephant hunt, has he?"

"No, not yet, Junkie," returned Barret; "he has been faithful to his
promise not to go on with that story till you and your brothers are
present."

"Well, but tell it now, Mr Jackman, and I'll go an call Eddie and
Archie," pleaded the boy.

"You will call in vain, then," said his father, "for they have both gone
up the burn, one to photograph and the other to paint.  I never saw such
a boy as Archie is to photograph.  I believe he has got every scene in
the island worth having on his plates now, and he has taken to the
cattle of late--What think ye was the last thing he tried?  I found him
in the yard yesterday trying to photograph himself!"

"That must indeed have puzzled him; how did he manage?" asked MacRummle.

"Well, it was ingenious.  He tried to get Pat Quin to manipulate the
instrument while he sat; but Quin is clumsy with his fingers, at least
for such delicate work, and, the last time, he became nervous in his
anxiety to do the thing rightly; so, when Archie cried `Now,' for him to
cover the glass with its little cap, he put it on with a bang that
knocked over and nearly smashed the whole concern.  So what does the boy
do but sets up a chair in the right focus and arranges the instrument
with a string tied to the little cap.  Then he sits down on the chair,
puts on a heavenly smile, and pulls the string.  Off comes the cap!  He
counts one, two--I don't know how many--and then makes a sudden dash at
the camera an' shuts it up!  What the result may be remains to be seen."

"Oh, it'll be the same as usual," remarked Junkie in a tone of contempt.
"There's always something goes wrong in the middle of it.  He tried to
take Boxer the other day, and _he_ wagged his tail in the middle of it.
Then he tried the cat, and she yawned in the middle.  Then Flo, and she
laughed in the middle.  Then me, an' I forgot, and made a face at Flo in
the middle.  It's a pity it has got a middle at all; two ends would be
better, I think.  But won't you tell about the elephants to _us_, Mr
Jackman?  There's plenty of us here--please!"

"Nay, Junkie; you would not have me break my word, surely.  When we are
all assembled together you shall have it--some wet day, perhaps."

"Then there'll be no more wet days _this_ year, if I've to wait for
that," returned the urchin half sulkily.

That same day, Milly, Barret, and Jackman arranged that the mystery of
the cowardly young man must be cleared up.

"Perhaps it would be best for Miss Moss to explain to her mother," said
Giles.

"That will not I," said Milly with a laugh.

"I have decided what to do," said Barret.  "I was invited by her to call
and explain anything I had to say, and apologise.  By looks, if not by
words, I accepted that invitation, and I shall keep it.  If you could
only manage somehow, Milly, to get everybody out of the way, so that I
might find your mother alone in--"

"She's alone _now_," said Milly.  "I left her just a minute ago, and she
is not likely to be interrupted, I know."

"Stay, then; I will return in a few minutes."

Barret retired to his room, whence he quickly returned with shooting
coat, knickerbockers, pot-cap and boots, all complete.

"`Richard's himself again!'  Allow me to congratulate you," cried
Jackman, shaking his friend by the hand.  "But, I say, don't you think
it may give the old lady rather a shock as well as a surprise?"

Barret looked at Milly.

"I think not," said Milly.  "As uncle often says of dear mother, `she is
tough.'"

"Well, I'll go," said Barret.

In a few minutes he walked into the middle of the drawing-room and stood
before Mrs Moss, who was reading a book at the time.  She laid down the
book, removed her glasses, and looked up.

"Well, I declare!" she exclaimed, with the utmost elevation of her
eyebrows and distension of her eyes; "there you are at last!  And you
have not even the politeness to take your hat off, or have yourself
announced.  You are the most singularly ill-bred young man, for your
looks, that I ever met with."

"I thought, madam," said Barret in a low voice, "that you would know me
better with my cap on--"

He stopped, for the old lady had risen at the first sound of his voice,
and gazed at him in a species of incredulous alarm.

"Forgive me," cried Barret, pulling off his cap; but again he stopped
abruptly, and, before he could spring forward to prevent it, the little
old lady had fallen flat upon the hearth-rug.

"Quick! hallo!  Milly--Giles!  Ass that I am!  I've knocked her down
_again_!" he shouted, as those whom he summoned burst into the room.

They had not been far off.  In a few more minutes Mrs Moss was reviving
on the sofa, and alone with her daughter.

"Milly, dear, this has been a great surprise; indeed, I might almost
call it a shock," she said, in a faint voice.

"Indeed it has been, darling mother," returned Milly in sympathetic
tones, as she smoothed her mother's hair; "and it was all my fault.  But
are you quite sure you are not hurt?"

"I don't _feel_ hurt, dear," returned the old lady, with a slight dash
of her argumentative tone; "and don't you think that if I _were_ hurt I
should _feel_ it?"

"Perhaps, mother; but sometimes, you know, people are so _much_ hurt
that they _can't_ feel it."

"True, child, but in these circumstances they are usually unable to
express their views about feeling altogether, which I am not, you see--
no thanks to that--th-to John Barret."

"Oh! mother, I cannot bear to think of it--"

"No wonder," interrupted the old lady.  "To think of my being violently
knocked down _twice--almost_ three times--by a big young man like that,
and the first time with a horrid bicycle on the top of us--I might
almost say mixed up with us."

"But, mother, he _never_ meant it, you know--"

"I should _think_ not!" interjected Mrs Moss with a short sarcastic
laugh.

"No, indeed," continued Milly, with some warmth; "and if you only knew
what he has suffered on your account--"

"Milly," cried Mrs Moss quickly, "is all that _I_ have suffered on
_his_ account to count for nothing?"

"Of course not, _dear_ mother.  I don't mean that; you don't understand
me.  I mean the reproaches that his own conscience has heaped upon his
head for what he has inadvertently done."

"Recklessly, child, not inadvertently.  Besides, you know, his
conscience is not _himself_.  People cannot avoid what conscience says
to them.  Its remarks are no sign of humility or self-condemnation, one
proof of which is that wicked people would gladly get away from
conscience if they could, instead of agreeing with it, as they should,
and shaking hands with it, and saying, `we are all that you call us, and
more.'"

"Well, that is exactly what John has done," said Milly, with increasing,
warmth.  "He has said all that, and more to me--"

"To _you_?" interrupted Mrs Moss; "yes, but you are not his conscience,
child!"

"Yes, I am, mother; at least, if I'm not, I am next thing to it, for he
says _everything_ to me!" returned Milly, with a laugh and a blush.
"And you have no idea how sorry, how ashamed, how self-condemned, how
overwhelmed he has been by all that has happened."

"Humph!  I have been a good deal more overwhelmed than he has been,"
returned Mrs Moss.  "However, make your mind easy, child, for during
the last week or two, in learning to love and esteem John Barret, I have
unwittingly been preparing the way to forgive and forget the cowardly
youth who ran me down in London.  Now go and send Mr Jackman to me; I
have a great opinion of that young man's knowledge of medicine and
surgery, though he _is_ only an amateur.  He will soon tell me whether I
have received any hurt that has rendered me incapable of feeling.  And
at the same time you may convey to that coward, John, my entire
forgiveness."

Milly kissed her mother, of course, and hastened away to deliver her
double message.

After careful examination and much questioning, "Dr" Jackman pronounced
the little old lady to be entirely free from injury of any kind, save
the smashing of a comb in her back-hair, and gave it as his opinion that
she was as sound in wind and limb as before the accident, though there
had unquestionably been a considerable shock to the feelings, which,
however, seemed to have had the effect of improving rather than
deranging her intellectual powers.  The jury which afterwards sat upon
her returned their verdict in accordance with that opinion.

It was impossible, of course, to prevent some of all this leaking into
the kitchen, the nursery, and the stable.  In the first-mentioned spot,
Quin remarked to the housemaid,--"Sure, it's a quare evint entirely,"
with which sentiment the housemaid agreed.

"Aunt Moss is a buster," was Junkie's ambiguous opinion, in which Flo
and the black doll coincided.

"Tonal'," said Roderick, as he groomed the bay horse, "the old wumman
iss a fery tough person."

To which "Tonal'" assented, "she iss, what-e-ver."



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

ELEPHANTS AGAIN--FOLLOWED BY SOMETHING MORE AWFUL.

There came a rainy day at last at Kinlossie House.  Such days will come
at times in human experience, both in metaphor and fact.  At present we
state a fact.

"It will bring up the fush," was Roderick's remark, as he paused in the
operation of cleaning harness to look through the stable door on the
landscape; "an' that wull please Maister MacRummle."

"It will pe good for the gress too, an' that will please Muss Mully,"
said Donald, now permanently appointed to the stables.

"H'm! she wull pe carin' less for the gress, poy, than she wass used to
do," returned the groom.  "It iss my opeenion that they wull pe all
wantin' to co away sooth pefore long."

We refer to the above opinions because they were shared by the party
assembled in Barret's room, which was still retained as a snuggery,
although its occupant was fully restored to normal health and vigour.

"You'll be sure to get `that salmon' next time you try, after all this
rain, MacRummle," said Mabberly.  "At least, I hope you will before we
leave."

"Ay, and you must have another try with the repeater on the Eagle Cliff,
Mac.  It would never do to leave a lone widdy, as Quin calls it, after
murdering the husband."

"Perhaps I _may_ have another day there," answered the old gentleman,
with a pleased smile; for although they roasted him a good deal for
mistaking an eagle for a raven, and only gave him credit for a "fluke,"
it was evident that he congratulated himself not a little on his
achievement.

"Archie is having an awful time skinning and stuffing it," said Eddie,
who sat by the window dressing trout flies.

Junkie, who was occupied at another window, mending the top of his rod,
remarked that nothing seemed to give Archie so much pleasure as skinning
and stuffing something.  "He's always doing it," said the youngster.
"Whatever happens to die, from a tom-cat to a tom-tit, he gets hold of.
I do believe if he was to die, he would try to skin and stuff himself!"

At that moment Archie entered the room.

"I've got it nearly done now," he said, with a pleased expression, while
he rubbed his not-over-clean hands.  "I'll set him up to-night and
photograph him to-morrow, with Flo under his wings to show his
_enormous_ size."

"Oh! that minds me o' the elephants," cried Junkie, jumping up and
running to Jackman, who was assisting.  Barret to arrange plants for
Milly.  "We are _all_ here now--an' you _promised_, you know."

A heavy patter of rain on the window seemed to emphasise Junkie's
request by suggesting that nothing better could be done.

"Well, Junkie, I have no objection," said the Woods-and-Forester, "if
the rest of the company do not object."

As the rest of the company did not object, but rather expressed anxiety
to hear about the hunt, Jackman drew his chair near to the fire, the
boys crowded round him, and he began with,--"Let me see.  Where was I?"

"In India, of course," said Junkie.  "Yes; but at what part of the
hunt?"

"Oh! you hadn't begun the hunt at all.  You had only made Chand
somethin' or other, Isri Per-what-d'ee-call-it, an' Raj Mung-thingumy
give poor Mowla Buksh such an awful mauling."

"Just so.  Well, you must know that next day we received news of large
herds of elephants away to the eastward of the Ganges, so we started off
with all our forces--hunters, matchlock-men, onlookers, etcetera, and
about eighty tame elephants.  Chief among these last were the fighting
elephants, to which Junkie gave such appropriate names just now, and
king of them all was the mighty Chand Moorut, who had never been known
