CHAPTER XXXIV  Unc' Billy and Old Mrs. Possum

All the way home from school Peter Rabbit did his best to think who
it could be who ate flesh, yet wasn't a member of the order of
flesh eaters.  Every few hops he would stop to think, but all his
stopping and all his thinking were in vain, and when he started
for school the next morning he was as puzzled as ever.  On his way
through the Green Forest he passed a certain tree.  He was just
past and no more when a familiar voice hailed him.

"Morning, Bre'r Rabbit," said the voice.  "What's yo' hurry?"  Peter
stopped abruptly and looked up in that tree.  There, peering down at
him from a hole high up in the trunk, was a sharp, whitish-gray face,
with a pair of twinkling black eyes.

"Hello, Unc' Billy," cried Peter.  "How are you and Ol' Mrs. Possum?"

"Po'ly, Peter, Po'ly.  We-uns haven't had breakfast yet, so we-uns
are feeling po'ly," replied Unc' Billy with a grin.

A sudden thought popped into Peter's head.  "Unc' Billy," cried
Peter excitedly, "are you a Carnivora?"

Unc' poked his head a little farther out and put his hand behind
his ear as if he were a little hard of hearing.  "What's that,
Bre'r Rabbit?  Am I a what?" he demanded.

"Are you a Carnivora?" repeated Peter.

"Ah reckons Ah might be if Ah knew what it was, but as long as Ah
don't, Ah reckons I ain't," retorted Unc' Billy.  "Ah reckons Ah'm
just plain Possum.  When Ah wants to be real uppity, Ah puts on an
'o.'  Then Ah am Mister Opossum."

But Peter wasn't listening.  The fact is, Peter had started
lipperty-lipperty-lip for school, without even being polite enough
to say good-by.  He arrived at school quite out of breath.  "I
know!" he panted.  "I know!"

"What do you know?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"I know who it is who eats flesh, yet doesn't belong to the order
of flesh eaters.  It's Unc' Billy Possum!" cried Peter.

"Right you are," replied Old Mother Nature.  "However did you find
it out?"

"I didn't exactly find it out; I guessed it," replied Peter.  "On
my way here I saw Unc' Billy, and it popped into my head right
away that he was one we haven't heard about, and must be the one.
But if he eats flesh, I don't see why he isn't a member of the
order of flesh eaters."

"It is because he belongs to a group which has something which
makes them entirely different from all other animals, and for
this reason they have been given an order of their own," explained
Old Mother Nature.  "They belong to the order of Marsupials,
which means pouched animals.  It is because the mothers have big
pockets in which they carry their babies.  Old Mrs. Possum has
just such a pocket."

"Of course," exclaimed Peter.  "I've seen those babies poking
their heads out of that pocket.  They look too funny for anything."

"The Opossums are the only Marsupials in this country," continued
Old Mother Nature.  "Now have I made it quite clear why, although
they eat flesh, Unc' Billy and Ol' Mrs. Possum are not members of
the same big order as Buster Bear and the other flesh eaters?"

Everybody nodded.  Just then Chatterer the Red Squirrel shouted,
"Here comes Unc' Billy, Ol' Mrs. Possum and all the little Possums."

Sure enough, down the Lone Little Path came the Possum family, and
a funny looking sight they were.  Unc' Billy was whitish-gray, his
face whiter than the rest of him.  He looked as if he had just
gotten out of bed and forgotten to brush his hair; it pointed every
which way.  His legs were dark, his feet black and his toes white.
His ears were without any hair at all, and were black for the lower
half, the rest being white.  He had a long whitish tail without any
hair on it.  Altogether, with his sharp face and naked tail, he
looked a great deal as though he might be a giant Rat.

But if Unc' Billy was a funny-looking fellow, Ol' Mrs. Possum was
even more funny-looking.  She seemed to have heads and tails all
over her.  You see, she had brought along her family, and Ol' Mrs.
Possum is one of those who believe in large families.  There were
twelve youngsters, and they were exactly like their parents, only
small.  They were clinging all over Ol' Mrs. Possum.  Some were on
her back, some were clinging to her sides, and a couple were in
the big pocket, where they had spent their babyhood.

"We--all done thought we'd come to school," explained Unc' Billy
with a grin.

"I'm glad you did," replied Old Mother Nature.  "You see, the rest
of your friends here are a little curious about the Possum family."

Meanwhile Ol' Mrs. Possum was climbing a tree, and when she had
reached a comfortable crotch the little Possums left her and began
to play about in the tree.  It was then that it appeared what handy
things those naked little tails were.  When the little Possums
crawled out where the branches were small, they simply wrapped
their tails around the twigs to keep from falling.

"My!" exclaimed Peter.  "Those certainly are handy tails."

"Handiest tails ever was," declared Unc' Billy.  "Don't know what
Ah ever would do without mah tail."

"Suppose you climb a tree, Unc' Billy, and show your friends here
how you manage to get the eggs from a nest that you cannot reach
by crawling along the branch on which it is placed," said Old
Mother Nature.

Unc' Billy grinned, and good-naturedly started up a tree.  He crept
out on a branch that overhung another branch.  Way out where the
branch was small crept Unc' Billy.  Then he wrapped the end of his
tail around the branch and swung himself off, keeping hold of the
branch only with his tail and one hind foot. Then, stretching down
full length, he could just reach the branch below him. "You see,"
he explained, "if there was a nest on this branch down here, Ah
could get those eggs without any trouble.  Ah wish there was a
nest.  Just speaking of eggs makes mah mouth water."  Again Unc'
Billy grinned and then pulled himself back to the other branch.

Old Mother Nature shook her head reprovingly.  "Unc' Billy," said
she, "you are a bad old rascal to steal eggs.  What's more, it
doesn't matter to you much whether you find eggs or young birds
in a nest.  It is a wonder that between you and Chatterer the Red
Squirrel any of the birds succeed in raising families around
here.  Have you visited Farmer Brown's hen house lately?"

Unc' Billy shook his head.  "Not lately," said he; "Ah done got
a dreadful scare the last time Ah was up there, and Ah reckons
Ah'll stay away from there for a while."

"What else do you eat?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"Anything," replied Unc' Billy.  "Ah reckons Ah ain't no ways
particular--insects, roots, Frogs, Toads, small Snakes, Lizards,
berries, fruits, nuts, young Rats and Mice, corn, any old meat
that has been left lying around.  Ah reckon Ah could find a meal
most any time most anywhere."

"Do you always have as big a family as you have there?" asked
Peter Rabbit.

"Not always," replied Unc' Billy.  "But sometimes Mrs. Possum
has to tote around a still bigger family. We believe in chillun
and lots of them. We reckon on havin' two or three big families
every year."

"Where is your home?" asked Johnny Chuck.  "I know," said Peter
Rabbit.  "It's up in a big hollow tree."

Unc' Billy looked down at Peter.  "'Tisn't at all necessary to
tell anybody where that hollow tree is, Bre'r Rabbit," said he.

"Are Possums found anywhere except around here?" inquired
Happy Jack.

"Yes, indeed," replied Old Mother Nature.  "They are found all down
through the Sunny South, and in the warmer parts of the Middle West.
Unc' Billy and his relatives are not fond of cold weather.  They
prefer to be where they can be reasonably warm all the year round.

"Some folks think Unc' Billy isn't smart, but those folks don't
know Unc' Billy.  He learned a long time ago that he can't run as
fast as some others, so he has learned to depend on his wits in
time of danger.  What do you think he does?"

"I know," cried Peter; "I saw him do it once.  Farmer Brown's boy
surprised Unc' Billy, and Unc' Billy just fell right over dead."

"Pooh!  That's a story, Peter Rabbit.  How could Unc' Billy have
fallen over dead and be alive up in that tree this very minute?"
cried Happy Jack.

"I didn't mean he was really dead, but that he looked as if he
were dead," explained Peter.  "And he did, too.  He was the deadest
looking thing I ever saw.  I thought he was dead myself.  I was
watching from a bramble tangle where I was hiding, and I certainly
thought the life had been scared right out of Unc' Billy.  I guess
Farmer Brown's boy thought so too.  He picked Unc' Billy up by the
tail, and looked him all over, and said, 'You poor little thing. I
didn't mean to hurt you.'  Unc' Billy didn't so much as wink an eye.
Farmer Brown's boy went off up the path carrying Unc' Billy by the
tail.  By and by he laid Unc' Billy down on an old stump while he
went to look at a nest of Blacky the Crow.  When he came back Unc'
Billy wasn't there.  I never did see Unc' Billy hurry as he did
the minute Farmer Brown's boy's back was turned.  He came to life
as suddenly as he had dropped dead."

"Very good, Peter," said Old Mother Nature.  "Some other smart
little people try that trick sometimes, but none of them can do
it as well as Unc' Billy Possum.  Pretending to be dead in order
to remain alive is the cleverest thing Unc' Billy does.  Now how
about Lightfoot the Deer for the next lesson?"

"Splendid," cried all together and prepared to start for their homes.



CHAPTER XXXV  Lightfoot, Blacktail and Forkhorn

Of all the people who live in the Green Forest none is more admired
than Lightfoot the Deer.  So perhaps you can guess how delighted
every one was when, just as the morning lesson was to begin,
Lightfoot himself stepped daintily out from a thicket and bowed
to Old Mother Nature.

"I heard," said he, "that my little friends here are to learn
something about my family this morning, and thought you would not
mind if I joined them."

"I should say not!" exclaimed Peter Rabbit forgetting that Lightfoot
had spoken to Old Mother Nature.

All laughed, even Old Mother Nature.  You see, Peter was so very
much in earnest, and at the same time so excited, that it really
was funny.

"Peter has spoken for all of us," said Old Mother Nature.  "You
are more than welcome, Lightfoot.  I had intended to send for you,
but it slipped my mind.  I am delighted to have you here and I know
that the others are.  I suspect you will be most comfortable if you
lie down, but before you do this I want everybody to have a good
look at you.  Just stand for a few minutes in that little open
space where all can see you."

Lightfoot walked over to the open space where the sun fell full on
him and there he stood, a picture of grace and beauty with just
enough honest pride in his appearance to give him an air of noble
dignity.  There was more than one little gasp of admiration among
his little neighbors.

"There," began Old Mother Nature, "is one of the most beautiful
of all my children, and the knowledge that he is beautiful does
not spoil him.  Lightfoot belongs to the Deer family, as you all
know, and this in turn is in the order called Ungulata, which
means hoofed."

Peter Rabbit abruptly sat up, and his ears stood up like exclamation
points.  "Farmer Brown's cows have those funny feet called hoofs;
are they related to Lightfoot?" he asked eagerly.

"They belong to another family, but it is in the same order.  So
they are distant cousins of Lightfoot," replied Old Mother Nature.

"And Farmer Brown's Pigs, what about them?" asked Chatterer the
Red Squirrel.  "They also belong to that order and so are related,"
explained Old Mother Nature.

"Huh!" exclaimed Chatterer.  "If I were in Lightfoot's place I
never, never would acknowledge any such homely, stupid creatures
as those as relatives of mine."

"Don't forget that Prickly Porky the Porcupine and Robber the Rat
are members of the same order to which you belong," retorted Old
Mother Nature softly, and Chatterer hung his head.  "Lightfoot,"
she continued, "is the White-tailed or Virginia Deer, and is in
some ways the most beautiful of the Deer family.  You have only to
look at him to know that those slim legs of his are meant for speed.
He can go very fast, but not for long distances without stopping.
Like Peter Rabbit he is a jumper rather than a true runner, and
travels with low bounds with occasional high ones when alarmed.
He can make very long and high jumps, and this is one reason he
prefers to live in the Green Forest where there are fallen trees
and tangles of old logs.  If frightened he can leap over them,
whereas his enemies must crawl under or climb over or go around
them.  Ordinary fences, such as Farmer Brown has built around his
fields, do not bother Lightfoot in the least.  He can leap over
them as easily as Peter Rabbit can jump over that little log he
is sitting beside.

"Just now, because it is summer, Lightfoot's coat is decidedly
reddish in color and very handsome.  But in winter it is wholly
different."

"I know," spoke up Chatterer the Red Squirrel.  "It is gray then.
I've often seen Lightfoot in winter, and there isn't a red hair
on him at that season.

"Quite right," agreed Old Mother Nature.  "His red coat is for
summer only.  Notice that Lightfoot has a black nose.  That is, the
tip of it is black.  Beneath his chin is a black spot.  A band
across his nose, the inside of each ear and a circle around each
eye is whitish.  His throat is white and he is white beneath.  Now,
Peter, you are so interested in tails, tell me without looking
what color Lightfoot's tail is."

"White, snowy white," replied Peter promptly.  "I suppose that is
why he is called the White-tailed Deer."

"Huh!" grunted Johnny Chuck who happened to be sitting a little
back of Lightfoot, "I don't call it white.  It has a white edge,
but mostly it is the color of his coat."

Now while Lightfoot had been standing there his tail had hung down,
and it was as Johnny Chuck had said.  But at Johnny's remark up flew
Lightfoot's tail, showing only the under side.  It was like a pointed
white flag.  With it held aloft that way, no one behind Lightfoot
would suspect that his whole tail was not white.

"Notice how long and fluffy the hair on that tail is," said Old
Mother Nature.  "Mrs. Lightfoot's is just like it, and this makes
it very easy for her babies to follow her in the dark.  When
Lightfoot is feeding or simply walking about he carries it down,
but when he is frightened and bounds away, up goes that white
flag.  Now look at his horns.  They are not true horns.  The
latter are hollow, while these are not.  Farmer Brown's cows have
horns.  Lightfoot has antlers.  Just remember that.  The so-called
horns of all the Deer family are antlers and are not hollow.
Notice how Lightfoot's curve forward with the branches or tines
on the back side."

Of course everybody looked at Lightfoot's crown as he held his head
proudly.  "What is the matter with them?" asked Whitefoot the Wood
Mouse.  "They look to me as if they are covered with fur.  I always
supposed them to be hard like bone."

"So they will be a month from now," explained Old Mother Nature,
smiling down at Whitefoot.  "That which you call fur will come off.
He will rub it off against the trees until his antlers are polished,
and there is not a trace of it left.  You see Lightfoot has just
grown that set this summer."

"Do you mean those antlers?" asked Danny Meadow Mouse, looking very
much puzzled.  "Didn't he have any before?  How could things like
those grow, anyway?"

"Don't you know that he loses his horns, I mean antlers, every
year?" demanded Jumper the Hare.  "I thought every one knew that.
His old ones fell off late last winter.  I know, for I saw him
just afterward, and he looked sort of ashamed.  Anyway, he didn't
carry his head as proudly as he does now.  He looked a lot like
Mrs. Lightfoot; you know she hasn't any antlers."

"But how could hard, bony things like those grow?" persisted Danny
Meadow Mouse.

"I think I will have to explain," said Old Mother Nature.  "They
were not hard and bony when they were growing.  Just as soon as
Lightfoot's old antlers dropped off, the new ones started.  They
sprouted out of his head just as plants sprout out of the ground,
and they were soft and very tender and filled with blood, just
as all parts of your body are.  At first they were just two round
knobs.  Then these pushed out and grew and grew.  Little knobs
sprang out from them and grew to make the branches you see now.
All the time they were protected by a furry skin which looks a
great deal like what men call velvet.  When Lightfoot's antlers
are covered with this, they are said to be in the velvet state.

"When they had reached their full size they began to shrink and
harden, so that now they are quite hard, and very soon that velvet
will begin to come off.  When they were growing they were so tender
that Lightfoot didn't move about any more than was necessary and
kept quite by himself.  He was afraid of injuring those antlers.
By the time cool weather comes, Lightfoot will be quite ready to
use those sharp points on anybody who gets in his way.

"As Jumper has said, Mrs. Lightfoot has no antlers.  Otherwise she
looks much like Lightfoot, save that she is not quite as big.  Have
any of you ever seen her babies?"

"I have," declared Jumper, who, as you know, lives in the Green
Forest just as Lightfoot does.  "They are the dearest little
things and look like their mother, only they have the loveliest
spotted coats."

"That is to help them to remain unseen by their enemies," explained
Old Mother Nature.  When they lie down where the sun breaks through
the trees and spots the ground with light they seem so much like
their surroundings that unless they move they are not often seen
even by the sharpest eyes that may pass close by.  They lie with
their little necks and heads stretched flat on the ground and do
not move so much as a hair.  You see, they usually are very
obedient, and the first thing their mother teaches them is to keep
perfectly still when she leaves them.

"When they are a few months old and able to care for themselves a
little, the spots disappear.  As a rule Mrs. Lightfoot has two
babies each spring.  Once in a while she has three, but two is the
rule.  She is a good mother and always on the watch for possible
danger.  While they are very small she keeps them hidden in the
deepest thickets.  By the way, do you know that Lightfoot and Mrs.
Lightfoot are fine swimmers?"

Happy Jack Squirrel looked the surprise he felt.  "I don't see how
under the sun any one with little hoofed feet like Lightfoot's can
swim," said he.

"Nevertheless, Lightfoot is a good swimmer and fond of the water,"
replied Old Mother Nature.  "That is one way he has of escaping his
enemies.  When he is hard pressed by Wolves or Dogs he makes for
the nearest water and plunges in.  He does not hesitate to swim
across a river or even a small lake.

"Lightfoot prefers the Green Forest where there are close thickets
with here and there open places.  He likes the edge of the Green
Forest where he can come out in the open fields, yet be within a
short distance of the protecting trees and bushes.  He requires
much water and so is usually found not far from a brook, pond or
river.  He has a favorite drinking place and goes to drink early
in the morning and just at dusk.  During the day he usually sleeps
hidden away in a thicket or under a windfall, coming out late in
the afternoon.  He feeds mostly in the early evening.  He eats
grass and other plants, beechnuts and acorns, leaves and twigs
of certain trees, lily pads in summer and, I am sorry to say,
delights to get into Farmer Brown's garden, where almost every
green thing tempts him.

"Like so many others he has a hard time in winter, particularly
when the snows are deep.  Then he and Mrs. Lightfoot and their
children live in what is called a yard.  Of course it isn't really
a yard such as Farmer Brown has.  It is simply a place where they
keep the snow trodden down in paths which cross and cross, and is
made where there is shelter and food.  The food is chiefly twigs
and leaves of evergreen trees.  As the snow gets deeper and deeper
they become prisoners in the yard until spring comes to melt the
snow and set them free.

"Lightfoot depends for safety more on his nose and ears than on his
eyes.  His sense of smell is wonderful, and when he is moving about
he usually goes up wind; that is, in the direction from which the
wind is blowing.  This is so that it will bring to him the scent
of any enemy that may be ahead of him.  He is very clever and
cunning.  Often before lying down to rest he goes back a short
distance to a point where he can watch his trail, so that if any
one is following it he will have warning.
