well punished already, and I don't think he will trouble me again."

"If he does, send for me," and the detective handed Frank his card and
address.

"It is fortunate for me," said the telegraph boy, "that you saw him put
the money in my pocket."

"You would have experienced some inconvenience; but the story you have
told me would have cleared you with the jury."

"My young friend," said the clergyman, "I owe you an apology. I too
hastily assumed that you were guilty."

"It looked like it, sir. You were quite justified in what you said. Mr.
Haynes did not appear to relish your remarks to him," added Frank,
laughing.

"His crime was greater and meaner than the one charged upon you. To
steal is certainly a grave offence,--yet sometimes it is prompted by
necessity; but a deliberate attempt to fasten a false charge upon a
fellow-creature is vastly more atrocious."

"So it is, sir," said the old Irish woman, nodding assent vigorously. "I
quite agree wid your honor. It is owtracious."

The passengers smiled at the old woman's mistake; but it was clear that
they agreed with her in sentiment.

Meanwhile the car had been speeding along, and was near its terminus.
Frank bethought himself that he had been carried considerably beyond
his destination.

He pulled the bell, and, as he got out, he said, "Thank you all for
taking my part."

"We don't quite deserve that," said one of the passengers, after Frank
had left the car. "I was at first of opinion that the boy was guilty."

"We have been saved from doing a great injustice," said the clergyman.
"It should be a lesson to all of us not to be too hasty in our
judgments."

James Haynes in his hurried exit from the car fully believed that he
would be pursued and arrested. He was relieved to find his fears
groundless. But he was disappointed at the failure of his scheme. He had
carefully prepared it, and for several days he had been in readiness to
carry it into execution whenever he should meet Frank. This morning had
brought the opportunity; but it had miscarried.

"But for that cursed detective I would have carried the thing through,"
he muttered. "He spoiled all. I _hate_ that boy!"

But, though revengeful, Haynes was prudent. He gave up the thought of
injuring Frank because he saw that it would be dangerous to himself. He
did not remain long in New York, but soon joined his confederate in
Hartford.




CHAPTER XXVII.

FRANK BECOMES A GOOD SAMARITAN.


The close of the month came, and Frank laid aside his uniform. He was a
telegraph boy no more.

The superintendent shook hands with him cordially, and bade him good-by.

"Come and see us sometimes," he said. "I wish you all success. Your
services have been very satisfactory, and you have gained an excellent
reputation."

"Thank you, sir," said Frank. "I have tried to do my duty. Good-by,
boys!"

He shook hands with all his young comrades, with whom he was very
popular. They knew of his good fortune, and were disposed to regard him
as very rich. Six thousand dollars in a boy's eyes is a fortune.

"Now you're rich, Frank, I suppose you won't notice the likes of us,"
said Johnny O'Connor.

"I hope you don't think as badly of me as that, Johnny," said Frank,
earnestly. "I am not rich; but, even if I were, I should always be glad
to meet any of you. If I am ever able to do a favor to any of you I
will."

"I believe you, Frank," said Johnny. "You was always a good feller."

"Where's Tom Brady?" asked Frank, looking about him. "Is he out on an
errand?"

"Tom's sick," said the superintendent. "He's got a fever."

"It's bad for him," said Johnny, "for his mother and sister depended on
Tom's wages. Poor Tom felt bad because he had to give up work."

"Where does he live?" asked Frank, with quick sympathy.

"No. -- East Fourteenth street," answered Johnny. "I know, because I
live in the same block."

"I'll go and see him."

Frank's heart was not hardened by his own prosperity. He knew what it
was to be poor, and could enter into the feelings of the unfortunate
telegraph boy.

Half an hour found him in front of a large tenement-house, in front of
which were playing children of all ages, most of them showing in their
faces that unhealthy pallor which so generally marks a tenement-house
population.

"Do you know where Mrs. Brady lives?" asked Frank of a girl of twelve.

"Which Brady is it?" asked the girl. "There's three lives here."

"It's Tom Brady's mother," answered our hero.

"Is it Tom, the telegraph boy?"

"Yes."

"I'll show you then. Tom's been sick for some time."

"I know it. I have come to see him."

"Do you know Tom?" asked the girl, in some surprise; for Frank, having
laid aside his uniform, was handsomely dressed, and looked like the son
of a rich man.

"Yes, Tom is a friend of mine. I am sorry he's sick."

Up two flights of rickety stairs Frank followed the girl, who halted
before a door.

"That's the place," said his young guide, and disappeared down the
stairs, sliding down the banisters. Young ladies in the best society do
not often indulge in this amusement, but Mary Murphy knew little of
etiquette or conventionality.

In answer to Frank's knock, the door was opened by Mrs. Brady, a poorly
clad and care-worn woman.

"What is your wish, young gentleman?" she said.

"I've come to see Tom. How is he?"

"Do you know my Tom?" asked Mrs. Brady, in surprise.

"Yes; is he very sick?"

"The poor boy has got a fever."

"Can I see him?"

"If you'll come into such a poor place, sir. We're very poor, and now
that Tom's wages is stopped I don't know how we'll get along at all."

"Better than you think, perhaps, Mrs. Brady," said Frank, cheerfully.
"Why, Tom, what made you get sick?"

He had entered the room, and reached the bed on which the sick boy was
lying.

Tom looked up in surprise and pleasure.

"Is it you, Frank?" he said. "I'm glad you've come to see me. But how
did you find me out?"

"Johnny O'Connor told me where you lived. How long have you been sick?"

"Three days. It's rough on a poor boy like me. I ought to be earning
money for my mother."

"We'll miss Tom's wages badly," said Mrs. Brady; "I can't earn much
myself, and there's three of us to feed, let alone the rint."

"How did you get off, Frank?" asked Tom.

"I've left the office."

"Was this young gentleman a telegraph boy?" asked Mrs. Brady, in
surprise.

"Yes," said Tom; "but he's come into a fortune, and now he won't have to
work."

"I'm sure I'm glad of his good luck, and it's a great condescension for
a rich young gentleman to come and see my Tom."

"I have come into some money, but not a fortune, Mrs. Brady," said
Frank; "but it does not make me any better than when I was a poor
telegraph boy."

Evidently Mrs. Brady was not of this opinion, for she carefully dusted
with her apron the best chair in the room, and insisted on Frank's
seating himself in it.

"Have you had a doctor, Mrs. Brady?" asked Frank.

"Yes."

"What does he say?"

"He says that Tom will be sick for three or four weeks, and I don't know
what we'll do without his wages all that time."

"That's what troubles me," said Tom. "I wouldn't mind it so much if I'd
get my pay reg'lar while I'm sick."

"Then you needn't be troubled, Tom," said Frank, promptly, "for you
shall get it regularly."

"They won't give it to me," said Tom, incredulously.

"They won't, but I will."

"Do you mean it, Frank?"

"Certainly I do. I will give you a week's pay this morning, and I will
call every week, and pay you the same."

"Do you hear that, mother?" said Tom, joyfully.

"God bless you, young gentleman, for your kindness to us!" said Mrs.
Brady, gratefully.

"Oh, it isn't much," said Frank; "I can spare it well enough. I have had
such good luck myself that I ought to do something for those who need
it."

"You're a good feller, Frank," said Tom, warmly. "I'll get well quick
now. If you ever want anybody to fight for you, just call on Tom Brady."

"I generally do my own fighting, Tom," said Frank, laughing, "but I'll
remember your offer. When you are well, you must come and spend an
evening with me."

"I'm sure he'll be proud to do the same," said Mrs. Brady.

"I must bid you good-by, now, Tom. Keep a 'stiff upper lip,' and don't
be down-hearted. We must all be sick sometimes, you know, and you'll
soon be well."

"I won't be down-hearted now," said Tom, "with my wages comin' in
reg'lar. Remember me to the boys, Frank."

"I will, Tom."

When Frank reached home he found a large, overgrown boy, with big red
hands, and clothes of rural cut, who apparently did not know what to do
with his legs and arms, waiting to see him.

It was his cousin Jonathan.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A COUNTRY COUSIN.


Jonathan was a loose-jointed, heavily built, and awkward boy of
seventeen, bearing not the slightest resemblance to his cousin Frank.
Still he was a relation, and our hero was glad to see him.

"How are you, Jonathan?" said Frank, cordially. "I wasn't expecting to
see you. Are all well at home?"

"They're pooty smart," answered Jonathan. "I thought I'd come down and
look round a little."

"I shall be glad to show you round. Where would you like to go?--to
Central Park?"

"I don't care much about it," said the country cousin. "It's only a big
pasture, dad says. I'd rather go round the streets. Is there any place
where I can buy a few doughnuts? I feel kinder empty."

"Do you prefer doughnuts to anything else?" asked Frank, with a smile.

"I hear they're cheap,--only a cent apiece," answered Jonathan, "and I
calc'late five or six will be enough to fill me up."

"You needn't mind the expense, cousin; I shall pay for your dinner."

Jonathan's heavy face lighted up with satisfaction.

"I don't care if you do," he said. "I hear you've got a lot of money
now, Frank."

"I shall have enough, to make me comfortable, and start me in business."

"I wish I had as much money as you," said Jonathan, longingly.

"You are all right. Some time you will have more than I."

"I don't know about that. Dad keeps me awful close."

"You have all you want, don't you?"

"I've got some money in the bank," said Jonathan, "but I'd like to put
in more. I never thought you'd have more money than I."

"You used to tell me I ought to go to the poor-house," said Frank,
smiling.

"That's because you was livin' on dad, you know," explained Jonathan.
"It wasn't fair to me, because he wouldn't have so much to leave me."

In the country Frank had not found much satisfaction in the company of
his cousin, who inherited the combined meanness of both parents, and
appeared to grudge poor Frank every mouthful he ate; but in the sunshine
of his present prosperity he was disposed to forgive and forget.

Frank led the way to a restaurant not far away, where he allowed his
cousin to order an ample dinner, which he did without scruple, since he
was not to pay for it.

"It costs a sight to live in the city," he said, as he looked over the
bill of fare.

"It costs something in the country, too, Jonathan."

"I wish you'd come and board with dad. He'd take you for five dollars a
week, and it will cost you more in New York."

"Yes, it will cost me more here."

"Then you'll come, won't you? You'll be company for me."

Frank doubted whether Jonathan would be much company for him.

"You didn't use to think so, Jonathan."

"You couldn't pay your board then."

"Now that I can I prefer to remain in the city. I mean to go to school,
and get a good education."

"How much do you have to pay for board here?"

"I can't tell what I shall have to pay. At present I am staying with
friends, and pay nothing."

"Do you think they'd take me for a week the same way?" asked Jonathan,
