Freda did not seek to avoid her captor, but remained standing quietly
until he approached. For some time they conversed; then she turned and
left him and re-entered her hut. Sweyn stood looking after her, and
then with an angry stamp of the foot returned to the galleys.

"I would give much to be able to warn her that I am present and will
follow her until I rescue her from Sweyn," Edmund said. "Once at sea
and on her way south she may well despair of escape, and may consent,
from sheer hopelessness, to become his wife. Were it not that her hut
is so strongly guarded at night I would try to approach it, but as this
cannot be done I must take my chance in the day. To-morrow I will dress
myself in your garments and will hide in the wood as near as I can to
the hut; then if she come out to take the air I will walk boldly out
and speak with her. I see no other way of doing it."

On the following morning, attired in the Dane's clothes and helmet,
Edmund took his place near the edge of the wood. It was not until late
in the afternoon that Freda made her appearance. The moment was
propitious; almost all the men were at work on the ships and their
oars. The women were cooking the evening meal, and there was no one
near Freda, with the exception of the two armed Danes who sat on the
trunk of a fallen tree on guard, a short distance away. Edmund issued
boldly from the wood, and, waiting till Freda's steps, as she passed
backwards and forwards, took her to the farthest point from the guards,
he approached her.

"Freda," he said, "do not start or betray surprise, for you are
watched."

At the sound of his voice the girl had paused in her steps, and
exclaimed in a low voice, "Edmund!" and then, obeying his words, stood
motionless.

"I am near you, dear, and will watch over you. I have not strength to
carry you away; but my ship will be at the mouth of the river as you
pass out. Hang a white cloth from the window of your cabin in the poop
as a signal. If we fail to rescue you there we will follow you
wheresoever you may go, even to Italy, where I hear you are bound. So
keep up a brave heart. I have seen your father, and he has sent me to
save you. See, the guards are approaching, I must go."

Edmund then made for the forest. "Stop there!" the guards cried. "Who
are you, and whence do you come?"

Edmund made no answer, but, quickening his steps, passed among the
trees, and was soon beyond pursuit. This, indeed, the Danes did not
attempt. They had been surprised at seeing, as they supposed, one of
their party addressing Freda, for Sweyn's orders that none should speak
with her were precise. He had given this command because he feared,
that by the promise of rich rewards she might tempt some of his
followers to aid her escape. They had, therefore, risen to interrupt
the conversation, but it was not until they approached that it struck
them that the Northman's face was unfamiliar to them, and that he was
not one of their party, but Edmund had entered the wood before they
recovered from their surprise. Their shouts to him to stop brought
Sweyn to the spot.

"What is it?" he asked.

"A strange Northman has come out of the wood, and spoken to the lady
Freda."

Sweyn turned to his captive. She stood pale and trembling, for the
shock of the surprise had been a severe one.

"Who is this whom you have spoken to?" he asked. Freda did not answer.

"I insist upon knowing," Sweyn exclaimed angrily.

Freda recovered herself with an effort, and, raising her head, said,
"Your insistence has small effect with me, as you know, Jarl Sweyn; but
as there is no reason for concealment I will tell you. He is a
messenger whom my dear father has sent to me to tell me that some day
he hopes to rescue me from your hands."

Sweyn laughed loudly.

"He might have saved himself the trouble," he said. "Your good father
lies wounded near Paris, and by the time he is able to set out to your
rescue we shall be with Hasting on the sunny waters of Italy, and long
ere that you will, I hope, have abandoned your obstinate disposition,
and consented to be my wife."

Freda did not answer at once. Now that there was a hope of rescue,
however distant, she thought it might be as well to give Sweyn some
faint hope that in time she might yield to his wishes. Then she said:

"I have told you often, jarl, that I will never be your wife, and I do
not think that I shall ever change my mind. It may be that the sunny
skies you speak of may work a wonderful change in me, but that remains
to be seen." Sweyn retired well satisfied. Her words were less defiant
than any she had hitherto addressed to him. As to the message of her
father, who could know nothing of his intention to sail to the
Mediterranean, he thought no further of it.

Three days later the galleys were launched, and after a day spent in
putting everything in its place they started on their way down the
river. They rowed many miles, and at night moored by the bank. After
darkness had fallen a small boat rowed at full speed past them. It paid
no attention to the summons to stop, enforced though it was by several
arrows, but continued its way down the river, and was soon lost in the
darkness. Sweyn was much displeased. As they rowed down they had
carefully destroyed every boat they found on the river, in order that
the news of their coming might not precede them.

"The boat must have been hauled up and hidden," he said; "we might as
well have stopped and landed at some of the villages and replenished
our larder. Now we shall find the small places all deserted, and the
cattle driven away from the river. It is an unfortunate mischance."

As the Northmen anticipated they found the villages they passed the
next day entirely deserted by their inhabitants, and not a head of
cattle was to be seen grazing near the banks. In the afternoon they
came to Liege. The gates were shut, and the walls bristled with spears.
The galleys passed without a stay. Sweyn had other objects in view. Any
booty that might be obtained without severe fighting he would have been
glad enough to gather in; but with a long sea-voyage before him he
cared not to burden his galleys, and his principal desire was to obtain
a sufficient supply of provisions for the voyage. For several days the
galleys proceeded down the river. The villages were all deserted, and
the towns prepared for defence.

When he arrived within a day's journey of the sea he was forced to
halt. Half the crews were left in charge of the ships, and with the
others he led a foray far inland, and after some sharp fighting with
the natives succeeded in driving down a number of cattle to the ships
and in bringing in a store of flour.

Edmund had kept ahead of the galleys, stopping at every town and
village and warning the people of the approach of the marauders. He
reached the mouth of the river two days before them, but to his deep
disappointment saw that the Dragon had not arrived at the rendezvous.
On the following afternoon, however, a distant sail was seen, and as it
approached Edmund and his followers gave a shout of joy as they
recognized the Dragon, which was using her oars as well as sails and
was approaching at full speed. Edmund leaped into the boat and rowed to
meet them, and a shout of welcome arose from the Dragon as the crew
recognized their commander.

"Are we in time?" Egbert shouted.

"Just in time," Edmund replied. "They will be here to-morrow." Edmund
was soon on board, and was astonished at seeing Siegbert standing by
the side of his kinsman.

"What is the news of Freda?" the jarl asked eagerly.

"She is well and keeps up a brave heart," Edmund replied. "She has
sworn to kill herself if Sweyn attempts to make her his wife by
violence. I have spoken to her and told her that rescue will come. But
how is it that you are here?"

"After you had left us your good kinsman Egbert suggested to me that I
should take passage in the Dragon. In the first place I should the
sooner see my daughter; and in the next, it would be perilous work,
after the Danish army had left, for a small party of us to traverse
France."

"I would I had thought of it," Edmund said; "but my mind was so
disturbed with the thought of Freda's peril that it had no room for
other matters. And how fares it with you?"

"Bravely," the Northman replied. "As soon as I sniffed the salt air of
the sea my strength seemed to return to me. My wound is well-nigh
healed; but the joint has stiffened, and my leg will be stiff for the
rest of my life. But that matters little. And now tell me all your
adventures. We have heard from the messenger you sent how shrewdly you
hunted out Sweyn's hiding-place."




CHAPTER XVII: A LONG CHASE


The following morning the weather was still and dull. Not a breath of
wind ruffled the surface of the river.

"This is unfortunate," Edmund said to his companion. "Sweyn's galleys
will row faster than we can go with oars alone, and though they may not
know the Dragon they will be sure that she is not one of their own
ships. We must hope that they may attack us."

The day passed on without a sight of the galleys, but late in the
afternoon they were seen in the distance. The Dragon was moored near
the middle of the rivet. Her oars were stowed away, and the crews
ordered to keep below the bulwarks, in hopes that the Danes, seeing but
few men about and taking her for an easy prize, might attack her. When
they approached within half a mile the Danish galleys suddenly ceased
rowing.

"What is that strange-looking vessel?" Sweyn asked the Northmen
standing round him.

"I know her," one of them said, "for I have twice seen her before to my
cost. The first time she chased us hotly at the mouth of the Thames,
destroying several of the vessels with which we were sailing in convoy.
The next time was in the battle where King Alfred defeated us last
year, nearly in the same water. She is a Saxon ship, wondrous fast and
well-handled. She did more damage in the battle than any four of her
consorts."

"Were it not that I have other game in view," Sweyn said, "we would
fight her, for we are two to one and strongly manned, and the Saxon can
scarce carry more men than one of our galleys; but she is not likely to
be worth the lives she would cost us to capture her; therefore we will
e'en let her alone, which will be easy enough, for see that bank of
sea-fog rolling up the river; another ten minutes and we shall not see
across the deck. Give orders to the other galley to lay in oars till
the fog comes, then to make for the left bank of the river and to drift
with the tide close inshore. Let none speak a word, and silence be kept
until they hear my horn. I will follow the right bank till we reach the
mouth."

Freda was standing near and heard these orders with a sinking heart.
She had no doubt that Edmund was on board the Saxon ship, and she had
looked forward with confidence to be delivered from her captor; but now
it seemed that owing to the evil change of the weather the hope was to
be frustrated.

Edmund and the Saxons had viewed with consternation the approach of the
sea-fog. The instant it enveloped the ship the oars were got out and
they rowed in the direction of the Danish vessels, which they hoped
would drop anchor when the fog reached them. Not a word was spoken on
board the Dragon. Edmund, Egbert, and Siegbert stood on the forecastle
intently listening for any sound which would betray the position of the
Danes, but not a sound was to be heard. They had, they calculated,
already reached the spot where the Dane should have been anchored when
from the left, but far away astern, a loud call in a woman's voice was
heard.

"That must be Freda!" Edmund exclaimed. "Turn the ship; they have
passed us in the fog."

The Dragon's head was turned and she was rowed rapidly in the direction
of the voice. No further sound was heard. Presently there was a sudden
shock which threw everyone on to the deck. The Dragon had run high on
the low muddy bank of the river. The tide was falling; and although for
a few minutes the crew tried desperately to push her off they soon
found that their efforts were in vain, and it was not until the tide
again rose high nine hours later that the Dragon floated. Until morning
broke nothing could be done, and even when it did so matters were not
mended, for the fog was still dense.

The disappointment of Edmund and Siegbert at the escape of the Danes
was extreme. Their plans had been so well laid that when it was found
that the Dragon had arrived in time no doubts were entertained of the
success of the enterprise, and to be foiled just when Freda seemed
within reach was a terrible disappointment.

"My only consolation is," Edmund said as he paced the deck impatiently
side by side with Egbert, "that this fog which delays us will also
hinder the Danes."

"That may be so or it may not," Egbert answered. "It is evident that
some on board the Danish ships must have recognized us, and that they
were anxious to escape rather than fight. They draw so little water
that they would not be afraid of the sandbanks off the mouth of the
river, seeing that even if they strike them they can jump out, lighten
the boats, and push them off; and once well out at sea it is probable
that they may get clearer weather, for Siegbert tells me that the fog
often lies thick at the mouths of these rivers when it is clear enough
in the open sea."

When the tide again began to run out Edmund determined at all risks to
proceed to sea. The moorings were cast off from the shore and the
Dragon suffered to drift down. Men with poles took their stations in
her bows and sounded continually, while at her stern two anchors were
prepared in readiness to drop at a moment's notice. Several times the
water shoaled so much that Edmund was on the point of giving orders to
drop the anchors, but each time it deepened again.

So they continued drifting until they calculated that the tide must be
nearly on the turn, and they then dropped anchor. It was much lighter
now than it had been in the river, but was still so misty that they
could not see more than a hundred yards or so round the vessel. No
change took place until night, and then Edmund, who had been too
excited and anxious to sleep on the previous night, lay down to rest,
ordering that he should be woke if any change took place in the
weather. As the sun rose next morning the fog gradually lifted, and
they were able to see where they were. Their head pointed west; far
away on their left could be seen a low line of coast. Not a sail was in
sight, and indeed sails would have been useless, for the water was
still unruffled by a breath of wind. The anchors were at once got up
and the oars manned, and the ship's head turned towards shore.

Two hours' rowing took them within a short distance of land, and
keeping about a mile out they rowed to the west. The men, knowing how
anxious was their leader to overtake the Danish galleys, rowed their
hardest, relieving each other by turns, so that half the oars were
constantly going. Without intermission they rowed until night set in,
and then cast anchor. When the wind came--it was not until the third
day--it was ahead, and instead of helping the Dragon it greatly impeded
its progress.

So far they had seen nothing of the galleys, and had the mortification
of knowing that in spite of all their efforts these were probably
gaining ground upon them every day. Even without wind the galleys would
row faster than the Dragon, and being so fully manned would be able to
keep all their oars going; but against the wind their advantage would
be increased greatly, for lying low in the water they would offer but
little resistance to it, and would be able to make way at a brisk pace,
while the Dragon could scarce move against it.

The Saxon ship was off Calais when the breeze sprang up, and as it
increased and their progress became slower and slower Edmund held a
consultation with his companions and it was determined to run across
the channel and lie in the mouth of the Thames till the wind turned. So
long as it continued to blow they would lag farther and farther behind
the chase, who might, moreover enter any of the rivers in search of
shelter or provisions, and so escape their pursuers altogether.
Siegbert had never been up the Mediterranean, but he had talked with
many Danes who had been. These had told him that the best course was to
sail west to the extremity of England, then to steer due south until
they came upon the north coast of Spain. They would follow this to its
western extremity; and then run south, following the land till they
came to a channel some ten miles wide, which formed the entrance to the
Mediterranean.

They decided, therefore, to follow this course in hopes of interrupting
the galleys there; they would thus avoid the dangerous navigation of
the west coast of France, where there were known to be many islands and
rocks, around which the tides ran with great fury. For a fortnight the
Dragon lay windbound; then came two days of calm; and then, to their
delight, the pennon on the top of the mast blew out from the east.

They were lying in the mouth of the Colne, and would therefore have no
difficulty in making the Foreland; and with her sail set and her oars
out the Dragon dashed away from her moorings. Swiftly they ran round
the south-easterly point of England and then flew before the breeze
along the southern coast. On the third day they were off Land's End and
hauled her head to the south. The east wind held, the Bay of Biscay was
calm, and after a rapid voyage they sighted the high lands of Spain
ahead. Then they sheered to the west till they rounded its extremity
and then sailed down the coast of Spain. They put into a river for
provisions, and the natives assembled in great numbers on the banks
with the evident intention of opposing a landing; but upon Egbert
shouting that they were not Danes but Saxons, and were ready to barter
for the provisions they required, the natives allowed them to approach.
There was no wrangling for terms. Cattle were purchased, and the
water-tanks filled up, and a few hours after entering the river the
Dragon was again under way. Rounding the southern point they followed
the land. After a day's sailing they perceived land on their right, and
gave a shout of joy at the thought that they had arrived at the
entrance of the straits. At nightfall they dropped anchor.

"What are you looking at, Siegbert?" Edmund asked, seeing the jarl
looking thoughtfully at the anchor-chain as the ship swung round.

"I am thinking," the jarl said, "that we must have made some error. Do
you not see that she rides, just as we were sailing, with her head to
the north-east? That shows that the current is against us."

"Assuredly it does," Edmund said; "but the current is a very slack one,
for the ropes are not tight."

"But that agrees not," Siegbert said, "with what I have been told. In
the first place, this channel points to the northeast, whereas, as I
have heard, the straits into the Mediterranean run due east. In the
next place, those who have been through have told me that there are no
tides as in the northern seas, but that the current runs ever like a
river to the east."

"If that be so," Edmund said, "we must have mistaken our way, for here
what current there is runs to the west. To-morrow morning, instead of
proceeding farther, we will cross to the opposite side, and will follow
that down until we strike upon the right channel."

In the morning sail was again made, and crossing what was really the
Bay of Cadiz they sailed on till they arrived at the mouth of the
straits. There was no doubt now that they were right. The width of the
channel, its direction, and the steady current through it, all
corresponded with what Siegbert had heard, and proceeding a mile along
it they cast anchor.

They soon opened communications with the natives, who, although
speaking a tongue unknown to them, soon comprehended by their gestures
and the holding up of articles of barter that their intentions were
friendly. Trade was established, and there was now nothing to do but to
await the coming of the galleys.

"I would," Edmund said, as, when evening was closing, he looked across
the straits at the low hills on the opposite side, "that this passage
was narrower. Sweyn will, doubtless, have men on board his ship who
have sailed in these seas before, and will not need to grope his way
along as we have done. If he enters the straits at night we shall see
nothing of him, and the current runs so fast that he would sweep
speedily by. It is possible, indeed, that he has already passed. If he
continued to row down the shores of France all the time we were lying
wind-bound he would have had so long a start when the east wind began
to blow, that, although the galleys carry but little sail, they might
well have been here some days before us. Sweyn would be anxious to join
Hasting as soon as he could. The men would be thirsting for booty, and
would make but short halt anywhere. I will stay but a week. If in that
time they come not we will enter this southern sea and seek the fleet
of Hasting. When we find that we shall find Sweyn; but I fear that the
search will be a long one, for these people speak not our tongue, and
we shall have hard work in gaining tidings of the whereabouts of the
Northmen's fleet."

Day and night a vigilant watch was kept up from the mast-head of the
Dragon, but without success. Each day they became more and more
convinced that Sweyn must be ahead of them, and on the morning of the
seventh they lifted their anchor and proceeded through the straits.
Many had been the consultations between Edmund and his friends, and it
had been determined at last to sail direct for Rome. Siegbert knew that
by sailing somewhat to the north of east, after issuing from the
passage, they would in time arrive at Italy.

At Rome there was a monastery of Saxon monks, and through them they
would be able to obtain full information as to the doings and
whereabouts of the squadron of Hasting. Scarcely were they through the
straits than the wind, veering to the south-east, prevented them from
making the course they had fixed upon, but they were able to coast
along by the shore of Spain. They put into several small ports as they
cruised up, but could obtain no intelligence of the Danes, being unable
to converse except by signs.

When they reached Marseilles they were pleased to meet with Franks,
with whom they could converse, and hired a pilot acquainted with the
coasts of the Mediterranean. They learned that Hasting and his fleet
had harried the coasts of Provence and Italy; that the Genoese galleys
had had several engagements with them, but had been worsted.

The Danish fleet was now off the coast of Sicily, and the Northmen were
ravaging that rich and fertile island. They were reported to have even
threatened to ascend the Tiber and to burn Rome. Having obtained the
services of a man who spoke both the Italian and Frankish tongues,
Edmund started again. He first went to Genoa, as he thought that the
