"Ah--er--difficult case; yes, yes, decidedly complex, costs and
commissions," stammered the judge, becoming more turkey-red than he
naturally was. "We won't retrospect. To the case in hand."

"Well?" spoke Frank, looking so open-faced and steadily at Roseberry that
the latter blinked.

"I--that is--I would suggest an intermediary, see? The law is very
baffling, my friend. Once in its clutches a man is lost."

"But I'm not a man--I'm only an innocent, misjudged boy," burst forth
Frank. "See here, Judge Roseberry, I know why you come and who sent you."

"My client, Mr. Mace--"

"Is a wicked, unjust man," flared out Frank, "and you are just as bad.
Neither of you can possibly believe that I would steal. Why, I don't have
to steal. I have what money I need, and more than that. I tell you, if my
father was here I think you people would take back-water quick enough. When
he does come, you shall suffer for this."

Judge Roseberry looked impressed. He stared at Frank in silence. Perhaps
his muddled mind reflected that the accused lad had a good reputation
generally. Anyhow, the open, resolute way in which Frank spoke daunted him.
But he shook his head in an owl-like manner after a pause and remarked:

"My function's purely legal in the case--must do my duty."

"Do it, then, and don't bother me," said Frank irritably, and started away
from the spot.

"Hold on, hold on," called out the judge after him. "I've a compromise to
offer."

"There is nothing to compromise," asserted Frank over his shoulder.

"Suggestion, then. Don't be foolish, young man."

"Well, what's your suggestion?" demanded Frank.

"We'll take a walk in the woods, see? I've got a ten-dollar bill in my
pocket. I'll walk one way, you walk the other. No witnesses. I'll put the
ten-dollar bill on the stump--you'll do your part at another stump. We'll
turn, pass each other. Backs to each other, see?"

"I don't know what you are driving at," declared Frank.

"As you pass my stump you take up the ten-dollar bill; it's yours. As I
pass your stump--backs to each other, mind you, no witnesses, matter
pleasantly adjusted--I'll pick up the diamond bracelet."

"All right--that suits me," said Frank readily, but with a grim twinkle in
his eye.

"You agree?" inquired the judge eagerly.

"Yes."

"Good."

"Provided you furnish the bracelet," went on the boy.

"Bah!" snorted the judge in high dudgeon, marching from the spot. "Young
man, I've done my duty out of consideration for your respected family. You
won't listen to reason, so you must take the consequences. I shall advise
Mr. Mace to have you arrested at once."




CHAPTER IV

GILL MACE


About the middle of the afternoon Frank strolled down to the village. He
had been worked up a good deal all morning, and when dinner time came he
was made aware that his aunt was determined to treat him as a kind of
culprit.

The cross-grained old maid did not speak to him during the entire meal. She
sat prim and erect, barely glanced at him, and as Frank arose from the
table, half choked with the unwelcome food he had eaten, he resolved to
speak his mind.

"I'd like to say a word or two, Aunt Tib," he began.

"Say it," snapped his ungracious relative sharply.

"About this monstrous charge made against me by Mr. Mace," continued Frank.

"It is indeed a terrible charge," remarked Miss Brown, with a chilling,
awesome groan.

"Of course it isn't true, and of course you can't believe it," went on
Frank. "I am sure that a day or two will change things that look so black
for me now. All that I am worrying about is that this affair may get to
father and mother. It would simply worry them both to death, and it mustn't
be. I hope you wouldn't be so cruel, so wicked, as to add to their
troubles."

"I shall not write to them until you have confessed."

"Confessed!" cried Frank hotly. "There is nothing to confess. Don't I tell
you that I never saw old man Mace's bracelet? Aunt Tib, I am ashamed of
you. I tell you, I'm holding in a good deal. If I thought you believed that
man's story I'd leave the house for good."

"You mustn't do that, Frank," she said quickly. "We must bear our crosses
patiently."

"It's no use; I'm just fighting mad," declared Frank to himself as he left
the house. "I just hope Mace and Roseberry will do something to bring
affairs to a focus. If this thing gets around the village, it will be a
nice, pleasant thing for me, won't it, now? I've half a mind to make a
break and get out of it all."

Frank was in a decidedly disturbed state of mind. From being angry he got
dejected, and for some time he allowed his thoughts to wander unrestrained.
He actually envied Ned Foreman and his wandering career. If it had not been
for his loyalty to his parents he would have hunted up the grinding wagon
to ask the man who had relieved Ned to give him a job.

It would not have been so hard for Frank if he had had any close chum to
whom he could have confided his troubles. But Miss Brown had spoiled all
that. She kept the garden like a parlor, and scared away what few
acquaintances Frank had with her severe looks and manner. The Jordans had
lived at Tipton for only a year. The greater part of that time Frank had
been absent at a boarding-school in a neighboring town. The lads with whom
he had formerly associated in Tipton were away at various academies. Frank
did not know the town schoolboys very well.

He went downtown and strolled about for a time. Defiantly he walked calmly
past Mace's jewelry store, and even paused and looked through its front
plate-glass show window. He passed the usual hangout of Judge Roseberry,
and did not hasten his steps a bit when he saw that the judge, lounging on
a bench, noticed him.

Frank fancied that after he had passed the tavern the judge said something
to some of his fellow hangers on, and that they glanced after him with some
curiosity. A little farther on two little schoolboys paused in their walk,
stared hard at him and then scooted away, saying something about a
"burglary."

"Mace is bluffing, and so is the judge," determined Frank. "They have no
evidence against me, and they don't dare to arrest me. If they spread their
false stories, all the same, they shall suffer for it."

Frank felt pretty lonesome and gloomy as he passed the schoolhouse. The
boys were rushing out, free from the tasks of the day. It might have been
imagination, but Frank fancied that one or two of them greeted him with a
cool nod and hurried on. As he politely lifted his cap to a bevy of girls,
he imagined that they were rather constrained in their return greeting and
looked at him queerly.

Beyond the schoolhouse was Bolter's Hill, a famous place for coasting in
the winter time. Just now it had a new power of attraction for the
schoolboys. An old hermit-like fellow named Clay Dobbins had lived for
years at the other side of the hill. He owned a little patch of ground and
a dilapidated house. His wife had died recently, and all the village knew
of his two chronic complaints.

The first was that "Sairey had died leaving a sight less money than he had
expected," and old Dobbins had wondered if the lawyers or the speculators
had got it.

The second was that the old man had got nervous and lonely living in the
isolated spot. So he had rented a hut the other side of Bolter's Hill, near
the schoolhouse. He planned to have his house moved there, and intended
starting a little candy and notion store.

There had never been much house-moving in Tipton, and nobody in the village
was equipped to undertake even the simple task of conveying the Dobbins
dwelling uphill and then down again. A house-moving firm from Pentonville,
however, had engaged to perform the work. They had jacked up the house on
screws, chained it securely to a log frame, and, setting a portable
windlass at the top of the hill, operated this by horse power.

An immense rope cable, thick as a man's arm, ran to a pulley under the
house. It was a novelty to the school youngsters to watch the horse go
round and round the windlass, and to see the house come up the hill a slow
inch at a time.

Work on the moving had been suspended for the day, but the boys hung around
the spot. They raced through the house, clambered over the moving frame,
and knocked with the workmen's mallets on the rollers to make the hollow
echo that was new to them and sounded like music.

The house movers had set the windlass locked, and the strain on the rope
brought it taut. The house was anchored about half way up the hill,
straining at the giant cable dangerously and on a sharp tilt.

A little urchin was trying to "walk the tightrope," as he called it, as
Frank came up, shaping a willow stick with his pocket knife.

"Say, Frank Jordan," cried the lad, "won't you make me a whistle?"

"Of course I will," replied Frank accommodatingly, and got astride a moving
timber and set at work. Only a few of the large boys were about the spot.
Frank noticed that Gill Mace, the nephew of the village jeweler, was among
their number.

Frank soon turned out a first-class whistle for the applicant, who went
away tooting at a happy rate. A second urchin preferred a modest request,
and Frank had just completed the second whistle when the boy he had sent
away contented came back sniveling.

"Why, what's the matter?" inquired Frank sympathizingly.

Between sobs the little fellow related his troubles. Gill Mace had forcibly
taken the whistle away from him, and when he had got through testing its
merits had pocketed it and sent its owner away with a cuff on the ear.

"I'll give Gill Mace a piece of my mind, just now," declared Frank, hastily
getting to the ground. The jeweler's nephew was up to just such mean,
unmanly tricks all of the time. Frank felt that he deserved a lesson.
Besides, at just the present moment he had no great love for the whole Mace
family.

Frank hurried around to the side of the house, to come upon Gill and his
companions, who were engaged in leaping across a puddle near a pit in the
hillside. He marched right up to the culprit, the little fellow he had
befriended trailing after him.

"See here, Gill Mace," cried Frank promptly, "can't you find a little
better employment of your time than bullying little children?"

Gill flushed up, but put on a braggart air.

"Any of your business?" he demanded blusteringly.

"I'm making it my business--it ought to be the business of any decent,
fair-minded fellow," asserted Frank staunchly.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" demanded Gill, doubling up his
fists.

"I'm going to give you just twenty seconds to give that whistle back to
that boy, or I'm going to take it out of your hide," declared Frank
steadily.

"Oho! you are, eh?" snorted Gill, swelling up and glaring wickedly at
Frank. "Well, you won't get the whistle, for it's there in the mud."

"I've a good mind to make you go after it," began Frank, when Gill, making
a sudden jump, landed up against him, and dealt him a quick, foul blow
below the waist.

"I don't care about dirtying my hands with a thief," answered Gill, "but--"

"What's that?" cried Frank, all the pride and anger in his nature coming to
the front.

"I said it," replied Gill, keeping up his doubled fists, but edging away,
for the look in the eyes of his adversary warned and cowed him.

"You call me a thief, do you?" demanded Frank.

"Yes; you stole a diamond bracelet from my uncle's store this morning."

"It's a falsehood!" shouted Frank--"a falsehood as foul and dirty as the
muck in that pool! That for you!"

Frank's arm shot out like a piston-rod, and into the mud-puddle, head over
heels, went Gill Mace with a frightened howl.




CHAPTER V

THE RUINED HOUSE


"Well, it's been a pretty lively day for me, and every move I make I seem
to be getting deeper and deeper into trouble."

This was the sentiment expressed by Frank as he retired to rest at the end
of the most eventful day in his young life. The hours had indeed been full
of incidents. He reviewed them all as he lay, his head on his pillow.

Frank smiled to himself as he remembered Gill Mace. The boy who had called
Frank a thief was unable to repeat the vile accusation when he emerged from
the puddle into which Frank had pushed him. His mouth was full of mud, his
hair was a dripping mop, his clothes were plastered with it. Frank had
waited to respond to any later move that Gill might decide on. The
jeweler's nephew, however, made none. As he emerged from the puddle three
schoolgirls, arms linked in friendly companionship, passed the spot. They
noticed Gill and tittered, and Gill sneaked away without so much as even
glancing at Frank again.

"I always thought you three fellows a pretty good lot," Frank spoke to the
companions of Gill. "I'd hate to change my opinion by thinking you believe
what Gill Mace said about my being a thief."

Frank looked so manly and earnest as he spoke these words that his hearers
were impressed. One of them stepped up and shook hands with him. Another
remarked that he believed no story until he had evidence of its
truthfulness, and a third half intimated that he would have served Gill
Mace just as Frank had done if he made an untrue accusation.

When Frank got home he discovered that his pocket knife was missing. He
tried to remember what had become of it, and finally decided that he must
have left it on the log frame or dropped it to the ground when he had
started out to meet Gill Mace. Frank valued the knife as a pleasant
reminder of Ned Foreman, and planned to get up extra early the next morning
and make a search for it.

He was pretty well satisfied as he closed his eyes in sleep that the
jeweler would not dare to have him arrested for the theft of the diamond
bracelet.

Nothing would probably come of the ridiculous charge, except that the
underhanded public insinuations of Mace would damage Frank's character. Now
that he had taught Gill Mace a needed lesson, of course his family would be
more bitter against Frank than ever.

"The thing will die down," decided Frank. "If they get too rampant,
I'll--yes, I'll actually sue them for slander."

It must have been about midnight when Frank awoke with a shock. The echo of
a frightful rumble and crash deafened his ears, and he fancied that the bed
was vibrating. A scream inside the house made him sit up and listen. He was
startled and bewildered.

"Frank! Frank!" quavered the terror-filled tones of his aunt, as she
knocked sharply at the door of his bedroom, "get up at once!"

"What has happened?" inquired Frank quickly.

"I don't know--something dreadful, I am sure!" gasped the affrighted
spinster. "It felt like an earthquake. It shook the whole town. It must
have been an explosion."

"Humph! Good thing you know I'm in the house," observed Frank, as he jumped
to the floor and hustled into his clothes.

"Why is that, Frank?"

"Because it may have been a dynamite explosion blowing up somebody's safe,
and of course Mace would say I did it."

"Don't jest, Frank," pleaded his aunt. "I'm chilled through and shaking all
over. Get outside and see if you cannot learn what it all means."

"I think myself it was probably an accidental blast at the quarry down the
river," said Frank; "but I'll soon find out."

He did not dress fully, and let himself out on the porch in his slippers.
As he walked down to the gate Frank noticed lights appear in many houses
nearer the village, as if their inmates had been suddenly aroused from
sleep.

Then distant voices, a rumbling wagon, people talking in loud tones, boyish
shouts and a vague chorus of sounds unusual for the midnight hour, were
drifted to Frank's hearing. From all this, however, he could think out no
coherent idea as to what might be going on nearer town.

"It's not a fire, for there's no glare," he decided. "There's some kind of
a commotion over near the schoolhouse, it seems. Reckon I'll dress fully
and investigate."

There was a certain attraction for Frank in the distant bustle and turmoil.
He went back into the house to find his aunt seated in the front hall. She
was wrapped up in a shawl, pale and shivering.

"Oh, Frank, what is it?" she chattered.

"I didn't find out, but I'm going to," he announced, as he hurried on to
his room.

"Is--is it coming here?"

"Is what coming here?"

"The--the--whatever it is."

"It hasn't hurt us any, has it? And I don't think it will."

Frank got back to the road ten minutes later and started on a run toward
the town. Taking the middle of the road, he nearly bumped into a man where
the highway turned.

"Hi, there!" challenged the latter.

"Hello!" responded Frank, recognizing a truck gardner who lived just beyond
the Jordan place. "What's happened, Daley?"

"Old Dobbins' house."

"What, the one they're moving?"

"Yes. It broke loose from its bearings and has rolled right back to where
it stood."

"You don't say so?" exclaimed Frank, with something of a shock.

"Yes, it has," asserted Daley, "only it's the greatest wreck of bricks and
plaster now you ever saw."

"No one hurt, I hope?"

"No, except old Dobbins' feelings. He's capering around at a great rate,
saying that the town, or the county, or the government, will have to pay
him for the damage."

"The movers couldn't have understood their business very well to have such
a thing happen." said Frank.

"Looks that way," acceded Daley, and they parted at the gateway of the
Jordan home.

Frank advised his aunt of the state of affairs and went back to bed.
Naturally he was curious to have a view of the wrecked house. He got up
early before breakfast and took a stroll over to the scene of the disaster.
The lad, too, thought of his lost knife and bore that fact in mind.

He gave up all hopes of recovering the knife, however, as he reached the
spot where he believed he had lost it the afternoon previous. Where the
Dobbins house had been anchored on the hillside the ground was torn up and
disturbed as though a cyclone had passed over the place. At the bottom of
the hill, jammed half way through the rickety old stable, was what was left
of the dismantled house.

Miss Brown made Frank stay in the house and study from eight until ten
every morning. With all the exciting thoughts that were passing through his
mind, Frank found it difficult to fix his attention on his books that
morning. He was glad to get out of the house when ten o'clock came. His pet
pigeons were his first care. Then he started for the post-office, hoping
that he would find a letter from his father.

"Hi, Frank," a voice hailed him as he made a short cut through a little
grove at the rear of the house, and a familiar form emerged from some
bushes.

"Why, it's Mr. Dobbins!" exclaimed Frank in some surprise. He had expected
to find the miserly old fellow in the depths of despair over the loss of
his house, but Dobbins was grinning and chuckling at a great rate.

"So 'tis Frank," he bobbed with a broad smile. "Was looking for you."

"What for, Mr. Dobbins?"

The old man blinked. Then he laughed in a pleased, crafty way and put his
hand in his pocket.

"See here," he cried, and Frank noticed that he held three coins in his
palm. There was a twenty, a ten and a five-dollar gold piece.

"Um-m," observed Dobbins. "Double eagle a good deal of money, isn't it now,
Frank?"

"Why, yes," assented Frank wonderingly, and the old fellow picked out the
twenty-dollar gold piece with his free hand and put it in his vest pocket.

"It would be extravagant for a boy to squander even as much as ten dollars,
hey?"

Frank did not answer, for he could not surmise what the old fellow was
getting at.

"So, if you'll consider this five-dollar gold piece the right thing,"
resumed Dobbins, "you're mightily welcome to it, and say, Frank--you're a
bully boy!"

"How's that?" inquired Frank.

"Oh, you know," asserted Dobbins. "Take it quick, before I change my mind."

"Take the five dollars, you mean?" questioned Frank.

"Exactly."

"Why should I do that? You don't owe me anything."

"Don't?" cried Dobbins. "Why, boy, I owe you everything. No nonsense
between friends, you see."

"I don't see--" began Frank.

Old Dobbins placed a finger beside his nose in a crafty, expressive way. He
winked blandly at Frank, with the mysterious words:

"That's all right, Frank, boy. No need of going into particulars, but--you
know right enough. Mum's the word. Take the five dollars."




CHAPTER VI

AN ASTONISHING CLUE


"But I don't know," declared Frank forcibly, "and as I have _not_
earned any five dollars, of course I can't take it."

"Sho!" chuckled old Dobbins, dancing about Frank, as spry as a schoolboy
and poking him playfully in the ribs. Frank had to smile.

"See here, Mr. Dobbins," he observed, "it appears to me that you feel
pretty lively for a man who has just had his house all smashed to pieces."

"That's just it--that's just it," retorted Dobbins in a tone almost
jubilant. "Where would I be if it hadn't happened? Why, boy, when I think
of what you've done, I--I almost would adopt you--that is, if you weren't
too big an eater."

There was some mystery under all this, Frank discerned. He wanted to get at
the plain facts of the case.

"I'm afraid I don't entirely understand," he began when his eccentric
visitor interrupted him.

"Ho! ho!" he guffawed. "You will be _sharp_, you young _blade_,
won't you? Got some _temper_--hey? True as _steel_--hi! When the
rope gave out you _cut_ for it--ho! ho! ho!" and the speaker went into
spasms of merriment over his own wit.

"'Blade, temper, steel,'" quoted Frank. "Are you getting off a pun, Mr.
Dobbins?"

"Put it that way if you like," returned Dobbins cheerfully. "There was a
knife. That's the long and short of it, don't you see? A boy's pocket
knife. It sawed the big moving cable. Snap! Bang! Away went the house.
Whose knife? Aha! Dear me--who can tell? Sly, hey--Frank, boy? We ain't
going to tell. No need of it. Artful dodgers--ho! ho! ho! Take the five
dollars."

Frank gave a vivid start. He was partly enlightened now. He had mislaid his
knife near the house that had been anchored on the hill side. Somebody had
found it and had cut the cable with it.

"What you are getting at, then," said Frank, "is that a knife cut the rope
loose?"

"Ah, just that."

"And my knife?"

"Oh, yes, it was your knife, Frank--no doubt about that at all."

"How do you know it was my knife?" asked Frank.

"Because it had your name on it. Of course I didn't see the knife used, but
Judge Roseberry found it the next morning right under the windlass."

"Who?" fairly shouted Frank.

"Judge Roseberry. The knife fitted to the cut. Judge Roseberry came to me
with it. 'Dobbins,' says he to me, 'business is business. I have made a
discovery. The person who smashed your house is Frank Jordan, and I can
prove it.' Then he told me the rest."

"And what did you say?" cried the astonished Frank.

"Well, feeling pretty perk over a discovery I had just made, I listened to
the crafty old varmint."

"And what did he say?"

"He told me that you had stolen a diamond bracelet from Mace, the jeweler."

"Which was a falsehood," asserted Frank with vehemence.

"Yes, I can believe that," nodded Dobbins, "seeing that Roseberry said so.
He then began to tell me how they were trying to have you give up that
bracelet. He said that if I would have you arrested for smashing the house,
it would break you down and make you confess about the bracelet. Anyhow, it
would look so bad for you that your father would settle all the damage."

"The villain!" commented Frank.

"Them's my sentiments, too, Frank. Mebbe, if things hadn't turned out as
