her absence for a short time.

"Do you think I shall get well?" asked Mrs. Redburn, as soon as the
door closed behind Katy.

"A person who is very sick, is of course, always in danger, which may
be more or less imminent," replied the doctor, with professional
indirectness.

"I beg of you, doctor, do not conceal from me my true situation."

"I cannot foresee the result, my good woman."

"Do you think there is any hope for me?"

"Certainly there is."

"Tell me, I implore you, what you think of my case," pleaded the
sufferer, in feeble tones. "I felt this morning that my end was very
near."

"O, no; it is not so bad as that. I should say you had as many as five
chances in ten to be on your feet in a fortnight."

"Do you think so?"

"I do not regard your case as a critical one."

"I wish you had told me so last night. It would have saved my poor
child a very bitter pang."

"I was not aware that you thought yourself alarmingly sick, or I
certainly should; for such an opinion on your part would do more to
bring about a fatal result than could be counteracted by the most
skilful treatment. A physician does not hold the issues of life and
death; he can only assist nature, as the patient may by a cheerful view
of his case. This is not your old complaint; you have taken cold, and
have considerable fever; but I think it is a very hopeful case."

The return of Katy interrupted the conversation; but the doctor's
opinion was immediately imparted to her, and it sent a thrill of joy to
her heart.

"I was low-spirited this morning, Katy," said Mrs. Redburn, when the
physician had gone. "I really felt as though my end was rapidly
approaching. I am sorry I mentioned my thoughts to you."

"It was all for the best, I suppose," replied Katy.

But Mrs. Redburn was very sick; and even now the disease might have a
fatal termination. The best of care would be required to restore her to
health, and Katy was very anxious. Her mother was still suffering the
most acute pain.

The doctor had left a prescription, and Katy was again obliged to call
in Mrs. Howard while she went to the apothecary's to procure it; but
the good woman declared she was glad to come, and would bring her work
and stay all the forenoon. The medicine, when obtained, to some extent
relieved the sufferer's pain.

As her presence was not required in the chamber, Katy went down-stairs
to what she called the candy room. She had an hour or two to spare, and
she put on the kettle with the intention of making a part of the next
day's candy. She was nearly worn out by watching and anxiety, and not
fit to perform such hard work; but weak and weary as she felt, her
spirit was still earnest, and she resolutely commenced her labors.

At noon she had made half the quantity required. Mrs. Howard was then
obliged to go home, and attend to her own family, for she had two
children besides Tommy, who had not yet returned from the East Indies.
Mrs. Redburn was very restless during the afternoon, and could not be
left alone for more than a short time at once. Mrs. Howard had promised
to come again in the evening, and make the rest of the candy; but
Charley came home from school quite sick, seemingly threatened with the
scarlet fever, so that she could not keep her promise. Mrs. Sneed,
however, dropped in, and consented to remain for two hours, which
enabled Katy to make the rest of the candy.

By this time the poor girl was completely worn out. Her resolute will,
even, could no longer impart its strength to the body. Her mother
worried sadly about her, and finally induced her to lie down on the bed
by her side, on condition that she should be awakened in an hour. In
this manner she obtained a few hours' sleep during the night; but these
severe labors were a fearful task to be imposed upon a mere child.

The next day Mrs. Redburn, who could not fail to observe Katy's pale
face and sunken eye, fretted so much about her that she was obliged to
promise she would not attempt to make any more candy. Mrs. Howard's son
was still very sick, so that she was unable to render much assistance.
The rest of the neighbors, though kindly disposed, had their own
families to care for, and could do very little for others.

With what slight aid her friends could afford, Katy struggled through a
week, when Dr. Flynch appeared, and demanded the rent. There was but
little more than money enough left to pay it, but Katy would not ask
him for any indulgence, and paid him in full.

In a few days more the purse was empty. Katy's most dreaded hour had
come. She had no money, and almost every day some new thing was
required for her mother. But this time she had friends, and she
determined to use them, as all true friends wish to be used in the day
of sorrow and trial. After considerable debate with herself, she
decided to apply to Mrs. Gordon for a loan of twenty dollars. She was
still poor and proud, and she could not endure the thought of asking a
loan, which might be regarded as a gift, or which, by her own inability
to pay it, might virtually become such; therefore she proposed to
present her father's silver watch as security for the payment of the
debt.



CHAPTER XIX.

KATY RESORTS TO A LOAN.

Katy was not at all pleased with the mission which her duty seemed to
impose upon her. Again she felt the crushing weight of poverty, and
pride rose up to throw obstacles in her path. She was a child of
twelve, and to ask a loan of twenty dollars, though she offered
sufficient security for the payment of the debt, seemed like demanding
a great deal of her friends--like inviting them to repose a vast amount
of confidence in her ability and honesty. They would not want the
watch; it would be of no value to them; and the more she considered the
matter, the more like an act of charity appeared the favor she was
about to ask.

More than once on her way to Temple Street did she stop short, resolved
to get the money of some other person--the grocer, Mr. Sneed, or even
of a pawnbroker; but as often she rebuked the pride that tormented her
like a demon, and went forward again. She stood some time at Mrs.
Gordon's door before she had the resolution to ring the bell.

"What right have I to be so proud?" said she, grasping the bell handle.
"I must get this money, or my mother may suffer."

She rang with a force that must have astonished Michael, and led him to
think some extraordinary character had arrived; for he ran to the door
at full speed, and burst out into a violent fit of laughter, when he
saw no one but the little candy merchant.

"Good morning, to you, Katy. Are you nervous this morning?" said he.

"Good morning, Michael. I am not very nervous."

"I thought you would pull down the bell," he added, good-naturedly.

"I didn't mean to, Michael; I hope you will excuse me if I did any
harm."

"Not a bit of harm; but you're looking as sober as a deacon. What ails
you, Katy?"

"I feel very sad, Michael; for my mother is very sick, and I don't know
as she will ever get well."

"Indeed? I'm sorry to hear that of her;" and Michael, whatever he felt,
looked very much concerned about Mrs. Redburn's health.

"Is Mrs. Gordon at home?"

"She isn't."

"Is Miss Grace?"

"Neither of them; they went to Baltimore ten days ago but I am
expecting them back every day."

Katy's heart sank within her; for now that Mrs. Gordon was not at hand,
she did not feel like asking any other person; and if the case had not
been urgent, she would have been satisfied to return home, and regard
the lady's absence as a sufficient excuse for not procuring the money.

"You want to see her very much?" asked Michael.

"Very much, indeed."

"Can I be of any service to you?"

"No, Michael."

"Perhaps I can, Katy."

"No, I'm much obliged to you."

"If it's anything in the house you want, I can get it for you."

"No, I must see Mrs. Gordon."

"If it's any nice preserve or jelly you want just say the word, and
I'll bring it to you at once."

"I do not want anything of that kind. Do you think Mrs. Gordon will
return by to-morrow?"

"I thought she would be here yesterday, and she may come to-night."

"Very well; I will, perhaps, call again to-morrow," and she turned to
leave.

"I'll tell Mrs. Gordon you came. Stop a minute, Katy. Won't you tell me
what you want?"

"I would rather not, Michael; but I will come again to-morrow."

"See here, Katy; maybe you're short of money. If you are, I have a
matter of three hundred dollars in the Savings Bank; and you may be
sure you shall have every cent of it if you want it."

This was a very liberal offer, though it is probable he did not think
she would want any considerable portion of it, or that she could even
comprehend the meaning of so large a sum. Katy was sorely tempted to
negotiate with him for the loan but she was not sure that it would be
proper to borrow money of the servant, and perhaps Mrs. Gordon would
not like it.

"I thank you, Michael; you are very kind, but I think I would rather
see Mrs. Gordon."

"I have a matter of five or six dollars in my pocket now; and it
that'll be of any service to you, take it and welcome."

Katy stopped to think. A few dollars would be all that she needed
before the return of Mrs. Gordon; and yet she did not feel like
accepting it. What would the lady say on her return, when told that she
had borrowed money of her servant? Yet the servant had a kind heart,
and really desired to serve her. Was it not pride that prevented her
from accepting his offer? Did she not feel too proud to place herself
under obligations to the servant? She felt rebuked at her presumption;
for what right had she to make such distinctions? If she had been a
lady, like Mrs. Gordon, she might have been excusable for cherishing
such pride; but she was a poor girl; she was actually in want.

"Michael, you are so good, that I will tell you my story," said she,
conquering her repugnance.

"Just come in the house, then;" and he led her into the sitting-room;
being, in the absence of the mistress, the lord and master of the
mansion, and feeling quite at home in that position.

In a few words she explained to him her situation, though her
rebellious pride caused her to paint the picture in somewhat brighter
colors than the truth would justify. She stated her intention to borrow
twenty dollars of Mrs. Gordon, and offer her the watch as security, at
the same time exhibiting the cherished treasure.

"Now Michael, if you will lend me three dollars till Mrs. Gordon
returns, I will pay you then, for I know she will let me have the
money; or at least let me have enough to pay you," continued she, when
she had finished her narrative.

"Indeed I will, Katy!" exclaimed he, promptly pulling out his wallet.
"And if you will come at this time to-morrow, you shall have the whole
twenty dollars."

"Thank you, Michael."

"There's six dollars; take it, Katy, and my blessing with it."

"Only three dollars, Michael," replied Katy, firmly.

Michael insisted, but all his persuasion would not induce her to accept
more than the sum she had mentioned, and he was reluctantly compelled
to yield the point.

"Here is the watch, Michael; you shall keep that till I pay you."

"Is it me!" exclaimed he, springing to his feet, with an expression
very like indignation on his countenance. "Sure, you don't think I'd
take the watch."

"Why not you as well as Mrs. Gordon?" asked Katy.

"She didn't take it," replied Michael triumphantly. "You couldn't make
her take it, if you try a month. Don't I know Mrs. Gordon?"

"But please to take it; I should feel much better if you would."

"Bad luck to me if I do! I wouldn't take it to save my neck from the
gallows. Where's my Irish heart? Did I leave it at home, or did I bring
it with me to America?"

"If you will not take it, Michael----"

"I won't."

"If you won't, I will say no more about it," replied Katy, as she
returned the watch to her pocket. "You have got a very kind heart, and
I shall never forget you as long as I live."

Katy, after glancing at the portrait of the roguish lady that hung in
the room, took leave of Michael, and hastened home. On her way, she
could not banish the generous servant from her mind. She could not
understand why he should be so much interested in her as to offer the
use of all he had; and she was obliged to attribute it all to the
impulses of a kind heart. If she had been a little older, she might
have concluded that the old maxim, slightly altered would explain the
reason: "Like mistress, like man," that the atmosphere of kindness and
charity that pervaded the house had inspired even the servants.

"Where have you been, Katy?" asked Mrs. Redburn, as she entered the
sick chamber, and Mrs. Sneed hastened home.

"I have been to Mrs. Gordon."

"What for?"

Katy did not like to tell. She knew it would make her mother feel very
unhappy to know that she had borrowed money of Mrs. Gordon's servant.

"Oh, I went up to see her," replied Katy.

"No matter, if you don't like to tell me," faintly replied Mrs. Redburn.

"I will tell you, mother," answered Katy, stung by the gentle rebuke
contained in her mother's words.

"I suppose our money is all gone," sighed the sick woman.

"No, mother; see here! I have three dollars," and Katy pulled out her
porte-monnaie, anxious to save her even a moment of uneasiness.

