"Of course, dear, you certainly ought. But as to Miss Peel being
plain, Ida, I don't think I quite agree with you. Her face is too
clever for that. Have you watched her when she acts?"

"No, I don't think I have. She seems to be very uninteresting."

"Look at her next time, and tell me if you think her uninteresting
afterward. Now I'm off to find Maggie. She is sure to be having one of
her bad times, poor darling."

Constance Field was a girl whose opinion was always received with
respect. Ida went off obediently to fulfil her behests; and Constance,
after searching in Maggie's room and wandering in different parts of
the grounds, found the truant at last, comfortably established with a
pile of new books and magazines in the library. The library was the
most comfortable room in the house, and Maggie was leaning back
luxuriously in an easy-chair, reading some notes from a lecture on
Aristotle aloud to Prissie, who sat at her feet and took down notes of
her own from Maggie's lips.

The two looked up anything but gratefully when Constance approached.
Miss Field, however, was not a person to be dismissed with a light and
airy word, and Maggie sighed and closed her book when Constance sat
down in an armchair, which she pulled close to her. There were no
other girls in the library, and Prissie, seeing that Miss Field
intended to be confidential, looked at Maggie with a disconsolate air.

"Perhaps I had better go up to my own room," she said timidly.

Maggie raised her brows and spoke in an impatient voice.

"You are in no one's way, Priscilla," she said. "Here are my notes
from the lecture. I read to the end of this page; you can make out the
rest for yourself. Well, Constance, have you anything to say?"

"Not unless you want to hear me," said Miss Field in her dignified
manner.

Maggie tried to stifle a yawn.

"Oh, my dear Connie, I'm always charmed, you know that."

"Well, I thought I'd like to tell you that I admired the way you spoke
last night."

"Were you present?"

"No, but some friends of mine were. They repeated the whole thing
verbatim."

"Oh, you heard it second-hand. Highly colored, no doubt, and not the
least like its poor original."

Maggie spoke with a kind of bitter, defiant sarcasm, and a delicate
color came into Miss Field's cheeks.

"At least, I heard enough to assure me that you spoke the truth and
concealed nothing," she said.

"It is the case that I spoke the truth, as far as it went; but it is
not the case that I concealed nothing."

"Well, Maggie, I have come to offer you my sincere sympathy."

"Thank you," said Maggie. She leaned back in her chair, folded her
hands and a tired look came over her expressive face. "The fact is,"
she said suddenly, "I am sick of the whole thing. I am sorry I went; I
made a public confession of my sorrow last night; now I wish to forget
it."

"How can you possibly forget it until you know Miss Heath's and Miss
Eccleston's decision?"

"Frankly, Constance, I don't care what decision they come to."

"You don't care? You don't mind the college authorities knowing?"

"I don't care if every college authority in England knows. I have been
humbled in the eyes of Miss Heath, whom I love; nothing else matters."

When Maggie said these words Prissie rose to her feet, looked at her
with a queer, earnest glance, suddenly bent forward, kissed her
frantically and rushed out of the room.

"And I love that dear, true-hearted child, too," said Maggie. "Now,
Constance, do let us talk of something else."

"We'll talk about Miss Peel. I don't know her as you do, but I'm
interested in her."

"Oh, pray don't; I want to keep her to myself."

"Why? Is she such a rara avis?"

"I don't care what she is. She suits me because she loves me without
question. She is absolutely sincere; she could not say an untrue
thing; she is so clever that I could not talk frivolities when I am
with her; and so good, so really, simply good that she keeps at bay my
bad half-hours and my reckless moods."

Constance smiled. She believed part of Maggie's speech; not the whole
of it, for she knew the enthusiasm of the speaker.

"I am going to Kingsdene," said Maggie suddenly. "Prissie is coming
with me. Will you come, too, Constance? I wish you would."

"Thank you," said Constance. She hesitated for a moment. "It is the
best thing in the world for Heath Hall," she thought, "that the girls
should see me walking with Maggie to-day." Aloud she said, "All right,
Maggie, I'll go upstairs and put on my hat and jacket and meet you and
Miss Peel in the porch."

"We are going to tea at the Marshalls'," said Maggie. "You don't mind
that, do you? You know them, too?"

"Know them? I should think so. Isn't old Mrs. Marshall a picture? And
Helen is one of my best friends."

"You shall make Helen happy this afternoon, dear Constance."

Maggie ran gaily out of the room as she spoke, and a few minutes later
the three girls, in excellent spirits, started for Kingsdene.

As they entered the town they saw Rosalind Merton coming to meet them.
There was nothing in this, for Rosalind was a gay young person and had
many friends in Kingsdene. Few days passed that did not see her in the
old town on her way to visit this friend or that, or to perpetrate
some little piece of extravagance at Spilman's or at her dressmaker's.

On this occasion, however, Rosalind was neither at Spilman's or the
dressmaker's. She was walking demurely down the High Street, daintily
dressed and charming to look at, in Hammond's company. Rosalind was
talking eagerly and earnestly, and Hammond, who was very tall, was
bending down to catch her words, when the other three girls came
briskly round a corner and in full view of the pair.

"Oh!" exclaimed Priscilla aloud in her abrupt, startled way. Her face
became suffused with a flood of the deepest crimson, and Maggie, who
felt a little annoyed at seeing Hammond in Rosalind's company, could
not help noticing Priscilla's almost uncontrollable agitation.

Rosalind, too, blushed, but prettily, when she saw the other three
girls come up.

"I will say good-by now, Mr. Hammond," she said, "for I must get back
to St. Benet's in good time tonight."

She held out her hand, which the young man took and shook cordially.

"I am extremely obliged to you," he said.

Maggie was near enough to hear his words. Rosalind tripped past her
three fellow-students with an airy little nod and the faint beginning
of a mocking curtsy.

Hammond came up to the three girls and joined them at once.

"Are you going to the Marshalls'?" he said to Maggie.

"Yes."

"So am I. What a lucky rencontre."

He said another word or two and then the four turned to walk down the
High Street. Maggie walked on in front with Constance. Hammond fell to
Priscilla's share.

"I am delighted to see you again," she said in her eager, agitated,
abrupt way.

"Are you?" he replied in some astonishment. Then he hastened to say
something polite. "I forgot, we had not ended our discussion. You
almost convinced me with regard to the superior merits of the Odyssey,
but not quite. Shall we renew the subject now?"

"No, please don't. That's not why I'm glad to see you. It's for
something quite, quite different. I want to say something to you, and
it's most important. Can't we just keep back a little from the others?
I don't want Maggie to hear."

Now why were Miss Oliphant's ears so sharp that afternoon? Why, even
in the midst of her gay chatter to Constance, did she hear every word
of Priscilla's queer, garbled speech? And why did astonishment and
even anger steal into her heart?

What she did, however, was to gratify Prissie immensely by hurrying on
with her companion, so that she and Hammond were left comfortably in
the background.

"I don't quite know what you mean," he said stiffly. "What can you
possibly have of importance to say to me?"

"I don't want Maggie to hear," repeated Prissie in her earnest voice.
She knew far too little of the world to be in the least alarmed at
Hammond's stately tones.

"What I want to say is about Maggie, and yet it isn't."

"About Miss Oliphant?"

"Oh, yes, but she's Maggie to me. She's the dearest, the best--
there's no one like her, no one. I didn't understand her at first, but
now I know how noble she is. I had no idea until I knew Maggie that a
person could have faults and yet be noble. It's a new sort of
experience to me."

Prissie's eyes, in which even in her worst moments there always sat
the soul of a far-reaching sort of intelligence, were shining now
through tears. Hammond saw the tears, and the lovely expression in the
eyes, and said to himself:

"Good heavens, could I ever have regarded that dear child as plain?"
Aloud he said in a softened voice, "I'm awfully obliged to you for
saying these sorts of things of Miss-- Miss Oliphant, but you must
know, at least you must guess, that I-- I have thought them for myself
long, long ago."

"Yes, of course, I know that. But have you much faith? Do you keep to
what you believe?"

"This is a most extraordinary girl!" murmured Hammond. Then he said
aloud, "I fail to understand you."

They had now nearly reached the Marshalls' door. The other two were
waiting for them.

"It's this," said Prissie, clasping her hands hard and speaking in her
most emphatic and distressful way. "There are unkind things being said
of Maggie, and there's one girl who is horrid to her-- horrid! I want
you not to believe a word that girl says."

"What girl do you mean?"

"You were walking with her just now."

"Really, Miss Peel, you are the most extraordinary--"

But Maggie Oliphant's clear, sweet voice interrupted them.

"Had we not better come into the house?" she said. "The door has been
open for quite half a minute."

Poor Prissie rushed in first, covered with shame; Miss Field hastened
after, to bear her company; and Hammond and Maggie brought up the
rear.

  CHAPTER XX

 A PAINTER

THE Marshalls were always at home to their friend on Friday
afternoons, and there were already several guests in the beautiful,
quaint old drawing-room when the quartet entered. Mrs. Marshall, her
white hair looking lovely under her soft lace cap, came forward to
meet her visitors. Her kind eyes looked with appreciation and welcome
at one and all. Blushing and shame-faced Prissie received a pleasant
word of greeting, which seemed in some wonderful way to steady her
nerves. Hammond and Maggie were received as special and very dear
friends, and Helen Marshall, the old lady's pretty grand-daughter,
rushed forward to embrace her particular friend, Constance Field.

Maggie felt sore; she scarcely knew why. Her voice was bright, her
eyes shining, her cheeks radiant in their rich and lovely bloom. But
there was a quality in her voice which Hammond recognized-- a certain
ring which meant defiance and which prophesied to those who knew her
well that one of her bad half-hours was not very far off.

Maggie seated herself near a girl who was a comparative stranger and
began to talk. Hammond drew near and made a third in the conversation.
Maggie talked in the brilliant, somewhat reckless fashion which she
occasionally adopted. Hammond listened, now and then uttered a short
sentence, now and then was silent, with disapproval in his eyes.

Maggie read their expression like a book.

"He shall be angry with me," she said to herself. Her words became a
little wilder. The sentiments she uttered were the reverse of those
Hammond held.

Soon a few old friends came up. They were jolly, merry, good-humored
girls, who were all prepared to look up to Maggie Oliphant and to
worship her beauty and cleverness if she would allow them. Maggie
welcomed the girls with effusion, let them metaphorically sit at her
feet and proceeded to disenchant them as hard as she could.

Some garbled accounts of the auction at St. Benet's had reached them,
and they were anxious to get a full report from Miss Oliphant. Did she
not think it a scandalous sort of thing to have occurred?

"Not at all," answered Maggie in her sweetest tones; "it was capital
fun, I assure you."

"Were you really there?" asked Miss Duncan, the eldest of the girls.
"We heard it, of course, bur could scarcely believe it possible."

"Of course I was there," replied Maggie. "Whenever there is something
really amusing going on, I am always in the thick of it."

"Well!" Emily Duncan looked at her sister Susan. Susan raised her
brows. Hammond took a photograph from a table which stood near and
pretended to examine it.

"Shall I tell you about the auction?" asked Maggie.

"Oh, please, if you would be so kind. I suppose, as you were present,
such a thing could not really lower the standard of the college?"
These words came from Susan Duncan, who looked at Hammond as she
spoke. She was his cousin and very fond of him.

"Please tell us about the auction," he said, looking full at Maggie.

"I will," she replied, answering his gaze with a flash of repressed
irritation. "The auction was splendid fun! One of our girls was in
