learned that they were on their way to join a corsair fleet that was
collecting at some point on the eastern side of Sardinia, with the
intention of sweeping the coast of Italy. It was this, rather than the
capture of these three vessels, that induced us to disobey the general
instructions we had been given to cruise along the northern coast of
Africa, and determined us to push north to give warning along the coast
from Naples to Genoa of the danger that threatened, and, if possible, to
enable Genoa to fit out her galleys to encounter the corsairs. That duty
has still to be fulfilled, though I fear that Genoa will be able to
do little, for of late she has been engaged in a long civil struggle
between her great families, and has taken but a small part in maritime
affairs. However, we can at least warn her, as well as Naples, Pisa,
and other towns, and may possibly find some opportunity for ourselves
striking another blow against the pirates."

"If so, certainly we shall be glad to accompany you, if you will allow
us to serve under you; for nothing would please us so much as the
opportunity of paying off a small share of the vengeance we owe them.
But of course, if you would rather, we will sail for Rhodes in the
prizes."

"I am not thinking of sending them to Rhodes at present," Gervaise said.
"It seems to me that we may be able, in some way, to utilise them to
advantage. They have their sails, and rowers for the oars. There will
be, in each, besides seven knights of the Order, thirty men who, like
yourselves, must feel willing to strike a blow at their late oppressors.
I need hardly say that I shall be glad indeed to have the company and
aid of three such well known knights of the Order, and would, could I
do so, gladly resign my command into your experienced hands. But this
I cannot do, and, anticipating that you would be willing to join us in
this expedition, I have been thinking how I could best utilise your aid.
I have thought that, if you would accept the positions, I would appoint
one of you to each of the prizes, to act, not as its commander, but as
the leader of the band of released captives. Most of them are sailors,
of course, and with them you could work the guns and give effective aid
to the little party of knights in any actual fight."

The three knights all exclaimed that they would gladly accept the posts
he offered them.

"The idea is a capital one, Sir Gervaise; and, as long as it does
not come to close fighting, the three ships should be able to render
efficient aid to your galley in any encounter. They will be, at any
rate, a match for their own number of pirate ships," Caretto said.

As soon as the meal concluded, the Moslem captives were questioned one
by one as to the rendezvous at which the pirate fleet was to assemble;
all, however, protested that the place was known only to the three
commanders, all of whom had fallen in the fight.



CHAPTER XIV THE CORSAIR FLEET


An hour later all was ready for a start. The knights of the langues of
France, Germany, and Spain went on board their respective ships, as did
the three parties of released captives, with the knights who were to
command them, while the rowers took their seats on the benches, shackled
with the chains that had recently held the Christians. The wind was from
the south, and with sails and oars the prizes were able to keep fairly
abreast of the galley. With a few short intervals of rest, the slaves
continued their work all night, until, shortly before daybreak, land was
seen ahead, and the pilot at once pronounced it to be Cape Carbonara.

"A good landfall, Gervaise," Ralph said. "The pilot has done right well.
I suppose you mean to anchor when you get there?"

"Certainly, Ralph. The slaves will have rowed nearly eighteen hours,
with only two hours' rest. They must have some hours, at least, of sleep
before we go on. As you and I have been up all night, we will turn in
also. We will send a boat ashore to try and find out from the natives
they may come across whether any vessels, bearing the appearance of
Moorish corsairs, have been seen passing up the coast, and also to find
out what bays and inlets there are where they would be likely to anchor.
Some of the Italian knights had best go with the boat, for though I
believe these people speak a different dialect to those of the mainland,
they would have more chance of understanding them than any of the
others."

The sun had risen when the little fleet came to an anchor close to the
cape. A boat was at once prepared to go ashore, and Gervaise begged
Fabricius Caretto, the senior of the rescued Italian knights, to
endeavour to find out whether a swift sailing craft of some kind could
be hired. If so, he was to secure her on any terms, and come off in her
at once to the galley.

Gervaise had already talked the matter over with Ralph, and they agreed
that a strongly manned craft of this kind would go faster than any of
those they had taken, and that, moreover, it would be a pity to weaken
their force by sending one of the prizes away. Having seen them off,
Gervaise retired to the cabin and threw himself down for a short sleep,
leaving the knights who had been off watch during the night, to see
that all went well. In two hours he was roused. A native craft had come
alongside with Sir Fabricius Caretto.

"I think she is just the craft for us," the knight said, as Gervaise
came on deck. "She belongs to a large fishing village just round the
point to the left. There were several boats there, but the villagers all
said that this was the speediest vessel anywhere along the coast. She
belongs to two brothers, who, with four men, constitute her regular
crew; but I have arranged for twelve others to go in her, in order that
they may row her along at a good pace if the wind falls light."

"Are your companions come off yet?"

"No; but we can hoist a flag for their recall."

"Do so. I shall be greatly obliged if you will undertake this mission to
the seaports. It needs one of name and rank to speak with the nobles and
officials authoritatively."

"I will gladly do so, Sir Gervaise. Give me your instructions, and you
can rely upon my carrying them out."

"I thank you greatly, Sir Fabricius, and shall be glad if you will take
with you any two of the knights you may select. I have to write letters
for you to deliver to the authorities at Naples, Pisa, and Genoa. I
shall write but briefly, and leave you to explain matters more fully. I
shall merely say that I have intelligence of the arrival here of a fleet
of Moorish corsairs, of whose strength I am ignorant, but that assuredly
their intention is to make a raid on the commerce of the coast, and
perhaps to land at unprotected places. At Ostia, after warning the
authorities to send orders along the coast for the inhabitants to be on
their guard, pray them to carry word at once to Rome, and request his
Holiness the Pope to order some armed galleys to put to sea as soon
as possible. Beg them at Naples and Pisa to do the same thing. But of
course it is from Genoa that we must hope for the most assistance.

"In each place you will, if possible, see the syndic himself, and such
of his council as can be got quickly together. The moment you have done
all you can at Genoa sail for the Island of Madalena, which lies off the
northeastern point of the island. There you will either find us, or a
boat with a message where to direct your course. I think perhaps it will
be best to omit Naples--it will save you fully a day, if not two, to do
so. Pray them at Ostia to send off news down the coast, or to request
the papal authorities to despatch mounted messengers. 'Tis likely that,
at first, at any rate, the corsairs will try the narrower waters to the
north. From here to Ostia is nigh two hundred miles, and if the wind is
brisk you may arrive there tomorrow afternoon, and start again at night,
arriving at Pisa before noon on the following day; while, allowing for
four or five hours to ascend the river there, you may be at Genoa next
morning.

"Three hours should suffice to gather from the authorities what force
they can despatch, and as soon as you have learned this, embark again
and sail south. You may reach Madalena in two days. Thus, at the
earliest, it must be from six to seven days before you can bring us the
news there; if you meet with calms or foul winds you may be well nigh
double that time. If at Ostia you can get a faster craft than this, hire
it, or take a relay of fresh rowers. I will furnish you with means when
I give you the letters."

In less than half an hour Gervaise was on deck again. The boat had
returned with the other Italian knights. An ample store of provisions
had been placed on board the Sperondra, both for the crew and for the
three knights, and, without a minute's delay, these took their places on
board, the great sails were hoisted, and the craft glided rapidly away.

"The villagers spoke truly as to her speed," Ralph said, as they looked
after her. "Even with this light wind, she is running fully six miles an
hour, and as, by the look of the sky, there will be more of it soon, she
will make the run to Ostia well within the time we calculated."

Gervaise now questioned the other Italian knights as to what information
they had gained.

They said the peasants had told them that several strange craft, using
both oars and sails, had been noticed passing northwards, and that so
strong was the opinion that these were either Algerines or Tunisians
that, for the last three or four days, none of the fishing craft had
ventured to put to sea. They were able to tell but little as to the
bays along the coastline, which they described as very rugged and
precipitous. Five or six little streams ran, they knew, down from
the mountains. They thought the most likely places for corsairs to
rendezvous would be in a deep indentation north of Cape Bellavista, or
behind Cape Comino. If not at these places, they might meet in the great
bay at whose entrance stands Tavolara Island, and that beyond, there
were several deep inlets on the northeastern coast of the Island.
Gervaise had a consultation with Ralph.

"The first thing is to find out where these corsairs have their meeting
place, Ralph; and this must be done without their catching sight of the
galley or of the prizes, which some of them would be sure to recognise."

Ralph nodded.

"It is a difficult question, Gervaise. Of course, if we had a boat
speedy enough to row away from the corsairs it would be easy enough; but
with wind and oars they go so fast that no boat could escape them."

"That is quite certain, Ralph; and therefore, if it is done by a boat,
it must be by one so small and insignificant that they would pay but
little attention to it if they caught sight of it. My idea is that we
should take our own little boat, which is a fast one, paint it black, to
give it the appearance of a fisherman's boat, and hire a couple of good
rowers from the village. This, with one knight dressed as a fisherman,
should go ahead of us, and explore every inlet where ships could be
sheltered. We would follow ten miles behind. When we get near the places
where the natives think the fleet is likely to be, the boat must go on
at night, while we anchor. In that way they ought to be able to discover
the corsairs, while themselves unseen, and to gain some idea of their
numbers and the position in which they are anchored, and bring us back
news."

"Shall I go myself, Gervaise?"

"I could not spare you, Ralph. The risk of capture does not seem to me
to be great, but there certainly is a risk, and I dare not part with
you. It had better be an Italian, because there will doubtless be an
opportunity of landing at villages and questioning the inhabitants,
therefore we will send Fosco. If there are some eight or ten corsairs
gathered in any of these bays the news is sure to travel along the
shore, and we may get some tidings in that way. The first thing is to
send off to the village again to fetch two young fishermen; they must
be active fellows, strong, and possessed of some courage. I will ask da
Vinci to go himself and select them. While he is away we will paint our
boat black, and make ready for her to start at once; the sooner she is
off the better."

The Italian knight at once undertook the mission, and started for the
shore. Fosco, who had been chosen principally because he was light of
frame, as well as very shrewd and intelligent, was then called up, and
his mission explained to him. He was delighted at having been selected.
Gervaise took him down to the cabin, and they consulted the maps with
which the galley was furnished.

"You will row on to Muravera; it is some twenty miles from here. You
see, the village lies at the mouth of a river. As soon as you arrive
there, you will land and find out whether there is any report of
Moorish pirates having been seen along the coast. We shall be there this
evening, and you will come on board and report. Next day you will get to
Lunasei, which is about five miles on this side of Cape Bellavista, and
they will certainly know there if the pirates are lying behind the cape.
If they are so, you will row back to meet us; if they are not, you will
remain there until we come up in the evening. Remember that, should you
on either day be seen and chased, and you find they are overtaking you,
you will make for the shore, land, and conceal yourselves. We shall keep
along near the coast, and as we pass you can come down to the water's
edge and signal to us to take you off. Now you had better disguise
yourself, so as to be in readiness to start as soon as da Vinci
comes off with the men. You will only need to take a small stock of
provisions, as each night you can replenish them here."

An hour later da Vinci came off with two stalwart young fishermen. The
little boat had already been painted, and it was lowered at once; Fosco
stepped into it, and started.

Two hours later the prizes got up sail, and, accompanied by the galley,
coasted quietly along the shore, arriving, late in the afternoon, at
Muravera. Fosco at once came on board.

"There is no news here beyond that which we gained this morning, Sir
Gervaise," he said. "Strange ships have certainly been seen sailing
north, but they did not approach the coast."

A similar report was given at Lunasei; there were certainly no corsairs
lying behind Cape Bellavista, or news would assuredly have reached the
village. At Orosei, next day, the report was the same; there were no
strange ships at Cape Comino. They had been warned overnight that
the coast beyond the cape was so precipitous, that there would be no
villages at which to make inquiries, and arranged with Fosco that the
ships should anchor north of the cape, and that he should go on at once
to inspect the next bay. If he found ships there, he was to return at
once; if not, he was, at daybreak, to land at one of the villages in the
bay, and to make inquiries.

No news was brought in by him during the night.

"It is evident the pirates are not in the bay, Gervaise," Ralph said, as
they came on deck at daybreak.

"Yes; and I am glad of it. It is a large bay, and if the Genoese send
half a dozen galleys, some of the pirates might still escape, while the
next bays are deeper and narrower, and it would be more easy to entrap
them all. I have all along thought it most probable that they would
rendezvous there. The maps show no villages for many miles round, and
they might lie there for weeks without so much as a shepherd getting
sight of them from the cliffs. Moreover, it is the nearest point for
cutting off ships coming down between Corsica and the mainland, and they
can, besides, snap up those proceeding from the south to Marseilles, as
these, for the most part, pass between Sardinia and Corsica."

At eight o'clock the boat was seen coming round the point.

"Any news, Fosco?" Gervaise asked, as it approached the galley.

"None, Sir Gervaise. They have heard nothing of pirates, nor seen
anything of them."

Exclamations of disappointment broke from the knights.

"That makes it all the more likely," Gervaise said, "that they are
lying in one of the inlets to the north. You see, lower down they kept
comparatively close to the shore, being careless who might notice them;
but as they approached their rendezvous, they would be more careful, and
might either pass along at night, or keep far out. If they had not been
anxious to conceal their near presence, they would have been likely to
put into this bay in search of plunder and captives; for Tempe, one of
the largest of the Sardinian towns, lies but a short distance away, and
there must be a considerable amount of traffic."

"There are four or five small craft lying there," Fosco, who had by this
time stepped on board, put in, "and a considerable number of fishing
boats. When I came upon the ships in the dark, I thought at first that
I had lighted on the pirates, but on letting the boat drift closely by
them I soon saw they were not corsair galleys."

"Shall we get up anchor and go into the bay?" Ralph asked.

"It were safer not to do so, Ralph. Possibly one of the craft lying
there might be presently captured by them, and they might learn from her
crew of the presence of a galley of the Order there. Therefore I think
it best to remain where we are till nightfall, and then to proceed and
anchor on the north side of the Island of Madalena, if we can find a
sheltered cove where we could not be seen either from the land or by
passing ships."

During the day there was a good deal of discussion among the knights
as to whether the corsairs might not already have sailed away. It was
evident that if all their ships had arrived, there would be no motive
for delay. Three ships they knew would never join them, and others might
have been detained, from some cause or another. There could be no doubt
that the pirates had already ample force for capturing as many merchant
vessels as they might come across. But it might be intended to carry out
some more daring project--to sack and burn towns along the coast, carry
off the leading people for ransom, and fill the vessels with slaves--the
attack being made simultaneously on several unprotected towns. A vast
amount of plunder could thus be reaped, together with captives of even
greater money value. Were this their plan, they would doubtless delay
until all those who had promised to join in the expedition had arrived.
The balance of opinion, then, was that the corsairs were still in
hiding.

By daybreak next morning they were moored in a sheltered little bay to
the north of Madalena, the galley lying inside the prizes, so as to be
concealed as much as possible from view of any craft that might happen
to pass the mouth of the bay. Fosco started as soon as darkness fell in
the evening, and returned early in the morning.

"They are there," he shouted, as he neared the galley, "hidden in a deep
inlet that runs into one of the narrow bays."

"How many are there of them?"

"Seventeen or eighteen, I could not say which. They are all moored side
by side."

By this time Fosco's boat had reached the galley.

"You have done well indeed," Gervaise said, as the young knight ascended
to the poop. "Now give us a full account of what you have seen."

"As you know, Sir Gervaise, the bay opposite this island splits up into
two, running a long way inland, like the fangs of a great tooth. I had,
of course, no difficulty in finding the entrance to the bay itself, as
it is but a short distance across the strait. I steered first for the
left hand shore, and kept close along under the shadow of the cliffs,
which, in many cases, rise almost straight out from the water. We rowed
very quietly, fearing to run against a rock; for although it was light
enough to see across the water, and to make out any craft that might be
anchored there, it was very dark along the foot of the cliffs. There was
no need for haste, as I knew I had plenty of time to explore both arms
of the bay, and to be back here before day began to break.

"We rowed up to the end of the inlet, and then, having assured ourselves
that it was empty, came down the other side, and turned up the western
arm. We had got some distance along when I fancied I heard voices,
and so let the boat drift along, only dipping the oars in the water
occasionally. I could make out no signs whatever of the corsairs, when
suddenly we came upon a break in the cliffs. It was only some fifty
yards across, and here a creek came in at right angles to the shore.
I could have given a shout of pleasure as I looked up it, for there a
score of lights were burning above a dark mass, and we could hear the
sound of talking and laughter. It was but a glimpse I caught, for the
men at once backed water, and we were soon round the corner again.

"Up till then the fishermen had been ready enough to go where I wanted,
but the sight of that clump of galleys regularly scared them, and they
wanted to row straight away; but of course I pointed out to them that
they had taken pay to do this thing, and that they had to do it. They
said that if caught they would be either killed or made slaves of, and
I could not contradict them, but said that, in the first place, as I was
ready to run the risk, there was no reason why they shouldn't do so, and
in the second, there was no chance whatever of their being taken, as,
if discovered, we should get so long a start that we could either escape
them altogether or run the boat ashore at some point where the trees
came down to the water's edge, carry the boat up and hide it, and then
move up into the hills until the corsairs had gone.

"We waited there three or four hours, looking round the point
occasionally. At the end of that time all was quiet. Two or three of
the lanterns still burned, but there was no sign of life or movement on
their decks. After waiting another half hour to ensure the crews being
asleep, we rowed quietly up the creek, keeping within an oar's length of
the rocks. There was not much to see; the galleys lay two abreast, and
as there was no space between them, I supposed the whole were lashed
together. There were eight of them on the side we went along, but I
think there were only seven on the other side. As I thought it did not
much matter whether there were fifteen or sixteen, and as the men were
in a state of horrible fright, we turned and went back again, and I own
I felt very glad myself when we got round the point without an alarm
being given. We came quietly out, and it was fortunate we did so, for we
had not gone a quarter of a mile when we heard the sound of oars, and,
lying silently under the cliff, we saw two large galleys row past us."

"It is a strong force, Gervaise," Ralph said, as they paced up and down
the poop together. "Probably in each of those galleys are eighty or a
hundred men, in addition to the rowers. It is evident that unless Genoa
sends us help we shall not be able to interfere with their plans."

"I don't know, Ralph. I think we may injure them sorely, though we might
not be able to defeat them altogether. I want you tonight to take one of
the prizes, and row round to the bay we passed, and there to buy three
coasting vessels and six or eight fishing boats. Get as much pitch,
oil, and other combustibles, as you can purchase in the villages on
the shore. If you can engage a score of fishermen to man them, all the
better. My idea is that if Caretto returns with news that the Genoese
have no galleys ready for sea, we must do what we can to injure these
corsairs. If we smear these craft you are going to fetch with pitch and
oil, and fill the holds with combustibles, and so turn them into fire
ships, we may at least do the pirates a tremendous lot of harm. When we
get to the mouth of this inlet, we could have the fire ships rowed in by
three or four men in each, they having a boat behind in which to escape
as soon as the boats are lighted. The sight of a dozen craft coming
down on them in flames would cause a terrific panic, for, moored closely
together, as they are, if one took fire there would be little chance
of the others escaping. Of course, we should add to the confusion by
opening a fire with all our guns, and could hope to capture some at
least of them as they tried to make their way out."

"It is a grand idea, Gervaise; a splendid idea! It would be a terrific
blow to the Moors, and would make the sea safe from them for a long
time."

"When you buy the other things, Ralph, get a quantity of black cloth--it
matters not how coarse, or of what material; and also some white. As
soon as you come back with it, all hands shall set to work to make the
stuff up into mantles of the Order, with the white cross. We will put
these on to the Christians in the prizes, and the Moors will suppose
that they are attacked by four of the galleys of the Order. If you can
get some more arms and some iron headpieces, all the better."

"I will do what I can, Gervaise; the arms will certainly be wanted,
for those we found on the decks were sufficient only to arm half the
Christians. As to the steel caps, that will not matter so much, as in
the darkness and confusion the sight of the mantles will be quite enough
to convince the corsairs that we are all knights of the Order. By the
way, Gervaise, we have not yet looked into the holds of the prizes."

"That is so, Ralph; we knew, of course, that as the ships had but
just started we should find nothing in them save the cargo of that
unfortunate craft they captured."

On searching they found, as they had expected, that the cargo of the
captured ship had been of no great value. It consisted of wine, olive
oil, and grain. These were all useful, for the number of mouths to be
fed was considerable, and heavy inroads had already been made on the
stores of the galley. The rowers of the four vessels were at once set to
work to crush the grain between flat stones brought from the shore, and
an ample supply of coarse flour for their use for at least a fortnight
was obtained before sunset.

As soon as darkness fell, Ralph and two of the French knights started
