like a ring, was a round cake with a hole in the middle of it.

"Oh! it's one of Debby's jumbles!" she exclaimed.

"Where?  What are you doing?  Give me one too!" cried Clover, starting
up.  Katy rummaged till she found another, then, half frozen, she ran
back to bed; and the two lay nibbling the jumbles, and talking about
home, till dawn deepened into daylight, and morning was fairly come.

Breakfast was half an hour later than usual, which was comfortable.
As soon as it was over, the girls proceeded to unpack their box.  The
day was so cold that they wrapped themselves in shawls, and Clover
put on a hood and thick gloves.  Rose Red, passing the door, burst
out laughing, and recommended that she should add india rubbers and
an umbrella.

"Come in," cried the sisters,--"come in, and help us open our box."

"Oh, by the way, you have a box, haven't you?" said Rose, who was
perfectly aware of the important fact, and had presented herself with
the hope of being asked to look on.  "Thank you, but perhaps I would
better come some other time.  I shall be in your way."

"You humbug!" said Clover, while Katy seized Rose and pulled her into
the room.  "There, sit on the bed, you ridiculous goose, and put on
my gray cloak.  How can you be so absurd as to say you won't?  You
know we want you, and you know you came on purpose!"

"Did I?  Well, perhaps I did," laughed Rose.  Then Katy lifted off the
lid and set it against the door.  It was an exciting moment.

"Just look here!" cried Katy.

The top of the box was mostly taken up with four square paper boxes,
round which parcels of all shapes and sized were wedged and fitted.
The whole was a miracle of packing.  It had taken Miss Finch three
mornings, with assistance from old Mary, and much advice from Elsie,
to do it so beautifully.

Each box held a different kind of cake.  One was of jumbles, another
of ginger-snaps, a third of crullers, and the fourth contained a big
square loaf of frosted plum-cake, with a circle of sugar almonds set
in the frosting.  How the trio exclaimed at this!

"I never imagined any thing so nice," declared Rose, with her mouth
full of jumble.  "As for those snaps, they're simply perfect.  What
can be in all those fascinating bundles?  Do hurry and open one,
Katy."

Dear little Elsie!  The first two bundles opened were hers, a white
hood for Katy, and a blue one for Clover, both of her own knitting,
and so nicely done.  The girls were enchanted.

"How she has improved!" said Katy.  "She knits better than either of
us, Clover."

"There never was such a clever little darling!" responded Clover, and
they patted the hoods, tried them on before the glass, and spent so
much time in admiring them that Rose grew impatient.

"I declare," she cried, "it isn't any of my funeral, I know; but if
you don't open another parcel soon, I shall certainly fall to myself.
It seems as if, what with cold and curiosity, I couldn't wait."

"Very well," said Katy, laying aside her hood, with one final glance.
"Take out a bundle, Clover.  It's your turn."

Clover's bundle was for herself, "Evangeline," in blue and gold; and
pretty soon "Golden Legend," in the same binding, appeared for Katy.
Both these were from Dorry.  Next came a couple of round packages of
exactly the same size.  These proved to be ink-stands, covered with
Russia leather: one marked, "Katy from Johnnie," and the other,
"Clover from Phil."  It was evident that the children had done their
shopping together, for presently two long narrow parcels revealed the
carved pen-handles, precisely alike; and these were labelled, "Katy
from Phil," and "Clover from Johnnie."

What fun it was opening those bundles!  The girls made a long business
of it, taking out but one at a time, exclaiming, admiring, and
exhibiting to Rose, before they began upon another.  They laughed,
they joked, but I do not think it would have taken much to make
either of them cry.  It was almost too tender a pleasure, these
proofs of loving remembrance from the little one; and each separate
article seemed full of the very look and feel of home.

"What can this be?" said Katy, as she unrolled a paper and disclosed
a pretty round box.  She opened.  Nothing was visible but pink cotton
wool.  Katy peeped beneath, and gave a cry.

"O Clovy!  Such a lovely thing!  It's from papa,--of course it's from
papa.  How could he?  It's a great deal too pretty."

The "lovely thing" was a long slender chain for Katy's watch, worked
in fine yellow gold.  Clover admired it extremely; and her joy knew
no bounds when farther search revealed another box with a precisely
similar chain for herself.  It was too much.  The girls fairly cried
with pleasure.

"There never was such a papa in the world!" they said.

"Yes, there is.  Mine is just as good," declared Rose, twinkling away
a little tear-drop from her own eyes.  "Now don't cry, honeys.  Your
papa's an angel, there's no doubt about it.  I never saw such pretty
chains in my life,--never.  As for the children, they're little ducks.
You certainly are a wonderful family.  Katy, I'm dying to know what
is in the blue parcel."

The blue parcel was from Cecy, and contained a pretty blue ribbon for
Clover.  There was a pink one also, with a pink ribbon for Katy.
Everybody had thought of the girls.  Old Mary sent them each a yard
measure; Miss Finch, a thread-case, stocked with differently colored
cottons.  Alexander had cracked a bag full of hickory nuts.

"Did you ever?" said, Rose, when this last was produced.  "What a
thing it is to be popular!  Mrs. Hall?  Who's Mrs. Hall?" as Clover
unwrapped a tiny carved easel.

"She's Cecy's mother," explained Clover.  "Wasn't she kind to send me
this, Katy?  And here's Cecy's photograph in a little frame for you."

Never was such a wonderful box.  It appeared to have no bottom
whatever.  Under the presents were parcels of figs, prunes, almonds,
raisins, candy; under those, apples and pears.  There seemed no end
to the surprises.

At last all were out.

"Now," said Katy, "let's throw back the apples and pears, and then I
want you to help divide the other things, and make some packages for
the girls.  They are all disappointed not to have their boxes.  I
should like to have them share ours.  Wouldn't you, Clover?"

"Yes, indeed.  I was just going to propose it."

So Clover cut twenty-nine squares of white paper, Rose and Katy sorted
and divided, and pretty soon ginger-snaps and almonds and sugar-plums
were walking down all the entries, and a gladsome crunching showed
that the girls had found pleasant employment.  None of the snowed-up
boxes got through till Monday, so except for Katy and Clover the
school would have had no Christmas treat at all.

They carried Mrs. Nipson a large slice of cake, and a basket full of
the beautiful red apples.  All the teachers were remembered, and the
servants.  The S. S. U. C. was convened and feasted; and as for Rose,
Louisa, and other special cronies, dainties were heaped upon them
with such unsparing hand that they finally remonstrated.

"You're giving everything away.  You'll have none left for yourselves."

"Yes, we shall,--plenty," said Clover.  "O Rosy! here's such a splendid
pear!  You must have this."

"No! no!" protested Rose; but Clover forced it into her pocket.  "The
Carrs' Box" was always quoted in the Nunnery afterward, as an example
of what papas and mammas could accomplish, when they were of the right
sort, and really wanted to make school-girls happy.  Distributing
their treasures kept Katy and Clover so busy that it was not until
after dinner that they found time to open the smaller box.  When they
did so, they were sorry for the delay.   The box was full of flowers,
roses, geranium-leaves, heliotrope, beautiful red and white carnations,
all so bedded in cotton that the frost had not touched them.  But they
looked chilled, and Katy hastened to put them in warm water, which she
had been told was the best way to revive drooping flowers.

Cousin Helen had sent them; and underneath, sewed to the box, that
they might not shake about and do mischief, were two flat parcels
wrapped in tissue paper, and tied with white ribbon, in Cousin Helen's,
dainty way.  They were glove-cases, of quilted silk, delicately
scented, one white, and one lilac; and to each was pinned a loving
note, wishing the girls a Merry Christmas.

"How awfully good people are!" said Clover.  "I do think we ought to
be the best girls in the world."

Last of all, Katy made a choice little selection from her stores, a
splendid apple, a couple of fine pears, and handful of raisins and
figs, and, with a few of the freshest flowers in a wine-glass, she
went down the Row and tapped at Miss Jane's door.

Miss Jane was sitting up for the first time, wrapped in a shawl, and
looking very thin and pale.  Katy, who had almost ceased to be afraid
of her, went in cheerily.

"We've had a delicious box from home, Miss Jane, full of all sorts
of things.  It has been such fun unpacking it!  I've brought you an
apple, some pears, and this little bunch of flowers.  Wasn't it a
nice Christmas for us?"

"Yes," said Miss Jane, "very nice indeed.  I heard some one saying
in the entry that you had a box.  Thank you," as Katy set the basket
and glass on the table.  "Those flowers are very sweet.  I wish you
a Merry Christmas, I'm sure."

This was much from Miss Jane, who couldn't help speaking shortly, even
when she was pleased.  Katy withdrew in high glee.

But that night, just before bed-time, something happened so surprising
that Katy, telling Clover of it afterward, said she half fancied that
she must have dreamed it all.  It was about eight o'clock in the
evening: she was passing down Quaker Row, and Miss Jane called and
asked her to come in.  Miss Jane's cheeks were flushed, and she spoke
fast, as if she had resolved to say something, and thought the sooner
it was over the better.

"Miss Carr," she began, "I wish to tell you that I made up my mind some
time since that we did you an injustice last term.  It is not your
attentions to me during my illness which have changed my opinion,--
that was done before I fell ill.  It is your general conduct, and
the good influence which I have seen you exert over other girls, which
convinced me that we must have been wrong about you.  That is all.  I
thought you might like to hear me say this, and I shall say the same
to Mrs. Nipson."

"Thank you," said Katy, "you don't know how glad I am!"  She half
thought she would kiss Miss Jane, but somehow it didn't seem possible;
so she shook hands very heartily instead, and flew to her room, feeling
as if her feet were wings.

"It seems too good to be true.  I want to cry, I am so happy," she
told Clover.  "What a lovely day this has been!"

And of all that she had received, I think Katy considered this
explanation with Miss Jane as her very best Christmas box.




CHAPTER XII.  WAITING FOR SPRING.


School was a much happier place after this.  Mrs. Nipson never
alluded to the matter, but her manner altered.  Katy felt that
she was no longer watched or distrusted, and her heart grew light.

In another week Miss Jane was so much better as to be hearing her
classes again.  Illness had not changed her materially.  It is only
in novels that rheumatic fever sweetens tempers, and makes disagreeable
people over into agreeable ones.  Most of the girls disliked her as
much as ever.  Her tongue was just as sharp, and her manner as grim.
But for Katy, from that time forward, there was a difference.  Miss
Jane was not affectionate to her,--it was not in her nature to be
that,--but she was civil and considerate, and in a dry way, friendly,
and gradually Katy grew to have an odd sort of liking for her.

Do any of you know how incredibly long winter seems in climates where
for weeks together the thermometer stands at zero?  There is something
hopeless in such cold.  You think of summer as of a thing read about
somewhere in a book, but which has no actual existence.  Winter seems
the only reality in the world.

Katy and Clover felt this hopelessness growing upon them as the days
went on, and the weather became more and more severe.  Ten, twenty,
even thirty degrees below zero, was no unusual register for the
Hillsover thermometers.  Such cold half frightened them, but nobody
else was frightened or surprised.  It was dry, brilliant cold.  The
December snows lay unmelted on the ground in March, and the paths
cut then were crisp and hard still, only the white walls on either
side had risen higher and higher, till only a moving line of hoods
and tippets was visible above them, when the school went out for its
daily walk.  Morning after morning the girls woke to find thick
crusts of frost on their window-panes, and every drop of water in
the wash-bowl or pitcher turned to solid ice.  Night after night,
Clover, who was a chilly little creature, lay shivering and unable
to sleep, notwithstanding the hot bricks at her feet, and the many
wraps which Katy piled upon her.  To Katy herself the cold was more
bracing than depressing.  There was something in her blood which
responded to the sharp tingle of frost, and she gained in strength
in a remarkable way during this winter.  But the long storms told
upon her spirits.  She pined for spring and home more than she liked
to tell, and felt the need of variety in their monotonous life, where
the creeping days appeared like weeks, and the weeks stretched
themselves out, and seemed as long as months do in other places.

The girls resorted to all sorts of devices to keep themselves alive
during this dreary season.  They had little epidemics of occupation.
At one time it was "spattering," when all faces and fingers had a
tendency to smudges of India ink; and there was hardly a fine comb
or tooth-brush fit for use in the establishment.  Then a rage for
tatting set in, followed by a fever of fancy-work, every one falling
in love with the same pattern at the same time, and copying and
recopying, till nobody could bear the sight of it.  At one time Clover
counted eighteen girls all at work on the same bead and canvas pin-
cushion.  Later there was a short period of _decalcomanie;_ and then
came the grand album craze, when thirty-three girls out of the thirty-
nine sent for blank books bound in red morocco, and began to collect
signatures and sentiments.  Here, also, there was a tendency toward
repetition.

Sally Austin added to her autograph these lines of her own composition:--


           When on this page your beauteous eyes you bend,
           Let it remind you of your absent friend.
                                       Sally J. Austin,
                                            Galveston, Texas.


The girls found this sentiment charming, at least a dozen borrowed it,
and in half the albums in the school you might read,--


             "When on this page your beauteous eyes," &c.


Esther Dearborn wrote in Clover's book: "The better part of Valor is
Discretion."  Why she wrote it, nobody knew, or why it was more
applicable to Clover than to any one else; but the sentiment proved
popular, and was repeated over and over again, above various neatly
written signatures.  There was a strife as to who should display the
largest collection.  Some of the girls sent home for autographs of
distinguished persons, which they pasted in their books.  Rose Red,
however, out-did them all.

"Did I ever show you mine?" she asked one day, when most of the girls
were together in the school-room.

"No, never!" cried a number of voices.  "Have you got one?  Oh, do let
us see it."

"Certainly, I'll get it right away, if you like," said Rose, obligingly.
