"Gracious, ain't that an awful lot of money," exclaimed Davy. "She's
the woman you and Diana lit on when you jumped into the spare room bed,
ain't she? Diana told me that story. Is that why she left you so much?"

"Hush, Davy," said Anne gently. She slipped away to the porch gable with
a full heart, leaving Marilla and Mrs. Lynde to talk over the news to
their hearts' content.

"Do you s'pose Anne will ever get married now?" speculated Davy
anxiously. "When Dorcas Sloane got married last summer she said if she'd
had enough money to live on she'd never have been bothered with a
man, but even a widower with eight children was better'n living with a
sister-in-law."

"Davy Keith, do hold your tongue," said Mrs. Rachel severely. "The way
you talk is scandalous for a small boy, that's what."




Chapter XIX

An Interlude


"To think that this is my twentieth birthday, and that I've left my
teens behind me forever," said Anne, who was curled up on the hearth-rug
with Rusty in her lap, to Aunt Jamesina who was reading in her pet
chair. They were alone in the living room. Stella and Priscilla had
gone to a committee meeting and Phil was upstairs adorning herself for a
party.

"I suppose you feel kind of, sorry" said Aunt Jamesina. "The teens are
such a nice part of life. I'm glad I've never gone out of them myself."

Anne laughed.

"You never will, Aunty. You'll be eighteen when you should be a hundred.
Yes, I'm sorry, and a little dissatisfied as well. Miss Stacy told me
long ago that by the time I was twenty my character would be formed,
for good or evil. I don't feel that it's what it should be. It's full of
flaws."

"So's everybody's," said Aunt Jamesina cheerfully. "Mine's cracked in
a hundred places. Your Miss Stacy likely meant that when you are twenty
your character would have got its permanent bent in one direction or
'tother, and would go on developing in that line. Don't worry over it,
Anne. Do your duty by God and your neighbor and yourself, and have a
good time. That's my philosophy and it's always worked pretty well.
Where's Phil off to tonight?"

"She's going to a dance, and she's got the sweetest dress for it--creamy
yellow silk and cobwebby lace. It just suits those brown tints of hers."

"There's magic in the words 'silk' and 'lace,' isn't there?" said Aunt
Jamesina. "The very sound of them makes me feel like skipping off to
a dance. And YELLOW silk. It makes one think of a dress of sunshine.
I always wanted a yellow silk dress, but first my mother and then my
husband wouldn't hear of it. The very first thing I'm going to do when I
get to heaven is to get a yellow silk dress."

Amid Anne's peal of laughter Phil came downstairs, trailing clouds of
glory, and surveyed herself in the long oval mirror on the wall.

"A flattering looking glass is a promoter of amiability," she said.
"The one in my room does certainly make me green. Do I look pretty nice,
Anne?"

"Do you really know how pretty you are, Phil?" asked Anne, in honest
admiration.

"Of course I do. What are looking glasses and men for? That wasn't what
I meant. Are all my ends tucked in? Is my skirt straight? And would this
rose look better lower down? I'm afraid it's too high--it will make me
look lop-sided. But I hate things tickling my ears."

"Everything is just right, and that southwest dimple of yours is
lovely."

"Anne, there's one thing in particular I like about you--you're so
ungrudging. There isn't a particle of envy in you."

"Why should she be envious?" demanded Aunt Jamesina. "She's not quite as
goodlooking as you, maybe, but she's got a far handsomer nose."

"I know it," conceded Phil.

"My nose always has been a great comfort to me," confessed Anne.

"And I love the way your hair grows on your forehead, Anne. And that
one wee curl, always looking as if it were going to drop, but never
dropping, is delicious. But as for noses, mine is a dreadful worry to
me. I know by the time I'm forty it will be Byrney. What do you think
I'll look like when I'm forty, Anne?"

"Like an old, matronly, married woman," teased Anne.

"I won't," said Phil, sitting down comfortably to wait for her escort.
"Joseph, you calico beastie, don't you dare jump on my lap. I won't go
to a dance all over cat hairs. No, Anne, I WON'T look matronly. But no
doubt I'll be married."

"To Alec or Alonzo?" asked Anne.

"To one of them, I suppose," sighed Phil, "if I can ever decide which."

"It shouldn't be hard to decide," scolded Aunt Jamesina.

"I was born a see-saw Aunty, and nothing can ever prevent me from
teetering."

"You ought to be more levelheaded, Philippa."

"It's best to be levelheaded, of course," agreed Philippa, "but you miss
lots of fun. As for Alec and Alonzo, if you knew them you'd understand
why it's difficult to choose between them. They're equally nice."

"Then take somebody who is nicer" suggested Aunt Jamesina. "There's that
Senior who is so devoted to you--Will Leslie. He has such nice, large,
mild eyes."

"They're a little bit too large and too mild--like a cow's," said Phil
cruelly.

"What do you say about George Parker?"

"There's nothing to say about him except that he always looks as if he
had just been starched and ironed."

"Marr Holworthy then. You can't find a fault with him."

"No, he would do if he wasn't poor. I must marry a rich man, Aunt
Jamesina. That--and good looks--is an indispensable qualification. I'd
marry Gilbert Blythe if he were rich."

"Oh, would you?" said Anne, rather viciously.

"We don't like that idea a little bit, although we don't want Gilbert
ourselves, oh, no," mocked Phil. "But don't let's talk of disagreeable
subjects. I'll have to marry sometime, I suppose, but I shall put off
the evil day as long as I can."

"You mustn't marry anybody you don't love, Phil, when all's said and
done," said Aunt Jamesina.

     "'Oh, hearts that loved in the good old way
     Have been out o' the fashion this many a day.'"

trilled Phil mockingly. "There's the carriage. I fly--Bi-bi, you two
old-fashioned darlings."

When Phil had gone Aunt Jamesina looked solemnly at Anne.

"That girl is pretty and sweet and goodhearted, but do you think she is
quite right in her mind, by spells, Anne?"

"Oh, I don't think there's anything the matter with Phil's mind," said
Anne, hiding a smile. "It's just her way of talking."

Aunt Jamesina shook her head.

"Well, I hope so, Anne. I do hope so, because I love her. But _I_ can't
understand her--she beats me. She isn't like any of the girls I ever
knew, or any of the girls I was myself."

"How many girls were you, Aunt Jimsie?"

"About half a dozen, my dear."




Chapter XX

Gilbert Speaks


"This has been a dull, prosy day," yawned Phil, stretching herself idly
on the sofa, having previously dispossessed two exceedingly indignant
cats.

Anne looked up from Pickwick Papers. Now that spring examinations were
over she was treating herself to Dickens.

"It has been a prosy day for us," she said thoughtfully, "but to some
people it has been a wonderful day. Some one has been rapturously happy
in it. Perhaps a great deed has been done somewhere today--or a great
poem written--or a great man born. And some heart has been broken,
Phil."

"Why did you spoil your pretty thought by tagging that last sentence
on, honey?" grumbled Phil. "I don't like to think of broken hearts--or
anything unpleasant."

"Do you think you'll be able to shirk unpleasant things all your life,
Phil?"

"Dear me, no. Am I not up against them now? You don't call Alec and
Alonzo pleasant things, do you, when they simply plague my life out?"

"You never take anything seriously, Phil."

"Why should I? There are enough folks who do. The world needs people
like me, Anne, just to amuse it. It would be a terrible place if
EVERYBODY were intellectual and serious and in deep, deadly earnest. MY
mission is, as Josiah Allen says, 'to charm and allure.' Confess now.
Hasn't life at Patty's Place been really much brighter and pleasanter
this past winter because I've been here to leaven you?"

"Yes, it has," owned Anne.

"And you all love me--even Aunt Jamesina, who thinks I'm stark mad. So
why should I try to be different? Oh, dear, I'm so sleepy. I was awake
until one last night, reading a harrowing ghost story. I read it in bed,
and after I had finished it do you suppose I could get out of bed to put
the light out? No! And if Stella had not fortunately come in late that
lamp would have burned good and bright till morning. When I heard Stella
I called her in, explained my predicament, and got her to put out the
light. If I had got out myself to do it I knew something would grab
me by the feet when I was getting in again. By the way, Anne, has Aunt
Jamesina decided what to do this summer?"

"Yes, she's going to stay here. I know she's doing it for the sake of
those blessed cats, although she says it's too much trouble to open her
own house, and she hates visiting."

"What are you reading?"

"Pickwick."

"That's a book that always makes me hungry," said Phil. "There's so much
good eating in it. The characters seem always to be reveling on ham and
eggs and milk punch. I generally go on a cupboard rummage after reading
Pickwick. The mere thought reminds me that I'm starving. Is there any
tidbit in the pantry, Queen Anne?"

"I made a lemon pie this morning. You may have a piece of it."

Phil dashed out to the pantry and Anne betook herself to the orchard in
company with Rusty. It was a moist, pleasantly-odorous night in early
spring. The snow was not quite all gone from the park; a little dingy
bank of it yet lay under the pines of the harbor road, screened from the
influence of April suns. It kept the harbor road muddy, and chilled the
evening air. But grass was growing green in sheltered spots and Gilbert
had found some pale, sweet arbutus in a hidden corner. He came up from
the park, his hands full of it.

Anne was sitting on the big gray boulder in the orchard looking at the
poem of a bare, birchen bough hanging against the pale red sunset
with the very perfection of grace. She was building a castle in air--a
wondrous mansion whose sunlit courts and stately halls were steeped in
Araby's perfume, and where she reigned queen and chatelaine. She frowned
as she saw Gilbert coming through the orchard. Of late she had managed
not to be left alone with Gilbert. But he had caught her fairly now; and
even Rusty had deserted her.

Gilbert sat down beside her on the boulder and held out his Mayflowers.

"Don't these remind you of home and our old schoolday picnics, Anne?"

Anne took them and buried her face in them.

"I'm in Mr. Silas Sloane's barrens this very minute," she said
rapturously.

"I suppose you will be there in reality in a few days?"

"No, not for a fortnight. I'm going to visit with Phil in Bolingbroke
before I go home. You'll be in Avonlea before I will."

"No, I shall not be in Avonlea at all this summer, Anne. I've been
offered a job in the Daily News office and I'm going to take it."

"Oh," said Anne vaguely. She wondered what a whole Avonlea summer would
be like without Gilbert. Somehow she did not like the prospect. "Well,"
she concluded flatly, "it is a good thing for you, of course."

"Yes, I've been hoping I would get it. It will help me out next year."

"You mustn't work too HARD," said Anne, without any very clear idea of
what she was saying. She wished desperately that Phil would come out.
"You've studied very constantly this winter. Isn't this a delightful
evening? Do you know, I found a cluster of white violets under that
old twisted tree over there today? I felt as if I had discovered a gold
mine."

"You are always discovering gold mines," said Gilbert--also absently.

"Let us go and see if we can find some more," suggested Anne eagerly.
"I'll call Phil and--"

"Never mind Phil and the violets just now, Anne," said Gilbert quietly,
taking her hand in a clasp from which she could not free it. "There is
something I want to say to you."

"Oh, don't say it," cried Anne, pleadingly. "Don't--PLEASE, Gilbert."

"I must. Things can't go on like this any longer. Anne, I love you. You
know I do. I--I can't tell you how much. Will you promise me that some
day you'll be my wife?"

"I--I can't," said Anne miserably. "Oh, Gilbert--you--you've spoiled
everything."

"Don't you care for me at all?" Gilbert asked after a very dreadful
pause, during which Anne had not dared to look up.

"Not--not in that way. I do care a great deal for you as a friend. But I
don't love you, Gilbert."

"But can't you give me some hope that you will--yet?"
