miserable minds that if the Story Girl did not altogether believe it was
true she believed it might be true; and the possibility was almost as
dreadful as the certainty.

"It CAN'T be true," said Sara Ray, seeking refuge, as usual, in tears.
"Why, everything looks just the same. Things COULDN'T look the same if
the Judgment Day was going to be to-morrow."

"But that's just the way it's to come," I said uncomfortably. "It tells
you in the Bible. It's to come just like a thief in the night."

"But it tells you another thing in the Bible, too," said Cecily eagerly.
"It says nobody knows when the Judgment Day is to come--not even the
angels in heaven. Now, if the angels in heaven don't know it, do you
suppose the editor of the _Enterprise_ can know it--and him a Grit,
too?"

"I guess he knows as much about it as a Tory would," retorted the Story
Girl. Uncle Roger was a Liberal and Uncle Alec a Conservative, and
the girls held fast to the political traditions of their respective
households. "But it isn't really the _Enterprise_ editor at all who is
saying it--it's a man in the States who claims to be a prophet. If he IS
a prophet perhaps he has found out somehow."

"And it's in the paper, too, and that's printed as well as the Bible,"
said Dan.

"Well, I'm going to depend on the Bible," said Cecily. "I don't believe
it's the Judgment Day to-morrow--but I'm scared, for all that," she
added piteously.

That was exactly the position of us all. As in the case of the
bell-ringing ghost, we did not believe but we trembled.

"Nobody might have known when the Bible was written," said Dan, "but
maybe somebody knows now. Why, the Bible was written thousands of years
ago, and that paper was printed this very morning. There's been time to
find out ever so much more."

"I want to do so many things," said the Story Girl, plucking off her
crown of buttercup gold with a tragic gesture, "but if it's the Judgment
Day to-morrow I won't have time to do any of them."

"It can't be much worse than dying, I s'pose," said Felix, grasping at
any straw of comfort.

"I'm awful glad I've got into the habit of going to church and Sunday
School this summer," said Peter very soberly. "I wish I'd made up my
mind before this whether to be a Presbyterian or a Methodist. Do you
s'pose it's too late now?"

"Oh, that doesn't matter," said Cecily earnestly. "If--if you're a
Christian, Peter, that is all that's necessary."

"But it's too late for that," said Peter miserably. "I can't turn into
a Christian between this and two o'clock to-morrow. I'll just have to be
satisfied with making up my mind to be a Presbyterian or a Methodist. I
wanted to wait till I got old enough to make out what was the difference
between them, but I'll have to chance it now. I guess I'll be a
Presbyterian, 'cause I want to be like the rest of you. Yes, I'll be a
Presbyterian."

"I know a story about Judy Pineau and the word Presbyterian," said the
Story Girl, "but I can't tell it now. If to-morrow isn't the Judgment
Day I'll tell it Monday."

"If I had known that to-morrow might be the Judgment Day I wouldn't have
quarrelled with you last Monday, Sara Stanley, or been so horrid and
sulky all the week. Indeed I wouldn't," said Felicity, with very unusual
humility.

Ah, Felicity! We were all, in the depths of our pitiful little souls,
reviewing the innumerable things we would or would not have done "if
we had known." What a black and endless list they made--those sins
of omission and commission that rushed accusingly across our young
memories! For us the leaves of the Book of Judgment were already opened;
and we stood at the bar of our own consciences, than which for youth
or eld, there can be no more dread tribunal. I thought of all the evil
deeds of my short life--of pinching Felix to make him cry out at family
prayers, of playing truant from Sunday School and going fishing one
day, of a certain fib--no, no away from this awful hour with all such
euphonious evasions--of a LIE I had once told, of many a selfish and
unkind word and thought and action. And to-morrow might be the great
and terrible day of the last accounting! Oh, if I had only been a better
boy!

"The quarrel was as much my fault as yours, Felicity," said the Story
Girl, putting her arm around Felicity. "We can't undo it now. But if
to-morrow isn't the Judgment Day we must be careful never to quarrel
again. Oh, I wish father was here."

"He will be," said Cecily. "If it's the Judgment Day for Prince Edward
Island it will be for Europe, too."

"I wish we could just KNOW whether what the paper says is true or not,"
said Felix desperately. "It seems to me I could brace up if I just
KNEW."

But to whom could we appeal? Uncle Alec was away and would not be back
until late that night. Neither Aunt Janet nor Uncle Roger were people to
whom we cared to apply in such a crisis. We were afraid of the Judgment
Day; but we were almost equally afraid of being laughed at. How about
Aunt Olivia?

"No, Aunt Olivia has gone to bed with a sick headache and mustn't be
disturbed," said the Story Girl. "She said I must get dinner ready,
because there was plenty of cold meat, and nothing to do but boil the
potatoes and peas, and set the table. I don't know how I can put my
thoughts into it when the Judgment Day may be to-morrow. Besides, what
is the good of asking the grown-ups? They don't know anything more about
this than we do."

"But if they'd just SAY they didn't believe it, it would be a sort of
comfort," said Cecily.

"I suppose the minister would know, but he's away on his vacation" said
Felicity. "Anyhow, I'll go and ask mother what she thinks of it."

Felicity picked up the _Enterprise_ and betook herself to the house. We
awaited her return in dire suspense.

"Well, what does she say?" asked Cecily tremulously.

"She said, 'Run away and don't bother me. I haven't any time for your
nonsense.'" responded Felicity in an injured tone. "And I said, 'But,
ma, the paper SAYS to-morrow is the Judgment Day,' and ma just said
'Judgment Fiddlesticks!'"

"Well, that's kind of comforting," said Peter. "She can't put any faith
in it, or she'd be more worked up."

"If it only wasn't PRINTED!" said Dan gloomily.

"Let's all go over and ask Uncle Roger," said Felix desperately.

That we should make Uncle Roger a court of last resort indicated all
too clearly the state of our minds. But we went. Uncle Roger was in
his barn-yard, hitching his black mare into the buggy. His copy of the
_Enterprise_ was sticking out of his pocket. He looked, as we saw with
sinking hearts, unusually grave and preoccupied. There was not a glimmer
of a smile about his face.

"You ask him," said Felicity, nudging the Story Girl.

"Uncle Roger," said the Story Girl, the golden notes of her voice
threaded with fear and appeal, "the _Enterprise_ says that to-morrow is
the Judgment Day? IS it? Do YOU think it is?"

"I'm afraid so," said Uncle Roger gravely. "The _Enterprise_ is always
very careful to print only reliable news."

"But mother doesn't believe it," cried Felicity.

Uncle Roger shook his head.

"That is just the trouble," he said. "People won't believe it till it's
too late. I'm going straight to Markdale to pay a man there some money I
owe him, and after dinner I'm going to Summerside to buy me a new suit.
My old one is too shabby for the Judgment Day."

He got into his buggy and drove away, leaving eight distracted mortals
behind him.

"Well, I suppose that settles it," said Peter, in despairing tone.

"Is there anything we can do to PREPARE?" asked Cecily.

"I wish I had a white dress like you girls," sobbed Sara Ray. "But I
haven't, and it's too late to get one. Oh, I wish I had minded what ma
said better. I wouldn't have disobeyed her so often if I'd thought the
Judgment Day was so near. When I go home I'm going to tell her about
going to the magic lantern show."

"I'm not sure that Uncle Roger meant what he said," remarked the Story
Girl. "I couldn't get a look into his eyes. If he was trying to hoax
us there would have been a twinkle in them. He can never help that.
You know he would think it a great joke to frighten us like this. It's
really dreadful to have no grown-ups you can depend on."

"We could depend on father if he was here," said Dan stoutly. "HE'D tell
us the truth."

"He would tell us what he THOUGHT was true, Dan, but he couldn't KNOW.
He's not such a well-educated man as the editor of the _Enterprise_. No,
there's nothing to do but wait and see."

"Let us go into the house and read just what the Bible does say about
it," suggested Cecily.

We crept in carefully, lest we disturb Aunt Olivia, and Cecily found and
read the significant portion of Holy Writ. There was little comfort for
us in that vivid and terrible picture.

"Well," said the Story Girl finally. "I must go and get the potatoes
ready. I suppose they must be boiled even if it is the Judgment Day
to-morrow. But I don't believe it is."

"And I've got to go and stump elderberries," said Peter. "I don't see
how I can do it--go away back there alone. I'll feel scared to death the
whole time."

"Tell Uncle Roger that, and say if to-morrow is the end of the world
that there is no good in stumping any more fields," I suggested.

"Yes, and if he lets you off then we'll know he was in earnest," chimed
in Cecily. "But if he still says you must go that'll be a sign he
doesn't believe it."

Leaving the Story Girl and Peter to peel their potatoes, the rest of
us went home, where Aunt Janet, who had gone to the well and found the
fragments of the old blue cup, gave poor Felicity a bitter scolding
about it. But Felicity bore it very patiently--nay, more, she seemed to
delight in it.

"Ma can't believe to-morrow is the last day, or she wouldn't scold like
that," she told us; and this comforted us until after dinner, when the
Story Girl and Peter came over and told us that Uncle Roger had really
gone to Summerside. Then we plunged down into fear and wretchedness
again.

"But he said I must go and stump elderberries just the same" said Peter.
"He said it might NOT be the Judgment Day to-morrow, though he believed
it was, and it would keep me out of mischief. But I just can't stand it
back there alone. Some of you fellows must come with me. I don't want
you to work, but just for company."

It was finally decided that Dan and Felix should go. I wanted to go
also, but the girls protested.

"YOU must stay and keep us cheered up," implored Felicity. "I just don't
know how I'm ever going to put in the afternoon. I promised Kitty Marr
that I'd go down and spend it with her, but I can't now. And I can't
knit any at my lace. I'd just keep thinking, 'What is the use? Perhaps
it'll all be burned up to-morrow.'"

So I stayed with the girls, and a miserable afternoon we had of it. The
Story Girl again and again declared that she "didn't believe it," but
when we asked her to tell a story, she evaded it with a flimsy excuse.
Cecily pestered Aunt Janet's life out, asking repeatedly, "Ma, will you
be washing Monday?" "Ma, will you be going to prayer meeting Tuesday
night?" "Ma, will you be preserving raspberries next week?" and various
similar questions. It was a huge comfort to her that Aunt Janet always
said, "Yes," or "Of course," as if there could be no question about it.

Sara Ray cried until I wondered how one small head could contain all the
tears she shed. But I do not believe she was half as much frightened as
disappointed that she had no white dress. In mid-afternoon Cecily came
downstairs with her forget-me-not jug in her hand--a dainty bit of
china, wreathed with dark blue forget-me-nots, which Cecily prized
highly, and in which she always kept her toothbrush.

"Sara, I am going to give you this jug," she said solemnly.

Now, Sara had always coveted this particular jug. She stopped crying
long enough to clutch it delightedly.

"Oh, Cecily, thank you. But are you sure you won't want it back if
to-morrow isn't the Judgment Day?"

"No, it's yours for good," said Cecily, with the high, remote air of one
to whom forget-me-not jugs and all such pomps and vanities of the world
were as a tale that is told.

"Are you going to give any one your cherry vase?" asked Felicity, trying
to speak indifferently. Felicity had never admired the forget-me-not
jug, but she had always hankered after the cherry vase--an affair of
white glass, with a cluster of red glass cherries and golden-green glass
leaves on its side, which Aunt Olivia had given Cecily one Christmas.

"No, I'm not," answered Cecily, with a change of tone.

"Oh, well, I don't care," said Felicity quickly. "Only, if to-morrow is
the last day, the cherry vase won't be much use to you."

"I guess it will be as much use to me as to any one else," said Cecily
indignantly. She had sacrificed her dear forget-me-not jug to satisfy
some pang of conscience, or propitiate some threatening fate, but
surrender her precious cherry vase she could not and would not. Felicity
needn't be giving any hints!

With the gathering shades of night our plight became pitiful. In the
daylight, surrounded by homely, familiar sights and sounds, it was not
so difficult to fortify our souls with a cheering incredulity. But now,
in this time of shadows, dread belief clutched us and wrung us with
terror. If there had been one wise older friend to tell us, in serious
fashion, that we need not be afraid, that the _Enterprise_ paragraph
was naught save the idle report of a deluded fanatic, it would have been
well for us. But there was not. Our grown-ups, instead, considered our
terror an exquisite jest. At that very moment, Aunt Olivia, who had
recovered from her headache, and Aunt Janet were laughing in the kitchen
over the state the children were in because they were afraid the end
of the world was close at hand. Aunt Janet's throaty gurgle and Aunt
Olivia's trilling mirth floated out through the open window.

"Perhaps they'll laugh on the other side of their faces to-morrow," said
Dan, with gloomy satisfaction.

We were sitting on the cellar hatch, watching what might be our last
sunset o'er the dark hills of time. Peter was with us. It was his last
Sunday to go home, but he had elected to remain.

"If to-morrow is the Judgment Day I want to be with you fellows," he
said.

Sara Ray had also yearned to stay, but could not because her mother had
told her she must be home before dark.

"Never mind, Sara," comforted Cecily. "It's not to be till two o'clock
to-morrow, so you'll have plenty of time to get up here before anything
happens."

"But there might be a mistake," sobbed Sara. "It might be two o'clock
to-night instead of to-morrow."

It might, indeed. This was a new horror, which had not occurred to us.

"I'm sure I won't sleep a wink to-night," said Felix.

"The paper SAYS two o'clock to-morrow," said Dan. "You needn't worry,
Sara."

But Sara departed, weeping. She did not, however, forget to carry the
forget-me-not jug with her. All things considered, her departure was a
relief. Such a constantly tearful damsel was not a pleasant companion.
Cecily and Felicity and the Story Girl did not cry. They were made of
finer, firmer stuff. Dry-eyed, with such courage as they might, they
faced whatever might be in store for them.

"I wonder where we'll all be this time to-morrow night," said Felix
mournfully, as we watched the sunset between the dark fir boughs. It was
an ominous sunset. The sun dropped down amid dark, livid clouds, that
turned sullen shades of purple and fiery red behind him.

"I hope we'll be all together, wherever we are," said Cecily gently.
"Nothing can be so very bad then."

"I'm going to read the Bible all to-morrow forenoon," said Peter.

When Aunt Olivia came out to go home the Story Girl asked her permission
to stay all night with Felicity and Cecily. Aunt Olivia assented
lightly, swinging her hat on her arm and including us all in a friendly
smile. She looked very pretty, with her big blue eyes and warm-hued
golden hair. We loved Aunt Olivia; but just now we resented her having
laughed at us with Aunt Janet, and we refused to smile back.

"What a sulky, sulky lot of little people," said Aunt Olivia, going away
