those men of violence despoiling us, I felt the natural man rise
within me, and I smote him hip and thigh."

"I thought you hit him on the arm, doctor," said Mr. Sprague.

"Again I spoke figuratively, my young friend. I cannot say I regret
yielding to the impulse that moved me. I feel that I have helped to
foil the plans of the wicked."

"Doctor," said one of the miners, "you've true grit. When you preach
at the Black Hills, count me and my friends among the listeners.
We're all willing to help along your new church, for you're one of
the right sort."

"My friends, I will gladly accept your kind proposal, but I trust
it will not be solely because I have used this arm of flesh in your
defense. Mr. Sprague and I have but acted as humble instruments in
the hands of a Higher Power."

"Well, gentlemen," said Colonel Braddon, "I think we may as well get
into the stage again and resume our journey."

"What shall I do with this revolver?" asked Luke, indicating the one
he had picked up.

"Keep it," said the colonel. "You'll make better use of it than the
rascal who lost it."

"I've got an extra one here," said Mortimer Sprague, raising the one
on which he had put his foot. "I don't need it myself, so I will
offer it to the reverend doctor."

The missionary shook his head.

"I should not know how to use it," he said, "nor indeed am I sure
that I should feel justified in doing so."

"May I have it, sir?" asked one of the miners.

"Certainly, if you want it," said Mr. Sprague.

"I couldn't afford to buy one; but I see that I shall need one
out here."

In five minutes the stage was again on its way, and no further
adventures were met with. About the middle of the next day the
party arrived at Deadwood.



CHAPTER XXXIV

FENTON'S GULCH


Deadwood, at the time of Luke's arrival, looked more like a mining
camp than a town. The first settlers had neither the time nor the
money to build elaborate dwellings. Anything, however rough, that
would provide a shelter, was deemed sufficient. Luxury was not
dreamed of, and even ordinary comforts were only partially supplied.
Luke put up at a rude hotel, and the next morning began to make
inquiries for Mr. Harding. He ascertained that the person of whom he
was in search had arrived not many weeks previous, accompanied by
his sister. The latter, however, soon concluded that Deadwood was no
suitable residence for ladies, and had returned to her former home,
or some place near by. Mr. Harding remained, with a view of trying
his luck at the mines.

The next point to be ascertained was to what mines he had directed
his steps. This information was hard to obtain. Finally, a man who
had just returned to Deadwood, hearing Luke making inquiries of the
hotel clerk, said:

"I say, young chap, is the man you are after an old party over
fifty, with gray hair and a long nose?"

"I think that is the right description," said Luke, eagerly. "Can
you tell me anything about him?"

"The party I mean, he may be Harding, or may be somebody else, is
lying sick at Fenton's Gulch, about a day's journey from here--say
twenty miles."

"Sick? What is the matter with him?"

"He took a bad cold, and being an old man, couldn't stand it as well
as if he were twenty years younger. I left him in an old cabin lying
on a blanket, looking about as miserable as you would want to see.
Are you a friend of his?"

"I am not acquainted with him," answered Luke, "but I am sent out by
a friend of his in the East. I am quite anxious to find him. Can you
give me directions?"

"I can do better. I can guide you there. I only came to Deadwood
for some supplies, and I go back to-morrow morning."

"If you will let me accompany you I will be very much obliged."

"You can come with me and welcome. I shall be glad of your company.
Are you alone?"

"Yes."

"Seems to me you're rather a young chap to come out here alone."

"I suppose I am," returned Luke, smiling, "but there was no one
else to come with me. If I find Mr. Harding, I shall be all right."

"I can promise you that. It ain't likely he has got up from his
sick-bed and left the mines. I reckon you'll find him flat on his
back, as I left him."

Luke learned that his mining friend was known as Jack Baxter. He
seemed a sociable and agreeable man, though rather rough in his
outward appearance and manners. The next morning they started in
company, and were compelled to travel all day. Toward sunset they
reached the place known as Fenton's Gulch. It was a wild and
dreary-looking place, but had a good reputation for its yield
of gold dust.

"That's where you'll find the man you're after," said Baxter,
pointing to a dilapidated cabin, somewhat to the left of the mines.

Luke went up to the cabin, the door of which was open, and
looked in.

On a pallet in the corner lay a tall man, pale and emaciated.
He heard the slight noise at the door, and without turning his
head, said: "Come in, friend, whoever you are."

Upon this, Luke advanced into the cabin.

"Is this Mr. James Harding?" he asked.

The sick man turned his head, and his glance rested with surprise
upon the boy of sixteen who addressed him.

"Have I seen you before?" he asked.

"No, sir. I have only just arrived at the Gulch. You are Mr.
Harding?"

"Yes, that is my name; but how did you know it?"

"I am here in search of you, Mr. Harding."

"How is that?" asked the sick man, quickly. "Is my sister sick?"

"Not that I know of. I come from Mr. Armstrong, in New York."

"You come from Mr. Armstrong?" repeated the sick man, in evident
surprise. "Have you any message for me from him?"

"Yes, but that can wait. I am sorry to find you sick. I hope that
it is nothing serious."

"It would not be serious if I were in a settlement where I could
obtain a good doctor and proper medicines. Everything is serious
here. I have no care or attention, and no medicines."

"Do you feel able to get away from here? It would be better for you
to be at Deadwood than here."

"If I had anyone to go with me, I might venture to start for
Deadwood."

"I am at your service, Mr. Harding."

The sick man looked at Luke with a puzzled expression.

"You are very kind," he said, after a pause. "What is your name?"

"Luke Larkin."

"And you know Mr. Armstrong?"

"Yes. I am his messenger."

"But how came he to send a boy so far? It is not like him."

Luke laughed.

"No doubt you think him unwise," he said. "The fact was, he took me
for lack of a better. Besides, the mission was a confidential one,
and he thought he could trust me, young as I am."

"You say you have a message for me?" queried Harding.

"Yes!"

"What is it?"

"First, can I do something for your comfort? Can't I get you some
breakfast?"

"The message first."

"I will give it at once. Do you remember purchasing some government
bonds for Mr. Armstrong a short time before you left his
employment?"

"Yes. What of them?"

"Have you preserved the numbers of the bonds?" Luke inquired,
anxiously.

"Why do you ask?"

"Because Mr. Armstrong has lost his list, and they have been stolen.
Till he learns the numbers, he will stand no chance of identifying
or recovering them."

"I am sure I have the numbers. Feel in the pocket of my coat yonder,
and you will find a wallet. Take it out and bring it to me."

Luke obeyed directions.

The sick man opened the wallet and began to examine the contents.
Finally he drew out a paper, which he unfolded.

"Here is the list. I was sure I had them."

Luke's eyes lighted up with exultation.

It was clear that he had succeeded in his mission. He felt that
he had justified the confidence which Mr. Armstrong had reposed
in him, and that the outlay would prove not to have been wasted.

"May I copy them?" he asked.

"Certainly, since you are the agent of Mr. Armstrong--or you may
have the original paper."

"I will copy them, so that if that paper is lost, I may still have
the numbers. And now, what can I do for you?"

The resources of Fenton's Gulch were limited, but Luke succeeded in
getting together materials for a breakfast for the sick man. The
latter brightened up when he had eaten a sparing meal. It cheered
him, also, to find that there was someone to whom he could look
for friendly services.

To make my story short, on the second day he felt able to start
with Luke for Deadwood, which he reached without any serious
effect, except a considerable degree of fatigue.

Arrived at Deadwood, where there were postal facilities, Luke lost
no time in writing a letter to Mr. Armstrong, enclosing a list of
the stolen bonds. He gave a brief account of the circumstances under
which he had found Mr. Harding, and promised to return as soon as he
could get the sick man back to his farm in Minnesota.

When this letter was received, Roland Reed was in the merchant's
office.

"Look at that, Mr. Reed," said Armstrong, triumphantly. "That boy
is as smart as lightning. Some people might have thought me a fool
for trusting so young a boy, but the result has justified me. Now
my course is clear. With the help of these numbers I shall soon be
able to trace the theft and convict the guilty party."



CHAPTER XXXV

BACK IN GROVETON


Meanwhile, some things occurred in Groveton which require to be
chronicled. Since the visit of Tony Denton, and the knowledge that
his secret was known, Prince Duncan had changed in manner and
appearance. There was an anxious look upon his face, and a haggard
look, which led some of his friends to think that his health was
affected. Indeed, this was true, for any mental disturbance is
likely to affect the body. By way of diverting attention from the
cause of this altered appearance, Mr. Duncan began to complain of
overwork, and to hint that he might have to travel for his health.
It occurred to him privately that circumstances might arise which
would make it necessary for him to go to Canada for a lengthened
period.

With his secret in the possession of such a man as Tony Denton,
he could not feel safe. Besides, he suspected the keeper of the
billiard-room would not feel satisfied with the thousand-dollar bond
he had extorted from him, but would, after awhile, call for more.

In this he was right.

Scarcely a week had elapsed since his first visit, when the
servant announced one morning that a man wished to see him.

"Do you know who it is, Mary?" asked the squire.

"Yes, sir. It's Tony Denton."

Prince Duncan's face contracted, and his heart sank within him.
He would gladly have refused to see his visitor, but knowing
the hold that Tony had upon him, he did not dare offend him.

"You may tell him to come in," he said, with a troubled look.

"What can the master have to do with a man like that?" thought Mary,
wondering. "I wouldn't let him into the house if I was a squire."

Tony Denton entered the room with an assumption of ease which was
very disagreeable to Mr. Duncan.

"I thought I'd call to see you, squire," he said.

"Take a seat, Mr. Denton," said the squire coldly.

Tony did not seem at all put out by the coldness of his reception.

"I s'pose you remember what passed at our last meeting, Mr. Duncan,"
he said, in a jaunty way.

"Well, sir," responded Prince Duncan, in a forbidding tone.

"We came to a little friendly arrangement, if you remember,"
continued Denton.

"Well, sir, there is no need to refer to the matter now."

"Pardon me, squire, but I am obliged to keep to it."

"Why?"

"Because I've been unlucky??"

"I suppose, Mr. Denton," said the squire haughtily, "you are capable
of managing your own business. If you don't manage it well, and meet
with losses, I certainly am not responsible, and I cannot understand
why you bring the matter to me."

"You see, squire," said Tony, with a grin, "I look upon you as a
friend, and so it is natural that I should come to you for advice."

"I wish I dared kick the fellow out of the house," thought Prince
Duncan. "He is a low scamp, and I don't like the reputation of
having such visitors."

Under ordinary circumstances, and but for the secret which Tony
possessed, he would not have been suffered to remain in the squire's
study five minutes, but conscience makes cowards of us all, and Mr.
Duncan felt that he was no longer his own master.

"I'll tell you about the bad luck, squire," Tony resumed. "You know
the bond you gave me the last time I called?"

Mr. Duncan winced, and he did not reply.

"I see you remember it. Well, I thought I might have the luck to
double it, so I went up to New York, and went to see one of them
Wall Street brokers. I asked his advice, and he told me I'd better
buy two hundred shares of some kind of stock, leaving the bond with
him as margin. He said I was pretty sure to make a good deal of
money, and I thought so myself. But the stock went down, and
yesterday I got a letter from him, saying that the margin was all
exhausted, and I must give him another, Or he would sell out the
stock."

"Mr. Denton, you have been a fool!" exclaimed Mr. Duncan irritably.
"You might have known that would be the result of your insane folly.
You've lost your thousand dollars, and what have you got to show
for it?"

"You may be right, squire, but I don't want to let the matter end
so. I want you to give me another bond."

"You do, eh?" said Duncan indignantly. "So you want to throw away
another thousand dollars, do you?"

"If I make good the margin, the stock'll go up likely, and I won't
lose anything."

"You can do as you please, of course, but you will have to go
elsewhere for your money."

"Will I?" asked Tony coolly. "There is no one else who would let
me have the money."

"I won't let you have another cent, you may rely upon that!"
exclaimed Prince Duncan furiously.

"I guess you'll think better of that, squire," said Tony, fixing
his keen black eyes on the bank president.

"Why should I?" retorted Duncan, but his heart sank within him,
for he understood very well what the answer would be.

"Because you know what the consequences of refusal would be,"
Denton answered coolly.

"I don't understand you," stammered the squire, but it was
evident from his startled look that he did.

"I thought you would," returned Tony Denton quietly. "You know
very well that my evidence would convict you, as the person who
robbed the bank."

"Hush!" ejaculated Prince Duncan, in nervous alarm.

Tony Denton smiled with a consciousness of power.

"I have no wish to expose you," he said, "if you will stand
my friend."

In that moment Prince Duncan bitterly regretted the false step
he had taken. To be in the power of such a man was, indeed,
a terrible form of retribution.

"Explain your meaning," he said reluctantly.

"I want another government bond for a thousand dollars."

"But when I gave you the first, you promised to preserve
silence, and trouble me no more."

"I have been unfortunate, as I already explained to you."

"I don't see how that alters matters. You took the risk voluntarily.
Why should I suffer because you were imprudent and lost your money?"

