When anything occurred that did not seem to favor this view, he closed
his eyes to it, preferring to believe that he was a popular favorite.

"I hope I shall never be so deceived about myself," thought Philip.

When the entertainment was over, Mr. Caswell, president of the club,
came up to Philip and said cordially:

"Mr. Gray, we are very much indebted to you. Thanks to you, we are out
of debt, and shall have a balance of from twelve to fifteen dollars in
the treasury."

"I am very glad of it," said Philip.

"So am I," said the professor, pushing forward, jealous lest Philip
should get more than his share of credit.

"And we are indebted to you also, Professor Riccabocca," said the
president, taking the hint.

"You are entirely welcome, sir," said Riccabocca loftily. "My help has
often been asked in behalf of charitable organizations. I remember once,
in Philadelphia, I alone raised five hundred dollars for a--a--I think
it was a hospital."

This was an invention, but Professor Riccabocca had no scruple in
getting up little fictions which he thought likely to redound to his
credit and increase his reputation.

"Doubtless you are often called upon also, Mr. Gray," suggested Mr.
Caswell with a smile.

"No," answered Philip. "This is the first time that I have ever had the
opportunity."

"There's no humbug about the boy," thought Mr. Caswell. "As for the
professor, he is full of it."

"I have pleasure in handing you the price agreed upon," said the
president, presenting each with a ten-dollar bill.

"Thank you," said Philip.

Professor Riccabocca carelessly tucked the bill into his vest pocket, as
if it were a mere trifle.

At this moment, Mr. Turner came up with all the other gentleman. "Mr.
Gray," he said, "here is a gentleman who wishes to speak to you."

Philip looked up, and saw the well-known figure of Squire Pope.



CHAPTER XXXVII. HIS OWN MASTER.



"Ahem, Philip," said the squire. "I should like a little conversation
with you."

"Good evening, Squire Pope," said our hero, not pretending to be
cordial, but with suitable politeness.

"I didn't expect to see you here," pursued the squire.

"Nor I you, sir."

"I am visiting my sister, Mrs. Cunningham, who lives in Knoxville. Will
you come around with me, and make a call?"

Now, considering the treatment which Philip had received from the squire
before he left Norton, the reader can hardly feel surprised that our
hero didn't care to trust himself with his unscrupulous fellow townsman.

"Thank you, Squire Pope," said Philip, "but it is rather late for me to
call at a private house. I am staying at the hotel, and if you will
take the trouble to go around there with me, we will have a chance to
converse."

"Very well," said the squire, hesitating. Just then up came his niece,
Carrie, who was determined to get acquainted with Philip.

"Uncle," she said, "introduce me to Mr. Gray."

"This is my niece, Caroline Cunningham," said the squire stiffly.

"I am glad to meet Miss Cunningham," said Philip, extending his hand,
with a smile.

"What a lovely player you are, Mr. Gray!" she said impulsively.

"I am afraid you are flattering me, Miss Cunningham."

"Don't call me Miss Cunningham. My name is Carrie."

"Miss Carrie, then."

"I was ever so much surprised to hear that uncle was your guardian."

Philip looked quickly at the squire, but did not contradict it. He only
said:

"We used to live in the same town."

During this conversation Squire Pope looked embarrassed and impatient.

"It's getting late, Carrie," he said. "You had better go home."

"Aren't you coming, too, uncle?"

"I am going to the hotel to settle some business with Philip."

"What business, I wonder?" thought our hero.

Arrived at the hotel, they went up-stairs to Philip's chamber. "You left
Norton very abruptly, Philip," commenced the squire.

"There was good reason for it," answered Philip significantly.

"It appears to me you are acting as if you were your own master,"
observed the squire.

"I am my own master," replied Philip firmly.

"You seem to forget that I am your guardian."

"I don't forget it, for I never knew it," said our hero.

"It is generally understood that such is the case."

"I can't help it. I don't need a guardian, and shall get along without
one."

"Ahem! Perhaps that isn't to be decided by you."

"If I am to have a guardian, Squire Pope," said Philip bluntly, "I
sha'n't select you. I shall select Mr. Dunbar."

"I have much more knowledge of business than Mr. Dunbar," said the
squire, shifting his ground.

"That may be, but there is one important objection."

"What is that?"

"You are not my friend, and Mr. Dunbar is."

"Really this is very extraordinary!" ejaculated the squire. "I am not
your friend? How do you know that?"

"You tried to make a pauper out of me, when, as you must perceive, I am
entirely able to earn my own living."

"Is it true that you were paid ten dollars for playing this evening?"
asked the squire curiously.

"Yes, sir."

"It beats all!" said the squire, in amazement.

"Yet you wanted to sell my violin for a good deal less than I have
earned in one evening," said Philip, enjoying his enemy's surprise.

"You gave an entertainment at Wilkesville also, I hear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you make as much there?"

"I made between sixty and seventy dollars over and above expenses."

"You don't expect me to believe that!" said the squire.

"I don't care whether you believe it or not; it's true."

"Have you got the money with you?"

"Yes."

"Then you'd better give it to me to keep for you."

"Thank you; I feel capable of taking care of it myself."

"But it's improper for a boy of your age to carry round so much money,"
said the squire sharply.

"If I need help to take care of it, I will ask Mr. Dunbar."

"Come, Philip," said the squire, condescending to assume a persuasive
manner, "you must remember that I am your guardian."

"I dispute that," said Philip.

"I won't insist upon your going back with me to Norton, as long as you
are able to support yourself."

"Then you wouldn't advise me to go back to the poorhouse," said Philip,
with some sarcasm in his voice.

"I didn't mean to have you stay there long," said the squire, rather
confused. "You'd better give me most of your money, and I'll take care
of it for you, and when you're twenty-one you'll have quite a little
sum."

"I am much obliged to you, sir, but I won't put you to the trouble of
taking care of my money," answered Philip coldly.

Squire Pope continued to argue with Philip, but made no impression. At
length he was obliged to say good night.

"I will call round in the morning," he said, at parting. "Perhaps you'll
listen to reason then."

When he called round in the morning he learned to his disappointment
that Philip was gone.



CHAPTER XXXVIII. AN OFFER DECLINED.



After his interview with Squire Pope, Philip came down to the office,
where he saw Professor Riccabocca, apparently waiting for him.

"Well, Mr. Gray, where shall we go next?" asked the professor, with
suavity.

"I haven't decided where to go--have you?" asked Philip coolly.

"I suppose we had better go to Raymond. That is a good-sized place. I
think we can get together a good audience there."

"You seem to be under the impression that we are in partnership," said
Philip.

"Of course," answered Riccabocca.

"I have made no agreement of that sort, professor."

"But, of course, it is understood," said Riccabocca quickly, "as long as
we draw so well."

"You must excuse me, Professor Riccabocca. I must decline the proposal."

"But why?" inquired the professor anxiously.

"I hope you won't press me for an explanation."

"But I do. I can't understand why you should act so against your own
interest. You can't expect people will come just to hear you play. You
need me to help you."

"It may be as you say, professor, but if you insist upon my speaking
plainly, I don't care to travel with a man who has treated me as you
have."

"I don't understand you," said Riccabocca nervously; but it was evident,
from his expression, that he did.

"Then you seem very forgetful," said Philip. "You tried to deprive me of
my share of the proceeds of the entertainment at Wilkesville, and would
have succeeded but for a lucky accident."

"I told you that it was all owing to neuralgia," said Professor
Riccabocca. "I had such an attack of neuralgic headache that it nearly
drove me wild."

"Then," said Philip, "I would rather find a partner who is not troubled
with neuralgic headache. I think it would be safer."

"It won't happen again, Mr. Gray, I assure you," said the professor
apologetically.

He endeavored to persuade Philip to renew the combination, but our
hero steadily refused. He admitted that it might be to his pecuniary
advantage, but he had lost all confidence in the eminent professor, and
he thought it better to part now than to give him another opportunity of
playing a similar trick upon him.

The professor thereupon consulted the landlord as to whether it would be
advisable for him to give another entertainment unaided, and was assured
very emphatically that it would not pay expenses.

"You make a great mistake, Mr. Gray," said Riccabocca. "It would be
a great advantage for you to have my assistance at this stage of your
professional career."

"I don't expect to have any professional career," answered Philip.

"Don't you intend to become a professional musician?" asked the
professor, surprised.

"Probably not. I have only been playing because I needed money, and my
violin helped me to a living."

"You can't make as much money in any other way."

"Not at present; but I want to get a chance to enter upon some kind of
business. I am going to New York."

"You will some time have a chance to hear me there, in the Academy of
Music," said Riccabocca pompously.

"I will go and hear you," said Philip, laughing, "if I can afford a
ticket."

"Say the word and we will appear there together, Mr. Gray."

"I think not, professor."

In fact, though Philip had found himself unexpectedly successful as a
musician, he knew very well that he was only a clever amateur, and that
years of study would be needed to make him distinguished.

He was glad that he had the means of paying his expenses for a
considerable time, and had in his violin a trusty friend upon which
he could rely in case he got into financial trouble. Directly after
breakfast he set out on his journey.



CHAPTER XXXIX. AN AMBITIOUS WAYFARER.



The large sums which Philip had received for his playing might have
dazzled a less sensible boy. He was quite conscious that he played
unusually well for a boy, but when it came to selecting music as
a profession, he felt it would not be wise to come to too hasty a
decision. To be a commonplace performer did not seem to him very
desirable, and would not have satisfied his ambition.

He had told Professor Riccabocca that he intended to go to New York.
This design had not been hastily formed. He had heard a great deal of
the great city in his home in the western part of the State of which
it was the metropolis, and he was desirous of seeing it. Perhaps there
might be some opening for him in its multitude of business houses.

Philip had plenty of money, and could easily have bought a railroad
ticket, which would have landed him in New York inside of twenty-four
hours, for he was only about four hundred miles distant; but he was in
no hurry, and rather enjoyed traveling leisurely through the country
towns, with his violin in his hand.

It reminded him of a biography he had read of the famous Doctor
Goldsmith, author of the "Vicar of Wakefield," who made a tour on the
continent of Europe, paying his way with music evoked from a similar
instrument.

Three days later, he found himself on the outskirts of a village, which
I will call Cranston. It was afternoon, and he had walked far enough to
be tired.

He was looking about for a pleasant place to lounge, when his attention
was drawn to a boy of about his own age, who was sitting on the stone
wall under a large tree.

He was rather a slender boy, and had originally been well dressed, but
his suit was travel-stained, and covered with dust.

Now, boys have a natural attraction for each other, and Philip
determined to introduce himself to the stranger. This he did in
boy-fashion, by saying:

"Hello!"

"Hello!" said the stranger, looking up.

But he spoke slowly and wearily, and to Philip he seemed out of spirits.

"Do you live in Cranston?" asked Philip, taking a seat beside the other
boy, upon the top of the stone wall.

"No; do you?"

"No."

"Where do you live?"

"I don't live anywhere just at present," answered Philip, with a smile.
"I am traveling."

"So am I," said the other boy.

"I am traveling to New York," Philip continued.

"And I am traveling from there," said his new acquaintance.

Then both boys surveyed each other curiously.

"What's your name?" asked the stranger.

"Philip Gray. What's your's?"

"Mine is Henry Taylor. What have you got there?"

"A violin."

"Do you play on it?"

"Yes; a little."

"I should think you'd be tired lugging it round."

Philip smiled.

"It is about all the property I have," he said; "so it won't do for me
to get tired of it."

"You're richer than I am, then," said Henry.

"Are you poor, then?" asked Philip, in a tone of sympathy.

"I haven't got a cent in my pocket, and I haven't had anything to eat
since breakfast."

"Then I'm glad I met you," said Philip warmly. "I will see that you have
a good supper. How long is it since you left New York?"

