that your mother's wedding is a thing worthy to remember as a fine
affair."

"Perhaps Joel and Phronsie will think as we do," said Polly. But her
heart said No.

"All right if they do," said Mr. King easily, "but unless you come and
tell me it is their own choice, why, I shall just go on with my plans
as mapped out," he added obstinately. "Thomas," as that functionary
appeared in the doorway, "take the letters to the post at once; you
will find them on my writing table."

"All right, sir."

"I'll give you till to-morrow to find out," said Mr. King. "Now come
and kiss me, Polly dear. You'll see it's all right after it's over, and
be glad I had the sense to keep my mind about it."

Polly put up her lips obediently. But it was a sad little kiss that was
set upon his mouth, and it left him feeling like a criminal.

And running out, she met her difficult task without a moment of
preparation.

"Halloo, Polly!" whooped Joel, rushing around an angle in the hall,
"Grandpapa promised me that I might go out with him, to give the supper
orders, and all that kind of nonsense."

Polly's heart stood still.

"Joel," she began, seizing his jacket with trembling fingers, "come up
into my room a minute."

"What's up?" cried Joel with curiosity; "some more mysteries? There's
nothing but whisperings, and secrets, and no end of jolly
understandings, ever since Mamsie commenced to marry Dr. Fisher. Go
ahead, I'll come."

"And Phronsie, too," said Polly, seeing the yellow head emerge from the
breakfast-room doorway.

"Come on, Phron," sang out Joel, "up in Polly's room--she wants you,"
and the three hurried off.

"Now, Joel," said Polly, closing the door and facing him desperately,
"you are Mamsie's own boy."

"I should think so," said Joel, "I'm not anybody's else. Is that all
you brought me up here to say?" thrusting his hands in his pockets and
looking at her.

"And you can make her happy, or just as miserable as I can't say what,"
went on Polly incoherently.

"What in the world are you firing at?" demanded the boy, visions of
certain pranks at school unpleasantly before him. "Don't shoot over my
head, Polly, but keep somewhere near your mark," he advised irritably.

Phronsie surveyed the two with wide eyes, and a not wholly pleased
manner.

"Mamsie does not want a big wedding," declared Polly, going to the
heart of the matter, "but dear kind Grandpapa thinks it will please us
children, and so he wants to give her one."

"And so it will," cried Joel, "please us children. Whoop la! give us
your hand, Phronsie, this is the way we'll dance afterwards at the
party."

"I don't want to dance," said Phronsie, standing quite still in the
middle of the room. The morning sun shone across her yellow hair, but
no light came into the large eyes. "Polly wants something, first; what
is it, Joel?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Joel, poised on a careless foot, and
executing a remarkable pas seul. "I don't believe she knows herself.
Polly is often queer, you know, Phronsie," he added cheerfully.

"Tell me, Polly, do," whispered Phronsie, going over to her.

"Phronsie," said Polly very slowly, "Mamsie doesn't want a big party in
the evening to see her married, but to have a cunning little company of
friends come in the morning, and"--

"Ugh!" cried Joel in disgust, coming down suddenly to both feet.

"It will please Mamsie best," went on Polly, with a cold shoulder to
Joel. "And I never should be happy in all this world to remember that I
helped to make my Mamsie unhappy on her wedding day."

Phronsie shivered, and her voice held a miserable little thrill as she
begged, "Oh! make her be married just as she wants to be, Polly, do."

"Now that's what I call mean," cried Joel in a loud, vindictive tone
back of Polly, "to work on Phronsie's feelings. You can't make me say I
don't want Mamsie to have a wedding splurge, so there, Polly Pepper!"

Polly preserved a dignified silence, and presented her shoulder again
to his view.

"You can't make me say it, Polly Pepper!" shouted Joel shrilly.

"Oh, Phronsie!" exclaimed Polly in a rapture, throwing her arms around
the child, "Mamsie will be so pleased--you can't think. Let us go and
tell her; come!"

"See here!" called Joel, edging up, "why don't you talk to me?"

"I haven't anything to say," Polly condescended to give him, without
turning her head. "Come, Phronsie," holding out her hand.

"Wait a minute."

"Well, what is it?" Polly's hand now held Phronsie's, but she paused on
the way to the door.

"I guess I can give up things as well as she can, if I know Mamsie
wants me to," said Joel, with a deeply injured manner.

"Mamsie doesn't want any of us to give up anything unless we do it as
if we were glad to," said Polly. For her life, she couldn't conceal a
little scornful note in her voice, and Joel winced miserably.

"I--I wish she wouldn't have the big party," he whined.

"I thought you wanted it," said Polly, turning to him.

"I--I don't. I'd rather Mamsie would be happy. O, dear! don't look at
me so."

"I'm not looking at you so," said Polly. "You acted just as if you had
your heart set on the party."

"Well, it isn't. I'll--I'll--if you say party to me again!" and he
faced her vindictively.

"Joel Pepper!" cried Polly, holding him with her brown eyes, "do you
really mean that you are glad to give up that big evening party, and
have the little teeny one in the morning?"

"Yes," said Joel, "as true as I live and breathe, I do!"

"Oh! oh! oh!" cried Polly, and seizing his arm, she led off in a dance,
so much surpassing his efforts, that Phronsie screamed with delight to
see them go. When they could dance no more, Polly, flushed and panting,
ran out of the room, leaving the two to find out as best they might,
the cause of the strange demeanor.

"Grandpapa," Polly rushing over the stairs, met him coming up to Mrs.
Whitney's room, "Joel says it's the little morning wedding--please; and
Phronsie too!"

The old gentleman gave no sign of his defeat, beyond a "Humph! and so
I'm beaten, after all!"

And Dr. Fisher never knew all this.

Mamsie's wedding-day! At last it came! Was any other ever so bright and
beautiful? Phronsie thought not, and thereupon she impeded the
preparations by running up to kiss her mother every few moments, until
such time as Felicie carried her off to induct her into a white muslin
gown. Polly, here, there, and everywhere, was in such a rapture that
she seemed to float on wings, while the boys of the household, with the
exception of Jasper, lost their heads early in the day, and helplessly
succumbed to all demands upon them.

Every flower had to be put in place by the young people. Old Turner for
once stood one side. And Polly must put the white satin boxes filled
with wedding cake on the little table where one of the waiters would
hand them to departing guests. And Phronsie must fasten Mamsie's pearl
broach--the gift of the five little Peppers--in her lace collar the
very last thing. And Jasper collected the rice and set the basket
holding it safely away from Joel's eager fingers till such time as they
could shower the bride's carriage. And all the boys were ushers, even
little Dick coming up grandly to offer his arm to the tallest guest as
it happened.

And old Mr. King gave the bride away! And Dr. Fisher at the last forgot
all the one hundred and thirty eyes, and his "I will," rang out like a
man's who has secured what he has long wanted. And ever so many of the
guests said "What a good father he will make the children," and several
attempted to tell the Peppers so. "As if we didn't know it before,"
said Joel indignantly.

And Alexia and all the other girls of Polly's set were there, and
Joel's little blue and white creature came, to his great satisfaction,
with her aunt, who was quite intimate in the family; and Pickering
Dodge was there of course, and the Alstynes, and hosts of others.

And Mother Pepper in her silver-gray gown and bonnet, by the side of
her husband, with Phronsie clinging to one hand, heard nothing but
heart-felt wishes for her happiness and that of the five little Peppers.

And there was not so much as the shadow of a skeleton at the wedding
breakfast. And Cousin Mason Whitney took charge of the toasts--and
everybody felt that just the right things had been said. And then there
was a flutter of departure of the bridal party, and in the rattle of
the wheels Phronsie piped out bravely as she threw the slipper after
the departing coach:

"Mamsie has been taking care of us all these years; now we're going to
be good and let her be happy."




XV

MRS. CHATTERTON HAS A NEW PLAN


"Polly is learning to play beautifully," mused Phronsie, nursing one
foot contemplatively, as she curled up on the floor. "And Ben is to be
a capital business man, so Papa Fisher says, and Joel is going to buy
up this whole town sometime, and Davie knows ever so many books from
beginning to end, but what can I do?"

Down went the little foot to the floor, and the yellow head drooped
over the white apron.

"Nothing," mourned Phronsie, "just nothing at all; not even the wee-est
teeniest bit of anything do I know how to do. O, dear!"

Outside, Jasper was calling to Prince. Phronsie could hear the big dog
rushing over the lawn in response, barking furiously as he went. But
she did not move.

"And Mamsie will never be glad for me, unless I learn how to do things
too. If I don't hurry, I shall never be grown up."

"Tweet--tweet--ch-r-r-r"--Cherry in his cage over her head, chirped
vigorously by way of consolation, but Phronsie did not lift her head.
Cherry seeing all his efforts in vain, stopped his song and rolled one
black eye down at her in astonishment, and soon became quite still.

Presently the rustle of a stiff black satin gown became the chief
intruder upon the silence. It was so asserting that Phronsie lifted her
head to look into the face of Mrs. Chatterton, standing before her,
playing with the rings on her long white hands, and regarding her as if
she would soon require an explanation of such strange conduct.

"What are you doing, Phronsie?" at last demanded the lady.

"Thinking," said Phronsie; and she laid her chin in her hand, and
slowly turned her gaze upon the thin, disagreeable face before her, but
not as if in the slightest degree given up to a study of its lines and
expression.

"So I perceive," said Mrs. Chatterton harshly. "Well, and what are you
thinking of, pray tell?"

Still Phronsie looked beyond her, and it was not until the question had
been repeated, that an answer came.

"Of many things," said Phronsie, "but I do not think I ought to tell
you."

"And why not, pray?" cried the lady, with a short and most unpleasant
laugh.

"Because I do not think you would understand them," said Phronsie. And
now she looked at the face she had before overlooked, with a deliberate
scrutiny as if she would not need to repeat the attention.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Chatterton angrily, "and pray how long since
your thoughts have been so valuable?"

"My thoughts are nice ones," said Phronsie slowly, "because they are
about nice people."

"Ah!"

"And they won't tell themselves. And I ought not to make them. They
would fly away then, and I should never find them again, when I wanted
to think them."

"Your mother brought you up well, I must say," observed Mrs.
Chatterton, deliberately drawing up a chair and putting her long figure
within it, "to talk in this style to a lady as old as I am."

Phronsie allowed one foot to gently trace the pattern on the carpet
before she answered. "I know you are very old," she said at last, "but
I cannot tell my thoughts to you."

"Very old!" cried Mrs. Chatterton, her chin in the air. "Indeed! well,
I am not, I would have you know, Miss Phronsie," and she played with
the silk cord of her satin wrapper. "I hate a child that is made a
prig!" she added explosively under her breath.

Phronsie made no reply, being already deep in her own calculations once
more.

"Now, Phronsie," said Mrs. Chatterton, suddenly drawing herself out of
her angry fit, and clearing her brow, "I want you to give your
attention to me a moment, for I have something I must say to you.
That's why I came in here, to find you alone. Come, look at me, child.
It isn't polite to be staring at the carpet all the time."

Phronsie, thus admonished, took her gaze from the floor, to bestow it
on the face above her.

"It's something that nobody is to know but just you and me," began Mrs.
Chatterton, with a cautious glance at the door.

Then she got out of her chair, and going across the room, closed it
carefully. "There, that's better; Polly is always around. Now we are
quite alone," coming back to her seat.

"You see, Phronsie," she proceeded, not caring that the brown eyes were
slowly adding to their astonishment an expression that augured ill for
any plans she might be hoping to carry out toward propitiation. "It is
necessary to be careful not to be overheard, for what I am going to say
to you must be kept quite secret."

"I must tell Mamsie," said Phronsie distinctly.

"Indeed you will not," declared Mrs. Chatterton. "She is the very one
of all others who ought not to know. You can help her, Phronsie, if you
