
Walter smiled.

"I have not been in the habit of taking that view of it," he said.

"Perhaps not, but I do," said Snodgrass, firmly. "You are a very young
man, and ought not to expect much pay. I will give you two dollars a
week and pay your traveling expenses."

"I beg to decline your offer, Mr. Snodgrass," said Walter, politely. "I
have thought of changing my business before, but was unwilling to leave
the professor. As we are strangers, I need have no further hesitation."

"Young man," said Snodgrass, "I think you are making a mistake. It will
not be so easy getting another place as you suppose."

"Perhaps not, but I can afford to live a few weeks without work."

"Your savings will soon go"--Snodgrass knew nothing of Walter's prize
money--"and then what will you do?"

"Trust to luck," answered Walter, lightly.

Nahum Snodgrass shook his head gloomily. He thought Walter a very
foolish young man.

Had Walter lost his position two months earlier it would have been a
serious matter to him, but now, with a capital of nearly a thousand
dollars, he could afford to be independent. As he expressed it, he
could afford to be idle for a few weeks. Still, he didn't wish to remain
unemployed for a long time. He felt happier when at work, but wished to
secure some employment that would be congenial.

"Mr. Snodgrass," said the professor, "I think you are making a mistake
in not employing Walter Sherwood."

Nahum Snodgrass shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't mean to pay away all my profits to an assistant," he said.

"But you can't get along alone very well."

"I will try, unless I can find some one that will take what I am willing
to pay."

He finally succeeded in doing this. A young man of eighteen, employed in
a drug-store in town, who was on the point of being discharged, agreed
to take the position, and stepped into Walter's place. To anticipate a
little, he disappeared two weeks later, carrying with him fifty dollars
belonging to his employer.

Walter stayed two days longer at the hotel, and then, sending his valise
ahead to Burnton, twenty miles farther on, started to walk the
distance. He was in a mountainous country, and the scenery was wild and
attractive, so that he felt that this arrangement would prove agreeable
to him. He provided himself with a stout staff and started at good
speed. He had accomplished about eight miles, when he was overtaken by
a shabbily dressed traveler riding on the back of a fine horse. The
horseman slackened his pace when he reached Walter.

"Good morning, stranger!" he said.

"Good morning!" responded Walter, turning his head.

"I am glad to have company. It's a lonesome stretch of road here."

"Yes," answered Walter, carelessly. "But there isn't any danger, is
there?"

"Well, there might be. A friend of mine was stabbed and robbed here
three months since."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; and though I haven't much money with me, I shouldn't like to be
robbed of what I have."

"It would be inconvenient."

"Do you carry much money with you?" asked the other, in a careless tone.

Walter was not disposed to take a stranger into his confidence.

"Not much!" he responded.

"You are prudent. Are you armed?"

Walter drew out Dick Ranney's revolver, which he still carried. The
stranger eyed him respectfully.

"That's a mighty handsome weapon," he said. "Just let me look at it."

Walter began to think he had fallen in with a highwayman again.




CHAPTER XXIX

WALTER BUYS A HORSE


"You can look at the pistol as I hold it," said Walter, in response to
the request recorded at the close of the preceding chapter.

"I say," remarked the stranger suddenly, "don't you want to buy a
horse?"

"How much do you ask for the horse?" he inquired.

"I want to get her off my hands. Give me fifty dollars, and she's
yours."

Walter had a pad in his satchel and a fountain pen in his pocket. He
hastily wrote out the following form:

"In consideration of fifty dollars by me received, I give and transfer
to Walter Sherwood my roan horse." Here followed a brief description of
the animal.

"Now put your name there, and I will hand you the money," said Walter.

"Thank you, stranger! You've got a good bargain."

"I agree to that," said Walter.

"I suppose the horse is sound?" he said inquiringly.

"Sound as a die! Don't you take no trouble about that. It goes to my
heart to give her up. Good-by, old gal!"

Walter touched the horse lightly with his whip, and she bounded forward.
After a few miles he reached a town of good size. Riding along the main
street his attention was drawn to a printed notice in front of a store.
It read thus:

"HORSE STOLEN!

"Stolen from the subscriber, on the evening of the twenty-fifth, a roan
mare, eight years old and sixteen hands high, with a white mark between
the eyes. Answers to the name of Bess. Whoever will return her to the
subscriber, or give information that will lead to her recovery, will
receive a suitable reward.

"COLONEL RICHARD OWEN, Shelby."

A terrible suspicion entered Walter's mind. He recognized the white
mark. Then he called "Bess." The mare half turned her head and whinnied.




CHAPTER XXX

WALTER FINDS HIMSELF IN A TIGHT PLACE


Walter had hardly time to consider what to do in the light of the
discovery he had made before the matter was taken out of his hands.

"Young feller, you'd better get off that hoss!" fell on his ears in a
rough voice.

He turned, and saw two stalwart men eyeing him suspiciously.

"Gentlemen," said Walter earnestly, "till I read this notice I had no
idea that the horse was stolen."

"That's neither here nor there. You'd better get off the hoss."

Walter felt that this was a command, and obeyed at once.

"Very well, gentlemen," he said. "I will leave the horse in your hands,
and depend upon you to return it to the owner."

As Walter spoke he turned to walk off, but the man who had first
accosted him got in his way.

"I don't want to have any trouble with you, sir. Please get out of my
way, and let me go."

"Not by a long shot."

"What do you propose to do with me?"

"Take you to the lockup."

Walter was now really alarmed.

"You'll have to go with us, young feller!" said Crane.

"And leave the hoss?" asked Penton. "We'd ought to take charge of it,
and get the reward."

"That's so, Penton. You go and get a constable. We'll stand by the
hoss."

Penton hurried off, and returned shortly with a constable in uniform.

"What's up?" he asked.

"This young feller's rid into town with Colonel Richard Owen's hoss."

"But I'd ought to secure the hoss," said the constable, who felt that
perhaps he might be entitled to the reward offered.

"Look here, Cyrus Stokes, you secure the thief--that's your lookout."

"Gentlemen," said Walter, "I object to being called a thief. I have
already told you I did not steal the horse."

The constable seized Walter by the arm and walked off with him. To add
to his mortification, people whom they met on the street looked at him
curiously.




CHAPTER XXXI

IN THE LOCKUP


The lockup was a basement room under the engine-house. There were four
cells, about four by eight, and into one of these Walter was put. The
cell opposite was occupied by a drunken tramp, who looked up stupidly as
Walter entered, and hiccoughed: "Glad to see you sonny."

"And I must stay in here overnight--with that man?"

"Hoss-stealers mustn't be particular," said the constable.

"Can you tell me where Colonel Owen lives--the man that owns the horse?"

"You ought to know that!"

"Is there any lawyer in this village?"

"Yes, there's two, an old man and a young one."

"I should like to see one of them. Can you ask one of them to come
here?"

"It's a leetle out of my way," suggested Constable Stokes.

The constable pocketed with alacrity the half-dollar our hero tendered
him, and said briskly. "I'll send him right off."

"I shay," interjected the tramp, "send me a lawyer, too."

"The same man will do for you," replied the constable. "A lawyer won't
do you no good, though."

"We're victims of tyrannical 'pression!" said the tramp gloomily. "What
are you in for, young feller?"

"I'm charged with stealing a horse."

"Smart boy!" said the tramp admiringly. "I didn't think you was up to
hoss-stealin'."

"I am not. The charge is false."

"That's right! Stick to it! Deny everything. That's what I do." Half
an hour later the outer door was opened and the constable reappeared,
followed by a young man of about thirty.

"This is Mr. Barry, the lawyer," he said. "Mr. Barry, here is the key.
You can keep it and let yourself out if you will be responsible for the
safe custody of the prisoner."

"Yes, Mr. Stokes, I will give you my word that he shall not escape.
Which is my client?"

"You don't look like a criminal, certainly," said the lawyer, with a
rapid survey of his new client.

"I hope not."

"But one can't go by appearances wholly. As your lawyer, for I will
undertake your case, I must ask you to trust me entirely, and give me
your full confidence.

"First, let me ask your name."

"Walter Sherwood."

"It will now be necessary for you to tell me frankly whether you stole
the horse or not."

"Of course I did not," answered Walter indignantly.

"You must excuse my asking the question. I did not believe you guilty,
but it was necessary for me to know positively from your own lips. You
must not be sensitive."

"I have no right to be, but I find myself in a very trying position."

"Of course, but I will try to get you out of it. Now, will you tell me
in detail how the horse came into your possession?"

Walter told the story, and the lawyer listened attentively.

"Have you any proof of what you assert?" he asked, when Walter finished.

"There was no one present."

"I suppose not. Did no papers pass between you and this man?"

"Oh, yes!" answered Walter quickly, and he drew out the receipt which he
had drawn up and got Hank Wilson to sign.

"Come, this is very important!" said Mr. Barry cheerfully. "It is a very
valuable confirmation of your story. Will you trust me with it?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Is there any suggestion you have to offer, Mr. Sherwood? Sometimes I
find that my clients give me valuable assistance that way."

"I wish you would telegraph to Colonel Owen to come here."

"Probably he has been sent for, but if not I will request him to come.
Do you know the colonel?"

"No, sir; I never heard his name till I read the advertisement. Do you
know anything of him, Mr. Barry?"

"He is the owner of a large estate in Shelby, and is a thorough
gentleman of the old school."

"All the better! I would rather deal with such a man. Besides, by
describing the man of whom I bought the horse I may put him in the way
of capturing the real thief."

"Well thought of. May I ask, Mr. Sherwood, if you are from this part of
the country?"

"No; I am a native of New York State.

"A year ago I was a member of the sophomore class of Euclid College."

"That is strange!" ejaculated Barry. "What is strange?"

"Colonel Owen, the owner of the horse, is an old graduate of the same
institution."

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Walter, in genuine amazement.

"It is quite true. I am glad to have made the discovery. It will
prepossess him in your favor, and this, I need hardly say, will be
a great point gained. Well, I believe I have obtained all the data I
require, and I will now go home and think over your case. I wish I could
take you with me."

"I wish you could; I hate to be left in such a place."

"Cheer up, Mr. Sherwood. It won't be for long, I predict. You may rest
assured of my best efforts in your behalf. I will at once telegraph for
Colonel Owen."

The evening glided wearily away. Walter threw himself on his pallet and
was nearly asleep when a confused noise was heard outside, and heavy
blows were rained upon the outer door.

"What does it mean?" asked Walter, bewildered.

He listened intently, and there came to his ears a shout which made him
turn pale with terror.




CHAPTER XXXII

AN AWFUL MOMENT


"Bring out the hoss thief! Lynch him! Lynch him!"

"What's up?" asked the tramp drowsily, opening his eyes.

"Bring out the hoss thief!" cried a dozen rough voices, as the battering
at the door was repeated.

"They want you, young feller!" he continued, as he caught the meaning of
the cry.

"What shall we do?" asked Walter helplessly.

"They don't want me," returned the tramp complacently. "It's you they
want!"
