about as they pleased, so long as they stayed in the field.

The king had told one of the keepers to hang about for a little and see
what became of Jesper, not doubting, however, that as soon as he saw the
coast clear he would use his legs to the best advantage, and never
show face at the palace again. It was therefore with great surprise and
annoyance that he now learned of the mysterious return of the hares and
the likelihood of Jesper carrying out his task with success.

'One of them must be got out of his hands by hook or crook,' said he.
'I'll go and see the queen about it; she's good at devising plans.'

A little later, a girl in a shabby dress came into the field and walked
up to Jesper.

'Do give me one of those hares,' she said; 'we have just got visitors
who are going to stay to dinner, and there's nothing we can give them to
eat.'

'I can't,' said Jesper. 'For one thing, they're not mine; for another, a
great deal depends on my having them all here in the evening.'

But the girl (and she was a very pretty girl, though so shabbily
dressed) begged so hard for one of them that at last he said:

'Very well; give me a kiss and you shall have one of them.'

He could see that she didn't quite care for this, but she consented to
the bargain, and gave him the kiss, and went away with a hare in her
apron. Scarcely had she got outside the field, however, when Jesper blew
his whistle, and immediately the hare wriggled out of its prison like an
eel, and went back to its master at the top of its speed.

Not long after this the hare-herd had another visit. This time it was a
stout old woman in the dress of a peasant, who also was after a hare to
provide a dinner for unexpected visitors. Jesper again refused, but the
old lady was so pressing, and would take no refusal, that at last he
said:

'Very well, you shall have a hare, and pay nothing for it either, if you
will only walk round me on tiptoe, look up to the sky, and cackle like a
hen.'

'Fie,' said she; 'what a ridiculous thing to ask anyone to do; just
think what the neighbours would say if they saw me. They would think I
had taken leave of my senses.'

'Just as you like,' said Jesper; 'you know best whether you want the
hare or not.'

There was no help for it, and a pretty figure the old lady made in
carrying out her task; the cackling wasn't very well done, but Jesper
said it would do, and gave her the hare. As soon as she had left the
field, the whistle was sounded again, and back came long-legs-and-ears
at a marvellous speed.

The next to appear on the same errand was a fat old fellow in the dress
of a groom: it was the royal livery he wore, and he plainly thought a
good deal of himself.

'Young man,' said he, 'I want one of those hares; name your price, but I
MUST have one of them.'

'All right,' said Jesper; 'you can have one at an easy rate. Just stand
on your head, whack your heels together, and cry "Hurrah," and the hare
is yours.'

'Eh, what!' said the old fellow; 'ME stand on my head, what an idea!'

'Oh, very well,' said Jesper, 'you needn't unless you like, you know;
but then you won't get the hare.'

It went very much against the grain, one could see, but after some
efforts the old fellow had his head on the grass and his heels in the
air; the whacking and the 'Hurrah' were rather feeble, but Jesper was
not very exacting, and the hare was handed over. Of course, it wasn't
long in coming back again, like the others.

Evening came, and home came Jesper with the hundred hares behind him.
Great was the wonder over all the palace, and the king and queen seemed
very much put out, but it was noticed that the princess actually smiled
to Jesper.

'Well, well,' said the king; 'you have done that very well indeed.
If you are as successful with a little task which I shall give you
to-morrow we shall consider the matter settled, and you shall marry the
princess.'

Next day it was announced that the task would be performed in the great
hall of the palace, and everyone was invited to come and witness it. The
king and queen sat on their thrones, with the princess beside them, and
the lords and ladies were all round the hall. At a sign from the king,
two servants carried in a large empty tub, which they set down in the
open space before the throne, and Jesper was told to stand beside it.

'Now,' said the king, 'you must tell us as many undoubted truths as will
fill that tub, or you can't have the princess.'

'But how are we to know when the tub is full?' said Jesper.

'Don't you trouble about that,' said the king; 'that's my part of the
business.'

This seemed to everybody present rather unfair, but no one liked to be
the first to say so, and Jesper had to put the best face he could on the
matter, and begin his story.

'Yesterday,' he said, 'when I was herding the hares, there came to me a
girl, in a shabby dress, and begged me to give her one of them. She got
the hare, but she had to give me a kiss for it; AND THAT GIRL WAS THE
PRINCESS. Isn't that true?' said he, looking at her.

The princess blushed and looked very uncomfortable, but had to admit
that it was true.

'That hasn't filled much of the tub,' said the king. 'Go on again.'

'After that,' said Jesper, 'a stout old woman, in a peasant's dress,
came and begged for a hare. Before she got it, she had to walk round me
on tiptoe, turn up her eyes, and cackle like a hen; AND THAT OLD WOMAN
WAS THE QUEEN. Isn't that true, now?'

The queen turned very red and hot, but couldn't deny it.

'H-m,' said the king; 'that is something, but the tub isn't full yet.'
To the queen he whispered, 'I didn't think you would be such a fool.'

'What did YOU do?' she whispered in return.

'Do you suppose I would do anything for HIM?' said the king, and then
hurriedly ordered Jesper to go on.

'In the next place,' said Jesper, 'there came a fat old fellow on the
same errand. He was very proud and dignified, but in order to get the
hare he actually stood on his head, whacked his heels together, and
cried "Hurrah"; and that old fellow was the----'

'Stop, stop,' shouted the king; 'you needn't say another word; the tub
is full.' Then all the court applauded, and the king and queen accepted
Jesper as their son-in-law, and the princess was very well pleased, for
by this time she had quite fallen in love with him, because he was so
handsome and so clever. When the old king got time to think over it, he
was quite convinced that his kingdom would be safe in Jesper's hands if
he looked after the people as well as he herded the hares.

(Scandinavian.)




THE UNDERGROUND WORKERS

On a bitter night somewhere between Christmas and the New Year, a man
set out to walk to the neighbouring village. It was not many miles off,
but the snow was so thick that there were no roads, or walls, or hedges
left to guide him, and very soon he lost his way altogether, and was
glad to get shelter from the wind behind a thick juniper tree. Here he
resolved to spend the night, thinking that when the sun rose he would be
able to see his path again.

So he tucked his legs snugly under him like a hedgehog, rolled himself
up in his sheepskin, and went to sleep. How long he slept, I cannot tell
you, but after awhile he became aware that some one was gently shaking
him, while a stranger whispered, 'My good man, get up! If you lie there
any more, you will be buried in the snow, and no one will ever know what
became of you.'

The sleeper slowly raised his head from his furs, and opened his heavy
eyes. Near him stood a long thin man, holding in his hand a young fir
tree taller than himself. 'Come with me,' said the man, 'a little way
off we have made a large fire, and you will rest far better there than
out upon this moor.' The sleeper did not wait to be asked twice, but
rose at once and followed the stranger. The snow was falling so fast
that he could not see three steps in front of him, till the stranger
waved his staff, when the drifts parted before them. Very soon they
reached a wood, and saw the friendly glow of a fire.

'What is your name?' asked the stranger, suddenly turning round.

'I am called Hans, the son of Long Hans,' said the peasant.

In front of the fire three men were sitting clothed in white, just as
if it was summer, and for about thirty feet all round winter had been
banished. The moss was dry and the plants green, while the grass seemed
all alive with the hum of bees and cockchafers. But above the noise the
son of Long Hans could hear the whistling of the wind and the crackling
of the branches as they fell beneath the weight of the snow.

'Well! you son of Long Hans, isn't this more comfortable than your
juniper bush?' laughed the stranger, and for answer Hans replied he
could not thank his friend enough for having brought him here, and,
throwing off his sheepskin, rolled it up as a pillow. Then, after a hot
drink which warmed both their hearts, they lay down on the ground. The
stranger talked for a little to the other men in a language Hans did
not understand, and after listening for a short time he once more fell
asleep.

When he awoke, neither wood nor fire was to be seen, and he did not know
where he was. He rubbed his eyes, and began to recall the events of the
night, thinking he must have been dreaming; but for all that, he could
not make out how he came to be in this place.

Suddenly a loud noise struck on his ear, and he felt the earth tremble
beneath his feet. Hans listened for a moment, then resolved to go
towards the place where the sound came from, hoping he might come across
some human being. He found himself at length at the mouth of a rocky
cave in which a fire seemed burning. He entered, and saw a huge forge,
and a crowd of men in front of it, blowing bellows and wielding hammers,
and to each anvil were seven men, and a set of more comical smiths could
not be found if you searched all the world through! Their heads were
bigger than their little bodies, and their hammers twice the size of
themselves, but the strongest men on earth could not have handled their
iron clubs more stoutly or given lustier blows.

The little blacksmiths were clad in leather aprons, which covered them
from their necks to their feet in front, and left their backs naked.
On a high stool against the wall sat the man with the pinewood staff,
watching sharply the way the little fellows did their work, and near him
stood a large can, from which every now and then the workers would come
and take a drink. The master no longer wore the white garments of the
day before, but a black jerkin, held in its place by a leathern girdle
with huge clasps.

From time to time he would give his workmen a sign with his staff, for
it was useless to speak amid such a noise.

If any of them had noticed that there was a stranger present they took
no heed of him, but went on with what they were doing. After some hours'
hard labour came the time for rest, and they all flung their hammers to
the ground and trooped out of the cave.

Then the master got down from his seat and said to Hans:

'I saw you come in, but the work was pressing, and I could not stop to
speak to you. To-day you must be my guest, and I will show you something
of the way in which I live. Wait here for a moment, while I lay aside
these dirty clothes.' With these words he unlocked a door in the cave,
and bade Hans pass in before him.

Oh, what riches and treasures met Hans' astonished eyes! Gold and silver
bars lay piled on the floor, and glittered so that you could not look at
them! Hans thought he would count them for fun, and had already reached
the five hundred and seventieth when his host returned and cried,
laughing:

'Do not try to count them, it would take too long; choose some of the
bars from the heap, as I should like to make you a present of them.'

Hans did not wait to be asked twice, and stooped to pick up a bar of
gold, but though he put forth all his strength he could not even move it
with both hands, still less lift it off the ground.

'Why, you have no more power than a flea,' laughed the host; 'you will
have to content yourself with feasting your eyes upon them!'

So he bade Hans follow him through other rooms, till they entered one
bigger than a church, filled, like the rest, with gold and silver.
Hans wondered to see these vast riches, which might have bought all the
kingdoms of the world, and lay buried, useless, he thought, to anyone.

'What is the reason,' he asked of his guide, 'that you gather up these
treasures here, where they can do good to nobody? If they fell into
the hands of men, everyone would be rich, and none need work or suffer
hunger.'

'And it is exactly for that reason,' answered he, 'that I must keep
these riches out of their way. The whole world would sink to idleness if
men were not forced to earn their daily bread. It is only through work
and care that man can ever hope to be good for anything.'

Hans stared at these words, and at last he begged that his host would
tell him what use it was to anybody that this gold and silver should lie
mouldering there, and the owner of it be continually trying to increase
his treasure, which already overflowed his store rooms.

'I am not really a man,' replied his guide, 'though I have the outward
form of one, but one of those beings to whom is given the care of the
world. It is my task and that of my workmen to prepare under the earth
the gold and silver, a small portion of which finds its way every year
to the upper world, but only just enough to help them carry on their
business. To none comes wealth without trouble: we must first dig out
the gold and mix the grains with earth, clay, and sand. Then, after long
and hard seeking, it will be found in this state, by those who have good
luck or much patience. But, my friend, the hour of dinner is at hand. If
you wish to remain in this place, and feast your eyes on this gold, then
stay till I call you.'

In his absence Hans wandered from one treasure chamber to another,
sometimes trying to break off a little lump of gold, but never able to
do it. After awhile his host came back, but so changed that Hans could
not believe it was really he. His silken clothes were of the brightest
flame colour, richly trimmed with gold fringes and lace; a golden girdle
was round his waist, while his head was encircled with a crown of gold,
and precious stones twinkled about him like stars in a winter's night,
and in place of his wooden stick he held a finely worked golden staff.

The lord of all this treasure locked the doors and put the keys in his
pocket, then led Hans into another room, where dinner was laid for them.
Table and seats were all of silver, while the dishes and plates were of
solid gold. Directly they sat down, a dozen little servants appeared to
wait on them, which they did so cleverly and so quickly that Hans could
hardly believe they had no wings. As they did not reach as high as the
table, they were often obliged to jump and hop right on to the top to
get at the dishes. Everything was new to Hans, and though he was rather
bewildered he enjoyed himself very much, especially when the man with
the golden crown began to tell him many things he had never heard of
before.

'Between Christmas and the New Year,' said he, 'I often amuse myself
by wandering about the earth watching the doings of men and learning
something about them. But as far as I have seen and heard I cannot
speak well of them. The greater part of them are always quarrelling and
complaining of each other's faults, while nobody thinks of his own.'

Hans tried to deny the truth of these words, but he could not do it, and
sat silent, hardly listening to what his friend was saying. Then he went
to sleep in his chair, and knew nothing of what was happening.

Wonderful dreams came to him during his sleep, where the bars of gold
continually hovered before his eyes. He felt stronger than he had ever
felt during his waking moments, and lifted two bars quite easily on
to his back. He did this so often that at length his strength seemed
exhausted, and he sank almost breathless on the ground. Then he heard
the sound of cheerful voices, and the song of the blacksmiths as they
blew their bellows--he even felt as if he saw the sparks flashing before
his eyes. Stretching himself, he awoke slowly, and here he was in the
green forest, and instead of the glow of the fire in the underworld
the sun was streaming on him, and he sat up wondering why he felt so
strange.

At length his memory came back to him, and as he called to mind all the
wonderful things he had seen he tried in vain to make them agree with
those that happen every day. After thinking it over till he was nearly
mad, he tried at last to believe that one night between Christmas and
the New Year he had met a stranger in the forest, and had slept all
night in his company before a big fire; the next day they had dined
together, and had drunk a great deal more than was good for them--in
short, he had spent two whole days revelling with another man. But here,
with the full tide of summer around him, he could hardly accept his own
explanation, and felt that he must have been the plaything or sport of
some magician.

Near him, in the full sunlight, were the traces of a dead fire, and when
he drew close to it he saw that what he had taken for ashes was really
fine silver dust, and that the half burnt firewood was made of gold.

Oh, how lucky Hans thought himself; but where should he get a sack to
carry his treasure home before anyone else found it? But necessity is
the mother of invention: Hans threw off his fur coat, gathered up the
silver ashes so carefully in it that none remained behind, laid the gold
sticks on top, and tied up the bag thus made with his girdle, so that
nothing should fall out. The load was not, in point of fact, very heavy,
although it seemed so to his imagination, and he moved slowly along till
he found a safe hiding-place for it.

In this way Hans suddenly became rich--rich enough to buy a property of
his own. But being a prudent man, he finally decided that it would be
best for him to leave his old neighbourhood and look for a home in a
distant part of the country, where nobody knew anything about him. It
did not take him long to find what he wanted, and after he had paid for
it there was plenty of money left over. When he was settled, he married
a pretty girl who lived near by, and had some children, to whom on his
death-bed he told the story of the lord of the underworld, and how he
had made Hans rich.

(Ehstnische Marchen.)




THE HISTORY OF DWARF LONG NOSE

It is a great mistake to think that fairies, witches, magicians, and
such people lived only in Eastern countries and in such times as those
of the Caliph Haroun Al-Raschid. Fairies and their like belong to every
country and every age, and no doubt we should see plenty of them now--if
we only knew how.

In a large town in Germany there lived, some couple of hundred years
ago, a cobbler and his wife. They were poor and hard-working. The man
sat all day in a little stall at the street corner and mended any shoes
that were brought him. His wife sold the fruit and vegetables they grew
in their garden in the Market Place, and as she was always neat and
