it."

"I would have called in a policeman if I dared, but you know I am not on
the best of terms with these gentlemen."

"Are we to lose the ring, then?"

"I am afraid so, unless I can make them believe in the store that I am
really what I pretend to be."

"Can't you do it?"

"Not very easily, unless stay, I have an idea. Do you see that young
man?"

He directed his wife's attention to a young man, evidently fresh from
the country, who was approaching, staring open-eyed at the unwonted
sights of the city. He was dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons,
while his pantaloons, of a check pattern, terminated rather higher up
than was in accordance with the fashion.

"Yes, I see him," said Mrs. Montgomery. "What of him?"

"I am going to recover the ring through his help."

"I don't see how."

"You will see."

"How do you do?" said the adventurer, cordially, advancing to the young
man, and seizing his hand.

"Pretty smart," said the countryman, looking surprised.

"Are your parents quite well?"

"They're so's to be around."

"When did you come to the city?"

"This mornin'."

"Do you stay any length of time?"

"I'm goin' back this afternoon."

"You didn't expect to meet me now, did you?" asked Mr. Montgomery.

"I s'pose I'd orter know you," said the perplexed youth, "but I can't
think what your name is."

"What! Not know Mr. Barnes, the minister of Hayfield Centre? Don't you
remember hearing me preach for your minister?"

"Seems to me I do," answered the young man, persuading himself that he
ought to remember.

"Of course you do. Now, my young friend, I am very glad to have met
you."

"So am I," said the other, awkwardly.

"You can do me a favor, if you will."

"Of course, I will," said Jonathan, "if it's anything I can do."

"Yes, you will have no trouble about it. You see, I went into a
jeweler's near by to sell a valuable ring, and they wanted to make sure
I was really a minister, and not intending to cheat them. If you will go
in with me, and say that you have often heard me preach, and that I am
the Rev. Mr. Barnes, of Hayfield Centre, I won't mind paying you five
dollars for your trouble."

"All right; I'll do it," said the rustic, considering that it would be
an unusually easy way of earning few dollars.

"You'll remember the name, won't you?"

"Yes--Parson Barnes, of Hayfield Centre."

"That is right. The store is near by. Walk along with us, and we will be
there in five minutes."



CHAPTER XXIII

A NEW EXPEDIENT

"I believe your name is Peck?" said Mr. Montgomery, hazarding a guess.

"No, it's Young, Ephraim Young."

"Of course it is. I remember now, but I am apt to forget names. You said
your parents were quite well?"

"Yes, they're pretty smart."

"I am glad to hear it; I have the pleasantest recollections of your
excellent father. Let me see, didn't you call there with me once, Mrs.
Barnes?"

"Not that I remember."

"You must go with me the next time. I want you to know the parents
of our young friend. They are excellent people. Do you go back this
afternoon, Mr. Young?"

"Yes, I guess so. You don't know of any sitooation I could get in a
store round here, do you?"

"Not at present, but I have some influential friends to whom I will
mention your name. Suppose, now, I could obtain a situation for you, how
shall I direct the letter letting you know?"

"Just put on the letter 'Ephraim Young.' Everybody in Plainfield knows
me."

"So he lives in Plainfield," said Mr. Montgomery to himself. "It's as
well to know that." Then aloud: "I won't forget, Mr. Young. What sort of
business would you prefer?"

"Any kind that'll pay," said the gratified youth, firmly convinced
of his companion's ability to fulfill his promise. "I've got tired of
stayin' round home, and I'd like to try York a little while. Folks say
it's easy to make money here."

"You are right. If I were a business man, I would come to New York at
once. For a smart young man like you it offers a much better opening
than a country village."

"That's what I've told dad often," said the rustic, "but he's afraid I
wouldn't get nothing to do and he says it's dreadful expensive livin'
here."

"So it is expensive, but then you will be better paid than in the
country. However, here we are. You won't forget what I told you?"

"No--I'll remember," said the young man.

The reappearance of Mr. Barnes and wife so soon excited some surprise
in the store, for it had got around, as such things will, that he was an
impostor, and it was supposed that he would not venture to show his face
there again. The appearance of his rustic companion likewise attracted
attention. Certainly, Mr. Montgomery (it makes little difference what we
call him) did not exhibit the slightest appearance of apprehension, but
his manner was quite cool and self-possessed. He made his way to that
part of the counter attended by the clerk with whom he had before
spoken. He observed with pleasure and relief that the man who had
questioned his identity with any of the ministers of Hayfield Centre
was no longer in the store. This would make the recovery of the ring
considerably easier.

"Well, sir," he said, addressing the clerk, "I suppose you did not
expect to see me again so soon?"

"No, sir."

"Nor did I expect to be able to return for the ring before to-morrow,
not supposing that I could bring witnesses to prove that I was what
I represented. But fortunately I met just now a young friend, who
can testify to my identity, as he has heard me preach frequently in
Plainfield, where he resides. Mr. Young, will you be kind enough to tell
this gentleman who I am?"

"Parson Barnes, of Hayfield Centre," said the youth, confidently.

"You have heard me preach, have you not, in Plainfield?"

"Yes," said the young man, fully believing that he was telling the
truth.

"And I have called on your parents?"

"Yes."

"I think," said the adventurer, "that will be sufficient to convince you
that I am what I appear."

It was hard to doubt, in the face of such evidence. Ephraim Young was so
unmistakably from the rural districts that it would have been absurd to
suspect him of being an artful city rogue. Besides, Mr. Barnes himself
was got up so naturally that all the clerk's doubts vanished at once. He
concluded that the customer who had questioned his genuineness must be
very much mistaken.

"I ought to apologize to you, sir," he said, "for doubting your word.
But in a city like this you know one has to be very careful."

"Of course," said the adventurer, blandly, "I do not blame you in the
least. You only did your duty, though it might have cost me some trouble
and inconvenience."

"I am sorry, sir."

"No apologies, I beg. It has all turned out right, and your mistake
was a natural one. If you will kindly return me the ring, I will defer
selling it, I think, till another day."

The clerk brought the ring, which he handed back to Mr. Montgomery. The
latter received it with so much the more satisfaction, as he had made
up his mind at one time that it was gone irrevocably, and put it away in
his waistcoat pocket.

"I had intended to buy some silver spoons," he said, "but it will be
necessary to wait until I have disposed of the ring. However, I may as
well look at some, eh, Mrs. Barnes?"

"If you like," assented the lady.

So the pair examined some spoons, and fixed upon a dozen, which they
said they would return and buy on the next day, and then, with a
polite good-by, went out of the store, leaving behind, on the whole, a
favorable impression.

Ephraim Young accompanied them out, and walked along beside them in the
street. He, too, was in good spirits, for had not his companion promised
him five dollars for his services, which he had faithfully rendered?
Five dollars to the young man from the rural districts was a very
considerable sum of money--quite a nugget, in fact--and he already
enjoyed in advance the pleasure which he anticipated of telling his
friends at home how easily he had earned such a sum in "York." He walked
along beside the adventurer, expecting that he would say something about
paying him, but no allusion was made by the adventurer to his
promise. Indeed, five dollars was considerably more than he had in his
possession. When they reached Amity street, for they were now proceeding
up Broadway, he sought to shake off the young man, whose company he no
longer desired.

"This is our way," he said. "I suppose you are going further. I am very
glad to have met you, Mr. Young. I hope you will give our regards to
your excellent parents;" and he held out his hand in token of farewell.

"Ain't you goin' to pay me that money?" said Ephraim, bluntly, becoming
alarmed at the prospect of losing the nugget he had counted on with so
much confidence.

"Bless me, I came near forgetting it! I hope you will excuse me," and
to Ephraim's delight he drew out his pocketbook. But the prospect of
payment was not so bright as the young man supposed.

"I don't think I have a five-dollar bill," said Mr. Montgomery, after an
examination of the pocketbook. "Mrs. Montgomery, do you happen to have a
five with you?"

"No, I haven't," said the lady, promptly. "I spent all my money shopping
this morning."

"That is unfortunate. Our young friend has rendered us such a service I
don't like to make him wait for his money."

Ephraim Young looked rather blank at this suggestion.

"Let me see, I have a hundred-dollar bill here," said Mr. Montgomery.
"I will go into the next store, and see if I can't get it changed. Mr.
Young, will you be kind enough to remain with my wife?"

"Certain," said Ephraim, brightening up.

Mr. Montgomery went into a shop near by, but made no request to have a
hundred-dollar bill changed. He was rather afraid that they might comply
with his request, which would have subjected him to some embarrassment.
He merely inquired if he could use a pen for a moment; request which was
readily granted. In less than five minutes he emerged into the street
again. Ephraim Young looked toward him eagerly.

"I am sorry to say, my young friend," he remarked, "that I was unable to
get my bill changed. I might get it changed at a bank, but the banks are
all closed at this hour."

The countryman looked disturbed.

"I am afraid," continued Mr. Montgomery, "I must wait and send you the
money in a letter from Hayfield Centre."

"I'd rather have it now," said Ephraim.

"I am sorry to disappoint you," said the adventurer smoothly; "but after
all you will only have a day or two to wait. To make up to you for the
delay I have decided to send you ten dollars instead of five. Finding
I could not change my bill, I wrote a note for the amount, which I will
hand you."

Ephraim received the paper, which the other handed him, and read as
follows:

NEW YORK, Sept 15, 18--.

Three days from date I promise to pay Mr. Ephraim Young ten dollars.

JOTHAM BARNES, of Hayfield Centre.

"How will that do?" asked the adventurer. "By waiting three days you
double your money."

"You'll be sure to send it," said Ephraim, doubtfully.

"My young friend, I hope you do not doubt me," said the Rev. Mr. Barnes,
impressively.

"I guess it's all right," said Ephraim, "only I thought I might like to
spend the money in the city."

"Much better save it up," said the other. "By and by it may come in
useful."

Ephraim carefully folded up the note, and deposited it in an immense
wallet, the gift of his father. He would have preferred the money which
it represented: but three days would soon pass, and the ten dollars
would be forwarded to him. He took leave of his new acquaintances, Mr.
Montgomery shaking his hand with affectionate warmth, and requesting him
to give his best respects to his parents. When Ephraim was out of sight
he returned to his wife, with a humorous twinkle in his eye, and said:

"Wasn't that cleverly done, old lady?"

"Good enough!" remarked the lady. "Now you've got the ring back again,
what are you going to do with it?"

"That, my dear, is a subject which requires the maturest consideration.
I shall endeavor to convert it as soon as possible into the largest
possible sum in greenbacks. Otherwise I am afraid our board bill, and
the note I have just given to my rural friend, will remain unpaid."



CHAPTER XXIV

MR. MONTGOMERY'S ARREST

Having shaken off his country acquaintance, of whom he had no further
need, Mr. Montgomery started to return to his lodgings. On the whole,
he was in good spirits, though he had not effected the sale of the ring.
But it was still in his possession, and it had a tangible value.

"I am sorry you did not sell the ring," said Mrs. Montgomery.

"So am I," said her husband. "We may have to sell it in some other
city."

