director of the movements of the little party. He felt jealous of this
big boy, who had come suddenly and taken the management of everything.
When Joe caught him rather roughly by the front paws, and tried to
force him to walk about after a fashion which certainly nature never
intended, he was strongly inclined to lay angry teeth on his arm. But
Cecile's eyes said no, and poor Toby, like many another before him,
submitted tamely because of his love. He loved Cecile, and for his love
he would submit to this indignity. The small performance over, Joe
Barnes, flinging his fiddle over his shoulder, started to his feet, and
the little party of pilgrims, now augmented to four, commenced their
march. They walked for two hours; Joe, when Maurice was very tired,
carrying him part of the way. At the end of two hours they reached
another small village. Here Joe, taking his fiddle, played dexterously,
and soon the village boys and girls, with their foreign dresses and
foreign faces, came flocking out.

"Ef Toby could only dance I'd make a fortune 'ere," whispered Joe to
Cecile.

But even without this valuable addition he did secure enough sous to
pay for his own supper and leave something over for breakfast the next
morning. Then, in French, which was certainly a trifle rusty for want
of use, he demanded refreshments, of which the tired and hungry
wanderers partook eagerly. Afterward they had another and shorter march
into a still smaller and poorer village, where Joe secured them a very
cheap but not very uncomfortable night's lodging.

After they had eaten their supper, and little Maurice was already fast
asleep, Cecile came up to the tall boy who had so opportunely and
wonderfully acted their friend.

"Jography," she said earnestly, "do you know the French of blue eyes
and golden hair--the French of a red, red mouth, and little teeth like
pearls. Do you know the French of all that much, dear Jography?"

"Why, Missie," answered Joe, "I s'pose as I could manage it. But what
do I want with blue eyes and gold hair? That ain't my mother, nor Jean
neither."

"Yes, Jography. But 'tis Lovedy. My stepmother said as I was to ask for
that sort of girl in all the small villages and all the tiny inns, dear
Jography."

"Well, well, and so we will, darlin'; we'll ax yere first thing
to-morrow morning; and now lie down and go to sleep, for we must be
early on the march, Missie."

Cecile raised her lips to kiss Joe, and then she lay down by Maurice's
side. But she did not at once go to sleep. She was thanking Jesus for
sending to such a destitute, lonely little pair of children so good and
so kind a guide.

While Joe, for his part, wondered could it be possible that this
unknown Lovedy could have bluer eyes than Cecile's own.




CHAPTER IV.

THE WORD THAT SETTLED JOE BARNES.


From London to Paris is no distance at all. The most delicate invalid
can scarcely be fatigued by so slight a journey.

So you say, who go comfortably for a pleasure trip. You start at a
reasonably early hour in the morning, and arrive at your destination in
time for dinner. A few of you, no doubt, may dread that short hour and
a half spent on the Channel. But even its horrors are mitigated by
large steamers and kind and attentive attendants, and as for the rest
of the journey, it is nothing, not worth mentioning in these days of
rushing over the world.

Yes, the power of steam has brought the gay French capital thus near.
But if you had to trudge the whole weary way on foot, you would still
find that there were a vast number of miles between you and Paris. That
these miles were apt to stretch themselves interminably, and that your
feet were inclined to ache terribly; still more would you feel the
length of the way and the vast distance of the road, if the journey had
to be made in winter. Then the shortness of the days, the length of the
nights, the great cold, the bitter winds, would all add to the horrors
of this so-called simple journey.

This four little pilgrims, going bravely onward, experienced.

Toby, whose spirits rather sank from the moment Joe Barnes took the
management of affairs, had the further misfortune of running a thorn
into his foot; and though the very Joe whom he disliked was able to
extract it, still for a day or two the poor dog was lame. Maurice, too,
was still such a baby, and his little feet so quickly swelled from all
this constant walking, that Joe had to carry him a great deal, and in
this manner one lad felt the fatigue nearly as much as the other. On
the whole, perhaps it was the little Queen of the party, the real
Leader of the expedition, who suffered the least. Never did knight of
old go in search of the Holy Grail more devoutly than did Cecile go now
to deliver up her purse of gold, to keep her sacred promise.

Not a fresh day broke but she said to herself: "I am a little nearer to
Lovedy; I may hear of Lovedy to-day." But though Joe did not fail to
air his French on her behalf, though he never ceased in every village
inn to inquire for a fair and blue-eyed English girl, as yet they had
got no clew; as yet not the faintest trace of the lost Lovedy could be
heard of.

They were now over a week in France, and were still a long, long way
from Paris. Each day's proceedings consisted of two marches--one to
some small village, where Joe played the fiddle, made a couple of sous,
and where they had dinner; then another generally shorter march to
another tiny village, where they slept for the night. In this way their
progress could not but be very slow, and although Joe had far more
wisdom than his little companions, yet he often got misdirected, and
very often, after a particularly weary number of miles had been got
over, they found that they had gone wrong, and that they were further
from the great French capital than they had been the night before.

Without knowing it, they had wandered a good way into Normandy, and
though it was now getting quite into the middle of February, there was
not a trace of spring vegetation to be discovered. The weather, too,
was bitter and wintry. East winds, alternating with sleet showers,
seemed the order of the day.

Cecile had not dared to confide her secret to Mr. Danvers, neither had
all Mrs. Moseley's motherly kindness won it from her. But,
nevertheless, during the long, long days they spent together, she was
not proof against the charms of the tall boy whom she believed Jesus
had sent to guide her, and who was also her own fellow-countryman.

All that long and pathetic interview which Cecile and her dying
stepmother had held together had been told to Jography. Even the
precious leather purse had been put into his hands, and he had been
allowed to open it and count its contents.

For a moment his deep-black eyes had glittered greedily as he felt the
gold running through his fingers, then they softened. He returned the
money to the purse, and gave it back, almost reverently, to Cecile.

"Little Missie," he said, looking strangely at her and speaking in a
sad tone, "you ha' showed me yer gold. Do you know what yer gold 'ud
mean to me?"

"No," answered Cecile, returning his glance in fullest confidence.

"Why, Missie, I'm a poor starved lad. I ha' been treated werry
shameful. I ha' got blows, and kicks, and rough food, and little of
that same. But there's worse nor that; I han't no one to speak a kind
word to me. Not one, not _one_ kind word for seven years have I heard,
and before that I had a mother and a brother. I wor a little lad, and I
used to sleep o' nights with my mother, and she used to take me in her
arms and pet me and love me, and my big brother wor as good to me as
brother could be. Missie, my heart has _starved_ for my mother and my
brother, and ef I liked I could take that purse full o' gold and let
you little children fare as best you might, and I could jump inter the
next train and be wid my mother and brother back in the Pyrenees in a
werry short time."

"No, Joe Barnes, you couldn't do that," answered Cecile, the finest
pucker of surprise on her pretty brow.

"You think as I couldn't, Missie dear, and why not? I'm much stronger
than you."

"No, Joe, _you_ couldn't steal my purse of gold," continued Cecile,
still speaking quietly and without a trace of fear. "Aunt Lydia Purcell
could have taken it away, and I dreaded her most terribly, and I would
not tell dear Mrs. Moseley, nor Mr. Danvers, who was so good and kind;
I would not tell them, for I was afraid somebody else might hear, or
they might think me too young, and take away the purse for the present.
But _you_ could not touch it, Jography, for if you did anything so
dreadful, dreadful mean as that, your heart would break, and you would
not care for your mother to pet you, and if your big brother were an
honest man, you would not like to look at him. You would always think
how you had robbed a little girl that trusted you, and who had a great,
great dreadful care on her mind, and you would remember how Jesus the
Guide had sent you to that little girl to help her, and your heart
would break. You could not do it, Joe Barnes."

Here Cecile returned her purse to its hiding place, and then sat quiet,
with her hands folded before her.

Nothing could exceed the dignity and calm of the little creature. The
homeless and starved French boy, looking at her, felt a sudden lump
rising in his throat;--a naturally warm and chivalrous nature made him
almost inclined to worship the pretty child. For a moment the great
lump in his throat prevented him speaking, then, falling on his knees,
he took Cecile's little hand in his.

"Cecile D'Albert," he said passionately, "I'd rayther be cut in little
bits nor touch that purse o' gold. You're quite, quite right, little
Missie, it 'ud break my heart."

"Of course," said Cecile. "And now, Joe, shall we walk on, for 'tis
most bitter cold under this sand hill; and see! poor Maurice is nearly
asleep."

That same evening, when, rather earlier than usual, the children and
dog had taken refuge in a very tiny little wayside house, where a woman
was giving them room to rest in almost for nothing, Joe, coming close
to Cecile, said:

"Wot wor that as you said that Jesus the Guide sent me to you, Missie.
I don't know nothink about Jesus the Guide."

"Oh, Joe! what an unhappy boy you must be! I was _so_ unhappy until I
learned about Him, and I was a long, long time learning. Yes, He did
send you. He could not come His own self, so He sent you."

"But, indeed, Missie, no; I just runned away, and I got to France, and
I heard you two funny little mites talking o' jography under the sand
hill. It worn't likely as a feller 'ud forget the way you did speak o'
jography. No one sent me, Missie."

"But that's a way Jesus has, Jography. He does not always tell people
when He is sending them. But He does send them all the same. It's very
simple, dear Jography, but I was a long, long time learning about it.
For a long time I thought Jesus came His own self, and walked with
people when they were little, like me. I thought I should see Him and
feel His hand, and when me and Maurice found ourselves alone outside
Calais, and we did not know a word of French, I did, I did wish Jesus
lived down here and not up in heaven, and I said I wished it, and then
I said that I even wished jography was a person, and I had hardly said
it before you came. Then you know, Joe, you told me you were for a
whole long seven years trying to get back to your mother and brother,
and you never could run away from your cruel master before. Oh, dear
Jography! of course 'twas Jesus did it all, and now we're going home
together to our own home in dear south of France."

"Well, missie, perhaps as you're right. Certain sure it is, as I could
never run away before; and I might ha' gone round to the side o' the
sand hill and never heerd that word jography. That word settled the
business for me, Miss Cecile."

"Yes, Joe; and you must love Jesus now, for you see He loves you."

"No, no, missie; nobody never did love Joe since he left off his
mother."

"But Jesus, the good Guide, does. Why, He died for you. You don't
suppose a man would die for you without loving you?"

"Nobody died fur me, Missie Cecile--that ere's nonsense, miss, dear."

"No, Joe; I have it all in a book. The book is called the New
Testament, and Mrs. Moseley gave it to me; and Mrs. Moseley never,
never told a lie to anybody; and she said that nothing was so true in
the world as this book. It's all about Jesus dying for us. Oh,
Jography! I _cry_ when I read it, and I will read it to you. Only it is
very sad. It's all about the lovely life of Jesus, and then how He was
killed--and He let it be done for you and me. You will love Jesus when
I read from the New Testament about Him, Joe."

"I'd like to hear it, Missie, darling--and I love you now."

"And I love you, poor, poor Joe--and here is a kiss for you, Joe. And
now I must go to sleep."




CHAPTER V.

OUTSIDE CAEN.


The morning after this little conversation between Joe and Cecile broke
so dismally, and was so bitterly cold, that the old woman with whom the
children had spent the night begged of them in her patois not to leave
her. Joe, of course, alone could understand a word she said, and even
Joe could not make much out of what very little resembled the
_Bearnais_ of his native Pyrenees; but the Norman peasant, being both
kind and intelligent, managed to convey to him that the weather looked
ugly; that every symptom of a violent snowstorm was brewing in the
lowering and leaden sky; that people had been lost and never heard of
again in Normandy, in less severe snowstorms than the one that was
likely to fall that night; that in almost a moment all landmarks would
be utterly obliterated, and the four little travelers dismally perish.

Joe, however, only remembering France by what it is in the sunny south,
and having from his latter life in London very little idea of what a
snowstorm really meant, paid but slight heed to these warnings; and
having ascertained that Cecile by no means wished to remain in the
little wayside cottage, he declared himself ready to encounter the
perils of the way.

The old peasant bade the children good-by with tears in her eyes. She
even caught up Maurice in her arms, and said it was a direct flying in
the face of Providence to let so sweet an angel go forth to meet
"certain destruction." But as her vehement words were only understood
by one, and by that one very imperfectly, they had unfortunately little
result.

The cottage was small, close, and very uncomfortable, and the children
were glad to get on their way.

Soon after noon they reached the old town of Caen. They had walked on
for two or three miles by the side of the river Orne, and found
themselves in old Caen before they knew it. Following strictly Cecile's
line of action, the children had hitherto avoided all towns--thus, had
they but known it, making very little real progress. But now, attracted
by some washer-women who, bitter as the day was, were busy washing
their clothes in the running waters of the Orne, they got into the
picturesque town, and under the shadow of the old Cathedral.

Here, indeed, early as it was in the day, the short time of light
seemed almost to have disappeared. The sky--what could be seen of it
between the tall houses of the narrow street--looked almost black, and
little flakes of snow began to fall noiselessly.

Here Joe, thinking of the Norman peasant, began to be a little alarmed.
He proposed, as they had got into Caen, that they should run no further
risk, but spend the night there.

But this proposition was met by tears of reproach by Cecile. "Oh, dear
Jography! and stepmother did say, never, never to stay in the big
towns--always to sleep in the little inns. Caen is much, much too big a
town. We must not break my word to stepmother--we must not stay here."

Cecile's firmness, joined to her great childish ignorance, could be
dangerous, but Joe only made a feeble protest.

"Do you see that old woman, and the little lass by her side making
lace?" he said. "That house don't look big; we might get a night's
lodging as cheap as in the villages."

