
"It means exactly what I have said. He went because I begged him to;
because I explained things to him, and he said he would go. But he made
a condition, and I am bound to stick to my part of it."

"And that was----How your eyes shine, Nora!"

"That was, that I am to stay patiently here, and get as English as ever
I can. Oh! I must stick to my part of the bargain."

"Well, I cannot say you look very happy," said Molly, "although you are
such a favorite at the school. If I was not very fond of you myself I
should be jealous. If I had a friend whom I really worshiped, before you
appeared on the scene, it was Stephanotie Miller, the American girl."

"Oh, isn't she charming?" said Nora. "She makes me laugh. I am sure she
has Irish blood in her."

"Not a bit of it; she's a Yankee of the Yankees."

"Well, she has been sent to school to get tame, just as I have been,"
said Nora; "but I don't want you to lose her friendship. After all,
I care very little for anyone in the school but you, Molly; only
Stephanotie makes me laugh."

"We'll have her to tea tomorrow. I'll run in now and ask mother. I
shan't mind a bit if you are not going quite to take her from me. After
all, she can be friends with both of us. I'll run into the house this
moment, and ask mother if we may have Stephanotie to tea."

Molly rushed into the house. Her mother was seated in the morning room,
busily writing.

"Well, my dear, well?" she said. "I hear you--you need not bang the
door. What is it, Molly?"

"Oh, mother! do look up and listen."

Mrs. Hartrick raised her head slowly.

"Yes, dear?" she said.

"I have behaved a great deal better lately--have I not, mother?"

"You certainly have, Molly; and I am pleased with you. If you would
restrain some of your impetuosity, I should be glad to tell you how
pleased I am."

"It is all owing to Nora."

"To Nora, my dear! Nora is as wild as you are."

"All the same, it is owing to Nora; and she is not as wild as I am. I
mean that I have been downright vulgar; but if you think there is one
trace of that in little Nora, it is because you do not know her a bit."

"What is your special request, Molly? I am very busy just now, and
cannot discuss your cousin's character. You have improved, and I am
pleased with you."

"Then, if you are pleased with me, mother, will you do me a favor?"

"What is that?"

"Stephanotie Miller has never been at our house."

"Stephanotie Miller. What an outlandish name! Who is she?"

"She is a dear, jolly, sweet, handsome American girl. She came to school
last term, and she is in the same form with Nora and me; and we both
adore her, yes we do. Whatever she does, and whatever she says, we think
simply perfection; and we want to ask her here. She is staying with a
rather tiresome aunt, in a little house in the village, and she has come
over to be Englishized. May she have tea with us tomorrow?"

"I will inquire about her from Miss Flowers; and if she seems to be a
nice girl I shall have no objection."

"But we want her to come tomorrow," said Molly. "It is Saturday, you
know, and a whole holiday. We thought she might come to lunch, or, if
you objected to that, immediately after lunch."

"And what about Linda? Does Linda like her?"

"Holy Moses, no!" said Molly.

"Molly!"

"Oh, mother! do forgive me, and don't say she mustn't come because I
said 'Holy Moses.' It's all Linda; she excites the vulgar in me always.
But may Stephie come, mother? You are always having Linda's friends
here."

"I will not be reproved by you, Molly."

"But, please, dear mother, let her come. Nora and I want her so badly."

"Well, dear, I will try and see Miss Flowers tomorrow morning."

"Won't you judge of her for yourself, mother? There never was a better
judge than you are."

This judicious flattery had its effect on Mrs. Hartrick, She sat quite
still for a moment, pondering. After all, to be a pupil at Mrs. Flowers'
school was in itself a certificate of respectability, and Molly had been
very good lately--that is, for her; and if she and Nora wanted a special
friend to spend the afternoon with them, it would be possible for Mrs.
Hartrick quickly to decide whether the invitation was to be repeated.

"Very well," she said, looking at her daughter, "for this once you may
have her; and as you have wisely expressed it, Molly, I can judge for
myself."

"Oh, thank you, thank you, mother!"

Molly rushed out of the room. She was flying headlong down the passage,
when she came plump up against Linda.

"Now, what is up?" said that young person. "Really, Molly!"

"Oh, hurrah! I have won my way for once," said Molly. "Stephanotie is
coming tomorrow to spend the whole afternoon."

"Stephanotie--that horrid Yankee?" said Linda.

"Horrid Yankee yourself!" was Molly's vulgar retort.

"But she cannot come. I have asked Mabel and Rose Armitage, and you know
they cannot stand Stephanotie."

"Well, you, and your Mabel and Rose, can keep away from
Stephanotie--that's all," said Molly. "Anyhow, she is coming. Don't keep
me. I must tell Nora."

Linda made way for her sister to fly past her, as she afterward
expressed it, like a whirlwind. She stood still for a moment in deep
consideration. Stephanotie was a daring, bright, go-ahead young person,
and had she ever taken, in the very least, to Linda, Linda would have
worshiped her. Stephanotie was extremely rich, and the bouquets she
brought to school, and the bon-bons she kept in her pocket, and the
pretty trinkets she wore, and the dresses she exhibited had fascinated
Linda more than once. For, rich as the Hartricks were, Mrs. Hartrick
had far too good taste to allow her daughters more pocket-money, or more
trinkets, or more bon-bons than their companions. Linda, in her heart
of hearts, had greatly rebelled against her mother's rule in this
particular, and had envied Stephanotie what she called her free life.
But Stephanotie had never taken to Linda, and she had taken to Molly,
and still more had she taken to Nora; and, in consequence, Linda
pretended to hate her, and whenever she had an opportunity used to run
her down.

Linda and her friends, Rose and Mabel Armitage, with several other
girls, formed quite a clique in the school against Stephanotie and what
she termed her "set"; and now to think that this very objectionable
American girl was to spend the next day at The Laurels because Molly,
forsooth! wished it, was quite intolerable.

Linda thought for a moment, then went into the room where her mother was
busy writing. Mrs. Hartrick had just finished her letter. She looked up
when Linda approached.

"Well, darling?" she said. Mrs. Hartrick was very fond of Linda, and
petted her a great deal more than Molly.

"Oh, mother! I am vexed," said Linda. "Is it quite settled?"

"Is what settled, my dear?"

"Is it quite settled that Stephanotie is to come to-morrow?"

"By the way, I was going to ask you about her, Linda. What sort of girl
is she?"

"I do not wish to say anything against my schoolfellows, mother; but if
you could only see her--"

Mrs. Hartrick raised her eyebrows in alarm.

"Molly has taken so violently to her," she answered, "and so has Nora;
and I thought that just for once--"

"So you have given leave, mother?"

"Yes; I have."

"And my friends are coming--those two charming girls, the Armitages."

"Yes, dear; I greatly admire both the Armitage girls. I am glad they are
coming; but why should not Miss Miller come also?"

"Only, she is not in their 'set,' mother--that is all. I wish--I do wish
you would ask her to postpone her visit. If she must come, let her come
another Saturday."


"I will think about it," said Mrs. Hartrick. "I have certainly promised
and----But I will think about it."

Linda saw that she could not press her mother any further. She went away
in great disquietude.

"What is to be done?" she thought. "If only mother would speak to Molly
at once; but Molly is so impetuous; and once Stephanotie is asked, there
will be no getting out of it. She is just the sort of girl to tell that
unpleasant story about me, too. If mother knew that, why, I should at
last be in her black books. Well, whatever happens, Stephanotie must not
be asked to spend the afternoon here to-morrow. I must somehow contrive
to put some obstacle in the way."




CHAPTER XXI.


THE ROSE-COLORED DRESS.

Meanwhile Molly rushed off to Nora. "Linda means mischief, and I must
put my foot down immediately," she said.

"Why, Molly, what is up?"

"Put on your hat, darling, and come with me as fast as ever you can."

"Where to?"

"Mother has given in about Stephanotie. Linda will put her finger in the
pie if she possibly can. I mean Stephanotie to get her invitation within
the next five minutes. Now, then, come along, Nora. Do be quick."

Mrs. Hartrick never allowed the girls to go out except very neatly
dressed; but on this occasion they were seen tearing down the road with
their garden hats on and minus their gloves. Had anyone from The Laurels
observed them, good-by to Molly's liberty for many a long day. No one
did, however. Linda during the critical moment was closeted with her
mother. When she reappeared the girls were halfway to the village. They
reached it in good time, and arrived at the house of Miss Truefitt,
Stephanotie's aunt.

Miss Truefitt was an old-fashioned and precise little lady. She had
gone through a great deal of trouble since the arrival of her niece, and
often, as she expressed it, did not know whether she stood on her head
or her heels; but she was fond of Stephanotie, who, notwithstanding her
wild ways, was very affectionate and very taking. And now, when she saw
Molly and Nora appearing, she herself entered the hall and opened the
door for them.

"Well, my dears," she said, "Stephie is in her bedroom; she has a
headache, and wanted to lie down for a little."

"Oh, just let me run up to her. I won't keep her a minute," said Molly.

"Come in here with me," said Miss Truefitt to Nora. She opened the
door of her neat little parlor. Nora entered. The room was full of gay
pictures and gay books, and scattered here and there were very large
boxes of bon-bons.

"How she can eat them all is what puzzles me," said Miss Truefitt;
"she seems to live on them. The quantity she demolishes would wreck the
health of any English girl. Ah, here comes Molly."

But Molly did not come downstairs alone; the American girl was with her.
Stephanotie rushed into the room.

"I am going to The Laurels to-morrow, auntie. I am going quite early;
this dear old Molly has asked me. You guess I'll have a good time. There
will be a box of bon-bons for Nora, sweet little Irish Nora; and a box
for dear little Molly, a true native of England, and a fine specimen to
boot. Oh, we shall have a nice time; and I am so glad I am asked!"

"It is very kind of Mrs. Hartrick to send you an invitation, Stephie,"
said her aunt.

"Oh, bother that, Aunt Violet! You know perfectly well she would not ask
me if Molly and Nora had not got it out of her."

"Well, we did try our best and most conoodling ways," said Nora in a
soft voice.

"Ah, didn't you, you little Irish witch; and I guess you won, too. Well,
I'm going; we'll have a jolly lark with Linda. If for no other reason, I
should be glad to go to upset her apple cart."

"Dear me, Stephie! you are very coarse and vulgar," said Miss Truefitt.

"Not a bit of it, auntie. Have a bon-bon, do." Stephanotie rushed across
the room, opened a big box of bon-bons, and presented one, as if it were
a pistol, full in Miss Truefitt's face.

"Oh, no, thank you, my dear!" said that lady, backing; "the indigestion
I have already got owing to the way you have forced your bon-bons upon
me has almost wrecked my health. I have lost all appetite. Dear me,
Stephie! I wish you would not be so dreadfully American."

"The process of Englishizing me is a slow one," said Stephanotie. She
turned, walked up to the glass, and surveyed herself. She was dressed in
rich brown velveteen, made to fit her lissome figure. Her hair was of
an almost fiery red, and surrounded her face like a halo; her eyes were
very bright china-blue, and she had a dazzlingly fair complexion. There
were people who thought Stephanotie pretty; there were others who did
not admire her at all. She had a go-ahead, very independent manner, and
was the sort of girl who would be idolized by the weaker members of the
school. Molly, however, was by no means a weak member of the school,
nor, for that matter, was Nora, and they both took great pleasure out of
Stephanotie.

"My bark is worse than my bite," said that young person. "I am something
like you, Molly. I am a bit of a scorcher; but there, when I am trained
in properly I'll be one of the best of good creatures."

"Well, you are booked for to-morrow now," said Molly; "and Jehoshaphat!
if you don't come in time--"

"Oh, Molly!" whispered Nora.

"There, I won't say it again."

Poor Miss Truefitt looked much shocked. Molly and Nora bade her good-by,
and nodded to Stephanotie, who stood upon the doorstep and watched them
down the street; then she returned to her aunt.

"I did think," said Miss Truefitt slowly, "that the girls belonging to
your school were ladylike; but to come here without gloves, and that
eldest girl, Miss Hartrick, to use such a shocking expression."

"Oh, bless you, Aunt Vi! it's nothing to the expressions she uses at
school. She's a perfect horror of a girl, and I like her for that very
reason. It is that horrid little Linda would please you; and I must say
I am sorry for your taste."

Stephanotie went upstairs to arrange her wardrobe for the next day.
She had long wished to visit Molly's home. The Laurels was one of
the prettiest places in the neighborhood, and Molly and Linda were
considered as among the smartest girls at the school. Stephanotie wished
to be hand-and-glove with Molly, not because she was supposed to be
rich, or respectable, or anything else, but simply because her nature
fitted to that of the wild, enthusiastic American girl. But, all the
same, now that she had got the _entree_, as she expressed it, of the
Hartricks' home, she intended to make a sensation.

 "When I do the thing I may as well do it properly," she said to
herself. "I will make them open their eyes. I have watched Mrs. Hartrick
in church; and, oh dear me! have not I longed to give her a poke in the
back. And as to Linda, she thinks a great deal of her dress. She
does not know what mine will be when I take out my very best and most
fascinating gown."

Accordingly Stephanotie rifled her trunk, and from its depths she
produced a robe which would, as she said, make the members of The
Laurels sit up. It was made of rose-colored silk, and trimmed with
quantities of cream lace. The skirt had many little flounces on it, and
each was edged with lace. The bodice was cut rather low in the neck, and
the sleeves did not come down anything like as far as the wrists. The
rose-colored silk with its cream lace trimmings was altogether the sort
of dress which might be worn in the evening; but daring Stephanotie
intended to appear in it in the morning. She would encircle her waist
with a cream-colored sash, very broad, and with much lace upon it; and
would wear many-colored beads round her neck, and many bracelets on her
arms.

"The whole will have a stylish effect, and will at any rate distinguish
me from everyone else," was her inward comment. She shook out the dress,
and then rang the bell. One of the servants appeared.

"I want to have this robe ironed and made as presentable as possible,"
said Stephanotie; "see you have it all done and put in my wardrobe ready
for wear tonight. I guess it will fetch 'em," she added, and then she
