I think that it would be unwise for me to take any public notice of it
at present; possibly there may be another attempt made to destroy that
bridge. If nothing more is said about it, the Boers may in time cease
to be careful, and a few determined men landed at Lorenzo Marques may
manage to succeed where you were unable to do so. It would be worth any
money to us to put a stop to the constant flow of arms and ammunition
that is going on via Lorenzo Marques. I consider your expedition to
have been in the highest degree praiseworthy, and to have been
conducted with great skill."

"My father is a mining engineer, and managing-director of several mines
round Johannesburg, general. I have been working there under him and
learning the business, and therefore know a good deal about dynamite,
and what a certain quantity would effect."

"Have you thought of going into the army? because if so, I will appoint
you and your three friends to regiments at once, and you will be
gazetted as soon as my report goes home."

"I am very much obliged to you, general, but I have no thought of
entering the army. I will, of course, mention it to my friends. I have
never heard them say anything on the subject. We are fighting because
we hate the Boers. No one can say, unless he has been resident there,
what we have all had to put up with, for the past year especially. On
the way down the Boers not only threatened to strike us, but struck
many of the ladies, my mother among them, besides robbing everyone of
watches and all other valuables. If it had not been for that, some of
us might have changed our minds before we got down here. That settled
the matter. And besides, sir, I hope that we shall be able to do more
good in our own way than if we became regular officers, as we know
nothing about drill and should be of very little good, whereas we do
understand our own way of fighting. I can say so without boasting, for
we have twice thrashed the Boers; once when they were twice our number,
and the other time when they were nearly four times as strong as we
were."

"Go on doing so, Mr. King; go on doing so, you cannot do better.
However, if any of your three friends, or all of them, choose to accept
my offer, it is open to them."

They were by this time close to Frere, and the general went on: "I am
sorry that I cannot ask you to dine with me this evening, as we shall
all be too busy for anything like a regular meal, for in a few hours
there will be a general advance. Good-evening. When I am less busy I
shall be glad to hear about those two fights that you speak of. You
colonists have taught us a few lessons already."

Chris saluted, wheeled his horse round, and cantered back to Chieveley.
There was much satisfaction among the whole of the party when Chris
related what General Buller had said. None of his three companions had
any desire to accept a commission. Willesden's father was a doctor with
a large practice in Johannesburg, and the lad himself was going home
after the war was over to study for the profession and to take his
medical degree; while Brown and Peters were both sons of very wealthy
capitalists.

"If I could not have done any fighting any other way I should have
liked a commission very much. Of course I could have thrown it up at
the end of the war. But I would a great deal rather be on horseback
than on foot, and I own I have no inclination to fight my way across
those hills. Talana was a pretty serious business, but it was child's
play to what this will be."

"Very well," Chris said; "I did not think that any of you would care
for it, although I could not answer for you. There is no need for hurry
in sending in a reply; there will be time to do that when we get into
Ladysmith. Then I will get Captain Brookfield to draw up the kind of
letter that ought to be sent, for I have not the least idea how I
should address a commander-in-chief. Of course, a thing of this sort
ought to be done in a formal sort of way; I could not very well say,
'My dear general, my three friends don't care to accept your kind
offer. Yours very truly.'" There was a general laugh, and then they
talked over the coming fight, for it was now generally known that the
attack was to be made in a couple of days at latest. The next morning
General Buller's column started before daybreak, and were by nine
o'clock encamped on the open veldt three miles north of Chieveley;
Barton's brigade having already marched out to the site of a new camp,
some five thousand yards south of Colenso. Although well within reach
of their guns, the Boers made no effort to hinder the operation, or to
shell the camp after it was formed. It was evidently their policy to
conceal their guns until the last moment, and although a very heavy
bombardment of their positions was maintained all day by the naval
guns, no reply whatever was elicited, though through the glasses it
could be seen that much damage was being done to the entrenchments.

"I don't like this silence," Chris said, as he and some of the others
were standing watching the hills in front of them. "It does not seem
natural when you are being pelted like that not to shy something back.
I am afraid it will be a terribly hot business when they do open fire
tomorrow."

There had been a discussion that morning whether the four natives Chris
had engaged for his expedition should be taken on permanently, and they
unanimously agreed that they should be. It was quite possible that all
the colonial corps would at some time be called upon to act as
infantry, and it would be a good thing to have six men to look after
the twenty-five horses while they were away. Then, too, it would be
very handy to have a stretcher party of their own. On the question
being put to them, the four men had willingly agreed to follow the
party whenever they went into a fight, to take two stretchers with
which they could at once carry any who might be wounded back to camp.
They were all strong fellows belonging to fighting peoples, and would,
the boys had no doubt, show as much courage as the Indian bearers had
displayed at Dundee and Elandslaagte. In the evening Captain Brookfield
sent for Chris.

"The orders for to-morrow are out," he said, "as far as we are
concerned. A thousand mounted infantry and one battery are to move in
the direction of Hlangwane--that is the hill, you know, this side of
the river to the right of Colenso. We shall cover the right flank of
the general movement and endeavour to take up a position on the hill,
where the battery will pepper the Boers on the kopjes north of the
bridge. Two mounted troops of three and five hundred men will cover the
right and left flanks respectively and protect the baggage. Half my
troop are to accompany Dundonald, the other half will form a part of
the force guarding the left wing. Your party will be with this force.
You have had your share of fighting, and none of the others have yet
had a chance."

"Very well, sir, I shall not be sorry to be on this duty; for naturally
we shall have a good view of the whole fight, while if we were engaged
we should see nothing except what was going on close to us."

"Yes, it will be something to see, Chris, and something to hear, for I
doubt whether there has been so heavy a fire as that which will be kept
up to-morrow, ever since war began. We have some twenty-three thousand
men, and the Boers more than as many, and what with magazine-guns,
machine-guns, and fast-firing cannon of all sizes, it will be an
inferno."




CHAPTER XII

THE BATTLE OF COLENSO


By daybreak next morning the whole force was under arms. General
Hildyard in the centre was to attack the iron bridge at Colenso.
General Hart's Irish brigade was to march towards Bridle Drift, and
after crossing to move along the left bank of the river towards the
kopjes north of the iron bridge. General Barton was to move forward
east of the railway towards Hlangwane Hill, and to support General
Hildyard, or the Colonial troops moving against that hill as might
appear necessary, while General Lyttleton's brigade, half-way between
those of Hildyard and Hart, were to be prepared to render assistance to
either as might be required. One division of the artillery was to
follow Lyttleton's brigade. The six naval guns were to advance on his
right. The sixth brigade were to aid General Hart, and three batteries
of Royal Artillery to move east of the railway, under cover of the
sixth brigade, to a point from which they could prepare the way for
Hildyard's brigade to cross the bridge.

The action began before six o'clock, the naval guns opening with
lyddite on the trenches on Grobler's Hill, and those between it and
Fort Wylie. No reply whatever was made by the Boers, and the troopers
standing by their horses' heads in readiness to mount should any party
of Boers make a raid on the camp, began to wonder whether the enemy had
not retreated. Hildyard's men advanced in open order close to the
railway; the Queen's own, with the West York in support, on the right
of the railway; and the Devons, with East Surrey behind them, on the
left. They marched as steadily and in as perfect alignment as if on
parade, eight paces apart. Hart's Irish brigade, far away to the left,
were in close order. The cavalry could be seen proceeding at a trot
towards Hlangwane, General Barton's brigade still bearing to the east;
and Colonel Long and Colonel Hunt with their batteries, without waiting
for their protection, galloped straight forward, and, taking up a
position almost facing Fort Wylie, a few hundred yards beyond the
river, opened a heavy fire; the six naval guns, which were drawn by
bullocks, being still a considerable distance behind them.

Still the Boer guns remained silent. But at half past six their
musketry opened suddenly upon the Queen's Own, the Devons, and the
guns, in one continuous roar. It came not only from the entrenchments
on the face of the hill, but from trenches close down by the river, and
from the houses of Colenso, from some railway huts, and from the bushes
that fringed the south bank of the river, which had been believed to be
wholly unoccupied. Five minutes later their cannon joined in the roar,
with machine-guns, one-pounder Maxims, and the great Creusots and
Krupps. And yet through this storm of lead and iron our soldiers went
on quietly and steadily. The very ground round them was torn up by
bullet and ball. Many fell, but there was no flinching; while on their
right, Long's batteries, though swept by a hail of missiles from unseen
foes, maintained a continuous fire at Fort Wylie.

"It is awful!" Peters exclaimed as he lowered his glasses. "I thought
it would be dreadful, but I never dreamt of anything like this. Look at
the bodies dotting the ground our men are passing over, and yet the
others go on as if it was a shower of rain through which they were
passing. I can't look at it any longer."

"It is as bad for the artillery," Chris said, with his glasses still
riveted upon them. "I saw a lot of the horses go down before they were
unlimbered, and I can see the men are falling fast. Surely they can
never have been meant to go within five or six hundred yards of
magazine rifles. I thought everyone had agreed that artillery could not
live within range of breech-loaders. Why doesn't Barton's brigade move
down towards them, and try and keep down the fire? How is Hart getting
on?"

But it was not easy to see this even with glasses. They had not become
engaged until a little later than the others, but as they approached
the river an equally terrible fire opened upon them. Being in
comparatively close order, they suffered more heavily than Hildyard had
done. Presently they came upon a spruit which they took to be the main
river, and under a tremendous fire from the Mausers and guns, dashed
across it, and swinging round their left made for the drift, sweeping
before them a number of Boers who had been hidden in the long grass.
Trenches were there line after line, but over these the four
regiments--the Connaught Rangers, the Border regiment, the Inniskilling
and Dublin Fusiliers--dashed forward with such fury that the Boers did
not stop to meet their bayonets. By a quarter-past seven the enemy had
been driven across the Tugela. Without hesitation the Irish dashed into
the river. Many fell headlong, for along the bottom barbed wires had
been stretched. Worse still, it was found that instead of being two
feet deep, as was expected, it was eight feet; for the Boers had
erected a dyke across the river a little lower down, and had dammed the
water back.

Some swam across with their rifles and ammunition, but it was a feat
beyond all except the strongest swimmers, and after maintaining
themselves for some time they were forced to retire. The naval guns did
their best to assist them, and silenced some of the Boer cannon that
were pounding them, but they failed to draw the Boer fire upon
themselves. It was only in the centre that even partial success was
gained. Hildyard's men had reached but not captured Colenso bridge. In
spite of the tremendous fire, some of the soldiers tried to make their
way along it, but were recalled; for they were deprived of the support
of the artillery that should have covered their passage, had no hope of
Hart bringing his brigade round to clear the enemy out from the kloofs
on the opposite side, and but little of aid from Lyttleton, who had
been obliged to move farther to the left to lend assistance to Hart.
Some of the Scottish Fusiliers had joined them from Barton's brigade,
but the brigade itself was far away.

Terrible as the fighting was at all points, it was the batteries down
by the river that most engaged the attention of the anxious spectators.
Desperate attempts were being made to get the guns back. Almost all the
horses had been killed, but the drivers of the teams of the ammunition
waggons, the few survivors of the officers, and several of the
general's staff dashed recklessly forward under a hail of fire. Horse
and man went over, but two of the guns were carried off. Fortunately,
the naval battery and the third field battery had not been taken so far
forward, and were withdrawn with comparatively little loss; and the ten
guns stood alone and deserted by the last of the party as it seemed.
Then, to the surprise of the watchers, one of them spoke out, for four
of the men who worked it had stood to their charge to the last. Again
and again it sent its shrapnel among the Boer trenches. One fell and
then another, but two remained. They continued to fire until the last
round of reserve ammunition was finished. Then those who were near
enough to make out their figures saw them take their stand, one on each
side of the gun, at attention, until both fell dead by the side of the
piece they had served so well. Even on the right, where success might
really have been hoped for, everything had gone badly. The dismounted
Colonials had fought their way gallantly up the slopes of the
Hlangwane, and nearly reached the crest. But they were not seconded by
Lord Dundonald's cavalry; Barton's brigade, which was charged with
aiding them, were kept at a distance, and the Colonials were at last
forced to fall back.

Great as was the loss at other points, the failure to capture this hill
was really the greatest misfortune of the day. From its position on the
south of the river, and in a loop, batteries erected on its summit
would have taken all the Boer defences on the lower slopes of the hills
in flank, and it would have covered the crossing of the river at
Colenso. Cut off by the river from the rest of the Boer position it
could hardly have been retaken, and its fire would have searched the
valley up which the roadway ran almost as far as Mount Bulwana.

Renewed attempts were made for some time to carry off the guns, but
early in the afternoon the general saw that it was but a waste of life
to persevere further, and orders were despatched for the troops to
retire. It had been a day of misfortunes, and yet a day of glory, for
never had the fighting power of British troops been more splendidly
exhibited, never were greater deeds of individual daring performed;
never had troops supported with heroic indifference so terrible a fire.
Undoubtedly the English general had greatly underrated the fighting
powers of the Boers and the amount of artillery to which he was
exposed. Had he not done so, he would scarcely have distributed his
force over so wide a face, or attacked at three points nearly four
miles apart, but would have prepared for the grand assault by seizing
Hlangwane and firmly establishing some of his batteries there, even at
the cost of two or three days' labour, and only attempted to cross the
river when the movement would have been covered by their fire.

The Boers were quick in discovering the importance of the hill, and
speedily covered its face with such entrenchments, that not until after
long weeks of effort and failure was an attack again attempted against
it; and the success of that attack opened the way to Ladysmith. But had
the general's orders been carried out at all points it would probably
have been captured. Hart's brigade was to have begun the attack, but
owing to the map with which he was furnished being defective, his
troops losing their way in the spruit, and their being led in far too
close a formation under the enemy's fire, its attempt failed; this
being, however, largely due to the astuteness of the Boers in damming
back the river and rendering the ford impracticable. The impetuosity of
the officers commanding two of the batteries of artillery, in pushing
their guns forward unattended by infantry as ordered, not only caused
the loss of ten guns and of nearly all the men who worked them, but
deprived Hildyard's column of the protection they would have had in
crossing the bridge, and rendered the undertaking impossible; while the
failure of Barton's brigade to give assistance either to Hildyard or to
the assailants of Hlangwane, contributed to the one failure, and
entirely brought about the other.

General Buller and General Clery had been wherever the shots were
flying the thickest. Three of the former's staff, Captains Schofield
and Congreve, and Lieutenant Roberts, son of Lord Roberts, had ridden
forward as volunteers to try and get the guns off. Roberts was fatally
wounded, Congreve was wounded and taken prisoner, and Schofield alone
escaped unharmed with the two guns that were saved.

The day had been almost more terrible for the troops who remained
unoccupied near the baggage than for those actually engaged in the
terrible light. The latter, animated by excitement and anger at their
inability to get at the foe, had scarce time to think of their danger,
and even laughed and joked in the midst of the hail of bullets, but the
watchers had nothing to distract them during the long hours. With their
glasses they could plainly see that no advance had been made at any
point. To them it seemed incredible that any could come back from that
storm of fire. From time to time they learned from wounded men brought
up by the bearers, who fearlessly went down into the thick of the fire
to do their duty, news of how matters were going on in the front.

Gladly, had they received orders to do so, would they have dashed down
to try and carry off the guns. Many shed tears of rage as they heard
how the Irish strove in vain to cross the deep river, and how many were
drowned in their attempts to swim it. They expected, when in the
afternoon the troops came in, that they would see an utterly dispirited
body of men, and were surprised when the Irish, who were the first to
return to camp, marched along smoking their pipes and joking as if they
had returned from a day of triumph rather than of failure. They were
animated by a knowledge that they had done all that men could do, had
proved they were worthy successors of their countrymen who had won
glory in so many hard-fought fields, and that no shadow of reproach
could fall upon them for their share in the day's work. Although they
had suffered far more heavily than the other brigade, they returned
more cheerfully. And yet there was no depression anywhere evinced,
although there was anger, fierce anger, that they had not been able to
get at the enemy, and a grim determination that next time they met,
things should go differently.

A good many prisoners had been lost. Parties had spread along among the
bushes that lined the river, and maintained a steady fire against the
Boer entrenchments facing them. Some of these had not heard the bugle
sounding the retire. When they were aware what was being done some had
left their shelter and rushed across the open ground to join the
columns, the majority being shot down as they did so. Others had waited
among the bushes, intending to try after nightfall; but as soon as we
fell back the Boers had again crossed the river and spread along its
banks, and had thus made prisoners those who were in hiding there or in
the little dongas. Among those so captured were fourteen of the Devons
and as many gunners, with Colonel Hunt, Colonel Bullock, Major
MacWalter, and Captains Goodwin, Vigors, and Congreve; the total loss
in killed, wounded, and prisoners amounted to about one thousand five
hundred, of whom nearly half belonged to the Irish brigade. That
evening the searchlight, which had been placed on a lofty hill visible
from one end of the high kopjes held by the garrison of Ladysmith,
flashed the news that the attack had failed, and that the garrison must
be prepared to hold out for some time yet.

The news of the reverse created a tremendous sensation throughout
Natal, where it had been confidently anticipated that the army would
brush aside without difficulty the opposition of the Boers, relieve
Ladysmith and, advancing sweep the invaders out of the colony. In
England, too, the sensation was scarcely less pronounced, and for the
first time the gravity of the war in which we were engaged was
recognized. Hitherto it had been thought that fifty thousand men would
suffice to bring it to a successful conclusion; now it was perceived
that at least double that number would be required. The offers of the
colonies to aid the mother country with troops had hitherto been coldly
received, but these were now accepted thankfully, and although our
military authorities would not as yet recognize that the volunteers
could be relied upon as a real fighting force, there was a talk that
some of the militia regiments might be embodied, and a large number of
reservists were at once summoned back to the ranks.

At the front matters went on as before. It was now known how it was
that the guns had advanced so far. Colonel Long had sent forward some
of his mounted men with two officers. The Boers allowed them to
approach the river bank without firing a shot. One of the scouts
actually rode across the bridge to the other side, and returning to the
battery they reported that there were no Boers about, and it was only
after receiving this message that Colonel Long took the guns forward to
within six hundred yards of the river, and twelve hundred of Fort Wylie.

The wounded were all taken to Frere or Estcourt, where hospitals had
been prepared. Hart and Lyttleton's brigades were sent back to Frere,
and the camp at Chieveley was moved nearer to the station, both for
convenience of supply, and because the position now taken up was a more
defensible one, and was less exposed to the fire of the big Boer guns;
large numbers of transport animals and waggons were brought up country.
