reward, bounded away with the fleetness of a deer, and quickly vanished
in the gloom. He went on foot because he could travel faster and last
longer than could any animal in camp that he might ride.

Carson went back to his friends and kept watch until morning. As soon
as it came to light, the animals were hitched to the wagons and urged
forward again to the fullest extent of their ability.

Some hours later, several Cheyenne horsemen were seen riding rapidly
toward them. When a hundred yards distant, Carson compelled them to
halt. Then he allowed them to come closer and told them he had lost
patience with their annoyances, and the night before had sent an express
to Rayado (where his ranche was built), asking the troops to see that
the persecution was stopped. Should it so happen that the soldiers
came and found the party massacred, they would take the trail of the
Cheyennes and punish them for what they had done.

The cunning Indians, before accepting the statement of the leader, said
they would examine the prairie for the trail of the messenger. Carson
assisted them in the search, and it did not take long to find the
moccasin tracks. A brief scrutiny also satisfied the warriors he had
started so many hours before, that it was useless to try to overtake
him.

The result was the attack and massacre were not made, and, though the
assistance which was asked was sent, yet it was not needed. One of
the two experienced mountaineers with Carson on that eventful journey,
declared afterward, that had any other living man than he been at the
head of the party not one would have escaped. The achievement certainly
ranks among the most extraordinary of the many performed by a most
extraordinary man.

It would be thought that after such an experience, Carson would be
content to settle down and give his entire attention to his ranche.
While it cannot be said that he neglected his duties as a farmer, yet
he loved the mountains and prairies too well ever to abandon them
altogether.

He and Maxwell, his old friend, determined on having one more old
fashioned beaver hunt, such as they were accustomed to a score of years
before. They did not mean it should be child's play and they admitted no
amateur hunters and trappers: all were veterans of years' standing, and,
when the party was fully made up, they numbered about a score.

The expedition was a memorable one. They fixed upon one of the longest
and most dangerous routes, which included many Rocky Mountain streams
and involved every possible kind of danger.

In one respect, the party were pleasantly disappointed. Years before the
beavers had been so effectively cleaned out that they expected to find
very few if any; but because the business had been so little followed
for so long a time, the animals had increased very fast and therefore
the trappers met with great success.

They began operation on the South Fork of the Platte and finally ended
on the Arkansas. They were gone many weeks and when they returned to
their homes, nearly if not all felt that they had engaged on their last
trapping expedition.

Carson had not wrought very long on his ranche, when he learned of the
scarcity and high prices of sheep in California. He at once set about
collecting several thousand, hired a number of men and drove the herd
to Fort Laramie: thence he made his way by the old emigrant trail to
California where he disposed of the sheep at prices which brought him a
profit of several thousand dollars.

While in San Francisco, he visited a prominent restaurant where he
ordered a good substantial dinner for six persons. When it was ready he
surveyed it for a moment with satisfaction, and, seating himself at the
table, disposed of it all. His journey across the plains had given him a
somewhat vigorous appetite.



CHAPTER XXXIV.


 In San Francisco--The Return Homeward--The Mormon Delegate Gives Carson
 Some Interesting Information--Carson's First Stirring Duties as Indian
 Agent--The Affection of the Red Men for Father Kit.

Kit Carson's old friend, Maxwell, who had been his companion in so
many stirring adventures, joined him in San Francisco, whose marvellous
growth even at that remote day was a continual surprise and delight. As
the two veteran mountaineers made their way through the streets, where
but a few years before all was a wild, untrodden wilderness, they paused
and indulged in many wondering exclamations as though they were a couple
of countrymen visiting the metropolis for the first time in their lives.

The couple concluded to make their way home by the southern route,
passing in the neighborhood of the Gila; but the distance could be
shortened so much by taking the steamer to Los Angeles that Maxwell
decided to adopt that course. When he asked Carson to join him the
mountaineer shook his head.

"I got enough of that in 1846," he said, alluding to his brief voyage,
when serving under Fremont in California, at the beginning of the
Mexican war; "I never was so sick in all my life."

"You ain't likely to be sick again," plead Maxwell; "and, if you are,
it don't last long. You'll save two or three weeks in time and enjoy
yourself much more."

But it was no use: Carson said he never would venture upon salt water
again, and he would rather ride a thousand miles on the back of a mule
than to sail a hundred in a ship. Accordingly, the party separated for
the time and Maxwell took steamer to Los Angeles, where he arrived fully
two weeks in advance of Carson, who rode into the quaint old town on the
back of a somewhat antiquated mule.

They were soon ready for their long ride, when they struck a leisurely
pace and all went well until they reached the Gila. There they entered
a region which had been visited by one of those droughts which continue
sometimes for many months. The grass was so dry and parched that it
contained scarcely any nourishment, and the friendly Pimos told them
if they pushed on their animals were sure to die of starvation. It was
impossible to doubt these statements and Carson therefore proposed a
new route, which though very rough and difficult in some places, would
furnish all the forage that was required.

The course led them along the Gila to the mouth of the San Pedro, and
finally with little difficulty they reached the copper mines of
New Mexico. Shortly after Carson encountered the Mormon delegate to
Congress. During the exchange of courtesies, the gentleman conveyed the
interesting information that he--Carson--had been made Indian Agent for
New Mexico.

The news was a surprise and a great pleasure to the mountaineer. He had
no thought of any such honor and with all his modesty could not but feel
that he was eminently fitted for the performance of its duties. No
one had travelled so extensively through the west, and no one could
understand the nature of native Americans better than he. A hundred
tribes knew of "Father Kit," as he soon came to be called, and they
referred to him as a man who never spoke with a "double tongue," and who
was just toward them at all times. He had ventured among the hostiles
more than once where the bravest white man dared not follow him, and
had spent days and nights in their lodges without being offered the
slightest indignity. Kit Carson was brave, truthful, kind and honest.

Aside from the gratification which one naturally feels, when receiving
an appointment that is pleasant in every respect, and which he holds
thoroughly "in hand," as may be said, the honest mountaineer was
especially delighted over the thought that his government conferred it
without any solicitation on his part.

But the man who accepts the position of Indian Agent and conscientiously
attends to its duties has no sinecure on his hands. Many of them use
it as such while others do still worse, thereby sowing the seeds which
speedily develop into Indian outrages, massacres and wars.

When Carson reached Taos, he had his official bond made out, and sent
it with his thanks and acceptance of his appointment to the proper
authorities in Washington.

The Indian Agent for New Mexico had scarcely entered upon his new
duties, when trouble came. A branch of the Apaches became restless and
committed a number of outrages on citizens. Stern measures only would
answer and a force of dragoons were sent against them. They dealt them
a severe blow, killing one of their most famous chiefs, besides a
considerable number of warriors.

Instead of quieting the tribe, it rather intensified their anger, though
they remained quiescent for a time through fear. Not long after, Carson
was notified that a large party of the tribe were encamped in the
mountains, less than twenty miles from Taos. He decided at once to
supplement the work of the sword with the gentle arguments of peace.

This proceeding on the part of the Indian Agent is one deserving of
special notice, for it shows no less the bravery of Carson than it does
the philanthropic spirit which actuated him at all times in his dealings
with the red men. Alas, that so few of our officials today deem his
example worth their imitation.

The venture was so dangerous that Carson went alone, unwilling that any
one else should run the risk. When he arrived at their encampment,
he made his way without delay to the presence of the leaders, whom he
saluted in the usual elaborate fashion, and then proceeded to state the
important business that took him thither.

Nearly every warrior in camp recognized the short, thickset figure and
the broad, pleasant face when they presented themselves. They knew he
was one of the most terrible warriors that ever charged through a camp
of red men. He had met them many a time in fierce warfare, but he always
fought warriors and not papooses and squaws. He was the bravest of the
brave and therefore they respected him.

But he was a truthful and just man. He had never lied to them, as most
of the white men did, and he had shown his confidence in them by walking
alone and unattended into the very heart of their encampment. They were
eager to rend to shreds every pale face upon whom they could lay hands,
but "Father Kit" was safe within their lodges and wigwams.

Carson made an admirable speech. He at first caused every serpent-like
eye to sparkle, by his delicate flattery. Then he tried hard to convince
them that their hostility to the whites could result only in injury
to themselves, since the Great Father at Washington had hundreds and
thousands of warriors whom he would send to replace such as might lose
their lives. Then, when he made known that the same Great Father had
appointed him to see that justice was done them, they grinned with
delight and gathering around, overwhelmed him with congratulations.

The Agent insisted that they should prove their sincerity by pledging to
follow the line of conduct he had lain down, and they did so with such
readiness that a superficial observer would have declared the mission a
complete success.

But Kit Carson thought otherwise. He knew the inherent treachery of the
aboriginal nature, and his estimate of Apache loyalty was the true
one. The most that he was warranted in feeling was the hope that those
furious warriors would be less aggressive than had been their custom.
Though they had expressed a willingness to make any agreement which he
might propose, yet it was their very willingness to do so which caused
his distrust. Had they been more argumentative and more tenacious of
their rights, their sincerity might have been credited.

The Agent could have secured their consent almost to any agreement, but
the sagacious official asked as little as he could.

"And I don't believe they mean to keep even that agreement," he
muttered, as he bade the effusive sachems and warriors goodbye and made
his way back to Taos.



CHAPTER XXXV.


 Trouble With the Apaches--Defeat of the Soldiers--Colonel Cook's
 Expedition Against Them--It Meets With Only Partial Success--Major
 Brooks' Attempt to Punish the Apaches--A Third Expedition.

Just as Carson suspected, the Apaches were insincere in their
professions of good will toward the settlers. He had scarcely reached
home, when they renewed their outrages. The sinewy horsemen, as daring
as the Crusaders who invaded the Holy Land, seemed to be everywhere.
We have already referred to those extraordinary warriors, who, for many
years have caused our Government more trouble in the southwest than all
the other tribes combined, and it is not necessary, therefore, to
say that when any branch of the Apaches went on the war path the most
frightful scenes were sure to follow.

Carson knew when to be gentle and when to be stern. If the former
measures failed, he did not hesitate to use the latter. Coercive means
were taken, but, in the first encounter between the red men and the
United States troops, the latter were decisively defeated.

As a consequence, the Apaches became more troublesome than ever. Colonel
Cook of the Second Regiment of United States Dragoons, was sent against
them. He selected Kit Carson for his guide. The Agent's wish, it may
be said, was to learn whether any other tribe was concerned in the
outrages, and in no way could he do it as well as by accompanying the
expedition, which was fully organized by the selection of a number of
Pueblo Indians to act as scouts and spies. These were placed under the
immediate command of the well known James H. Quinn, who died some time
later.

The force proceeded northward from Taos to the stream known as the
Arroya Hondo. This was followed to the Rio del Norte, which being very
high, was crossed with much difficulty. As an illustration of the rugged
work which such expeditions were called upon to undergo, Dr. Peters
says that when they struggled to the other shore, they found themselves
confronted by a mass of solid and almost perpendicular rocks, fully six
hundred feet high. This was ascended, after the most exhausting labor,
by means of a zigzag trail, and the journey was pushed over a rough
and diversified country. Grass and water could not be found until they
reached a small Mexican town where they were enabled to buy what was so
sadly needed. Men and animals were so worn out that they rested for an
entire day.

The next morning the line of march was taken up, and they had not gone
far when Carson discovered a trail. This was followed with renewed vigor
and a couple of days later the Indians were overtaken. They did not
attempt any stand against such a strong force, but took to flight at
once. The Apaches used their utmost endeavors to get away and they
were helped by the roughness of the country. They were pressed so hard,
however, that they lost most of their horses and plunder besides a
number of warriors.

Two Americans were wounded, one of whom shortly died; but the soldiers
having "located" the Indians, as may be said, did not give over their
efforts to punish them. Pursuit was resumed at earliest daylight and men
and animals did everything possible. Over mountains, through ravines,
around rocks, up and down declivities, the chase continued, until the
cunning Apaches resorted to their old tricks: they dissolved, as may
be said, into their "original elements"--that is, they began separating
until there were almost as many different trails as there were warriors.
Then in their flight, they selected the worst possible ground. Being
familiar with the country and possessing far more endurance than the
ordinary Indian, it soon became clear that the marauders were beyond
reach.

Accordingly Colonel Cook ordered the pursuit discontinued and they
headed toward the nearest Mexican village, where forage and rest could
be secured for the animals. When the place was reached, Colonel Cook
learned of a serious mistake made by the party who were transporting
the soldier wounded several days before. They discovered an Indian whom,
after some difficulty, they captured. His horse and arms were taken from
him under the supposition that he was one of the hostile Apaches. He
was not treated very gently and watching his opportunity, he made his
escape. It was afterwards learned that the warrior was a Utah, with whom
the white men were at peace.

The Utahs were of a war-like nature and Colonel Cook was apprehensive
they would use the occurrence as a pretext for joining the Apaches
in their attack upon the settlers. He therefore sent Carson to the
headquarters of his agency to do what he could to explain the matter and
make all the reparation in his power.

As soon as he arrived at Taos, Carson sent a messenger with a request
that the Utah chiefs would come and have a talk with him. They were
always glad to meet Father Kit face to face. The agent told how the
mistake was made, expressed the regret of himself and Colonel Cook and
ended by restoring the property and by distributing a few presents among
the chiefs. The business was managed with such tact that the sachems
expressed themselves perfectly satisfied and their affection and
admiration for Father Kit became greater than before.

Colonel Cook was unwilling to return without striking a more effective
blow against the Apaches. Pausing only long enough, therefore, to rest
and recruit his men and horses, he resumed the hunt. He had not gone
far, when he struck another trail which was followed with great vigor;
but before anything of the Indians could be discovered, it began
snowing. In a few minutes the flakes were eddying all around them, the
wind blowing so furiously that the men could hardly see each other, as
they bent their heads and rode slowly against it. This rendered pursuit
out of the question, because the trail was entirely hidden. Much against
his will Colonel Cook was forced to give up the pursuit.

He made his way to a small town lying on his route, where he met Major
Brooks, who was marching to his help with reinforcements. The latter
officer instead of returning with Colonel Cook, decided to take up the
hunt himself for the hostiles.

With little delay, a fresh trail was found and an energetic pursuit
began. It was plain the Indians were making for the Utah country,
