be wi' ye;" and Luke wrung Bill's hand heartily.

"I shan't say goodby, Bill," Mary Powlett said quietly. "I don't think
Ned Sankey can have done this thing, and if he hasn't you will find that
he will not run away, but will stay here and face it out."

"Then he will be a fool," Luke Marner said. "I tell ee the evidence be
main strong agin him, and whether he be innocent or not he will find it
hard to clear hisself. Oi don't think much the worst of him myself if he
done it, and most in Varley will be o' my way o' thinking. Foxey war a
tyrant if ever there war one, and the man what was so hard a maister to
his hands would be loike to be hard to his wife's children."

"Don't speak like that, feyther," Polly said; "murder is murder, you
know."

"Ay, lass, and human natur be human natur, and it be no use your going
agin it. If he ha been and ill treated the boy, and I don't doubt as he
has, thou may'st argue all noight, but thou won't get me to say as oi
blames him much if he has done it. Oi don't suppose as he meant to kill
him--not vor a moment. I should think hard of him if oi thowt as how he
did. He meant, oi reckon, vor to throw his horse down and cut his knees,
knowing, as every one did, as Mulready were moighty proud of his horse,
and he may have reckoned as Foxey would git a good shake, and some
bruises as well, as a scare, but oi doan't believe, not vor a moment, as
he meant vor to kill him. That's how oi reads it, lass."

"Well, it may be so," Mary assented. "It is possible he may have done
it, meaning really only to give him a fright and a shake; but I hope he
didn't. Still if that was how it happened I will shake hands, Bill, and
wish you goodby and good luck, for it would be best for him to get away,
for I am afraid that the excuse that he only meant to frighten and not
to kill him will not save him. I am sorry you are going, Bill, very
sorry; but if you were my own brother I would not say a word to stop
you. Didn't his feyther give up his life to save little Janey? and I
would give mine to save his. But I do think it will be good for you,
Bill; times are bad, and it has been very hard for you lately in Varley.
I know all about it, and you will do better across the seas. You will
write, won't you, sometimes?"

"Never fear," Bill said huskily, "oi will wroite, Polly; goodby, and God
bless you all; but it mayn't be goodby, for oi mayn't foind him;" and,
wringing the hands of Luke and Polly, Bill returned to his cottage,
hastily packed up a few things in a kit, slung it over his shoulder on a
stick, and started out in search of Ned.

Late that evening there came a knock at the door of Luke's cottage. On
opening it he found Bill standing there.

"Back again, Bill!--then thou hasn't found him?"

"No," Bill replied in a dejected voice. "Oi ha' hoonted high and low vor
him; oi ha' been to every place on the moor wheer we ha' been together,
and wheer oi thowt as he might be a-waiting knowing as oi should set
out to look for him as soon as oi heard the news. Oi don't think he be
nowhere on the moor. Oi have been a-tramping ever sin' oi started this
mourning. Twice oi ha' been down Maarsten to see if so be as they've
took him, but nowt ain't been seen of him. Oi had just coom from there
now. Thou'st heerd, oi suppose, as the crowner's jury ha found as Foxey
wer murdered by him; but it bain't true, you know, Luke--be it?"

Bill made the assertions stoutly, but there was a tremulous eagerness in
the question which followed it; He was fagged and exhausted. His faith
in Ned was strong, but he had found the opinion in the town so unanimous
against him that he longed for an assurance that some one beside himself
believed in Ned's innocence.

"Oi doan't know, Bill," Luke Marner said, stroking his chin as he always
did when he was thinking; "oi doan't know, Bill--oi hoape he didn't
do it, wi' all my heart. But oi doan't know aboot it. He war sorely
tried--that be sartain. But if he did it, he did it; it makes no
difference to me. It doan't matter to me one snap ov the finger whether
the lad killed Foxey or whether he didn't--that bain't my business or
yours. What consarns me is, as the son of the man as saved my child's
loife at t' cost of his own be hunted by the constables and be in risk
of his loife. That's t' question as comes home to me--oi've had nowt
else ringing in my ears all day. Oi ha' been oot to a searching high
and low. Oi ain't a found him, but oi ha made oop moi moind whaat I be
agoing to do."

They had moved a little away from the cottage now, but Luke lowered his
voice:

"Oi be agoing down to t' town in the morning to give moiself oop vor the
murder of Foxey."

Bill gave an exclamation of astonishment:

"But thou didn'st do it, Luke?"

"I moight ha' done it for owt thou know'st, Bill. He wer the worst of
maisters, and, as thou know'st, Bill, oi hated him joost as all the
countryside did. He's been warned by King Lud and ha' been obliged to
get the sojers at his factory. Well, thou knowest it was nateral as
he would drive down last noight to see how t' chaps at t' engine was
a-getting on, and it coomed across my moind as it wer a good opportunity
vor to finish un; so ther thou hast it."

Bill gazed in astonishment through the darkness at his companion.

"But it bain't true, Luke? Thou wast talking to me arter thou coom'd out
of the Coo at noine o'clock, an thou saidst as thou was off to bed."

"Nowt of the koind," Luke replied. "Oi told ye, thou know'st, as I wer
a-going down to t' toon and oi had got a job in hand. Oi spoke mysterous
loike, and you noticed as how oi had got a long rope coiled up in moi
hand."

Bill gave a gasp of astonishment.

"That's what thou hast got to say," Luke said doggedly; "only astead o'
its being at noine o'clock it war at ten. Oi were just a-slipping owt
of the cottage, t' others were all asleep and knew nowt aboot moi having
goone out."

Bill was silent now.

"Oi wish oi had a-thowt of it," he said at last; "oi would ha' doon it
moiself."

"Oi wouldn't ha' let thee, Bill," Luke said quietly. "He be a friend of
thine, and oi know thou lovest him loike a brother, and a soight mor'n
most brothers; but it be moi roight. The captain gave his loife vor moi
child's, and oi bee a going vor to give mine for his. That will make us
quits. Besides, thou art young; oi be a-getting on. Jarge, he will be
a-arning money soon; and Polly, she can get a place in sarvice, and 'ul
help t' young uns. They will manage. Oi ha' been thinking it over in all
loites, and ha' settled it all in moi moind."

Bill was silent for a time and then said:

"Ther be one thing agin' it, Luke, and it be this: As we can't hear nowt
of Maister Ned, oi be a thinking as he ha' made straight vor Liverpool
or Bristol or London, wi' a view to going straight across the seas or of
'listing, or doing somewhat to keep out of t' way. He be sure to look in
t' papers, to see how things be a-going on here; and as sure as he sees
as how you've gived yourself up and owed up as you ha' done it, he will
coom straight back again and say as how it were him."

"Maister Ned might ha' killed Foxey in a passion, but not loike this. He
didn't mean to kill him, but only vor to give him a shaake and frighten
him. But oi be sartin sure as he wouldn't let another be hoonged in his
place. So ye see thou'd do more harm nor good."

"Oi didn't think of that," Luke said, rubbing his chin. "That be so,
surely. He'd be bound to coom back agin. Well, lad, oi will think it
over agin avore moorning, and do thou do t' same. Thou know'st moi
wishes now. We ha' got atween us to get Maister Ned off--that be the
thing as be settled. It doan't matter how it's done, but it's got to be
done soomhow; and oi rely on thee to maake moi story good, whatever it
be.

"There can't be nowt wrong about it--a loife vor a loife be fair, any
way. There be more nor eno' in Yorkshire in these toimes, and one more
or less be of no account to any one."

"Oi be thy man, Luke," Bill said earnestly. "Whatever as thou sayest oi
will sweer to; but I would reyther change places."

"That caan't be, Bill, so it bain't no use thinking aboot it. Oi know
thou wilt do thy best vor Polly and t' young uns. It 'ull be rough on
her, but it bain't to be helped; and as she will be going away from
Varley and settling elsewhere, it wouldn't be brought up again her
as she had an uncle as were a Luddite and got hoong for killing a bad
maister. Goodnoight, lad! oi will see thee i' t' morning."




CHAPTER XIII: COMMITTED FOR TRIAL


After a talk with Luke Marner early in the morning Bill Swinton went
down into Marsden to hear if there was any news of Ned. He was soon back
again.

"Maister Ned's took," he said as he met Luke, who was standing in front
of his cottage awaiting his return before starting out to renew his
search for Ned.

"Oi hear, at noine o'clock last noight he walked in to Justice
Thompson's and said as he had coom to give hisself up. He said as how
he had been over at Painton, where the old woman as was his nurse lives;
and directly as the news coom in t' arternoon as Foxey had been killed
and he was wanted for the murder, he coom straight over."

"That's roight," Luke said heartily; "that settles it. He must ha' been
innocent or he would ha' bolted straight away, and not coom back and
gi'd hisself oop to justice. It were only his hiding away as maade oi
think as he moight ha' done it. Noo in course he will be able to clear
hisself; for if he was over at Painton, why, he couldn't be here--that
be plain to any one."

"Oi be aveared, by what t' constable told me, as he won't be able vor to
prove it. It seems as how he didn't get to Painton till t' morning. He
says as how he were awalking aboot on t' moor all night. So you see he
will have hard work vor to clear hisself."

"Then I shall ha' to give meself up," Luke said quietly. "Ye see as
it can't do him harm now, 'cause he ha' coom back; and ef oi says as I
killed the man they will open the doors, and he will only have to walk
out."

"Oi ha' been a-thinking of that as I coom back," Bill said, "and oi
doan't think as oi see my way clear through it now. Firstly, if Maister
Ned did it, of course he will hold his tongue and leave 'em to prove it,
which maybe they can't do; so he has a chance of getting off. But if you
cooms forward and owns up, he will be saaf, if he did it, to say so at
once; and so you will have done him harm rather nor good. Vor of course
he will be able to prove his story better nor you will yourn, and you
will have put the noose round his neck instead of getting it put round
yourn. In the second place, it be loike enough as they lawyer chaps
moight find out as your story weren't true when they coom to twisting
me inside owt in the box. They might foind as oi war a-swearing false.
There be never no saying. They moight prove as that bit of rope warn't
yourn. Polly moight swear as she hadn't been asleep till arter the
time you said you went out, and that you never moved as long as she war
awake. Lots of unexpected things moight turn up to show it war a lie and
then you know they'd drop onto Maister Ned wourse nor ever."

"I doan't believe they would ask you any questions, Bill. When a
man cooms and says, 'Oi did a murder,' they doan't want to ask many
questions aboot it. They takes it vor granted as he wouldn't be such a
fool as vor to say he did it when he didn't. But th' other point be more
sarous. It be loike enough as t' lad did it, and if he did he will out
wi' it when oi cooms forward. If oi could get to see him first oi moight
argue him into holding his tongue by pointing owt that moi loife bain't
of so much valley as hissen, also that I owe a debt to his feyther."

"Well, oi ha' been thinking it over," Bill said, "and moi opinion is
thou had best hold thy tongue till the trial. Thou can'st be in the
court. Ef the jury foind him innocent, of course thou will't hold thy
tongue; ef they foind him guilty, then thou'lt get up in the court, and
thou'lt say to the joodge, civil loike:

"Moi lord, the gentlemen of the jury have made a mistake; oi am the
chap as killed Foxey and oi ha' got a young man here as a witness as moi
words is true."

"Perhaps that will be the best way, Bill," Luke said thoughtfully. "Oi
ha' bin thinking how we moight get over Polly's evidence agin me; every
noight oi will get up regular and coom and ha' a talk wi' you; oi will
coom out wi'out my shoes as quiet as a cat, and then if Polly sweers
as oi didn't leave t' house that noight thou can'st sweer as she knows
nothing at all aboot it, as oi ha' been out every noight to see thee."

So the matter was allowed to stand for the time; and Bill and Luke, when
they had had their breakfast, went down again to Marsden to hear what
was going on. Marsden was greatly excited. The sensation caused by the
news of the murder scarcely exceeded that which was aroused when it was
heard that Ned Sankey had come in and given himself up. Some thought
that at the examination which was to take place at noon he would at once
confess his guilt, while others believed that he would plead not guilty,
and would throw the burden of proving that he killed his stepfather upon
the prosecution.

All through the previous day Mrs. Mulready had been the central object
of interest to the town gossips pending the capture of her son. Dr.
Green had been in and out of the house all day. It was known that she
had passed from one fit of hysterics into another, and that the doctor
was seriously alarmed about her state. Rumors were about that the
servants, having been interviewed at the back gate, said, that in the
intervals of her screaming and wild laughter she over and over again
accused Ned as the murderer of her husband. Dr. Green, when questioned,
peremptorily refused to give any information whatever as to his
patient's opinions or words.

"The woman is well nigh a fool at the best of times," he said irritably,
"and at present she knows no more what she is saying than a baby. Her
mind is thrown completely off any little balance that it had and she is
to all intents and purposes a lunatic."

Only with his friend Mr. Porson, who called upon him after the first
visit had been paid to Mrs. Mulready immediately after her husband's
body had been brought in, did Dr. Green discuss in any way what had
happened.

"I agree with you, Porson, in doubting whether the poor boy had a hand
in this terrible business. We both know, of course, that owing to the
bad training and total absence of control when he was a child in India
his temper was, when he first came here, very hot and ungovernable.
His father often deplored the fact to me, blaming himself as being to
a great extent responsible for it, through not having had time to watch
and curb him when he was a child; but he was, as you say, an excellently
disposed boy, and your testimony to the efforts which he has made to
overcome his faults is valuable. But I cannot conceal from you, who are
a true friend of the boy's, what I should certainly tell to no one else,
namely, that I fear that his mother's evidence will be terribly against
him.

"She has always been prejudiced against him. She is a silly, selfish
woman. So far as I could judge she cared little for her first husband,
who was a thousand times too good for her; but strangely enough she
appears to have had something like a real affection for this man
Mulready, who, between ourselves, I believe, in spite of his general
popularity in the town, to have been a bad fellow. One doesn't like to
speak ill of the dead under ordinary circumstances, but his character
is an important element in the question before us. Of course among my
poorer patients I hear things of which people in general are ignorant,
and it is certain that there was no employer in this part of the country
so thoroughly and heartily detested by his men."

"I agree with you cordially," Mr. Porson said. "Unfortunately I know
from Ned's own lips that the lad hated his stepfather; but I can't bring
myself to believe that he has done this."

"I hope not," the doctor said gravely, "I am sure I hope not; but I have
been talking with his brother, who is almost heartbroken, poor boy, and
he tells me that there was a terrible scene last night. It seems that
Mulready was extremely cross and disagreeable at tea time; nothing,
however, took place at the table; but after the meal was over, and the
two boys were alone together in that little study of theirs, Ned made
some disparaging remarks about Mulready. The door, it seems, was open.
The man overheard them, and brutally assaulted the boy, and indeed
Charlie thought that he was killing him. He rushed in and fetched his
mother, who interfered, but not before Ned had been sadly knocked about.
Mulready then drove off to his factory, and Ned, who seems to have been
half stunned, went out almost without saying a word, and, as you know,
hasn't been heard of since.

"It certainly looks very dark against him. You and I, knowing the boy,
and liking him, may have our doubts, but the facts are terribly against
him, and unless he is absolutely in the position to prove an alibi, I
fear that it will go hard with him."

"I cannot believe it," Mr. Porson said, "although I admit that the facts
are terribly against him. Pray, if you get an opportunity urge upon his
mother that her talk will do Ned horrible damage and may cost him his
life. I shall at once go and instruct Wakefield to appear for him, if
he is taken, and to obtain the best professional assistance for his
defense. I feel completely unhinged by the news, the boy has been such a
favorite of mine ever since I came here; he has fought hard against his
faults, and had the makings of a very fine character in him. God grant
that he may be able to clear himself of this terrible accusation!"

Ned's first examination was held on the morning after he had given
himself up, before Mr. Simmonds and Mr. Thompson. The sitting was a
private one. The man who first found Mr. Mulready's body testified to
the fact that a rope had been laid across the road. Constable Williams
proved that when he arrived upon the spot nothing had been touched. Man
and horse lay where they had fallen, the gig was broken in pieces, a
strong rope was stretched across the road. He said that on taking the
news to Mrs. Mulready he had learned from the servants that the prisoner
had not slept at home that night, and that there had been a serious
quarrel between him and the deceased the previous evening.

After hearing this evidence Ned was asked if he was in a position to
account for the time which had elapsed between his leaving home and his
arrival at his nurse's cottage.

He replied that he could only say that he had been wandering on the
moor.

The case was remanded for a week, as the evidence of Mrs. Mulready
and the others in the house would be necessary, and it was felt that
a mother could not be called upon to testify against her son with her
husband lying dead in the house.

"I am sorry indeed to see you in this position," Mr. Simmonds said to
