Otto took what comfort he could in the knowledge that his mother was
constantly looking out for some way to help Wiseli.

He was always planning some way to help her himself, but never hit upon
any thing that could be carried out. He saw very well that she could not
free herself; and the only idea that occurred to him as Christmas drew
near was to write on his list of wishes, in huge letters so big that
they could easily be read from heaven above, "I wish that the Christ
child would set Wiseli at liberty."

Winter was come again, and the coast offered its feast of inexhaustible
pleasure to the children, who never wearied of its charm. The moon shone
with the most unusual brightness, it seemed to Otto, who, at last, had
the cleverness to suggest that all the children should collect on the
hillside at seven o'clock to take advantage of its beauty for an evening
coasting-party.

This suggestion was received with universal approbation, and the
children separated at five o'clock when it began to be dark, to meet
again at seven for their favorite amusement.

Otto's mother was not so enthusiastic over this great scheme as were the
children, and could not agree with them when they expressed their
delight. She said it was too cold for them to be out late into the
evening; that there was great danger of accidents in the uncertain
moonlight; and particularly objected to allowing Pussy to expose
herself. But her objections only served to enhance the interest the
children felt for the expedition, and Pussy pleaded for her consent as
if her very life hung on being one of this coasting-party. Otto
promised, "upon his word of honor," that he would not let any thing
happen to his sister, and would always keep near to her and protect her.
At last their mother gave her consent; and, with great noise and
rejoicing, the children went out into the beautiful, clear, cold
moonlight.

Every thing went on without a drawback. The coast was in perfect
condition; and the mysteriousness of the darker places, upon which the
moonlight did not fall, heightened the interest of the occasion. There
were a vast number of children assembled, and all were in the best
humor. Otto let them all go down first; then he followed, and Pussy came
last of all, so that no one could run her down. Otto had arranged it in
this way, so that he could always glance backward to see that his little
sister went safely down the coast.

As every thing went so smoothly and happily, somebody proposed that they
should make a "train;" that is, bind all the sleds together, and so go
down: it would be more delightful than ever by moonlight. No sooner said
than done. Only Pussy's sled was not tied to her brother's, for he
feared lest the straining and shocks that often took place in this kind
of coasting might prove dangerous to her. She followed, therefore, as
usual; but Otto could not stop his sled if she was delayed, for he had
to go on with the "train." Off they went, and the long chain reached the
bottom safely and happily.

Suddenly Otto heard a fearful cry, and he recognized at once his little
sister's voice. What had happened? He had no choice, however, but to go
down to the very end with the merry party to which he was closely
fastened--down to the foot of the hill, no matter how great his fear
might be. Once at the bottom, however, he tore his sled loose, and ran
up the hill as quickly as possible, with all the others at his heels;
for they had all heard the screams, and wanted to see what they meant.
Half-way up the ascent stood Pussy by her sled, and screamed and cried
rivers of tears. Out of breath with his haste, Otto could hardly call
out, "What is the matter? What has happened?"

"He did--he did--he did," sobbed Pussy, and could get no further.

"What did he do? Who was it? Where? Who?" stammered Otto.

"That man there, that man; he did try to kill me, and said terrible
words, too."

As much as this Otto understood, accompanied by screams and sobs.

"Be quiet now, Pussy: do not go on like that. He did not kill you, after
all. Did he really strike you?" asked Otto, very gently and soothingly,
for he was much alarmed.

"No," sobbed Pussy, beginning again; "but he was going to. He had a
stick, and he held it out like that, and said, 'Wait a moment;' and such
dreadful words he said, too."

"Then he really did not do any thing to hurt you?" asked Otto, and began
to breathe more freely.

"But he did, he did; and you were all off down the hill, and I was all
alone." And Pussy's tears and sobs continued to break forth.

"Hush, hush!" said Otto, consolingly. "Now try to be quiet. I will not
leave you again, and the man will not trouble you any more; and if you
will be quiet and good, I will give you the red candy cock that was on
the Christmas-tree."

This made an impression upon Pussy. She dried her eyes, and did not make
another sound; for that big red candy cock on the Christmas-tree was
what the child had most wished for. In the division of the things it had
fallen to Otto's share; but his little sister had never forgotten her
longing for it. Now that every thing was quiet again, the children began
to climb the hill, and they tried to make out who the man could be who
had threatened to kill Pussy.

"Oh, kill! Not so bad as that," interposed Otto. "I saw a big man with a
stick, who was obliged to step into the snow to get out of our way when
we went down the coast on the 'train.' It made him angry to be obliged
to go into the snow; and finding Pussy alone there, he scolded her a
little to relieve himself."

This explanation satisfied everybody, it was so perfectly natural.
Everybody wondered that they had not thought of it before,--indeed,
thought they had,--and soon forgot all about it, and continued coasting.
This, however, had an end, like all other pleasures; for eight o'clock
had struck long ago, and that was the hour at which they were to break
up and go home. On the way back, Otto charged Pussy not to speak of her
adventure; otherwise their mother would never again let them go coasting
in the moonlight. She should have the candy cock, but must promise not
to say a word if she took it.

All traces of her tears had long vanished, and nothing betrayed their
secret to the family.

Both children slept quietly in their beds soon after, and Pussy dreamed
of the red candy cock, and shouted out with pleasure in her dreams.
Presently there was a loud knocking at the house-door, that made Colonel
Ritter and his wife spring up from the table, where they were
comfortably talking about the children; and old Trine called out of the
window, in an angry tone,--

"What sort of a way of knocking is that?"

"A terrible thing has happened," said some one from below. "We want the
colonel to come down the hill. They have found Andrew the carpenter
dead." And off ran the messenger again.

Mr. and Mrs. Ritter had heard enough, however, for they had heard this
sad news from the window. The colonel threw his cloak about his
shoulders, and hastened down to the carpenter's. As he entered the room,
he found that there were already a crowd of people assembled. The
justice of the peace and the chief magistrate had been fetched, and a
number of curious and sympathetic people had come along with them.
Andrew lay on the floor, in his blood, and gave no sign of life. The
colonel went to his side.

"Has nobody been for the doctor?" he asked. "We want a doctor at once."

Nobody had thought of that,--there was no use in trying to do any thing,
they said.

"Run, somebody, as quickly as possible," said the colonel. "Go,
you,"--to a lad who stood near,--"tell the doctor that I send him word
to come here immediately." He helped to raise Andrew from the ground,
and to carry him into his bedroom, and to lay him on the bed. Then he
went back to the chattering group of neighbors, to find out how the
accident had taken place,--if anybody knew the precise circumstances.

The miller's son stepped forward, and told his story. He was passing
the house about a half-hour ago, he said; and, seeing a light in the
window, stopped to ask if his bits of furniture were finished. He found
the door of the room open, and Andrew lying dead on the floor, covered
with blood; and by his side stood Meadow-Joggi, and held out a piece of
gold between his fingers. Then the miller's son had called all the
neighbors, and sent some one for the chief magistrate and everybody
whose business it was.

Meadow-Joggi--who was so called because he lived down in the
meadow-land--was a foolish fellow, who was supported by the neighbors,
who gave him little jobs of work suitable to his feeble capacity, such
as carrying sand or stone where they were needed, or helping to sort the
fruit, or gathering fagots in winter.

No one ever had heard of his doing any mischief. The miller's son told
him to stay where he was until the president came; and so Joggi stood in
the corner, held his fist tightly closed, and laughed to himself. The
doctor soon arrived on the scene, and behind him came the president. The
council took its place in the middle of the room, to consider the case.
The doctor, however, went at once into the bedroom, and the colonel
followed him. The doctor examined the motionless body carefully.

"Here it is," he cried presently. "Here, at the back of the head, is
where Andrew was struck. There is a large wound here."

"But he is not dead, doctor, is he?"

"No, no; he breathes feebly, but it is with difficulty."

The doctor wanted all sorts of things,--water and sponges, and linen
rags, and so on,--and the people ran this way and that, and searched and
pulled things out from the closets and drawers, and produced a heap of
things, but nothing that was useful for this occasion.

"We want a woman here who has some intelligence, and knows what is
needed in sickness," said the doctor at last, rather impatiently. They
all called out this one or that one; but not one was able to come of all
those mentioned.

"Let somebody go to the 'Heights,' and tell my wife to send old Trine
down here," said the colonel. And somebody ran off.

"Your wife won't thank you," said the doctor; "for I shall not be able
to let the nurse leave this patient for three days and nights."

Trine came, laden with all needful things, much sooner than anybody
dared hope for her; for she was all ready with her big basket packed,
and her mistress stood by her side, expecting the order for her to go
down to Andrew's; for they would not believe that Andrew was dead, and
had thought of every thing that could possibly be needed. She had
sponges and bandages, lint and oil, and warm flannels, packed in her
basket, and had only to run off when the messenger came. The doctor was
delighted.

"Everybody must go now. Good-night, colonel; and turn all those people
out of the house, will you?" cried the doctor, and closed the door
without ceremony as soon as the colonel went out.

The committee was still sitting, but the colonel explained that the
house must be emptied; so they decided to imprison Joggi, and then
institute investigations. Two men took Joggi between them, so that he
could not get away, and carried him off to the poor-house, and shut him
up in a room. Joggi went with them very willingly, and laughed now and
then, and looked into his hand.

The following morning Mrs. Ritter hastened down to Andrew's house in
great anxiety. Trine came softly from the bedroom, and brought the
welcome news that Andrew had come to himself a little; that the doctor
had already made his visit, and found his patient in better condition
than he expected; but he left especial orders that nobody should be
allowed to enter the room. Andrew was not to be permitted to speak one
word, even if he wished to speak: only the doctor and the nurse might
come into his presence. Trine said these words with great pride, for she
was a very good nurse, and well aware of the importance of the
situation. Mrs. Ritter fully appreciated all this, and went home
rejoicing over the news.

A week went by. Every morning Mrs. Ritter went down to the sick man's
house to obtain an accurate statement of his condition herself, and to
find out if any thing were needed for his comfort, in order that all his
wants might be supplied at once. Every day Otto and Pussy sent the same
message; namely, "When could they be permitted to see their sick
friend?" but the doctor was inexorable. There was no possibility of
Trine being allowed to go, either; and the doctor could not praise her
enough for her intelligent care of the patient. After the week was
fairly over, however, the doctor sent word to the colonel that if he
would come to Andrew's at the same time he made his daily visit, they
would go in together; for now that Andrew was able to talk, the doctor
wished to have the colonel hear what could be told about the terrible
assault that had prostrated the good carpenter.

Andrew was very glad to press the colonel's hand gratefully in his
own,--he knew very well where all the care and comfort came from with
which he was surrounded.

He collected his thoughts to the best of his ability to answer the
questions put to him. This was, however, all that he could tell them. He
had taken out the yearly sum of money that he always carried up to the
colonel for investment, and was in the act of counting it over once
again, to be sure that it was right. It was rather late in the evening,
and he was seated with his back towards the door. While he was in the
midst of counting, he heard some one enter the room; and before he had
time to turn about, he received a tremendous blow upon his head. After
that, all was a blank.

There had been a heap of money upon the table. Nothing was to be found
of it, however, but the piece that Joggi held in his hand when they
found him.

Even supposing that Joggi were the malefactor, where was the rest of
that money? When Andrew learned that they had taken Joggi into custody
and shut him up, he was very uneasy.

"Oh, you must let him go, poor Joggi!" he said. "He never would hurt the
smallest infant. _He_ never struck me."

For all that, Andrew had no suspicion who it could have been. He had no
enemy, he said, and knew of nobody who would wish him harm.

"It may have been a stranger," suggested the doctor, as he looked at the
window. "If you sat here, with the bright light shining upon your pile
of money while you counted it over on the table, anybody going by the
house could have seen you, and taken a notion to rob you."

"I suppose it must have been in that way," said Andrew. "I never
thought of such a thing, however. Every thing has always stood open in
the house."

"It is well that you have laid something by already, Andrew," said the
colonel. "Do not fret over this: it is so lucky that you will soon be
well again."

"Certainly, colonel; and I have every reason for thankfulness. The good
God has given me far more than I have any use for." And he shook hands
with his friends, who agreed, in parting, that Andrew was much less to
be pitied than the man who tried to kill him.

There was a sad story told about Joggi, which excited the sympathy of
the schoolboys exceedingly. Otto brought it home with him and repeated
it several times, for it made a deep impression on his mind. It seemed
that when they brought Joggi, laughing all the way, into the almshouse
that evening, he was told to give up his piece of gold to one of his
guards,--the son of the justice of the peace; but Joggi shut his fist
tighter, and would not give it up at all. But the two men were stronger
than he, and at last forced his hand open; and, as they took the money
away from him, one of them said, "Only wait a little till the others
come, then you will get what you deserve. You will see!" For he was
vexed at the scratches he had got in the struggle.

These threats had frightened the poor half-witted fellow, who thought he
was going to be beheaded, having no idea of what his punishment might
be. And he refused to eat, and cried and groaned incessantly.

The officers of justice had been to see him twice, to assure him that,
if he would only tell them what he had done, he should not be
punished. He repeated that he had not done any thing but look in at
the window; and when he saw Andrew on the floor, he went to him and
shook him a little, and then he was dead. He saw something shining in
the corner, and picked it up; and then the miller's son came in, and a
lot of other people.

When Joggi got thus far in his story, he began to cry and groan, and
would not be pacified.




CHAPTER VII.

ANDREW IS BETTER, AND SOMEBODY ELSE, ALSO.


Mrs. Ritter went, as usual, to visit her friend, but no longer remained
closeted with Trine, for she could now go freely into his room, talk
with him for a little while, and mark his daily improvement. Otto and
Pussy also paid several visits, armed with dainties for their favorite.
So that Andrew said to the old Trine, with great feeling, "If I were a
king, they could not show me more kindness."

The doctor was well pleased with the rapidity of the cure, and said to
the colonel, whom he met on the threshold one day,--

"Every thing has worked wonderfully well. Your wife can have her Trine
back again; and tell her she was worth her weight in gold. I only wish
there were some one to stay with Andrew for a little while; or who could
come in, now and then, to help him. The poor fellow must have something
to eat, and he has no wife nor child,--in fact, nobody. Do ask Mrs.
Ritter if she cannot think of something that will help us."

The colonel carried his message correctly, and his wife went the next
day to Andrew's, as usual; and, seating herself by his bedside, said,
without circumlocution, "I have something to say to you, Andrew. Are you
inclined to listen to me?"

"Certainly, certainly. Every thing you do is right," said Andrew,
supporting his head on his hand, and prepared to give her all his
attention.

"I am going to take Trine away, now that you are so well," began
Mrs. Ritter.

"Oh, dear lady, I beg you to believe me, I have wished to send her home
for a long time past. I know how much you must miss her."

"I would not have allowed her to enter my house, if she had tried to
come back before," replied Mrs. Ritter. "But now it is different: the
doctor has dismissed her. He says, however,--and I fully agree with
him,--that you need some one who can wait upon you, cook for you, or
fetch your food from my house, and do a hundred little things: somebody
for at least a few weeks. Now, Andrew, why cannot you have little Wiseli
to do this?"

The words were scarcely spoken, when Andrew almost sprang up in his bed.
