4. A condemned man was led out for execution, he had taken human life,
but under circumstances of the greatest provocation, and public sympathy
was active in his behalf. Thousands had signed petitions for a reprieve,
a favorable answer had been expected the night before, and, though it
had not come, even the sheriff felt confident that it would yet arrive
in season. Thus the morning passed without the appearance of the
messenger. The last moment was up. The prisoner took his place on the
drop, the cap was drawn over his eyes, the bolt was drawn, and a
lifeless body hung suspended in the air. Just at that moment a horseman
came into sight, galloping down the hill, his steed covered with foam.
He carried a packet in his right hand, which he waved to the crowd. He
was the express rider with the reprieve. But he had come too late. A
comparatively innocent man had died an ignominious death, because a
watch had been five minutes too slow, making its bearer arrive _behind
time_.

5. It is continually so in life. The best laid plans, the most important
affairs, the fortunes of individuals, the wealth of nations, honor,
happiness, life itself, are daily sacrificed because somebody is "behind
time." There are men who always fail in whatever they undertake, simply
because they are "behind time." Five minutes in a crisis are worth
years. It is but a little period, yet it has often saved a fortune, or
redeemed a people. If there is one virtue that should be cultivated more
than another by him who would succeed in life, it is _punctuality_; if
there is one error that should be avoided, it is being _behind time_.

QUESTIONS.--1. What sad results are mentioned, in consequence of being
_behind time?_ 2. What virtue should be cultivated, and what error
avoided? 3. What is the use of the hyphen in the word _re-enforcements?_
See SANDERS' NEW SPELLER, page 165.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LX.

   TWIN' ED, interwoven.
   GAR' LAND, wreath of flowers.
   MUS' ED, thought; meditated.
   AN TIQUE', (_an teek'_,) ancient.
   MOLD, shape; form.
   RARE, scarce; seldom seen.
   SOOTH ED, calmed; quieted.
   THROB' BED, beat; palpitated.
   CO' ZY, snug; comfortable.
   EBB' ED, flowed back.
   JOUR' NEY, travel.
   LONG' ING, earnestly desiring.
   TIE, bond of affection.
   RIV' EN, torn asunder.


"HOW HAPPY I'LL BE."

1. A little girl sat amid the flowers,
   In the blush and bloom of childhood's hours;
   She twined the buds in a garland fair,
   And bound them up in her shining hair:
   "Ah, me!" said she, "_how happy I'll be_,
   When ten years more have gone over me,
   And I am a maiden with youth's bright glow
   Flushing my cheek, and lighting my brow!"

2. A maiden mused in a pleasant room,
   Where the air was filled with a soft perfume;
   Vases were near of antique mold,
   And beautiful pictures, rare and old;
   And she, amid all the beauty there,
   Was by far the loveliest and most fair.
   "Ah, me!" said she, "_how happy I'll be_,
   When my heart's own choice comes back to me,
   When I proudly stand by my dear one's side,
   With the thrilling joy of a youthful bride!"

3. A mother bent o'er the cradle nest
   Where she soothed her babe to his smiling rest;
   She watched the sleep of her cherub-boy,
   And her spirit throbbed with exulting joy.
   "Ah, me!" said she, "_how happy I'll be_,
   When he reaches manhood, proud and free,
   And the world bows down, in its rapture wild,
   It the earnest words of my darling child!"

4. An aged one sat by the cozy hearth,
   Counting life's sands as they ebbed from earth;
   Feeble and frail; the race she run
   Had borne her along to the setting sun.
   "Ah, me!" said she, "_how happy I'll be_,
   When from time's long fever my soul is free,
   When the world fades out with its weary strife,
   And I soar away to a better life!"

5. 'Tis thus we journey from youth to age,
   Longing to turn to another page,
   Striving to hasten the years away,
   Lighting our hearts with the future's ray,
   Hoping on earth till its visions fade,
   Wishing and waiting, through sun and shade,
   But turning, when earth's last tie is riven,
   To the beautiful rest of a fadeless Heaven.

QUESTIONS.--1. When did the little girl think she would be happy? 2.
What did she say when she became old? 3. What are we constantly
expecting from youth to age? 4. What is the meaning of the suffix _ing_,
in such words as _longing, striving, lighting_, &c.? See SANDERS &
McELLIGOTT'S ANALYSIS, page 134, Ex. 176.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXI.

   VET' ER AN, old soldier.
   GRASP' ED, seized hold of.
   AN' CIENT, old.
   MUR' MUR, ED, uttered in a low voice.
   IM MOR' TAL, imperishable.
   RAG' ED, was furious.
   RE MAIN', still exists.
   SIRE, father.
   LIGHT' EN ED, (EN, _make_; ED, _did_,) did make light.


THE SWORD OF BUNKER HILL.

WILLIAM R. WALLACE.

1. He lay upon his dying bed,
(pl.) His eye was growing dim,
   When, with a feeble voice, he called
     His weeping son to him:
   "Weep not, my boy," the veteran said,
     "I bow to Heaven's high will;
   But quickly from yon antlers bring,
     The sword of Bunker Hill."

2. The sword was brought; the soldier's eye
     Lit with a sudden flame;
   And, as he grasped the ancient blade,
     He murmured Warren's[1] name;
   Then said, "My boy, I leave you gold,
     But what is richer still,
   I leave you, mark me, mark me, now,
     The sword of Bunker Hill.

3. "'Twas on that dread, immortal day,
     I dared the Briton's band,
   A captain raised his blade on me,
     I tore it from his hand;
   And while the glorious battle raged,
     It lightened Freedom's will;
   For, boy, the God of Freedom blessed
     The sword of Bunker Hill.

4. "Oh! keep this sword," his accents broke,--
     A smile--and he was dead;
   But his wrinkled hand still grasped the blade,
     Upon that dying bed.
   The son remains, the sword remains,
     Its glory growing still,
   And twenty millions bless the sire
     And sword of Bunker Hill.

[Footnote 1: General Warren, a brave and valuable officer, fell by a
musket-ball, while fighting the British at Bunker's Hill, June 17th,
1775.]

QUESTIONS.--1. What request did the old veteran make of his son? 2. What
bequest did he make to him? 3. How did he obtain that sword? 4. What did
he say to his son? 5. Who was Warren?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXII.

   LE' GEND, fictitious narrative.
   MOR' TAL, deadly.
   COM' BAT, battle; conflict.
   PRI ME' VAL, first; primitive.
   MUS' CU LAR, strong; vigorous.
   CA DAV' ER OUS, pale; sickly.
   REF U GEE', runaway; fugitive.
   QUAR' TER, mercy; indulgence.
   PIN' ION ED, confined; shackled.
   A BYSS', yawning gulf.
   PRO POS' AL, offer; proposition.
   DI SHEV' EL ED, disordered.
   IM BO' SOM ED, surrounded; inclosed.
   CON FESS' ED, owned; acknowledged.
   RE LENT' ING, pitying; compassionate.
   RAN' DOM, venture.
   SU PER STI' TION, false religious belief.
   A VENGE', take satisfaction for.
   UN CON' SCIOUS, unaware.
   SUB LIM' I TY, grandeur.


THE BIBLE LEGEND OF THE WIS SA HI' KON.

LIPPARD.

1. It was here in the wilds of the Wis sa hi' kon, on the day of battle,
as the noonday sun came shining through the thickly clustered leaves,
that two men met in mortal combat. They grappled in deadly conflict near
a rock that rose, like the huge wreck of some primeval world, at least
one hundred feet above the dark waters of the Wis sa hi'kon.

2. That man with the dark brow and the darker gray eye,--with the
muscular form, clad in the blue hunting-frock of the Revolution,--is a
Continental, named Warner. His brother was murdered at the massacre of
Pao'li. That _other_ man, with long black hair drooping along his
cadaverous face, is clad in the half-military costume of a Tory refugee.
_That_ is the murderer of Pao'li, named Dabney.

3. They had met there in the woods by accident; and now they fought, not
with sword or rifle, but with long and deadly hunting-knives, that flash
in the light as they go turning, and twining, and twisting over the
green-sward. At last, the Tory is down!--down on the green-sward, with
the knee of the Continental upon his breast,--that up-raised knife
quivering in the light,--that dark-gray eye flashing death into his
face!

4. "Quarter! I yield!" gasped the Tory, as the knee was pressed upon his
breast. "Spare me!--I yield!"

5. "_My_ brother," said the patriot soldier, in a low tone of deadly
hate,--"_My_ brother cried for quarter on the night of Pa o' li, and,
even as he clung to your knees, you struck that knife into his heart.
Oh, I will give you the quarter of Pa o' li!" And his hand was raised
for the blow, and his teeth were clinched in deadly hate. He paused for
a moment, and then pinioned the Tory's arms, and, with one rapid stride,
dragged him to the verge of the rock, and held him quivering over the
abyss.

6. "Mercy!" gasped the Tory, turning black and ashy by turns, as that
awful gulf yawned below. "_Mercy! I have a wife! a child! spare me!_"

7. Then the Continental, with his muscular strength gathered for the
effort, shook the murderer once more over the abyss, and then hissed
this bitter sneer between his teeth,--"_My brother had a wife and two
children_. The morning after the night of Pa o' li, that wife was a
widow,--those children were orphans! Would not you like to go and beg
your life of that widow and her children?"

8. The proposal, made by the Continental in the mere mockery of hate,
was taken in serious earnest by the horror-stricken Tory. He begged to
be taken to the widow and her children, to have the pitiful privilege of
begging his life. After a moment's serious thought, the patriot soldier
consented. He bound the Tory's arms yet tighter, placed him on the rock
again, and then led him up the woods. A quiet cottage, imbosomed among
the trees, broke on their eyes.

9. They entered that cottage. There, beside the desolate hearth-stone,
sat the widow and her children. She was a matronly woman of about thirty
years, with a face faded by care, a deep, dark eye, and long, disheveled
hair about her shoulder. On one side was a dark-haired boy, of some six
years; on the other, a little girl, one year younger, with light hair
and blue eyes. The Bible, an old, venerable volume, lay open on that
mother's lap.

10. And then that pale-faced Tory flung himself on his knees, confessed
that he had butchered her husband on the night of Pa o'li, but begged
his life at her hands! _"Spare me, for the sake of my wife--my child!"_
He had expected that his pitiful moan would touch the widow's heart; but
not one relenting gleam softened her pale face.

11. "The Lord shall judge between us!" she said in a cold, icy tone,
that froze the murderer's heart. "Look! The Bible lies open before me. I
will close that volume, and then this boy shall open it, and place his
finger at random upon a line, and by _that line_ you shall live or die!"
This was a strange proposal, made in full faith of a wild and dark
superstition of the olden time. For a moment, the Tory, kneeling there,
livid as ashes, was wrapt in thought. Then, in a faltering voice, he
signified his consent.

12. Raising her dark eyes to heaven, the mother prayed the Great Father
to direct the finger of her son. She closed the book, and handed it to
that boy, whose young cheek reddened with loathing as he gazed upon his
father's murderer. He took the Bible, opened its holy pages at random,
and placed his fingers upon a verse.

13. Then there was a silence. That Continental soldier, who had sworn to
avenge his brother's death, stood there with dilating eyes and parted
lips. Then the culprit, kneeling on the floor, with a face like
discolored clay, felt his heart leap to his throat. Then, in a clear,
bold voice, the widow read this line from the Old Testament. It was
short, yet terrible: "_That man shall die!_"

14. Look! The brother springs forward to plunge a knife into the
murderer's heart; but the Tory, pinioned as he is, begs that one more
trial may be made by the little girl,--that child of five years, with
golden hair and laughing eyes. The widow consents. There is an awful
pause. With a smile in her eye, without knowing what she does, the
little girl opens the Bible,--she turns her laughing face away,--she
places her fingers upon the page.

15. That awful silence grows deeper. The deep-drawn breath of the
brother, and the broken gasps of the murderer, alone disturb the
stillness. The widow and dark-eyed boy are breathless. That little girl,
unconscious as she was, caught a feeling of awe from the countenances
around her, and stood breathless, her face turned aside, and her tiny
fingers resting on that line of life or death. At last, gathering
courage, the widow bent her eyes on the page, and read. It was a line
from the New Testament: "LOVE YOUR ENEMIES." Ah! that moment was
sublime!

16. Oh, awful Book of God! in whose dread pages we see Job talking face
to face with Jehovah, or Jesus waiting by Samaria's well, or wandering
by the waves of dark Galilee! Oh, awful Book! shining to-night, as I
speak, the light of that widow's home,--the glory of the mechanic's
shop,--shining where the world comes not, to look on the last night of
the convict in his cell, lightening the way to God, even over that dread
gibbet!

17. Oh, Book of terrible majesty and child-like love,--for sublimity
that crushes the soul into awe,--of beauty that melts the heart with
rapture! you never shone more strangely beautiful than there in the
lonely cot of the Wissa hi'kon, where you saved the murderer's life.
For,--need I tell you?--_that murderer's life was saved_. That widow
recognized the finger of God, and even the stern brother was awed into
silence. The murderer went his way.

18. Now look ye, how wonderful are the ways of Heaven! That very night,
as the widow sat by her lonely hearth, her orphans by her side,--sat
there with a crushed heart and hot eye-balls, thinking of her husband,
who, she supposed, now lay moldering on the blood-drenched soil of Pa o'
li,--there was a tap at the door. She opened it, and that husband,
living, though covered with wounds, was in her arms! He had fallen at Pa
o' li, but not in death. _He was alive_,--his wife lay panting on his
breast. That night there was a prayer in that wood-embowered cot of the
Wis sa hi' kon.

QUESTIONS.--1. What two men are said to have engaged in deadly combat?
2. Which gained the mastery? 3. What did the patriot soldier say to the
Tory, when he cried, _Quarter_? 4. What, when the Tory told him he had a
wife and child? 5. What proposal was made to him? 6. How was his fate to
be decided? 7. Was his life spared? 8. What proved the justice of the
decision?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXIII.

   VES' TI BULE, porch, entrance.
   VI' BRATE, move to and fro.
   IM MOR' TALS, undying creatures.
   MON' U MENTS, memorials.
   A CHIEVE', accomplish.
   MU TA BLE, changeable.
   IM MOR TAL' I TY, deathless existence.
   IL LU' MIN ATE, enlighten.
   UN DER STAND' ING, intellect.
   RE AL' I TIES, truths; facts.
   AS SAULTS', violent attacks.
   DE SER' TION, abandonment.
   IN EX HAUST' I BLE, never-failing.
   CHAR' TER, title; deed.


ADVICE TO THE YOUNG.

E.H. CHAPIN.

1. Young friends', in whatever pursuits you may engage, you must not
forget that the lawful objects of human efforts, are but means to higher
results and nobler ends. Start not forward in life with the idea of
becoming mere seekers of pleasure,--sportive butterflies searching for
gaudy flowers. Consider and act with reference to the true ends of
existence.

2. This world is but the vestibule of an immortal life. Every action of
your life touches on some chord that will vibrate in eternity. These
thoughts and motives within you, stir the pulses of a deathless spirit.
Act not, then, as mere creatures of this life, who, for a little while,
are to walk the valleys and the hills, to enjoy the sunshine and to
breathe the air, and then pass away and be no more; but _act_ as
immortals, with an _aim_ and a _purpose_ worthy of your high nature.

3. Set before you, as the chief object to be obtained, an _end_ that is
superior to any on earth,--_a desirable end_, A PERFECT END. Labor to
accomplish a work which shall survive unchanged and beautiful, when time
shall have withered the garland of youth, when thrones of power and
monuments of art shall have crumbled into ashes; and, finally, aim to
achieve something, which, when these our mutable and perishing voices
are hushed forever, shall live amid the songs and triumphs of
IMMORTALITY.

4. Well will it be for you, if you have a _guide_ within, which will aid
you in every issue which will arm you in every temptation, and comfort
you in every sorrow. Consult, then, that Volume whose precepts will
never fail you. Consult it with a deep aspiration after the true and
good, and it shall illuminate your understanding with divine realities.

5. Open your soul, and it shall breathe into it a holy influence, and
fill all its wants. Bind it close to your heart; it will be a shield
against all the assaults of evil. Read it in the lonely hour of
desertion; it will be the best of companions. Open it when the voyage of
life is troubled'; it is a sure chart. Study it in poverty'; it will
unhoard to you inexhaustible riches. Commune with it in sickness'; it
contains the medicine of the soul. Clasp it when dying'; IT IS THE
CHARTER OF IMMORTALITY.

QUESTIONS.--1. What ought we not to forget? 2. How ought the world to be
regarded? 3. How ought we to act and labor? 4. What ought we to consult?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXIV.

   IN TREP' ID, brave; heroic.
   BE TO' KEN ED, showed; indicated.
   E LAS' TIC, springy; agile.
   AT' TI TUDE, posture; position.
   UN' DER GROWTH, shrubbery.
   CON FRONT', stand before.
   CA TAS' TRO PHE, disaster; calamity.
   DE TER' RED, hindered; prevented.
   HUR' RI CANE, violent tempest.
   BUF' FET ING, beating with the hands.
   ATH LET' IC, strong; powerful.
   MI RAC' U LOUS, wonderful.
   TRE MEN DOUS, terrible; frightful.
   DES' PE RATE, rash; furious.
   IN VOL' UN TA RY, spontaneous.
   CAT' A RACT, waterfall.
   RE SUS' CI TATE, revive; bring to life.
   CH AR' AC TER IZ ED, distinguished.


THE INTREPID YOUTH.

1. It was a calm, sunny day in the year 1750; the scene, a piece of
forest land in the north of Virginia, near a noble stream of water.
Implements of surveying were lying about, and several men reclining
under the trees, betokened, by their dress and appearance, that they
composed a party engaged in laying out the wild lands of the country.

2. These persons had apparently just finished their dinner. Apart from
the group, walked a young man of a tall and compact frame, and moved
with the elastic tread of one accustomed to constant exercise in the
open air. His countenance wore a look of decision and manliness not
usually found in one so young, for he was apparently little over
eighteen years of age. His hat had been cast off, as if for comfort, and
he had paused, with one foot advanced, in a graceful and natural
attitude.

3. Suddenly there was a shriek, then another, and several in rapid
succession. The voice was that of a woman, and seemed to proceed from
the other side of a dense thicket. At the first scream, the youth turned
his head in the direction of the sound; but when it was repeated, he
pushed aside the undergrowth which separated him from it, and,
quickening his footsteps, as the cries succeeded each other in alarming
rapidity, he soon dashed into an open space on the banks of the stream,
where stood a rude log-cabin.

4. As the young man broke from the undergrowth, he saw his companions
crowded together on the banks of the river, while in the midst stood the
woman, from whom proceeded the shrieks, held back by two of the men, but
struggling vigorously for freedom. It was but the work of a moment for
the young man to make his way through the crowd and confront the female.
The instant her eye fell on him, she exclaimed, "Oh! sir, you will do
something for me. Make them release me,--for the love of God! _My
boy,--my poor boy is drowning, and they will not let me go!"_ "It would
be madness; she will jump into the river," said one, "and the rapids
would dash her to pieces in a moment!"

5. The youth had scarcely waited for these words, for he recollected the
child, a bold little boy of four years old, whose beautiful blue eyes
and flaxen ringlets made him a favorite with all who knew him. He had
been accustomed to play in the little inclosure before the cabin, but
the gate having been left open, he had stolen incautiously out, reached
the edge of the bank, and was in the act of looking over, when his
mother saw him.

6. The shriek she uttered only hastened the catastrophe she feared; for
the child, frightened at the cry of its mother, lost its balance, and
fell into the stream, which here went foaming and roaring along amid
innumerable rocks, constituting the most dangerous rapids known in that
section of the country. Scream now followed scream in rapid succession,
as the agonized mother rushed to the bank.

7. The party we left reclining in the shade within a few steps of the
accident, were immediately on the spot. Fortunate it was that they were
so near, else the mother would have jumped in after her child, and both
been lost. Several of the men approached the brink, and were on the
point of springing in after the child, when the sight of the sharp rocks
crowding the channel, the rush and whirl of the waters, and the want of
any knowledge where to look for the boy, deterred them, and they gave up
the enterprise.

8. Not so with the noble youth. His first work was to throw off his
coat; next to spring to the edge of the bank. Here he stood for a
moment, running his eyes rapidly over the scene below, taking with a
glance the different currents and the most dangerous of the rocks, in
order to shape his course when in the stream. He had scarcely formed his
conclusion, when he saw in the water a white object, which he knew to be
the boy's dress, and he plunged into the wild and roaring rapids.

9. _"Thank God, he will save my child,"_ cried the mother; _"there he
is!--oh! my boy, my darling boy, how could I leave you!"_ Every one had
rushed to the brink of the precipice, and was now following with eager
eyes the progress of the youth, as the current bore him onward, like a
feather in the embrace of the hurricane. Now it seemed as if he would be
dashed against a jutting rock, over which the water flew in foam, and a
whirlpool would drag him in, from whose grasp escape would appear
impossible.

10. At times, the current bore him under, and he would be lost to sight;
then, just as the spectators gave him up, he would appear, though far
from where he vanished, still buffeting amid the vortex. Oh, how that
mother's straining eyes followed him in his perilous career! how her
heart sunk when he went under,--and with what a gush of joy when she saw
him emerge again from the waters, and, flinging the waves aside with his
athletic arms, struggle on in pursuit of her boy!

11. But it seemed as if his generous efforts were not to avail; for,
though the current was bearing off the boy before his eyes, scarcely ten
feet distant, he could not, despite his gigantic efforts, overtake the
drowning child. On flew the youth and child; and it was miraculous how
each escaped being dashed in pieces against the rocks. Twice the boy
went out of sight, and a suppressed shriek escaped the mother's lips;
but twice he reappeared, and then, with hands wrung wildly together, and
breathless anxiety, she followed his progress, as his unresisting form
was hurried with the onward current.

12. The youth now appeared to redouble his exertions, for they were
approaching the most dangerous part of the river, where the rapids,
contracting between the narrow shores, shot almost perpendicularly down
a declivity of fifteen feet. The rush of the waters at this spot was
tremendous, and no one ventured to approach its vicinity, even in a
canoe, lest he should be dashed in pieces. What, then, would be the
youth's fate, unless he soon overtook the child? He seemed fully
sensible of the increasing peril, and now urged his way through the
foaming current with a desperate strength.

13. Three times he was on the point of grasping the child, when the
waters whirled the prize from him. The third effort was made just as
they were entering within the influence of the current above the fall;
and when it failed, the mother's heart sunk within her, and she groaned,
fully expecting the youth to give up his task. But no; he only pressed
forward the more eagerly; and, as they breathlessly watched amid the
boiling waters, they saw the form of the brave youth following close
after that of the boy.

14. And now, like an arrow from the bow, pursuer and pursued shot to the
brink of the precipice. An instant they hung there, distinctly visible
amid the foaming waters. Every brain grew dizzy at the sight. But a
shout of involuntary exultation burst from the spectators, when they saw
the boy held aloft by the right arm of the youth,--a shout that was
suddenly checked with horror, when they both vanished into the abyss
below!

15. A moment elapsed before a word was spoken, or a breath drawn. The
mother ran forward, and then stood gazing with fixed eyes at the foot of
the cataract, as if her all depended upon what the next moment should
reveal. Suddenly she gave the glad cry, (_f_.) "_There they are! See!
they are safe!_--Great God, I thank thee!" And, sure enough, there was
