
"Who made the joke?" asked Scraps.

"Diksey Horner. He is working in the mines, just now, but he'll be home
before long. Suppose we wait and talk with him about it? Maybe he'll be
willing to explain his joke to the Hoppers."

"All right," said Scraps. "I'll wait, if Diksey isn't too long."

"No, he's short; he's shorter than I am. Ha, ha, ha! Say! that's a
better joke than Diksey's. He won't be too long, because he's short.
Hee, hee, ho!"

The other Horners who were standing by roared with laughter and seemed
to like their Chief's joke as much as he did. Scraps thought it was odd
that they could be so easily amused, but decided there could be little
harm in people who laughed so merrily.




Chapter Twenty-Three

Peace Is Declared


"Come with me to my dwelling and I'll introduce you to my daughters,"
said the Chief. "We're bringing them up according to a book of rules
that was written by one of our leading old bachelors, and everyone says
they're a remarkable lot of girls."

So Scraps accompanied him along the street to a house that seemed on
the outside exceptionally grimy and dingy. The streets of this city
were not paved nor had any attempt been made to beautify the houses or
their surroundings, and having noticed this condition Scraps was
astonished when the Chief ushered her into his home.

Here was nothing grimy or faded, indeed. On the contrary, the room was
of dazzling brilliance and beauty, for it was lined throughout with an
exquisite metal that resembled translucent frosted silver. The surface
of this metal was highly ornamented in raised designs representing men,
animals, flowers and trees, and from the metal itself was radiated the
soft light which flooded the room. All the furniture was made of the
same glorious metal, and Scraps asked what it was.

"That's radium," answered the Chief. "We Horners spend all our time
digging radium from the mines under this mountain, and we use it to
decorate our homes and make them pretty and cosy. It is a medicine,
too, and no one can ever be sick who lives near radium."

"Have you plenty of it?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"More than we can use. All the houses in this city are decorated with
it, just the same as mine is."

"Why don't you use it on your streets, then, and the outside of your
houses, to make them as pretty as they are within?" she inquired.

"Outside? Who cares for the outside of anything?" asked the Chief. "We
Horners don't live on the outside of our homes; we live inside. Many
people are like those stupid Hoppers, who love to make an outside show.
I suppose you strangers thought their city more beautiful than ours,
because you judged from appearances and they have handsome marble
houses and marble streets; but if you entered one of their stiff
dwellings you would find it bare and uncomfortable, as all their show
is on the outside. They have an idea that what is not seen by others is
not important, but with us the rooms we live in are our chief delight
and care, and we pay no attention to outside show."

"Seems to me," said Scraps, musingly, "it would be better to make it
all pretty--inside and out."

"Seems? Why, you're all seams, my girl!" said the Chief; and then he
laughed heartily at his latest joke and a chorus of small voices echoed
the chorus with "tee-hee-hee! ha, ha!"

Scraps turned around and found a row of girls seated in radium chairs
ranged along one wall of the room. There were nineteen of them, by
actual count, and they were of all sizes from a tiny child to one
almost a grown woman. All were neatly dressed in spotless white robes
and had brown skins, horns on their foreheads and three-colored hair.

"These," said the Chief, "are my sweet daughters. My dears, I introduce
to you Miss Scraps Patchwork, a lady who is traveling in foreign parts
to increase her store of wisdom."

The nineteen Horner girls all arose and made a polite curtsey, after
which they resumed their seats and rearranged their robes properly.

"Why do they sit so still, and all in a row?" asked Scraps.

"Because it is ladylike and proper," replied the Chief.

"But some are just children, poor things! Don't they ever run around
and play and laugh, and have a good time?"

"No, indeed," said the Chief. "That would be improper in young ladies,
as well as in those who will sometime become young ladies. My daughters
are being brought up according to the rules and regulations laid down
by a leading bachelor who has given the subject much study and is
himself a man of taste and culture. Politeness is his great hobby, and
he claims that if a child is allowed to do an impolite thing one cannot
expect the grown person to do anything better."

"Is it impolite to romp and shout and be jolly?" asked Scraps.

"Well, sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn't," replied the Horner,
after considering the question. "By curbing such inclinations in my
daughters we keep on the safe side. Once in a while I make a good joke,
as you have heard, and then I permit my daughters to laugh decorously;
but they are never allowed to make a joke themselves."

"That old bachelor who made the rules ought to be skinned alive!"
declared Scraps, and would have said more on the subject had not the
door opened to admit a little Horner man whom the Chief introduced as
Diksey.

"What's up, Chief?" asked Diksey, winking nineteen times at the
nineteen girls, who demurely cast down their eyes because their father
was looking.

The Chief told the man that his joke had not been understood by the
dull Hoppers, who had become so angry that they had declared war. So
the only way to avoid a terrible battle was to explain the joke so they
could understand it.

"All right," replied Diksey, who seemed a good-natured man; "I'll go at
once to the fence and explain. I don't want any war with the Hoppers,
for wars between nations always cause hard feelings."

So the Chief and Diksey and Scraps left the house and went back to the
marble picket fence. The Scarecrow was still stuck on the top of his
picket but had now ceased to struggle. On the other side of the fence
were Dorothy and Ojo, looking between the pickets; and there, also,
were the Champion and many other Hoppers.

Diksey went close to the fence and said:

"My good Hoppers, I wish to explain that what I said about you was a
joke. You have but one leg each, and we have two legs each. Our legs
are under us, whether one or two, and we stand on them. So, when I said
you had less understanding than we, I did not mean that you had less
understanding, you understand, but that you had less standundering, so
to speak. Do you understand that?"

The Hoppers thought it over carefully. Then one said:

"That is clear enough; but where does the joke come in?'"

Dorothy laughed, for she couldn't help it, although all the others were
solemn enough.

"I'll tell you where the joke comes in," she said, and took the Hoppers
away to a distance, where the Horners could not hear them. "You know,"
she then explained, "those neighbors of yours are not very bright, poor
things, and what they think is a joke isn't a joke at all--it's true,
don't you see?"

"True that we have less understanding?" asked the Champion.

"Yes; it's true because you don't understand such a poor joke; if you
did, you'd be no wiser than they are."

"Ah, yes; of course," they answered, looking very wise.

"So I'll tell you what to do," continued Dorothy. "Laugh at their poor
joke and tell 'em it's pretty good for a Horner. Then they won't dare
say you have less understanding, because you understand as much as they
do."

The Hoppers looked at one another questioningly and blinked their eyes
and tried to think what it all meant; but they couldn't figure it out.

"What do you think, Champion?" asked one of them.

"I think it is dangerous to think of this thing any more than we can
help," he replied. "Let us do as this girl says and laugh with the
Horners, so as to make them believe we see the joke. Then there will be
peace again and no need to fight."

They readily agreed to this and returned to the fence laughing as loud
and as hard as they could, although they didn't feel like laughing a
bit. The Horners were much surprised.

"That's a fine joke--for a Horner--and we are much pleased with it,"
said the Champion, speaking between the pickets. "But please don't do
it again."

"I won't," promised Diksey. "If I think of another such joke I'll try
to forget it."

"Good!" cried the Chief Horner. "The war is over and peace is declared."

There was much joyful shouting on both sides of the fence and the gate
was unlocked and thrown wide open, so that Scraps was able to rejoin
her friends.

"What about the Scarecrow?" she asked Dorothy.

"We must get him down, somehow or other," was the reply.

"Perhaps the Horners can find a way," suggested Ojo. So they all went
through the gate and Dorothy asked the Chief Horner how they could get
the Scarecrow off the fence. The Chief didn't know how, but Diksey said:

"A ladder's the thing."

"Have you one?" asked Dorothy.

"To be sure. We use ladders in our mines," said he. Then he ran away to
get the ladder, and while he was gone the Horners gathered around and
welcomed the strangers to their country, for through them a great war
had been avoided.

In a little while Diksey came back with a tall ladder which he placed
against the fence. Ojo at once climbed to the top of the ladder and
Dorothy went about halfway up and Scraps stood at the foot of it. Toto
ran around it and barked. Then Ojo pulled the Scarecrow away from the
picket and passed him down to Dorothy, who in turn lowered him to the
Patchwork Girl.

As soon as he was on his feet and standing on solid ground the
Scarecrow said:

"Much obliged. I feel much better. I'm not stuck on that picket any
more."

The Horners began to laugh, thinking this was a joke, but the Scarecrow
shook himself and patted his straw a little and said to Dorothy: "Is
there much of a hole in my back?"

The little girl examined him carefully.

"There's quite a hole," she said. "But I've got a needle and thread in
the knapsack and I'll sew you up again."

"Do so," he begged earnestly, and again the Hoppers laughed, to the
Scarecrow's great annoyance.

While Dorothy was sewing up the hole in the straw man's back Scraps
examined the other parts of him.

"One of his legs is ripped, too!" she exclaimed.

"Oho!" cried little Diksey; "that's bad. Give him the needle and thread
and let him mend his ways."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the Chief, and the other Horners at once roared
with laughter.

"What's funny?" inquired the Scarecrow sternly.

"Don't you see?" asked Diksey, who had laughed even harder than the
others. "That's a joke. It's by odds the best joke I ever made. You
walk with your legs, and so that's the way you walk, and your legs are
the ways. See? So, when you mend your legs, you mend your ways. Ho, ho,
ho! hee, hee! I'd no idea I could make such a fine joke!"

"Just wonderful!" echoed the Chief. "How do you manage to do it,
Diksey?"

"I don't know," said Diksey modestly. "Perhaps it's the radium, but I
rather think it's my splendid intellect."

"If you don't quit it," the Scarecrow told him, "there'll be a worse
war than the one you've escaped from."

Ojo had been deep in thought, and now he asked the Chief: "Is there a
dark well in any part of your country?"

"A dark well? None that ever I heard of," was the answer.

"Oh, yes," said Diksey, who overheard the boy's question. "There's a
very dark well down in my radium mine."

"Is there any water in it?" Ojo eagerly asked.

"Can't say; I've never looked to see. But we can find out."

So, as soon as the Scarecrow was mended, they decided to go with Diksey
to the mine. When Dorothy had patted the straw man into shape again he
declared he felt as good as new and equal to further adventures.

"Still," said he, "I prefer not to do picket duty again. High life
doesn't seem to agree with my constitution." And then they hurried away
to escape the laughter of the Horners, who thought this was another
joke.




Chapter Twenty-Four

Ojo Finds the Dark Well


They now followed Diksey to the farther end of the great cave, beyond
the Horner city, where there were several round, dark holes leading
into the ground in a slanting direction. Diksey went to one of these
holes and said:

"Here is the mine in which lies the dark well you are seeking. Follow
me and step carefully and I'll lead you to the place."

He went in first and after him came Ojo, and then Dorothy, with the
Scarecrow behind her. The Patchwork Girl entered last of all, for Toto
kept close beside his little mistress.

A few steps beyond the mouth of the opening it was pitch dark. "You
won't lose your way, though," said the Horner, "for there's only one
way to go. The mine's mine and I know every step of the way. How's that
for a joke, eh? The mine's mine." Then he chuckled gleefully as they
followed him silently down the steep slant. The hole was just big
enough to permit them to walk upright, although the Scarecrow, being
much the taller of the party, often had to bend his head to keep from
hitting the top.

The floor of the tunnel was difficult to walk upon because it had been
worn smooth as glass, and pretty soon Scraps, who was some distance
behind the others, slipped and fell head foremost. At once she began to
slide downward, so swiftly that when she came to the Scarecrow she
knocked him off his feet and sent him tumbling against Dorothy, who
tripped up Ojo. The boy fell against the Horner, so that all went
tumbling down the slide in a regular mix-up, unable to see where they
were going because of the darkness.

Fortunately, when they reached the bottom the Scarecrow and Scraps were
in front, and the others bumped against them, so that no one was hurt.
They found themselves in a vast cave which was dimly lighted by the
tiny grains of radium that lay scattered among the loose rocks.

"Now," said Diksey, when they had all regained their feet, "I will show
you where the dark well is. This is a big place, but if we hold fast to
each other we won't get lost."

They took hold of hands and the Horner led them into a dark corner,
where he halted.

"Be careful," said he warningly. "The well is at your feet."

"All right," replied Ojo, and kneeling down he felt in the well with
his hand and found that it contained a quantity of water. "Where's the
gold flask, Dorothy?" he asked, and the little girl handed him the
flask, which she had brought with her.

Ojo knelt again and by feeling carefully in the dark managed to fill
the flask with the unseen water that was in the well. Then he screwed
the top of the flask firmly in place and put the precious water in his
pocket.

"All right!" he said again, in a glad voice; "now we can go back."

They returned to the mouth of the tunnel and began to creep cautiously
up the incline. This time they made Scraps stay behind, for fear she
would slip again; but they all managed to get up in safety and the
Munchkin boy was very happy when he stood in the Horner city and
realized that the water from the dark well, which he and his friends
had traveled so far to secure, was safe in his jacket pocket.




Chapter Twenty-Five

They Bribe the Lazy Quadling


"Now," said Dorothy, as they stood on the mountain path, having left
behind them the cave in which dwelt the Hoppers and the Horners, "I
think we must find a road into the Country of the Winkies, for there is
where Ojo wants to go next."

"Is there such a road?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I don't know," she replied. "I s'pose we can go back the way we came,
to Jack Pumpkinhead's house, and then turn into the Winkie Country; but
that seems like running 'round a haystack, doesn't it?"

"Yes," said the Scarecrow. "What is the next thing Ojo must get?"

"A yellow butterfly," answered the boy.

"That means the Winkie Country, all right, for it's the yellow country
of Oz," remarked Dorothy. "I think, Scarecrow, we ought to take him to
the Tin Woodman, for he's the Emp'ror of the Winkies and will help us
to find what Ojo wants."

"Of course," replied the Scarecrow, brightening at the suggestion. "The
Tin Woodman will do anything we ask him, for he's one of my dearest
