John could reach the baby now, and the little princess was handed down
by the tongs.



4.  Where Is She?

One fine summer day, a month after these her first adventures, during
which time she had been very carefully watched, the princess was lying
on the bed in the queen's own chamber, fast asleep.  One of the windows
was open, for it was noon, and the day was so sultry that the little
girl was wrapped in nothing less ethereal than slumber itself.  The
queen came into the room, and not observing that the baby was on the
bed, opened another window.  A frolicsome fairy wind, which had been
watching for a chance of mischief, rushed in at the one window, and
taking its way over the bed where the child was lying, caught her up,
and rolling and floating her along like a piece of flue, or a dandelion
seed, carried her with it through the opposite window, and away.  The
queen went down-stairs, quite ignorant of the loss she had herself
occasioned.

When the nurse returned, she supposed that her Majesty had carried her
off, and, dreading a scolding, delayed making inquiry about her.  But
hearing nothing, she grew uneasy, and went at length to the queen's
boudoir, where she found her Majesty.

"Please, your Majesty, shall I take the baby?" said she.

"Where is she?" asked the queen.

"Please forgive me.  I know it was wrong."

"What do you mean?" said the queen, looking grave.

"Oh! don't frighten me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the nurse, clasping
her hands.

The queen saw that something was amiss, and fell down in a faint.  The
nurse rushed about the palace, screaming, "My baby! my baby!"

Every one ran to the queen's room.  But the queen could give no orders.
They soon found out, however, that the princess was missing, and in a
moment the palace was like a beehive in a garden; and in one minute
more the queen was brought to herself by a great shout and a clapping
of hands.  They had found the princess fast asleep under a rose-bush,
to which the elvish little wind-puff had carried her, finishing its
mischief by shaking a shower of red rose-leaves all over the little
white sleeper.  Startled by the noise the servants made, she woke, and,
furious with glee, scattered the rose-leaves in all directions, like a
shower of spray in the sunset.

She was watched more carefully after this, no doubt; yet it would be
endless to relate all the odd incidents resulting from this peculiarity
of the young princess.  But there never was a baby in a house, not to
say a palace, that kept the household in such constant good humour, at
least below-stairs.  If it was not easy for her nurses to hold her, at
least she made neither their arms nor their hearts ache.  And she was
so nice to play at ball with!  There was positively no danger of
letting her fall.  They might throw her down, or knock her down, or
push her down, but couldn't let her down.  It is true, they might let
her fly into the fire or the coal-hole, or through the window; but none
of these accidents had happened as yet.  If you heard peals of laughter
resounding from some unknown region, you might be sure enough of the
cause.  Going down into the kitchen, or the room, you would find Jane
and Thomas, and Robert and Susan, all and sum, playing at ball with the
little princess.  She was the ball herself, and did not enjoy it the
less for that.  Away she went, flying from one to another, screeching
with laughter.  And the servants loved the ball itself better even than
the game.  But they had to take some care how they threw her, for if
she received an upward direction, she would never come down again
without being fetched.



5.  What Is to Be Done?

But above-stairs it was different.  One day, for instance, after
breakfast, the king went into his counting-house, and counted out his
money.  The operation gave him no pleasure.

"To think," said he to himself, "that every one of these gold
sovereigns weighs a quarter of an ounce, and my real, live,
flesh-and-blood princess weighs nothing at all!"

And he hated his gold sovereigns, as they lay with a broad smile of
self-satisfaction all over their yellow faces.

The queen was in the parlour, eating bread and honey.  But at the
second mouthful she burst out crying, and could not swallow it.

The king heard her sobbing.  Glad of anybody, but especially of his
queen, to quarrel with, he clashed his gold sovereigns into his
money-box, clapped his crown on his head, and rushed into the parlour.

"What is all this about?" exclaimed he.  "What are you crying for,
queen?"

"I can't eat it," said the queen, looking ruefully at the honey-pot.

"No wonder!" retorted the king.  "You've just eaten your breakfast--two
turkey eggs, and three anchovies."

"Oh, that's not it!" sobbed her Majesty.  "It's my child, my child!"

"Well, what's the matter with your child?  She's neither up the chimney
nor down the draw-well.  Just hear her laughing."

Yet the king could not help a sigh, which he tried to turn into a
cough, saying--

"It is a good thing to be light-hearted, I am sure, whether she be ours
or not."

"It is a bad thing to be light-headed," answered the queen, looking
with prophetic soul far into the future.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-handed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing to be light-fingered," answered the queen.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-footed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing--" began the queen; but the king interrupted her.

"In fact," said he, with the tone of one who concludes an argument in
which he has had only imaginary opponents, and in which, therefore, he
has come off triumphant--"in fact, it is a good thing altogether to be
light-bodied."

"But it is a bad thing altogether to be light-minded," retorted the
queen, who was beginning to lose her temper.

This last answer quite discomfited his Majesty, who turned on his heel,
and betook himself to his counting-house again.  But he was not
half-way towards it, when the voice of his queen overtook him.

"And it's a bad thing to be light-haired," screamed she, determined to
have more last words, now that her spirit was roused.

The queen's hair was black as night; and the king's had been, and his
daughter's was, golden as morning.  But it was not this reflection on
his hair that arrested him; it was the double use of the word light.
For the king hated all witticisms, and punning especially.  And
besides, he could not tell whether the queen meant light-haired or
light-heired; for why might she not aspirate her vowels when she was
exasperated herself?

He turned upon his other heel, and rejoined her.  She looked angry
still, because she knew that she was guilty, or, what was much the
same, knew that HE thought so.

"My dear queen," said he, "duplicity of any sort is exceedingly
objectionable between married people of any rank, not to say kings and
queens; and the most objectionable form duplicity can assume is that of
punning."

"There!" said the queen, "I never made a jest, but I broke it in the
making.  I am the most unfortunate woman in the world!"

She looked so rueful, that the king took her in his arms; and they sat
down to consult.

"Can you bear this?" said the king.

"No, I can't," said the queen.

"Well, what's to be done?" said the king.

"I'm sure I don't know," said the queen.  "But might you not try an
apology?"

"To my old sister, I suppose you mean?" said the king.

"Yes," said the queen.

"Well, I don't mind," said the king.

So he went the next morning to the house of the princess, and, making a
very humble apology, begged her to undo the spell.  But the princess
declared, with a grave face, that she knew nothing at all about it.
Her eyes, however, shone pink, which was a sign that she was happy.
She advised the king and queen to have patience, and to mend their
ways.  The king returned disconsolate.  The queen tried to comfort him.

"We will wait till she is older.  She may then be able to suggest
something herself.  She will know at least how she feels, and explain
things to us."

"But what if she should marry?" exclaimed the king, in sudden
consternation at the idea.

"Well, what of that?" rejoined the queen.  "Just think!  If she were to
have children!  In the course of a hundred years the air might be as
full of floating children as of gossamers in autumn."

"That is no business of ours," replied the queen.  "Besides, by that
time they will have learned to take care of themselves."

A sigh was the king's only answer.

He would have consulted the court physicians; but he was afraid they
would try experiments upon her.



6.  She Laughs Too Much.

Meantime, notwithstanding awkward occurrences, and griefs that she
brought upon her parents, the little princess laughed and grew--not
fat, but plump and tall.  She reached the age of seventeen, without
having fallen into any worse scrape than a chimney; by rescuing her
from which, a little bird-nesting urchin got fame and a black face.
Nor, thoughtless as she was, had she committed anything worse than
laughter at everybody and everything that came in her way.  When she
was told, for the sake of experiment, that General Clanrunfort was cut
to pieces with all his troops, she laughed; when she heard that the
enemy was on his way to besiege her papa's capital, she laughed hugely;
but when she was told that the city would certainly be abandoned to the
mercy of the enemy's soldiery--why, then she laughed immoderately.  She
