
"Where are you going to?" seeing by Harry's rather gloomy face that he
was quite in earnest.

"I believe I am going to Peru."

"What are you going there for, Harry?" the lad said quietly.

"I told you," the other went on, "that Mr. Fortescue said that he had
no personal objection to me, but that if I was in a position to give
his daughter a home equal to that which I wanted her to leave, he would
be content."

Bertie nodded.

"This seemed to me hopeless," Harry went on. "I told you that she was
willing to wait for two years, but that she couldn't promise much
longer than that, for her father had set his mind on her making a good
match; he has certainly put a tremendous pressure upon her. When I was
talking at the club this evening to Mr. Barnett--you know that he is
our oldest friend and is one of our trustees--I told him about it, and
said that though I was ready to do anything and go anywhere I could not
see my way at all to making a big fortune straight away. He agreed with
me. After talking it over he said he knew of but one way by which such
a thing would be at all possible, but the betting would be twenty
thousand to one against it. Of course I said that if there was even a
possibility I would try it. Well, you know he was in Peru for some
years. He says that the natives have all sorts of legends about rich
mines that were hidden when the Spaniards came first, and that it is
certain that, tremendous as was the amount of loot they got, a great
part of the Incas' treasure was hidden away. Once or twice there had
been great finds-in one case two million and a half dollars. It is
believed that the secret is still known to certain Indians. When he
went out there he had a muleteer, whose life he saved when he was
attacked by some beast or other, and this man as much as hinted that he
knew of a place where treasure might be concealed; but as Barnett was
interested in beasts and plants and that sort of thing, and had a
comfortable fortune, he never troubled himself about it one way or
another. Well, he offered to give me a letter to this man, and he
regarded it as just possible that the fellow, who seems to be a
descendant of some of the people who were members of the Incas' court
at the time the Spaniards came, may have some knowledge of the rich
mines that were then closed down, and that he may be able to show them
to me, from his feeling of gratitude to Barnett. It is but one chance
in a million, and as I can see no other possibility of making a fortune
in two years, I am going to try it."

"Of course you will," the lad said excitedly, "and I should think that
you would take me with you."

"I certainly had not dreamt of doing so, Bertie. But if I have to keep
on getting fresh outfits for you, the idea has come into my mind during
the last half-hour that I could not do better."

"Harry, you are sure to be disappointed lots of times before you hit on
a treasure, and then if you were all by yourself you would get down in
the mouth. Now, I should be able to keep you going, pat you on the back
when you felt sick, help you to fight Indians and wild beasts, and be
useful in all sorts of ways."

"That is like your impudence, Bertie," the other laughed. "Seriously, I
know I shall be a fool to take you, and if I really thought I had any
chance to speak of I should not do so; but though I am going to try, I
don't expect for a moment that I shall succeed. I feel that really it
would be a comfort to have someone with me upon whom I could rely in
such a life as I should have to lead. It certainly would be lonely work
for one man. The only doubt in my mind is whether it will be fair to
you--you have got your profession."

"But I can go back to it if nothing good turns up, Harry. I can visit
the firm and tell them that I am going to travel with you for a bit,
and hope that on my return they will take me back again and let me
finish my apprenticeship. I should think they would be rather glad, for
they always build and never buy ships, and it will take them six months
to replace the _Stella_. Besides, it will do me a lot of good. I shall
pick up Spanish--at least, I suppose that is the language they speak
out there--and shall learn no end of things. As you know, we trade with
the west coast of America, so I should be a lot more useful to the firm
when I come back than I am now."

"Well, I will think it over, and let you know in the morning. I must
certainly consult Mr. Barnett, for he is your trustee as well as mine.
If we go I shall work my way out. It will be a big expense, anyhow, and
I don't mean, if possible, to draw upon my capital beyond three or four
hundred pounds. I believe living is cheap out there, and if I buy three
or four mules I shall then have to pay only the wages for the
muleteers, and the expenses of living. Of course I shall arrange for my
income and half-pay to be sent out to some firm at Lima. Now, you had
better go off to bed, and don't buoy yourself up with the belief that
you are going, for I have by no means decided upon taking you yet."

"You will decide to take me, Harry," the lad said confidently, and then
added with a laugh: "the fact that you should have adopted a plan like
this is quite sufficient to show that you want somebody to look after
you."

Harry Prendergast did not get much sleep that night. He blamed himself
for having mentioned the matter at all to Bertie, and yet the more he
thought over it the more he felt that it would be very pleasant to have
his brother with him. The lad was full of fun and mischief, but he knew
that he had plenty of sound sense, and would be a capital companion,
and the fact that he had been three years at sea, and was accustomed to
turn his hand to anything, was all in his favour. If nothing came of it
he would only have lost a couple of years, and, as the boy himself had
said, the time would not have been altogether wasted. Bertie was down
before him in the morning. He looked anxiously at his brother as he
came in.

"Well, Harry?"

"Well, I have thought it over in every light. But in the first place,
Bertie, if you go with me you will have to remember that I am your
commanding officer. I am ten years older than you, and besides I am a
lieutenant in the King's Navy, while you are only a midshipman in the
merchant service. Now, I shall expect as ready obedience from you as if
I were captain of my own ship and you one of my men; that is absolutely
essential."

"Of course, Harry, it could not be otherwise."

"Very well, then; in the next place I shall abide by what Mr. Barnett
says. He is your guardian as well as trustee, and has a perfect right
to put a veto upon any wild expedition of this sort. Lastly, I should
hope, although I don't say that this is absolutely necessary, that you
may get your employer's promise to take you back again in order that
you may complete your time."

"Thank you very much, Harry!" the lad said gratefully. "The first
condition you may rely upon being performed, and I think the third will
be all right, for I know that I have always been favourably reported
upon. Old Prosser told me so himself when he said that I should have a
rise in my pay this voyage. As to Mr. Barnett, of course I can't say,
but I should think, as it was he who put you up to this, he must see
that it would be good for you to have someone to take care of you."

"I think he is much more likely to say that I shall have quite enough
to do to take care of myself, without having the bother of looking
after you. However, I will go and see him this morning. You had better
call upon your employers."

"Don't you think I had better go to Mr. Barnett with you, Harry?"

"Not as you are now anyhow, Bertie. Your appearance is positively
disgraceful. You evidently had on your worst suit of clothes when you
were wrecked, and I can see that they have not been improved by the
experience. Why, there is a split right down one sleeve, and a big rent
in your trousers!"

"I got them climbing on board, for I had no time to pick and choose,
with the _Stella_ sinking under my feet."

"Well, you may as well go as you are, but you had better borrow a
needle and thread from the landlady and mend up the holes. You really
cannot walk through the city in that state. I will see about getting
you some more clothes when we get back, for I cannot have you coming
here in these in broad daylight. Here are three guineas; get yourself a
suit of pilot cloth at some outfitter's at the East End. It will be
useful to you anyhow, whether you go with me or ship again here."

"There is a good deal in what you say, Harry," Mr. Barnett said when
Prendergast asked his opinion as to his taking his brother with him.
"Two years would not make any material difference in his career as a
sailor; it simply means that he will be so much older when he passes as
mate. There is no harm in that. Two or three and twenty is quite young
enough for a young fellow to become an officer, and I don't think that
many captains care about having lads who have just got their
certificate. They have not the same sense of responsibility or the same
power of managing. Then, too, Bertie will certainly have a good deal of
knocking about if he spends a couple of years in South America, and the
knowledge he will gain of Spanish will add to his value with any firm
trading on that coast. As far as you are concerned, I think it would be
a great advantage to have him with you. In a long expedition, such as
you propose, it is a gain to have a companion with you. It makes the
work more pleasant, and two men can laugh over hardships and
disagreeables that one alone would grumble at; but apart from this, it
is very important in case of illness.

"A lonely man laid up with fever, or accidental injury, fares badly
indeed if he is at a distance from any town where he can obtain medical
attendance, and surrounded only by ignorant natives. I was myself at
one time down with fever for six weeks in a native hut, and during that
time I would have given pretty nearly all that I was worth for the
sight of a white face and the sound of an English voice. As to the fact
that it is possible that the lad might catch fever, or be killed in an
affray with natives, that must, of course, be faced; but as a sailor he
runs the risk of shipwreck, or of being washed overboard, or killed by
a falling spar. Everything considered, I think the idea of his going
with you is a good one. I don't suppose that many guardians would be of
the same opinion, but I have been so many years knocking about in one
part of the world or another, that I don't look at things in the same
light as men who have never been out of England."

"I am glad you see it in that way, sir. I own that it would be a great
satisfaction to have him with me. He certainly would be a cheery
companion, and I should say that he is as hard as nails, and can stand
as much fatigue and hardship as myself. Besides, there is no doubt that
in case of any trouble two men are better than one."

"I cannot advance any money out of the thousand pounds that will come
to him when he is of age. By your father's will it was ordered that, in
the event of his own death before that time, the interest was to
accumulate. Your father foresaw that, like you, probably Bertie would
take to the sea, and as the amount would be fully two thousand pounds
by the time he comes of age, it would enable him to buy a share in any
ship that he might, when he passed his last examination, command; but I
will myself draw a cheque for a hundred pounds, which will help towards
meeting expenses. I feel myself to some extent responsible for this
expedition. I somewhat regret now having ever spoken to you on the
subject, for I cannot conceal from myself that the chance of your
making a discovery, where the Spaniards, with all their power of
putting pressure on the natives for the past two or three hundred
years, have failed, is so slight as to be scarcely worth consideration.

"I tell you frankly that I broached the subject chiefly because I
thought it was much better for you to be doing something than kicking
your heels about London, and mooning over this affair with Miss
Fortescue. There is nothing worse for a young man than living in London
with just enough to keep him comfortably without the necessity of
working. Therefore I thought you would be far better travelling and
hunting for treasure in Peru, than staying here. Even if you fail, as I
feel is almost certain, in the object for which you go out, you will
have plenty to occupy your thoughts, and not be dwelling continually
upon an attachment which in all probability will not turn out
satisfactorily. I do not suppose that you are likely to forget Miss
Fortescue, but by the time you return you will have accustomed yourself
to the thought that it is useless to cry for the moon, and that, after
all, life may be very endurable even if she does not share it.
Therefore I propounded this Peruvian adventure, feeling sure that,
whatever came of it, it would be a benefit to you."

"No doubt it will, sir. I see myself the chance of success is small
indeed, but there is none at all in any other way. It is just the sort
of thing I should like, and I quite feel myself that it would be good
for me to have plenty to think about; and now that you have consented
to Bertie's going with me, I feel more eager than before to undertake
the expedition. The place is in rather a disturbed state, isn't it?"

"If you are going to wait until Peru ceases to be in a disturbed state,
Harry, you may wait another hundred years. The Spanish rule was bad,
but Peru was then a pleasant place to live in compared with what it is
now. It is a sort of cock-pit, where a succession of ambitious rascals
struggle for the spoils, and the moment one gets the better of his
rivals fresh intrigues are set on foot, and fresh rebellions break out.
There are good Peruvians--men who have estates and live upon them, and
who are good masters. But as to the politicians, there is no principle
whatever at stake. It is simply a question of who shall have the
handling of the national revenue, and divide it and the innumerable
posts among his adherents. But these struggles will not affect you
largely. In one respect they will even be an advantage. Bent upon their
own factious aims, the combatants have no time to concern themselves
with the doings of an English traveller, whose object out there is
ostensibly to botanize and shoot. Were one of them to obtain the
undisputed control of affairs he might meddle in all sorts of ways;
but, as it is, after you have once got pretty well beyond the area of
their operations, you can regard their doings with indifference,
knowing that the longer they go on fighting the fewer scoundrels there
will be in the land.

"But even were they to think that it was mining, and not science or
sport that took you out there, they would scarcely interfere with you.
It is admitted by all the factions that Peru needs capital for her
development, and at present that can best be got from this country. The
discovery of a fresh mine means employment to a large number of people,
and the increase of the revenues by a royalty or taxation. English
explorers who have gone out have never had any reason to complain of
interference on the part of the authorities. You will find the average
better class of Peruvians a charming people, and extremely hospitable.
The ladies are pretty enough to turn the head of anyone whose
affections are not already engaged. The men are kindly and courteous in
the extreme. However, you would have little to do with these.

"In the mountains you would largely depend upon your rifle for food,
and on what you could get in the scattered native villages. The Indians
have no love for the Peruvians. They find their condition no better off
under them than it was under the Spaniards. Once they find out that you
are English they will do all in their power for you. It is to Cochrane
and the English officers with him that they owe the overthrow and
expulsion of their Spanish tyrants, and they are vastly more grateful
than either the Chilians or Peruvians have shown themselves to be."

On returning to their lodgings Harry met his brother, who had been into
the city.

"Old Prosser was very civil," said Bertie. "He said that as their ships
were chiefly in the South American trade it would be a great advantage
for me to learn to speak Spanish well. They had not yet thought
anything about whether they should order another ship to replace the
_Stella_; at any rate, at present they had no vacancy, and would gladly
give me permission to travel in South America, and would find me a
berth to finish my apprenticeship when I returned. More than that, they
said that as I had always been so favourably reported upon they would
put me on as a supernumerary in the _Para_, which will sail in a
fortnight for Callao. I should not draw pay, but I should be in their
service, and the time would count, which would be a great pull, and I
should get my passage for nothing."

"That is capital. Of course I will take a passage in her too."

"And what does Mr. Barnett say?"

"Rather to my surprise, Bertie, he did not disapprove of the plan at
all. He thought it would be a good thing for me to have you with me in
case of illness or anything of that sort. Then no doubt he thought to
some extent it would keep you out of mischief."

"I don't believe he thought anything of the sort. Did he say so?"

"Well, no, he didn't; but I have no doubt he felt it in some way a sort
of relief."

"That is all very fine. I know, when I have been down to his place in
the country between voyages, I have always been as well behaved as if I
had been a model mid."

"Well, I have heard some tales of your doings, Bertie, that didn't seem
quite in accord with the character you give yourself."

"Oh, of course I had a few larks! You cannot expect a fellow who has
been away from England for a year to walk about as soberly as if he
were a Methodist parson!"

"No, I should not expect that, Bertie. But, on the other hand, I should
hardly have expected that he would, for example, risk breaking his neck
by climbing up to the top of the steeple and fastening a straw-hat on
the head of the weathercock."

"It gave it a very ornamental appearance; and that weathercock was
never before watched so regularly by the people of the village as it
was from that time till the hat was blown away in a gale."

"That I can quite believe. Still, Mr. Barnett told me that the rector
lodged a complaint about it."

"He might complain as much as he liked; there is no law in the land, as
far as I know, that makes the fixing of a straw-hat upon a weathercock
a penal offence. It did no end of good in the village, gave them
something to talk about, and woke them up wonderfully."

"And there were other things too, I think," his brother went on.

"Oh, well, you need not go into them now! they are an old story.
Besides, I fancy I have heard of various tricks played by Mr.
Midshipman Harry Prendergast, and, as I heard them from your lips, I
cannot doubt but that they were strictly veracious. Well, this is jolly
now. When are we going to begin to get our outfit?"

"We will lose no time about that. But really there is not much to
get--a couple of good rifles and two brace of pistols, with a good
store of ammunition, those clothes you have just bought, and two or
three suits of duck for the voyage. I shan't get any special kit until
we arrive there, and can take the advice of people at Lima whether we
had better travel in European clothes or in those worn by the
Peruvians. Of course saddles and bridles and all that sort of thing we
can buy there, and we shall want a small tent to use when we get into
out-of-the-way places. I shall take three hundred pounds in gold. I
have no doubt we can exchange it into silver profitably; besides, it is
much more handy for carrying about. I shall go down this afternoon and
see Prosser and secure a berth."

"I think you will have to arrange that with the captain. Very few of
our ships have accommodation for passengers, but the captains are
allowed to take one or two if they like."

"All right! At any rate I must go to the office first. They can refer
me to the skipper if they like; that would be better than my going to
him direct."




CHAPTER II

THE START


Harry Prendergast went down to Leadenhall Street and saw the managing
owner of the _Para_. As Bertie had anticipated, Mr. Prosser, after
hearing Harry's statement that he wished to take a passage to Callao in
the vessel advertised to start in a week's time, and that he was much
obliged to them for giving Bertie a berth as supernumerary midshipman,
said:

"We shall certainly have pleasure in putting your brother's name on the
ship's books. He has already explained to me his desire to go out with
you; we have had every reason to be satisfied with him since he entered
our service, and he had better draw pay as usual, as his service during
the voyage will then count towards his time. As for yourself, we do not
book passengers, it is more bother than it is worth; but we have no
objection to our masters taking one or two. The addition of a mouth or
so practically makes very little difference in the amount of ships'
stores consumed. The masters pay us a small sum a head and make their
own terms with the passengers they take. In that way we are saved all
complaints as to food and other matters. Of course a passenger would
put on board for himself a stock of such wines, spirits, and little
luxuries as he may choose.

"You will find Captain Peters down at the docks. The last cargo has
been discharged, and they are giving an overhaul to the rigging and
making a few repairs; he is not a man to leave his ship if he can help
it while work is going on there."

Harry at once went down.

"Well, sir," the captain said, when he had told him that he wished to
take a passage to Callao, and that the owners had referred him to him,
"I had fully made up my mind that I would not take passengers again. On
my last voyage they were always grumbling at the food, expecting to be
treated as if they were in a first-class hotel."

"I am not likely to grumble, Captain; I have been knocking about the
King's service since I was fourteen."

"Oh, you are a royal navy man, are you, sir?"

"I am; I am a lieutenant."

"That makes a difference; and I have no doubt we can arrange the matter
to our satisfaction."

"I may tell you," Harry said, "that I have a younger brother coming out
with me. He is an apprentice nearly out of his time, and was on board
the _Stella_ when she was sunk in the Channel. Your owners have kindly
arranged that he shall go out with you as a supernumerary; that is one
reason why I wish to go in your ship."

The Master thought for a minute or two. "Well, Mr. Prendergast," he
said, "I like having one of you naval gentlemen on board; if anything
goes wrong it is a comfort to have your advice. If we have bad weather
round the Horn, could I rely upon you to give me a helping hand should
I need it? I don't mean that you should keep watch or anything of that
sort, but that you should, as it were, stand by me. I have a new first
mate, and there is no saying how he may turn out. No doubt the firm
would make every enquiry. Still, such enquiries don't mean much; a
master doesn't like to damn a man by refusing to give him a good
character. I dare say he is all right. Still, I should certainly feel
very much more comfortable if I had a naval officer with me. Now, sir,
I pay the firm twelve pounds for each passenger I take as his share of
the cabin stores; you pay me that, and I will ask for nothing for your
passage. I cannot say fairer than that."

