
"I was talking to him about that only yesterday," said Polynesia. "But I
couldn't get any satisfactory answer out of him. He didn't seem to want
to speak about it."

There was a pause in the conversation.

"Do you know what I believe?" she added presently. "I believe the Doctor
has given up even thinking of going home."

"Good Lord!" cried Bumpo. "You don't say!"

"Sh!" said Polynesia. "What's that noise?"

We listened; and away off in the distant corridors of the palace we
heard the sentries crying,

"The King!--Make way!--The King!"

"It's he--at last," whispered Polynesia--"late, as usual. Poor man, how
he does work!--Chee-Chee, get the pipe and tobacco out of the cupboard
and lay the dressing-gown ready on his chair."

When the Doctor came into the room he looked serious and thoughtful.
Wearily he took off his crown and hung it on a peg behind the door. Then
he exchanged the royal cloak for the dressing-gown, dropped into his
chair at the head of the table with a deep sigh and started to fill his
pipe.

"Well," asked Polynesia quietly, "how did you find the baby?"

"The baby?" he murmured--his thoughts still seemed to be very far
away--"Ah yes. The baby was much better, thank you--It has cut its
second tooth."

Then he was silent again, staring dreamily at the ceiling through a
cloud of tobacco-smoke; while we all sat round quite still, waiting.

"We were wondering, Doctor," said I at last,--"just before you came
in--when you would be starting home again. We will have been on this
island seven months to-morrow."

The Doctor sat forward in his chair looking rather uncomfortable.

"Well, as a matter of fact," said he after a moment, "I meant to speak
to you myself this evening on that very subject. But it's--er--a little
hard to make any one exactly understand the situation. I am afraid that
it would be impossible for me to leave the work I am now engaged on....
You remember, when they first insisted on making me king, I told you it
was not easy to shake off responsibilities, once you had taken them up.
These people have come to rely on me for a great number of things. We
found them ignorant of much that white people enjoy. And we have, one
might say, changed the current of their lives considerably. Now it is a
very ticklish business, to change the lives of other people. And whether
the changes we have made will be, in the end, for good or for bad, is
our lookout."

He thought a moment--then went on in a quieter, sadder voice:

"I would like to continue my voyages and my natural history work; and I
would like to go back to Puddleby--as much as any of you. This is March,
and the crocuses will be showing in the lawn... . But that which I
feared has come true: I cannot close my eyes to what might happen if I
should leave these people and run away. They would probably go back to
their old habits and customs: wars, superstitions, devil-worship and
what not; and many of the new things we have taught them might be put to
improper use and make their condition, then, worse by far than that in
which we found them.... They like me; they trust me; they have come to
look to me for help in all their problems and troubles. And no man wants
to do unfair things to them who trust him.... And then again, I like
THEM. They are, as it were, my children--I never had any children of my
own--and I am terribly interested in how they will grow up. Don't you
see what I mean?--How can I possibly run away and leave them in the
lurch?... No. I have thought it over a good deal and tried to decide
what was best. And I am afraid that the work I took up when I assumed
the crown I must stick to. I'm afraid--I've got to stay."

"For good--for your whole life?" asked Bumpo in a low voice.

For some moments the Doctor, frowning, made no answer.

"I don't know," he said at last--"Anyhow for the present there is
certainly no hope of my leaving. It wouldn't be right."

The sad silence that followed was broken finally by a knock upon the
door.

With a patient sigh the Doctor got up and put on his crown and cloak
again.

"Come in," he called, sitting down in his chair once more.

The door opened and a footman--one of the hundred and forty-three who
were always on night duty--stood bowing in the entrance.

"Oh, Kindly One," said he, "there is a traveler at the palace-gate who
would have speech with Your Majesty."

"Another baby's been born, I'll bet a shilling," muttered Polynesia.

"Did you ask the traveler's name?" enquired the Doctor.

"Yes, Your Majesty," said the footman. "It is Long Arrow, the son of
Golden Arrow."




THE THIRD CHAPTER. THE RED MAN'S SCIENCE

"LONG ARROW!" cried the Doctor. "How splendid! Show him in--show him in
at once."

"I'm so glad," he continued, turning to us as soon as the footman had
gone. "I've missed Long Arrow terribly. He's an awfully good man to have
around--even if he doesn't talk much. Let me see: it's five months now
since he went off to Brazil. I'm so glad he's back safe. He does take
such tremendous chances with that canoe of his--clever as he is. It's
no joke, crossing a hundred miles of open sea in a twelve-foot canoe. I
wouldn't care to try it."

Another knock; and when the door swung open in answer to the Doctor's
call, there stood our big friend on the threshold, a smile upon his
strong, bronzed face. Behind him appeared two porters carrying loads
done up in Indian palm-matting. These, when the first salutations were
over, Long Arrow ordered to lay their burdens down.

"Behold, oh Kindly One," said he, "I bring you, as I promised, my
collection of plants which I had hidden in a cave in the Andes. These
treasures represent the labors of my life."

The packages were opened; and inside were many smaller packages and
bundles. Carefully they were laid out in rows upon the table.

It appeared at first a large but disappointing display. There were
plants, flowers, fruits, leaves, roots, nuts, beans, honeys, gums, bark,
seeds, bees and a few kinds of insects.

The study of plants--or botany, as it is called--was a kind of natural
history which had never interested me very much. I had considered it,
compared with the study of animals, a dull science. But as Long Arrow
began taking up the various things in his collection and explaining
their qualities to us, I became more and more fascinated. And before
he had done I was completely absorbed by the wonders of the Vegetable
Kingdom which he had brought so far.

"These," said he, taking up a little packet of big seeds, "are what I
have called 'laughing-beans.'"

"What are they for?" asked Bumpo.

"To cause mirth," said the Indian.

Bumpo, while Long Arrow's back was turned, took three of the beans and
swallowed them.

"Alas!" said the Indian when he discovered what Bumpo had done. "If he
wished to try the powers of these seeds he should have eaten no more
than a quarter of a one. Let us hope that he does not die of laughter."

The beans' effect upon Bumpo was most extraordinary. First he broke
into a broad smile; then he began to giggle; finally he burst into such
prolonged roars of hearty laughter that we had to carry him into
the next room and put him to bed. The Doctor said afterwards that
he probably would have died laughing if he had not had such a strong
constitution. All through the night he gurgled happily in his sleep.
And even when we woke him up the next morning he rolled out of bed still
chuckling.

Returning to the Reception Room, we were shown some red roots which Long
Arrow told us had the property, when made into a soup with sugar and
salt, of causing people to dance with extraordinary speed and endurance.
He asked us to try them; but we refused, thanking him. After Bumpo's
exhibition we were a little afraid of any more experiments for the
present.

There was no end to the curious and useful things that Long Arrow had
collected: an oil from a vine which would make hair grow in one
night; an orange as big as a pumpkin which he had raised in his own
mountain-garden in Peru; a black honey (he had brought the bees that
made it too and the seeds of the flowers they fed on) which would put
you to sleep, just with a teaspoonful, and make you wake up fresh in the
morning; a nut that made the voice beautiful for singing; a water-weed
that stopped cuts from bleeding; a moss that cured snake-bite; a lichen
that prevented sea-sickness.

The Doctor of course was tremendously interested. Well into the early
hours of the morning he was busy going over the articles on the table
one by one, listing their names and writing their properties and
descriptions into a note-book as Long Arrow dictated.

"There are things here, Stubbins," he said as he ended, "which in the
hands of skilled druggists will make a vast difference to the medicine
and chemistry of the world. I suspect that this sleeping-honey by itself
will take the place of half the bad drugs we have had to use so far.
Long Arrow has discovered a pharmacopaeia of his own. Miranda was
right: he is a great naturalist. His name deserves to be placed beside
Linnaeus. Some day I must get all these things to England--But when," he
added sadly--"Yes, that's the problem: when?"




THE FOURTH CHAPTER. THE SEA-SERPENT

FOR a long time after that Cabinet Meeting of which I have just told
you we did not ask the Doctor anything further about going home. Life
in Spidermonkey Island went forward, month in month out, busily and
pleasantly. The Winter, with Christmas celebrations, came and went, and
Summer was with us once again before we knew it.

As time passed the Doctor became more and more taken up with the care
of his big family; and the hours he could spare for his natural history
work grew fewer and fewer. I knew that he often still thought of his
house and garden in Puddleby and of his old plans and ambitions; because
once in a while we would notice his face grow thoughtful and a little
sad, when something reminded him of England or his old life. But he
never spoke of these things. And I truly believe he would have spent the
remainder of his days on Spidermonkey Island if it hadn't been for an
accident--and for Polynesia.

The old parrot had grown very tired of the Indians and she made no
secret of it.

"The very idea," she said to me one day as we were walking on the
seashore--"the idea of the famous John Dolittle spending his valuable
life waiting on these greasy natives!--Why, it's preposterous!"

All that morning we had been watching the Doctor superintend the
building of the new theatre in Popsipetel--there was already an
opera-house and a concert-hall; and finally she had got so grouchy and
annoyed at the sight that I had suggested her taking a walk with me.

"Do you really think," I asked as we sat down on the sands, "that he
will never go back to Puddleby again?"

"I don't know," said she. "At one time I felt sure that the thought of
the pets he had left behind at the house would take him home soon. But
since Miranda brought him word last August that everything was all right
there, that hope's gone. For months and months I've been racking my
brains to think up a plan. If we could only hit upon something that
would turn his thoughts back to natural history again--I mean something
big enough to get him really excited--we might manage it. But how?"--she
shrugged her shoulders in disgust--"How?--when all he thinks of now is
paving streets and teaching papooses that twice one are two!"

It was a perfect Popsipetel day, bright and hot, blue and yellow.
Drowsily I looked out to sea thinking of my mother and father. I
wondered if they were getting anxious over my long absence. Beside me
old Polynesia went on grumbling away in low steady tones; and her words
began to mingle and mix with the gentle lapping of the waves upon the
shore. It may have been the even murmur of her voice, helped by the soft
and balmy air, that lulled me to sleep. I don't know. Anyhow I presently
dreamed that the island had moved again--not floatingly as before, but
suddenly, jerkily, as though something enormously powerful had heaved it
up from its bed just once and let it down.

How long I slept after that I have no idea. I was awakened by a gentle
pecking on the nose.

"Tommy!--Tommy!" (it was Polynesia's voice) "Wake up!--Gosh, what a
boy, to sleep through an earthquake and never notice it!--Tommy, listen:
here's our chance now. Wake up, for goodness' sake!"

"What's the matter?" I asked sitting up with a yawn.

"Sh!--Look!" whispered Polynesia pointing out to sea.

Still only half awake, I stared before me with bleary, sleep-laden eyes.
And in the shallow water, not more than thirty yards from shore I saw
an enormous pale pink shell. Dome-shaped, it towered up in a graceful
rainbow curve to a tremendous height; and round its base the surf broke
gently in little waves of white. It could have belonged to the wildest
dream.

"What in the world is it?" I asked.

"That," whispered Polynesia, "is what sailors for hundreds of years
have called the Sea-serpent. I've seen it myself more than once from the
decks of ships, at long range, curving in and out of the water. But
now that I see it close and still, I very strongly suspect that the
Sea-serpent of history is no other than the Great Glass Sea-snail that
the fidgit told us of. If that isn't the only fish of its kind in the
seven seas, call me a carrion-crow--Tommy, we're in luck. Our job is to
get the Doctor down here to look at that prize specimen before it
moves off to the Deep Hole. If we can, then trust me, we may leave this
blessed island yet. You stay here and keep an eye on it while I go after
the Doctor. Don't move or speak--don't even breathe heavy: he might get
scared--awful timid things, snails. Just watch him; and I'll be back in
two shakes."

Stealthily creeping up the sands till she could get behind the cover
of some bushes before she took to her wings, Polynesia went off in
the direction of the town; while I remained alone upon the shore
fascinatedly watching this unbelievable monster wallowing in the shallow
sea.

It moved very little. From time to time it lifted its head out of the
water showing its enormously long neck and horns. Occasionally it would
try and draw itself up, the way a snail does when he goes to move, but
almost at once it would sink down again as if exhausted. It seemed to
me to act as though it were hurt underneath; but the lower part of it,
which was below the level of the water, I could not see.

I was still absorbed in watching the great beast when Polynesia returned
with the Doctor. They approached so silently and so cautiously that I
neither saw nor heard them coming till I found them crouching beside me
on the sand.

One sight of the snail changed the Doctor completely. His eyes just
sparkled with delight. I had not seen him so thrilled and happy since
the time we caught the Jabizri beetle when we first landed on the
island.

"It is he!" he whispered--"the Great Glass Sea-snail himself--not a
doubt of it. Polynesia, go down the shore a way and see if you can find
any of the porpoises for me. Perhaps they can tell us what the snail is
doing here--It's very unusual for him to be in shallow water like this.
And Stubbins, you go over to the harbor and bring me a small canoe.
But be most careful how you paddle it round into this bay. If the snail
should take fright and go out into the deeper water, we may never get a
chance to see him again."

"And don't tell any of the Indians," Polynesia added in a whisper as
I moved to go. "We must keep this a secret or we'll have a crowd of
sightseers round here in five minutes. It's mighty lucky we found the
snail in a quiet bay."

Reaching the harbor, I picked out a small light canoe from among the
number that were lying there and without telling any one what I wanted
it for, got in and started off to paddle it down the shore.

I was mortally afraid that the snail might have left before I got back.
And you can imagine how delighted I was, when I rounded a rocky cape and
came in sight of the bay, to find he was still there.

Polynesia, I saw, had got her errand done and returned ahead of me,
bringing with her a pair of porpoises. These were already conversing in
low tones with John Dolittle. I beached the canoe and went up to listen.

"What I want to know," the Doctor was saying, "is how the snail comes
to be here. I was given to understand that he usually stayed in the
Deep Hole; and that when he did come to the surface it was always in
mid-ocean."

"Oh, didn't you know?--Haven't you heard?" the porpoises replied: "you
covered up the Deep Hole when you sank the island. Why yes: you let it
down right on top of the mouth of the Hole--sort of put the lid on, as
it were. The fishes that were in it at the time have been trying to get
out ever since. The Great Snail had the worst luck of all: the island
nipped him by the tail just as he was leaving the Hole for a quiet
evening stroll. And he was held there for six months trying to wriggle
himself free. Finally he had to heave the whole island up at one end to
get his tail loose. Didn't you feel a sort of an earthquake shock about
an hour ago?"

"Yes I did," said the Doctor, "it shook down part of the theatre I was
building."

"Well, that was the snail heaving up the island to get out of the Hole,"
they said. "All the other fishes saw their chance and escaped when he
raised the lid. It was lucky for them he's so big and strong. But the
strain of that terrific heave told on him: he sprained a muscle in his
tail and it started swelling rather badly. He wanted some quiet place to
rest up; and seeing this soft beach handy he crawled in here."

"Dear me!" said the Doctor. "I'm terribly sorry. I suppose I should have
given some sort of notice that the island was going to be let down. But,
to tell the truth, we didn't know it ourselves; it happened by a kind of
an accident. Do you imagine the poor fellow is hurt very badly?"

"We're not sure," said the porpoises; "because none of us can speak his
language. But we swam right around him on our way in here, and he did
not seem to be really seriously injured."

"Can't any of your people speak shellfish?" the Doctor asked.

"Not a word," said they. "It's a most frightfully difficult language."

"Do you think that you might be able to find me some kind of a fish that
could?"

"We don't know," said the porpoises. "We might try."

"I should be extremely grateful to you if you would," said the Doctor.
"There are many important questions I want to ask this snail--And
besides, I would like to do my best to cure his tail for him. It's the
least I can do. After all, it was my fault, indirectly, that he got
hurt."

"Well, if you wait here," said the porpoises, "we'll see what can be
done."




THE FIFTH CHAPTER. THE SHELLFISH RIDDLE SOLVED AT LAST

SO Doctor Dolittle with a crown on his head sat down upon the shore like
King Knut, and waited. And for a whole hour the porpoises kept going and
coming, bringing up different kinds of sea-beasts from the deep to see
if they could help him.

Many and curious were the creatures they produced. It would seem
however that there were very few things that spoke shellfish except the
shellfish themselves. Still, the porpoises grew a little more hopeful
when they discovered a very old sea-urchin (a funny, ball-like, little
fellow with long whiskers all over him) who said he could not speak pure
shellfish, but he used to understand starfish--enough to get along--when
he was young. This was coming nearer, even if it wasn't anything to go
crazy about. Leaving the urchin with us, the porpoises went off once
more to hunt up a starfish.

They were not long getting one, for they were quite common in those
parts. Then, using the sea-urchin as an interpreter, they questioned the
starfish. He was a rather stupid sort of creature; but he tried his best
to be helpful. And after a little patient examination we found to our
delight that he could speak shellfish moderately well.

Feeling quite encouraged, the Doctor and I now got into the canoe; and,
with the porpoises, the urchin and the starfish swimming alongside, we
paddled very gently out till we were close under the towering shell of
the Great Snail.

And then began the most curious conversation I have ever witnessed.
First the starfish would ask the snail something; and whatever answer
the snail gave, the starfish would tell it to the sea-urchin, the urchin
would tell it to the porpoises and the porpoises would tell it to the
Doctor.

In this way we obtained considerable information, mostly about the very
ancient history of the Animal Kingdom; but we missed a good many of the
finer points in the snail's longer speeches on account of the stupidity
of the starfish and all this translating from one language to another.

While the snail was speaking, the Doctor and I put our ears against the
wall of his shell and found that we could in this way hear the sound of
his voice quite plainly. It was, as the fidgit had described, deep and
