the front door, accompanied by Duke Vesey's announcement that it was
himself who claimed admission.

The captain drew back the fastenings and the rustler stepped inside,
his face showing great agitation.

"This is a fine state of things," he said, addressing young Whitney,
Hawkridge and the captain.

"To what do you refer?" asked Whitney.

"You sent Mont Sterry out awhile ago, and the rustlers have caught
him; he's in their hands and will be shot at daybreak. Capt. Inman
sent me to you with that message, and to say that the fight will open
in a few minutes. You can't play your tricks any longer on us."

It was apparent that Duke Vesey was in a rage over the mishap that had
befallen his friend.

Capt. Asbury quietly placed himself between the fellow and the door by
which he had entered.

"What is the meaning of that?" demanded the rustler, turning his head;
"I'm here under a flag of truce."

"Where is it? You haven't shown any, and you can't. I shall hold you
as a hostage for the safety of Mont Sterry; whatever harm is visited
upon _him_ shall descend upon _your_ head!"




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE PRISONER.


It may be said that Monteith Sterry's main hope for the success of his
perilous scheme lay in its boldness.

It was not to be supposed that the rustlers, surrounding the besieged
on every hand, would forget the probability of just such an attempt as
he made. The stockmen could not expect to slip away one by one, or in
a body; nor was there anything to tempt such an effort, even if it
offered a fair prospect of success; for, of necessity, they would have
to depart on foot, and with the coming of daylight their situation
would be worse than now, with a strong shelter above and around them.

But it was known among the defenders that two of their number were
doomed, if they fell into the hands of the rustlers. It was probable,
therefore, that one or both of these individuals would try to get
away.

Whether or not the leaders held any distrust of Vesey cannot be known;
but his little scheme for befriending Monteith Sterry was nipped in
the bud by his being retained at the front of the building, where, as
has been shown, he acted as the bearer of messages between Inman and
Capt. Asbury.

There were men closely watching the building from the moment darkness
closed over the scene. Had Sterry attempted to steal along the side of
the house and then dodge away, he would have been detected and halted
at once. On the contrary, he moved with his usual gait in a diagonal
direction toward the stables. His object was to learn the likeliest
method of leaving the place.

He had perhaps walked fifty feet, when some one advanced from the
gloom and called, in an undertone:

"Halloo, who is that?"

"It's I, Smith; who are you?"

The name, of course, was a venture, but it was not uncommon, as the
reader knows, and more likely to be right than any other. The best of
it was, it seemed to satisfy the other, who, without announcing his
own, asked:

"What are you doing?"

"I've been looking around to see what I could learn."

"Anything new?"

"No, not as far as I can discover; they seem to have a light burning
in there, but are waiting for us."

"I wonder they didn't give you a shot; Vesey says they are desperate,
and he brought back word that they would shoot the first of us seen
prowling about the place. I wonder you didn't catch it."

"I took good care. When do you suppose the fight will open?"

"Pretty soon; I s'pose you are as tired of this dallying as the rest
of us."

"Well, it strikes me as best to wait until sure everything is ready."

Sterry was anxious to end this pointless conversation, for the
stranger had approached quite near and peered into his face, as though
not free from suspicion. The darkness was deep, but on the other side
of the ridge a small fire was burning, from fragments brought from the
stables. Of this the adventurer meant to keep clear at all hazards.
More than one rustler knew him intimately, and it might be that he to
whom he was talking was an old acquaintance and enemy.

How Sterry longed for the presence of Vesey!

In a natural manner he sauntered up the ridge, as if his intention
was to return to the camp-fire, that being the course most likely to
dissipate any misgiving on the part of the other.

The latter made no response, and Sterry kept on, thinking:

"I'm rid of him, any way, and ought to have less trouble with others
that may wish to ask questions."

But, glancing over his shoulder, he was startled to observe that
the man, instead of moving off, as he had supposed, was standing
motionless in the gloom, as if studying him.

"By gracious!" concluded the youth, "he must have noticed my voice,
for, not knowing Smith, how could I imitate it?"

The situation would have made any one uneasy, but he did not hasten
nor retard his footsteps until he reached the top of the ridge, and
was able to observe the camp-fire clearly.

It was small, as has been said, but five or six figures were
lolling about it, smoking, talking, and passing the dismal hours as
inclination prompted. Other forms were moving hither and thither, some
of them quite close to where Sterry had halted, though none paid him
any attention.

The young man was looking for an opening by which he could make his
way beyond the lines without attracting attention. The best prospect
seemed to be the stretch of prairie extending from the front of the
house toward the Big Horn Mountains.

"No one appears to be on the lookout there--"

At that instant each arm was tightly gripped, and the man with whom he
had exchanged words but a few minutes before said:

"Mr. Smith, please go with us to the fire; my friend here is Smith,
and he is the only one in our party with that name; maybe you are his
double."

It was useless to resist, and Sterry replied:

"You know there are several Smiths in this country, and I ought to
have the privilege of wearing the name without objection."

"We'll soon see," replied the first captor.

Within the next minute Sterry was marched in front of the camp-fire,
where the full glare fell upon his countenance.

Then a howl of exultation went up, for more than half of the rustlers
in the group recognized him.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

OUT IN THE NIGHT.


Enough has been already told for the reader to understand the scheme
which Jennie Whitney, with the help of her mother, attempted to carry
out for the benefit of the besieged cattlemen.

With her cloak around her shoulders and her saddle supported on one
arm, she passed quickly from the rear of her home to the stables, only
a short distance away. She had been on the alert for the signal of
Duke Vesey, and, seeing it not, was prepared to encounter some one
else.

In this she was not disappointed, for at the moment of catching sight
of the dark mass where the horses were sheltered the figure of a man
loomed into view as though he had risen from the ground. She stopped
short, and observed, dimly, the forms of two others just behind him.

"Halloo!" exclaimed the nearest, "how is this?"

With peculiar emotions the young lady recognized the voice of Larch
Cadmus. She hoped this was a favourable omen, and was quick to turn it
to account.

"Larch, is that you?" she asked, peering forward as if uncertain of
his identity.

"I declare, it is Miss Jennie!" he exclaimed, coming forward; "how is
it you are alone?"

"Mother did not wish to come with me," replied the daughter, trying
to avoid the necessity of direct deceit. "She will probably leave the
house pretty soon."

The fellow was plainly embarrassed, despite the protecting gloom which
concealed his features. Jennie knew him to be one of her most ardent
admirers, though she had never liked him. Her hopes were now based
upon making use of his regard for her.

"You have come out, Jennie, I suppose," said he, offering his hand,
which she accepted, "so as not to be in the house when the--ah,
trouble begins."

"O, I know it will be dreadful; I want to go as far away as I can--do
you blame me, Larch?"

"Not at all--not at all; and I hope, Jennie, you don't blame me for
all that your folks have suffered."

"Why, Larch, why should I blame you?" asked the young lady, coming
fearfully near a fiction in making the query, for she knew many
good reasons for censuring him in her heart. "But how soon do you
intend--that is, how soon do the rest of your folks intend to attack
the cowmen?"

"We--that is, they--expected to do so long ago, but there have been
all sorts of delays; it will come pretty soon now."

"Where are you to place mother and me?"

"Over the ridge, yonder; you will be out of danger; you need fear
nothing; why should you, for your mother will be with you and your
brother will be with us, so that he can take no part in the fight."

He made no reference to Mont Sterry, and she was too wise to let fall
a hint of her anxiety concerning him.

"But, Larch, suppose, when you set fire to the house, as I heard your
folks intended, our people rush out and attack you?"

"Do they intend to do that?" he asked.

"I am sure I don't know; but you can see, if they do, the shooting
will be going on all around mother and me."

"You can pass farther out on the plain or take shelter in the stable,
among the horses."

"But that may be too late," interposed Jennie, in well-feigned alarm.

"You can take refuge here now."

"I can't bear to stay in the stable, for the horses will become
terrified when the shooting begins; they may break loose and prove
more dangerous than the flying bullets."

There was sense in this objection, and the rustler saw it. He was
anxious to propitiate the young woman, whom he admired so ardently.

"Well, my dear, what would you like to do?"

"Now, Larch, you won't laugh at me if I tell you," she replied, in her
most coquettish manner.

"Laugh at you!" he protested; "this is no time for laughing; it was a
shame that those people should turn your house into a fort, when it
could do them no good. Tell me what you want and it shall be done, if
it is in my power."

"Thanks! You are very kind, and I shall never forget this favour; I
want to mount one of the best horses in the stable and ride out so far
that I am sure to be beyond reach of danger."

The proposition staggered the rustler--so much so that it did not
occur to him, just then, that the daughter appeared a great deal more
anxious to look after her own safety than her mother's.

"You have a horse in the stable, haven't you?"

"Yes, Jack is there, and he is a splendid fellow; he is the one I
want."

"But the saddle?"

"I have it with me; here it is; you and I will adjust it together."

And the impulsive miss placed the saddle in his grasp before he knew
it. She certainly was rushing things. It must be admitted, too, that
she showed fine discretion. There was but one way of handling Mr.
Larch Cadmus, and she was using that way.

He turned about and walked to the door of the stable.

"Jack is in the second stall," she said, pausing at the entrance, "and
his bridle is on the hook near his head."

The gloom was impenetrable, but a couple of matches gave Cadmus all
the light needed, and a minute later he brought forth the fine animal,
who whinnied with pleasure at recognizing his mistress, despite the
gloom.

Jennie gave what help she could in saddling and bridling him, the
other two men standing a little way off in silence. She kept up an
incessant chatter, repeating her thanks to Cadmus for his kindness,
and binding him more completely captive every minute.

But the rustler was inclined to be thoughtful, for before the animal
was ready he began to feel misgivings as to the prudence of what he
was doing. There was something odd, too, about the young lady mounting
her pony, riding alone out on the plain, and leaving her mother
behind. Then, too, she had emerged from the rear instead of the front
of the house, as he judged from her line of approach.

Could there be any ulterior purpose in all this? If she would only
cease her chatting for a minute or two he might figure out the
problem, but the trouble was, nothing could stop her. In fact he
didn't wish her to stop, for that voice was the most musical one to
which he could listen, and he would have been glad had it sounded for
hours in his ears.

He managed to drift dangerously near the truth.

"Can it be that she intends to ride away for help?" he reflected. "It
has that look; but no, it is hardly that, for there isn't any help
within reach that I know of. She might find it in the course of a day
or two, but this affair will be over before daylight--I beg pardon,
what was it you said, Jennie?"

"Why, Larch, I'm tempted to pull your ears; you are a fine gallant;
here I have been standing full ten seconds, waiting for you to help me
on the horse, and you have paid me no attention."

"It _was_ rude, my dear; I hope you will pardon me," he replied,
stepping quickly forward, "but I am very absent-minded to-night."

"I will pardon you, of course, for you have been so good and nice that
it would be ungrateful for me to be impatient."

He took the Cinderella-like foot in his broad palm and cleverly
assisted her in the saddle. While he helped to adjust the reins, her
tongue rattled on harder than ever.

"How far, Larch, will it be necessary for me to ride so as to be
sure--mind you, sure--of being out of the way when this awful business
opens?"

"Well, I should say a hundred yards or so will be enough--"

"Mercy! do you think so? I ought to go two or three times as far as
that; you won't object, will you? and when the shooting _does_ begin,
I can hurry Jack farther off."

"Do as you think best; but it seems to me, Jennie, that you are
forgetting your mother--"

"O, no; when Fred brings her out--maybe he has done so now--tell her
the direction I have gone and she will understand. Which is the best
course for me to take? I guess it don't make any difference, so I will
go this way."

Through all this apparently aimless chatter, Miss Jennie Whitney was
using her wits. She knew a long ride was before her, and everything
would be ruined if she lost her way. There was no moon or stars to
give guidance, and she therefore carefully took her bearings while the
chance was hers.

"I suppose it's all the same which course you follow, but I fear I am
doing wrong in allowing you to ride off--"

"Now, don't spoil everything by regretting the handsome way in which
you have indulged my whim; I think I will ride over the ridge to the
left--"

"Hold on, Jennie, until I can speak to Inman; he may object--"

"You can speak to him after I am gone; good-night, Larch, and many
thanks again for your kindness."

She rode off with her intelligent Jack on a walk until she was clear
of the camp, when she touched him into an easy gallop.

