
"He can spare it, for he has sold the claim for a fortune," Hogan
reasoned.  "It isn't fair that he should have everything and I should
have nothing.  He ought to have made me his partner, anyway.  He
would if he hadn't been so selfish.  I have just as much right to a
share in it as this infernal Yankee.  I'd like to choke him."

This argument was a very weak one, but a man easily persuades himself
of what he wants to do.

"I'll try for it," Hogan decided, "this very night."




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE NUGGET IS STOLEN.

At this time Joe and Joshua were occupying a tent which they had
purchased on favorable terms of a fellow miner.

They retired in good season, for they wished to start early on their
journey on the following morning.

"I don't know as I can go to sleep," said Joshua.  "I can't help
thinkin' of how rich I am, and what dad and all the folks will say."

"Do you mean to go home at once, Mr. Bickford?"

"Jest as soon as I can get ready.  I'll tell you what I am goin' to
do, Joe.  I'm goin' to buy a tip-top suit when I get to Boston, and a
gold watch and chain, and a breast-pin about as big as a saucer.
When I sail into Pumpkin Holler in that rig folks'll look at me, you
bet.  There's old Squire Pennyroyal, he'll be disappointed for one."

"Why will he be disappointed?"

"Because he told dad I was a fool to come out here.  He said I'd be
back in rags before a year was out.  Now, the old man thinks a good
deal of his opinion, and he won't like it to find how badly he's
mistaken."

"Then he would prefer to see you come home in rags?"

"You bet he would."

"How about Susan?  Ain't you afraid she has married the store clerk?"

Joshua looked grave for a moment.

"I won't say but she has," said he; "but if she has gone and
forgotten about me jest because my back is turned, she ain't the gal
I take her for, and I won't fret my gizzard about her."

"She will feel worse than you when she finds you have come back with
money."

"That's so."

"And you will easily find some one else," suggested Joe.

"There's Sophrony Thompson thinks a sight of me," said Mr. Bickford.
"She's awful jealous of Susan.  If Susan goes back on me, I'll call
round and see Sophrony."

Joe laughed.

"I won't feel anxious about you, Joshua," he said, "since I find you
have two girls to choose between."

"Not much danger of breakin' my heart.  It's pretty tough."

There was a brief silence.

Then Joshua said:

"What are your plans, Joe?  Shall you remain in San Francisco?"

"I've been thinking, Mr. Bickford, that I would like to go home on a
visit.  If I find that I have left my business in good hands in the
city, I shall feel strongly tempted to go home on the same steamer
with you."

"That would be hunky," said Bickford, really delighted.  "We'd have a
jolly time."

I think we would.  But, Mr. Bickford, I have no girls to welcome me
home, as you have."

"You ain't old enough yet, Joe.  You're a good-lookin' feller, and
when the time comes I guess you can find somebody."

"I don't begin to trouble myself about such things yet," said Joe,
laughing.  "I am only sixteen."

"You've been through considerable, Joe, for a boy of sixteen.  I wish
you'd come up to Pumpkin Holler and make me a visit when you're to
home."

"Perhaps I can arrange to be present at your wedding, Mr.
Bickford--that is, if Susan doesn't make you wait too long."

While this conversation was going on the dark figure of a man was
prowling near the tent.

"Why don't the fools stop talking and go to sleep," muttered Hogan.
"I don't want to wait here all night."  His wish was gratified.

The two friends ceased talking and lay quite still.  Soon Joe's deep,
regular breathing and Bickford's snoring convinced the listener that
the time had come to carry out his plans.

With stealthy step he approached the tent, and stooping over gently
removed the nugget from under Joshua's head.  There was a bag of
gold-dust which escaped his notice.  The nugget was all he thought of.

With beating heart and hasty step the thief melted into the darkness,
and the two friends slept on unconscious of their loss.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

HOGAN'S FATE

The sun was up an hour before Joe and Bickford awoke.  When Joe
opened his eyes he saw that it was later than the hour he intended to
rise.  He shook his companion.

"Is it mornin'?" asked Bickford drowsily.

"I should say it was.  Everybody is up and eating breakfast.  We must
prepare to set out on our journey."

"Then it is time--we are rich," said Joshua, with sudden remembrance.
"Do you know, Joe, I hain't got used to the thought yet.  I had
actually forgotten it."

"The sight of the nugget will bring it to mind."

"That's so."

Bickford felt for the nugget, without a suspicion that the search
would be in vain.

Of course he did not find it.

"Joe, you are trying to play a trick on me," he said.  "You've taken
the nugget."

"What!" exclaimed Joe, starting.  "Is it missing?"

"Yes, and you know all about it.  Where have you put it, Joe?"

"On my honor, Joshua, I haven't touched it," said Joe seriously.
"Where did you place it?"

"Under my head--the last thing before I lay down."

"Are you positive of it?"

"Certain, sure."

"Then," said Joe, a little pale, "it must have been taken during the
night."

"Who would take it?"

"Let us find Hogan," said Joe, with instinctive suspicion.  "Who has
seen Hogan?"

Hogan's claim was in sight, but he was not at work.  Neither was he
taking breakfast.

"I'll bet the skunk has grabbed the nugget and cleared out,"
exclaimed Bickford, in a tone of conviction.

"Did you hear or see anything of him during the night?"

"No--I slept too sound."

"Is anything else taken?" asked Joe.  "The bag of dust------"

"Is safe.  It's only the nugget that's gone."

The loss was quickly noised about the camp.  Such an incident was of
common interest.  Miners lived so much in common--their property was
necessarily left so unguarded--that theft was something more than
misdemeanor or light offense.   Stern was the justice which overtook
the thief in those days.  It was necessary, perhaps, for it was a
primitive state of society, and the code which in established
communities was a safeguard did not extend its protection here.

Suspicion fell upon Hogan at once.  No one of the miners remembered
to have seen him since rising.

"Did any one see him last night?" asked Joe.

Kellogg answered.

"I saw him near your tent," he said.  "I did not think anything of
it.  Perhaps if I had been less sleepy I should have been more likely
to suspect that his design was not a good one."

"About what hour was this?"

"It must have been between ten and eleven o'clock."

"We did not go to sleep at once.  Mr. Bickford and I were talking
over our plans."

"I wish I'd been awake when the skunk come round," said Bickford.
"I'd have grabbed him so he'd thought an old grizzly'd got hold of
him."

"Did you notice anything in his manner that led you to think he
intended robbery?" asked Kellogg.

"He was complainin' of his luck.  He thought Joe and I got more than
our share, and I'm willin' to allow we have; but if we'd been as lazy
and shif'less as Hogan we wouldn't have got down to the nugget at
all."

An informal council was held, and it was decided to pursue Hogan.  As
it was uncertain in which direction he had fled, it was resolved to
send out four parties of two men each to hunt him.  Joe and Kellogg
went together, Joshua and another miner departed in a different
direction, and two other pairs started out.

"I guess we'll fix him," said Mr. Bickford.  "If he can dodge us all,
he's smarter than I think he is."

Meanwhile Hogan, with the precious nugget in his possession, hurried
forward with feverish haste.  The night was dark and the country was
broken.  From time to time he stumbled over some obstacle, the root
of a tree or something similar, and this made his journey more
arduous.

"I wish it was light," he muttered.

Then he revoked his wish.  In the darkness and obscurity lay his
hopes of escape.

"I'd give half this nugget if I was safe in San Francisco," he said
to himself.

He stumbled on, occasionally forced by his fatigue to sit down and
rest.

"I hope I'm going in the right direction, but I don't know," he said
to himself.

He had been traveling with occasional rests for four hours when
fatigue overcame him.  He lay down to take a slight nap, but when he
awoke the sun was up.

"Good Heaven!" he exclaimed in alarm.  "I must have slept for some
hours.  I will eat something to give me strength, and then I must
hurry on."

He had taken the precaution to take some provisions with him, and he
began to eat them as he hurried along.

"They have just discovered their loss," thought Hogan.  "Will they
follow me, I wonder?  I must be a good twelve miles away, and this is
a fair start.  They will turn back before they have come as far as
this.  Besides, they won't know in what direction I have come."

Hogan was mistaken in supposing himself to be twelve miles away.  In
reality, he was not eight.  During the night he had traveled at
disadvantage, and taken a round-about way without being aware of it.
He was mistaken also in supposing that the pursuit would be easily
abandoned.  Mining communities could not afford to condone theft, nor
were they disposed to facilitate the escape of the thief.  More than
once the murderer had escaped, while the thief was pursued
relentlessly.  All this made Hogan's position a perilous one.  If he
had been long enough in the country to understand the feeling of the
people, he would not have ventured to steal the nugget.

About eleven o'clock Hogan sat down to rest.  He reclined on the
greensward near the edge of a precipitous descent.  He did not dream
that danger was so close till he heard his name called and two men
came running toward him.  Hogan, starting to his feet in dismay,
recognized Crane and Peabody, two of his late comrades.

"What do you want?" he faltered, as they came within hearing.

"The nugget," said Crane sternly.

Hogan would have denied its possession if he could, but there it was
at his side.

"There it is," he said.

"What induced you to steal it?" demanded Crane.

"I was dead broke.  Luck was against me.  I couldn't help it."

"It was a bad day's work for you," said Peabody.  "Didn't you know
the penalty attached to theft in the mining-camps?"

"No," faltered Hogan, alarmed at the stem looks of his captors.
"What is it?"

"Death by hanging," was the terrible reply.

Hogan's face blanched, and he sank on his knees before them.

"Don't let me be hung!" he entreated.  "You've got the nugget back.
I've done no harm.  No one has lost anything by me."

"Eight of us have lost our time in pursuing you.  You gave up the
nugget because you were forced to.  You intended to carry it away."

"Mercy! mercy!  I'm a very unlucky man.  I'll go away and never
trouble you again."

"We don't mean that you shall," said Crane sternly.  "Peabody, tie
his hands; we must take him back with us."

"I won't go," said Hogan, lying down.  "I am not going back to be
hung."

It would obviously be impossible to carry a struggling man back
fifteen miles, or more.

"We must hang you on the spot then," said Crane, producing a cord.
"Say your prayers; your fate is sealed."

"But this is murder!" faltered Hogan, with pallid lips.

"We take the responsibility."

He advanced toward Hogan, who now felt the full horrors of his
situation.  He sprang to his feet, rushed in frantic fear to the edge
of the precipice, threw up his arms, and plunged headlong.  It was
done so quickly that neither of his captors was able to prevent him.

They hurried to the precipice and looked over.  A hundred feet below,
on a rough rock, they saw a shapeless and motionless figure, crushed
out of human semblance.

"Perhaps it is as well," said Crane gravely.  "He has saved us an
unwelcome task."

The nugget was restored to its owners, to whom Hogan's tragical fate
was told.

"Poor fellow!" said Joe soberly.  "I would rather have lost the
nugget."

"So would I," said Bickford.  "He was a poor, shif'less critter; but
I'm sorry for him."




CHAPTER XXXIX

HOW JOE'S BUSINESS PROSPERED

Joe and his friend Bickford arrived in San Francisco eight days later
without having met with any other misadventure or drawback.  He had
been absent less than three months, yet he found changes.  A
considerable number of buildings had gone up in different parts of
the town during his absence.

"It is a wonderful place," said Joe to his companion.

"It is going to be a great city some day."

"It's ahead of Pumpkin Holler already," said Mr. Bickford, "though
the Holler has been goin' for over a hundred years."

Joe smiled at the comparison.  He thought he could foresee the rapid
progress of the new city, but he was far from comprehending the
magnificent future that lay before it.  A short time since, the
writer of this story ascended to the roof of the Palace Hotel, and
from this lofty elevation, a hundred and forty feet above the
sidewalk, scanned with delighted eyes a handsome and substantial
city, apparently the growth of a century, and including within its
broad limits a population of three hundred thousand souls.  It will
not be many years before it reaches half-a-million, and may fairly be
ranked among the great cities of the world.

Of course Joe's first visit was to his old place of business.  He
received a hearty greeting from Watson, his deputy.

"I am glad to see you, Joe," said he, grasping our hero's hand
cordially.  "When did you arrive?"

"Ten minutes ago.  I have made you the first call."

"Perhaps you thought I might have 'vamosed the ranch,'" said Watson,
smiling, "and left you and the business in the lurch."

"I had no fears on that score," said Joe.  "Has business been good?"

"Excellent.  I have paid weekly your share of the profits to Mr.
Morgan."

"Am I a millionaire yet?" asked Joe.
