"I certainly am."

"I can't live at all if you increase my rent, which is already larger
than I can afford to pay, Mr. Fairfield."

"Then I must find a tenant who can and will," said the agent,
emphatically.

"I am sure Mr. Percival can't understand the true state of the case, or
the circumstances of his tenants. Will you give me his address, and I
will take the liberty of writing to him and respectfully remonstrate
against any increase?"

Mr. Fairfield looked uneasy.

This appeal would not at all suit him. Yet how could he object without
leading to the suspicion that he was acting in this matter wholly on his
own responsibility, and not by the express orders of his principal? How
could he refuse to furnish Mr. Percival's address?

A middle course occurred to him.

"You may write your appeal, if you like, Hamlin," he said, "and hand it
to me. I will forward it; though I don't believe it will do any good.
The fact is that Mr. Percival has made up his mind to have more income
from his property in Jackson."




CHAPTER XXXVII

FRANK RECEIVES A LETTER FROM MR. PERCIVAL


While Frank was waiting for an answer to a letter to Mr. Percival he
devoted part of his time to the business which was supposed to be his
only reason for remaining in Jackson.

I am bound to say that as regards this business his trip might be
pronounced a failure. There was little ready money in Jackson. Many of
the people were tenants of Mr. Percival, and found it difficult to pay
the excessive rents demanded by his agent. Of course, they had no money
to spare for extras. Even if they had been better off, there was little
demand for stationery in the village. The people were chiefly farmers,
and did not indulge in much correspondence.

When Frank returned to his boarding place on the afternoon of the first
day, Mr. Hamlin asked him, not without solicitude, with what luck he had
met.

"I have sold twenty-five cents' worth of note paper," answered Frank,
with a smile.

Mr. Hamlin looked troubled.

"How many places did you call at?" he inquired.

"About a dozen."

"I am afraid you will get discouraged."

"If you don't do better, you won't begin to pay expenses."

"That is true."

"But perhaps you may do better to-morrow."

"I hope so."

"I wish you could find something in Jackson that would induce you to
remain here permanently, and make your home with us. I would charge you
only the bare cost of board."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Hamlin. I should enjoy being with you, but I
don't believe I shall find any opening here. Besides, I like a more
stirring life."

"No doubt--no doubt! Boys like a lively place. Well, I am glad you feel
independent of your business."

"For a little time. I am afraid it wouldn't do for me to earn so little
for any length of time."

Frank enjoyed the society of Dick Hamlin. Together they went fishing and
hunting, and a mutual liking sprang up between them.

"I wish you were going to stay longer, Frank," said Dick. "I shall feel
very lonely when you are gone."

"We may meet again under different circumstances," said Frank. "While I
am here, we will enjoy ourselves as well as we can."

So the days passed, and at length a letter came from Mr. Percival. I
append the most important passages:

"Your report is clear, and I have perfect confidence in your statement.
Mr. Fairfield has abused my confidence and oppressed my tenants, and I
shall dismiss him. I am glad you have found in Jackson a man who is
capable of succeeding him. Solely upon your recommendation, I shall
appoint Mr. Hamlin my resident agent and representative for the term of
six months. Should he acquit himself to my satisfaction, he will be
continued in the position. I am prepared to offer him one hundred
dollars a month, if that will content him.

"Upon receipt of this letter, and the accompanying legal authority, you
may call upon Mr. Fairfield and require him to transfer his office, and
the papers and accounts connected with it, to Mr. Hamlin. I inclose a
check for three hundred dollars, payable to your order, which you may
make payable to him, in lieu of three months' notice, provided he
immediately surrenders his office. Should he not, I shall dismiss him
summarily, and proceed against him for the moneys he has misappropriated
to his own use, and you may so inform him."

With this letter was a letter to Mr. Fairfield, of the same purport, and
a paper appointing Mr. Hamlin agent.

When this letter was received, Frank was overjoyed, knowing how much
pleasure he was about to give his new friends.

With this appointment and salary, Mr. Hamlin would consider himself a
rich man, and Dick's hope for a liberal education might be realized.

The letter came just before supper, and, at the close of the evening
meal, Frank determined to inform his friends of their good fortune.

"Mr. Hamlin," said he, "I have some good news for you."

"Indeed!" said the farmer, surprised.

"Your rent will not be increased."

"But how do you know this! Has Mr. Fairfield told you so?"

"No," answered Frank. "I have a question to ask. Would you be willing to
take Mr. Fairfield's place at a hundred dollars a month?"

"Willing? I should be delighted to do so. But why do you say this?"

"Because," answered Frank, quietly, "I am authorized to offer it to you
at that salary."

The whole family looked at Frank in bewildered surprise. It occurred to
them that he might have become crazy.

"You!" exclaimed the farmer. "What can you have to do with the agency?"

Frank explained to a very happy family group and then he and Mr. Hamlin
set out for the house of the agent.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE AGENT IS NOTIFIED


It was still early in the evening when Frank and Mr. Hamlin reached the
house of the agent. Had they come five minutes later, they would have
found him absent. Usually, soon after supper, he made his way to the
tavern, where he spent his time and money in a very unprofitable way.

The agent was surprised when his two visitors made their appearance.

"What brings you here, Hamlin?" he asked, with scant ceremony.

"I come on a little matter of business," answered Mr. Hamlin, gravely.

Mr. Fairfield concluded that the farmer had come to make an appeal to
have his rent continued at the old rates, and answered, impatiently:

"I don't think it will be of much use. My mind is made up. Have you come
on business, also?" he asked, turning to Frank, with a sneer.

"Yes, sir," answered our hero, quietly.

"That will be of no use, either," said the agent. "I am not in want of
stationery, and, if I were, I should not buy of a peddler."

"I have not come here to sell stationery, Mr. Fairfield," said Frank.

"Then, may I take the liberty of asking what is your business here?"

"I come on the same business as Mr. Hamlin," answered Frank, who
preferred that his companion should introduce the subject.

"Look here, I have no time for trifling," said Mr. Fairfield, angrily.
"I am going out and can only spare you five minutes."

"Mr. Fairfield, I would advise you not to go out till you have heard
what I have to say," said the farmer in a meaning tone.

"I certainly shall. You can call some other time."

"Another time will not do."

"Look here, sir! Do you know to whom you are talking? How dare you use
such a tone to Mr. Percival's representative?"

"I suppose you don't always expect to be Mr. Percival's representative?"

"I suppose I shall die sometime, if that's what you mean; but I am not
dead yet, as you will find. To pay you for your impertinence, I shall
increase your rent more than I intended. I'll drive you out of
town--that's what I'll do."

This was accompanied by an angry stamp of the foot, which, however, did
not frighten Mr. Hamlin much.

"I shall not pay a dollar more rent, nor shall I leave the farm I
occupy," returned Mr. Hamlin, whose patience was exhausted by the rough
insolence of the man before him.

"So you defy me, do you?" demanded Fairfield, furiously.

"I shall resist your injustice, sir, or rather I would do so if you were
able to carry out your threat. Luckily you have not the power."

"Have not the power? You will see if I have not the power!" roared the
angry agent. "I give you notice that at the end of the quarter you must
go, at any rate. After your insolence, I won't let you stay on any
terms. I wouldn't let you stay if you would pay double the rent. Do you
hear me, Hamlin?"

"Yes, I hear you."

Mr. Fairfield looked at the farmer in surprise. The latter seemed
perfectly calm and undisturbed by his threat, though it was of the most
serious nature. He had expected to see him humbled, and to hear him
entreat a reversal of the sentence; but his tenant was thoroughly
self-possessed, and appeared to care nothing for the agent's threats.

"You need not expect that I will change my mind," he added. "Out of
Jackson you must go. I know there is no other farm which you can hire,
and while I am Mr. Percival's agent, you need expect no favors from me."

"I don't expect any while you are Mr. Percival's agent," said Mr.
Hamlin.

There was something in the farmer's tone that arrested the agent's
attention and excited his curiosity, though it did not awaken his alarm,
and he could not help saying:

"Then what do you expect? Do you think I am going to die?"

"I don't expect that you will die or resign, Mr. Fairfield. You may be
removed."

"Have you been writing to Mr. Percival?" exclaimed Fairfield, in mingled
anger and apprehension.

"No, sir; I have not communicated with him in any way. You would not
give me his address."

"Of course I would not," said the agent, feeling relieved. "It would be
mere impertinence for you to write to him."

"Fortunately there is no immediate occasion for me to do so, as he has
sent a representative here to investigate your official conduct."

"A representative!" exclaimed Fairfield, now thoroughly startled. "Where
is he? I have not seen him."

"He is present," said Mr. Hamlin, indicating Frank.

The agent broke into a scornful laugh.

"You? Why, you are a peddler!"

"Only in appearance, Mr. Fairfield. I assumed that business in order not
to attract attention or excite suspicion. I am really Mr. Percival's
private secretary, as I can prove to your satisfaction."

"Is this true?" he asked, in a changed voice.

"Yes, sir; quite true."

"Have you written to Mr. Percival?"

"Yes, sir; and this afternoon I received a letter from him."

"What did he write?" asked Fairfield, in a husky voice; for he was
convinced now that Frank spoke the truth.

"He removes you, inclosing a check of three hundred dollars in place of
notice, and appoints Mr. Hamlin in your place."

"Will you read this letter, sir?"

It was enough. Fairfield knew that his management would not stand
investigation, and he yielded with a bad grace.

Mr. Hamlin, the next day, to the great joy of the villagers, made known
his appointment.

Fairfield left town and drifted to California, where he became an
adventurer, living in a miserable and precarious manner. Mr. Hamlin
moved into his fine house, and Dick was sent to a school to prepare for
college.

The next day Frank started on his return to New York.




CHAPTER XXXIX

AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY


On his return to New York, Frank had no reason to be dissatisfied with
his reception. From Mr. Percival to Freddie, all the family seemed
delighted to see him.

"You mustn't go away again, Frank," said little Freddie. "I wanted to
see you ever so much."

"And I wanted to see you, Freddie," said our hero, his heart warming to
the little boy.

"You won't go away again, will you, Frank?"

"Not if I can help it, Freddie."

"We are all glad to see you back Frank," said his employer. "But you
have justified my opinion of you by your success. Some of my friends
ridiculed me for sending a boy on such an important mission, but I don't
believe any of them would have succeeded any better than you, if as
well."

"I am glad you are satisfied with me, sir," said Frank, very much
gratified by the commendation of his employer.

"I feel that you have done a great service, and indeed I don't know whom
I could have sent in your place. However, I am glad to see you back
again. I have missed you about my letters, and have postponed answering
some till my young secretary returned."

Frank resumed his regular employment, and three months passed without
anything that needs to be recorded.

At the end of that time, Frank received an important letter from Col.
Vincent, which gave him much food for thought.

The letter was as follows:

"Dear Frank: For some time past I have been intending to write to you,
but I have delayed for no good reason. Now, however, I am led to write
by a surprising discovery which has just been made in your old home,
which may be of material importance to you.

"When your stepfather went away, he requested me to have an eye to the
estate, and order whatever I might think necessary to be done. I am not,
as you know, a very cordial friend of Mr. Manning's, but I have always
regarded the property as of right belonging to you--that is, since your
mother's death--and so accepted the commission.

"A few days since I went over the house and found that it was quite
dirty. Where the dirt could come from in an unoccupied house I can't
tell, but, at all events, I felt justified in engaging a woman to clean
the paint, so, if any of you should return unexpectedly, you would find
the house fit to receive you. This was a very simple matter, you will
think, and scarcely needs mentioning. But, my dear Frank, events of
importance often hinge on trifles, and so it has proved in the present
instance.

"On the evening of the second day I received a call from Mrs. Noonan,
whom I had employed to scrub the house. She had in her hand a folded
