
1. The day was sultry, and towards noon a strong wind sprang up that
roared in the pine tops like the dashing of distant billows, but without
in the least degree abating the heat. The children were lying listlessly
upon the floor, and the girl and I were finishing sunbonnets, when Mary
suddenly exclaimed, "Bless us, mistress, what a smoke!"

2. I ran immediately to the door, but was not able to distinguish ten
yards before me. The swamp immediately below us was on fire, and the heavy
wind was driving a dense black cloud of smoke directly towards us.

3. "What can this mean?" I cried. "Who can have set fire to the fallow?"
As I ceased speaking, John Thomas stood pale and trembling before me.
"John, what is the meaning of this fire?"

4. "Oh, ma'am, I hope you will forgive me; it was I set fire to it, and I
would give all I have in the world if I had not done it."

5. "What is the danger?"

6. "Oh, I'm afraid that we shall all be burnt up," said John, beginning to
whimper. "What shall we do?"

7. "Why, we must get out of it as fast as we can, and leave the house to
its fate."

8. "We can't get out," said the man, in a low, hollow tone, which seemed
the concentration of fear; "I would have got out of it if I could; but
just step to the back door, ma'am, and see."

9. Behind, before, on every side, we were surrounded by a wall of fire,
burning furiously within a hundred yards of us, and cutting off all
possibility of retreat; for, could we have found an opening through the
burning heaps, we could not have seen our way through the dense canopy of
smoke; and, buried as we were in the heart of the forest, no one could
discover our situation till we were beyond the reach of help.

10. I closed the door, and went back to the parlor. Fear was knocking
loudly at my heart, for our utter helplessness destroyed all hope of our
being able to effect our escape. The girl sat upon the floor by the
children, who, unconscious of the peril that hung over them, had both
fallen asleep. She was silently weeping; while the boy who had caused the
mischief was crying aloud.

11. A strange calm succeeded my first alarm. I sat down upon the step of
the door, and watched the awful scene in silence. The fire was raging in
the cedar swamp immediately below the ridge on which the house stood, and
it presented a spectacle truly appalling.

12. From out of the dense folds of a canopy of black smoke--the blackest I
ever saw--leaped up red forks of lurid flame as high as the tree tops,
igniting the branches of a group of tall pines that had been left for saw
logs. A deep gloom blotted out the heavens from our sight. The air was
filled with fiery particles, which floated even to the doorstep--while the
crackling and roaring of the flames might have been heard at a great
distance.

13. To reach the shore of the lake, we must pass through the burning
swamp, and not a bird could pass over it with unscorched wings. The fierce
wind drove the flames at the sides and back of the house up the clearing;
and our passage to the road or to the forest, on the right and left, was
entirely obstructed by a sea of flames. Our only ark of safety was the
house, so long as it remained untouched by the fire.

14. I turned to young Thomas, and asked him how long he thought that would
he. "When the fire clears this little ridge in front, ma'am. The Lord have
mercy on us then, or we must all go."

15. I threw myself down on the floor beside my children, and pressed them
to my heart, while inwardly I thanked God that they were asleep,
unconscious of danger, and unable by their cries to distract our attention
from adopting any plan which might offer to effect their escape.

16. The heat soon became suffocating. We were parched with thirst, and
there was not a drop of water in the house, and none to be procured nearer
than the lake. I turned once more to the door, hoping that a passage might
have been burnt through to the water. I saw nothing but a dense cloud of
fire and smoke--could hear nothing but the crackling and roaring of
flames, which was gaining so fast upon us that I felt their scorching
breath in my face.

17. "Ah," thought I--and it was a most bitter thought--"what will my
beloved husband say when he returns and finds that his poor wife and his
dear girls have perished in this miserable manner? But God can save us
yet."

18. The thought had scarcely found a voice in my heart before the wind
rose to a hurricane, scattering the flames on all sides into a tempest of
burning billows. I buried my head in my apron, for I thought that all was
lost, when a most terrific crash of thunder burst over our heads, and,
like the breaking of a waterspout, down came the rushing torrent of rain
which had been pent up for so many weeks.

19. In a few minutes the chip yard was all afloat, and the fire
effectually checked. The storm which, unnoticed by us, had been gathering
all day, and which was the only one of any note we had that summer,
continued to rage all night, and before morning had quite subdued the
cruel enemy whose approach we had viewed with such dread.


DEFINITIONS.-l. A-bat'ing, lessening. List'less-ly, not paying attention,
heedlessly. 3. Fal'low, a new clearing usually covered with brush heaps.
8. Con-cen-tra'tion, bringing into a small space, the essence. 9.
Can'o-py, a covering or curtain. 10. Ef-fect', to bring to pass. 11.
Suc-ceed'ed, followed. Ap-pall'ing, terrifying. 12. Lu'rid, dull red.
Ig-nit'ing, setting on fire. 15. Dis-tract', con-fuse, perplex. 16.
Parched, made very dry. 18. Wa'ter-spout, a column of water caught up by a
whirlwind.



LXXXII. THE DYING SOLDIERS. (230)

1. A waste of land, a sodden plain,
     A lurid sunset sky,
   With clouds that fled and faded fast
     In ghostly phantasy;
   A field upturned by trampling feet,
     A field uppiled with slain,
   With horse and rider blent in death
     Upon the battle plain.

2. The dying and the dead lie low;
     For them, no more shall rise
   The evening moon, nor midnight stars,
     Nor day light's soft surprise:
   They will not wake to tenderest call,
     Nor see again each home,
   Where waiting hearts shall throb and break,
     When this day's tidings come.

3. Two soldiers, lying as they fell
     Upon the reddened clay--
   In daytime, foes; at night, in peace
     Breathing their lives away!
   Brave hearts had stirred each manly breast;
     Fate only, made them foes;
   And lying, dying, side by side,
     A softened feeling rose.

4. "Our time is short," one faint voice said;
     "To-day we've done our best
   On different sides: what matters now?
     To-morrow we shall rest!
   Life lies behind. I might not care
     For only my own sake;
   But far away are other hearts,
     That this day's work will break.

5. "Among New Hampshire's snowy hills,
     There pray for me to-night
   A woman, and a little girl
     With hair like golden light;"
   And at the thought, broke forth, at last,
     The cry of anguish wild,
   That would not longer be repressed
     "O God, my wife, my child!"

6. "And," said the other dying man,
     "Across the Georgia plain,
   There watch and wait for me loved ones
     I ne'er shall see again:
   A little girl, with dark, bright eyes,
     Each day waits at the door;
   Her father's step, her father's kiss,
     Will never greet her more.

7. "To-day we sought each other's lives:
     Death levels all that now;
   For soon before God's mercy seat
     Together we shall bow.
   Forgive each other while we may;
     Life's but a weary game,
   And, right or wrong, the morning sun
     Will find us, dead, the same."

8. The dying lips the pardon breathe;
     The dying hands entwine;
   The last ray fades, and over all
     The stars from heaven shine;
   And the little girl with golden hair,
     And one with dark eyes bright,
   On Hampshire's hills, and Georgia's plain,
     Were fatherless that night!


DEFINITIONS.--l. Sod'den, soaked. Phan'ta-sy, specter-like ap-pearance.
Blent, mingled together. 2. Ti'dings, news. 5. An'guish, deep distress.
Re-pressed', kept back. 8. Par'don, forgiveness. En-twine', clasp
together.


EXERCISE.--What do the first two stanzas describe? What does the third?
What did one soldier say to the other? Where was his home? What friends
had he there? Where was the home of the other soldier? Who waited for him?
Did they forgive each other?



LXXXIII. THE ATTACK ON NYMWEGEN. (233)

From "The History of the United Netherlands," by John Lothrop Motley, who
was born in 1814, at Dorchester, Mass. He graduated at Harvard in 1831,
and afterwards lived many years In Europe, writing the histories which
made him famous. He died in 1877.

1. On the evening of the 10th of August, 1589, there was a wedding feast
in one of the splendid mansions of the stately city. The festivities were
prolonged until deep in the midsummer's night, and harp and viol were
still inspiring the feet of the dancers, when on a sudden, in the midst of
the holiday groups, appeared the grim visage of Martin Schenk, the man who
never smiled.

2. Clad in no wedding garment, but in armor of proof, with morion on head,
and sword in hand, the great freebooter strode heavily through the
ballroom, followed by a party of those terrible musketeers who never gave
or asked for quarter, while the affrighted revelers fluttered away before
them.

3. Taking advantage of a dark night, he had just dropped down the river
from his castle, with five and twenty barges, had landed with his most
trusted soldiers in the foremost vessels, had battered down the gate of
St. Anthony, and surprised and slain the guard.

4. Without waiting for the rest of his boats, he had then stolen with his
comrades through the silent streets, and torn away the latticework, and
other slight defenses on the rear of the house which they had now entered,
and through which they intended to possess themselves of the market place.

5. Martin had long since selected this mansion as a proper position for
his enterprise, but he had not been bidden to the wedding, and was
somewhat disconcerted when he found himself on the festive scene which he
had so grimly interrupted.

6. Some of the merrymakers escaped from the house, and proceeded to alarm
the town; while Schenk hastily fortified his position, and took possession
of the square. But the burghers and garrison were soon on foot, and he was
driven back into the house.

7. Three times he recovered the square by main strength of his own arm,
seconded by the handful of men whom he had brought with him, and three
times he was beaten back by overwhelming numbers into the wedding mansion.

8. The arrival of the greater part of his followers, with whose assistance
he could easily have mastered the city in the first moments of surprise,
was mysteriously delayed. He could not account for their prolonged
absence, and was meanwhile supported only by those who had arrived with
him in the foremost barges.

9. The truth--of which he was ignorant--was, that the remainder of the
flotilla, borne along by the strong and deep current of the Waal, then in
a state of freshet, had shot past the landing place, and had ever since
been vainly struggling against wind and tide to force their way back to
the necessary point.

10. Meantime Schenk and his followers fought desperately in the market
place, and desperately in the house which he had seized. But a whole
garrison, and a town full of citizens in arms proved too much for him, and
he was now hotly besieged in the mansion, and at last driven forth into
the streets.

11. By this time day was dawning, the whole population, soldiers and
burghers, men, women, and children, were thronging about the little band
of marauders, and assailing them with every weapon and every missile to be
found. Schenk fought with his usual ferocity, but at last the musketeers,
in spite of his indignant commands, began rapidly to retreat toward the
quay.

12. In vain Martin stormed and cursed, in vain with his own hand he struck
more than one of his soldiers dead. He was swept along with the
panic-stricken band, and when, shouting and gnashing his teeth with
frenzy, he reached the quay at last, he saw at a glance why his great
enterprise had failed.

13. The few empty barges of his own party were moored at the steps; the
rest were half a mile off, contending hopelessly against the swollen and
rapid Waal. Schenk, desperately wounded, was left almost alone upon the
wharf, for his routed followers had plunged helter-skelter into the boats,
several of which, overladen in the panic, sank at once, leaving the
soldiers to drown or struggle with the waves.

14. The game was lost. Nothing was left the freebooter but retreat.
Reluctantly turning his back on his enemies, now in full cry close behind
him, Schenk sprang into the last remaining boat just pushing from the
quay. Already overladen, it foundered with his additional weight, and
Martin Schenk, encumbered with his heavy armor, sank at once to the bottom
of the Waal.

15. Some of the fugitives succeeded in swimming down the stream, and were
picked up by their comrades in the barges below the town, and so made
their escape. Many were drowned with their captain. A few days afterward,
the inhabitants of Nymwegen fished up the body of the famous partisan. He
was easily recognized by his armor, and by his truculent face, still
wearing the scowl with which he had last rebuked his followers.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Mo'ri-on, a kind of helmet. Free'boot-er, one who
plunders. Mus-ket-eer', a soldier armed with a musket. Quar'ter, mercy. 6.
Burgh'ers, inhabitants of a town. Gar'ri-son, troops stationed in a fort
or town. 9. Flo-til'la, a fleet of small vessels. 11. Ma-raud'ers,
plunderers. Quay (pro. ke), a wharf  14. Foun'dered, sank. En-cum'bered,
weighed down. 15. Par'ti-san, a commander of a body of roving troops.
Tru'cu-lent, fierce.



LXXXIV. THE SEASONS. (237)

1. SPRING.

H. G. Adams, an English writer, has compiled two volumes of poetical
quotations, and is the author of several volumes of original poems. The
following is from the "Story of the Seasons."

A bursting into greenness;
  A waking as from sleep;
A twitter and a warble
  That make the pulses leap:
A watching, as in childhood,
  For the flowers that, one by one,
Open their golden petals
  To woo the fitful sun.
A gust, a flash, a gurgle,
  A wish to shout and sing,
As, filled with hope and gladness,
  We hail the vernal Spring.


II. SUMMER.

Now is the high tide of the year,
  And whatever of life hath ebbed away
Comes flooding back with a ripply cheer,
  Into every bare inlet and creek and bay.
We may shut our eyes, but we can not help knowing
  That skies are clear and grass is growing;
The breeze comes whispering in our ear,
  That dandelions are blossoming near,
That maize has sprouted, that streams are flowing,
  That the river is bluer than the sky,
That the robin is plastering his house hard by;
  And if the breeze kept the good news back
For other couriers we should not lack;
  We could guess it all by yon heifer's lowing,--
And hark! how clear bold chanticleer,
Warmed with the new wine of the year,
  Tells all in his lusty crowing.
                                       --Lowell.


III. AUTUMN.

Thomas Hood, author of the following selection, was born in 1798, at
London, where he was editor of the "London Magazine," and died in 1845. He
is best known as a humorist, but some of his poems are full of tender
feeling.

The autumn is old;
The sear leaves are flying;
He hath gathered up gold
And now he is dying:
Old age, begin sighing!

The year's in the wane;
There is nothing adorning;
The night has no eve,
And the day has no morning;
Cold winter gives warning.


IV. WINTER.

Charles T. Brooks translated the following selection from the original by
the German poet, Ludwig Holty. Mr. Brooks was born at Salem, Mass., in
1813. After graduation at Harvard he entered the ministry. He translated
much from the German, both of poetry and prose. He died in 1883.

  Now no plumed throng
  Charms the wood with song;
Icebound trees are glittering;
Merry snowbirds, twittering,
  Fondly strive to cheer
  Scenes so cold and drear.

  Winter, still I see
  Many charms in thee,
Love thy chilly greeting,
Snowstorms fiercely beating,
  And the dear delights
  Of the long, long nights.



LXXXV. BRANDYWINE FORD. (239)

Bayard Taylor was born at Kennett Square, Penn., in 1825. He received a
limited school education, but at an early age displayed great energy and
talent. He was a great traveler, and a fluent, graceful writer, both of
prose and verse. Mr. Taylor held high official positions under the
government. The following selection is adapted from "The Story of
Kennett," He died in 1878.

1. The black, dreary night, seemed interminable. He could only guess, here
and there, at a landmark, and was forced to rely more upon Roger's
instinct of the road than upon the guidance of his senses. Toward
midnight, as he judged, by the solitary crow of a cock, the rain almost
entirely ceased.

2. The wind began to blow sharp and keen, and the hard vault of the sky to
lift a little. He fancied that the hills on his right had fallen away, and
that the horizon was suddenly depressed towards the north. Roger's feet
began to splash in constantly deepening water, and presently a roar,
distinct from that of the wind, filled the air.

3. It was the Brandywine. The stream had overflowed its broad meadow
bottoms, and was running high and fierce beyond its main channel. The
turbid waters made a dim, dusky gleam around him; soon the fences
disappeared, and the flood reached to his horse's body.

4. But he knew that the ford could be distinguished by the break in the
fringe of timber; moreover, that the creek bank was a little higher than
the meadows behind it, and so far, at least, he might venture. The ford
was not more than twenty yards across, and he could trust Roger to swim
that distance.

5. The faithful animal pressed bravely on, but Gilbert soon noticed that
he seemed at fault. The swift water had forced him out of the road, and he
stopped from time to time, as if anxious and uneasy. The timber could now
be discerned, only a short distance in advance, and in a few minutes they
would gain the bank.
