
Mrs. Bourne _would_ bind them. "Of course!" said she. "How blind of me
not to see that this gentleman is one of your schoolfellows, Phil."

"Mother," said Phil, "this is John Acton."

"I've heard Phil talk about your wonderful win at Aldershot. I suppose
you're great friends?"

The "great friends" looked on the ground rather guiltily, but Phil cut
in with--

"I say, Acton, you must come and have tea with mother and me in my den.
Can you?"

Acton said quietly, "All right, Bourne. Thanks, awfully." Then he added
under his breath to Phil, "If I can come as a friend?"

"On that condition," said Phil, "I'd like you to come."

The trio walked back along the road--a happy trio they were, too--and a
melancholy procession of injured horses and an angry coachman closed
their rear. The tea in Bourne's room was very successful, and I should
fancy that Hinton did more hard thinking and hard staring when he saw
Acton amicably seated with his feet under Bourne's table than he ever
did before. The minute he had permission, he flew down the corridor, and
exploded bombshell after bombshell among wondering Amorians.

"Acton and Bourne teaing together like two birds on a bough!" he gasped.

"That would be a funny sight," said Cherry. "Birds don't take tea."

"Write an epilogue, Fruity. Teaing together as friendly as Grim and I
might."

"Only that," said W.E. Grim, with a genial wink, "my opinion is, that
Hinton's been on the drink, and seen double."

Incredulity and wonder were the dominant notes among Amorians for the
next two hours.

Acton and Phil walked to the station with Mrs. Bourne, and when she had
gone to town, and the pair were returning schoolwards, Acton said
thoughtfully--

"Look here, Bourne. Don't know quite what it was that made me feel so
cheap when you rushed to thank me for helping your mater. I felt very
small."

"If that's so, you'll feel cheaper and smaller when pater sees you. I'd
have those hands cured first."

"Bourne," said Acton, very seriously, "I've been an arrant cad since
I've come to St. Amory's, and if those horses hadn't bolted with your
mater I should never have seen in you anything but a strait-laced prig,
as I've all along thought you. I have, really. But that's all changed
now, and I'm going to dry up. I suppose you know you aren't popular
among the fellows generally?"

"Rather!" said Phil, gloomily.

"And you know that you owe all this to me?"

"Only too well, Acton."

"Well, I'm going to make what amends I can. Have you any objection to my
proposing you as captain to-night?"

"Acton, you are a brick," said Phil, "but you're too late now. I don't
stand a ghost of a chance against Mivart."

"And I'll get Mivart to second you. I can put all the fellows straight
concerning you, and, by Jove, it's the least I can do! I'll make a clean
breast of it to them all to-night before the election comes on."

"Oh no, you won't! I'd rather lose the captaincy than that. Besides,
Aspinall asked me not to do anything bar refuse you your cap."

"I've been an insufferable cad," said Acton, with a hot blush, "but you
shall be captain in any case."

Acton saw Mivart, and whether he told him the whole history of his
quarrel with Bourne or not, I cannot say; anyhow, Acton prevailed on him
to second Phil. Mivart was a very good fellow, as I said before, and he
thoroughly believed that Bourne would make a better captain than he
himself would, so he said he would be delighted to back Phil up to any
extent, since Phil was not now the jealous bounder he had so long been
considered.

I myself, as the retiring captain, took the chair in the Sixth Form
room to see the election of my successor through with all due solemnity.
Acton got up, and though he was very nervous, he said out straight what
he had resolved to say.

"I propose Phil Bourne for captain in place of Carr, and I'll tell you
why. I consider him the most suitable fellow to take our old captain's
place. Many of you may be--will be--surprised to hear me propose Bourne,
for between us two, as you all know, there has been no love lost. But in
all the dreary business I have been the utter cad and Bourne the other
thing. He brought upon himself any amount of bad feeling because he
would not give me my 'footer' cap. I did not deserve it"--some one here
said "rot!" emphatically--"not because I wasn't good enough a player,
but for another reason, which, much as I should shy at telling you, I
would tell, only Bourne begged me not to. It is his and Carr's and
another fellow's secret as much as mine, so I feel I had better not say
it. But, believe me, in the business I was an utter cad, and instead of
bringing all that row about my cap upon Bourne's head, I ought to have
burned my boots, and never kicked a football again. There's another
matter, this time strictly between Bourne and self, in which I did him
as big an injury as one fellow can do another. He gave me a sound
thrashing for it on the morning that you fellows went away last term,
and Carr and Vercoe here assisted us in our little mill. No one ever
deserved a thrashing as I deserved that one, and now I'm glad I got it.
It was Bourne's only score against me. Fact is," said Acton, with a grim
smile, "I'd rather meet another Jarvis than Bourne."

The fellows opened their eyes, and wondered what next.

"This term I've worked the whole school, and especially you monitors,
against Bourne, to make his chance of getting the captaincy a very rocky
one. And I think I pretty well succeeded. You all liked Bourne before I
appeared on the scene, with good reason, and I do hope you will all give
him your votes, for, and I say it absolutely sure of its truth, the best
fellow in St. Amory's is Bourne. That is all I can say."

Mivart got up before the fellows had time to recover from their
astonishment, and said--

"I have great pleasure in seconding Acton's proposal. I, too, consider
Bourne out and out the best fellow to take Carr's place. Whilst Phil was
under a cloud I was willing to stand for captain, but since we all know
now that he stands where he did, the only proper thing to do is to give
him the unanimous vote, for I do not mean to stand at all."

The fellows blankly voted for Bourne, and, as Grim would be sure to say,
"the proposition was carried _nem. con_."

That evening Corker confirmed Phil's appointment, and I spent as happy
an evening as I can remember. Acton said he should not come back to St.
Amory's again, as his record was too black to be used as a convenient
reference, but Phil and I and all the fellows told him we should be
only too glad to let bygones be bygones, and that he had really done the
square thing at the last.

He did come back, and Phil's letters to me tell me that his old enemy is
one of the most popular--deservedly--in the school, and his best friend.
They are inseparable, play back together at "footer," and are variously
called Gemini, Damon and Pythias, David and Jonathan, as the case may
be.

Biffen's are still cock-house at "footer;" Acton is going in again for
the "heavy"--this time without the Coon's help--and those "niggers,"
Singh Ram and Runjit Mehtah, to Worcester's intense disgust, are the
representatives of St. Amory's in gymnastics; and, altogether, Biffen's
House is, thanks to Acton's help, perhaps the most distinguished in the
school.




ACTON'S CHRISTMAS

I

SNOWED UP


A jollier going away for the Christmas holidays had not taken place for
an age.

An old Amorian had done "something good" in India, which had obtained an
extra week's holiday for his old school, and the Amorians, a day or so
before, had beaten the Carthusians, whose forwards had been led to the
slaughter by an International whose very initials spell unapproachable
football.

The station of St. Amory's was crowded with the fellows, all sporting
rugs of vivid patterns on their arms, and new and of-the-latest-shape
"bowlers" on their heads, and new and fancy trouserings on their
emancipated legs. No more Amorian cap--peak pointing well down the
neck--no more trouserings of sober grey-and-black, no more beakish
restraint for five weeks! Couples strolled up and down arm-in-arm; knots
of the Sixth and Fifth discussed matters of high state interest, and the
worthies of the lower forms made the lives of the perspiring porters a
misery and a burden to them. Prominent Amorians were cheered, and when
those old enemies, John Acton and Phil Bourne, tumbled out of their cab
as the greatest of chums, the fags quavered out their shrill rejoicings,
honouring the famous school backs who had stemmed the sweeping rush of
the Carthusians a day or so before.

There was a rumour that Acton had been asked to play for the
Corinthians, and the other athletes on the platform pressed round the
pair for information.

Our old friends, Wilson and Jack Bourne, had shut up by stratagem B.A.M.
Cherry in the lamp-room, and the piteous pleadings of that young
Biffenite were listened to with ecstacy by a crowd of a dozen, who
hailed the promises and threats of the prisoner with shouts of mocking
laughter.

W.E. Grim, Esq., explained to a few of his particular chums, Rogers
among them, the wonderful shooting he was going to have "up at Acton's
place" in Yorkshire, and they listened with visible envy.

"Look here, Grimmy, if you tell us next term that you bagged two
woodcock with one barrel, we'll boot you all round Biffen's yard--so
there."

Acton had, as a matter of fact, invited Dick Worcester, Gus Todd, Jack
Senior, of Merishall's house, and Grim, to spend Christmas with him at
his mother's place, and they had all accepted with alacrity.

The northern express rolled into the station, and Grim was hurriedly
informed by Rogers that he was to bag the end carriage for Acton under
pain of death. Grim tore down the platform, and, encouraged by the
cheerful Rogers, performed prodigies of valour, told crams to groups of
disgusted Amorians, who went sighing to search elsewhere for room,
engaged in single combat with one of Sharpe's juniors, and generally
held the fort. And then, when Acton came running down, and wanted to
know what the deuce he was keeping him waiting for, Grim realized that
Rogers had "done" him to a turn. He shouted weird threats as he was
hurried away, to the bubbling Rogers, and that young gentleman lifted
his hat in ironical acknowledgment. There was the warning shriek from
the engine, and then the train crawled out, taking toll of all the
Amorians going north, and leaving the others to shout after them
endearing epithets and clinching witticisms.

For two days before the Amorians were on the wing home there had been
heavy falls of snow, culminating, on the going-away day, in a heavy
snow-storm. All the way from St. Amory's the express had been held up by
doubtful signals, and in the deeper cuttings the snow had piled up in
huge drifts. The express had toiled on its northern journey, steadily
losing time at every point. At Preston Acton had telegraphed home that
probably they would arrive quite three hours late. Thus it was that,
tired but jolly, the party of five Amorians got out of the main line
express at Lowbay, and, each laden with rugs and magazines, stumbled
light-heartedly across the snow-sodden platform into the local train,
which had waited for the express nearly three hours. They found
themselves sixteen miles from home, and with no prospect of reaching it
before midnight.

"Raven Crag," the name of Acton's home, was situated just within the
borders of Yorkshire. A single line of rails takes you from Lowbay
Junction up the Westmoreland hills to the top of the heaviest gradient
in the kingdom, and then hurtles you down into the little wayside
station of Lansdale, the station for "Raven Crag."

The sturdy tank engine coupled to the short local train was steaming
steadily and noisily, and when the express had rolled heavily out for
Carlisle, the station-master hastily beat up intending passengers for
the branch line. Besides Acton's party, there were only two passengers,
a lady and a little girl.

"I'll give the old tank a good half-hour to crawl the eight miles to the
top of the fells," said Acton, "and then we'll rattle into Lansdale in
ten minutes. But she _will_ cough as she crawls up. Look here, Dick,
I'll have a whole rug, please. This carriage is as cold as a
refrigerator."

The fellows made themselves as comfortable as an unlimited supply of
rugs and a couple of foot-warmers would admit of. Dick Worcester,
without a blush, propped his head against a window and said: "Grim,
there's a lingering death for you if you fail to wake me five minutes
from Lansdale." The others exchanged magazines and yawned hopefully,
whilst Acton took out his Kipling, and straightway forgot snow, home,
and friends.

The station master, and the driver, and the guard held an animated
conversation round the engine. "Strikes me, Bill, the old engine'll
never get t' top of t' bank to-night!" said the guard. "The snow must be
terrible thick in Hudson's cutting."

"She'll do it," said the driver,--"wi' luck."

"Got another engine with steam up," inquired the guard, "to give us a
lift behind?"

"No, they're all shut down, and we couldn't wait now. You'll have to run
her through yourselves," said the station-master. "Nearly four hours
late already! Off with you!"

"I'm doubting we can't do it," said the guard, thoughtfully. "To-night is
the worst night I can remember for years. The expresses could just
manage it."

"Oh, well," said the driver, "we're down to run it, and we're going to
try."

"There'll be drifts twenty feet deep in the cutting, and it'll be like
running into a house," said the guard, slowly, "but I suppose we've got
to try, anyhow."

He walked away thoughtfully to his van, and a moment later there was a
shrill whistle, and the Lansdale local ran out into the night.

And it _was_ a night! There was no moon, and not the least glimmer of a
star overhead; an utter darkness shrouded the world. The wind was high
and steady, and its mournful howling through the rocky cuttings of the
railway sounded unspeakably melancholy. Driven by the gale, the
snowflakes had in five minutes covered the windward side of the train
with a winding-sheet, inches deep, and when Gus Todd, from curiosity,
opened the window to peer out into the night, the flakes, heavy, large,
and soft, whirled into the carriage a very cataract of snow.

"Don't, Gus, please," pleaded Acton, looking up from his book in
astonishment at the snow glittering in the lamp-light; "I prefer that
outside, thanks."

"It's an awful storm, Acton," said Gus, hastily drawing up the window.
"Allah! how it snows!"

"Is this up to the usual sample here?" asked Senior, nestling nearer the
dozing Dick.

"Well," said Acton, listening a moment to the stroke of the engine, and
the roar of the wind, "I think we may say it is."

"Blizzard seems nearer the word, old man. The flakes come at you like
snowballs."

"Shan't be sorry when we tread your ancestral halls. This weather is
too-too for comfort. And don't we crawl!"

"We're rising," said Acton, "and it is uphill work. Hear the old tank
groaning?"

In fact, the train, labouring up the heavy gradient, did barely more
than crawl through the snow and wind, and the slow beat of the engine
told how hard it was even to do that. Acton added thoughtfully, "We've
quite four miles yet to the summit, and there's a chance we mayn't----"

"Mayn't what, Acton, please?" said Grim, putting down his magazine.

"Get there, Grimmy."

"To the top? Oh, rot!" said Senior.

"I can't quite remember such a crawl as this, Jack; listen how the
engine coughs."

"If we can't get to the top of the incline--what then?" asked Grim.

"Go back, I should say."

"To Lowbay?"

"Yes. But while we _do_ crawl there's no need to fret."

"That would mean goodbye for the present to your place, old man?"

"Yes. 'Twould be a horrid nuisance, wouldn't it?"

The Amorians listened anxiously to the engine toiling up the incline;
but the howling of the wind almost drowned every other sound. The pace
was still a crawl, but it was a steady one.

"Oh! she'll worry through after all," said Acton.

Hardly were the words out of his mouth when the train pulled up with a
jerk that sent Senior and Grim flying forward into the unexpectant arms
of the dozing Dick and Gus Todd. The luggage rattled out of the rack in
instantaneous response, and whilst all the fellows were staring blankly
at each other they heard the crunching of the brake, and felt that the
train had come to a dead stop.

"What ever is the matter?" gasped Worcester, quite wide awake by now.

"We've landed into a drift, I fancy," said Acton, "and there's no home
for us to-night. What beastly luck!"

There was now no sound but the roaring of the storm; the engine gave no
sign that they could hear, and Acton impatiently let down the window,
but was instantly almost blinded by the snow, which whirled through the
open window. Crossing over, he tried the other with better success, and
the first thing he saw was the guard, waist deep in snow, trying to make
his way forward, and holding his lamp well before him. "What's happened,
guard?" he asked.

"Matter!--why, we're off the line for one thing, and----"

Forward, they could hear the shouts of the driver above the hiss of
escaping steam.

"Let me have your cap, Grim," said Acton, all energy in a moment. "I'm
going forward to see what is up. Back in a minute."

He slipped out carefully, but seeing the predicament of the guard, he
did not jump out into the snow, but advanced carefully along the
footboards, feeling his way forward by the brass-work of the carriages.
To the leeward the bulk of the train gave comparative shelter from the
fury of the storm, and Acton was in a minute abreast of the guard,
floundering heavily in the drifts.

"This is a better way, guard. Take my hand, and I'll pull you up."

"All right, sir. Here's the lamp."

Acton's hand closed on the guard's wrist, and in a moment the young
athlete had the man beside him. Together they made their way forward,
and by the light of the lamp they saw what had happened. The engine had
taken a drift edge-way, had canted up, and then rolled over against the
walls of the cutting. Luckily, the carriages had kept the rails. The
