gay little high-pitched voice in the house, it would have been so much
less forlorn.  And that a man should be compelled to carry about in his
breast the thought that he had seemed to wrong and desert a child was
not a thing one could face.

"Come, come," he said in his cheery voice; "we'll find her yet."

"We must begin at once.  No time must be lost," Mr. Carrisford fretted.
"Have you any new suggestion to make--any whatsoever?"

Mr. Carmichael felt rather restless, and he rose and began to pace the
room with a thoughtful, though uncertain face.

"Well, perhaps," he said.  "I don't know what it may be worth.  The
fact is, an idea occurred to me as I was thinking the thing over in the
train on the journey from Dover."

"What was it?  If she is alive, she is somewhere."

"Yes; she is SOMEWHERE. We have searched the schools in Paris.  Let us
give up Paris and begin in London.  That was my idea--to search London."

"There are schools enough in London," said Mr. Carrisford. Then he
slightly started, roused by a recollection.  "By the way, there is one
next door."

"Then we will begin there.  We cannot begin nearer than next door."

"No," said Carrisford.  "There is a child there who interests me; but
she is not a pupil.  And she is a little dark, forlorn creature, as
unlike poor Crewe as a child could be."

Perhaps the Magic was at work again at that very moment--the beautiful
Magic.  It really seemed as if it might be so. What was it that brought
Ram Dass into the room--even as his master spoke--salaaming
respectfully, but with a scarcely concealed touch of excitement in his
dark, flashing eyes?

"Sahib," he said, "the child herself has come--the child the sahib felt
pity for.  She brings back the monkey who had again run away to her
attic under the roof.  I have asked that she remain. It was my thought
that it would please the sahib to see and speak with her."

"Who is she?" inquired Mr. Carmichael.

"God knows," Mr. Carrrisford answered.  "She is the child I spoke of. A
little drudge at the school."  He waved his hand to Ram Dass, and
addressed him.  "Yes, I should like to see her.  Go and bring her in."
Then he turned to Mr. Carmichael.  "While you have been away," he
explained, "I have been desperate.  The days were so dark and long. Ram
Dass told me of this child's miseries, and together we invented a
romantic plan to help her.  I suppose it was a childish thing to do;
but it gave me something to plan and think of.  Without the help of an
agile, soft-footed Oriental like Ram Dass, however, it could not have
been done."

Then Sara came into the room.  She carried the monkey in her arms, and
he evidently did not intend to part from her, if it could be helped.
He was clinging to her and chattering, and the interesting excitement
of finding herself in the Indian gentleman's room had brought a flush
to Sara's cheeks.

"Your monkey ran away again," she said, in her pretty voice. "He came
to my garret window last night, and I took him in because it was so
cold.  I would have brought him back if it had not been so late. I knew
you were ill and might not like to be disturbed."

The Indian gentleman's hollow eyes dwelt on her with curious interest.

"That was very thoughtful of you," he said.

Sara looked toward Ram Dass, who stood near the door.

"Shall I give him to the Lascar?" she asked.

"How do you know he is a Lascar?" said the Indian gentleman, smiling a
little.

"Oh, I know Lascars," Sara said, handing over the reluctant monkey. "I
was born in India."

The Indian gentleman sat upright so suddenly, and with such a change of
expression, that she was for a moment quite startled.

"You were born in India," he exclaimed, "were you?  Come here." And he
held out his hand.

Sara went to him and laid her hand in his, as he seemed to want to take
it.  She stood still, and her green-gray eyes met his wonderingly.
Something seemed to be the matter with him.

"You live next door?" he demanded.

"Yes; I live at Miss Minchin's seminary."

"But you are not one of her pupils?"

A strange little smile hovered about Sara's mouth.  She hesitated a
moment.

"I don't think I know exactly WHAT I am," she replied.

"Why not?"

"At first I was a pupil, and a parlor boarder; but now--"

"You were a pupil!  What are you now?"

The queer little sad smile was on Sara's lips again.

"I sleep in the attic, next to the scullery maid," she said. "I run
errands for the cook--I do anything she tells me; and I teach the
little ones their lessons."

"Question her, Carmichael," said Mr. Carrisford, sinking back as if he
had lost his strength.  "Question her; I cannot."

The big, kind father of the Large Family knew how to question little
girls.  Sara realized how much practice he had had when he spoke to her
in his nice, encouraging voice.

"What do you mean by 'At first,' my child?" he inquired.

"When I was first taken there by my papa."

"Where is your papa?"

"He died," said Sara, very quietly.  "He lost all his money and there
was none left for me.  There was no one to take care of me or to pay
Miss Minchin."

"Carmichael!" the Indian gentleman cried out loudly.  "Carmichael!"

"We must not frighten her," Mr. Carmichael said aside to him in a
quick, low voice.  And he added aloud to Sara, "So you were sent up
into the attic, and made into a little drudge.  That was about it,
wasn't it?"

"There was no one to take care of me," said Sara.  "There was no money;
I belong to nobody."

"How did your father lose his money?" the Indian gentleman broke in
breathlessly.

"He did not lose it himself," Sara answered, wondering still more each
moment.  "He had a friend he was very fond of--he was very fond of him.
It was his friend who took his money. He trusted his friend too much."

The Indian gentleman's breath came more quickly.

"The friend might have MEANT to do no harm," he said.  "It might have
happened through a mistake."

Sara did not know how unrelenting her quiet young voice sounded as she
answered.  If she had known, she would surely have tried to soften it
for the Indian gentleman's sake.

"The suffering was just as bad for my papa," she said.  "It killed him."

"What was your father's name?" the Indian gentleman said. "Tell me."

"His name was Ralph Crewe," Sara answered, feeling startled.  "Captain
Crewe.  He died in India."

The haggard face contracted, and Ram Dass sprang to his master's side.

"Carmichael," the invalid gasped, "it is the child--the child!"

For a moment Sara thought he was going to die.  Ram Dass poured out
drops from a bottle, and held them to his lips.  Sara stood near,
trembling a little.  She looked in a bewildered way at Mr. Carmichael.

"What child am I?" she faltered.

"He was your father's friend," Mr. Carmichael answered her.  "Don't be
frightened.  We have been looking for you for two years."

Sara put her hand up to her forehead, and her mouth trembled.  She
spoke as if she were in a dream.

"And I was at Miss Minchin's all the while," she half whispered.  "Just
on the other side of the wall."



18

"I Tried Not to Be"


It was pretty, comfortable Mrs. Carmichael who explained everything.
She was sent for at once, and came across the square to take Sara into
her warm arms and make clear to her all that had happened. The
excitement of the totally unexpected discovery had been temporarily
almost overpowering to Mr. Carrisford in his weak condition.

"Upon my word," he said faintly to Mr. Carmichael, when it was
suggested that the little girl should go into another room. "I feel as
if I do not want to lose sight of her."

"I will take care of her," Janet said, "and mamma will come in a few
minutes."  And it was Janet who led her away.

"We're so glad you are found," she said.  "You don't know how glad we
are that you are found."

Donald stood with his hands in his pockets, and gazed at Sara with
reflecting and self-reproachful eyes.

"If I'd just asked what your name was when I gave you my sixpence," he
said, "you would have told me it was Sara Crewe, and then you would
have been found in a minute."  Then Mrs. Carmichael came in. She looked
very much moved, and suddenly took Sara in her arms and kissed her.

"You look bewildered, poor child," she said.  "And it is not to be
wondered at."

Sara could only think of one thing.

"Was he," she said, with a glance toward the closed door of the
library--"was HE the wicked friend?  Oh, do tell me!"

Mrs. Carmichael was crying as she kissed her again.  She felt as if she
ought to be kissed very often because she had not been kissed for so
long.

"He was not wicked, my dear," she answered.  "He did not really lose
your papa's money.  He only thought he had lost it; and because he
loved him so much his grief made him so ill that for a time he was not
in his right mind.  He almost died of brain fever, and long before he
began to recover your poor papa was dead."

"And he did not know where to find me," murmured Sara.  "And I was so
near."  Somehow, she could not forget that she had been so near.

"He believed you were in school in France," Mrs. Carmichael explained.
"And he was continually misled by false clues.  He has looked for you
everywhere.  When he saw you pass by, looking so sad and neglected, he
did not dream that you were his friend's poor child; but because you
were a little girl, too, he was sorry for you, and wanted to make you
happier.  And he told Ram Dass to climb into your attic window and try
to make you comfortable."

Sara gave a start of joy; her whole look changed.

"Did Ram Dass bring the things?" she cried out.  "Did he tell Ram Dass
to do it?  Did he make the dream that came true?"

"Yes, my dear--yes!  He is kind and good, and he was sorry for you, for
little lost Sara Crewe's sake."

The library door opened and Mr. Carmichael appeared, calling Sara to
him with a gesture.

"Mr. Carrisford is better already," he said.  "He wants you to come to
him."

Sara did not wait.  When the Indian gentleman looked at her as she
entered, he saw that her face was all alight.

She went and stood before his chair, with her hands clasped together
against her breast.

"You sent the things to me," she said, in a joyful emotional little
voice, "the beautiful, beautiful things?  YOU sent them!"

"Yes, poor, dear child, I did," he answered her.  He was weak and
broken with long illness and trouble, but he looked at her with the
look she remembered in her father's eyes--that look of loving her and
wanting to take her in his arms.  It made her kneel down by him, just
as she used to kneel by her father when they were the dearest friends
and lovers in the world.

"Then it is you who are my friend," she said; "it is you who are my
friend!"  And she dropped her face on his thin hand and kissed it again
and again.

"The man will be himself again in three weeks," Mr. Carmichael said
aside to his wife.  "Look at his face already."

In fact, he did look changed.  Here was the "Little Missus," and he had
new things to think of and plan for already.  In the first place, there
was Miss Minchin.  She must be interviewed and told of the change which
had taken place in the fortunes of her pupil.

Sara was not to return to the seminary at all.  The Indian gentleman
was very determined upon that point.  She must remain where she was,
and Mr. Carmichael should go and see Miss Minchin himself.

"I am glad I need not go back," said Sara.  "She will be very angry.
She does not like me; though perhaps it is my fault, because I do not
like her."

But, oddly enough, Miss Minchin made it unnecessary for Mr. Carmichael
to go to her, by actually coming in search of her pupil herself. She
had wanted Sara for something, and on inquiry had heard an astonishing
thing.  One of the housemaids had seen her steal out of the area with
something hidden under her cloak, and had also seen her go up the steps
of the next door and enter the house.

"What does she mean!" cried Miss Minchin to Miss Amelia.

"I don't know, I'm sure, sister," answered Miss Amelia.  "Unless she
has made friends with him because he has lived in India."

"It would be just like her to thrust herself upon him and try to gain
his sympathies in some such impertinent fashion," said Miss Minchin.
"She must have been in the house for two hours.  I will not allow such
presumption.  I shall go and inquire into the matter, and apologize for
her intrusion."

Sara was sitting on a footstool close to Mr. Carrisford's knee, and
listening to some of the many things he felt it necessary to try to
explain to her, when Ram Dass announced the visitor's arrival.

Sara rose involuntarily, and became rather pale; but Mr. Carrisford saw
that she stood quietly, and showed none of the ordinary signs of child
terror.

Miss Minchin entered the room with a sternly dignified manner.  She was
correctly and well dressed, and rigidly polite.

"I am sorry to disturb Mr. Carrisford," she said; "but I have
explanations to make.  I am Miss Minchin, the proprietress of the Young
Ladies' Seminary next door."

The Indian gentleman looked at her for a moment in silent scrutiny. He
was a man who had naturally a rather hot temper, and he did not wish it
to get too much the better of him.

"So you are Miss Minchin?" he said.

"I am, sir."

"In that case," the Indian gentleman replied, "you have arrived at the
right time.  My solicitor, Mr. Carmichael, was just on the point of
going to see you."

Mr. Carmichael bowed slightly, and Miss Minchin looked from him to Mr.
Carrisford in amazement.

"Your solicitor!" she said.  "I do not understand.  I have come here as
a matter of duty.  I have just discovered that you have been intruded
upon through the forwardness of one of my pupils--a charity pupil. I
came to explain that she intruded without my knowledge." She turned
upon Sara.  "Go home at once," she commanded indignantly. "You shall be
severely punished.  Go home at once."

The Indian gentleman drew Sara to his side and patted her hand.

"She is not going."

Miss Minchin felt rather as if she must be losing her senses.

"Not going!" she repeated.

"No," said Mr. Carrisford.  "She is not going home--if you give your
house that name.  Her home for the future will be with me."

Miss Minchin fell back in amazed indignation.

"With YOU! With YOU sir!  What does this mean?"

"Kindly explain the matter, Carmichael," said the Indian gentleman;
"and get it over as quickly as possible."  And he made Sara sit down
again, and held her hands in his--which was another trick of her papa's.

Then Mr. Carmichael explained--in the quiet, level-toned, steady manner
of a man who knew his subject, and all its legal significance, which
was a thing Miss Minchin understood as a business woman, and did not
enjoy.

"Mr. Carrisford, madam," he said, "was an intimate friend of the late
Captain Crewe.  He was his partner in certain large investments. The
fortune which Captain Crewe supposed he had lost has been recovered,
and is now in Mr. Carrisford's hands."

"The fortune!" cried Miss Minchin; and she really lost color as she
uttered the exclamation.  "Sara's fortune!"

"It WILL be Sara's fortune," replied Mr. Carmichael, rather coldly. "It
is Sara's fortune now, in fact.  Certain events have increased it
enormously.  The diamond mines have retrieved themselves."

"The diamond mines!"  Miss Minchin gasped out.  If this was true,
nothing so horrible, she felt, had ever happened to her since she was
born.

"The diamond mines," Mr. Carmichael repeated, and he could not help
adding, with a rather sly, unlawyer-like smile, "There are not many
princesses, Miss Minchin, who are richer than your little charity
pupil, Sara Crewe, will be.  Mr. Carrisford has been searching for her
for nearly two years; he has found her at last, and he will keep her."

After which he asked Miss Minchin to sit down while he explained
matters to her fully, and went into such detail as was necessary to
make it quite clear to her that Sara's future was an assured one, and
that what had seemed to be lost was to be restored to her tenfold;
also, that she had in Mr. Carrisford a guardian as well as a friend.

Miss Minchin was not a clever woman, and in her excitement she was
silly enough to make one desperate effort to regain what she could not
help seeing she had lost through her worldly folly.

"He found her under my care," she protested.  "I have done everything
for her.  But for me she should have starved in the streets."

Here the Indian gentleman lost his temper.

"As to starving in the streets," he said, "she might have starved more
