
"No; sit down," implored Ruth.

"Why? Surely you are not frightened. There never was any sort of
conveyance that would frighten me. I wish I might drive that horse
instead of the stupid old Jehu on the box. Isn't London a perfect place?
Oh, this is lovely, isn't it, Ruth?"

"Thank goodness I'm not always bothered by that dreadful speaking voice
inside me that you seem to have got," said Kathleen.

Here the cab drew up with a jerk at the Metropole.

"How much are we to pay you?" asked Kathleen.

The man was honest, and asked the customary shilling. A porter was
standing on the steps of the hotel. He flung the doors wide, and the two
entered. Presently a man came up and asked Kathleen what she wanted. The
hour was just before dinner, and the wide hall of the hotel was full.
Both men and women turned and stared at the children. Both were
extremely pretty, Kathleen almost startlingly so. But what about the
gloveless little hands and the untidy neck and throat?

"Please," said Kathleen, "we have come to see my aunt, Miss O'Flynn. She
is here, isn't she?"

The man said he would inquire, and went to the bureau.

"Yes," he said after a minute's pause. "Will you come to the
drawing-room, young ladies?"

He conducted the children down some wide passages covered with thick
Turkey carpets, opened the folding doors of a great drawing-room, and
left them to themselves. There was a minute or two of agonized terror on
the part of Ruth, of suspense and rapid heart-beating as far as Kathleen
was concerned, and then a deep, mellow, ringing voice was heard, and
Miss Katie O'Flynn entered the apartment.

"Why, I never!" she cried. "The top of the morning to you, my honey! God
bless you, my darling! Oh, it is joy to kiss your sweet face again!"

A little lady, all smiles and dimples, all curls and necklaces and gay
clothing, extended two arms wide and clasped them round Kathleen's neck.

"Ah, aunty!" said Kathleen, "this is good. And I ran away to see you. I
did, darling; I did. I have got into the most awful scrape; nobody knows
what will happen. See me--without gloves and without a necktie. And this
dear little girl, one of my chosen friends, Ruth Craven, has come with
me."

"Ah, now, how sweet of her!" said Miss O'Flynn, turning to Ruth.--"Kiss
me, my darling. Why, then, you are as welcome as though you were the
core of my heart for being so kind to my sweet Kathleen.--Come to the
light, Kathleen asthore, and let me look at you. But it isn't as rosy
you are as you used to be. It's a bit pale and pulled down you look. Do
you like England, my dear? If you don't like it all at all, it's home
you will come with me to the old castle and the old country. Now then,
children, sit by me and let's have a talk. We'll have a good meal
presently, and then I have a bit of a thought in the back of my head
which I think will please you both. Sit here anyway for the present, and
let us collogue to our hearts' content."

Miss Katie O'Flynn and her two young charges, as she told the girls she
considered them, drew a good deal of attention as they sat and talked
together. The little lady was not young, but was certainly very
fascinating. She had a vivacious, merry smile, the keenest, most
brilliant black eyes in the world, and a certain grace and dignity about
her which seemed to contrast with her rapid utterances and intensely
genial manner.

Dinner was announced, and the three went into the great dining-room.
Miss O'Flynn ordered a small table, and they sat down together. Ruth
felt unhappy; she keenly desired to go home again. She was more and more
certain that she had done wrong to listen to Kathleen's persuasions. But
Kathleen was enjoying herself to the utmost. She was an Irish girl
again, sitting close to one of her very own. She forgot the dull school
and the dreadfully dreary house where she now lived; she absolutely
forgot that such a person as Miss Ravenscroft existed; she ceased almost
to remember the Society of the Wild Irish Girls. Was she not Kathleen
O'Hara, the only daughter of the House of O'Hara, the heiress of her
beloved father's old castle? For some day she would be mistress of
Carrigrohane Castle; some day she would be a great lady on her own
account. Now Kathleen's ideas of what a great lady should be were in
themselves very sensible and noble. A great lady should do her utmost to
make others happy. She should dispense _largesse_ in the true sense of
the word. She should make as many people as possible happy. Her
retainers should feel certain that they dwelt in her heart. She should
love the soil of her native land with a passion which nothing could
undermine or weaken. The sons of the soil should be her brothers, her
kinsmen; the daughters of the soil should be her sisters in the best
sense of the word. But not only should the great lady of Carrigrohane
love her Irish friends, but men and women, both youths and children, but
she should love others who needed her help. There never was a more
affectionate, more generous-hearted girl than Kathleen; but of
self-control she had little or no knowledge, and those who crossed her
will had yet to find that Kathleen would not obey, for she was fearless,
defiant, resolute--in short, a rebel born and bred.

Ruth sat silent, perplexed, and anxious in the midst of the gay feast.
Kathleen and Aunt Katie O'Flynn laughed and almost shouted in their
mirth. Occasionally people turned to glance at the trio--the grave,
refined, extremely pretty, but shabbily dressed girl; the radiant
child, and the vivacious little lady who might be her mother but who
scarcely looked as if she was. It was a curious party for such a room
and for such surroundings.

"I think--" said Ruth suddenly. "Forgive me, Kathleen, but I think we
ought to be looking out a train to go back by."

"Indeed, and that you won't," said Miss O'Flynn. "You are going to stay
with me to-night. Why, do you think I'd let this precious darling child
back again in the middle of the night? And you must stay here too--what
is your name? Oh, Ruth. I can get you a room here, and you shall have a
fire and every comfort."

"I at least must go home," said Ruth. "My grandfather and grandmother
will be sitting up for me."

"Oh, nonsense, child!" said Miss O'Flynn. "I can send a commissionaire
down to tell your grandfather that I am keeping you for the night."

"Of course, Ruth," said Kathleen. "Don't be silly; it is absurd for you
to go on like that. And for my part I should love to stay."

"I am sorry, Kathleen," said Ruth, "but I must go home. Perhaps one of
the porters can tell me when there is a train to Merrifield. I must go
back, for grandfather would be terrified if I didn't go home. You, of
course, must please yourself."

"My dear child, leave it to me," said Miss O'Flynn. "You can't possibly
go back--neither you nor my sweet pet Kathleen. Oh, I'll arrange it,
dear; don't you be frightened. You couldn't go so late by yourself; it
wouldn't be right."

Miss O'Flynn, however, had not come in contact with a character like
Ruth's before. She could be as obstinate as a mule. It was in that
light Miss O'Flynn chose to consider her conduct.

"I must go," she said. "I can't by any possibility stay."

"Do, Ruth, for my sake," pleaded Kathleen, tears in her eyes.

"No, Kathleen, not even for your sake. And I think," added Ruth, "that
you ought to come with me. It would be much better for you to see Miss
Ravenscroft in the morning and explain matters to her."

"Nonsense!" said Kathleen, now speaking with decided temper. "That is my
affair. I like you very much, Ruth, but you really need not interfere
with me."

"I should think not indeed," said Miss O'Flynn. "I know nothing about
you, Miss Craven, but you don't understand what a person of consequence
my niece is considered in Ireland."

"That may be," replied Ruth; "but at school Kathleen, sweet and dear as
she is, has to obey the rules just like any other girl.--Please,
Kathleen, do be persuaded and come back with me.--Indeed, Miss O'Flynn,
if you will only believe me, it is considered a very grave offence to
miss morning school or to be late when nine o'clock strikes; and
Kathleen can't be at school in time unless she returns home now."

"I'm not going, so there!" said Kathleen.

"Perhaps some one would tell me when the next train for Merrifield
leaves Charing Cross," was Ruth's next remark.

Before any one could reply to her, however, a servant entered and said
something in a low tone to Miss O'Flynn.

"Well, now," she said, speaking with eagerness, her face all smiles and
dimples, "the way is made plain for you at least, Miss Craven.--Who do
you think has come, Kathleen? Why, the lady who has charge of you."

"Mrs. Tennant? Oh, the dear tired one!" cried Kathleen. "She can never
be cross, and I like her very much.--Where is the lady?" she added,
turning to the waiter.

"She is in the hall, miss."

Kathleen flew out, and before Mrs. Tennant, who was really feeling very
angry, could prevent her, had flung her arms round her neck.

"Thank goodness it is you!" said the young girl. "Now don't be angry,
for you don't know how to manage it. If it was Alice, wouldn't she be in
a tantrum? But you are all right; you haven't an idea of scolding me. I
arrived here as safely as a girl could. And what do you think? I brought
pretty Ruth Craven with me. She didn't much like it, but here she is;
and she's on tenter-hooks to get home, so she can return with you, can't
she?"

"You must come too, Kathleen. You annoyed me very much indeed. You gave
me a terrible fright. I did not know what might have happened to you,
knowing how ignorant you are of London and its ways."

"But I have got a head on my shoulders," laughed Kathleen. "And now that
you have come we must have a bit of fun. I want to introduce you to
aunty. It is Aunt Katie O'Flynn, you know, the lady who sent me the
beautiful, wonderful clothes."

But here Miss O'Flynn herself appeared on the scene. Kathleen did the
necessary introducing, and the two ladies moved a little apart to talk
together. By-and-by Miss O'Flynn called the two girls to her side.

"Mrs. Tennant is not angry with you now, Kathleen. On the contrary, she
loves you very much; and she will take Miss Ruth Craven back with her. I
have been trying to induce her to stay here herself, but she won't; and
as Ruth is anxious to return home, her escort has come very opportunely.
As to you, darling, nothing will induce me to part with you until
to-morrow morning."

"But what will you do about school?" said Ruth.

"That can be managed," said Miss O'Flynn. "It isn't the first time that
Kathleen and I have got up with the sunrise. We'll get up to-morrow
before it, I'm thinking, and take a train, and be in time to have a good
breakfast at Mrs. Tennant's.--Then if you, my dear lady, will put up
with me until lunch-time, I can see more of my Kathleen, and propound
some plans for your pleasure as well as hers. If you must go, Mrs.
Tennant, I am afraid you must, for the next train leaves Charing Cross
for Merrifield at ten minutes past nine."

Mrs. Tennant looked grave, but it was difficult to resist Miss O'Flynn,
and the time was passing. Accordingly she and Ruth left the Hotel
Metropole, and the aunt and niece found themselves alone.




CHAPTER XVII.

MISS KATIE O'FLYNN AND HER NIECE.


"Now, Kathleen," said Miss O'Flynn, "you come straight up to my bedroom,
where there is a cosy fire, and where we will be just as snug as Punch.
We'll draw two chairs up to the fire and have a real collogue, that we
will."

"Yes, that we will," said Kathleen. "I have a lot of things to ask you,
and a lot of things to tell you."

"Come along then, dear child. My room is on the second floor; we won't
wait for the lift."

Kathleen took Miss Katie O'Flynn's hand, and they ran merrily and as
lightly as two-year-olds up the stairs. People turned to look at them as
they sped upwards.

"Why, the little old lady seems as young and agile as the pretty niece,"
said one visitor to another.

"Oh, they're both Irish; that accounts for anything," was the answer.
"The most extraordinary and the most lively nation on the face of the
earth."

The two vivacious Irishwomen entered their bedroom. Aunt Katie flung
herself into a deep arm-chair; Kathleen did likewise, and then they
talked to their heart's content. It is good to hear two Irishwomen
conversing together, for there is so much action in the
conversation--such lifting of brows, such raising of hands, such
emphasis in tone, in voice, in manner. Imagery is so freely employed;
telling sentences, sharp satire, wit--brilliant, overflowing,
spontaneous--all come to the fore. Laughter sometimes checks the eager
flow of words. Occasionally, too, if the conversation is sorrowful,
tears flow and sobs come from the excited and over-sensitive hearts. No
one need be dull who has the privilege of listening to two Irishwomen
who have been parted for some time talking their hearts out to each
other. Kathleen and her aunt were no exception to the universal rule.
Kathleen had never been from home before, and Aunt Katie had things to
tell her about every person, man and woman, old and young, on the
Carrigrohane estate. But when all the news had been told, when the exact
number of dogs had been recounted, the cats and kittens described, the
fowls, the goats, the donkeys, the horses, the cows enumerated, it came
to be Aunt Katie's turn to listen.

"Now my love, tell me, and be quick, about all you have been doing. And
first and foremost, how do you like school?"

"Not at all, aunty; and I'm not learning anything."

"My dear, that is sad hearing; and your poor father pining his heart out
for the want of you."

"I never wished to go to school," said Kathleen.

"You will have to bear it now, my pet, unless you have real cause for
complaint. They're not unkind to you, acushla, are they?"

"Oh, not really, Aunt Katie; but they're such dull people. The teachers
are dull. I don't mind Miss Spicer so much; she's the music teacher. As
to Miss Ravenscroft, I have never even seen her."

"And who is she, darling?"

"The head-mistress, and no end of a toff."

"What's a toff, dear?"

"It's a slang word they use in stupid old England."

"I don't admire it, my love. Don't you demean yourself by bringing words
of that sort home to Carrigrohane."

"Not I. I shan't be a minute in the old place before the salt breezes
will blow England out of my memory. Ah! it's I who pine to be home
again."

"It will broaden your mind, Kathleen, and improve you. And some of the
English people are very nice entirely," said Miss O'Flynn, making this
last statement in what she considered a widely condescending manner. "So
your are not learning much?"

"I am getting on with my music. Perhaps I'll settle down to work. I
should not loathe it so much if it was not for Alice."

"Ah! she's the daughter of Mrs. Tennant. I rather took to Mrs. Tennant,
the creature! She seemed to have a kind-hearted sort of face."

"She's as right as rain, aunty; and so are the two boys. But Alice--she
is--"

"What, darling?"

"A prig, aunty. Detestable!"

"I never took to that sort," said Miss O'Flynn. "Wouldn't you like some
oyster-patties and some plumcake to munch while you are talking,
deary?"

"I shouldn't mind."

"I'll ring and order them."

A servant appeared. Miss O'Flynn gave orders which resulted in a rich
and most unwholesome supper being placed upon the table. Kathleen and
her aunt ate while they talked.

"And what occupies you, love, at all at all?" said Miss O'Flynn as she
ate her second oyster-patty. "From your description it seems to be a
sort of death in life, that town of Merrifield."

"I have to make my own diversions, aunty, and they are sprightly and
entertaining enough. Don't you remember when I told you to have all
those little hearts made for me?"

"To be sure, dear--the most extraordinary idea I ever heard in my life.
Only that I never cross you, Kathleen, I'd have written to know the
meaning of it."

"It doesn't matter about you knowing."

Here Kathleen briefly and in graphic language described the Society of
the Wild Irish Girls.

"It is the one thing that keeps me alive," she said. "However, I'm
guessing they are going to make a fuss about it in the school."

"And what will you do then, core of my heart?"

"Stick to them, of course, aunty. You don't suppose I'd begin a thing
and then drop it?"

"No; that wouldn't be at all like you, you young rebel.".

Kathleen laughed.

"I am all in a puzzle," she said, "to know where to hold the next
meeting, for there is no doubt that some of the girls who hate us
because they weren't asked to join spied last time; so I want the
society to meet the night after next in a new place."

"And I'll tell you what I've been thinking," said Aunt Katie; "that I'll
be present, and bring a sparkle of old Ireland to help the whole affair.
So you'll have to reckon with me on the occasion of the next meeting."

Kathleen sat very still, her face thoughtful.

"Nothing will induce me to give them up," she said, or to betray any
girl of my society. Oh, aunty, there's such a funny old woman! I met her
last Sunday. She's a certain Mrs. Church, and she lives in a cottage
about four miles from Merrifield. We could have our meetings there--I
know we could--and she'd never tell. Nobody would guess. She is the
great-aunt of one of the members of the society, Susy Hopkins, a nice
little girl, a tradesman's daughter."

"Oh, dear me, Kathleen! You don't mean to say you demean yourself by
associating with tradesmen's daughters?"

"I do so, aunty; and I find them very much nicer than the stuck-up girls
who think no end of themselves."

"Well, well," said Miss O'Flynn, "whatever you are, you are a lady born
and bred, and nothing can lower that sort--nothing nor nobody. You must
make your own plans and let me know."

"I am sure I can manage the old lady, and I will tell you why. She wants
to join our alms-women."

"What?"

"You know what a snug time our dear old alms-women have. I was telling
Mrs. Church about it last Sunday. She took a keen desire to belong to
us, and I sort of half, in a kind of a way, promised her. Is there
likely to be a vacancy soon, Aunt Katie?"

