
Such was the Ring Tailed Panther, a name that he had originally given to
himself and which the people had adopted, one who boasted that he feared
no man, the boast being true. He was heavily armed and he rode a black
and powerful horse, which he directed straight toward the place where
Ned and Obed were sitting.

"You are Ned Fulton an' Obed White, if report tells no lie?" he said in
a deep growling voice.

"We are," said Ned, who did not know the identity of their formidable
visitor.

"So I knew. I just wanted to see if you'd deny it. Glad to meet you,
gentlemen. As for me, I'm the Ring Tailed Panther."

"The Ring Tailed Panther?"

"Exactly. Didn't you hear me say so? I'm the Ring Tailed Panther, an' I
can whip anything livin', man or beast, lion or grizzly bear. That's why
I'm the Ring Tailed Panther."

"Happy to know you, Mr. Ring Tailed Panther," said Ned, "and having no
quarrel with you we don't wish to fight you."

The man laughed, his broad face radiating good humor.

"And I don't want to fight you, either," he said, "'cause all of us have
got to fight somebody else. See here, your name's Obed an' yours is Ned,
and that's what I'm goin' to call you. No Mistering for me. It don't
look well for a Ring Tailed Panther to be givin' handles to people's
names."

"Ned and Obed it is," said Ned with warmth.

"Then, Ned an' Obed, it's Mexicans. I've been fightin' Indians a long
time. Besides bein' a Ring Tailed Panther, I'm three parts grizzly bear
an' one part tiger, an' I want you both to come with guns."

"Is it fighting?" asked Ned, starting up.

"It's ridin' first an' then fightin'. Our people down at Gonzales have a
cannon. The Mexicans are comin' to take it away from them, an' I think
there's goin' to be trouble over the bargain. The Texans got the gun as
a defense against the Indians an' they need it. Some of us are goin'
down there to take a hand in the matter of that gun, an' you are goin'
with us."

"Of course we are!" said Ned and Obed together. In five minutes they
were riding, fully armed, with the Ring Tailed Panther over the prairie.
He gave them more details as they rode along.

"Some of our people had been gatherin' at San Felipe to stop the march
of Cos if they could," he said, "but they've been drawn off now to help
Gonzales. They're comin' from Bastrop, too, an' other places, an' if
there ain't a fight then I'm the Ring Tailed Panther for nothing. If we
keep a good pace we can join a lot of the boys by nightfall."

"We'll keep it," said Ned. The boy's heart was pounding. Somehow he felt
that an event of great importance was at hand, and he was glad to have a
share in it. But the three spoke little. The Panther led the way. Ned
saw that despite his boasting words he was a man of action. Certainly he
was acting swiftly now, and it was quite evident that he knew what he
was doing. At last he turned to Ned and said:

"You're only a boy. You know what you're goin' into, of course?"

"A fight, I think."

"And you may get killed?"

"I know it. One can't go into a fight without that risk."

"You're a brave boy. I've heard of what you did, an' you don't talk
much. I'm glad of that. I can do all the talkin' that's needed by the
three of us. The Lord created me with a love of gab."

The man spoke in a whimsical tone and Ned laughed.

"You can have all my share of the talking, Mr. Palmer," he said.

"The Ring Tailed Panther," corrected the man. "I told you not to be
Misterin' me. I like that name, the Ring Tailed Panther. It suits me,
because I fit an' I fight till they get me down, then I curl my tail an'
I take another round. Once in New Orleans I met a fellow who said he was
half horse, half alligator, that he could either claw to death the best
man living, stamp him to pieces or eat him alive. I invited him to do
any one of these things or all three of them to me."

"What happened?" asked Ned.

A broad smile passed over the man's brown face.

"After they picked up the pieces an' put him back together," he said, "I
told him he might try again whenever he felt like it, but he said his
challenge was directed to human beings, not to Ring Tailed Panthers. Him
an' me got to be great friends an' he's somewhere in Texas now. I may
run acrost him before our business with the Mexicans is over, which I
take it is goin' to last a good while."

It was now late in the afternoon, and dismounting at a clump of trees
the Panther lighted the end of a dead stick and waved the torch around
his head many times.

"Watch there in the west for another light like this," he said.

Ned, who sat on his horse, was the first to see the faint circling light
far down under the horizon. It was so distant that he could not have
seen it had he not been looking for it, but when he pointed it out the
Panther ceased to whirl his own torch.

"It's some friends," he said, "an' they're answerin'. They're sayin'
that they've seen us an' that they're waitin'. When they get through
we'll say that we understan' an' are comin'."

The whirling torch on the horizon stopped presently. The Panther whirled
his own for half a minute, then he sprang back upon his horse and the
three rode rapidly forward.

The sight of the lights sparkling in the twilight so far across the
prairie thrilled Ned. He felt that he was in very truth riding to a
fight as the Panther had said. Perhaps it was a part of the force of Cos
that was coming to Gonzales. Cos himself had turned from the land route
with a part of his force and, coming by sea, had landed at Copano about
two weeks before. Ned, having full cause, hated this brutal man, and he
hoped that the Texans would come to grips with him.

The night was at hand when they reached four men sitting on horseback
and waiting for them. They greeted the Ring Tailed Panther with few
words but with warmth. They gave to Ned and Obed, too, the strong
handclasp which men in danger give to friends who come. Ned thrilled
once more with pride that he should be associated with heroes in great
deeds. Such they undoubtedly were to him.

"The Mexicans will be at Gonzales to-morrow," said one of the men. "The
place, as you know, has refused to give up its cannon and has defied
them, but it's almost bare of men. I don't think they have a dozen
there."

"The battle is generally to the strong if they get there in time," said
Obed, "and here are seven of us on good horses."

"Not countin' the fact that one of us is a Ring Tailed Panther with
claws a foot long an' two sets of teeth in his mouth," said Palmer.
"Ride on, boys, an' ride hard."

They urged their horses into a gallop and sped over the prairie. At
midnight they clattered into the tiny village of Gonzales on the
Guadalupe River, where everybody except the little children was awake
and watching. Lights flared from the cabins, and the alarm at first,
lest they were Mexicans, changed to joy when they were disclosed as
Texans.

But the armed force of the place, though stout of heart, was pitifully
small. They found only eleven men in Gonzales capable of bearing arms,
and no more help could be expected before the Mexicans came the next
day. But eleven and seven make eighteen, and now that they were joined,
and communicating spirit and hope to one another, the eighteen were more
than twice as strong as the eleven had been. The Ring Tailed Panther
poured forth a stream of cheer and encouragement. He grew more voluble
at the approach of danger. Never had his teeth and claws been longer or
sharper.

"I'm afraid of nothin' except that they won't come," he said. "If they
don't, my health will give way. I'll be a-droopin' an' a-pinin' an' I'll
have to go off an' fight the Comanches an' Lipans to get back my
strength."

But he was assured that his health would not suffer. Mexican cavalry, a
hundred strong, were coming under a captain, Castenada, sent by
Ugartchea, the Mexican commander at San Antonio de Bexar. Scouts had
brought that definite news. They were riding from the west and they
would have to cross the Guadalupe before they could enter Gonzales.
There were fords, but it would be a dangerous task to attempt their
passage in face of the Texan rifles.

The ferryboat was tied safely on the Gonzales side, and then the
eighteen, every one a fine marksman, distributed themselves at the
fords. Ned, Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther stayed together. They did
not anticipate the arrival of the Mexican forces before dawn, but
Castenada might send spies ahead, and the Mexican scouts were full of
wiles and stratagems.

"At any rate," said the Panther, "if we catch any Mexican prowling
around here we'll throw him into the river."

"All things, including Mexicans, come to him who waits," said Obed, "and
speaking for myself I'd rather they wouldn't come until day. It's more
comfortable to sit quiet in the dark."

These three and six others had taken a position under a great oak tree,
where they were well shaded but could easily see anyone who approached
the ford on the opposite side. Back of them a few lights burned in the
little town, where the anxious women watched, but no noise came from it
or the second ford, where the other half of the eighteen were on guard.
Their horses were tethered some distance in the rear and they, too,
rested in quiet.

The tree sent up a great gnarled root and Ned sat on the ground, leaning
against it. It just fitted into the curve of his back and he was very
comfortable. But he did not allow his comfort to lull him into lethargy.
Always he watched the river and the farther shore. He had now become no
mean scout and sentinel. The faculties develop fast amid the continuous
fight for life against all kinds of dangers. Above all, that additional
sense which may be defined as prescience, and, which was a development
of the other five, was alive within him, ready to warn him of a hostile
presence.

But Ned neither saw nor heard anything, nor did his sixth sense warn him
that an enemy was near. The Guadalupe, wide, yellow and comparatively
shallow like most of the Texas rivers, flowed slowly and without sound.
Now and then Obed and the Panther walked down to the other ford, where
all, too, was quiet, but Ned kept his place against the root. Toward
morning the Panther sat down beside him there.

"Waitin's hard," he said. "I like to jump on the enemy with claws an'
nails an' have it out right there an' then. I like to roar an' bite.
That's why I'm a Ring Tailed Panther."

Ned laughed.

"If Castenada is coming, and they say he surely is," he said, "we'll
soon have use for all our claws and teeth."

"Patience will bring our Mexicans," said Obed White.

At daylight women from the cabins brought them all coffee and warm food,
for which they were very grateful. Then the sun rose, and the morning
was fresh and crisp, it now being autumn. The men remained by the
river, still watching intently and Ned caught a sudden sharp glint which
was not that of the sun, far out on the prairie. He knew that it was a
brilliant ray reflected from the polished head of a lance, and he said
as he pointed a finger:

"The Mexicans are coming."

"So they are," said the Ring Tailed Panther. "I see a horseman, an'
another, an' another, an' now a lot of 'em. They must be a hundred at
least. It's the troop of Castenada, an' they're after that cannon. Well,
I'm glad."

The man seemed to swell and his eyes darkened. He was like some
formidable beast about to spring. The boaster was ready to make good his
boast.

"Run down to the other ford, Ned," said Palmer, "an' tell the men there
that the Mexicans are at hand."

Ned did his errand, but returned very quickly. He was anxious to see the
advance of Castenada's troop. The Mexicans, about half of whom were
lancers and the rest armed with muskets, came on very steadily. An
officer in fine uniform, whom Ned took to be Castenada himself, rode at
their head. When they came within rifle shot a white flag was hoisted on
a lance.

"A white flag! This is no time for white flags," growled the Ring Tailed
Panther. "Never have any faith in a Mexican comin' under a white flag.
What we've got to do now is to roar an' rip an' claw."

"Still," said Obed, "it's evil to him who evil does, and we've got to
wait till these Mexicans do it. First we've got to hear what they say,
and if the saying isn't to our liking, as I'm thinking it won't be, then
it's ripping and roaring and clawing and all the other 'ings' to our
taste as long as we can stand it."

"Go ahead," growled the Ring Tailed Panther, "I'm not much on talkin'.
Fightin's more in my line an' when it's that I come with a hop, a skip
an' a jump, teeth an' claws all ready."

"Ned," said Obed, "you speak the best Spanish, so go down there to the
bank of the river, and hear what they have to say. Just remember that
we're not giving up the cannon, and clothe the answers in what fine
words you please. There isn't any rock here, but sooner this rock shall
fly from its firm base than the Texans will yield their cannon when they
are sure to be attacked by Indians and maybe Mexicans too."

Ned walked down to the edge of the river and the officer, whom he
rightly supposed to be Castenada, dismounting, came to the shore at an
opposite point.

"What do you want?" cried Ned in pure Spanish across the water.

"Are you empowered to speak for the people of Gonzales?"

"You hear me speaking and you see the other Texans listening."

"Then I have to say that on the order of General Cos I demand your
cannon in the name of General Santa Anna and Mexico."

"We've made up our minds to keep it. We're sure to need it later on."

"This is insolent. If you do not give it we shall come and take it."

"Tell him, Ned," growled the Ring Tailed Panther, "that we just hope
he'll come an' try to take it, that I'm here roarin' all the time, that
I've filed my teeth an' nails 'till they're like the edge of a razor,
an' that I'm just hungerin' to rip an' claw."

"The men of Gonzales mean to defend their cannon and themselves,"
called Ned across the river. "If you come to take the gun it means war.
It means more, too. It means that you will lose many of your soldiers.
The Texans, as you know, are both able and willing to shoot."

"This is rebellion and treason!" cried Castenada. "The great Santa Anna
will come with a mighty force, and when he is through not a Texan will
trouble the surface of the earth."

A roar of approval came from the men behind the Mexican captain, but Ned
replied:

"Until the earth is rid of us we may make certain spots of it dangerous
for you. So, I warn you to draw back. Our bullets carry easily across
this river."

Captain Castenada, white with rage, retired with his troop beyond the
range of the Texan rifles.




CHAPTER XV

THE FIRST GUN


"Well, Ned, it's sometimes ask and ye shall not receive, isn't it?" said
Obed White, looking at the retreating Mexicans.

But the Ring Tailed Panther growled between his shut teeth. Then he
opened his mouth and gave utterance to his dissatisfaction.

"It's a cheat, a low Mexican trick," he said, "to come here an' promise
a fight an' then go away. I'm willin' to bet my claws that them Mexicans
will hang around here two or three days, without tryin' to do a thing."

"An' won't that be all the better for us?" asked Ned. "We're only
eighteen and we surely need time for more."

"That's so," admitted the Ring Tailed Panther, "but when you've got all
your teeth and claws sharpened for a fight you want it right then an'
not next week."

The Mexicans tethered their horses and began to form camp about a half
mile from the river. They went about it deliberately, spreading tents
for their officers and lighting fires for cooking. The Texans could see
them plainly and the Mexicans showed the carelessness and love of
pleasure natural to children of the sun. Some lay down on the grass and
three or four began to strum mandolins and guitars.

There was a sterner manner on the Texan side of the Guadalupe. The watch
at the fords was not relaxed, but Ned went back into the little town to
carry the word to the women and children. Most of the women, like the
men, were dressed in deerskin and they, too, volunteered to fight if
they were needed. Ned told them what Castenada had asked, and he also
told them the reply which was received with grim satisfaction. The women
were even more bitter than the men against the Mexicans.

Ned passed a long day by the Guadalupe, keeping his place most of the
time at the ford with the Ring Tailed Panther, who was far less patient
than he.

"My teeth an' claws will shorely get dull with me a-settin' here an'
doin' nothin'," said Palmer. "I can roar an' I can keep on roarin' but
what's the good of roarin' when you can't do any bitin' an' tearin'?"

"Patience will have its perfect fight," said Obed, giving one of his
misquotations. "I've always heard that every kind of panther would lie
very quiet until the chance came for him to spring."

The Ring Tailed Panther growled between his shut teeth.

The sight of the Mexican force in the afternoon became absolutely
tantalizing. Although it was early autumn the days were still very hot
at times and Castenada's men were certainly taking their ease. Ned could
see many of them enjoying the siesta, and through a pair of glasses he
saw others lolling luxuriously and smoking cigarettes. It was especially
irritating to the Ring Tailed Panther, who grew very red in the face but
who now only emitted growls between his shut teeth.

It was evident that the Mexicans were going to make no demonstration
just yet and the night came, rather dark and cloudy. Now the anxiety in
Gonzales increased since the night can be cover for anything, and,
besides guarding the fords, several of the defenders were placed at
intermediate points.

Ned took a station with Obed in a clump of oaks that grew to the very
edge of the Guadalupe. There they sat a long time and watched the
surface of the river grow darker and darker. The Mexican camp had been
shut from sight long since, and no sounds now came from it. Ned
appreciated fully the need of a close watch. The Mexicans might swim the
river on their horses in the darkness, and gallop down on the town. So
he never ceased to watch, and he also listened with ears which were
rapidly acquiring the delicacy and sensitiveness peculiar to those of
expert frontiersmen.

Ned was not warlike in temper. He knew, from his reading, all the waste
and terrible passions of war, but he was heart and soul with the Texans.
He was one of them, and to him the coming struggle was a fight for home
and liberty by an oppressed people. With the ardor of youth flaming in
him he was willing for that struggle to begin at once.

Night on the Guadalupe! He felt that the darkness was full of omens and
presages for Texas and for him, too, a boy among its defenders. His
pulses quivered, and a light moisture broke out on his face. His
prescience, the gift of foresight, was at work. It was telling him that
the time, in very truth, had come. Yet he could not see or hear a single
thing that bore the remotest resemblance to an enemy.

The boy stepped from a clump of trees in order that he might get a
better look down the river. There was a crack on the farther shore, a
flash of fire, and a bullet sang past his ear. He caught a hasty glimpse
