So he talked and talked, until poor Beatrice felt both her head and
heart aching.

"I am not in your rank of life," she said at last, as her final thrust.
"My set is not the same as yours; my people can never belong to
yours--my dear old mother is a lady at heart, but she has not the
outward polish of your mother. You want me to be your wife now, but
by-and-bye you will remember the gulf which socially lies between us."

"How can you talk such nonsense? You are one of nature's ladies. Ask my
mother what she thinks of you. Ask Catherine. Don't you think Catherine
would be happy to put her arms round you and call you sister?"

When Bertram mentioned Catherine a sweet light came for the first time
into Beatrice's eyes.

"I love your sister Catherine," she said.

"You will love me too. You will make me the happiest of men."

"I have not even begun to love you. I have not a shadow of affection for
you."

"If you saw me very unhappy you would pity me."

"Yes, I pity all unhappy people."

"Then pity me, for I am miserable."

"Pity won't do you any good; and you have no right to be miserable."

"Still, pity me; for I am, I can't help it--I am wretched beyond words."

His face had grown really haggard, for he was beginning to think she
would never yield, and this look won her to say:

"Well, yes, if it comforts you to know it. I do pity you."

"Pity is akin to love. You will love me next."

"I don't see the smallest prospect; you mustn't delude yourself."

"I do, I will. I will trust you. I know your heart. You will pity me and
then you will love me. I am not a good fellow."

His words and looks were the soul of sincerity now. He took her hand.

"I have never been a really good man. I have not been a dutiful son, and
I have made my mother unhappy. If you were my wife I think I should
become good, for you, Beatrice, you are very good."

He was telling her the old, old story, and she was half believing him,
half believing that it might be in her power to redeem him. Beatrice
Meadowsweet was just the sort of woman to love such work, to glory in
such martyrdom.

She did not withdraw her hand from his, and her gray eyes, already dark
and misty with emotion, filled with tears.

"I have never been spoken to like this before," she said.

Here she rose and stood before him.

"Your words trouble me. It is not right for a girl to marry without
love, and yet most surely I pity you."

"Carry your pity a little further, and believe that the love will come.
You cannot receive all and give nothing in return--the love will come,
Beatrice, believe me, do believe me."

"I am not of your rank," she said, going back to her old objection,
which in itself was a sign of weakness.

"See what my mother says of your rank and of you. You can take any rank.
Oh, Beatrice, how happy you will make my mother."

She was not moved at all by this.

"And Catherine, I can see her eyes sparkle."

At Catherine's name Beatrice clasped her hands before her, and began to
pace slowly up and down the little enclosure which contained the wide
French windows opening into the garden.

"And you will make me good, Beatrice."

Captain Bertram was astute enough to see that he played his best card
here.

Half an hour later he left her. She had apparently consented to
nothing--but she had agreed to see him again the following day.




CHAPTER XXI.

WITH CATHERINE IN THE ROSE BOWER.


Mrs. Meadowsweet was not the least like Mrs. Bell. She was not
constantly on the watch for lovers for her only daughter. She was
naturally such a contented and easy-going woman that she never troubled
herself to look far ahead. The time being was always more or less
sufficient to her. No two people could be snugger or more absolutely
comfortable together than she and her Bee. It was no use therefore
worrying her head about the possible contingency that the girl might
marry and leave her.

Mrs. Meadowsweet, as she walked about her old-fashioned garden on that
summer's morning was not at all put about by the fact that her pretty
daughter was having a solemn conference in the drawing-room with the
handsomest and most elegant young man of their acquaintance. She was not
curious nor anxious, nor perturbed in any way. She pottered round her
plants, pulling up a weed here, and removing a withered bud there, in
the most comfortable fashion, and only once she made a remark to herself
with regard to the occupants of the drawing-room. This was her sole
allusion to them.

"I hope that young man won't forget to take the box of Eleazer'ss
Life-pills to his mother. I left it handy on the hall table, and I hope
he'll remember to slip it into his pocket."

Presently Mrs. Meadowsweet re-entered the house. There she noticed two
things. The drawing-room was empty, and the box of pills lay untouched
on the hall table.

She sighed a little over this latter circumstance, but reflecting that
she could send Jane with them in the evening she went slowly up to her
bedroom and busied herself putting on her afternoon gown, which was of a
large check pattern, the coloring being different shades in terra-cotta.

Arrayed thus she came down to dinner, and then for the first time she
was really startled by perceiving that Beatrice's place was empty. Jane
immediately explained her young mistress's absence.

"Miss Bee has a headache and is lying down, ma'am. I'm to take her a cup
of tea presently, but she doesn't want any dinner."

"Dear, dear," ejaculated Mrs. Meadowsweet.

"And the peas are lovely and tender to-day, and so for that matter is
the chicken. What a pity! Jane, you tell Miss Bee that if she has a
headache she had better take two of my pills immediately after she has
had her tea. You'll find them in the bottle on my dressing-table, Jane,
and you had better take her up some raspberry jam to swallow them in."

Jane promised obedience, and Mrs. Meadowsweet ate her green peas and
tender, young chicken in great contentment.

In the course of the afternoon Beatrice came downstairs again. She told
her mother that her headache was quite gone, but the old lady was acute
enough to observe a great change in the girl. She did not look ill, but
the brightness had gone out of her face.

"Is anything wrong, dearie?" she asked. "Has any one been worrying you,
my treasure?"

"I have got to think about something," replied Beatrice. "And I am just
a very little upset. I am going into the garden with a book, and you
won't mind if I don't talk to you, mother dear?"

"Of course not, my pet. What is an old mother good for, but to humor her
child? Go you into the garden, Trixie, and no one shall fret or molest
you, I'll see to that."

Beatrice kissed her mother, and book in hand went to the rose-bower, a
secluded spot where no one could see her or take her unawares. Mrs.
Meadowsweet sat upright in her chair, took out her knitting-bag, and
proceeded to add a few stitches to Beatrice's quilt.

Presently there came a quick and somewhat nervous ring to the door-bell.
Mrs. Meadowsweet often said that there were rings and rings. This ring
made her give a little start, and took away the sleepiness which was
stealing over her.

The next moment Catherine Bertram entered the room. Her eyes were
glowing, and her face, usually rather pale, was effused with a fine
color. She looked eager and expectant.

Mrs. Meadowsweet stretched out her two hands to her, and gave her a few
warm words of welcome. The impulsive girl stooped down, and kissed the
old lady on the forehead.

"You're just the person I'm glad to see, my dear," said Mrs.
Meadowsweet. "You'll take your mother back her pills. Poor dear, she
must have thought I had forgotten all about her."

"I have come to see Beatrice," said Catherine. "It is important. Can I
see her?"

"Well, my love, Bee is not quite herself. She is worried about
something; I don't know what for it's my aim in life to make her lot
smooth as velvet. She's in the garden with a book, and I said she
shouldn't be disturbed. But you, my dear----"

"I must see Beatrice," repeated Catherine. "It's important. I've come
here on purpose."

"Well, my love, you and Bee are always great friends. You haven't a
worrying way with you. She's in the rose-arbor. You can find her, child.
You walk straight down that path, and then turn to your left."

Catherine did not wait another instant. She had the quick and graceful
motions of a young fawn, and when she reached Beatrice her eager face
was so full of light and excitement that the other girl sprang to her
feet, her unopened book tumbled to the floor, and in one moment the two
friends had their arms round each other.

They did not kiss. This was not the moment for outward expressions of
affection. They looked at one another, then Catherine said:

"Well, Beatrice?" and, taking her friend's hand, she sat down by her.

"You know what happened this morning, Catherine?" said Beatrice, looking
at her sadly.

"Yes, I know. I have come about that. Loftus came home, and he told
mother. I heard him talking to her, and I heard mother crying; I came
into the room then, for I cannot bear the sound of my mother's sobs when
she is in distress, and she at once looked up when she heard nay step,
and she said:

"'It is all hopeless, Catherine; Beatrice Meadowsweet will not marry
Loftus.'

"'Nay, mother,' interrupted Loftus, 'there's a chance for me, she has
consented to see me again to-morrow.'

"I flew up to mother when Loftus had done speaking, and I knelt by her
and looked into her face and said, 'You make my heart beat so hard, I
never, never thought of this.' Mother went on moaning to herself. She
did not seem to care about me nor to notice that I was with her.

"'It was my last hope,' she said; 'the only chance to avert the trouble,
and it is over.'

"She went on saying that until I really thought she was almost
light-headed. At last Loftus beckoned me out of the room.

"'What is it, Loftus, what is wrong?" I asked.

"'Poor mother,' he replied; 'she loves Beatrice, and she had set her
heart on this. Her nerves are a good deal shaken lately. Poor mother!
she has had a more troubled life than you can guess about, Catherine.'

"'Loftie,' I answered, 'I have long guessed, I have long feared.'

"'If I could win Beatrice,' said Loftus, 'my mother should never have
another ache nor pain.'

"Then he went back into mother's room, and I stayed outside and thought.
After a time I resolved to come to you. No one knows that I am here."

"What have you come for, Catherine?" asked Beatrice.

"I have come to know what you mean to do. When you see Loftus to-morrow
what will you say to him?"

"What would you say, Catherine? If you did not love a man at all, if he
was absolutely nothing to you, would you give yourself to him? Yourself?
That means all your life, all your days, your young days, your
middle-aged years, your old age, always, till death parts you. Would you
do that, Catherine? Speak for yourself; would you?"

"How old are you, Beatrice?" asked Catherine.

"I am nineteen; never mind my age, that has nothing whatever to say to
the question I want you to answer."

"I asked you about your age on purpose--because I can't answer your
question. You are nineteen, I am seventeen. I feel like a child still; I
don't understand anything about loving people as you talk of love; but I
could be kind, and if it lay in my power to keep hearts from breaking I
think I'd be very glad to do it, and then Loftie _is_ nice, Bee."

Beatrice sighed. For the first time there was a gulf between her and
Catherine. As an intelligent and intellectual companion, as an
affectionate friend, Catherine was perfect; but in matters pertaining to
love--that great mystery which comes into most lives--her unawakened
heart was as a blank.

"You ask a great deal," said Beatrice, rising to her feet with
irritation. "For some reason, I don't know what, I am of value to you
and yours. I am not in your rank of life, still you want me. Your mother
is troubled, and in some inexplicable way I, an ignorant and uninformed
country girl, can relieve her. This is all very fine for you, but what
about me? I sacrifice myself forever to give temporary relief.
Catherine, you must tell me the truth. Why do you want me? Is it because
of my money?"

"Have you money?" asked Catherine. Her big, innocent, honest eyes looked
full at her friend, their expression showed bewilderment. When she
looked at her in this way Beatrice suddenly burst into a fit of
laughter. Then she put her arms round Catherine and kissed her two or
three times.

"Kate, you are the sweetest girl I ever met in all my life. You are
good, you are innocent. Kitty, I would do much for you."

"And Loftus is very kind," repeated Catherine; "and he's handsome, too.
He often told me that girls fell in love with him."

Beatrice patted Catherine's cheek.

"Little puss!" she said, "he ought not to breathe such words in your
innocent ears. So it is not for my money your mother and Loftus want me
so badly, Kitty."

"I never heard either of them breathe the subject of your money. Have
you any?"

"Yes, some."

"That would be nice, for somehow lately we seem to be dreadfully poor."

"If I were turned into a grand and patrician Bertram, and made into your
sister, sweet little Kitty, you shouldn't be poor. I'd see to that. I'd
dress you and pet you, and lade you with gifts."

"Beatrice, how bright your eyes are."

"Yes, I am excited when I think of the possible benefit I may be to
you."

"I only want you to be my sister, and to make my mother and Loftus
happy. My mother has a hidden trouble about which I must not speak; and
for some reason which I cannot in the least understand, if you marry
Loftus that trouble will disappear."

"And you want it to disappear?"

"I would give all I possess to make my mother happy."

"Good, dear, little Kitty! You don't incline then to the belief that
your brother wants me for the guineas' worth!"

"Beatrice, I don't think Loftus is really sordid and he loves you. Oh,
how earnestly he told me that he loved you. And my mother, she often,
often talks of you, and I know she cares for you, Bee."

"Come into the house," said Beatrice, suddenly. "Now that you have come
you must spend the evening with me. We can send a messenger to the Manor
to tell them, and after tea you and I will go on the water. We'll have a
happy evening together, Kate, and we won't talk any more about Loftus,
no, not another word. If I do a thing I do it generously, but I will not
discuss the _pros_ and _cons_ even with, you any more."




CHAPTER XXII.

SPARE THE POOR CHILD'S BLUSHES.


It was Miss Peters who first spread the news. She heard it whispered at
the fishmonger's, spoken of aloud at the butcher's, and confirmed at the
baker's. She could doubt this combined testimony no longer, and hurried
home to put on her best bonnet with the wallflowers in it, and go forth
