NOTE.--Nova Scotia was first settled by the French, but, in 1713, was
ceded to the English. The inhabitants refusing either to take the oath of
allegiance or to bear arms against their fellow-countrymen in the French
and Indian War, it was decided to remove the whole people, and distribute
them among the other British provinces. This was accordingly done in 1755.
The villages were burned to the ground, and the people hurried on board
the ships in such a way that but a few families remained undivided.

Longfellow's poem of "Evangeline" is founded on this incident, and the
above selection describes the scene where the male inhabitants of
Grand-Pre' are assembled in the church, and the order for their banishment
is first made known to them.


LXXIII. SONG OF THE SHIRT. (266)

Thomas Hood, 1798-1845, the son of a London bookseller, was born in that
city. He undertook, after leaving school, to learn the art of an engraver,
but soon gave up the business, and turned his attention to literature. His
lighter pieces, exhibiting his skill as a wit and punster, soon became
well known and popular. In 1821 he became subeditor of the "London
Magazine," and formed the acquaintance of the literary men of the
metropolis. The last years of his life were clouded by poverty and ill
health. Some of his most humorous pieces were written on a sick bed. Hood
is best known as a joker--a writer of "whims and oddities"--but he was no
mere joker. Some of his pieces are filled with the tenderest pathos; and a
gentle spirit, in love with justice and humanity, pervades even his
lighter compositions. His "Song of the Shirt" first appeared in the
"London Punch."
###


With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread:
Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,
And still with a voice of dolorous pitch,
  She sang the "Song of the Shirt!"

  "Work! work! work!
While the cock is crowing aloof!
  And work! work! work!
Till the stars shine through the roof!
  It is oh to be a slave
Along with the barbarous Turk,
  Where woman has never a soul to save,
If this is Christian work!

  "Work! work! work!
Till the brain begins to swim;
  Work! work! work!
Till the eyes are heavy and dim!
  Seam, and gusset, and band,
Band, and gusset, and seam,
  Till over the buttons I fall asleep,
And sew them on in a dream!

  "O men, with sisters dear!
   O men, with mothers and wives!
It is not linen you're wearing out,
  But human creatures' lives!
    Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,--
Sewing at once, with a double thread,
  A shroud as well as a shirt.

 "But why do I talk of Death?
  That Phantom of grisly bone,
I hardly fear his terrible shape,
  It seems so like my own;
  It seems so like my own,
  Because of the fasts I keep;
O God! that bread should be so dear,
  And flesh and blood so cheap!

  "Work! work! work!
My labor never flags;
  And what are its wages? A bed of straw,
A crust of bread--and rags,
  That shattered roof--and this naked floor--
A table--a broken chair--
  And a wall so blank, my shadow I thank
For sometimes falling there.

  "Work! work! work!
From weary chime to chime!
  Work! work! work!
As prisoners work for crime!
  Band, and gusset, and seam,
  Seam, and gusset, and band,
Till the heart is sick, and the brain benumbed,
  As well as the weary hand.

  "Work! work! work!
In the dull December light,
  And work! work! work!
When the weather is warm and bright;
While underneath the eaves
  The brooding swallows cling,
As if to show me their sunny backs,
  And twit me with the spring.

  "Oh but to breathe the breath
  Of the cowslip and primrose sweet!
With the sky above my head,
  And the grass beneath my feet!
For only one short hour
  To feel as I used to feel,
Before I knew the woes of want,
  And the walk that costs a meal!

  "Oh but for one short hour,--
  A respite, however brief!
No blessed leisure for love or hope,
  But only time for grief!
A little weeping would ease my heart,
  But in their briny bed
My tears must stop, for every drop
  Hinders needle and thread."

With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread:
    Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,
And still with a voice of dolorous pitch--
Would that its tone could reach the rich!
  She sang this "Song of the Shirt."



LXXIV. DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. (269)

Edouard Rene Lefebvre-Laboulaye, 1811-1883, was a French writer of note.
Most of his works involve questions of law and politics, and are
considered high authority on the questions discussed. A few works, such as
"Abdallah," from which the following extract is adapted, were written as a
mere recreation in the midst of law studies; they show great imaginative
power. Laboulaye took great interest in the United States, her people, and
her literature; and many of his works are devoted to American questions.
He translated the works of Dr. William E. Channing into French.
###


Mansour, the Egyptian merchant, one day repaired to the cadi on account of
a suit, the issue of which troubled him but little. A private conversation
with the judge had given him hopes of the justice of his cause. The old
man asked his son Omar to accompany him in order to accustom him early to
deal with the law.

The cadi was seated in the courtyard of the mosque. He was a fat,
good-looking man, who never thought, and talked little, which, added to
his large turban and his air of perpetual astonishment, gave him a great
reputation for justice and gravity.

The spectators were numerous; the principal merchants were seated on the
ground on carpets, forming a semicircle around the magistrate. Mansour
took his seat a little way from the sheik, and Omar placed himself between
the two, his curiosity strongly excited to see how the law was obeyed, and
how it was trifled with in case of need.

The first case called was that of a young Banian, as yellow as an orange,
with loose flowing robes and an effeminate air, who had lately landed from
India, and who complained of having been cheated by one of Mansour's
rivals.

"Having found a casket of diamonds among the effects left by my father,"
said he, "I set out for Egypt, to live there on the proceeds of their
sale. I was obliged by bad weather to put into Jidda, where I soon found
myself in want of money. I went to the bazaar, and inquired for a dealer
in precious stones. The richest, I was told, was Mansour; the most honest,
Ali, the jeweler. I applied to Ali.

"He welcomed me as a son, as soon as he learned that I had diamonds to
sell, and carried me home with him. He gained my confidence by every kind
of attention, and advanced me all the money I needed. One day, after
dinner, at which wine was not wanting, he examined the diamonds, one by
one, and said, 'My child, these diamonds are of little value; my coffers
are full of such stones. The rocks of the desert furnish them by
thousands.'

"To prove the truth of what he said, he opened a box, and, taking
therefrom a diamond thrice as large as any of mine, gave it to the slave
that was with me. 'What will become of me?' I cried; 'I thought myself
rich, and here I am, poor, and a stranger.'

"'My child,' replied Ali, 'Leave this casket with me, and I will give you
a price for it such as no one else would offer. Choose whatever you wish
in Jidda, and in two hours I will give you an equal weight of what you
have chosen in exchange for your Indian stones.'

"On returning home, night brought reflection. I learned that Ali had been
deceiving me. What he had given to the slave was nothing but a bit of
crystal. I demanded my casket. Ali refused to restore it. Venerable
magistrate, my sole hope is in your justice."

It was now Ali's turn to speak. "Illustrious cadi," said he, "It is true
that we made a bargain, which I am ready to keep, The rest of the young
man's story is false. What matters it what I gave the slave? Did I force
the stranger to leave the casket in my hands? Why does he accuse me of
treachery? Have I broken my word, and has he kept his?"

"Young man," said the cadi to the Banian, "have you witnesses to prove
that Ali deceived you? If not, I shall put the accused on his oath, as the
law decrees." A Koran was brought. Ali placed his hand on it, and swore
three times that he had not deceived the stranger. "Wretch," said the
Banian, "thou art among those whose feet go down to destruction. Thou hast
thrown away thy soul."

Omar smiled, and while Ali was enjoying the success of his ruse, he
approached the stranger, and asked, "Do you wish me to help you gain the
suit?" "Yes," was the reply; "but you are only a child--you can do
nothing."

"Have confidence in me a few moments," said Omar; "accept Ali's bargain;
let me choose in your stead, and fear nothing."

The stranger bowed his head, and murmured, "What can I fear after having
lost all?" Then, turning to the cadi, and bowing respectfully, "Let the
bargain be consummated," said he, "since the law decrees it, and let this
young man choose in my stead what I shall receive in payment."

A profound silence ensued. Omar rose, and, bowing to the cadi, "Ali," said
he to the jeweler, "you have doubtless brought the casket, and can tell us
the weight thereof."

"Here it is," said Ali; "it weighs twenty pounds. Choose what you will; if
the thing asked for is in Jidda, you shall have it within two hours,
otherwise the bargain is null and void."

"What we desire," said Omar, raising his voice, "is ants' wings, half male
and half female. You have two hours in which to furnish the twenty pounds
you have promised us." "This is absurd," cried the jeweler; "it is
impossible. I should need half a score of persons and six months labor to
satisfy so foolish a demand."

"Are there any winged ants in Jidda?" asked the cadi. "Of course,"
answered the merchants, laughing; "they are one of the plagues of Egypt.
Our houses are full of them, and it would be doing us a great service to
rid us of them."

"Then Ali must keep his promise or give back the casket," said the cadi.
"This young man was mad to sell his diamonds weight for weight; he is mad
to exact such payment. So much the better for Ali the first time: so much
the worse for him the second.  Justice has not two weights and measures.
Every bargain holds good before the law. Either furnish twenty pounds of
ants' wings, or restore the casket to the Banian." "A righteous judgment,"
shouted the spectators, wonder-struck at such equity.


[Illustration: In front of a middle-eastern building; a man seated with a
sword and water-pipe, facing a crowd. A small boy with his left arm
outstreached, is speaking to the man. A taller young man stands to the
right of the small boy; an older man stands further to the right.]


The stranger, beside himself with joy, took from the casket three diamonds
of the finest water; he forced them on Omar, who put them in his girdle,
and seated himself by his father, his gravity unmoved by the gaze of the
assembly. "Well done," said Mansour; "but it is my turn now; mark me well,
and profit by the lesson I shall give you. Stop, young man!" he cried to
the Banian, "we have an account to settle."

"The day before yesterday," continued he, "this young man entered my shop,
and, bursting into tears, kissed my hand and entreated me to sell him a
necklace which I had already sold to the Pasha of Egypt, saying that his
life and that of a lady depended upon it. 'Ask of me what you will, my
father,' said he, 'but I must have these gems or die.'

"I have a weakness for young men, and, though I knew the danger of
disappointing my master the pasha, I was unable to resist his
supplications. 'Take the necklace,' said I to him, 'but promise to give
whatever I may ask in exchange.' 'My head itself, if you will,' he
replied, 'for you have saved my life,' We were without witnesses, but,"
added Mansour, turning to the Banian, "is not my story true?"

"Yes," said the young man, "and I beg your pardon for not having satisfied
you sooner: you know the cause. Ask of me what you desire."

"What I desire," said Mansour, "is the casket with all its contents.
Illustrious magistrate, you have declared that all bargains hold good
before the law; this young man has promised to give me what I please; now
I declare that nothing pleases me but these diamonds."

The cadi raised his head and looked about the assembly, as if to
interrogate the faces, then stroked his beard, and relapsed into his
meditations.

"Ali is defeated," said the sheik to Omar, with a smile, "The fox is not
yet born more cunning than the worthy Mansour."

"I am lost!" cried the Banian. "O Omar, have you saved me only to cast me
down from the highest pinnacle of joy to the depths of despair? Persuade
your father to spare me, that I may owe my life to you a second time."

"Well, my son," said Mansour, "doubtless you are shrewd, but this will
teach you that your father knows rather more than you do. The cadi is
about to decide: try whether you can dictate his decree."

"It is mere child's play," answered Omar, shrugging his shoulders; "but
since you desire it, my father, you shall lose your suit." He rose, and
taking a piaster from his girdle, put it into the hand of the Banian, who
laid it before the judge.

"Illustrious cadi," said Omar, "this young man is ready to fulfill his
engagement. This is what he offers Mansour--piaster. In itself this coin
is of little value; but examine it closely, and you will see that it is
stamped with the likeness of the sultan, our glorious master. May God
destroy and confound all who disobey his highness!

"It is this precious likeness that we offer you," added he, turning to
Mansour; "if it pleases you, you are paid; to say that it displeases you
is an insult to the pasha, a crime punishable by death; and I am sure that
our worthy cadi will not become your accomplice--he who has always been
and always will be the faithful servant of an the sultans."

When Omar had finished speaking, all eyes turned toward the cadi, who,
more impenetrable than ever, stroked his face and waited for the old man
to come to his aid. Mansour was agitated and embarrassed. The silence of
the cadi and the assembly terrified him, and he cast a supplicating glance
toward his son.

"My father," said Omar, "permit this young man to thank you for the lesson
of prudence which you have given him by frightening him a little. He knows
well that it was you who sent me to his aid, and that all this is a farce.
No one is deceived by hearing the son oppose the Father, and who has ever
doubted Mansour's experience and generosity?"

"No one," interrupted the cadi, starting up like a man suddenly awakened
from a dream, "and I least of all; and this is why I have permitted you to
speak, my young Solomon. I wished to honor in you the wisdom of your
father; but another time avoid meddling with his highness's name; it is
not safe to sport with the lion's paws. The matter is settled. The
necklace is worth a hundred thousand piasters, is it not, Mansour? This
madcap, shall give you, therefore, a hundred thousand piasters, and all
parties will be satisfied."


NOTES--A cadi in the Mohammedan countries corresponds to our magistrate.

A sheik among the Arabs and Moors, may mean simply an old man, or, as in
this case, a man of eminence.

A Banian is a Hindoo merchant, particularly one who visits foreign
countries on business.

Jidda is a city in Arabia, on the Red Sea

A pasha is the governor of a Turkish province.

The Turkish piaster was formerly worth twenty-five cents: it is now worth
only about eight cents.



LXXV. THANATOPSIS. (275)

To him who in the love of Nature holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language: for his gayer hours
She has a voice  of gladness, and a smile
And eloquence of beauty; and she glides
Into his darker musings, with a mild
And healing sympathy, that steals away
Their sharpness, ere he is aware.
                             When thoughts
Of the last hitter hour come like a blight
Over thy spirit, and sad images
Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,
And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,
Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart;--
Go forth, under the open sky, and list
To Nature's teachings, while from all around--
Earth and her waters, and the depths of air--
Comes a still voice,--

                     Yet a few days, and thee
The all-beholding sun shall see no more
In all his course; nor yet in the cold ground,
Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,
Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist
Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim
Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again;
And, lost each human trace, surrendering up
Thine individual being, shalt thou go
To mix forever with the elements;
To be a brother to the insensible rock
And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain
Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak
Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mold.

  Yet not to thine eternal resting place
Shalt thou retire alone, nor couldst thou wish
Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down
With patriarchs of the infant world,--with kings,
The powerful of the earth,--the wise, the good,
Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,--
All in one mighty sepulcher.

                                 The hills,
Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun; the vales
Stretching in pensive quietness between;
The venerable woods; rivers that move
In majesty, and the complaining brooks,
That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
Old Ocean's gray and melancholy waste,--
Are but the solemn decorations all
Of the great tomb of man. The golden sun,
The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages.

                              All that tread
The globe are but a handful to the tribes
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, pierce the Barcan wilderness,
Or lose thyself in the continuous woods
Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound
Save his own dashings,--yet the dead are there:
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down
In their last sleep,--the dead reign there alone.

So shalt thou rest; and what if thou withdraw
In silence from the living, and no friend
Take note of thy departure? All that breathe
Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh
When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care
Plod on, and each one as before will chase
His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave
Their mirth and their employments, and shall come
And make their bed with thee. As the long train
Of ages glide away, the sons of men--
The youth in life's green spring, and he who goes
In the full strength of years, matron and maid,
The speechless babe, and the gray-headed man
Shall one by one be gathered to thy side
By those who in their turn shall follow them.

  So live, that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan, which moves
To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.
--Bryant.

NOTES.--Thanatopsis is composed of two Greek words, thanatos, meaning
death, and opsis, a view. The word, therefore, signifies a view of death,
or reflections on death.

Barca is in the northeastern part of Africa: the southern and eastern
portions of the country are a barren desert.

The Oregon (or Columbia) River is the most important river of the United
States emptying into the Pacific. The Lewis and Clark Expedition
(1803-1806) had first explored the country through which it flows only
five years before the poem was written.



LXXVI. INDIAN JUGGLERS. (278)

William Hazlitt, 1778-1830, was born in Maidstone, England. His father was
a Unitarian clergyman, and he was sent to a college of that denomination
to be educated for the ministry; but having a greater taste for art than
theology, he resolved, on leaving school, to devote himself to painting.
He succeeded so well in his efforts as to meet the warmest commendation of
his friends, but did not succeed in satisfying his own fastidious taste.
On this account he threw away his pencil and took up his pen. His works,
though numerous, are, with the exception of a life of Napoleon, chiefly
criticisms on literature and art.

Hazlitt is thought to have treated his contemporaries with an unjust
severity; but his genial appreciation of the English classics, and the
thorough and loving manner in which he discusses their merits, make his
essays the delight of every lover of those perpetual wellsprings of
intellectual pleasure. His "Table Talk," "Characters of Shakespeare's
Plays," "Lectures on the English Poets," and "Lectures on the Literature
of the Elizabethan Age," are the works that exhibit his style and general
merits in their most favorable light.
###


Coming forward and seating himself on the ground, in his white dress and
tightened turban, the chief of the Indian jugglers begins with tossing up
two brass balls, which is what any of us could do, and concludes by
keeping up four at the same time, which is what none of us could do to
save our lives, not if we were to take our whole lives to do it in.

Is it then a trifling power we see at work, or is it not something next to
miraculous? It is the utmost stretch of human ingenuity, which nothing but
the bending the faculties of body and mind to it from the tenderest
infancy with incessant, ever-anxious application up to manhood, can
accomplish or make even a slight approach to. Man, thou art a wonderful
animal, and thy ways past finding out! Thou canst do strange things, but
thou turnest them to small account!

To conceive of this extraordinary dexterity, distracts the imagination and
makes admiration breathless. Yet it costs nothing to the performer, any
more than if it were a mere mechanical deception with which he had nothing
to do, but to watch and laugh at the astonishment of the spectators. A
single error of a hair's breadth, of the smallest conceivable portion of
time, would be fatal; the precision of the movements must be like a
mathematical truth; their rapidity is like lightning.

To catch four balls in succession, in less than a second of time, and
deliver them back so as to return with seeming consciousness to the hand
again; to make them revolve around him at certain intervals, like the
planets in their spheres; to make them chase each other like sparkles of
fire, or shoot up like flowers or meteors; to throw them behind his back,
and twine them round his neck like ribbons, or like serpents; to do what
appears an impossibility, and to do it with all the ease, the grace, the
carelessness imaginable; to laugh at, to play with the glittering
mockeries, to follow them with his eye as if he could fascinate them with
its lambent fire, or as if he had only to see that they kept time with the
music on the stage--there is something in all this which he who does not
admire may be quite sure he never really admired anything in the whole
course of his life. It is skill surmounting difficulty, and beauty
triumphing over skill. It seems as if the difficulty, once mastered,
naturally resolved itself into ease and grace, and as if, to be overcome
at all, it must be overcome without an effort. The smallest awkwardness or
want of pliancy or self-possession would stop the whole process. It is the
work of witchcraft, and yet sport for children.

Some of the other feats are quite as curious and wonderful--such as the
balancing the artificial tree, and shooting a bird from each branch
through a quill--though none of them have the elegance or facility of the
keeping up of the brass balls. You are in pain for the result, and glad
when the experiment is over; they are not accompanied with the same
unmixed, unchecked delight as the former; and I would not give much to be
merely astonished without being pleased at the same time. As to the
swallowing of the sword, the police ought to interfere to prevent it.

When I saw the Indian juggler do the same things before, his feet were
bare, and he had large rings on his toes, which he kept turning round all
the time of the performance, as if they moved of themselves.

The hearing a speech in Parliament drawled or stammered out by the
honorable member or the noble lord, the ringing the changes on their
commonplaces, which anyone could repeat after them as well as they, stirs
me not a jot,--shakes not my good opinion of myself. I ask what there is
that I can do as well as this. Nothing. What have I been doing all my
life? Have I been idle, or have I nothing to show for all my labor and
pains? Or have I passed my time in pouring words like water into empty
sieves, rolling a stone up a hill and then down again, trying to prove an
argument in the teeth of facts, and looking for causes in the dark, and
not finding them? Is there no one thing in which I can challenge
competition, that I can bring as an instance of exact perfection, in which
others can not find a flaw?

The utmost I can pretend to is to write a description of what this fellow
can do. I can write a book: so can many others who have not even learned
to spell. What abortions are these essays! What errors, what ill-pieced
transitions, what crooked reasons, what lame conclusions! How little is
made out, and that little how ill! Yet they are the best I can do.

I endeavor to recollect all I have ever heard or thought upon a subject,
and to express it as neatly as I can. Instead of writing on four subjects
at a time, it is as much as I can manage, to keep the thread of one
discourse clear and unentangled. I have also time on my hands to correct
my opinions and polish my periods; but the one I can not, and the other I
will not, do. I am fond of arguing; yet, with a good deal of pains and
practice, it is often much as I can do to beat my man, though he may be a
very indifferent hand. A common fencer would disarm his adversary in the
twinkling of an eye, unless he were a professor like himself. A stroke of
wit will sometimes produce this effect, but there is no such power or
superiority in sense or reasoning. There is no complete mastery of
execution to be shown there; and you hardly know the professor from the
impudent pretender or the mere clown.



LXXVII. ANTONY OVER CAESAR'S DEAD BODY. (281)

           Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears:
         I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
         The evil that men do lives after them;
         The good is oft interred with their bones;
