
"Oh, try and stop them, Mr. Burroughs," cried Grace excitedly. "'Phone
the livery and tell them that I'm here. Then listen to me, for I've
walked all the way from Forest Park and there's no time to lose."

"Walked from Forest Park?" exclaimed the chief, as he turned to the
'phone. "Why that's a good twelve miles and----"

"I know," interrupted Grace, then was silent, for the chief had begun
talking to the livery.

"It's all right," he said, hanging up. "They'll be here directly. Caught
them just in the nick of time, however. Now what's on your mind, Grace?"

"They're going to rob old Judge Putnam," Grace burst forth incoherently.
"He's all alone. Oh, do send some one out there quickly, or it may be
too late. Isn't there a telephone in the judge's house? He ought to be
warned."

"Who's going to rob the judge? What are you talking about, my child?"
asked the chief. "No, the judge has no 'phone. He thinks them a
nuisance."

Grace rapidly told of her adventure in the woods, and her escape from
the cottage. Before she had finished Chief Burroughs had begun to act.
Summoning three special policemen, he narrated briefly what he had just
heard, and five minutes later Grace had the satisfaction of knowing
that, fully armed, they were well on their way to the Putnam estate.

"I can't understand why the girls didn't miss me," she said to the
chief, as she sat awaiting her father's appearance.

"Miss Bright and Miss O'Malley, who were in the second wagon, thought
you were in the first with Miss Pierson and Miss Nesbit, and vice
versa," replied the chief. "The second wagon broke down when about half
way home. It took over half an hour to get it fixed, so when it did
arrive the girls in the head wagon had all gone home. Your mother grew
uneasy when ten o'clock came, so she telephoned your friends, and on
comparing notes you were found to be among the missing."

"What a mix-up," laughed Grace. "No wonder I wasn't missed. I'm sorry
mother was uneasy, but she'll forgive me when she hears my tale. Oh,
I hope nothing has happened to the poor old judge."

"Well, we'll soon know," replied the chief. "Now, you just take it easy
and rest until your father comes. You need it after a twelve-mile walk.
Of all the brave little girls----"

The ringing of the telephone cut the chief short.

Grace gave a long sigh and leaned back in the big chair. She was so
tired. Her eyelids drooped----

"Well, I declare!" said the chief, as he turned from the telephone, for
Grace was fast asleep.




CHAPTER XXIV

CONCLUSION


The special policemen sent out to the Putnam estate were not doomed to
disappointment. After an hour's waiting, their patience was rewarded,
and the two housebreakers appeared upon the scene. Before they could do
any damage they were apprehended and a bag containing a complete outfit
of burglar's tools was taken away from them. They fought desperately,
but without avail, and were marched to jail to await their hearing.

Judge Putnam was greatly agitated over the affair. He had a large sum of
money in the house, not to mention old family silver and other
valuables.

"I realize I've had a narrow escape," he exclaimed to the chief the next
day. "I might have been murdered in cold blood. I'll have a burglar
alarm put in at once and a telephone, too. I had no business to let all
the servants except old James go for the night. Who did you say brought
the news? Tom Harlowe's little girl? She always was a wide awake
youngster. I wonder what I can do for her to show her that I appreciate
her bravery?"

"I don't believe she'd accept anything, Judge," replied the chief.
"She's not that sort."

"We shall see. We shall see," said the judge, rubbing his hands. "I have
a plan I think she'll listen to."

In the meantime, on reaching home Grace had been cried over by her
mother and put to bed as though she were a baby. The story had been told
by her chums throughout the school the next day, and Grace found herself
the "observed of all observers."

"Any of you would have done the same," she said when surrounded by a
bevy of admiring schoolmates.

"That's what you always say," exclaimed Nora. "But let me tell you
I should have been in hysterics if I had been left alone in the dark
twelve miles from nowhere."

Judge Putnam did not at once make his plan known to Grace. He called,
thanking her and complimenting her on her bravery and presence of mind.

"I shall have something to ask you when school closes, my dear child,"
he said as he rose to go. "Something that concerns you and your friends,
and you mustn't say 'no' to an old man."

"What on earth does he mean?" said Grace to her chums, as she repeated
the judge's words. "I shall be eaten up with curiosity until school
closes."

"Wish to goodness it was over now," growled Nora O'Malley. "I don't
believe the last of June will ever come."

The morning after commencement, eight highly excited girls gathered on
the Harlowe's veranda. Grace had received a note from Judge Putnam
requesting that the Phi Sigma Tau call upon him at ten o'clock that
morning.

"Do hurry," said Jessica, as they neared the judge's beautiful home.
"The sooner we get there the sooner we'll know."

"Good morning, young ladies," said the judge, bowing with old-time
gallantry as James ushered the eight girls into the library. "You look
like a garden of roses. There's nothing like youth; nothing like it. Sit
down and make yourselves comfortable while I tell you why I asked you to
come and see an old man."

"You are just like Mrs. Gray, Judge," said Grace, "always imagining
yourself old, when you know you're just a great big boy."

"Very pretty, my dear," chuckled the judge. "But if I am as young as you
say, then I must do something to keep young. Now, the way I propose
doing it is this: I have a camp up in the Adirondacks that needs
attention, so I wrote my youngest sister about it and she agrees with
me. She is going up there this week with a couple of servants to open
the bungalow and put it in readiness for eight girls who call themselves
the Phi Sigma Tau, providing their fathers and mothers can spare them
for a few weeks. Do you think they will care to go?"

"Oh-h-h-h! How lovely!" breathed the eight girls in concert.

"Care to go? Well I should say so. It will be the greatest lark ever,"
cried Grace.

"If you know any young men who can make themselves useful, we might
invite them. I don't like the idea of being the only boy, you know."

"David and Tom," said Grace and Anne.

"Hippy can go, I'm sure," said Nora.

"Not to mention Reddy and Arnold Evans," murmured Jessica, with a glance
at Miriam.

"It looks as though I shall not lack masculine company," remarked the
judge, with twinkling eyes. "Tell your parents that my sister will write
them."

"I move that we give three cheers and the High School yell for Judge
Putnam, and then go straight home and get proper permission," cried
Grace.

The cheers were given with a will, and after shaking hands with the
judge, the girls said good-bye.

"How did Judge Putnam know about the Phi Sigma Tau; even to its name?"
asked Marian Barber curiously.

"Lots of people know of it," remarked Eva Allen.

"Girls," said Grace earnestly, "don't you think our society has been a
success so far?"

"Yes, indeed," was the united answer.

"Our sorority has made us fast friends, loyal to each other, through
good and evil report," she continued. "Let us resolve now, that during
our senior year we will stand firmly together, and make the Phi Sigma
Tau represent all that is best and most worthy in High School life."

When next we meet Grace Harlowe and her girl chums, they will have
entered upon their senior year at High School. In "GRACE HARLOWE'S
SENIOR YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL; Or, The Parting of the Ways," we shall learn
how the Phi Sigma Tau kept their sorority pledge. Eleanor Savell will
again seek revenge, and Grace Harlowe will once more prove herself equal
to the occasion. Those who have followed the "High School Girls" through
three years of school life cannot fail to be interested in what befell
these lovable everyday girls during their senior year.


THE END




HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY'S
CATALOGUE OF

The Best and Least Expensive

Books for Real Boys
and Girls


Really good and new stories for boys and girls are not plentiful. Many
stories, too, are so highly improbable as to bring a grin of derision to
the young reader's face before he has gone far. The name of ALTEMUS is a
distinctive brand on the cover of a book, always ensuring the buyer of
having a book that is up-to-date and fine throughout. No buyer of an
ALTEMUS book is ever disappointed.

Many are the claims made as to the inexpensiveness of books. Go into any
bookstore and ask for an Altemus book. Compare the price charged you for
Altemus books with the price demanded for other juvenile books. You will
at once discover that a given outlay of money will buy more of the
ALTEMUS books than of those published by other houses.

Every dealer in books carries the ALTEMUS books.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sold by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price

=Henry Altemus Company=

507-513 Cherry Street, Philadelphia




The Motor Boat Club Series

=By H. IRVING HANCOCK=

The keynote of these books is manliness. The stories are wonderfully
entertaining, and they are at the same time sound and wholesome. No boy
will willingly lay down an unfinished book in this series.

1 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OF THE KENNEBEC; Or, The Secret of Smugglers'
Island.

2 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT NANTUCKET; Or, The Mystery of the Dunstan Heir.

3 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OFF LONG ISLAND; Or, A Daring Marine Game at
Racing Speed.

4 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AND THE WIRELESS; Or, The Dot, Dash and Dare
Cruise.

5 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB IN FLORIDA; Or, Laying the Ghost of Alligator
Swamp.

6 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT THE GOLDEN GATE; Or, A Thrilling Capture in the
Great Fog.

7 THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB ON THE GREAT LAKES; Or, The Flying Dutchman of the
Big Fresh Water.

          Cloth, Illustrated        Price, per Volume, 50c.




The Range and Grange Hustlers

=By FRANK GEE PATCHIN=

Have you any idea of the excitements, the glories of life on great
ranches in the West? Any bright boy will "devour" the books of this
series, once he has made a start with the first volume.

1 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS ON THE RANCH; Or, The Boy Shepherds of
the Great Divide.

2 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS' GREATEST ROUND-UP; Or, Pitting Their
Wits Against a Packers' Combine.

3 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS ON THE PLAINS; Or, Following the Steam
Plows Across the Prairie.

4 THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS AT CHICAGO; Or, The Conspiracy of the
Wheat Pit.

          Cloth, Illustrated        Price, per Volume, 50c.




Submarine Boys Series

=By VICTOR G. DURHAM=

These splendid books for boys and girls deal with life aboard submarine
torpedo boats, and with the adventures of the young crew, and possess,
in addition to the author's surpassing knack of storytelling, a great
educational value for all young readers.

1 THE SUBMARINE BOYS ON DUTY; Or, Life on a Diving Torpedo Boat.

2 THE SUBMARINE BOYS' TRIAL TRIP; Or, "Making Good" as Young Experts.

3 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE MIDDIES; Or, The Prize Detail at Annapolis.

4 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SPIES; Or, Dodging the Sharks of the Deep.

5 THE SUBMARINE BOYS' LIGHTNING CRUISE; Or, The Young Kings of the Deep.

6 THE SUBMARINE BOYS FOR THE FLAG; Or, Deeding Their Lives to Uncle Sam.

7 THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SMUGGLERS; Or, Breaking Up the New Jersey
Customs Frauds.

          Cloth, Illustrated        Price, per Volume, 50c.




The Square Dollar Boys Series

=By H. IRVING HANCOCK=

The reading boy will be a voter within a few years; these books are
bound to make him think, and when he casts his vote he will do it more
intelligently for having read these volumes.

1 THE SQUARE DOLLAR BOYS WAKE UP; Or, Fighting the Trolley Franchise
Steal.

2 THE SQUARE DOLLAR BOYS SMASH THE RING; Or, In the Lists Against the
Crooked Land Deal.

          Cloth, Illustrated        Price, per Volume, 50c.




Ben Lightbody Series

=By WALTER BENHAM=

1 BEN LIGHTBODY, SPECIAL; Or, Seizing His First Chance to Make Good.

2 BEN LIGHTBODY'S BIGGEST PUZZLE; Or, Running the Double Ghost to Earth.

          Cloth, Illustrated        Price, per Volume, 50c.




Pony Rider Boys Series

=By FRANK GEE PATCHIN=

These tales may be aptly described as those of a new Cooper. In every
sense they belong to the best class of books for boys and girls.

1 THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE ROCKIES; Or, The Secret of the Lost Claim.
