could be stopped.

"I wish you a good evenin', neighbors," she said. "I have been to the
house of mournin'."

"Find 'Liza Jane in, after the circus?" asked Isaac Brown, with equal
seriousness. "Excellent show, wasn't it, for so late in the season?"

"Oh, beautiful; it was beautiful, I declare," answered the pleased
spectator readily. "Why, I didn't see you, nor Mis' Brown. Yes; I felt
it best to refresh my mind an' wear a cheerful countenance. When I see
'Liza Jane I was able to divert her mind consid'able. She was glad I
went. I told her I'd made an effort, knowin' 'twas so she had to lose
the a'ternoon. 'Bijah left property, if he did die away from home on a
foreign shore."

"You don't mean that 'Bijah Topliff's left anything!" exclaimed John
York with interest, while Isaac Brown put both hands deep into his
pockets, and leaned back in a still more satisfactory position against
the gatepost.

"He enjoyed poor health," answered Mrs. Price, after a moment of
deliberation, as if she must take time to think. "'Bijah never was one
that scattereth, nor yet increaseth. 'Liza Jane's got some memories o'
the past that's a good deal better than others; but he died somewheres
out in Connecticut, or so she heard, and he's left a very val'able coon
dog,--one he set a great deal by. 'Liza Jane said, last time he was to
home, he priced that dog at fifty dollars. 'There, now, 'Liza Jane,'
says I, right to her, when she told me, 'if I could git fifty dollars
for that dog, I certain' would. Perhaps some o' the circus folks would
like to buy him; they've taken in a stream o' money this day.' But 'Liza
Jane ain't never inclined to listen to advice. 'Tis a dreadful
poor-spirited-lookin' creatur'. I don't want no right o' dower in him,
myself."

"A good coon dog's worth somethin', certain," said John York handsomely.

"If he _is_ a good coon dog," added Isaac Brown. "I wouldn't have parted
with old Rover, here, for a good deal of money when he was right in his
best days; but a dog like him's like one of the family. Stop an' have
some supper, won't ye, Mis' Price?"--as the thin old creature was
flitting off again. At that same moment this kind invitation was
repeated from the door of the house; and Mrs. Price turned in,
unprotesting and always sociably inclined, at the open gate.


II

It was a month later, and a whole autumn's length colder, when the two
men were coming home from a long tramp through the woods. They had been
making a solemn inspection of a wood-lot that they owned together, and
had now visited their landmarks and outer boundaries, and settled the
great question of cutting or not cutting some large pines. When it was
well decided that a few years' growth would be no disadvantage to the
timber, they had eaten an excellent cold luncheon and rested from their
labors.

"I don't feel a day older'n ever I did when I get out in the woods this
way," announced John York, who was a prim, dusty-looking little man, a
prudent person, who had been selectman of the town at least a dozen
times.

"No more do I," agreed his companion, who was large and jovial and
open-handed, more like a lucky sea-captain than a farmer. After pounding
a slender walnut-tree with a heavy stone, he had succeeded in getting
down a pocketful of late-hanging nuts which had escaped the squirrels,
and was now snapping them back, one by one, to a venturesome chipmunk
among some little frost-bitten beeches. Isaac Brown had a wonderfully
pleasant way of getting on with all sorts of animals, even men. After a
while they rose and went their way, these two companions, stopping here
and there to look at a possible woodchuck's hole, or to strike a few
hopeful blows at a hollow tree with the light axe which Isaac had
carried to blaze new marks on some of the line-trees on the farther edge
of their possessions. Sometimes they stopped to admire the size of an
old hemlock, or to talk about thinning out the young pines. At last they
were not very far from the entrance to the great tract of woodland. The
yellow sunshine came slanting in much brighter against the tall trunks,
spotting them with golden light high among the still branches.

Presently they came to a great ledge, frost-split and cracked into
mysterious crevices.

"Here's where we used to get all the coons," said John York. "I haven't
seen a coon this great while, spite o' your courage knocking on the
trees up back here. You know that night we got the four fat ones? We
started 'em somewheres near here, so the dog could get after 'em when
they come out at night to go foragin'."

"Hold on, John;" and Mr. Isaac Brown got up from the log where he had
just sat down to rest, and went to the ledge, and looked carefully all
about. When he came back he was much excited, and beckoned his friend
away, speaking in a stage whisper.

"I guess you'll see a coon before you're much older," he proclaimed.
"I've thought it looked lately as if there'd been one about my place,
and there's plenty o' signs here, right in their old haunts. Couple o'
hens' heads an' a lot o' feathers"--

"Might be a fox," interrupted John York.

"Might be a coon," answered Mr. Isaac Brown. "I'm goin' to have him,
too. I've been lookin' at every old hollow tree I passed, but I never
thought o' this place. We'll come right off to-morrow night, I guess,
John, an' see if we can't get him. 'Tis an extra handy place for 'em to
den; in old times the folks always called it a good place; they've been
so sca'ce o' these late years that I've thought little about 'em.
Nothin' I ever liked so well as a coon-hunt. Gorry! he must be a big old
fellow, by his tracks! See here, in this smooth dirt; just like a baby's
footmark."

"Trouble is, we lack a good dog," said John York anxiously, after he had
made an eager inspection. "I don't know where in the world to get one,
either. There ain't no such a dog about as your Rover, but you've let
him get spoilt; these days I don't see him leave the yard. You ought to
keep the women folks from overfeedin' of him so. He ought to've lasted a
good spell longer. He's no use for huntin' now, that's certain."

Isaac accepted the rebuke meekly. John York was a calm man, but he now
grew very fierce under such a provocation. Nobody likes to be hindered
in a coon-hunt.

"Oh, Rover's too old, anyway," explained the affectionate master
regretfully. "I've been wishing all this afternoon I'd brought him; but
I didn't think anything about him as we came away, I've got so used to
seeing him layin' about the yard. 'Twould have been a real treat for old
Rover, if he could have kept up. Used to be at my heels the whole time.
He couldn't follow us, anyway, up here."

"I shouldn't wonder if he could," insisted John, with a humorous glance
at his old friend, who was much too heavy and huge of girth for quick
transit over rough ground. John York himself had grown lighter as he had
grown older.

"I'll tell you one thing we could do," he hastened to suggest. "There's
that dog of 'Bijah Topliff's. Don't you know the old lady told us, that
day she went over to Dipford, how high he was valued? Most o' 'Bijah's
important business was done in the fall, goin' out by night, gunning
with fellows from the mills. He was just the kind of a worthless
do-nothing that's sure to have an extra knowin' smart dog. I expect
'Liza Jane's got him now. Perhaps we could get him by to-morrow night.
Let one o' my boys go over!"

"Why, 'Liza Jane's come, bag an' baggage, to spend the winter with her
mother," exclaimed Isaac Brown, springing to his feet like a boy. "I've
had it in mind to tell you two or three times this afternoon, and then
something else has flown it out of my head. I let my John Henry take the
long-tailed wagon an' go down to the depot this mornin' to fetch her an'
her goods up. The old lady come in early, while we were to breakfast,
and to hear her lofty talk you'd thought 't would taken a couple o'
four-horse teams to move her. I told John Henry he might take that wagon
and fetch up what light stuff he could, and see how much else there was,
an' then I'd make further arrangements. She said 'Liza Jane'd see me
well satisfied, an' rode off, pleased to death. I see 'em returnin'
about eight, after the train was in. They'd got 'Liza Jane with 'em,
smaller'n ever; and there was a trunk tied up with a rope, and a small
roll o' beddin' and braided mats, and a quilted rockin'-chair. The old
lady was holdin' on tight to a bird-cage with nothin' in it. Yes; an' I
see the dog, too, in behind. He appeared kind of timid. He's a yaller
dog, but he ain't stump-tailed. They hauled up out front o' the house,
and mother an' I went right out; Mis' Price always expects to have
notice taken. She was in great sperits. Said 'Liza Jane concluded to
sell off most of her stuff rather 'n have the care of it. She'd told the
folks that Mis' Topliff had a beautiful sofa and a lot o' nice chairs,
and two framed pictures that would fix up the house complete, and
invited us all to come over and see 'em. There, she seemed just as
pleased returnin' with the bird-cage. Disappointments don't appear to
trouble her no more than a butterfly. I kind of like the old creator'; I
don't mean to see her want."

"They'll let us have the dog," said John York. "I don't know but I'll
give a quarter for him, and we'll let 'em have a good piece o' the
coon."

"You really comin' 'way up here by night, coon-huntin'?" asked Isaac
Brown, looking reproachfully at his more agile comrade.

"I be," answered John York.

"I was dre'tful afraid you was only talking, and might back out,"
returned the cheerful heavy-weight, with a chuckle. "Now we've got
things all fixed, I feel more like it than ever. I tell you there's just
boy enough left inside of me. I'll clean up my old gun to-morrow
mornin', and you look right after your'n. I dare say the boys have took
good care of 'em for us, but they don't know what we do about huntin',
and we'll bring 'em all along and show 'em a little fun."

"All right," said John York, as soberly as if they were going to look
after a piece of business for the town; and they gathered up the axe and
other light possessions, and started toward home.


III

The two friends, whether by accident or design, came out of the woods
some distance from their own houses, but very near to the low-storied
little gray dwelling of Mrs. Price. They crossed the pasture, and
climbed over the toppling fence at the foot of her small sandy piece of
land, and knocked at the door. There was a light already in the kitchen.
Mrs. Price and Eliza Jane Topliff appeared at once, eagerly hospitable.

"Anybody sick?" asked Mrs. Price, with instant sympathy. "Nothin'
happened, I hope?"

"Oh, no," said both the men.

"We came to talk about hiring your dog to-morrow night," explained
Isaac Brown, feeling for the moment amused at his eager errand. "We got
on track of a coon just now, up in the woods, and we thought we'd give
our boys a little treat. You shall have fifty cents, an' welcome, and a
good piece o' the coon."

"Yes, Square Brown; we can let you have the dog as well as not,"
interrupted Mrs. Price, delighted to grant a favor. "Poor departed
'Bijah, he set everything by him as a coon dog. He always said a dog's
capital was all in his reputation."

"You'll have to be dreadful careful an' not lose him," urged Mrs.
Topliff "Yes, sir; he's a proper coon dog as ever walked the earth, but
he's terrible weak-minded about followin' 'most anybody. 'Bijah used to
travel off twelve or fourteen miles after him to git him back, when he
wa'n't able. Somebody'd speak to him decent, or fling a whip-lash as
they drove by, an' off he'd canter on three legs right after the wagon.
But 'Bijah said he wouldn't trade him for no coon dog he ever was
acquainted with. Trouble is, coons is awful sca'ce."

"I guess he ain't out o' practice," said John York amiably; "I guess
he'll know when he strikes the coon. Come, Isaac, we must be gittin'
along tow'ds home. I feel like eatin' a good supper. You tie him up
to-morrow afternoon, so we shall be sure to have him," he turned to say
to Mrs. Price, who stood smiling at the door.

"Land sakes, dear, he won't git away; you'll find him right there
betwixt the wood-box and the stove, where he is now. Hold the light,
'Liza Jane; they can't see their way out to the road. I'll fetch him
over to ye in good season," she called out, by way of farewell; "'twill
save ye third of a mile extra walk. No, 'Liza Jane; you'll let me do it,
if you please. I've got a mother's heart. The gentlemen will excuse us
for showin' feelin'. You're all the child I've got, an' your prosperity
is the same as mine."


IV

The great night of the coon-hunt was frosty and still, with only a dim
light from the new moon. John York and his boys, and Isaac Brown, whose
excitement was very great, set forth across the fields toward the dark
woods. The men seemed younger and gayer than the boys. There was a burst
of laughter when John Henry Brown and his little brother appeared with
the coon dog of the late Mr. Abijah Topliff, which had promptly run away
home again after Mrs. Price had coaxed him over in the afternoon. The
captors had tied a string round his neck, at which they pulled
vigorously from time to time to urge him forward. Perhaps he found the
night too cold; at any rate, he stopped short in the frozen furrows
every few minutes, lifting one foot and whining a little. Half a dozen
times he came near to tripping up Mr. Isaac Brown and making him fall at
full length.

"Poor Tiger! poor Tiger!" said the good-natured sportsman, when somebody
said that the dog didn't act as if he were much used to being out by
night. "He'll be all right when he once gets track of the coon." But
when they were fairly in the woods, Tiger's distress was perfectly
genuine. The long rays of light from the old-fashioned lanterns of
pierced tin went wheeling round and round, making a tall ghost of every
tree, and strange shadows went darting in and out behind the pines. The
woods were like an interminable pillared room where the darkness made a
high ceiling. The clean frosty smell of the open fields was changed for
a warmer air, damp with the heavy odor of moss and fallen leaves. There
was something wild and delicious in the forest in that hour of night.
The men and boys tramped on silently in single file, as if they followed
the flickering light instead of carrying it. The dog fell back by
instinct, as did his companions, into the easy familiarity of forest
life. He ran beside them, and watched eagerly as they chose a safe place
to leave a coat or two and a basket. He seemed to be an affectionate
dog, now that he had made acquaintance with his masters.

"Seems to me he don't exactly know what he's about," said one of the
York boys scornfully; "we must have struck that coon's track somewhere,
comin' in."

"We'll get through talkin' an' heap up a little somethin' for a fire, if
you'll turn to and help," said his father. "I've always noticed that
nobody can give so much good advice about a piece o' work as a new hand.
When you've treed as many coons as your Uncle Brown an' me, you won't
feel so certain. Isaac, you be the one to take the dog up round the
ledge, there. He'll scent the coon quick enough then. We'll tend to this
part o' the business."

"You may come too, John Henry," said the indulgent father, and they set
off together silently with the coon dog. He followed well enough now;
his tail and ears were drooping even more than usual, but he whimpered
along as bravely as he could, much excited, at John Henry's heels, like
one of those great soldiers who are all unnerved until the battle is
well begun.

A minute later the father and son came hurrying back, breathless, and
stumbling over roots and bushes. The fire was already lighted, and
sending a great glow higher and higher among the trees.

"He's off! He's struck a track! He was off like a major!" wheezed Mr.
Isaac Brown.

"Which way'd he go?" asked everybody.

"Right out toward the fields. Like's not the old fellow was just
starting after more of our fowls. I'm glad we come early,--he can't have
got far yet. We can't do nothin' but wait now, boys. I'll set right down
here."

"Soon as the coon trees, you'll hear the dog sing, now I tell you!" said
John York, with great enthusiasm. "That night your father an' me got
those four busters we've told you about, they come right back here to
the ledge. I don't know but they will now. 'Twas a dreadful cold night,
I know. We didn't get home till past three o'clock in the mornin',
either. You remember, don't you, Isaac?"

"I do," said Isaac. "How old Rover worked that night! Couldn't see out
of his eyes, nor hardly wag his clever old tail, for two days; thorns in
both his fore paws, and the last coon took a piece right out of his off
shoulder."

"Why didn't you let Rover come to-night, father?" asked the younger boy.
"I think he knew somethin' was up. He was jumpin' round at a great rate
when I come out of the yard."

"I didn't know but he might make trouble for the other dog," answered
Isaac, after a moment's silence. He felt almost disloyal to the faithful
creature, and had been missing him all the way. "Sh! there's a bark!"
And they all stopped to listen.

The fire was leaping higher; they all sat near it, listening and
talking by turns. There is apt to be a good deal of waiting in a
coon-hunt.

"If Rover was young as he used to be, I'd resk him to tree any coon that
ever run," said the regretful master. "This smart creature o' Topliff's
can't beat him, I know. The poor old fellow's eyesight seems to be
going. Two--three times he's run out at me right in broad day, an'
barked when I come up the yard toward the house, and I did pity him
dreadfully; he was so 'shamed when he found out what he'd done. Rover's
a dog that's got an awful lot o' pride. He went right off out behind the
long barn the last time, and wouldn't come in for nobody when they
called him to supper till I went out myself and made it up with him. No;
he can't see very well now, Rover can't."

"He's heavy, too; he's got too unwieldy to tackle a smart coon, I
expect, even if he could do the tall runnin'" said John York, with
sympathy. "They have to get a master grip with their teeth through a
coon's thick pelt this time o' year. No; the young folks get all the
good chances after a while;" and he looked round indulgently at the
chubby faces of his boys, who fed the fire, and rejoiced in being
promoted to the society of their elders on equal terms. "Ain't it time
we heard from the dog?" And they all listened, while the fire snapped
and the sap whistled in some green sticks.

"I hear him," said John Henry suddenly; and faint and far away there
came the sound of a desperate bark. There is a bark that means attack,
and there is a bark that means only foolish excitement.

"They ain't far off!" said Isaac. "My gracious, he's right after him! I
don't know's I expected that poor-looking dog to be so smart. You can't
tell by their looks. Quick as he scented the game up here in the rocks,
off he put. Perhaps it ain't any matter if they ain't stump-tailed,
long's they're yaller dogs. He didn't look heavy enough to me. I tell
you, he means business. Hear that bark!"

"They all bark alike after a coon." John York was as excited as anybody.
"Git the guns laid out to hand, boys; I told you we'd ought to follow!"
he commanded. "If it's the old fellow that belongs here, he may put in
any minute." But there was again a long silence and state of suspense;
the chase had turned another way. There were faint distant yaps. The
fire burned low and fell together with a shower of sparks. The smaller
boys began to grow chilly and sleepy, when there was a thud and rustle
and snapping of twigs close at hand, then the gasp of a breathless dog.
Two dim shapes rushed by; a shower of bark fell, and a dog began to sing
at the foot of the great twisted pine not fifty feet away.

"Hooray for Tiger!" yelled the boys; but the dog's voice filled all the
woods. It might have echoed to the mountain-tops. There was the old
coon; they could all see him half-way up the tree, flat to the great
limb. They heaped the fire with dry branches till it flared high. Now
they lost him in a shadow as he twisted about the tree. John York fired,
and Isaac Brown fired, and the boys took a turn at the guns, while John
Henry started to climb a neighboring oak; but at last it was Isaac who
brought the coon to ground with a lucky shot, and the dog stopped his
deafening bark and frantic leaping in the underbrush, and after an
astonishing moment of silence crept out, a proud victor, to his prouder
master's feet.

"Goodness alive, who's this? Good for you, old handsome! Why, I'll be
