newly-appointed governors have sent in strong protests, and urgent
requests that they might be furnished with new cannon, and that walls
and defences might be renewed. But what with the wars, the removal of
the capital, and the building and fortification of this place, these
matters have been neglected; and it is only now that the sultan sees
the necessity of putting the fortifications of all these places in
good repair.

"I have had the papers prepared and signed. Your escort has been
ordered. Is there anything else you can think of?"

"We should like to take our Palace attendant with us," Surajah said.
"He is a good man and, starting so suddenly, we should have a
difficulty in hiring servants we could rely on."

"I have thought of that," the chamberlain replied, "and have ordered a
horse to be got in readiness for him, together with a spare animal to
carry food and necessaries for your journey. You will need them on
your marches, and may even be glad of them in some of the smaller
forts, where the fare will be very rough."

When they returned to their room, they found Ibrahim awaiting them. He
was evidently delighted at the prospect of accompanying them.

"My lords," he said, "I have the pack horse saddled in the stable,
with two great sacks and ropes. Is it your pleasure that I should go
down, at once, to the market and buy flour and rice, spices, and other
things necessary?"

"Certainly, Ibrahim. But it will not be necessary to buy much meat. It
will not keep, and we ought always to be able to buy a sheep or a fowl
from villagers. Get some thick, wadded sleeping rugs, some cooking
pots, and whatever you think is necessary. Do not waste any time, for
we shall start immediately after our meal."

As soon as the man had left, Dick said to Surajah:

"I will hurry down to the town and see Pertaub. You had best remain
here, in case Tippoo should send for us to give us final instructions.
You can say, should he ask, that I have gone down to the town to get a
supply of powder and ball for our pistols, writing materials, and
other things that we may require; which will be true enough. It is
most lucky that we buried our jewels in the forest, ten days ago, for
we should not have had time to do it, now."

Dick returned in time for the meal, which was brought up by another
servant.

"Pertaub was delighted to hear of our good fortune," he said, on his
return. "He will keep our disguises by him, and if we have occasion
for them, will either bring them himself with the merchandise, or will
send them by a trusty messenger, to any place we may mention, directly
he hears from us. I do not think there is any chance of our wanting
them, but it is as well to prepare for any contingency that may
occur."

Half an hour later they started, at the head of an escort of twenty
troopers; Ibrahim riding in the rear, leading the pack horse, which
carried a change of clothes, and thick cloths to keep out the night
dews, as well as the stock of provisions. Ibrahim had also purchased
two very large, dark blankets, that could be used for a temporary
shelter. Surajah now felt quite at home, for he was engaged in the
same sort of duty he performed at Tripataly; and more than one pair of
dark eyes glanced admiringly at the two young officers, as they rode
down to the ford.

They had been furnished, by Fazli, with a list of the forts they were
to visit, and the order in which they were to take them; the first on
the list being Savandroog, fifty miles northeast of the city. After a
ride of twenty miles, they halted at a village. To the surprise of the
troopers, Surajah gave orders that nothing was to be taken by force,
as he was prepared to pay for all provisions required.

As soon as the villagers understood this, ample supplies were brought
in. Rice, grain, and fowls were purchased for the soldiers, and forage
for the horses, and after seeing that all were well provided for, the
two officers went to a room that had been placed at their service, in
the principal house in the village.

Ibrahim justified his assertion that he was a good cook, by turning
out an excellent curry. By the time they had finished this it was
getting dark, and after again visiting the troopers, and seeing that
their own horses were fed and well groomed, they retired to bed.

An early start was made, and at ten o'clock they approached
Savandroog. It was one of the most formidable of the hill forts of
Mysore, and stood upon the summit of an enormous mass of granite,
covering a base of eight miles in circuit, and rising in ragged
precipices to the height of 2,500 feet. The summit of the rock was
divided by a deep chasm into two peaks, each of which was crowned with
strong works, and capable of separate defence. The lower part of the
hill was, wherever ascent seemed possible, protected by walls, one
behind the other. The natives had regarded the fort as absolutely
impregnable, until it was stormed by the troops under Lord Cornwallis.

Dick looked with intense interest at the great rock, with its numerous
fortifications. The damages committed by the British guns could not be
seen at this distance, and it seemed to him well-nigh impossible that
the place could have been captured. They rode on, until they neared an
entrance in the wall that encircled the fort, at the side at which,
alone, access was considered possible.

They were challenged as they approached. Ordering the troopers to
remain behind, Dick and Surajah rode forward.

"We are the bearers," Surajah cried out, as they reined in their
horses within twenty yards of the gate, "of an order from the sultan
for our admittance, and of a letter to Mirzah Mohammed Bukshy, the
governor."

"I will send up word to him," an officer on the wall replied. "I can
admit no one, until I have received his orders to do so."

"How long will it be before we receive an answer?"

"An hour and a half, at the earliest. I regret that your Excellencies
will be inconvenienced, but my orders are absolute."

"I do not blame you," Surajah replied. "It is necessary that you
should always be vigilant;" and they retired under the shade of a
tree, a hundred and fifty yards from the gate.

Ibrahim spread out the rugs, and then proceeded to light the fire, and
to prepare a pillau of rice and fowl, while Dick and his companion
regarded the rock with fixed attention, and conversed together as to
the possibility of ascending at any of the points so steep as to be
left undefended by walls. They concluded, at last, that it would be
next to impossible to climb the rock anywhere on the side that faced
them, save by scaling several walls.

They had just finished their luncheon when the gate opened, and an
officer and four soldiers issued out. They at once rose, and went to
meet them.

"I have the governor's order to admit you, on the production of the
sultan's pass."

Surajah produced the document. The officer at once recognised the
seal, and carried it to his forehead, salaaming deeply.

"Your troopers can enter at the gate, but cannot proceed farther than
the second wall."

"Can we ride up, or must we walk?" Dick asked.

"You can ride," he replied. "The road is steep, but nowhere so steep
that horses cannot mount it."

After the party had entered the gate, it was at once closed and
bolted. The troopers dismounted, and were led to a small barrack;
while Surajah and Dick, accompanied by the officer, and four soldiers
on foot, rode on.

The road was a better one than Dick had expected. It was just wide
enough for a cart to proceed up it, and was cut out of the solid rock.
It turned and zigzagged continually, and at each angle was a small
fort, whose guns swept the approach. They passed under a score of
gateways, each defended by guns; and after upwards of an hour's
climbing, at a quick pace, they approached one of the forts on its
summit. The governor met them at the gate.

"You will pardon my not descending to meet you below," he said, "but I
am not so young as I used to be, and the journey up and down fatigues
me much."

Dick and Surajah dismounted, and the former presented the two
documents. The governor, after reading the pass, bowed, and led the
way into the interior of the fort; and they were soon seated on a
divan in his quarters, when he read the circular letter.

"I am glad indeed," he said, when he had finished, "that the sultan is
pleased to take into consideration the many demands I have made for
cannon and ammunition. A large number of the pieces are past service,
and they would be as dangerous to those who fired them as to those at
whom they were aimed; while I have scarcely powder enough to furnish
three rounds for each. As to the defences, I have done my best to
strengthen them. Idleness is bad for all men, most of all for
soldiers, and I have kept them well employed at repairing the effects
of the English fire. Still, there is much to do yet before they are
finished, and there are points where fortifications might be added
with advantage. These I will gladly point out to you. They have been
beyond our means here, for, as you will perceive, it will need
blasting in many places to scarp the rock, and to render inaccessible
several points at which active men can now climb up. For this work,
powder is required. And I would submit that, for such hard work, it
will be needful to supply extra rations to the troops, for the present
scale scarcely suffices to keep the men efficient, especially as most
of them have their wives and families dependent on them."

"I have no doubt that the sultan will accede to any reasonable
requests, your Excellency. He is anxious that the walls of the forts
should be placed in the best possible condition for defence. No one
doubts that we shall, ere long, be again at war with England, and
although the sultan relies much upon large reinforcements that have
been promised by France, with whom he has entered into an alliance,
they have not yet arrived, and he may have to bear the brunt of the
attack of the English by himself."

"I have heard of this," the governor said, "and regret that we shall
again have the Feringhees upon us. As for the Mahrattis or the Nizam,
I heed them not--they are dust, whom the sultan could sweep from his
path; but these English are terrible soldiers. I have fought against
them under Hyder, and in the last war they again showed their valour;
and the strangest thing is that they make the natives under them fight
as bravely as they do themselves.

"As to forts, nothing is safe from them. Were all the troops of the
Nizam and the Mahrattis combined to besiege us, I should feel
perfectly safe; while were there but five hundred Englishmen, I should
tremble for the safety of the fortress. You have come up the hill, and
have seen for yourselves how strong it is; and yet they took the place
without the loss of a single man. I was not here, for I was in command
of Kistnagherry at that time, and succeeded in holding it against
their assaults. When the war was over, and Kistnagherry was ceded to
them, I was appointed to this fortress, which seems to me to be even
stronger than that was.

"The commander was a brave man, the garrison was strong, there was no
suspicion of treachery; and though, at last, the troops were seized
with a panic, as they might well be when they saw that they were
unable to arrest the advance of the enemy, the defence up to that time
had been stout. The English brought up guns, where it was thought no
guns could be taken. They knocked the defences to pieces; and, after
winning their way to the top, in one day captured this fort, and that
on the hill yonder. It seems miraculous."

Coffee was brought in, and pipes, for although Tippoo was violently
opposed to smoking, and no one would venture upon the use of tobacco
in the Palace or fort, old officers like the governor, in distant
commands, did not relinquish tobacco.

"It is necessary here," the governor said, as he filled his pipe. "The
country round is terribly unhealthy, and the air is full of fever. I
do not discourage its use among the men, for they would die off like
flies, did they not smoke to keep out the bad air. The climate is,
indeed, the best protection to the fort, for an army that sat down for
any length of time before it, would speedily melt away."

He opened a box that stood on the divan beside him.

"I have copies here," he said, taking some papers out, "of the
memorials that I have sent in to the sultan, as to the guns. This is
the last. It was sent in two months ago. You see I asked for
forty-nine heavy pieces. Of these, thirty are to replace guns that are
honeycombed, or split. The other eleven are for new works. I asked for
thirty-two lighter ones, or howitzers, and a hundred wall guns. Of
course I could do with less; but to place the fort in a perfect state
of defence, that is the number that I and my artillery officer think
are requisite.

"Of powder, we have not more than a ton and a half, and if the siege
were to be a long one we might require ten times as much. We have not
more than eight rounds of shot for each gun, and we ought to have at
least fifty for the heavy pieces, and twenty for those defending the
path up the hill."

Dick made a note of the figures, in a pocket book he had bought for
the purpose.

"As for provisions," the governor went on, "we ought to have large
stores of rice and grain. The magazines are nearly empty, and as we
have eight hundred men in garrison, and perhaps twice as many women
and children, we should require a large store were we blockaded for
any time."

"Are the troops in good condition?" Surajah asked.

The governor shook his head.

"Many of them are past the term of service; but until I get
reinforcements to supply their places, I shall not venture to
discharge them. Many others are wasted by fever, and, I must say, from
insufficient rations, which not only weakens their bodies, but lowers
their spirits. As long as there was no fear of attack, this mattered
little; but if the English are coming again, we shall want well-fed
and contented men to oppose them.

"I see, by the stars on your turbans, that you are both colonels as
well as officers of the Palace. You are fortunate in obtaining that
rank so young."

"It was due to the sultan's favour," Surajah said. "The other day, at
the sports, a tiger burst into the sultan's zenana, and we were lucky
enough to kill it--that is, my friend did most of the killing. I only
gave the brute the final coup."

"Ah, it was you who performed that deed!" the governor said, warmly.
"I heard the news, from one of my officers who was on leave, and
returned yesterday. Truly it was a gallant action, and one quickly
done. No wonder that you obtained the sultan's favour, and your rank
as colonel.

"I was a sportsman, in my young days. But I think I should have been
more frightened at the thought of taking a peep into the sultan's
zenana, than I should have been of fighting the tiger."

"I did not think anything about it," Dick said, "until it was all
over. I heard some women scream, and, being quite close, went to their
assistance, without a thought whether they might be the ladies of the
zenana, or servants of the Palace. But indeed, I saw nothing save the
tiger, and only vaguely observed that there were women there at all."

"It was well that the sultan took the view he did of the matter," the
governor said. "I have known men put to death, for deeds that were but
trifles in comparison to looking into the zenana.

"Now, Colonel, I will send for my artillery officer and the horses,
and we will ride round the fortifications on the brow of the hill,
inspect the two forts closely, and will point out to you the spots
where it appears to us the defences ought to be strengthened."



Chapter 14: A Surprise.


Dick was much pleased with the governor. He was evidently an outspoken
old soldier and, though rough, his bearded face had an honest and
kindly expression, and he thought to himself, "If my father fell into
his hands, I don't think he would be treated with any unnecessary
hardship, though no doubt the sultan's orders would be obeyed."

When a soldier came in, to say that the horses were at the door, they
went out. An officer was standing beside them, and the governor
presented him as his chief artillery officer.

"You have not brought your horse," he said.

"No, your Excellency. The distance is not great, and we should need to
dismount so many times, to get a view from the walls, that it would
not be worthwhile to ride."

"In that case, we may as well walk, also," Dick said.

"I would rather do so, too," the governor said. "I proposed riding,
because I thought you might be tired. As Bakir Meeram says, the
distance is not great. The walls themselves, with the exception of
those of the two forts, are not more than half a mile in extent; for
in most places the rocks go sheer down, and there defences are, of
course, unnecessary. We will inspect this fort, first."

They went the round of the walls, Dick and his companion listening to
the suggestions of the two officers. The principal one was that a wall
should be raised, inside the gate.

"The English, last time, got in here by rushing in at the tail of the
fugitives from below. They were in before the gates could be closed,
and took our men so completely by surprise that they were seized with
a panic. Were we to raise a semicircular wall behind the gateway, such
a thing could not occur again," the governor said. "Of course, there
would be a gate in the inner wall, but not immediately behind the
outer gateway as, if so placed, it might be destroyed by the cannon
shots that battered the outer gate in. I should, therefore, put it at
one end of the inner wall. This gate would be generally open, but in
case of a siege I should have it blocked up with stones piled behind
it, placing a number of ladders by which men, running in, could get on
to the walls, and, however closely they were pursued, could make a
stand there until the ladders were pulled up."

"That would be an excellent idea," Surajah said gravely, "and I will
certainly lay it before the sultan. I suppose you would propose the
same for the other fort?"

"Just the same."

"The only thing that I would observe," Dick said, "is that, if an
enemy once got a footing on the top here, you could not hope to make a
long defence of these forts."

"That is so," the governor agreed. "The strength of the defence is not
here, but on the upward road, and if the English once gained the top
the forts must fall; but at least it shall not be said, as long as I
am governor, that Savandroog fell almost bloodlessly. In these forts
we can at least die bravely, and sell our lives to the last. It is for
that reason I desire that they shall be so defended that they cannot
be carried, as they were before, by a sudden rush."

The other fort was then visited, and a tour made round the walls. The
suggestions offered by the governor and the officers were all noted
down and approved.

Then they made what was, to Dick, the most important part of the
inspection; namely, an examination of the undefended portion of the
rock. The result showed him that the builders of the defences had not
acted unwisely in trusting solely to nature. At many points the rock
fell away in precipices, hundreds of feet deep. At other points,
although the descent was less steep, it was, as far as he could see
from above, altogether unclimbable; but this he thought he would be
able to judge better, from below.

"Do you have sentries round here at night?" he asked the governor.

"No. It would not be necessary, even if an enemy were encamped below.
If you will ride round the foot of the hill when you leave, you will
see for yourself that, save from the side you came up, the place is
absolutely inaccessible."

The view from the top of the hill was superb. Away to the northeast,
the governor pointed out the pagodas of Bangalore, twenty-two miles
away; the distance, in the clear air, seeming comparatively trifling.

"Are there many troops there?" Dick asked.

"There are about five battalions of the regular troops, and three
Chelah battalions. These can hardly be counted as troops. They have
never been of the slightest use. In the last war they ran like sheep.
It is a fancy of the sultan's. But, indeed, he can hardly expect men
to fight who have been forced into the ranks, and made to accept
Mohammedanism against their will. Naturally they regard an invader,
not as an enemy, but as a deliverer.

"Of course the sultan's idea was, that since the native troops,
drilled and led by Englishmen, fought so well; the Chelahs, who were
also drilled and led by Englishmen, would do the same. But the
Company's troops are willing soldiers, and it is the English leading,
more than the English drill, that makes them fight. If the Chelahs
were divided among the hill fortresses they might do good service; and
I could, as far as fighting goes, do with a battalion of them here;
for, mixed up with my men, they would have to do their duty. But, of
course, they will never be placed in the hill forts, for one would
never be safe from treachery. Even if all the lower walls were in the
hands of my own men, some of the Chelahs would be sure to manage to
desert, and give information as to all the defences."

A considerable portion of the upper plateau of the rock was occupied
by the huts of the troops, for the forts were much too small to
contain them and their families. On their way back, they passed
through these. Dick looked anxiously about for white faces, but could
see none, nor any building that seemed to him likely to be used as a
prison.

When they returned to the governor's quarters, they found that a room
had been placed at their disposal, and they presently sat down to
dinner with him.

"I suppose you have no English prisoners here?" Dick said carelessly,
when the meal was over.

The governor paused a moment, before he replied.

"I don't want any of them here," he said shortly. "Batches are sent
up, sometimes, from Bangalore; but it is only for execution. I am a
loyal subject of the sultan, but I would that this work could be done
elsewhere. Almost all the executions take place in the hill forts; in
order, I suppose, that they may be done secretly. I obey orders, but I
never see them carried out. I never even see the captives. They have
done no harm, or, at most, one of their number has tried to escape,
for which they are not to be blamed. I always have them shot, whether
that is the mode of execution ordered or not. It is a soldier's death,
and the one I should choose myself, and so that they are dead it can
matter little to the sultan how they die. If they were all shot, as
soon as they were taken, I should not think so much of it; but after
being held captive for years, and compelled to work, it seems to me
that their lives should be spared. As far as giving up my own life is
concerned, I would willingly do it at the orders of the sultan, but
these executions make me ill. I lose my appetite for weeks afterwards.
Let us talk of something else."

And the governor puffed furiously away at the hookah he had just
lighted. Then the conversation turned to the forts again.

"No, I do not find the life dull," he said, in answer to a remark of
Dick's. "I did so at first, but one soon becomes accustomed to it. I
have my wife and two daughters, and there are ten officers, so that I
can have company when I choose. All the officers are married, and that
gives society. Up here, we do not observe strictly the rules of the
plains, and although the ladies, of course, wear veils when they go
beyond the house, they put them aside indoors, and the families mix
freely with each other, so that we get on very well. You see, there
are very few changes ever made, and as many of the ladies are, like my
wife, no longer young, we treat them as comrades."

In the morning Dick and Surajah mounted their horses, took a hearty
farewell of the governor, and rode down to the gate. A soldier had
been sent down, half an hour before, and they found their escort in
readiness to move. They had decided that, before going to the next
fort, they would ride round the foot of the hill of Savandroog. This
they did, going at a foot pace, and scanning the cliffs and slopes as
they passed. Sometimes they reined up their horses and rode a little
farther back, so as to have a view to the very summit.

When they completed the round, they agreed that there were but two
spots where it seemed to them that an ascent was barely possible, and
they were very doubtful whether the difficulties, when examined more
closely, would not prove to be absolutely insurmountable.

"That is not a satisfactory outlook," Dick said, "but fortunately
there is, now, no motive for climbing the precipice. Certainly those
places would be of no use to a party wanting to make an attack. In the
first place, though you and I might get up, with soft shoes on, I am
sure that English soldiers, with muskets and ammunition pouches, could
never do it, especially at night; and in the daytime, even if a body
of troops strong enough to be of any use could get up, those who first
arrived at the top would be killed before the others could come to
their assistance, and a few stones rolled down would sweep all behind
them to the bottom.

"I don't like turning my back on the place," he went on, as they
