knot tight (Fig. 74).

[Illustration: 68

68 69 70

71 72 73 74

The halter, slip-knot, and hitching-tie.]




CHAPTER XII

ACCIDENTS

=Sprains. Bruises. Burns. Cuts. Sunstroke. Drowning=


One learns quickly how to take care of oneself while on the trail, and
serious accidents seldom occur. In fact, every member of the party takes
pride in keeping herself free from accident; it is so like a tenderfoot
to get hurt. However, it is well to be prepared in case accidents do
occur, and this chapter is intended to forearm you that you may not
stand helplessly by when your aid is needed.


=Sprains and Bruises=

The best immediate treatment for ordinary sprains and bruises is the
application of _cloths dipped in very hot water_. This takes out the
soreness and prevents inflammation. As soon as one application cools a
little, a hot one should take its place, as hot as can be borne without
scalding the flesh. Very cold water can be used when hot is not
obtainable. For a sprained ankle or wrist continue this treatment for a
while and then bind smoothly and firmly with a clean cotton bandage.
Keep as quiet as possible with a sprained ankle, and if the accident
occurs when on a walk the fireman's lift may be used for carrying the
injured person to camp.

[Illustration: The fireman's lift.]


=Fireman's Lift=

To be able to use the fireman's lift may be to save a life, as it can be
employed when there is but one person to do the carrying. With
practise any girl of ordinary strength can lift and carry another of her
own size or even larger.

In order to make the lift easy, instruct the patient to relax all her
muscles and become perfectly limp; then turn her on her face, stand over
her body with one foot at each side, face toward the patient's head.
Lean forward and place your hands under her arms, then gently raise her
to her knees, next slide your hands quickly down around her body at the
low waist-line, lifting her at the same time to her feet. Immediately
grasp her right wrist with your left hand, and pass your head under her
right arm and your right arm under one or both of her knees, shifting
the patient's hips well on your shoulders, rise to a standing position
and carry patient away.


=Cuts=

The accidents that most frequently happen are simple cuts and bruises.

For a slight cut wash the wound in lukewarm water to remove all dirt or
foreign matter, then press the lips or sides together and hold them in
place with strips of court-plaster or surgeon's adhesive plaster. Do not
cover the entire wound with the plaster, but put strips across at right
angles with the cut, leaving a space between every two strips and using
only enough plaster to keep the cut closed. Cover the hurt part with a
bandage to protect it from further injury.

[Illustration: The tourniquet.

Blanket stretcher.

Aids in "first aid."]


=When an Artery is Cut=

When an artery is cut the wound is more serious and the bleeding must be
stopped _immediately_. When the blood comes from an artery it is bright
red in color and flows copiously in spurts or jets. The blood in the
arteries is flowing away from the heart, therefore you must stop it
between the cut and the heart. It is the arteries in the arms and legs
that are most likely to be injured. In the arm the large artery runs
down the inner side of the upper arm. In the leg the artery runs down
the inner side of the upper leg.


=The Tourniquet=

To stop the bleeding press the artery _above_ the wound firmly with your
fingers while some one prepares a tourniquet. Use a handkerchief, a
necktie, or anything of the kind for a tourniquet; tie it loosely around
the limb and in the bandage place a smooth stone (or something that will
take its place), adjusting it just above your fingers on the artery.
Then slip a strong, slender stick about ten inches long under the
bandage at the outer side of the arm or leg and turn the stick around
like the hand of a clock, until the stone presses the artery just as
your fingers did. Tie the stick above and below the bandage to keep it
from untwisting.

_Do not forget_ that the tourniquet is cutting off circulation, and for
this to continue very long is dangerous. It is not safe to keep it on
more than one hour without loosening. If the hand or foot grows cold and
numb before that time loosen the tourniquet and rub briskly to restore
circulation. Should the wound begin to bleed again when the tourniquet
is loosened, be ready to tighten at once.

In case of an accident of this kind summon a physician, if one can be
reached quickly. If not, take the patient to the nearest doctor, for the
artery must be tied as soon as possible and only a physician or skilful
trained nurse can do that part of the work.


=Emergency Stretchers=

Loss of blood is too weakening to permit of the patient walking, and the
exertion may start the wound bleeding again, so a stretcher of some kind
must be contrived in which she may be carried. You can make a good
emergency stretcher of two strong poles of _green_ wood, one large
blanket, and the ever-useful horse-blanket safety-pins. The poles should
be about six feet long, of a size to clasp easily in your hand, and as
smooth as they can be made with hurried work. They should, at least, be
free from jagged stumps or branches and twigs.

Begin by folding the blanket through the middle _over_ one of the poles,
then pin the blanket together with the large safety-pins, with the pins
about six inches apart, to hold the pole in place. That finishes one
side; for the other, lap the two edges of the blanket over the second
pole and pin them down like a hem. The stretcher will be of double
thickness and will hold the injured person comfortably.

If a serious accident should occur some distance from camp and there are
no blankets to use, do not hesitate to appropriate for a stretcher
whatever you have with you. When there is nothing else cut your khaki
skirt into strips about twelve inches wide and tie the ends to two poles
(the poles need not be smooth except at the ends), leaving spaces
between.


=Burns and Scalds=

Personally I have repudiated the old method of treating simple burns and
scalds and, instead of applying oil or flour, have discovered for myself
that simply holding a slightly burned finger or hand in a running stream
of cold water not only gives instant relief but prevents the pain from
returning in any severity. Care of the injured part to prevent the skin
from breaking and causing a sore is the only thing left to be done.
However, here are the ordinary remedies for burns. Any of the following
things spread over a piece of linen or soft cotton cloth are said to be
good: olive-oil, carbolized vaseline, fresh lard, cream, flour, and
baking-soda. For serious burns a physician should be called.


=Heat Prostration and Sunstroke=

This will seldom occur in a camp of healthy girls whose stomachs and
blood are in good order, but it is best not to expose oneself to the
fierce rays of the sun during a period of intense heat, or directly
after eating. In case any one is overcome and complains of feeling
faint, and of dizziness and throbbing head, take her where it is cool,
in the shade if possible, lay her down, loosen her clothing, and apply
cold water to her face and head. She will probably be able to walk when
she revives, but if not, carry her home or into camp. _Do not give
whiskey, brandy, or any stimulants._


=Cinder or Foreign Substance in the Eye=

As a rule all that is necessary to remove "something" in your eye is to
take the eyelashes of the upper lid between your thumb and forefinger
and pull the lid down over the lower one. The lower lashes thus shut in,
combined with the tears that flood the eye, will clean the eye in most
cases.

If the cinder or other substance is embedded in the upper lid, roll back
the lid over a match (the sulphur end taken off), then moisten a corner
of a handkerchief and with it remove the cinder. If this treatment does
not avail and the substance cannot be removed, put a drop of olive-oil
in the eye, close it and cover with a soft bandage, then go to a
physician. _Do not put anything stiff or hard into the eye._


=Fainting=

Fainting occurs most often in overheated and over-crowded places where
the air is impure. The proper treatment is to lay the patient flat on
her back with the head lower than the rest of the body and feet raised;
then loosen the clothes at waist and neck, sprinkle the face and neck
with cold water, and hold smelling salts or ammonia to the nostrils.
Insist upon giving her all the fresh air possible. It is good also to
rub the limbs with the motion upward toward the body.


=Drowning--Shafer Method=

Secure a doctor if possible, but do not wait for him. Do not _wait_ for
anything; what you do, do _instantly_.

As soon as the rescued person is out of the water begin treatment to
restore respiration, that is, to make her _breathe_. If you can do this
her life will probably be saved. Not until the patient breathes
naturally must you work to bring warmth and circulation to the body. To
promote circulation _before_ the patient _breathes naturally_ may
endanger her life.

First quickly loosen the clothes at waist and neck; then turn the
patient face downward on the ground with face either downward or turned
to one side, arms extended above the head, and with chest raised
slightly from the ground and resting upon your folded skirt. Also place
something beneath her forehead to raise her nose and mouth from the
ground. This will allow the tongue to fall forward. If it does not,
grasp it with handkerchief and pull forward; this will permit the water
to run out and will provide room for breathing.

As in cases of fainting, so with drowning patient, she must have all the
air possible, for she is being suffocated with water, so do not allow a
crowd to form around her. Keep every one back except those assisting in
the actual work of restoration.

With the patient in the position described, kneel by her side or, better
still, astride of her, and let your hands fall into the spaces between
the short ribs. With your fingers turned outward and your weight falling
upon the palms of your hands, press steadily downward and forward to
expel the air from the lungs. Hold this position a fraction of a second,
count four, then gradually release the pressure to allow the air to
enter again through the throat. Count four, and again press down.
Continue this treatment for a while, then, using another method, slip
your hands under the patient at the waist-line and lift her up
sufficiently to allow her head to hang down as in illustration.

Lower her gently and lift again. Do this several times. You will find
that the movement will force the water from the lungs out of the mouth
and help to produce artificial respiration.

Return to the first method and continue the treatment until the breath
comes naturally. It may be an hour or two before there are any signs of
life such as a gasp or slight movement, then the breath must be
carefully aided by more gentle pressure until it comes easily without
help.

Do not give up hope, and _do not stop working_. The work may be
continued many hours if done in relays, that is, several girls taking
part, each one in her turn. Remember, however, the treatment must be
continuous and no time be allowed to elapse when the change is being
made.

[Illustration: Restoring respiration.]


=After Respiration Begins=

With returning breath the first corner in recovery has been turned, but
the after treatment is very important. To restore circulation, begin by
rubbing the limbs _upward_ with a firm pressure. This sends the blood to
the heart. Warmth must now be supplied by blankets heated before a fire,
and hot stones or bricks may be placed at the thighs and at the soles of
the feet. Or the patient should be wrapped in a warm blanket, placed on
a stretcher, carried to camp, or to a house, and put to bed. Here
hot-water bottles may be used, and as soon as it is possible for her to
swallow, if nothing else can be obtained, give a little strong, hot
coffee, unsweetened and without milk. Lastly, keep the patient quiet and
let her sleep.


=Nosebleed=

The simplest method of stopping the nosebleed is to hold something
_cold_ on the back of the neck (a large key will do) and pinch the
nostrils together; also cool the forehead with water and hold the arms
above the head. This is usually effective.




CHAPTER XIII

CAMP FUN AND FROLICS

=Active Sports and Games. Evenings in Camp. Around the Camp-Fire. Quiet
Games, Songs, and Stories. Lighting Fires Without a Match=


Camp fun should have a place, and an important one, in your plans for
the trail. For the time being the camp is your home and it should never
be allowed to become dull for want of a little gayety and wholesome
amusement. In a permanent camp there will be days when the entire party
will be loafing and then is the time to start a frolic of some kind.


=Obstacle Races=

Competitive sports are always entertaining, and races, of one kind or
another, are the most exciting. The Boy Scouts have a race in which the
competitors drop first their staffs, then their hats, their neckties,
leggins, and, finally struggling out of the blouse of their uniform,
they drop that also. All this must be done while on the way and before
they cross a given line. At the line they turn to go back over the
course and, while running, take up their various belongings and put them
on before they reach the home goal.

A race planned on these lines will be most amusing. A smooth course is
not necessary, you probably won't have it at camp, and to get over the
uneven ground, with the detentions of first dropping, then picking up
the articles dropped, will add to the excitement of the sport. An
entertaining variation of this will be to have those taking part in the
race appear in impromptu costumes (worn over the ordinary dress) which
they must remove piece by piece as they run and put the things all on
again while returning over the course. Such hastily adjusted costumes
cannot help but be funny.


=Medals=

The winner of the race should be given a medal as a prize. The medal can
be made of any handy material. A tin circular disk cut from the top of a
tin can will do. Drive a nail through this tin medal near the edge and
pass a string through the hole so that it may be hung around the neck of
the winner. Or instead of giving a medal, the victor may be crowned,
like the ancient Greeks, with a wreath of leaves.


=Blindfold Obstacle Walk=

Another amusing camp sport is the blindfold obstacle walk. Place six or
eight good-sized stones on the ground in a row, about two feet apart.
The stones should be flat on top so that you can stand a tin cup filled
with water on each stone. Let one member of the party make a trial trip
over the cups, stepping between them as she passes down the row; then
blindfold her, place two people as a guard, one on each side of her, to
hold her hands and prevent a fall, and let them lead her to the end of
the line of cups and tell her to go over it again.

The guard will steady her in case she stumbles but must in no way guide
her course aright. The stepper will step high and be absurdly careful
not to kick over one of the cups, for wet feet would probably be the
result. Sometimes the stepper will leave the line of her own accord;
sometimes her guard will purposely, and without her knowing it, lead
her off the course and then her careful, high steps over nothing add to
the fun of the onlookers.

Any number may take part in the sport, and in turn act as stepper. At
the end a prize should be given by vote to the one who afforded the
greatest amusement.


=Hunting the Quail=

This is something like the old game of hide-and-seek, with which all
girls are familiar, and it will not be difficult to learn. The players
are divided into "hunter" and "quails." The hunter is "It," and any
counting-out rhyme will decide who is to take that part. When the
hunter, with closed eyes, has counted her hundred, and the quails have
scurried away to their hiding-places behind trees, bushes, or rocks, the
hunt begins, and at the same time begins the cry of the quails:
"Bob-White! Bob-White! Bob-White!" These calls, coming from every
direction, are very bewildering, and the hunter must be alert to detect
the direction of one particular sound and quick to see the flight of a
quail and catch her before she can reach the home goal and find shelter
there. The first quail caught becomes hunter in her turn, and the noisy,
rollicking game continues as long as the players wish. Another romping
game is called


=Trotting-Horse=

It is warranted to put in circulation even the most sluggish blood and
to warm the coldest feet, and it is fine for the almost frosty weather
we sometimes have in the mountains.

The players form a circle in marching order; that is, each girl faces
the back of another, with a space between every two players.
Trotting-horse, the "It" of the game, stands in the centre of the
circle. When she gives the signal, the players forming the circle begin
to run round and round, keeping the circle intact, while trotting-horse,
