Half-way down the furlong their heads are together,
Scarce room 'twixt their noses to wedge in a feather;
Past grand stand, and judges, in neck-to-neck strife,
Ah, Salvator, boy, 'tis the race of your life!
I press my knees closer, I coax him, I urge,
I feel him go out with a leap and a surge;
I see him creep on, inch by inch, stride by stride,
While backward, still backward, falls Tenny beside.
We are nearing the turn, the first quarter is passed--
'Twixt leader and chaser the daylight is cast;
The distance elongates; still Tenny sweeps on,
As graceful and free-limbed and swift as a fawn,
His awkwardness vanished, his muscles all strained--
A noble opponent well born and well trained.

I glanced o'er my shoulder; ha! Tenny! the cost
Of that one second's flagging will be--the race lost;
One second's yielding of courage and strength,
And the daylight between us has doubled its length.
The first mile is covered, the race is mine--no!
For the blue blood of Tenny responds to a blow;
He shoots through the air like a ball from a gun,
And the two lengths between us are shortened to one.
My heart is contracted, my throat feels a lump,
For Tenny's long neck is at Salvator's rump;
And now with new courage grown bolder and bolder,
I see him once more running shoulder to shoulder.
With knees, hands and body I press my grand steed;
I urge him, I coax him, I pray him to heed!
O Salvator! Salvator! List to my calls,
For the blow of my whip will hurt both if it falls.
There's a roar from the crowd like the ocean in storm,
As close to the saddle leaps Tenny's great form;
One mighty plunge, and with knee, limb and hand,
I lift my horse first by a nose past the stand.
We are under the string now--the great race is done--
And Salvator, Salvator, Salvator won!

Cheer, hoary-headed patriarchs; cheer loud, I say;
'Tis the race of a century witnessed to-day!
Though ye live twice the space that's allotted to men
Ye never will see such a grand race again.
Let the shouts of the populace roar like the surf,
For Salvator, Salvator, king of the turf,
He has rivaled the record of thirteen long years;
He has won the first place in the vast line of peers.
'Twas a neck-to-neck contest, a grand, honest race,
And even his enemies grant him his place.
Down into the dust let old records be hurled,
And hang out 2:05 to the gaze of the world!

    _Ella Wheeler Wilcox._




I Got to Go to School


I'd like to hunt the Injuns 't roam the boundless plain!
I'd like to be a pirate an' plow the ragin' main!
An' capture some big island, in lordly pomp to rule;
But I just can't be nothin' cause I got to go to school.

'Most all great men, so I have read, has been the ones 'at got
The least amount o' learnin' by a flickerin' pitch pine knot;
An' many a darin' boy like me grows up to be a fool,
An' never 'mounts to nothin' 'cause he's got to go to school.

I'd like to be a cowboy an' rope the Texas steer!
I'd like to be a sleuth-houn' or a bloody buccaneer!
An' leave the foe to welter where their blood had made a pool;
But how can I git famous? 'cause I got to go to school.

I don't see how my parents kin make the big mistake.
O' keepin' down a boy like me 'at's got a name to make!
It ain't no wonder boys is bad, an' balky as a mule;
Life ain't worth livin' if you've got to waste your time in school.

I'd like to be regarded as "The Terror of the Plains"!
I'd like to hear my victims shriek an' clank their prison chains!
I'd like to face the enemy with gaze serene an' cool,
An' wipe 'em off the earth, but pshaw! I got to go to school.

What good is 'rithmetic an' things, exceptin' jest for girls,
Er them there Fauntleroys 'at wears their hair in pretty curls?
An' if my name is never seen on hist'ry's page, why, you'll
Remember 'at it's all because I got to go to school.

    _Nixon Waterman._




With Little Boy Blue

(_Written after the death of Eugene Field._)


Silent he watched them--the soldiers and dog--
  Tin toys on the little armchair,
Keeping their tryst through the slow going years
  For the hand that had stationed them there;
And he said that perchance the dust and the rust
  Hid the griefs that the toy friends knew,
And his heart watched with them all the dark years,
  Yearning ever for Little Boy Blue.

Three mourners they were for Little Boy Blue,
  Three ere the cold winds had begun;
Now two are left watching--the soldier and dog;
  But for him the vigil is done.
For him too, the angel has chanted a song
  A song that is lulling and true.
He has seen the white gates of the mansions of rest,
  Thrown wide by his Little Boy Blue.

God sent not the Angel of Death for his soul--
  Not the Reaper who cometh for all--
But out of the shadows that curtained the day
  He heard his lost little one call,
Heard the voice that he loved, and following fast,
  Passed on to the far-away strand;
And he walks the streets of the City of Peace,
  With Little Boy Blue by the hand.

    _Sarah Beaumont Kennedy._




The Charge of Pickett's Brigade


In Gettysburg at break of day
  The hosts of war are held in leash
To gird them for the coming fray,
  E'er brazen-throated monsters flame,
  Mad hounds of death that tear and maim.
Ho, boys in blue,
And gray so true,
  Fate calls to-day the roll of fame.

On Cemetery Hill was done
  The clangor of four hundred guns;
Through drifting smoke the morning sun
  Shone down a line of battled gray
  Where Pickett's waiting soldiers lay.
Virginians all,
Heed glory's call,
  You die at Gettysburg to-day,

'Twas Pickett's veteran brigade,
  Great Lee had named; he knew them well;
Oft had their steel the battle stayed.
  O warriors of the eagle plume,
  Fate points for you the hour of doom.
Ring rebel yell,
War cry and knell!
  The stars, to-night, will set in gloom.

O Pickett's men, ye sons of fate,
  Awe-stricken nations bide your deeds.
For you the centuries did wait,
  While wrong had writ her lengthening scroll
  And God had set the judgment roll.
A thousand years
Shall wait in tears,
  And one swift hour bring to goal.

The charge is done, a cause is lost;
  But Pickett's men heed not the din
Of ragged columns battle tost;
  For fame enshrouds them on the field,
  And pierced, Virginia, is thy shield.
But stars and bars
Shall drape thy scars;
  No cause is lost till honor yield.




Hullo


W'en you see a man in woe,
Walk right up and say "Hullo!"
Say "Hullo" and "How d'ye do?
How's the world a-usin' you?"
Slap the fellow on the back;
Bring your hand down with a whack;
Walk right up, and don't go slow;
Grin an' shake, an' say "Hullo!"

Is he clothed in rags? Oh! sho;
Walk right up an' say "Hullo!"
Rags is but a cotton roll
Jest for wrappin' up a soul;
An' a soul is worth a true
Hale and hearty "How d'ye do?"
Don't wait for the crowd to go,
Walk right up and say "Hullo!"

When big vessels meet, they say
They saloot an' sail away.
Jest the same are you an' me
Lonesome ships upon a sea;
Each one sailin' his own log,
For a port behind the fog;
Let your speakin' trumpet blow;
Lift your horn an' cry "Hullo!"

Say "Hullo!" an' "How d'ye do?"
Other folks are good as you.
W'en you leave your house of clay
Wanderin' in the far away,
W'en you travel through the strange
Country t'other side the range,
Then the souls you've cheered will know
Who ye be, an' say "Hullo."

    _Sam Walter Foss._




The Women of Mumbles Head


Bring, novelist, your note-book! bring, dramatist, your pen!
And I'll tell you a simple story of what women do for men.
It's only a tale of a lifeboat, of the dying and the dead,
Of the terrible storm and shipwreck that happened off Mumbles Head!
Maybe you have traveled in Wales, sir, and know it north and south;
Maybe you are friends with the "natives" that dwell at Oystermouth;
It happens, no doubt, that from Bristol you've crossed in a casual way,
And have sailed your yacht in the summer in the blue of Swansea Bay.

Well! it isn't like that in the winter, when the lighthouse stands alone,
In the teeth of Atlantic breakers that foam on its face of stone;
It wasn't like that when the hurricane blew, and the storm-bell tolled,
      or when
There was news of a wreck, and the lifeboat launched, and a desperate cry
      for men.
When in the world did the coxswain shirk? a brave old salt was he!
Proud to the bone of as four strong lads as ever had tasted the sea,
Welshmen all to the lungs and loins, who, about that coast, 'twas said,
Had saved some hundred lives apiece--at a shilling or so a head!

So the father launched the lifeboat, in the teeth of the tempest's roar,
And he stood like a man at the rudder, with an eye on his boys at the oar,
Out to the wreck went the father! out to the wreck went the sons!
Leaving the weeping of women, and booming of signal guns;
Leaving the mother who loved them, and the girls that the sailors love;
Going to death for duty, and trusting to God above!
Do you murmur a prayer, my brothers, when cozy and safe in bed,
For men like these, who are ready to die for a wreck off Mumbles Head?
It didn't go well with the lifeboat! 'twas a terrible storm that blew!
And it snapped the' rope in a second that was flung to the drowning crew;

And then the anchor parted--'twas a tussle to keep afloat!
But the father stuck to the rudder, and the boys to the brave old boat.
Then at last on the poor doomed lifeboat a wave broke mountains high!
"God help us now!" said the father. "It's over, my lads! Good-bye"!
Half of the crew swam shoreward, half to the sheltered caves,
But father and sons were fighting death in the foam of the angry waves.

Up at a lighthouse window two women beheld the storm,
And saw in the boiling breakers a figure--a fighting form;
It might be a gray-haired father, then the women held their breath;
It might be a fair-haired brother, who was having a round with death;
It might be a lover, a husband, whose kisses were on the lips
Of the women whose love is the life of men going down to the sea in ships.
They had seen the launch of the lifeboat, they had seen the worst, and
      more,
Then, kissing each other, these women went down from the lighthouse,
straight to shore.

There by the rocks on the breakers these sisters, hand in hand,
Beheld once more that desperate man who struggled to reach the land,
'Twas only aid he wanted to help him across the wave,
But what are a couple of women with only a man to save?
What are a couple of women? well, more than three craven men
Who stood by the shore with chattering teeth, refusing to stir--and then
Off went the women's shawls, sir; in a second they're torn and rent,
Then knotting them into a rope of love, straight into the sea they went!

"Come back!" cried the lighthouse-keeper. "For God's sake, girls, come
      back!"
As they caught the waves on their foreheads, resisting the fierce attack.
"Come back!" moaned the gray-haired mother, as she stood by the angry sea,
"If the waves take you, my darlings, there's nobody left to me!"

"Come back!" said the three strong soldiers, who still stood faint and
      pale,
"You will drown if you face the breakers! you will fall if you brave the
      gale!"
"_Come back_!" said the girls, "we will not! go tell it to all the town,
We'll lose our lives, God willing, before that man shall drown!"

"Give one more knot to the shawls, Bess! give one strong clutch of your
      hand!
Just follow me, brave, to the shingle, and we'll bring him safe to land!
Wait for the next wave, darling! only a minute more,
And I'll have him safe in my arms, dear, and we'll drag him to the shore."
Up to the arms in the water, fighting it breast to breast,
They caught and saved a brother alive. God bless them! you know the rest--
Well, many a heart beat stronger, and many a tear was shed,
And many a glass was tossed right off to "The Women of Mumbles Head!"

    _Clement Scott._




The Fireman's Story


"'A frightful face'? Wal, yes, yer correct;
  That man on the enjine thar
Don't pack the han'somest countenance--
  Every inch of it sportin' a scar;
But I tell you, pard, thar ain't money enough
  Piled up in the National Banks
To buy that face, nor a single scar--
  (No, I never indulges. Thanks.)

"Yes, Jim is an old-time engineer,
  An' a better one never war knowed!
Bin a runnin' yar since the fust machine
  War put on the Quincy Road;
An' thar ain't a galoot that pulls a plug
  From Maine to the jumpin' off place
That knows more about the big iron hoss
  Than him with the battered-up face.

"'Got hurt in a smash-up'? No,'twar done
  In a sort o' legitimate way;
He got it a-trying to save a gal
  Up yar on the road last May.
I heven't much time for to spin you the yarn,
  For we pull out at two-twenty-five--
Just wait till I climb up an' toss in some coal,
  So's to keep old '90' alive.

"Jim war pullin' the Burlin'ton passenger then,
  Left Quincy a half an hour late,
An' war skimmin' along purty lively, so's not
  To lay out No. 21 freight.
The '90' war more than whoopin' 'em up
  An' a-quiverin' in every nerve!
When all to once Jim yelled 'Merciful God!'
  As she shoved her sharp nose 'round a curve.

"I jumped to his side o' the cab, an' ahead
  'Bout two hundred paces or so
Stood a gal on the track, her hands raised aloft,
  An' her face jist as white as the snow;
It seems she war so paralyzed with the fright
  That she couldn't move for'ard or back,
An' when Jim pulled the whistle she fainted an' fell
  Right down in a heap on the track!

"I'll never forgit till the day o' my death
  The look that cum over Jim's face;
He throw'd the old lever cl'r back like a shot
  So's to slacken the '90's' wild pace,
Then let on the air brakes as quick as a flash,
  An' out through the window he fled,
An' skinned 'long the runnin' board cla'r in front,
  An' lay on the pilot ahead.

"Then just as we reached whar the poor creetur lay,
  He grabbed a tight hold, of her arm,
An' raised her right up so's to throw her one side
  Out o' reach of danger an' harm.
But somehow he slipped an' fell with his head
  On the rail as he throw'd the young lass,
An' the pilot in strikin' him, ground up his face
  In a frightful and horrible mass!

"As soon as we stopped I backed up the train
  To that spot where the poor fellow lay,
An' there sot the gal with his head in her lap
  An' wipin' the warm blood away.
The tears rolled in torrents right down from her eyes,
  While she sobbed like her heart war all broke--
I tell you, my friend, such a sight as that 'ar
  Would move the tough heart of an oak!

"We put Jim aboard an' ran back to town,
  What for week arter week the boy lay
A-hoverin' right in the shadder o' death,
  An' that gal by his bed every day.
But nursin' an' doctorin' brought him around--
  Kinder snatched him right outer the grave--
His face ain't so han'some as 'twar, but his heart
  Remains just as noble an' brave.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of course thar's a sequel--as story books say--
  He fell dead in love, did this Jim;
But hadn't the heart to ax her to have
  Sich a batter'd-up rooster as him.
She know'd how he felt, and last New Year's day
  War the fust o' leap year as you know,
So she jist cornered Jim an' proposed on the spot,
  An' you bet he didn't say no.

"He's building a house up thar on the hill,
  An' has laid up a snug pile o' cash,
The weddin's to be on the first o' next May--
  Jist a year from the day o' the smash--
The gal says he risked his dear life to save hers,
  An' she'll just turn the tables about,
An' give him the life that he saved--thar's the bell.
  Good day, sir, we're goin' to pull out."




Little Willie's Hearing


Sometimes w'en I am playin' with some fellers 'at I knows,
My ma she comes to call me, 'cause she wants me, I surpose:
An' then she calls in this way: "Willie! Willie, dear! Willee-e-ee!"
An' you'd be surprised to notice how dretful deef I be;
An' the fellers 'at are playin' they keeps mos' orful still,
W'ile they tell me, jus' in whispers: "Your ma is callin', Bill."
But my hearin' don't git better, so fur as I can see,
W'ile my ma stan's there a-callin': "Willie! Willie, dear! Willee-e-ee!"

An' soon my ma she gives it up, an' says: "Well, I'll allow
It's mighty cur'us w'ere that boy has got to, anyhow";
An' then I keep on playin' jus' the way I did before--
I know if she was wantin' much she'd call to me some more.
An' purty soon she comes agin an' says: "Willie! Willee-e-ee!"
But my hearin's jus' as hard as w'at it useter be.
If a feller has good judgment, an' uses it that way,
He can almos' allers manage to git consid'ble play.

But jus' w'ile I am playin', an' prob'ly I am "it,"
They's somethin' diff'rent happens, an' I have to up, an' git,
Fer my pa comes to the doorway, an' he interrup's our glee;
He jus' says, "William Henry!" but that's enough fer me.
You'd be surprised to notice how quickly I can hear
W'en my pa says, "William Henry!" but never "Willie, dear!"
Fer though my hearin's middlin' bad to hear the voice of ma,
It's apt to show improvement w'en the callin' comes from pa.




The Service Flag


Dear little flag in the window there,
Hung with a tear and a woman's prayer,
Child of Old Glory, born with a star--
Oh, what a wonderful flag you are!

Blue is your star in its field of white,
Dipped in the red that was born of fight;
Born of the blood that our forebears shed
To raise your mother, The Flag, o'er-head.

And now you've come, in this frenzied day,
To speak from a window--to speak and say:
"I am the voice of a soldier son,
Gone, to be gone till the victory's won.

"I am the flag of The Service, sir:
The flag of his mother--I speak for her
Who stands by my window and waits and fears,
But hides from the others her unwept tears.

"I am the flag of the wives who wait
For the safe return of a martial mate--
A mate gone forth where the war god thrives,
To save from sacrifice other men's wives.

"I am the flag of the sweethearts true;
The often unthought of--the sisters, too.
I am the flag of a mother's son,
Who won't come home till the victory's won!"

Dear little flag in the window there,
Hung with a tear and a woman's prayer,
Child of Old Glory, born with a star--
Oh, what a wonderful flag you are!

    _William Herschell._




Flying Jim's Last Leap

(_The hero of this tale had once been a famous trapeze performer._)


Cheeriest room, that morn, the kitchen. Helped by Bridget's willing hands,
Bustled Hannah, deftly mixing pies, for ready waiting pans.
Little Flossie flitted round them, and her curling, floating hair
Glinted gold-like, gleamed and glistened, in the sparkling sunlit air;
Slouched a figure o'er the lawn; a man so wretched and forlore,
Tattered, grim, so like a beggar, ne'er had trod that path before.
His shirt was torn, his hat was gone, bare and begrimed his knees,
Face with blood and dirt disfigured, elbows peeped from out his sleeves.
Rat-tat-tat, upon the entrance, brought Aunt Hannah to the door;
Parched lips humbly plead for water, as she scanned his misery o'er;
Wrathful came the dame's quick answer; made him cower, shame, and start
Out of sight, despairing, saddened, hurt and angry to the heart.
"_Drink_! You've had enough, you rascal. Faugh! The smell now makes me
      sick,
Move, you thief! Leave now these grounds, sir, or our dogs will help you
      quick."
Then the man with dragging footsteps hopeless, wishing himself dead,
Crept away from sight of plenty, starved in place of being fed,
Wandered farther from the mansion, till he reached a purling brook,
Babbling, trilling broken music by a green and shady nook,
Here sweet Flossie found him fainting; in her hands were food and drink;
Pale like death lay he before her, yet the child-heart did not shrink;
Then the rags from off his forehead, she with dainty hands offstripped,
In the brooklet's rippling waters, her own lace-trimmed 'kerchief dipped;
Then with sweet and holy pity, which, within her, did not daunt,
Bathed the blood and grime-stained visage of that sin-soiled son of want.
Wrung she then the linen cleanly, bandaged up the wound again
Ere the still eyes opened slowly; white lips murmuring, "Am I sane?"
"Look, poor man, here's food and drink. Now thank our God before you
      take."
Paused he mute and undecided, while deep sobs his form did shake
With an avalanche of feeling, and great tears came rolling down
O'er a face unused to showing aught except a sullen frown;
That "our God" unsealed a fountain his whole life had never known,
When that human angel near him spoke of her God as his own.
"Is it 'cause my aunty grieved you?" Quickly did the wee one ask.
"I'll tell you my little verse then, 'tis a holy Bible task,
It may help you to forgive her: 'Love your enemies and those
Who despitefully may use you; love them whether friends or foes!'"

