
"I should be proud of them, Major Drummond," said Thirza,
"considering that you got them in so great a battle, and one in
which you rendered such service to the king."

"You see, I shall not be always able to explain when and how I got
them," Fergus laughed. "People who do not know me will say:

"'There goes a young student, who has got his face slashed at the
university.'"

"They could not say that," she said indignantly. "Even if you were
not in uniform, anyone can see that you are a soldier."

"Whether or not, Countess Thirza, it is a matter that will
certainly trouble me very little. However, I begin to think that I
shall not always be a soldier. Certainly, I should not leave the
army as long as this war goes on; but I have seen such terrible
fighting, such tremendous carnage, that I think that at the end of
it, if I come out at the end, I shall be glad to take to a peaceful
life. My cousin, Marshal Keith, has been fighting all his life. He
is a great soldier, and has the honour of being regarded by the
king as his friend; but he has no home, no peace and quiet, no
children growing up to take his place. I should not like to look
forward to such a life, and would rather go back and pass my days
in the Scottish glens where I was brought up."

"I think that you are right," the count said seriously. "In
ordinary times a soldier's life would be a pleasant one, and he
could reckon upon the occasional excitement of war; but such a war
as this is beyond all calculation. In these three campaigns, and
the present one is not ended, nigh half of the army which marched
through here has been killed or wounded. It is terrible to think
of. One talks of the chances of war, but this is making death
almost a certainty; for if the war continues another two or three
years, how few will be left of those who began it!

"Even now a great battle will probably be fought, in a few days.
Two great armies are within as many marches of Dresden. The
smallest of them outnumbers Frederick. The other is fully twice his
strength, and so intrenched, as I hear, that the position is
well-nigh impregnable."

"I expect the king will find means to force him out of it, without
fighting," Fergus said with a smile. "Daun is altogether over
cautious, and Leuthen is not likely to have rendered him more
confident."

Fergus spent the greater part of his time at the count's, for
Marshal Keith insisted upon his abstaining from all duty, until the
march began.

"We are off tomorrow morning," he said, when he went up on the
evening of the 30th of September. "Where, I know not. Except the
king, Marshal Keith, and Prince Maurice, I do not suppose that
anyone knows; but wherever it is, we start at daybreak."

"May you return, ere long, safe and sound!" the count said. "Is
there nothing that we can do for you? You know we regard you as one
of the family, and there is nothing that would give us greater
pleasure than to be able, in some way, to make you comfortable."

"I thank you heartily, count, but I need nothing; and if I did I
could purchase it, for it is but seldom that one has to put one's
hand in one's pocket; and as a captain I have saved the greater
part of my pay for the last two years, and shall pile up my hoard
still faster, now that I am a major.

"I have never had an opportunity, before, of thanking you for that
purse which you handed to Karl, to be laid out for my benefit in
case of need. He holds it still, and I have never had occasion to
draw upon it, and hope that I never may have to do so."

The next morning the army, furnished with nine days' provisions,
and leaving a force to face the army of the Confederates, strode
along the road at its usual pace. They took the road for Bautzen,
drove off Loudon (who commanded Daun's northern outposts) without
difficulty, and so passed his flank. The advance guard pushed on to
Bautzen, drove away the small force there and, leaving there the
magazines of the army, occupied Hochkirch, a few miles away. The
king with the main body arrived at Bautzen on the following day,
and halted there, to see what Daun was going to do.

The latter was, in fact, obliged to abandon his stronghold; for the
Prussians, at Hochkirch, menaced the road by which he drew his
provisions from his magazines at Zittau. Marching at night, he
reached and occupied a line of hills between Hochkirch and Zittau,
and within a couple of miles of the former place.

Frederick had been forced to wait, at Bautzen, till another convoy
of provisions arrived. When he joined the division at Hochkirch,
and saw Daun's army on the opposite hills, busy as usual in
intrenching itself, he ordered the army to encamp when they were
within a mile of Daun's position.

Marwitz, the staff officer to whom he gave the order, argued and
remonstrated, and at length refused to be concerned in the marking
out of such an encampment. He was at once put under arrest, and
another officer did the work. Frederick, in fact, entertained a
sovereign contempt for Daun, with his slow marches, his perpetual
intrenchings, and his obstinate caution; and had no belief,
whatever, that the Austrian marshal would attempt to attack him. He
was in a very bad humour, too, having discovered that Retzow had
failed to take possession of the Stromberg, a detached hill which
would have rendered the position a safe one. He put him under
arrest, and ordered the Stromberg to be occupied.

The next morning the force proceeding to do so found, however, that
the post was already occupied by Austrians; who resisted stoutly
and, being largely reinforced, maintained their position on the
hill, on which several batteries were placed. It was now Tuesday,
and Frederick determined to march away on the Saturday.

His obstinacy had placed the army in an altogether untenable and
dangerous position. All his officers were extremely uneasy, and
Keith declared to the king that the Austrians deserved to be hanged
if they did not attack; to which Frederick replied:

"We must hope that they are more afraid of us than even of the
gallows."



Chapter 13: Hochkirch.


The village of Hochkirch stood on a hilltop, with an extensive view
for miles round on all sides; save on the south, where hills rose
one above another. Among these hills was one called the Devil's
Hill, where the primitive country people believed that the devil
and his witches held high festival, once a year.

Frederick's right wing, which was commanded by Keith, lay in
Hochkirch. Beyond the village he had four battalions, and a battery
of twenty guns on the next height to Hochkirch. From this point to
the Devil's Hill extended a thick wood, in which a strong body of
Croats were lurking. Frederick, with the centre, extended four
miles to the left of Hochkirch. Retzow, who had been restored to
his command, had ten or twelve thousand men lying in or behind
Weissenberg, four miles away.

Frederick's force, with that of Keith, amounted to twenty-eight
thousand men, and Retzow's command was too far away to be
considered as available. Daun's force, lying within a mile of
Hochkirch, amounted to ninety thousand men. Well might Keith say
that the Austrians deserved to be hanged, if they did not attack.
Frederick himself was somewhat uneasy, and would have moved away on
the Friday night, had he not been waiting for the arrival of a
convoy of provisions from Bautzen. Still, he relied upon Daun's
inactivity.

This time, however, his reliance was falsified. All Daun's generals
were of opinion that it would be disgraceful, were they to stand on
the defensive against an army practically less than a third of
their force; and their expostulations at length roused Daun into
activity. Once decided, his dispositions were, as usual, excellent.


[Map: Battle of Hochkirch]


His plan was an able one. He himself, with thirty thousand men, was
to start as soon as it was dark on Friday evening, sweep round to
the south, follow the base of the Devil's Mountain, and then
through the hollows and thick wood till he was close to the force
on the right of Hochkirch; and was to fall suddenly on them, at
five o'clock on Saturday morning. The orders were that, as soon as
Hochkirch was taken, the rest of the army, sixty thousand strong,
were to march against Frederick, both in front and on his left, and
so completely smash and crumple him up.

Frederick had no premonition of the storm that was gathering. On
Thursday and Friday the Austrians were engaged, as usual, in
felling trees, forming abattis, throwing up earthworks, and in all
ways strengthening their position. Everything seemed to show that
Daun was still bent upon standing upon the defensive only.

As the lurking Croats and Pandoors had, every night, crept up
through the brushwood and hollows, and skirmished with the Prussian
outposts away on the right, scattered firing was not heeded much in
Hochkirch. Fergus had just got up, in the little room he shared
with Lindsay in the marshal's quarters, a mile north of Hochkirch;
and was putting on his boots when, a few minutes past five, the
sound of firing was heard.

"There are the Croats, as usual," he said.

"What a restless fellow you are, Drummond! You have been up, at
this unearthly hour, each morning since we got here. It won't be
light for another two hours yet. I doubt whether it will be light
then. It looks to me as if it were a thick fog."

"You are right about my early hours, and I admit I have been
restless. It is not a pleasant idea that, but a mile away, there is
an army big enough to eat us up; and nothing whatever to prevent
their pouncing upon us, at any moment, except two or three
batteries. The marshal was saying, last night, he should regard it
as the most fortunate escape he ever had, if we drew off safely
tonight without being attacked.

"That firing is heavier than usual. There go a couple of guns!"

"Those two advanced pieces are sending a round or two of case shot
into the bushes, I suppose," Lindsay said drowsily.

Fergus completed his dressing, and went downstairs and out into the
night. Here he could hear much better than in the room above; which
had but one loophole for air and light, and that was almost stopped
up, with a wisp of straw. He could now plainly hear volley firing,
and a continued crackle of musketry. He ran upstairs again.

"You had better get your things on at once, Lindsay. It is a more
serious affair than usual. I shall take it upon myself to wake the
marshal."

He went to Keith's door, knocked, and opened it.

"Who is there? What is it?" the marshal asked.

"It is I, Drummond, sir. There is heavy firing going on to the
right, much heavier than it has been any other night."

"What o'clock is it?"

"About ten minutes past five, sir. There is a thick mist, and it is
pitch dark. Shall I go over and inquire what is going on?"

"Yes, do. I expect that those rascally Croats have been reinforced,
and are trying to find out whether we are still in our positions."

"I will be back as soon as I can, sir."

Fergus ran round to the low range of sheds in which their horses
were stabled.

"Karl, are you there?" he shouted.

"Yes, major," a voice said, close at hand. "I am listening to all
that firing."

"Saddle up at once. You may as well ride with me. I am going to see
what it is all about."

A lantern was burning in the shed, and by its light Fergus and the
orderly rapidly saddled the horses.

"You had better light two more lanterns, Karl. Leave the one on the
wall burning. We will take the others. We shall want them, for one
cannot see a horse's length away; and if we had not the sound of
firing to guide us, we should soon lose our way altogether."

The light enabled them to go at a fairly fast trot, but they
trusted rather to their horses' than to their own eyes. The roar
and rattle of the firing increased in volume, every minute.

"That is more than an affair with the Croats, Karl."

"A good deal more, major. It looks as if the Austrians were beating
up our quarters in earnest."

"It does indeed."

When they reached Hochkirch they found the troops there astir. The
cavalry trumpets were sounding to horse, and the clamour round the
village told that the troops encamped there were getting under
arms.

"Do you know what is going on to the right, sir?" Fergus asked a
field officer, who was in the act of mounting. "Marshal Keith has
sent me to inquire."

"Not in the least; but as far as I can tell by the sound, they must
be attacking us in force, and they seem to be working round in rear
of our battery there. The sound is certainly coming this way."

"Then I will go on to the battery," Fergus said.

He had ridden but a little way farther, when he was convinced that
the officer was right. The crash of musketry volleys rose
continuously, but although the boom of guns was mingled with it,
there was nothing like the continuous fire that might have been
expected from a twenty-gun battery.

Suddenly from his right a crackle of firing broke out, and then
heavy volleys. The bullets sung overhead.

"They are attacking us in the rear, sir, sure enough," Karl said.

"I am afraid they have captured our big battery, Karl," Fergus
said, as he turned his horse.

It was but a few hundred yards back to the village but, just as he
reached it, a roar of fire broke out from its rear. They could make
their way but slowly along the streets, so crowded were they now
with infantry who, unable to see until a yard or two away, could
not make room for them to pass, as they would otherwise have done
for a staff officer. With feverish impatience Fergus pushed on,
until the road was clear; but even now he had to go comparatively
slowly, for unless they kept to the track across the open ground
that led to the farmhouse, they must miss it altogether.

Lights were moving about there as he rode up. Keith himself was at
the door, and the orderlies were bringing up the horses.

"What is it, Major Drummond?"

"It is an attack in force, sir, on the right flank and rear. The
enemy have crept up between Hochkirch and our battery, and as I
came through the village they were attacking it in rear. I cannot
say for certain, but I believe that the battery is taken, though
there is a heavy infantry fire still going on there."

"Ride to Ziethen, Captain Lindsay. Give him the news, and tell him
to fall upon the Austrians.

"Captain Cosser and Captain Gaudy, ride off to the infantry and
bring them up at the double.

"I will take on the Kannaker battalion myself," and he rode down at
once to the camp of this battalion, which was but a hundred yards
away; despatching others of his staff to hasten up the regiments
near.

The Kannaker battalion was already under arms, and marched off with
him as soon as he arrived.

"I am going to the left of the village, Fergus, and shall make for
the battery, which we must retake. Do you go first into Hochkirch,
and see how matters go there. If badly, give my order to the
colonel of the first battalion that comes along, and tell him to
throw himself into the village and assist to hold it to the last.
After that, you must be guided by circumstances. It is doubtful if
you will ever find me again, in this black mist."

Fergus handed his lantern to Keith's orderly, who took his place at
the side of the marshal as the regiment went off at the double.
Fergus rode up to the village. It was scarce twenty minutes since
he had left it, but it was evident that a furious fight was raging
there, and that the Austrians had already penetrated some distance
into its streets. Without hesitation he turned and rode back again
and, in a few minutes, met a dark body of men coming along at a
rapid run.

"Where is the colonel?" he asked, reining in his horse suddenly,
for he had nearly ridden into the midst of them.

"Just ahead of us, to the right, sir."

In a minute Fergus was beside him. By the light that Karl carried,
he recognized him.

"Major Lange," he said, "I have the marshal's orders that you
should march into Hochkirch, and hold it to the last. The Austrians
are already in partial possession of it."

"Which way is it, Major Drummond? For in this mist I have almost
lost my direction, and there seems to be firing going on everywhere
ahead."

"I will direct you," Fergus said. "I have just come from there;"
and he trotted back to the village.

As they approached Hochkirch it was evident that, although the
defenders were still clinging to its outskirts, the greater portion
was lost; but with a cheer the battalion rushed forward, and was in
a moment fiercely engaged. Major Lange's horse fell dead under him,
struck by an Austrian bullet. Fergus rode into the first house he
came to, dismounted, and left his horse there.

"You may as well leave yours here too, Karl. We can do no good with
them, and should only be in the way. When it begins to get light,
we will try and find the marshal.

"You may as well get hold of the first musket and ammunition pouch
that you can pick up. There will be enough for every man to do to
hold this place until more reinforcements come up."

A desperate struggle went on in the streets. The Prussians who had
been driven back joined the battalion just arrived. Bayonets and
the butt-end of the musket were used, rather than shot; for in the
mist friend could not be distinguished from foe five yards away,
and it was from their shouts rather than by their uniforms that men
knew whether they had one or other in front of them. Karl was not
long in finding arms and, taking his place in the ranks, was soon
at work with the others.

The village was almost circular in shape, clustered as it were on
the top of the hill. The struggle was not confined to one street,
but raged in half a dozen, more or less parallel with each other.
Gradually the Prussians pressed forward, and had more than half
cleared the village when their advance was checked by the arrival
of fresh battalions of the Austrians. Then Lange threw his men into
the church and churchyard, and there stubbornly maintained himself.

Soon flames burst out from various directions, giving a welcome
light to the defenders, and enabling them to keep up so heavy a
fire upon the now swarming enemy that they repulsed each attack
made upon them. Eight battalions of Austrians in vain tried to
capture the position, attacking it on every side; but the stubborn
Prussians held firmly to it.

Meanwhile beyond, as far as the battery, the fight raged. The
Plothow battalion, which had been stationed in advance of it, had
been attacked and enveloped on all sides by the Austrians; but had
defended themselves splendidly and, though forced back by sheer
weight of numbers, had maintained their order and done heavy
execution by their fire. The battery had been lost, but those who
had been driven out rallied and, with the Plothow men, made so
furious a rush forward that they hurled the Austrians out again. It
was but for a few minutes, for such masses of the enemy poured up
through the mist that there was no withstanding them, and many of
the Prussians were taken prisoners. Their captivity was of short
duration, for through the mist Ziethen's horse burst out suddenly
into the raging tumult, scattered the Austrians, released the
prisoners, and were then off to fall upon fresh enemies, as soon as
they discovered their position.

Everywhere isolated combats took place. Battalion after battalion,
and squadron after squadron, as it arrived, flung itself upon the
first enemy it came upon in the darkness. Keith, on reaching the
battery, again retook it; but again the Austrian masses obtained
possession.

In and around Hochkirch, similar desperate struggles were going on.
None fled but, falling back until meeting another battalion
hastening up, reformed and charged again. Ziethen's horse, together
with the rest of the cavalry and gendarmes, mingled with staff
officers and others who had lost their way, continued to make
furious charges against the Austrians pressing round the rear of
the position, and holding them in check.

Until its cartridges were all spent, Lange's battalion held the
churchyard, though its numbers were terribly lessened by the
Austrian fire. Then the major called upon his men to form in a
mass, and cut their way through the enemy with the bayonet. This
they most gallantly did, losing many; but the remnant emerged from
the village, their gallant leader, wounded to death, among them.

Fergus and Karl separated themselves from them, ran to the house
where they had left their horses, mounted, and galloped off. By
this time the centre was coming up, led by the king himself. As
they neared Hochkirch a cannonball took off the head of Frank of
Brunswick, the king's youngest brother-in-law. Prince Maurice of
Dessau, riding in the dark till within twenty yards of the
Austrians, was badly hit; and the storm of case and musket bullets
that swept the approaches to Hochkirch was so terrible that
Frederick's battalion had to fall back.

"The first thing is to find the marshal," Fergus said, as he rode
out of Hochkirch. "He must be somewhere to the right."


[Illustration: Before he could extricate himself, Fergus
was surrounded by Austrians]


He galloped on until a flash of fire burst out, a few yards in
front. His horse fell dead under him and, before he could extricate
himself from it, he was surrounded by Austrians. An officer shouted
to him to surrender and, seeing the hopelessness of resistance, he
at once did so.

He looked round and, to his satisfaction, saw nothing of Karl. He
was placed in the midst of the Austrian regiment, under the charge
of a sergeant, and told that he would be shot if he tried to
escape.

Frederick, with more battalions that had come up, pushed on;
thrusting the Austrians back until he had left Hochkirch on his
left. But by this time it was past eight o'clock, the fog was
dispersing, and he saw a great body of Austrians on the heights to
his right, from Waditz to Meschduitz, as well as on the whole line
of heights on the left. His only line of retreat, therefore, was
along at the foot of the Dressau heights.

These he ordered to be seized, at once. This was done before the
Austrians could reach the spot, they being hindered by furious
charges by Ziethen, from the open ground between Kumschutz and
Canitz; and Frederick rearranged his front of battle, and waited
for Retzow to come up with the left wing.

