think more of the perfect ONE. I often have thought, Hamilton, of that
little girl's nice remark that I read to you last Sunday, about the
good and perfect gifts."

Hamilton did not reply, and for a minute or two longer they sat in
silence, when the report of a gun at a little distance roused them,
and almost at the same instant, a little bird Louis had been watching
as it flew into a large tree in front of them, fell wounded from branch
to branch, until it rested on the lowest, where a flutter among the
leaves told of its helpless sufferings.

"I must get it, Hamilton!" cried Louis, starting up. "It is wounded."

"The branch is too high," said Hamilton. "I dare say the poor thing is
dying; we cannot do it any good."

"Indeed I must try!" exclaimed Louis, scrambling partly up the immense
trunk of the tree, and slipping down much more quickly. "I wish there
were something to catch hold of, or to rest one's foot against."

"You'll never get up," said Hamilton, laughing; "if you must get it,
mount my shoulders."

As he spoke he came under the tree, and Louis, availing himself of
the proffered assistance, succeeded in reaching and bringing down the
wounded bird, which he did with many expressions of gratitude to Hamilton.

"I am sure you ought to be obliged," said Frank. "Royalty lending itself
out as a ladder is an unheard-of anomaly. Pray, what are you going to do
with cock-sparrow now you have got him?"

Louis only replied by laying some grass and leaves in the bottom of
his cap, and putting the bird on this extempore bed. He then seized
Hamilton's arm and urged him forward. Hamilton responded to Louis'
anxiety with some queries on the expediency of assisting wounded
birds if pleasant walks were to be thereby curtailed, and Frank,
after suggesting, to Louis' horror, the propriety of making a pie
of his favorite, walked on, singing,

    "A little cock-sparrow sat upon a tree,"

which, with variations, lasted till they reached the playground gates,
where Louis ran off to find Clifton, that he might enter into proper
arrangements for due attendance on his sparrow's wants.




CHAPTER XVII.

  "In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin; but he that
   refraineth his lips is wise."--Prov. x. 19.

  "Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
   and not thine own lips."--Prov. xxvii. 2.


We are now considering Louis Mortimer under prosperity; a state
in which it is much more difficult to be watchful, than in that
of adversity. When he first came to school, his struggle was to
be consistent in maintaining his principles against ridicule and
fear of his fellow-creatures' judgment. In that he nearly failed;
and then came the hard trial we have related, the furnace from
whose fires he came so bright: and another trial awaited him, but
different still.

By the beauty of conduct Divine grace _alone_ had enabled him to observe,
he now won the regard of the majority of his school-fellows; and no one
meddled with him or his opinions. He was loved by many; liked by most,
and unmolested by the rest. We are told, "When a man's ways please the
Lord, even his enemies are at peace with him;" and this was Louis'
case. If a few remarks were now and then made on the singularity and
stiffness of his notions, the countenance of the seniors, and the
general estimation in which he was held, prevented any annoyance or
interference. His feet were now on smooth ground, and the sky was
bright above his head; and he began to forget that a storm had
ever been.

One day between school-hours, when Louis and his brother were diligently
drilling the chorus, they were summoned to the drawing-room, where they
found the doctor standing talking with a lady, in the large bay-window.
Her face was turned towards the prospect beyond, and she did not see
them enter; and near her, leaning on the top of a high-backed chair,
stood a tall gentlemanly youth, whom Louis immediately recognized as
Mrs. Paget's esquire. The lady was speaking as they entered, and her
gentle lady-like tones fell very pleasantly on Louis' ears, and made
him sure he should like her, if even the words she had chosen had been
otherwise.

"I have been quite curious to see him; my sister has said so much,
poor little fellow!"

Dr. Wilkinson at this moment became aware of the presence of his pupils,
and, turning round, introduced them to the lady, and the lady in turn
to them, as Mrs. Norman.

"I am personally a stranger to you, Master Mortimer," said Mrs. Norman;
"but I have often heard of you. You know Mrs. Paget?"

"Oh, yes!" replied Louis.

"She is my sister, and, not being able to come herself to-day, she
commissioned me to bring an invitation for you and your brother to
spend the rest of this day with her, if Dr. Wilkinson will kindly
allow it."

[Illustration: The invitation.]

Louis looked at Dr. Wilkinson; and Reginald answered for himself--

"I am much obliged, ma'am; and, if you please, thank Mrs. Paget
for me, but as it is not a half-holiday, I shall not be able to
come this afternoon. I shall be very glad to come when school is
over, if Dr. Wilkinson will allow me."

Dr. Wilkinson smiled. "Mrs. Norman will, I am sure, excuse a
school-boy's anxiety to retain a hard-earned place in his class,"
he said. "I have given my permission, you may do as you please."

"Mrs. Paget will be so much disappointed," said Mrs. Norman;
"are you anxious about your class, too, Master Louis?"

Louis blushed, hesitated, and then looked from Reginald to the doctor,
but Dr. Wilkinson gave no assistance. Louis demurred a little; for he
had a place to lose that he had gained only the day before, and that,
probably, he might not be able to gain from Clifton for the rest of the
half-year. But at length, on another persuasive remark from Mrs. Norman,
he accepted the invitation in rather a confused manner; and, it being
decided that Reginald was to join them at dinner, he went away to make
some alteration in his dress. When he returned, Mrs. Norman carried
him off in her carriage, which was waiting at the door, having first
introduced him to her companion, as her son, Henry Norman.

During the ride to Clifton, Louis became very communicative. He liked
Mrs. Norman very much, she was so very sweet, and now and then made
little remarks that reminded Louis of home; and then he was sure she
liked him; even if he had not guessed that the few words he first heard
from her lips referred to him, her very kind full eyes and affectionate
manner spoke of unusual interest, and Louis felt very anxious to rise
in her estimation. Things that are not sinful in themselves, become
sins from the accompanying motives; the desire of favor in the eyes
of so excellent a person was not wrong, had it been mixed with a wish
to adorn the doctrine of Christ, and thankfulness for the love and favor
given; but now Louis talked of things which, though he really believed
them, and of feelings which, though he had once really experienced them,
were not now the breathings of a heart that overflowed with all its
fulness of gratitude. He had quickness enough to see what was most
precious in his new friend's sight, and tried to ingratiate himself
with her, by dwelling on these subjects, and showing how much he had
felt on them. _Had felt_, for he had "left his first love."

Let it not be supposed that Louis meant to deceive--he deceived himself
as much as any one; but he was in that sad state when a Christian has
backslidden so far as to live on the remembrance of old joys, instead
of the actual possession of new.

The carriage stopped, at length, at a house in York Crescent, where the
trio alighted. Mrs. Norman led Louis up stairs into the drawing-room,
while her son, who had scarcely spoken a word during the drive, stayed
a minute or two at the house-door, and then ran down the nearest flight
of steps leading to the carriage-road, jumped into the carriage, which
was just driving off, and paid a visit to the stables.

The room into which Louis entered was very large, and littered so
with all descriptions of chairs, stools, and non-descript elegancies,
that it required some little ingenuity to reach the further end without
upsetting the one, or being overthrown by the others. Near one of the
three windows, reclining on a sofa, was Mrs. Paget, who welcomed Louis
with her usual warmth.

"You see," said she, "I am a prisoner. I sprained my ankle the very
day I saw you; and I am positively forbidden to walk. But where is
Master Reginald?"

Louis informed Mrs. Paget of his brother's intentions, and, after
expressing her regrets at his non-appearance, the lady continued:

"Now, sit near me, and let us have a little talk; I want to hear
how you are going on, and how many prizes you are likely to get.
But, perhaps, my dear, you would like to go on the downs, or into
the town, or to----Where's Henry, I wonder: where is Mr. Norman?"
she asked of a servant who came to remove a little tray that stood
beside her.

"Just gone round to the stables, ma'am."

"Dear, how unfortunate! You can't think what a beautiful little horse
he has; I tell him it is quite a lady's horse. He will show it to you.
I can't think how he could go away this afternoon. You'll be very dull,
my dear--but my sister will take you out."

Louis assured her he should enjoy sitting with her.

"That is very kind of you; very few of your age would care about
staying with a lame, fidgety, old woman."

Louis protested against the two last epithets, and as Mrs. Norman
had left the room he began talking of the pleasant ride he had had
with her, and how much he loved her.

Mrs. Paget warmly admitted every thing, only adding that in some
things she was a little too particular.

"But, dear me! you must be very hungry," she exclaimed, interrupting
herself. "How could I forget? Just ring the bell, dear boy--there's
lunch down stairs. Oh, never mind, here is Charlotte."

As she spoke, Mrs. Norman re-entered, and took Louis down to lunch.

When he returned to the drawing-room, Mrs. Paget had her sofa moved
so as to face the window, and a little table was placed in front of
her. A low armchair was near her for Louis, and another quite in the
window Mrs. Norman took possession of, when she had provided herself
with some work.

"Oh, what a beautiful view!" exclaimed Louis, as he looked for the
first time out of the window. "How very, very beautiful! I think this
is the pleasantest situation in Clifton."

"It is very beautiful," said Mrs. Norman. "But you have a magnificent
prospect at Dr. Wilkinson's."

"Dr. Wilkinson's is a very nice place, I believe, is it not?" said
Mrs. Paget. "It is a pity such a pretty place should be a school."

"Nay," said Mrs. Norman, smiling; "why should you grudge the poor
boys their pleasure?"

"I don't think they appreciate it," said Mrs. Paget; "and, poor
fellows, they are always so miserable that they might as well be
miserable somewhere else."

"We are not at all miserable after the first week," said Louis.

"I thought you were not to go to school again, my dear," said
Mrs. Paget.

"So I thought, myself, but papa wished me to go, and he is the
best judge."

"Well, dear it's a very nice thing that you are wise enough to see
it,--and you are happy?"

"I should be very ungrateful not to be so ma'am; Dr. Wilkinson and
all the boys are so kind to me this half. It is so different from
the first quarter spent at school."

"They are kind, are they? Well, I dare say; they couldn't help it,
I'm sure," replied Mrs. Paget. "I suppose you will have the medal
again this half year. I am sure you ought to have it to make up."

"Oh, but I shouldn't have it to make up for last half, ma'am,"
said Louis, smiling.

"But you will get it, I dare say," said the lady.

"I don't know," said Louis; "perhaps--I think I have a very good
chance yet, but we never can tell exactly what Dr. Wilkinson thinks
about us. There are only one or two I am afraid of."

"I should think you needn't be afraid of any," said Mrs. Paget. "I
told you, Charlotte, about that story we heard at Heronhurst last
summer--dear boy--you know he bore--"

"Yes," interrupted Mrs. Norman. "You have a large number of
school-fellows, Master Louis," she added.

"Yes, ma'am, there are seventy-six of us this half, so many that
we hardly know the names of the lower school."

"Is that M. _Ferrar_ or _Ferrers_ there still?" asked Mrs. Paget.

"Yes, ma'am, and he is so much improved, you cannot think."

Louis looked very earnestly at her as she spoke, and she put her
hand on his forehead, stroking his hair off, while she replied,

"He is very happy in having so kind a friend, I am sure; he ought
to have been expelled."

"Oh no, ma'am--I think kindness was much the best way," said Louis;
and remembering how incautiously he had spoken of him before, he said
all that he could in his praise.

The conversation then turned upon the school in general, and it
was astonishing to watch how much Louis said indirectly in his own
praise, and how nearly every thing seemed to turn in the direction
of _dear self_, in the history of his lessons, progress, and rivals--and
even when it branched off to his friends, among whom in the first rank
stood Hamilton.

"You would so like Hamilton, he is so kind to me. I told you about him
before," said Louis, eagerly.

"Is that the young gentleman who had charge of you the other day?"
asked Mrs. Paget.

Louis answered in the affirmative.

"I did not much like him, only one doesn't judge people fairly
at first, often."

"Oh, Hamilton's such a good creature!" exclaimed Louis, in his energy
letting fall one end of a skein of silk he was holding. He gathered it
up, apologized, and resumed his defence of his friend.

"He is, perhaps, a little blunt, but he is so sincere, and so steady
and kind, Dr. Wilkinson is very, _very_ fond of him, I know; he
makes me sit by him every night, and I learn my lessons with him.
I am sure if it were not for him I should be terribly behind Clifton."

"I saw them coming out of Redland Chapel yesterday morning," said
Mrs. Paget. "At least I saw Mr. Hamilton, but I did not see you."

Louis informed her of the division of the school on Sunday, and she
continued,

"I noticed a very aristocratic young gentleman with Mr. Hamilton--quite
a contrast, so very handsome and elegant; who was he?"

"Was he tall?" asked Louis; "and dressed in black, with a light
waistcoat?"

"I don't know what waistcoat he had," said Mrs. Paget, laughing.
"His dress was in perfect gentlemanly taste. He was, I should think,
tall for his age, and had dark hair and eyes."

"I have no doubt it was Trevannion; he is the handsomest fellow in the
school, except Salisbury."

"That he is not," said Mrs. Paget, significantly.

Louis blushed, and felt rather foolish, certainly not wholly insensible
to the injudicious hint.

"Only Fred Salisbury is so different: he is not elegant, and yet he
is not awkward; he is rough and ready, and says all kinds of vulgar
things. He is very much liked among us, but I don't think Trevannion
is, though he gets his own way a great deal: he thinks nobody is equal
to himself, I know, but I am sure he is not a favorite."

"Why not?" said Mrs. Paget.

"He is so very selfish, and so contemptuous, and so dreadfully offended
if Hamilton does not treat him with the deference he wants. I think we
know more of each other than any one else does, and no one would think,
in company, when Trevannion is smiling and talking so cleverly, that he
is so unamiable."

"He does not look like an ill-tempered person," said the lady.

"I don't think he is what is generally called an ill-tempered person;
for he never puts himself into passions, nor does he seem to mind many
things that make others very angry. But he is sometimes dreadfully
disdainful and haughty when any one offends him, and especially when
Hamilton seems to like anybody as well as himself. Only last Saturday
he was so much affronted because Hamilton had asked leave for me to go
into Bristol with him. When he found I was coming, he wouldn't go with
us. I think he is very jealous of me, though I begged Hamilton to let
me stay at home, and I was just going after him to call him back, only
Hamilton wouldn't let me. I did not like to see such old friends quarrel.
I am sure I would very gladly have stayed at home to keep peace."

"I am quite sure of that," said Mrs. Paget. "But how came your perfect
Mr. Hamilton to choose such a friend?"

"I have often wondered," said Louis; "and last Saturday, when that
happened that I told you of just now, and Hamilton (he is so kind)
said he wouldn't give me up for anybody, he said he thought he made
Trevannion his friend because he was too lazy to find another for
himself."

"_Too lazy to find another?_" repeated Mrs. Paget.

"Hamilton does not like taking trouble, generally," said Louis;
"it is his greatest fault, I think. He takes things as they come.
I have often wished he would concern himself a little more about
the wrong things that go on among us. You know it would be of no
use my speaking about them, though I try sometimes; it is so much
easier to do right when the great boys support you."

"So it is, dear," said Mrs. Paget, kindly.

Mrs. Norman had scarcely spoken during the whole conversation, though
she had once or twice laid down her work and looked very gravely at
Louis; but he had not noticed it; for he was so elated with himself,
and the relations of his own importance at school, and the idea of his
superiority above his school-fellows, that there was no room for any
thing else in his head, and he went on with the firm conviction that
both the ladies were, like every one else, extremely delighted and
interested in him and his sentiments. There had been another auditor
in the room almost ever since the beginning of the long chat, and that
