the Eagle that was in their hearts almost eternal.

It was to receive their Eagle again that these officers and men had
been summoned.  They did not know that definitely yet, but some whisper
of it had been in the air.  They were on the _qui vive_ for the
developments of the evening and full of restless excitement.  When the
great door was at last thrown open and the Senior Captain caught sight
of the tall, lean figure of his commander, he instantly came to
attention and said sharply:

"Gentlemen, attention.  The Major Commanding."

To be sure, Lestoype no longer occupied that position.  His place had
been taken by the Marquis d'Aumenier, but in the mind of the Senior
Captain and of the others the old Major still was supreme and he said
the words quite naturally.

The talking ceased at once, the well-drilled officers and men stood at
attention, their hands raised in salute.  Major Lestoype in full
uniform, his breast bright with all his medals and orders--and it was
observable that everybody else had adorned himself with every
decoration he possessed, even those that had become illegal and
valueless, forbidden even, after the fall of the Empire--entered the
room, acknowledged the salutes and bowed ceremoniously to the officers
assembled.  He was followed by a tall slender young man on this
occasion dressed again in the uniform of the regiment.

And yet there was a difference between this stranger and the other
officers.  While from the uniforms of the other officers had been
carefully removed everything which in the least degree suggested the
Empire, no such deletion had taken place with the equipment of the
young man.  On the contrary, the buttons, the brasses, the braids, the
tricolored cockade; in short, everything was just as it was before the
restoration.

The eyes of the soldiers gleamed as they immediately recognized the
difference.  They looked upon him with a certain envy, because he so
boldly sported that of which they were deprived.  At first they did not
recognize the man who had the hardihood thus to display the insignia of
Napoleon in the kingdom of Louis.  It was not until he had advanced
further in the room and stood in the full light of the chandelier and
Major Lestoype turned toward him that one of the veterans recognized
him.

"By the living God," cried a deep voice, "Marteau!"

Instantly the name was caught up.

"Marteau!  Marteau!  Marteau!" came from all parts of the room.

"Gentlemen, comrades," said Lestoype, raising his hand, "I beseech you,
silence.  Walls have ears.  Every man here is tried and true.  We are
trusting our lives and honor to one another, but what may be outside I
know not.  We must do nothing to attract any attention.  Therefore,
restrain yourselves, I beg.  Captain Marteau, for it is indeed he,
gentlemen, has brought back to the regiment----"

He paused a moment, with an instinctive feeling for the dramatic.
Perhaps the little scene had been prearranged.  Marteau had carried his
hand behind his back.  As Lestoype stopped he brought his hand to the
front of his body.  There in the light of the candles, from the great
chandelier above, the officers and soldiers saw the thing which they
venerated next to God.  For a moment they stared, almost aghast at the
gilded emblem in Marteau's hand.  Eyes sparkled in some faces, brimmed
with tears in others, cheeks paled on one hand and flushed upon the
other; breaths came quicker, a low murmur ran through the room--almost
terrible in its meaning.

"The Eagle of the regiment, messieurs," said old Lestoype solemnly,
breaking the silence.

"_Vive l'Empereur!_" suddenly exclaimed a veteran port-aigle, or
standard bearer, in a low but tense voice, and the mighty battle-cry
swept softly through the room from man to man, in low notes, in broken
whispers like a great wavering sigh from a multitude of throbbing
hearts.

"Is it the same?" asked one as the sound died away.

"The very same," answered Lestoype.  "It was given into my hands years
ago.  I had someone write down the Emperor's words then.  I committed
them to memory.  I can hear him speak now."

"And what were those words we ask you, we, who are young in the
regiment," broke out a youth who was yet a veteran of the German
campaign of 1813.

"The Emperor, turning to Marshal Berthier, took the Eagle from him, he
held it up thus in his own hands."

Lestoype turned to Marteau and suited the gesture to the word.  He
seized the Eagle and advanced a step and those who watched him so
keenly noticed how he trembled.  It was to him as if the Emperor were
there again.  Some mystic aura of his mighty presence seemed to
overhang the uplifted Eagle.

"Gentlemen, we were paraded on the Champ de Mars with thousands of
others.  The Eagles had been marched along the line with the ruffles of
drums and blare of bugles.  It was raining like tonight, there was no
sun, but never saw I a brighter day.  The Emperor said:

"_'Soldiers of the Fifth regiment of Infantry of the Line, I entrust to
you the Eagle of France.  It is to serve to you ever as your rallying
point.  You swear to me never to abandon it but with life?  You swear
never to suffer an affront to it for the honor of France?  You swear
ever to prefer death to dishonor for it?  You swear?'_"

As the words of the old officer died away, moved by a common impulse,
the hands of the men before him went to their swords.  With sweeping
gestures they dragged them out of their sheaths, up into the air they
heaved the shining blades.

"We swear," they said solemnly, instinctively repeating the ceremony of
the past in which some of them had participated and of which all had
heard.

As their words died away the gruff voices of the non-commissioned
officers and privates standing at salute repeated the acclaim, in
accordance with the custom.

"It was so when the Eagle was given," said old Lestoype, deeply
gratified by the spontaneous tribute.  "Gentlemen and comrades, be
seated, if you please.  I have called you here for the honor of the
regiment to consult as to what is to be done."

"_Mon Commandant_," said an old veteran, stepping forward as those
present sought seats where they could, "I was port-aigle of the
regiment before Dresden.  May I not take in my hand again the
'cou-cou'?"

That was the cant name which the soldiers gave to the standard, a term
of affection, of familiarity, of comradeship which in no way indicated
any lack of respect or any diminution of determination to die for it if
necessary.

"To you I gladly commit it until we have determined what is to be done
with it," said Lestoype, handing it to the old man.

It seemed a perfectly natural and spontaneous act to the officers
present when the port-aigle pressed his lips reverently upon the number
plate below the feet of the Eagle and then, disdaining to sit down,
stood at attention, holding it before him.

"Will you not tell us, Mon Commandant," said another of the younger
officers, "something more about the Eagle before we discuss its
disposition?"

"I was a Sub-Lieutenant at Austerlitz," said Lestoype, only too anxious
to comply.  "We were under the command of Marshal Soult, club-footed
Soult we called him, upon the heights of Pratzen.  In the advance we
were overwhelmed.  The port-aigle was killed.  I was close at hand.  I
seized the staff but a bullet got me in the shoulder, here.  My arm has
been stiff ever since.  I fell--a Russian--we were that closely
intermingled and fighting hand to hand--seized the staff.  I lapsed
into unconsciousness.  Captain Grenier--you were Sergeant-Major
then--finish the story."

"Willingly, Major Lestoype.  I cut down that Russian, although wounded
myself, and tore the staff from him as he fell.  But I couldn't hold
it.  I fell with it at your feet.  Our men had been driven back.  There
was nobody beside us but the regimental dog."

"Mustache," said one of the other officers, and all eyes turned toward
the stuffed skin of a mongrel poodle dog mounted in a glass case hung
against the wall.  Hands went up in salute.  Some of the soldiers
laughed grimly.

"The brave Mustache," continued Grenier.  "He leaped over my prostrate
body.  I was conscious still.  I saw it all.  I would have given worlds
for strength, but I was helpless.  Still Mustache was enough.  He loved
the port-aigle.  He seemed to know the Eagle was in danger.  He snapped
at the hands of the Russian.  The man drew back and cut at him with his
sword.  Perhaps I should have received that blow.  You see where the
forepaw of the dog was sliced off?  But he had the spirit of a French
soldier, that brave dog, and he kept them off until the regiment
rallied and came back and drove away the Russians.  Marshal Lannes had
a collar made for Mustache.  You can see it there around his neck,
young gentlemen," continued the old Captain.  "On one side the
inscription reads: _'He lost a leg in the battle of Austerlitz but he
saved the Eagle of his regiment.'  On the other side: 'Mustache, a dog
of France, who will be everywhere respected and honored as a brave
soldier.'_"

"What became of the dog?" asked another.

"He was carried on the roll of the regiment until he was killed by an
English cannon ball at Badajos.  We took the skin and it is there, but
we buried the brave heart and the rest of him on the rampart where he
fell.  The soldiers put up a stone above him.  'Here lies the brave
Mustache,' it read.  I think the English left it standing."

"That Eagle has been in every capital of Europe, messieurs," remarked
another veteran.  "Rome, Berlin, Vienna, Madrid, Moscow."

"It charged with the Guard at Eylau," said Drehon.  "You remember,
comrades, some of you at least, how we went forward in support of the
battalions of the Guard under General Dorsenne?"

"I remember, I remember," came from one and another.

"_Hein_," said a veteran, "he was a bold soldier."

"And a handsome one.  They called him '_Le Beau Dorsenne_,'" continued
Drehon.  "The Guard advanced at arms-aport and so did we.  Our drums
and theirs were rolling _La Grenadiere_.  One of his staff said to him
as we drew near the ranks of the Russians, 'Hadn't we better begin
firing, my General?'  'No,' said the proud Dorsenne haughtily.
'Grenadiers keep your arms aport,' he continued as he saw some
wavering.  'The old guard only fights at the point of the bayonet.'"

"And what happened?"

"The Russians seemed to be paralyzed.  They stood and watched us.  When
they finally did fire, in their excitement, they overshot us.  The next
instant we burst upon them.  Our bayonets came down to a charge.  They
couldn't stand before us, comrades.  Corbleu! the white snow was red
with blood that day!  A squadron of cavalry, the Emperor's escort,
struck them in the rear at the same time and between us we cut them to
pieces.  They were heavy, those big Russians, to toss on the bayonet,
but we did it."

"Was that when the Emperor called us 'The Terrible Fifth'?" queried a
voice.

"That was the time."

"Tell us more," came from the excited assemblage.

"They gave us the gold wreath, there in Paris, after Jena and Eylau and
Friedland.  They loved the Eagle then, those Parisians," said Adjutant
Suraif, taking up the tale.  "The women fell on our necks and kissed us
when we came marching back.  They threw us flowers.  They opened their
arms to us.  They gave us wine.  Ah, that was fine."

"At Ratisbon," said the old Major, "I commanded the regiment at the
bridge-head.  We fought the Austrians off all day, giving the Emperor
time to make his dispositions.  We captured four hundred prisoners, an
Austrian battle flag, and three other flags.  The firing was terrible,
our cou-cou lost some leaves of his wreath there.  We were alone there
and at nightfall our ammunition was all gone.  The Austrians were there
in thousands.  They charged and overwhelmed us."

"But the Eagle?"

"Ah, we had taken precaution," laughed the old Major.  "We wrapped the
'cou-cou' up in the Austrian standard and in the battle flags and
buried it in a cellar, so when they captured us they got nothing but
the men and, of course, we didn't matter."

"And how did you get it back?" came an excited question.

"The Emperor took the town the day after.  They had kept us prisoners
there and so we were free.  I shall never forget the Emperor on that
day.  He rode down to us where we had formed in ranks.  He looked over
us.  His glance pierced every man's heart.  'Soldiers of the Fifth,' he
said, 'when I heard of the attack on the bridge at Ratisbon I said to
my staff, "I am tranquil, the Terrible Fifth is there," and now I see
you alive, many of you unharmed, and without your Eagle.  What have you
done with it?' he thundered out his face black as midnight.  'Sire,'
said I, stepping forward and upon my word, comrades, it took more
courage to face the Emperor in that mood than to charge an Austrian
battery, 'we have not lost our Eagle.  We have buried it and having
been but this instant released from captivity by your Majesty, we await
your permission to dig it up.'  'Go and resurrect it,' he said sharply.
'I will wait.'"

"And did he?"

"Most assuredly.  We found it safe and brought it back with the
Austrian standard.  The Emperor saluted it and commended us.  'I knew I
could trust you,' he said, smiling."

"He loved his Eagles," said another voice.

"That did he," answered a veteran.  "I have even seen him get out of
his traveling-carriage and stand at attention as an Eagle at the head
of a regiment marched by."

"I carried the Eagle in Marshal Macdonald's column at Wagram,
messieurs," said the old Eagle-bearer, stepping forward.  "It was there
the bullet struck the wing tip, here."  He laid his hand tenderly upon
it.  "Mon Dieu, that was a march!  Twenty thousand men in solid columns
going across the plain at steady step, with drums beating, the
Austrians pouring shot and shell into us.  You could hear the bullets
crash through the breasts of the division like glass.  My arm was numb
from the bullet which struck the Eagle, but I changed hands and carried
it forward.  I can see the big Marshal still.  The Emperor was looking
on.  It was terrible.  It didn't seem that mortal man could make it,
but we kept on, still, silent, until we came in touch with the
Austrians and then we cut them in two.  It was magnificent."

"I was with Marshal Mortier when we were caught in the pass of
Durrenstein," broke out one of the privates, an old Eagle-guard.  "We
fought all day and all night in that trap against awful odds, waiting,
hoping, until toward morning we heard the thunder of Dupont's guns.  We
were so close together that we seized the throats of the Russians, and
they ours.  We begged the Marshal to use a boat we had found to cross
over the Danube and escape.  'No,' he said, 'certainly not!  I will not
desert my brave comrades!  I will save them or die with them.'  Ah, he
was a brave man that day."

"And that such a man could betray the Emperor!" exclaimed another.

"I never could understand it," said one of the soldiers.

"That was the day," said a third, "when our drums were shot to pieces
and we had to beat the long roll on the iron cooking cans."

"You remember it well, comrade."

"I was a drummer there.  I remember there were but two thousand of the
six thousand in the division that answered roll call that day."

"I carried that Eagle into Moscow," said a scarred, one-armed veteran.
"I would have carried it back, but I was wounded at Malojaroslavets and
would have died but for you, my friend."

"And I carried it across the Niemen after that retreat was over,"
returned the other, acknowledging the generous tribute of his old
fellow soldier.

"Sacre-bleu!  How cold it was.  Not many of you can remember that march
because so few survived it.  The battalions in Spain can thank God they
escaped it," said another.

"It was hot enough there, and those English gave us plenty of
fighting," added one of the veterans who had fought against Wellington.

"Aye, that they did, I'll warrant," continued the veteran of Russia.
"The Emperor who marched on foot with the rest of us.  Before crossing
the Beresina--I shudder to think of the thousands drowned then.  I
dream about it sometimes at night--we were ordered to break up the
Eagles and throw them into the river."

"And did you?"

"Not I.  That is the only order I disobeyed.  I carried it with me,
wrapped in my own clothes.  One night my fingers froze to it.  See!"
He lifted his maimed hands.  "But I held on.  I crossed the Nieman
before Marshal Ney.  He threw away his musket, but I kept the Eagle.
He was the last man, I was just before him," said the man proudly.

"It was Marteau who saved it at Leipsic," said Lestoype, "and again
after he had hurled it into the Aube at Arcis he found it and brought
it back.  And it is here."

Tears glistened in the eyes of the veterans and the youth alike.
Hearts beat more rapidly, breaths came quicker, as these brave and
fragmentary reminiscences of the part the Eagle had played in past
glories were recited.

"What shall we do with it now?" asked Lestoype at last.

