spoke of. It will be highly interesting to learn the details of one
of these tribal fights."

Lisle accompanied Colonel Houghton to his quarters with a little
reluctance, for he was anxious to rejoin his comrades in the
regiment.

"Now, Bullen, tell me all about it," the colonel said. "I know that
you lifted me on to your horse. I called to you to jump up behind,
as the Afridis were close upon us; and I have never been able to
make out why the horse should have gone off at a mad gallop, with
me; but no doubt it was scared by the yells of the Afridis."

"When I lifted you up, sir, I certainly intended to get up behind
you; but the Afridis were so close that I felt that it was
impossible to do so, and that we should both be shot down before we
got out of range; so I gave the horse a prod with my sword and, as
I saw him go off at a gallop, I threw down my arms, as I told you."

"As it has turned out," the colonel said, "there is no doubt that
the tribesmen, valiant fighters themselves, admire courage. If you
had resisted, no doubt you would have been cut down; but your
action must have appeared so extraordinary, to them, that they
spared you.

"I have often bitterly reproached myself that I was unable to share
your fate. You are still young, and I am old enough to be your
father. I am unmarried, with no particular ties in the world. You
have given me new interest in life. It will be a great pleasure for
me to watch your career.

"If you have no objection I shall formally adopt you; and shall,
tomorrow, draw out a will appointing you heir to all I possess--which
I may tell you is something like fifteen thousand pounds--and shall
make it my business to push you forward."

"It is too much altogether, Colonel."

"Not at all, Bullen; you saved my life, when certain death seemed
to be staring you in the face; and it is a small thing, when I have
no longer need of it, that you should inherit what I leave behind.

"In the meantime, I shall make you an allowance of a couple of
hundred a year, as my adopted son. Say no more about it; you are
not stepping into anyone else's shoes, for I have no near relation,
no one who has a right to expect a penny at my death; and I have
hitherto not even taken the trouble to make a will. You will, I
hope, consider me, in the future, as standing in the place of the
brave father you lost, some years ago."

Lisle remained chatting with the officer for an hour, and then the
latter said:

"I won't keep you any longer, now. I am sure you must be wanting to
see your friends in the camp."

As soon as Lisle neared the lines of the regiment, he saw the
soldiers waiting about in groups. These closed up as he approached.
The sentry to whom he had spoken had been relieved, and had told
the news of his return to his comrades and, as he came along, the
whole regiment gathered round Lisle, and cheer after cheer went up.
He had gone but a few paces when he was seized and placed upon the
shoulders of two of the men; and carried in triumph, surrounded by
the other men, still cheering, to the front of the mess room. He
was so affected, by the warmth of the greeting, that the tears were
running down his cheeks when he was allowed to alight.

The officers, who had, of course, received the news, gathered at
the mess room when he was seen approaching. Before going up to them
Lisle turned and, raising his hand for silence, said:

"I thank you with all my heart, men, for the welcome you have given
me; and the proof that you have afforded me of your liking for me.
I thank you again and again, and shall never forget this
reception."

There was a fresh outburst of cheering, and Lisle then turned, and
ascended the four steps leading up to the mess room.



Chapter 13: The V.C.


The colonel was standing, surrounded by his officers.

"I welcome you back, Mr. Bullen," he said, as he shook the lad's
hand heartily, "in the name of the officers of the regiment, and my
own. We are proud of you, sir. How you escaped death, we know not;
it is enough for us that you are back, and are safe and sound.

"Your deed, in saving Colonel Houghton's life at what seemed the
sacrifice of your own, had been a sore trial and a grief to all of
us. No doubt existed in our minds that you had been cut to pieces,
and you seem to have almost come back from the dead."

The other officers then crowded round him, shaking his hand and
congratulating him on his escape.

"Now, come in and tell us how this miracle has come about. We can
understand that you have been held as a hostage, but how is it that
you are here?

"Now, do you get up on a chair, and give us a true and faithful
account of all that happened to you, and how it is that you
effected your escape."

"I did not effect my escape at all," Lisle said, as he mounted the
chair; "I was released without any terms being made and, for the
past three months, have been treated as an honoured guest by the
Afridi chief into whose hands I fell."

"Well, tell the story from the beginning," the colonel said; "what
you have said only adds to our wonder."

Lisle modestly told the story, amid frequent cross questioning.

"Well, there is no doubt that you were lucky, Lisle," the colonel
said, when he had brought his story to a conclusion. "The pluck of
your action, in getting Colonel Houghton off and staying yourself,
appealed strongly to the Afridis; and caused their chief to decide
to retain you as a hostage, instead of killing you at once. I do
not suppose that he really thought that he would gain much, by
saving you; for he must have known that we are in a hurry to get
down through the passes, and must consider it very doubtful whether
we should ever return. Still, no doubt he would have detained you
and, in the spring, sent down to say that you were in his hands;
and in that way would have endeavoured to make terms for your
release. But your assistance when he was attacked, and your
readiness to take part with his people, entirely changed his
attitude towards you.

"However, I don't suppose he will lose by it. The general is sure
to send back a handsome present to him, for his conduct towards
you.

"Have you seen Houghton yet?"

"Yes, sir; I have been with him for the past hour. He has been more
than kind to me and, as he has no near relations, has been good
enough to say that he will adopt me as his heir. So I have indeed
been amply rewarded for the service I did him."

"I congratulate you most heartily," the colonel said; "you have
well earned it, and I am sure that there is not a man in the army
who will envy your good fortune. There is only one thing wanting to
complete it, and that is the V.C.; which I have not the least doubt
in the world will be awarded to you, and all my fellow officers
will agree with me that never was it more nobly earned. You courted
what seemed certain death.

"The greater portion of the crosses have been earned by men for
carrying in wounded comrades, under a heavy fire; but that is
nothing to your case. Those actions were done on the spur of the
moment, and there was every probability that the men would get back
unhurt. Yours was the facing of a certain death. I can assure you
that it will be the occasion of rejoicings, on the part of the
whole regiment, when you appear for the first time with a cross on
your breast."

He rang the bell and, when one of the mess waiters appeared, told
him to bring half a dozen bottles of champagne. Lisle's health was
then drunk, with three hearty cheers. Lunch was on the table, and
Lisle was heartily glad when the subject of his own deeds was
dropped, and they started to discuss the meal.

"Now, Mr. Bullen," the colonel said, when the meal was finished, "I
must carry you off to the ladies. They have all rejoined, and will
be as anxious as we were to hear of your return."

"Must I go, Colonel?" Lisle asked shyly.

"Of course you must, Bullen. When a man performs brave deeds, he
must be expected to be patted on the back--metaphorically, at any
rate--by the ladies. So you have got to go through it all and, as I
have sent word round that I shall bring you to my bungalow, you
will be able to get it all over at once."

"Well, sir, I suppose I must do it, though I would much rather not.
Still, as you say, it were best to get it all over at once."

Six ladies were gathered at the bungalow, as Lisle entered with the
colonel. All rose as they entered, and pressed round him, shaking
his hand.

"I have come to tell you how pleased we all were," the colonel's
wife said, "to hear that you had returned, and how eager we have
all been to learn how it has come about. We think it very unkind of
you to stay so long in the mess room, when you must have known that
we are all on thorns to hear about it. I can assure you that we
have missed you terribly, since the regiment returned, and we are
awfully glad to have you back again.

"Now, please tell us all about it. We know, of course, how you got
Colonel Houghton off, and remained to die; and how proud all the
regiment has been of your exploit; so you can start and tell us how
it was that you escaped from being cut to mince-meat."

Lisle again went through the story.

"Why did you not return at once, when the chief who captured you
said that you were his guest? Was there not some fair young Afridi,
who held you in her chains?"

Lisle laughed.

"I can assure you that it was no feminine attractions that kept me.
There were some fifteen or twenty girls and, like everyone else,
they were very kind to me but, so far as I was able to judge, not
one of them was prettier, or I should rather say less ugly, than
the rest; although several of them had very good features, and were
doubtless considered lovely by the men. Certainly there was none
whom an Englishman would look at twice.

"Poor things, most of the work of the village is left to them. They
went out to cut grass, fed the cattle, gathered firewood, and
ground the corn; and I have no doubt that they are now all occupied
with the work of tilling the little patches of fertile ground
beyond the village.

"Besides, ladies, you must remember that I have a vivid
recollection of you all; which would, alone, have guarded me
against falling in love with any dusky maiden."

"I rather doubt your word, Mr. Bullen," the colonel's wife said;
"you were always very ready to make yourself pleasant, and do our
errands, and to make yourself generally useful and agreeable; but I
do not remember that you ever ventured upon making a compliment
before. You must have learnt the art somehow."

The lady laughed.

"I could hardly help comparing you with the women round me, but I
really had a vivid remembrance of your kindness to me."

"In future, Mr. Bullen, we shall consider you as discharged from
all duty. We have heard of other gallant deeds that you have done;
and henceforth shall regard you, with a real respect, as an officer
who has brought great credit upon the regiment. I am sure that,
henceforth, you will lose your old nickname of 'the boy,' and be
regarded as a hero."

"I hope not," Lisle said; "it has been very pleasant to be regarded
as a boy, and therefore to act as a sort of general fag to you. I
hope you will continue to regard me as so. I have always considered
it a privilege to be able to make myself useful to you, and I
should be very sorry to lose it.

"I can assure you that I still feel as a boy. I know nothing of the
world; have passed my whole time, as far back as I can remember, in
camp; and have thoroughly enjoyed my life. I suppose some day I
shall lose the feeling that I am still a boy, but I shall certainly
hold to it as long as I can."

"I suppose you had some difficulty in speaking with the natives?"
the doctor's wife said.

"At first I had but, from continually talking with them, I got to
know their language--I won't say as well as Punjabi, but certainly
very well--and I shall pass in it at the next examination."

"I wish all subalterns were like you," the colonel's wife said.
"Most of those who come out from England are puffed up with a sense
of their own importance, and I often wish that I could take them by
the shoulders, and shake them well. And what are you going to do
now?"

"I am going off to find the four men who came down with me, see if
they are comfortable, and tell them that the general will give them
the message to their chief, tomorrow."

"What will be the next thing, Mr. Bullen?"

"The next thing will be to go to the bazaar, and choose some
presents for the chief and his family."

"What do you mean to get?"

"I think a brace of revolvers, and a good store of ammunition for
the chief. As to the women I must, I suppose, get something in the
way of dress. For the other men I shall get commoner things.
Everyone has been most kind to me, and I should certainly like them
to have some remembrance of my stay.

"I suppose that there is five months' pay waiting for me in the
paymaster's chest."

"I should doubt it extremely," the colonel said. "You will get it
in time, but you will have to wait. You have been struck off the
regimental pay list, ever since you were put down as dead; and I
expect the paymaster will have to get a special authorization,
before you can draw your back pay."

"I was only joking, Colonel. My agent at Calcutta has my money in
his hands, and I have only to draw on him."

"So much the better, Bullen. It is always a nuisance getting into
debt, even when you are certain that funds will be forthcoming
which will enable you to repay what you owe. But have you enough to
carry you on till you hear from your agent?"

"Plenty, sir; I left all the money I did not care to carry about
with me in the regimental till."

"Then I expect you will find it there still. I know that nothing
has been done with it. A short time since, the paymaster was
speaking to me about it, and asking me if I knew the address of any
of your relations, or who was your agent at Calcutta. He said to
me:

"'I shall wait a bit longer. Mr. Bullen turned up quite
unexpectedly, once before and, though I fear there is not a shadow
of chance that he will do so again, I will hold the money for a
time. It is just possible that he is held as a hostage, in which
case we shall probably hear of him, when the passes are open.'"

Lisle went to the paymaster's at once and, finding that he had not
parted with the money, drew fifty pounds. He had no difficulty in
buying the revolvers and cartridges; but was so completely at a
loss as to the female garments, and the price he ought to pay, that
he went back to the cantonment and asked two of the ladies to
accompany him shopping. This they at once consented to do and, with
their aid, he laid in a stock of female garments: silk for the
chief's wife; and simpler, but good and useful materials--for the
most part of bright colour--for the other women. These were all
parcelled up in various bundles, and a looking glass inserted in
each parcel. For the men he bought bright waistbands and long
knives; and gave, in addition, a present in money to the men who
had come down with him.

It was evening before the work was finished, and he then returned
to mess with the regiment.

"I suppose you don't know yet whether you are coming back to us,
Bullen?" the major said.

"No, sir, the general did not say; but for myself, I would very
much rather join the regiment. Staff appointment sounds tempting,
but I must say that I should greatly prefer regimental work;
especially as I should be very much junior to the other officers of
the staff, and should feel myself out of place among them."

"I have no doubt that you are right, in that respect; but staff
appointments lead to promotion."

"I have no ambition for promotion, for the present, Major. I am
already five or six up among the senior lieutenants, which is quite
high enough for one of my age."

"Well, perhaps you are right. It is not a good thing for a young
officer to be pushed on too fast, and another two or three years of
regimental work will certainly do you no harm."

"I have not yet asked, Major, whether we are going up into the
Tirah again, this spring?"

"I fancy not. Already several deputations have come in from the
tribesmen, some of them bringing in the fines imposed upon them;
and all seem to say that there is a general desire among the
Afridis for peace, and that deputations from other tribes will
shortly follow them."

"I am glad to hear it, sir," Lisle said. "I think I have had quite
enough of hill fighting."

"I think we are all of the same opinion, Bullen. It is no joke
fighting an enemy hidden behind rocks, armed with Lee-Metford
rifles, and trained to shoot as well as a British marksman.

"The marching was even worse than the fighting. Passing a night on
the snow, any number of thousand feet above the sea, is worse than
either of them. No, I would rather go through a campaign against
the Russians, than have anything more to do with the Tirah; though
I must admit that, if we were to begin at once, we should not have
snow to contend with.

"I have been through several campaigns, but the last was infinitely
the hardest, and I have not the least desire to repeat it. Whether
all the tribes choose to send in and accept our terms, or not,
makes no very great difference; they have had such a sharp lesson
that it will certainly be some time before they rise again in
revolt. There may be an occasional cattle-lifting raid across the
frontier, but one can put up with that; and it would be infinitely
cheaper for Government to compensate the victims, than for us to
get an army in motion again, to punish the thieves.

"Moreover, having once taught them that we are stronger than they,
it would be a pity to weaken them still further for, if a Russian
army were to try and force its way into India, these fellows would
make it very hot for them. They are full of fight and, although
they are independent of Afghanistan, and have no particular
patriotic feeling, the thirst for plunder would bring them like
bees round an invading army.

"No, the thing has been well done, but the expense has been
enormous and the losses serious; and I trust that, at any rate as
long as we are stationed in Northern India, things will be quiet."

Next morning Lisle went, early, to headquarters. He had to wait a
little time before he could see the general. When he went in,
General Lockhart said:

"Now about yourself, Mr. Bullen. Your place has, of course, been filled
up; but I shall be glad to appoint you as extra aide-de-camp, if you
wish. Would you rather be on staff duty, or rejoin your regiment?"

"If you give me the choice, sir, I would rather rejoin the
regiment. Staff duty in war time is extremely interesting; but in
peace time, I would rather be at work with the regiment.

"You see, sir, I am very young, and much younger than any of the
staff; and I am sure that I should feel very much out of place."

"I agree with you," the general said, with a smile. "I think that
you are wise to prefer regimental duty. I have written home, giving
my account of your gallant action; telling how you were not, as
reported, killed; and recommending you, in the strongest possible
terms, for the V.C."

"I am greatly indebted to you, sir. I do not feel that I have done
anything at all out of the way, and acted only on the impulse of
the moment."

"You could not have done better, had you thought of it for an
hour," the general said; "but as I also reported your defence of
that hut, I have little doubt that you will get the well-earned
V.C."

There was great satisfaction among the officers and the regiment,
when Lisle told them of his interview with the general.

It was soon evident, from the sale of the transport animals, that
the war was over; and the regiment shortly afterwards returned to
their old quarters, at Rawal Pindi, and fell into the old routine
of drill.

In the middle of the following summer Lisle, while fielding at
cricket in a match with another regiment, suddenly staggered and
fell. The surgeon, running up from the pavilion, pronounced it as a
case of sunstroke. It was some time before he was conscious again.

"What has happened?" he asked.

"You have had a bad sunstroke," the surgeon said, "and I am going
to send you home, as soon as you are able to travel. I shall apply
for at least a year's leave for you, and I hope that, by the end of
that time, you will be perfectly fit for work again; but certainly
a period of rest, and the return to a temperate climate, is
absolutely necessary for you."

Long before this, a despatch had been received from England
bestowing the Victoria Cross upon Lisle. General Lockhart himself
came down from Peshawar and fixed it to his breast, in presence of
the whole regiment, drawn up in parade order. The outburst of
