"Can't 'elp it, sir. Tuk a fright there--bad fire--can't remember,
please, sir."

"Never mind; it doesn't matter. Stand up; I want to look at your hair."

Connie did so. Simeon took great masses of the golden, beautiful hair
between his slender fingers. He allowed it to ripple through them. He
felt its weight and examined its quality.

"Sit down again," he said.

"Yus, sir."

"You're exactly the young girl I want for my profession."

"Please, sir----"

"Hush!"

"Yus, sir."

"I repeat--and I wish you to listen--that in my profession you would
rise to eminence. You haven't an idea what it is like, have you?"

"No--I mean I'm not sure----"

"You had better keep in ignorance, for it won't be really necessary for
you to understand."

"Oh, sir."

"Not really necessary."

Connie looked up into the stern and very strange face.

"But you miss a good deal," said Stylites--"yes, a very great deal. Tell
me, for instance, how you employed your time before you entered Mrs.
Warren's establishment."

"I did machine-work, sir."

"I guessed as much--or perhaps Coppenger told me. Machine-work--attic
work?--Shop?"

"Yus, sir--in Cheapside, sir--a workshop for cheap clothing, sir."

"Did you like it?"

"No, sir."

"I should think not. Let me look at your hand."

He took one of Connie's hands and examined it carefully.

"Little, tapering fingers," he said, "spoiled by work. They could be
made very white, very soft and beautiful. Have you ever considered what
a truly fascinating thing a girl's hand is?"

Connie shook her head.

"You'd know it if you stayed with me. I should dress you in silk and
satins, and give you big hats with feathers, and lovely silk stockings
and charming shoes."

"To wear in this 'ere kitchen, sir?"

"Oh no, you wouldn't live in this kitchen; you would be in a beautiful
house with other ladies and gentlemen. _You would_ like that, wouldn't
you?"

"Yus, sir--ef I might 'ave Ronald and Giles and father and Father John,
and p'rhaps Mrs. Anderson and Mr. George Anderson, along o' me."

"But in that beautiful house you wouldn't have Mr. and Mrs. Anderson,
nor your father, nor that canting street preacher, nor the children
you've just mentioned. It's just possible you might have the boy Ronald,
but even that is problematical--you'd have to give up the rest."

"Then, sir," said Connie, "I rayther not go, please."

"Do you think that matters?" said Stylites.

"Wot, sir?"

"That you'd rather not go?"

"I dunno, sir."

"It doesn't matter one whit. Children who come here aren't asked what
they'd rather or rather not do, girl--they've got to do what _I_ order."

The voice came out, not loud, but sharp and incisive, as though a knife
were cutting something.

"Yus, sir--yus, sir."

"Connie"--the man's whole tone altered--"what will you give me if I let
you go?" "Oh, sir----"

"I want you to give me something very big, I've taken great trouble to
secure you. You're the sort of little girl I want; you would be very
useful to me. You have come in here--it is true you haven't the least
idea where this house is--but you've come in, and you've seen me, and
you've discovered the name which these low people call me. Of course,
you can understand that my real name is not Simeon Stylites--I have a
very different name; and my home isn't here--I have a very different
home. I would take you there, and treat you well, and afterwards perhaps
send you to another home. You should never know want, and no one would
be unkind to you. You would be as a daughter to me, and I am a lonely
man."

"Oh, sir--sir!" said poor Connie, "I--I like you, sir--I'm not
afeered--no, not much afeered--but if you 'ud only let the others
come----"

"That I cannot do, girl. If you choose to belong to me you must give up
the others."

"_Ef_ I choose, sir--may I choose?"

"Yes--on a condition."

The man who called himself Simeon Stylites looked at the girl with a
queer, hungry expression in his eyes.

"I wanted you very badly indeed," he said; "and I was not in the least
prepared to be sentimental. But I had a little sister like you. She died
when she was rather younger than you. I loved her, and she loved me. I
was quite a good man then, and a gentleman----"

"Oh, sir--ye're that now."

"No, girl--I am not. There are things that a gentleman would do which I
would _not_ do, and there are things which no gentleman would do which I
do. I have passed the line; nevertheless, the outward tokens remain; and
I live--well, child, I want for nothing. My profession is very
lucrative--very."

Connie did not understand half the words of this strange, queer man,
with a terribly stern and yet terribly pathetic voice.

"When I saw you this morning," said Stylites, "I knew at once it was no
go. You were like the little Eleanor whom alone in all the world I ever
truly loved. You are too young to be told my story, or I would tell it
to you."

"Oh, sir," said Connie, "I'd real like to comfort yer."

"You can't do that, and I won't spoil the life of any child with such a
look of my little Eleanor. I am going to give you back your liberty--on
a condition."

"Wot's that?" said Connie.

"That you never breathe to mortal what happened to you from the time you
left your friend, the street preacher, last night, until the time when
you found yourself at liberty and outside that same court. Wild horses
mustn't drag it from you; detectives must do their utmost in vain. I am
willing to do a good deal for you, girl, solely and entirely because of
that chance likeness. But I won't have _my_ profession and _my_ chances
in life imperilled. Do you promise?"

"Sir, I'll niver,--niver tell."

"You must promise more strongly than that--the others must be
witnesses."

"Oh, sir--oh, sir! you must trust me. Don't call the others in; let me
promise to you, yer lone self, an' I will keep my word."

The strange man with the strange eyes looked long for a full minute into
Connie's face.

"I could have been good to you," he said, "and what I had to offer was
not altogether contemptible. But it somehow wouldn't have fitted in with
my memory of Eleanor, who went back to God at eleven years of age, very
pure in heart, and just like a little child. 'Of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.' Those are the words which mark her little grave in a distant
part of the country. If you will follow in her steps, and be pure and
good in heart and life, you may meet my Eleanor in another world. And
perhaps you may be able to tell her that I--a man given over to extreme
wickedness--did one kind deed for her sake when I gave you back to your
friends."

"Sir----"

"Not another word. I am a man of moods, and I might recant what I have
just said."

Simeon Stylites sounded a little gong on the table. Agnes came hurriedly
in.

"Fetch this child's hat and jacket," said the great man imperatively.

Agnes brought them.

"Be I to take her out, sir?" she said.

"No. And listen. This child isn't for us; let her alone in future.--Are
you ready, Connie?"

"Yus, sir."

Simeon Stylites put on the most gentlemanly overcoat and a well-brushed
silk hat, and he took a neat stick in his hand and went boldly out of
the house. As soon as ever he got outside he saw a hansom, and beckoned
the driver. He and Connie got in.

They went for a long drive, and Stylites dismissed the hansom in a
distant part of the town.

"You wouldn't know your way back again?" he said to the girl.

"No, sir; an' ef I knew I wouldn't tell."

"Well, then--good-bye."

"Good-bye, sir."

"Yes, good-bye. Walk down this street till you come to the end. Here's a
shilling--you'll get a hansom; ask a policeman to put you in. From there
go home again, and forget that you ever saw or heard of Simeon
Stylites."




CHAPTER XXI.

SAFE HOME AT LAST.


When Harris parted from Sue he ran quickly in his cowardly flight. He
did not stay his fleet steps until he had gained a very quiet street.
Then, knowing that he was now quite safe, he exchanged his running for a
rapid walk. He suddenly remembered that he was to meet the detectives,
who were moving heaven and earth to get Connie back for him, not later
than three o'clock.

They were to meet by appointment in a certain street, and the hour of
rendezvous was quickly approaching. He got there in good time; but what
was his amazement to see, not only the two detectives--ordinary-looking
men in plain clothes--but also the street preacher?

The street preacher came up to him eagerly. The detectives also followed
close.

"Harris," said Atkins, "you can thank God on your knees--your child is
safe at home."

"Wot?" said Harris.

In that instant something sharp as a sword went through his heart. Oh,
what a mean, terrible, horrible wretch he was! What a cowardly deed he
had just committed! And yet God was kind, and had given him back his
child.

"Connie is in your room, waiting for you," said Atkins. "I went in not
an hour ago, hoping to find you, and there she was."

"It's very queer," said Detective Z. "You should have been there also,
and have questioned the girl. There isn't the least doubt that she could
give the most valuable information, but she won't utter a word--not a
word."

"Won't she, now?" said Harris. "Perhaps not to you, but she wull, quick
enough, to her own father."

The entire party then turned in the direction of Harris's rooms. They
went up the stairs, and Harris flung the door wide. A little, slight
girl, in the identical same dark-blue dress which Harris had bought for
her with such pride not many weeks ago, was standing near the fire.
Already her womanly influences had been at work.

The fire burned brightly. The room was tidy. The girl herself was
waiting--expectation, fear, longing, all expressed in her sensitive
face.

"Father!" she cried as Harris--brutal, red of face, self-reproachful, at
once the most miserable and the gladdest man on earth--almost staggered
into the room.

He took the slim little creature into his arms, gave her a few fierce,
passionate kisses; then saying, "It is good to have yer back, wench,"
pushed her from him with unnecessary violence. He sank into a seat,
trembling all over. The two detectives marked his agitation and were
full of compassion for him. How deeply he loved his child, they felt.
But Father John read deeper below the surface.

The man was in a very queer state. Had anything happened? He knew Harris
well. At such a moment as this, if all were right, he would not be so
overcome.

The detectives began to question Connie.

"We want to ask you a few questions, my dear," said Constable Z. "Who
dragged you into that court last night?"

"I won't say," answered Connie.

"You won't say? But you know."

"I won't say nothing," said Connie.

"That is blamed nonsense!" cried Harris, suddenly rousing himself.
"Yer've got to say--yer've got to make a clean breast of it. Wot's up?
Speak!"

"I wouldn't be here, father," said Connie, "'ef I'd not promised most
faithfully not _iver_ to tell, and I won't iver, iver, iver tell, not to
anybody in all the world."

There was a decidedly new quality in the girl's voice.

"I wouldn't do it for nobody," continued Connie. She drew herself up,
and looked taller; her eyes were shining. The detectives glanced at each
other.

"If you was put in the witness-box, missy," said one, "yer'd have to
break that promise o' yourn, whoever you made it to, or you'ud know what
contempt of the law meant."

