quarters of an hour, before you came up."

"I am very sorry," Mr. Blount replied; "somehow or other, we went
wrong altogether. There is nothing to guide one in this flat bush,
and the tracker who was leading the way said he was certain he was
going as you ordered him. Just before six o'clock we halted, and
looked in the direction in which we expected to see your smoke, but
there were no signs of it. Presently one of the constables
exclaimed:

"'There's the smoke, sir, right behind us.'

"I looked around and, sure enough, there was a column of smoke, and
a long way off it was.

"'What have you been doing, you rascal?' I said to the black.
'There's the smoke right behind us. You have been leading us wrong,
altogether.'

"The black insisted that he was right, and that the fire must have
been made by the black fellows. I didn't know what to make of it.
It was two or three minutes past six; and I noticed, when we halted
before, that your watch was exactly with mine. So I said to the
men:

"'We will wait five minutes longer and, if we see no other smoke,
you may be sure that that is made by Captain Whitney.'

"We waited the five minutes, and then I gave the word to start,
when one of the men exclaimed:

"'The black fellow's gone.'

"Sure enough, he had slipped away without being noticed, while we
were looking for the smoke. I felt sure, now, that something must
be wrong; and we galloped towards your smoke, as fast as the horses
could lay their feet to the ground. When we were about half way, we
heard the sound of firing, and I can tell you that we didn't lose a
moment on the way, after that. Have you had any losses?"

"Two of the constables are killed," Reuben said, "and we have all
got some more or less ugly scratches. My left arm is useless for a
time, I am afraid. A spear went right through it. I fear some of
the others have worse hurts."

"What can have become of the sergeant's party?" Mr. Blount said.

"They must have gone the wrong way, too," Reuben replied. "I told
you I suspected those trackers of being in league with the blacks,
and I have no doubt your fellow led you purposely astray, in order
to give them an opportunity of cutting us off before you could
arrive to our assistance. I suppose the other party has been misled
in the same way. It is fortunate, indeed, that you made up your
mind to ride for our smoke when you did. A quarter of an hour
later, and you would have found only our bodies, and would probably
have been ambushed in turn."

"Yes, it has been a close thing, indeed," Mr. Blount said. "I was
wrong, after what you told me, to trust that black scoundrel so
entirely; but I own it never entered my mind that he was leading us
astray."

By this time they had reached the fire, which was blazing high.

"How are you all?" Reuben asked. "Nobody badly hurt, I hope?"

"Nothing very bad, captain," Dick Caister replied cheerfully. "We
have all had our skin ripped up a bit, but nothing very deep. That
dodge of the saddles, of your black fellow, saved us. Mine was
knocked over half a dozen times by spears, each of which would have
done its business, if it hadn't been for it. I owe him my life so
completely, that I forgive him for making our horses a barricade,
to save yours."

Reuben laughed. He had noticed, when he ran for his horse, that Jim
had thrown him in the centre of the others: and their bodies
completely sheltered him from the spears of the natives.

"It was not fair, perhaps," he said; "but my horse would have been
killed, as well as yours, had he not done so; and Jim loves him
almost as well as he does me. He has watched over and guarded him
for the last three years."

"I am not angry with him," Dick said. "Nothing could have saved our
horses from being killed, and if one was to be saved, it is as well
it should be Tartar, and not one of the others, as yours was far
the most valuable of the five."

"Pile on the bushes," Reuben said to one of the constables. "Make
as big a blaze as you can. It will act as a beacon to the sergeant
and his party."

Half an hour later the trampling of horses' hoofs was heard and, a
few minutes later, the sergeant and his party rode up.

"I am sorry I am so late, sir," the sergeant said. "Somehow or
other we went wrong altogether, and saw nothing of your smoke. I
was afraid something was wrong, but did not know what to do; so we
halted till it came on dark, and presently made out a fire; but it
was miles away, and right in the direction from which we had come.
I did not think it could be you but, whether it was you or the
blacks, that was the place to ride to."

"Have you got the tracker with you, sergeant?"

"Yes, sir; at least, I saw him trotting ahead, ten minutes ago.
Why, where has he got to?"

The tracker was not to be seen.

"He has made off to join the blacks, I expect," Reuben said. "You
have been led astray purposely. We have been attacked, and Brown
and Simpson are killed."

An exclamation of rage broke from the men, who were in the act of
dismounting.

"I expect," Reuben said, turning to Mr. Blount, "that the fellows
noticed the talk I had with Jim, before we turned back from the
false trail, and concluded that we had some suspicion that they
were in league with the blacks; and so, when the party separated,
they determined to lead the two flanking columns astray, so as to
give their friends a chance of attacking us, and then to bolt."

"I expect that is it," Mr. Blount agreed. "And now, the first thing
is to get something to eat. When that is done, we will have a
consultation."

While the meat was cooking over the fire, Reuben told off a party
of eight men to bury the bodies of the two constables who had
fallen. The task was speedily completed, two holes being easily
scraped in the light, sandy soil.

After supper was over, the settlers gathered round Reuben.

"Now, captain, what do you mean to do?" Mr. Blount asked. "I have
given up all hope of seeing my sheep again, so don't let them
influence you, but just do as you think best. The blacks are in
strong force, that is evident; and it will be a serious business
pursuing them any further, in their own country."

"I am going to pursue them till I catch them," Reuben said; "that
is to say, as long as there is a sheep track to serve as a guide. I
don't ask you, gentlemen, to go further, for I know it is a serious
risk; but it is my duty to hunt those fellows down, and give them a
lesson, and I mean to do it. We shall never have safety in the
settlements, until those fellows come to understand that, whenever
they attack us, they will be hunted down."

"I think you are right," Dick Caister said, "and as long as you go
on, I go with you for one, whatever comes of it. But how I am to go
without my horse, I don't know."

"There are the spare horses," Reuben said; "Fortunately we have
still got six of them."

"So we have," Dick exclaimed joyfully. "I had forgotten all about
them. What luck, our bringing them with us!"

The other settlers all announced their intention of continuing the
chase, as long as Reuben was willing to push on.

"I will tell you what my idea is," Reuben said. "The horses are
already worn out and, by the end of another day, they will be half
mad with thirst. I propose that we take two days' supply for
ourselves, in our water bottles; and that we push forward on foot,
sending two of the constables back to the stream, with our horses.
I propose that we should push forward tonight. I expect the track
we are following is the true one, and the stars will do as a guide.

"At daybreak we will lie down in the bushes. The blacks will
probably leave some fellows behind, as scouts. They, seeing nothing
of us, will suppose we have given it up and gone home, and they
will make but a short journey. At night we will go on again, and
the chances are that, before morning, we shall catch sight of their
fires, and will fall upon them at daylight. What do you think of
the plan?"

"I think it is a good one," Mr. Blount said, warmly. "A capital
plan. Of course we don't much like leaving our horses, for in this
country one almost lives on horseback. Still, it will be the best
plan, certainly; for as you say, the poor brutes will be half mad,
by tomorrow night, with thirst."

"It will be a long tramp back again," a settler said dismally.

"We won't tramp all the way," Reuben said with a smile. "Directly
we have overtaken the blacks, and given them a lesson, I will send
Jim back again for the horses. He can cover the ground at a
wonderful pace, and coming back he will ride one of them, and help
the two constables to keep them together. They will have had two
days' rest, and plenty of food and water, and will meet us before
we get halfway back. There will be no fear of the blacks attacking
them."

All agreed that the plan was excellent, and half an hour later the
whole party--with the exception of the two constables, who were to
start at daybreak with the horses, for the river--set out on their
march. The sky was cloudless, and the stars would have been a
sufficient guide, even had they not had Jim with them. The black,
however, took his place at the head of the party, and strode along
as unhesitating as if it had been broad daylight.



Chapter 12: The Bush Rangers.


Scarce a word was spoken as the little party marched along. It was
possible, although very improbable, that the natives, on scattering
before the charge of Mr. Blount and his companions, might have left
some of their number behind, to watch the movements of their
pursuers. They would, however, certainly not anticipate the whites
pushing forward that night. The fire had been piled high, the last
thing before leaving, and the two men left there were told to keep
it burning brightly till morning, and to start before anyone
watching in the distance would be able to see whether the horses
were mounted, or not. Should any natives approach the fire, after
they had gone, they would take it for granted that the whole party
had ridden back to the settlement.

All night, Reuben and his companions marched steadily forward; and
were glad to throw themselves down on the ground, at the first
appearance of daybreak. Four sentries were placed, with strict
orders to keep a bright lookout through the bushes, but on no
account to raise their heads above their level; and, arrangements
having been made for their relief, every two hours, the rest of the
party were soon sound asleep.

Except to relieve the sentries, there was no stir among them until
late in the afternoon. Then there was a general movement, and soon
all were sitting up, and appeasing their appetite upon the cold
meat and dampers they had brought with them.

"There is no harm in a pipe, I suppose, captain?" Dick Caister said
laughingly.

"No, I think we can risk that," Reuben replied. "The eyes of the
savages may be wonderfully keen, but they would be a great deal
sharper than I can give them credit for, were they to notice the
smoke of a dozen pipes, curling up among the bushes."

"I suppose, Mr. Blount," Reuben said as, after the meal was
finished, the party lighted their pipes and drew closely round the
fire, "you have heard of a good many bad businesses, with the
blacks and bush rangers, in your time?"

"I have, indeed," Mr. Blount replied. "In the early days, the
settlers had a hard time of it with the blacks; who were, of
course, stronger than they are now and, after they had got over
their first fear of firearms, more fearless of the whites. The bush
rangers too were, when first they began to send convicts here, more
numerous than at present. I do not know that they were as desperate
as they are now--not so ready to take life, without provocation.
You see, there was a very much larger run of country open to them;
and many convicts who escaped, and took to the bush, were content
to have gained their freedom. Some of them took black gins, and
never troubled the colonists again; beyond, perhaps, coming down to
a station and carrying off a sheep or two, or a bullock, when they
got sick of kangaroo meat and wanted a change.

"You see, the first settlers were generally poor and hard-working
men. Young men with a little capital had not as yet been attracted
here, so there was but little inducement for the escaped convicts
to meddle with them. There were, of course, some notorious
scoundrels, who seemed to murder for the pure love of the thing.
The worst of them, I think, was a fellow who went by the name of
Cockeye. What his real name was, I never heard.

"That man was a perfect devil; and was, for a long time, the terror
of the settlers. He never worked with other white men, but lived
among the blacks. Of course, in those days the police system was in
its infancy, and we had to rely upon ourselves. I had a narrow
escape, once, of losing my life, from him and his blacks.

"When I was about seventeen, I lived with my father and mother in a
station about fifty miles from Sydney, or as it was called then
Port Jackson. It was at that time quite an outlying station. We had
two convicts allotted to us, both of them honest fellows enough,
who had been transported for poaching or something of that
kind--anyhow, they were not old hands, and gave no trouble. My
father was a kind master, and we always felt that, in case of need,
we could rely upon them just as upon ourselves. In those days it
was next to impossible to get hired hands for, as there was plenty
of land for anyone to squat upon, comparatively close to the port,
the men who came out generally set up for themselves, at once.

"One day I had been out on horseback, to look for a couple of
bullocks which had strayed away; and was on my way back when, ahead
of me, I heard the cooey of the blacks. I didn't think much of it,
because they were common enough at that time, and a party had made
a sort of encampment at a stream, about a mile from the house; but
when, a minute later, I heard a gun fired, I guessed that there was
mischief.

"The sound seemed to come from away towards the right, where I knew
that one of our men was out, herding the bullocks; so I clapped
spurs to my horse, and rode in that direction. When I got near, I
saw the cattle running wildly about, and a mob of black fellows
among them. I could see no signs of our man, and guessed that he
must have gone down; and that I had best ride and warn them, at the
house.

"The blacks saw me, and started at a run in my direction, but I
soon left them behind. I was within a quarter of a mile of the
house, when a native yell burst out ahead of me, followed by two
shots. I rode on and, when I got near the house, saw a lot of black
fellows round it.

"Then came a flash from one of the upper windows, and I saw one of
them roll over. That was a satisfaction, for I knew they hadn't
caught my father asleep. I knew the doors and shutters were strong,
and that he could make a good fight of it. Still, there was only
him and my mother at home, for both the men had gone out before I
left in the morning; and one man hasn't much chance of holding a
house, attacked on all sides. So I made up my mind to try to dash
through them, when the shutter opened a little, and my father
shouted out:

"'Ride for help, Bill. I will keep them off, till you get back.'

"So I turned; but when I had gone a few yards I looked over my
shoulder, and I saw a man dash out from behind the house on
horseback, and start at a gallop after me. It was a bay with a
white leg, and I knew that Cockeye used to ride such a horse, and
that there wasn't a better in the colony. Almost at the same moment
I heard a shot again, but I didn't look round.

"I can tell you I felt pretty badly frightened, for there was no
mercy to be expected from that scoundrel, and I knew that he was a
good deal better mounted than I was. The next station was about
four miles off, and I had about two hundred yards start, but before
I had gone half a mile, he was within fifty yards of me. I could
hear him, cursing and swearing and shouting to me to stop, but I
had made up my mind I would not do that.

"I had got a brace of pistols with me, but I wasn't much of a shot.
I had, soon after I started, pulled them out of the holsters and
shoved them into my belt in front of me; so that, as he came up, he
shouldn't see my hand go down for them. My hope was that he would
ride straight up to the side of me, not knowing that I was armed;
and that would give me a chance of suddenly letting fly at him.

"You would think the chance was a poor one; and that he would, to a
certainty, shoot me down before he got up. I did not much think he
would do that, for I guessed that the scoundrel would do with me as
he had in some other cases; namely, take me and carry me back to
the house, and there either threaten to shoot me, or hang me up
over a fire, or some such devilry, to make those inside give in. I
was determined this shouldn't be, and that if I could not shoot him
I would be shot myself; for otherwise he would have got my father
and mother, and it would have been three lives instead of one.

"Presently--crack!--came the sound of a pistol, and I heard the
bullet whiz close by. I expect that it was only to frighten me into
stopping; but in a second or two he fired again, and the shot just
grazed my shoulder, so he was in earnest that time.

"I bent low on my saddle, got a pistol out of my belt, and
prepared. There was another shot, the horse gave a spring and I
knew he was hit, but for a time he went faster than ever; still,
the last shot wasn't from more than twenty yards behind; and I
expected, every minute, to see his horse's head coming up beside
me. Then I heard a curse and a sudden fall and, looking round, saw
his horse was down.

"Cockeye was on his feet in a moment, and drew another pistol from
his holster; so I concluded to keep on as hard as I could go,
without waiting to make inquiries. I guessed pretty well what had
happened. The shot I had heard my father fire, as he started after
me, had hit the horse; and the poor brute had kept on until he
dropped. I understood the fellow's firing, now. He felt his horse
was failing under him, and his only chance was to stop me.

"I kept on till I got safe to the station. The three men there
started in different directions, to fetch assistance, and by the
evening we had a score of men assembled there, and started back to
our station. We heard a cooey when we were within a mile of the
place, and guessed it was a fellow on the watch. By the time we got
there they had all cleared off, but it was a close thing.

"My mother was a courageous woman, and had defended the back of the
house, and my father the front. The blacks had made several
attempts to burn the place down; but the roof, like the walls, was
made of solid timber; which is the only safe way to build a house,
when you are exposed to attacks of the blacks.

"As long as daylight lasted the old people had done very well, and
had kept the blacks at a distance; and we saw, by the marks of
blood in the morning, that they must have killed or wounded eight
or ten of them; but if we hadn't come up before the blacks had
darkness to cover them, it would have gone hard with them. Of
course we knew that, and calculated so as to get there before
nightfall."

"What became of the bush ranger?" Reuben asked.
