
Priscilla had usurped the throne!

The rocking-chair had been brought out and placed again in front of the
window, and there sat Priscilla, leaning back at her ease, with the
crown on her head, a big fan--made of calf-skin--in her hand, and a
general air of superiority pervading her whole being. Behind her, with
her hand on the back of the chair, stood Poqua-dilla, wearing her new
turban, but without the red shawl. She looked as if something had
happened.

In front of the chair was the Lord High Chancellor. He had evidently
gone over to the usurper. His red ribbon, very dusty and draggled, still
hung from his shirt-collar. The four courtiers sat together on a bench,
near the house, with their coats still buttoned up as high as
circumstances would allow. They seemed sad and disappointed, and
probably had been deprived of their rank. The _Hof-rath_ stood in the
front of the crowd. He did not appear happy; indeed, he seemed a good
deal ruffled, both in mind and clothes. Perhaps he had defended his
queen, and had been roughly handled.

Priscilla was talking, and fanning herself, gracefully and lazily, with
her calf-skin fan. I think she had been telling the people what she
intended to do, and what she intended them to do; but, almost
immediately after our arrival, she was interrupted by the _Hof-rath_,
who said something that we did not hear, but which put Priscilla into a
wild passion.

She sprang to her feet and stood up in the chair, while poor Poqua-dilla
held it firmly by the back so that it should not shake. I supposed from
this that Priscilla had been standing up before, and that our old friend
had been appointed to the office of chair-back-holder to the usurper.

Priscilla waved her fan high in air, and then, with her right hand, she
took off the crown, held it up for a minute, and replaced it on her
head.

"Afrikins, behole yer queen!" said she, at the top of her voice, and
leaning back so far that the rightful sovereign had a good deal of
trouble to keep the chair from going over.

"Dat's me!" she cried. "Look straight at me, an' ye see yer queen. An'
how you dar', you misribble Hop-grog, to say I no queen! You 'serve to
be killed. Take hole o' him, some uv you fellers! Grab dat Hop-grog!"

At this, two or three men seized the poor _Hof-rath_, while the crowd
cheered and laughed.

"Take him an' kill him!" shouted Priscilla. "Chop his head off!"

At this, a wild shout of laughter arose, and one of the men who held the
_Hof-rath_ declared, as soon as he got his breath, that they couldn't do
that,--they had no hatchet big enough.

Priscilla stood quiet for a minute. She looked over the crowd, and then
she looked at the poor _Hof-rath_, who now began to show that he was a
little frightened.

"You, Hop-grog," said she, "how much money did you grab in dem
scrahmbles?"

The _Hof-rath_ put his hand in his pocket and pulled out some pennies.

"Five big coppers," said he, sullenly.

"Gim me dem," said she, and he brought them to her.

"Now den, you kin git out," said she, pocketing the money. Then she
again raised her crown and replaced it on her head.

"Afrikins, behole your queen!" she cried.

This was more than we could stand. To see this usurpation and robbery
made our blood boil. We, by ourselves, could do nothing; but we could
get help. We slipped away and ran down the road in the direction of the
hotel. We had not gone far before we saw, coming along a cross-road, the
two yellow-leg men. We turned, hurried up to them, and hastily told them
of the condition of things, and asked if they would help us put down
this usurpation. They did not understand the matter, at first, but when
we made them see how it stood, they were greatly interested, and
instantly offered to join us.

"We can go down here to the police-station," said I, "and get some
help."

"No, no!" said the tall yellow-leg. "Don't tell those fellows. They'll
only make a row of it, and get somebody into trouble. We're enough to
capture that usurper. Let's go for her."

And we went.

When we neared the crowd, the shorter yellow-leg, Mr. Burgan, said that
he would go first; then his friend would come close behind him, while
Rectus and I could push up after them. By forming a line we could rush
right through the crowd. I thought I ought to go first, but Mr. Burgan
said he was the stoutest, and could better stand the pressure if the
crowd stood firm.

But the crowd didn't stand firm. The moment we made our rush, and the
people saw us, they scattered right and left, and we pushed right
through, straight to the house. Priscilla saw us before we reached her,
and, quick as lightning, she made a dive for the door. We rushed after
her, but she got inside, and, hurling the crown from her head, dashed
out of a back-door. We followed hotly, but she was out of the yard, over
a wall, and into a side lane, almost before we knew it.

Then a good chase began. Priscilla had a long start of us, for we had
bungled at the wall, but we were bound to catch her.

I was a good runner, and Rectus was light and active, although I am not
sure that he could keep up the thing very long; but the two yellow-legs
surprised me. They took the lead of us, directly, and kept it. Behind us
came a lot of darkeys, not trying to catch Priscilla, but anxious, I
suppose, to see what was going to happen.

Priscilla still kept well ahead. She had struck out of the lane into a
road which led toward the outskirts of the town. I think we were
beginning to gain on her when, all of a sudden, she sat down. With a
shout, we rushed on, but before we reached her she had jerked off both
her shoes,--she didn't wear any stockings,--and she sprang to her feet
and was off again. Waving the shoes over her head, she jumped and leaped
and bounded like an India-rubber goat. Priscilla, barefooted, couldn't
be caught by any man on the island: we soon saw that. She flew down the
road, with the white dust flying behind her, until she reached a big
limestone quarry, where the calcareous building-material of the town is
sawn out in great blocks, and there she made a sharp turn and dashed
down in among the stones. We reached the place just in time to see her
run across the quarry, slip in between two great blocks that were
standing up like statue pedestals on the other side, and disappear.

We rushed over, we searched and looked, here and there and everywhere,
and all the darkeys searched and looked, but we found no Priscilla. She
had gone away.

Puffing and blowing like four steam-fire-engines, we sat down on some
stones and wiped our faces.

"I guess we just ran that upstart queen out of her possessions," said
the tall yellow-legs, dusting his boots with his handkerchief. He was
satisfied.

We walked home by the road at the edge of the harbor. The cool air from
the water was very pleasant to us. When we reached the hotel, we found
Mr. and Mrs. Chipperton and Corny sitting outside, in the entrance
court, waiting for supper-time. A lot of arm-chairs always stood there,
so that people might sit and wait for meals, or anything else that they
expected. When Corny heard the dreadful news of the fall of our kingdom,
she was so shocked that she could scarcely speak; and as for Mrs.
Chipperton, I thought she was going to cry. Corny wanted to rush right
down to Poqua-dilla's house and see what could be done, but we were all
against that. No harm would come to the old woman that night from the
loss of her crown, and it was too near supper-time for any attempt at
restoration, just then.

"Only to think of it!" said Mrs. Chipperton. "After all we did for her!
I don't believe she was queen more than an hour. It's the shortest reign
I ever heard of."

"And that Priscilla!" cried Corny. "The girl we trusted to do so much,
and----"

"Paid every night," said I.

"Yes," she continued, "and gave a pair of mother's shoes to, for the
coronation! And to think that _she_ should deceive us and do the
usurping!"

The shorter yellow-legs, who had been standing by with his friend, now
made a remark. He evidently remembered Corny, on the Oclawaha
steam-boat, although he had never become acquainted with her or her
family.

"Did your queen talk French?" he asked, with a smile; "or was not that
the language of the Court?"

"No, it wasn't," said Corny, gravely. "African was the language of the
Court. But the queen was too polite to use it before us, because she
knew we did not understand it, and couldn't tell what she might be
saying about us."

"Good!" said the tall yellow-legs. "That's very good indeed. Burgan, you
owe her one."

"One what?" asked Corny.

"Another answer as good as that, if I can ever think of it," said Mr.
Burgan.

Corny did not reply. I doubt if she heard him. Her soul still ached for
her fallen queen.

"I tell you what it is," said Mr. Chipperton, who had kept unaccountably
quiet, so far. "It's a great pity that I did not know about this. I
should have liked nothing better than to be down there when that usurper
girl was standing on that throne, or rocking-chair, or whatever it
was----"

"Oh, my dear!" said Mrs. Chipperton. "It would never have done for you
to have exposed your lung to such a scene of turmoil and confusion."

"Bother my lung!" cried Mr. Chipperton, who was now growing quite
excited. "I would never have stood tamely by, and witnessed such vile
injustice----"

"We didn't stand tamely by," said I. "We ran wildly after the unjust
one."

"I would have stood up before that crowd," continued Mr. Chipperton,
"and I would have told the people what I thought of them. I would have
asked them how, living in a land like this, where the blue sky shines on
them for nothing, where cocoa-nut and the orange stand always ready for
them to stretch forth their hands and take them, where they need but a
minimum of clothes, and where the very sea around them freely yields up
its fish and its conchs,--or, that is to say, they can get such things
for a trifling sum,--I would have asked them, I say, how--when free
citizens of a republic, such as we are, come from our shores of liberty,
where kings and queens are despised and any throne that is attempted to
be set up over us is crushed to atoms,--that when we, I say, come over
here, and out of the pure kindness and generosity of our souls raise
from the dust a poverty-stricken and down-trodden queen, and place her,
as nearly as possible, on the throne of her ancestors, and put upon her
head a crown,--a bauble which, in our own land, we trample under
foot----"

At this I shuddered, remembering the sharp points I had filed in our
crown.

"And grind into the dust," continued Mr. Chipperton,--"I would ask them,
I say, how they could think of all this, and then deliberately subvert,
at the behest of a young and giddy colored hireling, the structure we
had upraised. And what could they have said to that, I would like to
know?" he asked, looking around from one to another of us.

"Give us a small dive, boss?" suggested Rectus.

"That's so," said Mr. Chipperton, his face beaming into a broad smile;
"I believe they would have said that very thing. You have hit it
exactly. Let's go in to supper."

The next day, Rectus and I, with Corny and Mrs. Chipperton, walked down
to the queen's house, to see how she fared and what could be done for
her.

When we reached Poqua-dilla's hut, we saw her sitting on her door-step.
By her side were several joints of sugar-cane, and close to them stood
the crown, neatly filled with scarlet pepper-pods, which hung very
prettily over the peaked points of brass. She was very still, and her
head rested on her breast.

"Asleep!" whispered Corny.

"Yes," said Mrs. Chipperton, softly, "and don't let's waken her. She's
very well off as she is, and now that her house is a little more
comfortable, it would be well to leave her in peace, to peddle what she
pleases on her door-step. Her crown will worry her less where it is than
on her head."

Corny whispered to her mother, who nodded, and took out her pocket-book.
In a moment, Corny, with some change in her hand, went quietly up to the
yard and put the money in the queen's lap. Then we went away and left
her, still asleep.

A day or two after this, the "Tigress" came in, bringing the mail. We
saw her, from one of the upper porticoes, when she was just on the edge
of the horizon, and we knew her by the way she stood up high in the
water, and rolled her smoke-stack from side to side. She was the
greatest roller that ever floated, I reckon, but a jolly good ship for
all that; and we were glad enough to see her.

There were a lot of letters for us in her mail. I had nine from the boys
at home, not to count those from the family.

We had just about finished reading our letters when Corny came up to us
to the silk-cotton tree, where we were sitting, and said, in a doleful
tone:

"We've got to go home."

"Home?" we cried out together. "When?"

"To-morrow," said Corny, "on the 'Tigress.'"

All our good news and pleasant letters counted for nothing now.

"How?--why?" said I. "Why do you have to go? Isn't this something new?"

Rectus looked as if he had lost his knife, and I'm sure I had never
thought that I should care so much to hear that a girl--no relation--was
going away the next day.

"Yes, it is something new," said Corny, who certainly had been crying,
although we didn't notice it at first. "It's a horrid old lawsuit.
Father just heard of it in a letter. There's one of his houses, in New
York, that's next to a lot, and the man that owns the lot says father's
house sticks over four inches on his lot, and he has sued him for
that,--just think of it! four inches only! You couldn't do anything with
four inches of dirt if you had it; and father didn't know it, and he
isn't going to move his wall back, now that he does know it, for the
people in the house would have to cut all their carpets, or fold them
under, which is just as bad, and he says he must go right back to New
