
Miriam, confident and handsome, sat near them. She wore a beautiful
white dress trimmed with lace, and her thick, black plaits were twisted
around her head like a coronet.

"She's all dressed up to step up on the stage and get her twenty-five,"
whispered Nora to Jessica.

"Perhaps she already knows she's going to get it," answered Jessica
doubtfully. "Perhaps Miss Leece has told her."

"If Miss Leece knew it, she would certainly have told her," answered
Grace, leaning over so that Anne could not hear her; "but I feel sure
Miss Thompson has managed it somehow, although I kept hoping all day she
would send me a note or something. It may be she hated to tell me the
bad news."

Hippy Wingate and Reddy Brooks came down the aisle in immaculate attire.
David followed behind, pale and silent.

Did David suspect anything about his sister? Grace wondered. Certainly
he had directly or indirectly been the means of balking every one of
Miriam's schemes for injuring Anne. Perhaps Miriam had told him she was
to win the prize, and he was thinking of Anne's disappointment. All
three boys paused when they saw their friends of the Christmas house
party. Hippy leaned over to say:

"Hello, girls! Can you guess what has brought us here to-night, all
dressed up in our best?"

"Not unless it was to show off your clothes," replied Nora.

"To see Miss Anne Pierson win the freshman prize. Simply that, and
nothing more."

"But I don't expect to win it, Hippy," protested Anne.

"If you don't, you aren't the girl we took you for, then," replied
Hippy. "I heard from a young person in your class that you hadn't made a
mistake in six months."

"But just as many people think Miriam will win," said Anne. "Look at all
the people congratulating her already."

Surely enough Miriam's friends had rallied around her at the final test,
and numbers of girls and boys and grown people, too, were already
prophesying victory.

Just then the audience composed itself, for the exercises were about to
begin. Soft music was heard and the graduates filed out and took their
seats.

Immediately they were seated, Mrs. Gray, in a beautiful lavender silk
gown and a white lace bonnet trimmed with violets, swept down the aisle,
bowing and smiling right and left.

"Girls!" cried Grace delightedly, looking over her shoulder, "guess who
is with our precious little Mrs. Gray?"

"Tom Gray!" cried the others in unison, just as Tom Gray himself
appeared opposite them and waved his hat, regardless of the many eyes
fastened upon him, for Mrs. Gray was an important personage not only at
these annual assemblages, but in Oakdale itself, of which she had always
been a most generous and loyal citizen.

Mrs. Gray nodded cordially when she saw the girls, but shook her head
over Anne's pale, drawn little face.

As the ceremonies proceeded after the opening prayer, Anne felt herself
drifting further and further away. She was a little boat on a troubled,
restless sea, with the noise of the waves in her head, and only
occasionally did she hear some one's voice reading a graduating essay or
making a speech--she couldn't tell which. She remembered there was a
piano solo, very loud and crashing, it seemed to her, and there was a
tremendous humming sound. The sea was growing very rough, she thought. A
storm was brewing somewhere. Then the wind died down again, there was a
complete and utter silence and she seemed to be entirely alone.

"I have great pleasure in announcing," she dimly heard a voice say,
"that the annual freshman prize, so generously donated always by Mrs.
Gray, is awarded this year to one of the most brilliant and remarkable
pupils who has ever studied in Oakdale High School. My language, in this
instance, may appear to be rather extravagant, but the pupil, who has
been under the eye of the faculty for many months because of her most
excellent standing, has achieved a unique success in the history of the
school. I may say that she has turned in a set of examination papers
absolutely perfect in every detail, and it is with real delight I
announce that she has won not only the usual smaller prize of
twenty-five dollars, but the premium always offered at the same time,
but never before won by any pupil of this school, of one hundred
dollars, for a flawless examination. I would, therefore, ask Miss Anne
Pierson to come to the platform, that I may have the honor of delivering
both prizes to her."

Such a shout as arose after this remarkable speech had never before been
heard at a high school graduation. The freshman class was fairly mad
with joy, while Hippy and Reddy yelled themselves hoarse.

"Anne!" cried Grace. "Wake up, Anne! Are you asleep, child? Go up to the
platform. Miss Thompson is waiting for you."

Tears of joy and relief were rolling down Grace's cheeks as she urged
Anne to rise from her seat.

Anne stood up, half dazed, still wondering what it was all about, and
made her way through a sea of faces to the platform.

"Hurrah!" roared the pupils of the High School in one voice.

"Hi-hi-hi! Hi-hi-hi! Oakdale, Oakdale, HIGH SCHOOL!"

This was an honor usually accorded only to football and baseball heroes.

When Anne reached the platform she appeared so small and plain, in her
simple white muslin frock, that people looked at her wonderingly. It was
not everyone in Oakdale who was familiar with the little, dark-haired
girl.

"My dear," said Miss Thompson, very handsome and imposing in a gray silk
dress, "I am happy to be the one to hand you these two prizes. You have
worked hard and richly deserve them both. I am sure everyone in this
house to-night is glad that your winter's unceasing labors are crowned
with success, and I now recommend you to take a good rest, for such
prizes are only earned by earnest and hard application, and hard work
carries with it, sometimes, its own penalty." (She placed special
emphasis on these last words.) "You have indeed earned the right to a
happy vacation."

Two bouquets were handed over the footlights at this point, one a
beautiful bunch of pink roses and the other of lilies of the valley.

Mrs. Gray had sent the roses Grace felt sure. It was her custom always
to send such a bouquet to the one who carried off the prize. But who had
sent the lilies of the valley?

"Very likely David," Grace said to herself, watching the boy's face as
Anne took the flowers from the usher.

Had he known then that his sister had lost the prize, or was his faith
in Anne so great?

But something had happened.

Suddenly the waves, which for the last half hour had been roaring and
tossing about Anne, seemed to submerge her completely. She felt a horrid
sensation of sickness for a moment; and then down, down she sank to the
bottom of nothing, carrying her flowers and prizes with her.

"She's fainted!" cried some one. "The poor, little, tired girl has
fainted!"

A tall young graduate picked up the small, limp figure and carried her
off the stage as easily as if she had been a child. The closing
exercises were then resumed, the benediction pronounced and the audience
filed out somewhat silently.

Grace and her friends hurried around behind the scenes, where they found
Mrs. Gray in the act of placing a smelling-salts bottle to Anne's
nostrils, while Tom Gray and David Nesbit were cooling her temples with
lumps of ice. "She is conscious at last!" exclaimed the old lady, as
Anne opened her eyes. "It was entirely too much excitement for this
delicate, worn-out child. Tom, order the carriage. I mean to take her
straight to my own house and nurse her myself. I am the only person in
this town who has time to give her all the care and attention she needs.
I feel like such a lazy, good-for-nothing old woman when I see all these
bright young people winning prizes and doing so many clever things."

"How you do go on, Mrs. Gray," said David. "You know very well you are
the brightest, youngest and prettiest girl in Oakdale."

Anne sat up at this moment, and looked into the faces of her best
friends leaning over her anxiously.

"I thought the boat capsized just as I was about to win the race," she
said faintly.

"The little boat did capsize, dear," answered Mrs. Gray gently, "but not
until after you had won the race. And now, if you are well enough to let
this strong nephew of mine carry you, we are going to take you right
home. Are all my Christmas children here?" she continued, looking about
her. Hippy and Reddy had joined the group just then. "Yes, here you are.
Tom and I can't take you all up in the carriage, but I want you to
follow us, if your parents and guardians have no objections. I have
arranged a little supper to celebrate Anne's victory. I am sorry she
can't come to her own party, but she may hear all about it afterwards
and the rest of you shall make merry for her."

Not long after, six young people strolled up Chapel Hill in the
moonlight, talking gayly of the happy days they had spent together with
Mrs. Gray; for Richards, the burglar, seemed now a sort of joke to them,
and even the terrible recollection of the wolves was softened by time,
and they could only laugh at poor Hippy's plight when his breath gave
out and his legs refused their office.

"Oh, well," exclaimed Hippy, pretending to be much offended, "it is a
very good idea to remember only the funny things and forget the
dangerous ones, when all's said and done. But if I'd have had a stroke
of apoplexy just as that young lady wolf began to lick my heels, you
wouldn't have been so merry over the recollection."

"Well," retorted Nora, "we would have been just about going into half
mourning, by now, and that's always a cheerful thought."

"Grace," whispered Jessica, taking advantage of the talk of the others
not to be overheard, "did you notice Miriam when Miss Thompson began her
speech?"

"No," answered Grace, "I was too intent upon Anne to look at Miriam.
Why?"

"Well," continued Jessica, "you remember that Miss Thompson mentioned no
names until almost the very end of the speech!"

"Yes," answered the other; "I remember it particularly, because I kept
wishing she would hurry and get to the point."

"Exactly," went on Jessica, "and Miriam thought she had won the prize."

"How do you know, Jessica! How could you tell?"

"Oh, in a hundred different ways. I could tell by the smile on her face
that she took every compliment to herself. Lots of people were watching
her, too, and I couldn't help feeling a little sorry for her, because
she is one of those people who just can't stand losing. When Miss
Thompson reached the place where she was about to ask Anne to step up
and get the prize, Miriam half rose in her seat. Mrs. Nesbit pulled her
back in the nick of time. I honestly believe she would have reached the
stage before Anne did, if her mother hadn't stopped her. Hippy told me
they left before the benediction. I suppose Miriam was not equal to the
mortification."

"I thought perhaps Miss Thompson would have mentioned her name as coming
second in the contest," said Grace. "She usually does, you know. But
there were good reasons, and plenty, why she shouldn't this time, I
suppose. And to think, Jessica, that Miriam need never have done that
dreadful thing. She would probably have passed second in the class
anyway, and copying the papers didn't help her one little bit."

Mrs. Gray reported Anne to be much better. She had taken some nourishing
broth and gone to bed, and she was at that moment sleeping soundly.

So there was no cause for anything but good cheer at the supper party.

And here let us leave them around Mrs. Gray's hospitable table. For, is
it not better to say farewell rejoicing so that no shadows may darken
the memory we shall carry with us during the long months of separation?

Before Oakdale High School welcomes her children back again, David will
sail abroad with his mother and sister; Grace and Anne will set off for
the country to visit Grace's grandmother; the others and their families
will scatter to various summer resorts, while Mrs. Gray will seek a cool
spot in the mountains.

However, in the next volume, which will be entitled, "Grace
Harlowe's Sophomore Year at High School; Or, the Record of the Girl
Chums in Work and Athletics," we shall again meet the four girls and
their friends. This book, the record of the girl chums in athletics,
tells of the exciting rivalries of the sophomore and junior basketball
teams, culminating in a final hard-fought battle. Again Grace Harlowe
distinguishes herself by her bravery and good judgment, and again Miriam
Nesbit will do her best to thwart her at every point. And we may learn
what Anne Pierson did with the prize money.


THE END.




       *       *       *       *       *




HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY'S

CATALOGUE OF

The Best and Least Expensive Books for Real Boys and Girls

Really good and new stories for boys and girls are not plentiful. Many
stories, too, are so highly improbable as to bring a grin of derision to
the young reader's face before he has gone far. The name of ALTEMUS is a
distinctive brand on the cover of a book, always ensuring the buyer of
having a book that is up-to-date and fine throughout. No buyer of an
ALTEMUS book is ever disappointed.

Many are the claims made as to the inexpensiveness of books. Go into any
bookstore and ask for an Altemus book. Compare the price charged you for
Altemus books with the price demanded for other juvenile books. You will
at once discover that a given outlay of money will buy more of the
ALTEMUS books than of those published by other houses.

Every dealer in books carries the ALTEMUS books.

Sold by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price

Henry Altemus Company

1326-1336 Vine Street, Philadelphia




The Motor Boat Club Series

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

The keynote of these books is manliness. The stories are wonderfully
entertaining, and they are at the same time sound and wholesome. No boy
will willingly lay down an unfinished book in this series.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OF THE KENNEBEC;
      Or, The Secret of Smugglers' Island.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT NANTUCKET;
      Or, The Mystery of the Dunstan Heir.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OFF LONG ISLAND;
      Or, A Daring Marine Game at Racing Speed.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AND THE WIRELESS;
      Or, The Dot, Dash and Dare Cruise.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB IN FLORIDA;
      Or, Laying the Ghost of Alligator Swamp.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT THE GOLDEN GATE;
      Or, A Thrilling Capture in the Great Fog.

    THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB ON THE GREAT LAKES;
      Or, The Flying Dutchman of the Big Fresh Water.




The Range and Grange Hustlers

By FRANK GEE PATCHIN

Have you any idea of the excitements, the glories of life on great
ranches in the West? Any bright boy will "devour" the books of this
series, once he has made a start with the first volume.

    THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS ON THE RANCH;
      Or, The Boy Shepherds of the Great Divide.

    THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS' GREATEST ROUND-UP;
      Or, Pitting Their Wits Against a Packers' Combine.

    THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS ON THE PLAINS;
      Or, Following the Steam Plows Across the Prairie.

    THE RANGE AND GRANGE HUSTLERS AT CHICAGO;
      Or, The Conspiracy of the Wheat Pit.




Submarine Boys Series

By VICTOR G. DURHAM

    THE SUBMARINE BOYS ON DUTY;
      Or, Life on a Diving Torpedo Boat.

    THE SUBMARINE BOYS' TRIAL TRIP;
      Or, "Making Good" as Young Experts.

    THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE MIDDIES;
      Or, The Prize Detail at Annapolis.

    THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SPIES;
      Or, Dodging the Sharks of the Deep.
