sort of rugged flatness in consequence of being looked down upon from
such an elevation.  Passing the Grand Plateau they reached a steep
incline, which rose towards a tremendous ice-precipice.  From the upper
edge of this there hung gigantic icicles.  Up the incline they went
slowly, for the crust of the snow broke down at every step, and the
Captain, being heavy, began to show symptoms of excessive heat and
labouring breath, but he grew comparatively cool on coming to a
snow-bridge which had to be passed in order to get over a crevasse.

"It'll never bear my weight," he said, looking doubtfully at the frail
bridge, and at the blue gulf, which appeared to be a bottomless pit.

Antoine, however, thought it might prove strong enough.  He patted the
snow gently, as on previous occasions of a similar kind, and advanced
with caution, while his followers fixed their heels in the snow, and
held tight to the rope to save him if he should break through.  He
passed in safety, and the others followed, but new difficulties awaited
them on the other side.  Just beyond this bridge they came to a slope
from which the snow had been completely swept, leaving the surface of
hard ice exposed.  It was so steep that walking on it was impossible.
Antoine, therefore, proceeded to cut steps along its face.  Two swings
of his ponderous mountain-axe were sufficient to cut each step in the
brittle ice, and in a few minutes the whole party were on the slope,
every man having a coil of the rope round his waist, while, with the
spike of his alpenstock driven firmly into the ice, he steadied himself
before taking each successive step.

There would have been no difficulty in crossing such a slope if its base
had terminated in snow, but as it went straight down to the brow of an
ice-precipice, and then abruptly terminated in a cornice, from which the
giant icicles, before mentioned, hung down into an unfathomable abyss,
each man knew that a false step, a slip, or the loss of balance, might
result in the instant destruction of the whole party.  They moved
therefore very slowly, keeping their eyes steadily fixed on their feet.

The mercurial temperament of Mr Slingsby was severely tried at this
point.  His desire to look up and revel in the beauties of nature around
him proved too strong a temptation.  While gazing with feelings of awe
at the terrible edge or cornice below he became, for the first time,
fully alive to his situation,--the smallness of the step of ice on which
he stood, the exceeding steepness of the glassy slope below, the dread
abyss beyond!  He shut his eyes; a giddy feeling came over him--a rush
of horror.

"Take care, Monsieur!" was uttered in a quick, deep tone, behind him.

It was the warning voice of Le Croix, who observed his condition.

The warning came too late.  Slingsby wavered, threw up his arms,
slipped, and fell with an appalling shriek.

Le Croix, however, was prepared.  In an instant he had fixed his staff
and heels firmly, and had leaned well back to resist the pull.  The
porter in front was not less prompt; the stout rope stood the strain;
and in another moment the artist was restored to his position, panting,
pale, and humbled.

A few minutes sufficed to restore his confidence sufficiently to admit
of his proceeding, and, with many warnings to be more cautious, the
advance was continued.

Up to this point the weather had favoured them, but now Mont Blanc
seemed as if inclined to resent the free and easy way in which these men
of mingled muscle and science had attacked his crown.  He drew several
ominous clouds around him, and shook out a flood of hoary locks from his
white head, which, caught up by a blast, created apparently for the
purpose, were whirled aloft in wild confusion, and swooped down upon the
mountaineers with bitter emphasis, in the form of snow-drift, as if they
had come direct from Captain Wopper's favourite place of reference,--
Nova Zembla.  Coats, which had hitherto been carried on the arm or
thrown open, were put on and buttoned, and heads were bent to meet the
blast and repel the snow-drift.  Little was said, save a murmured doubt
by Antoine as to the possibility of gaining the summit, even although
they were now so near it, for the day was far spent by that time, and
the rugged nature of the route over they had passed, precluded the
possibility of a rapid return to the hut at the Grands Mulets.  They
pushed steadily on, however, for the Professor was anxious to bury his
thermometer in the snow at the top; the guide was anxious to maintain
his credit for perseverance; and the others were anxious to be able to
say they had reached the highest height in Europe.

In any weather the ascent of Mont Blanc requires somewhat more than the
average share of physical vigour and perseverance; in bad weather it
demands unusual strength and resolution.  When, therefore, a severe
storm of wind arose, most of the party began to show symptoms of
distress.  The labour of ascending, being coupled with that of forcing
way against the blast, was very exhausting to the muscles, while the
extreme cold reduced the physical energy and cooled the most sanguine
spirit.  Antoine alone seemed to be proof against all influences, but
the responsibility lying on him clouded his usually open countenance
with a careworn expression.  Prudence counselled immediate return.
Ambition, as they were now so near the top, urged prolonged effort.  The
guide expressed his anxieties, but meeting with no response, followed
the dictates of his feelings, and pushed on.

Like pillars of living snow they toiled patiently upwards.  Breath
became too precious to waste in words.  They advanced in silence.  The
wind howled around them, and the snow circled in mad evolutions, as if
the demon of wintry storms dwelt there, and meant to defend his citadel
to the "bitter end."  There are two rocks near the summit, which crop
through the ice like rugged jewels in the monarch's diadem.  The lower
is named the Petits Mulets, the upper the Derniers Roches.  On reaching
the latter of these they paused a few moments to rest.  A feeling of
certainty that the end would be gained now began to prevail, but the
guide was a little alarmed, and the Professor horrified, on looking at
their companions' faces, to observe that they were pinched, haggard, and
old-looking, as if they all had aged somewhat during the last few hours!
Captain Wopper's rubicund visage was pale, and his nose blue; the face
of Lewis was white all over, and drawn, as if he were suffering pain;
Dr Lawrence's countenance was yellow, and Slingsby's was green.  The
Professor himself was as bad as his comrades, and the porters were no
better.

"We shan't be beaten now," said the man of science, with a ghastly
smile.

"Go 'head! nev'r s'die s'l'ng's th'r's shot 'n th' locker!" replied the
Captain, in the tone of a man who would rather avoid speaking, if
possible.

"What a face you've got, Stoutley!" said the artist.

"You're another!" replied Lewis, with a horrible grin.

"Allons!" exclaimed the guide, bending once more against the storm.

Once, for a few minutes, the wind ceased and the clouds lifted.  Captain
Wopper uttered a cheer, and rushed forward in advance of the guide, took
off his hat and threw it into the air.  They had reached the round
summit without being aware of it.  They stood 15,781 feet above the
sea-level!  No envious peak rose above their heads.  The whole world lay
below them, bathed, too, in bright sunshine, for the storm, which had so
suddenly swooped upon them, was confined, like an elemental body-guard,
to the head of the mountain-king.  But, clear though it was at the
moment, they were too high in the air to see anything quite distinctly,
yet this hazy aspect had a charm of its own, for it increased the
feeling and idea of vastness in connection with surrounding space.
Around, and now beneath, stood the mountain nobility of the land,
looking, however, somewhat reduced in size and majesty, as seen from the
royal presence.

Scarcely had the mountaineers assembled and glanced at the wondrous
panorama, when the envious clouds swooped down again and mingled with
the snow-drift which once more rose to meet them.

"We must be quick, Monsieur," said Antoine, taking a shovel from one of
the porters, while Le Croix grasped another.  "Where shall we dig?"

The Professor fixed on a spot, and, while the grave of the thermometer
was being dug, a plaid was set up on a couple of alpenstocks, in the
shelter of which the others consumed the bread and wine that had been
saved from breakfast.  It did them little good, however; the cold was
too intense.  The Captain's beard was already fringed with icicles, and
the whiskers of those who had them were covered with hoar-frost, while
the breath issued from their mouths like steam.  Before the thermometer
was buried all had risen, and were endeavouring to recover heat by
rubbing their hands, beating their arms across their breasts, and
stamping violently.

"Come," said the Professor, quickly, when the work was done, "we must
start at once."

"Oui, Monsieur," assented the guide, and, without more words, the whole
party began to descend the mountain at a run.

There was cause for haste.  Not only did the storm increase in violence,
but evening drew on apace, and all of them were more or less exhausted
by prolonged muscular exertion and exposure to severe cold.

Suddenly, having gone a considerable way down the mountain, they emerged
from fog and snow-drift into blazing sunshine!  The strife of elements
was confined entirely to the summit.  The inferior ice-slopes and the
valleys far below were bathed in the golden glories of a magnificent
sunset and, before they reached the huts at the Grands Mulets, they had
passed from a condition of excessive cold to one of extreme heat,
insomuch that the Captain and Professor were compelled to walk with
their coats slung over their shoulders, while perspiration streamed from
their bare brows.

That night the party slept again at the Grands Mulets, and next day they
reached Chamouni, fagged, no doubt, and bearing marks of mountaineering
in the shape of sun-burnt cheeks and peeled noses, but hearty,
nevertheless, and not a little elated with their success in having
scaled the mighty sides and the hoary summit of Mont Blanc.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

TELLS HOW LEWIS DISTINGUISHED HIMSELF.

Seated one morning on an easy chair in Susan Quick's apartment and
swinging his little blue legs to and fro in a careless, negligent
manner, Gillie White announced it as his opinion that Mister Lewis had
gone, or was fast going, mad.

"Why do you think so?" asked Susan, with a smile, looking up for a
moment from some portion of Lewis's nether integuments, which Mont Blanc
had riven almost to shreds.

"W'y do I think so?" repeated Gillie; "w'y, cos he's not content with
havin' busted his boots an' his clo'se, an' all but busted hisself, in
goin' to the top o' Mont Blang an' Monty Rosa, an' all the other
Monty-thingumbobs about but he's agoin' off to day with that queer fish
Laycrwa to hunt some where up above the clouds--in among the stars, I
fancy--for shamwas."

"Indeed!" said Susan, with a neat little laugh.

"Yes, indeed.  He's mountain-mad--mad as a Swiss March hare, if not
madder--By the way, Susan, wot d'ee think o' the French?"

Gillie propounded this question with the air of a philosopher.

"D'you mean French people?"

"No; I means the French lingo, as my friend Cappen Wopper calls it."

"Well, I can't say that I have thought much about it yet.  Missis keeps
me so busy that I haven't time."

"Ah!" said Gillie, "you're wastin' of precious opportoonities, Susan.
I've bin a-studdyin' of that lingo myself, now, for three weeks--off and
on."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Susan, with an amused glance, "and what do _you_
think of it?"

"Think of it!  I think it's the most outrageous stuff as ever was.  The
man who first inwented it must 'ave 'ad p'ralersis o' the brain, besides
a bad cold in 'is 'ead, for most o' the enns an' gees come tumblin'
through the nose, but only git half out after all, as if the speaker was
afraid to let 'em go, lest he shouldn't git hold of 'em again.  There's
that there mountain, now.  They can't call it Mont Blang, with a good
strong out-an'-out bang, like a Briton would do, but they catches hold
o' the gee when it's got about as far as the bridge o' the nose, half
throttles it and shoves it right back, so that you can scarce hear it at
all.  An' the best joke is, there ain't no gee in the word at all!"

"No?" said Susan, in surprise.

"No," repeated Gillie.  "I've bin studdyin' the spellin' o' the words in
shop-winders an' posters, an', would you b'lieve it, they end the word
Blang with a _c_."

"You don't say so!"

"Yes I do; an' how d'ee think they spell the name o' that feller
Laycrwa?"

"I'm sure I don't know," answered Susan.

"They spells it," returned Gillie, with a solemn look, "L-e-c-r-o-i-x.
Now, if _I_ had spelt it that way, I'd have pronounced it Laycroiks.
Wouldn't you?"

"Well, yes, I think I should," said Susan.

"It seems to me," continued Gillie, "that they goes on the plan of
spellin' one way an' purnouncin' another--always takin' care to choose
the most difficult way, an' the most unnatt'ral, so that a feller has no
chance to come near it except by corkin' up one nostril tight, an'
borin' a small extra hole in the other about half-way up.  If you was to
mix a sneeze with what you said, an' paid little or no attention to the
sense, p'raps it would be French--but I ain't sure.  I only wish you
heard Cappen Wopper hoistin' French out of hisself as if he was a wessel
short-handed, an' every word was a heavy bale.  He's werry shy about it,
is the Cappen, an' wouldn't for the world say a word if he thought any
one was near; but when he thinks he's alone with Antoine--that's our
guide, you know--he sometimes lets fly a broadside o' French that
well-nigh takes my breath away."

The urchin broke into a laugh here at the memory of the Captain's
efforts to master what he styled a furrin' tongue, but Susan checked him
by saying slily, "How could you know, Gillie, if the Captain was _alone_
with Antoine?"

"Oh, don't you know," replied Gillie, trying to recover his gravity,
"the Cappen he's wery fond o' me, and I like to gratify his feelin's by
keepin' near him.  Sometimes I keep so near--under the shadow of his
huge calf d'ee see--that he don't observe me on lookin' round; an',
thinkin' he's all alone, lets fly his French broadsides in a way that
a'most sends Antoine on his beam-ends.  But Antoine is tough, he is.  He
gin'rally says, `I not un'r'stan' English ver' well,' shakes his head
an' grins, but the Cappen never listens to his answers, bein' too busy
loadin' and primin' for another broadside."

The man to whom he referred cut short the conversation at this point by
shouting down the stair:--

"Hallo!  Gillie, you powder-monkey, where are my shoes?"

"Here they are, Cappen, all ready; fit to do dooty as a lookin'-glass to
shave yerself," cried the "powder-monkey," leaping up and leaving the
room abruptly.

Gillie's opinion in regard to the madness of Lewis was shared by several
of his friends above stairs.  Doctor Lawrence, especially, felt much
anxiety about him, having overheard one or two conversations held by the
guides on the subject of the young Englishman's recklessness.

"Really, Lewis," said the Doctor, on one occasion, "you _must_ listen to
a lecture from me, because you are in a measure under my charge."

"I'm all attention, sir," said Lewis meekly, as he sat down on the edge
of his bed and folded his hands in his lap.

"Well then, to begin," said the Doctor, with a half-serious smile, "I
won't trouble you with my own opinion, to which you attach no weight--"

"Pardon me, Lawrence, I attach great weight to it--or, rather, it has so
much weight that I can scarcely bear it."

"Just so, and therefore you shan't have it.  But you must admit that the
opinion of a good guide is worth something.  Now, I heard Antoine
Grennon the other day laying down some unquestionable principles to the
Professor--"

"What! lecturing the Professor?" interrupted Lewis, "how very
presumptuous."

"He said," continued the Doctor, "that the dangers connected with the
ascent of these Swiss mountains are _real_, and, unless properly
provided against, may become terrible, if not fatal.  He instanced your
own tendency to go roving about among the glaciers _alone_.  With a
comrade or a guide attached to you by a rope there is no danger worth
speaking of, but it must be as clear to you as it is to me that it when
out on the mountains alone, you step on a snow-covered crevasse and
break through, your instant death is inevitable."

"Yes, but," objected Lewis, with that unwillingness to be convinced
which is one of the chief characteristics of youth, "I always walk, when
_alone_ on the glaciers, with the utmost caution, sounding the snow in
front of me with the long handle of my axe at every step as I go."

"If the guides do not find this always a sufficient protection for
themselves, by what amazing power of self-sufficiency do you persuade
yourself that it is sufficient for _you_?" demanded Lawrence.

"Your question suffices, Doctor," said Lewis, laughing; "go on with your
lecture, I'm all attention and, and humility."

"Not my lecture," retorted Lawrence, "the guide's.  He was very strong,
I assure you, on the subject of men going on the high glaciers _without
a rope_, or, which comes to the same thing, _alone_, and he was not less
severe on those who are so foolhardy, or so ignorant, as to cross steep
slopes of ice on new-fallen snow.  Nothing is easier, the new snow
affording such good foothold, as you told us the other day when
describing your adventures under the cliffs of Monte Rosa, and yet
nothing is more dangerous, says Antoine, for if the snow were to slip,
as it is very apt to do, you would be smothered in it, or swept into a
crevasse by it.  Lives are lost in the Alps _every year_, I am told,
owing to indifference to these two points.  The guides say--and their
opinions are corroborated by men of science and Alpine experience--that
it is dangerous to meddle with any slope exceeding 30 degrees for
several days after a heavy fall, and yet it is certain that slopes
exceeding this angle are traversed annually by travellers who are
ignorant, or reckless, or both.  Did you not say that the slope which
you crossed the other day was a steeper angle than this, and the snow on
