Whether the "bit of sea" came up to expectations or not I know not.  I
was in no condition to criticise even my own movements.  I believe that
as time went on I became gradually amalgamated with the larger roiling
heap of fellow-sufferers on the floor, and during the last hour or so of
our misery rolled in concert with them.  But I should be sorry to state
positively that it was so.

All I know is that about a hundred years after we had passed the Isle of
Man I became suddenly awake to the consciousness that something
tremendous had happened.  Had we struck in mid-ocean? had the masts
above us gone by the board? were we sinking? or what?

On careful reflection I decided we were doing neither, and that the
cause of my agitation was that the last wave but one had gone past the
ship without breaking over her.  And out of the next dozen waves we
scrambled over I counted at least five which let us off in a similar
manner!

Oh, the rapture of the discovery!  I closed my eyes again lest by any
chance it should turn out to be a dream.

The next thing I was conscious of was a rough hand on my shoulder and a
voice shouting, "Now then, mister, wake up; all ashore except you.
Can't stay on board all day!"

I rubbed my eyes and bounded to my feet.

The _Royal Duke_ was at a standstill in calm water, and the luggage-
crane was busy at work overhead.

"Are we there?"  I gasped.

"All except you," said the sailor.

"How long have we been in?"

"Best part of an hour.  Got any luggage, mister?"

An hour!  Then I had missed my man once more!  Was ever luck like mine?

I gathered up my crumpled hat and umbrella, and staggered out of that
awful cabin.

"Look here," said I to the sailor, "did you see the passengers go
ashore?"

"I saw the steerage passengers go," said he; "and a nice-looking lot
they was."

"There was one of the steerage passengers I wanted particularly to see.
Did you see one with a portmanteau and hat-box?"

"Plenty of 'em," was the reply.

"Yes; but his was quite a new hat-box; you couldn't mistake it," said I.

"Maybe I saw him.  There was one young fellow--"

"Dark?"

"Yes; dark."

"And tall?"

"Yes; tall enough."

"Dismal-looking?"

"They were all that."

"Did you see which way he went?"

"No; but I heard him ask the mate the way to the Northern Counties
Railway; so I guess he's for the Derry line."

It was a sorry clue; but the only one.  I was scarcely awake; and, after
my night of tragedy, was hardly in a position to resume the hue and cry.
Yet anything was preferable to going back to sea.

So I took a car for the Northern Counties station.  For a wonder I was
in time for the train, which, I was told, was due to start in an hour's
time.

I spent that hour first of all in washing, then in breakfasting, finally
in telegraphing to my manager--

"Fancy tracked him here rough crossing--will wire again shortly."

Then having satisfied myself that none of the steamer passengers could
possibly have caught an earlier train, and determined not to lose the
train this time, I took a ticket for Londonderry, and ensconced myself a
good quarter of an hour before the appointed hour in a corner of a
carriage commanding a good view of the booking-office door.

As the minutes sped by, and no sign of my man, I began to grow nervous.
After all he might be staying in Belfast, or, having got wind of my
pursuit, might be escaping in some other direction.  It was not a
comfortable reflection, not did it add to my comfort that among the
passengers who crowded into my carriage, and helped to keep out my view
of the booking-office door, was the gloomy, detective-looking individual
whose demeanour had so disconcerted me during the first stage of this
disastrous journey.

He eyed me as suspiciously as ever from behind his everlasting
newspaper, and under his scrutiny I hardly dared persevere in my own
look-out.  I made a pretext of buying a newspaper in order to keep near
the door.  To my dismay the whistle suddenly sounded as I was counting
my change, and the train began to move off.  At the same moment a
figure, carrying in one hand a portmanteau and in the other a hat-box,
rushed frantically into the station, and made a blind clash at the very
door where I stood.  I shrunk back in a panic to my distant corner, with
my heart literally in my mouth.  There was a brief struggle on the
doorstep; the hat-box flew in, and the door was actually opened to admit
the owner, when a couple of porters laid violent hands upon him and
dragged him off the train.

It was not I who had been left behind this time, but Michael McCrane;
and while he and his portmanteau remained disconsolate in Belfast, I and
his hat-box were being whirled in the direction of Londonderry in the
company of a person who, whatever he may have thought of McCrane,
without doubt considered me a fugitive!

It was a trying position, and I was as much at sea as I had been during
the agitated hours of the terrible night, I tried to appear calm, and
took refuge behind my newspaper in order to collect my ideas and
interpose a screen between myself and the critical stare of my fellow-
passenger.  Alas! it was avoiding Scylla only to fall into Charybdis.
The first words which met my eyes were:--

"Bank Robbery in London.--

"A robbery was perpetrated in ---'s bank on Wednesday night, under
circumstances which point to one of the cashiers as the culprit.  The
manager's box, containing a considerable amount of loose cash, was found
broken open, and it is supposed the thief has also made away with a
considerable sum in notes and securities.  The cashier in question has
disappeared and is supposed to have absconded to the north.  He is dark
complexioned, pale, mysterious in his manners, and aged 26.  When last
seen wore a tall hat, gloves, and a grey office suit."

Instinctively I pulled off my gloves and deposited my hat in the rack
overhead, and tried to appear engrossed in another portion of the paper.
But I could not refrain from darting a look at my fellow-traveller.  To
my horror I perceived that the paper he was reading was the same as the
one I had; and that the page between which and myself his eyes were
uncomfortably oscillating was the very page on which the fatal paragraph
appeared.

_I_ was dark, _I_ was pale (after my voyage), and who should say my
manners were not mysterious?

In imagination I stood already in the box of the Old Bailey and heard
myself sentenced to the treadmill, and was unable to offer the slightest
explanation in palliation of my mysterious conduct.

In such agreeable reveries I passed the first hour of the journey; when,
to my unfeigned relief, on reaching Antrim my fellow-traveller quitted
the carriage.  No doubt his object was a sinister one, and when I saw
him speak to the constable at the station, I had no doubt in my own mind
that my liberty was not worth five minutes' purchase.  But even so,
anything seemed better than his basilisk eye in the corner of the
carriage.

I hastily prepared my defence and resolved on a dignified refusal to
criminate myself under any provocation.  What were they doing?  To my
horror, the "detective," the constable, the guard, and the station-
master all advanced on my carriage.

"In there?" said the official.

My late fellow-traveller nodded.  The station-master opened the door and
entered the carriage.  I was in the act of opening my lips to say--

"I surrender myself--there is no occasion for violence," when the
station-master laid his hand on the hat-box.

"It's labelled to C--," he said; "take it along, guard, and put it out
there.  He's sure to come on by the next train.  Right away there!"

Next moment we were off.  What did it all mean?  I was not under arrest!
Nobody had noticed me; but McCrane's hat-box had engaged the attention
of four public officials.

"Free and easy way of doing things on this line," said an Englishman in
the carriage; "quite the regular thing for a man and his luggage to go
by different trains.  Always turns up right in the end.  Are you going
to Derry, sir?" he added addressing me.

"No," said I, hastily.  "I'm getting out at the next station."

"What--at --" and he pronounced the name something like "Tobacco."

"Yes," I said, pining for liberty, no matter the name it was called by.

At the next station I got out.  It was a little wayside place without
even a village that I could see to justify its claim to a station at
all.  Nobody else got out; and as soon as the train had gone, I was left
to explain my presence to what appeared to be the entire population of
the district, to wit, a station-master, a porter, and a constable who
carried a carbine.  I invented some frivolous excuse; asked if there
wasn't a famous waterfall somewhere near; and on being told that the
locality boasted of no such attraction, feigned to be dismayed; and was
forced to resign myself to wait three hours for the next train.

It was at least a good thing to be in solitude for a short time to
collect my scattered wits.  McCrane was bound for C--, and would
probably come in the _next_ train, which, by the way, was the last.
That was all I had a clear idea about.  There was a telegraph office at
the station, and I thought I might as well report progress to my
manager.

"On the trail.  Expect news from C--.  Wire me there, post-office, if
necessary."

The station-master (who, as usual, was postmaster too) received this
message from my hands, and the remainder of the population--I mean the
porter and the constable--who were with him at the time read it over his
shoulder.  They all three looked hard at me, and the station-master said
"Tenpence!" in a tone which made my blood curdle.  I was doomed to be
suspected wherever I went!  What did they take me for now?

I decided to take a walk and inspect the country round.  It annoyed me
to find that the constable with his carbine thought well to take a walk
too, and keep me well in view.

I tried to dodge him, but he was too smart for me; and when finally to
avoid him I took shelter in a wayside inn, he seated himself on the
bench outside and smoked till I was ready to come out.

I discovered a few more inhabitants, but it added nothing to my comfort.
They, too, stared at me and followed me about, until finally I ran back
to the station and cried out in my heart for the four o'clock train.

About five o'clock it strolled up.  I got in anywhere, without even
troubling to look for Michael McCrane.  If he should appear at C--, well
and good, I would arrest him; if not, I would go home.  For the present,
at least, I would dismiss him from my mind and try to sleep.

I did try, but that was all.  We passed station after station.  Some we
halted at, as it appeared, by accident; some we went past, and then, on
second thoughts, pulled up and backed into.  At last, as we ran through
one of these places I fancied I detected in the gloaming the name C--
painted up.

"Is that C--?"  I asked of a fellow-traveller.

"It is so!  You should have gone in the back of the train if you wanted
to stop there."

Missed again!  I grew desperate.  The train was crawling along at a
foot's pace; my fellow-traveller was not a formidable one.  I opened the
door and jumped out on to the line.

I was uninjured, and C-- was not a mile away.  If I ran I might still be
there to meet the back of the train and Michael McCrane.

But as I began to run a grating sound behind me warned me that the train
had suddenly pulled up, and a shout proclaimed that I was being pursued.

Half a dozen passengers and the guard--none of them pressed for time--
joined in the hue and cry.

What it was all about I cannot imagine; all I know is that that evening,
in the meadows near C--, a wretched Cockney, in a battered chimney-pot
hat, and carrying an umbrella, was wantonly run to earth by a handful of
natives, and that an hour later the same unhappy person was clapped in
the village lock-up for the night as a suspicious character!  It had all
been tending to this.  Fate had marked me for her own, and run me down
at last.  Perhaps I _was_ a criminal after all, and did not know it.  At
any rate, I was too fatigued to care much what happened.  I "reserved my
defence," as they say in the police courts, and resigned myself to spend
the night as comfortably as possible in the comparative seclusion of a
small apartment which, whatever may have been its defects, compared most
favourably with the cabin in which I had lain the night before.

It was about ten o'clock next morning before I had an opportunity of
talking my case over with the inspector, and suggesting to him he had
better let me go.  He, good fellow, at once fell in with my wishes,
after hearing my statement, and in his anxiety to efface any unpleasant
impressions, I suppose, proposed an adjournment to the "Hotel" to drink
"siccess to the ould counthree."

The proposed toast was not sufficiently relevant to the business I had
on hand to allure me, so I made my excuses and hastened to the telegraph
office to ascertain whether they had any message for me there.

They had.  It was from my manager, as I expected; but the contents were
astounding--

"Return at once.  Robber captured here.  Keep down expenses."

It would be hard to say which of these three important sentences struck
me as the most cruel.  I think the last.

I was standing in the street, staring blankly at the missive, when I was
startled beyond measure by feeling a hand on my shoulder, and a voice
pronouncing my name--

"Samuels!"

It was Michael McCrane.  But not the Michael McCrane I knew in the City,
or the one I had seen going below on board the steamer.  He wore a
frock-coat and light trousers, lavender gloves, and a hat--glorious
product of that identical box--in which you might see your own face.  A
rose was in his button-hole, his hair was brushed, his collar was white,
and his chin was absolutely smooth.

"Whatever are you doing here?" he asked.

"Oh," faltered I, for I was fairly overcome, both by my own misfortunes
and his magnificent appearance, "nothing; only a--a little business run,
you know, for the manager."

"I didn't know we had any customers in these parts."

"Well no.  But, I say, what are _you_ doing here?"

"Business too," said he--"grave business.  By the way, Samuels, have you
got any better clothes than these?"

Here was a question.  And from Michael McCrane!

"Because," he went on--and here he became embarrassed himself--"if you
had--in fact, you'd do as you are, because you won't have to wear your
hat.  What I mean is, that now you _are_ here--I'd be awfully obliged if
