elevation rose above the general level. The change was very
welcome, for they were able to travel faster, and there was less
chance of their coming suddenly upon a party of the disbanded
troops.

Presently, just as they reached a larger village than usual, by the
river bank, a thick smoke arose from one of the houses, and they
could hear female screams.

"Come on!" Stanley shouted, to the three men riding behind him.
"See that your pistols are ready to hand, and draw your swords."

Illustration: Stanley cut down the man who was about to fire the
hut.

This village was not, like the last, stockaded; being some miles
away from the forest. As they dashed into it, they saw some twenty
Burmese. Two women lay dead, in front of one house; and one of the
men, with a torch, was about to fire another. Absorbed in their own
doings, the Burmese did not notice the coming of the horsemen until
the latter were close to them. Then, with a cry of consternation,
they turned to fly; but it was too late. Stanley cut down the man
who was about to fire the hut, and he and the others then fell upon
the Burmans, with sword and pistol. Six of them were killed. The
rest were pursued but, dashing down to the river, they plunged in,
pistol shots being sent after them.

Stanley remained on the bank, until he saw that they had fairly
started to cross the river, then he re-entered the village. Two or
three frightened people came out from their hiding places, when
Meinik shouted to them that all was safe.

"They have all gone," he said, "you need not fear being disturbed
by them again. See, there are six guns lying in the road; and you
will find plenty of ammunition on those fellows that have fallen.
There are some spears and swords, too. Of course, you can do
nothing if a number of these fellows come; but if there are only
two or three, you and the women ought to be able to dispose of
them. Now we must ride on."

On the third day they arrived at Tharawa, and found that Sir A.
Campbell, who had been assured by the natives that Bandoola had
retreated, had continued his march the day before. The place was so
large that Stanley thought it unsafe for them to sleep there, and
they rode on to a little village, two miles away. Here they were
received with great deference, the passage of the troops the day
before having profoundly impressed the villagers. After waiting
three hours to rest the horses, they again mounted and, riding all
night, arrived in the morning at Yuadit--a village twenty-six miles
from Tharawa--and found the force on the point of starting.

"No bad news, I hope, Mr. Brooke?" the general said, as he rode up
to him.

"I am sorry to say, sir, that my news is not good. Here is the
brigadier's despatch."

"This is unfortunate, indeed," the general said, when he had run
his eye over the document.

"Mr. Tollemache, please to ride along the line, and say that the
column is not to get into motion until further orders."

Colonel Adair and the other officers of the staff had been on the
point of mounting, when Stanley rode up. The general called two or
three of the senior officers to him.

"Cotton can neither take Donabew, nor get past it," he said. "Here
is his despatch. You see, he has lost several officers and a good
many men; and that in the assault on an outlying work, only. I am
afraid that there is nothing for us to do, but go back to his
assistance."

"I am afraid not, sir," Colonel Adair said. "Our supplies are
running short already and, you see, we decided upon filling up all
the carts at Tharawa, where we made sure that we should be met by
the boats. The country round here has been completely stripped, and
it would be a very serious matter to endeavour to advance to Prome,
without supplies. Moreover, we might expect a much more serious
resistance than we have bargained for. The news that Bandoola has
repulsed his assailants--and you may be sure that this has been
exaggerated into a great victory--will restore the spirit of the
Burmese. It is evident that we must turn back, and finish off with
Bandoola before we advance further."

Orders were accordingly sent, to the officers commanding the
various corps, that the column was to retrace its steps and, while
they passed through the village, Stanley related, in much greater
detail than had been given in the despatch, the events of the
attack, and the nature of the defences at Donabew.

The troops marched along with a cheerful mien. It was, of course,
an annoyance to have to plod back along the road they had before
traversed but, upon the other hand, there was a general
satisfaction that they were, after all, to take part in the capture
of Bandoola's last stronghold.

Colonel Adair rode on with the little troop of cavalry. He was to
push forward to Tharawa, and was to offer rewards to the natives
there for every boat brought in. There was little doubt that many
of the fishermen had hauled up their craft into clumps of bushes
and brush wood, to prevent their being requisitioned by Bandoola
and, although it was not likely that a large number would now be
obtained, yet even if but a dozen were found, it would be of
assistance.

The rest of the force reached Tharawa on the following evening,
with the exception of a party left to protect the slow-moving
waggons. They found that nine canoes had been obtained, and that a
considerable portion of the scanty population had been, all day,
employed in cutting bamboos and timber for rafts.

The next morning the troops were all engaged on the same work, and
in the construction of rafts; and at nightfall three hundred men of
the 49th were taken across the river to the town of Henzada, in
case Bandoola, on hearing of the preparations for crossing, should
send a force to oppose the passage. It took four days' continuous
labour to get the little army across, as it was necessary to make
large timber rafts to carry the carts, horses and bullocks, guns
and stores.

Hearing that a force was posted, some fifteen miles away, to
intercept the detachment that was marching from Bassein; Colonel
Godwin, with a party, was sent off that night to endeavour to
surprise it. The Burmese, however, took the alarm before they were
attacked; and scattered in all directions, without firing a shot.
The army marched along the right bank, and arrived before Donabew
on the 25th of March. Communications were opened with General
Cotton's force, below the town; and both divisions set to work to
erect batteries.

The Burmese made several sorties to interrupt the work, and one of
these was accompanied by Bandoola's seventeen elephants. The troop
of cavalry, horse artillery, and the rocket company charged close
up to the elephants; and opened fire upon the howdahs, filled with
troops, that they carried. In a short time most of these and the
drivers were killed; and the elephants--many of which also had
received wounds--dashed off into the jungle, while the infantry
fled back into the stockade, into which a discharge of shells and
rockets was maintained, all day.

The next morning--the 1st of April--the mortar batteries were
completed; and these, and others armed with light guns, kept up a
continuous fire into the enemy's camp. At daybreak on the 2nd, the
heavy guns of the breaching batteries also opened fire and, in a
very short time, the enemy were seen pouring out in the rear of
their works, and making their way into the jungle. As there had
been no idea that they would so speedily evacuate the stockade, no
preparations had been made for cutting them off; and the garrison,
therefore, effected their escape with but little loss.

The troops at once occupied the work, and found large stores of
grain and ammunition there, as well as a great number of guns. From
some of the wounded Burmans, it was ascertained that the evacuation
of the fort was due to the death of Bandoola; who had been killed,
by the explosion of a shell, while watching the operations from a
lookout that had been erected for him, at the top of a lofty tree.
His death had caused the most profound depression among the
garrison. Their leaders in vain endeavoured to reanimate their
courage. The opening of the fire with the heavy guns completed
their discomfiture, and they fled without thought of resistance.
Indeed, the greater part had stolen away during the night.

A portion of the fleet had already passed up beyond the fort, under
a heavy fire; and the rest now came up. The supplies of grain were
renewed and, a guard being left to hold the works, which would now
serve as a base, the army again started up the river--the water
column proceeding to Tharawa, the land force marching back to
Henzada, whence they were carried across the river in the boats.
Here the force was joined by the reserve column from Rangoon,
consisting of several companies of the Royals and the 28th Native
Infantry, with a supply of elephants and carriage cattle which had
arrived from Calcutta.

On the 14th, Yuadit was again reached. No opposition, whatever, was
encountered; indeed, the whole country was deserted, the
inhabitants having been ordered away by the Burmese authorities, as
soon as the fall of Donabew was known. When within four days' march
of Prome, two native officials came in, with a communication to the
effect that the Burmese were ready to treat for peace. As it was
known, however, that reinforcements were on their way down from
Ava, it was evident that this was merely a pretext to gain time;
and the general sent word that, when he arrived at Prome, he would
be ready to open negotiations for peace.

The country through which the army was now passing was very
beautiful. In the far distance on the left, the mountains of Aracan
could be seen; while on the right the country was undulating,
richly cultivated, and broken by clumps of timber, with a
background of the range of hills running along near the Pegu river.
On the 24th the heights of Prome, eight miles away, were visible;
and the flotilla could be seen, lying at anchor a short distance
below the town. Messengers came out that afternoon, to endeavour to
induce the general not to enter it; but a reply was sent that this
was out of the question, that no harm would befall the inhabitants,
and that--as soon as he entered--the general would be ready to
receive any persons qualified to treat for peace.

Some hours before daybreak the army marched forward and, by
sunrise, were close to the town. The position was found to be
extremely strong. Every hill commanding the place had been
fortified, to the very summit. Strong stockades ran in every
direction, and it was evident that a great number of men must have
been engaged, for a long time, in attempting to render the place
impregnable.

Not a soldier, however, was to be found. A native of the place
presently met them, with the news that the governor and troops had
evacuated it, with the exception of a small party who were firing
the town. This story was corroborated by wreaths of smoke, rising
at various points.

The troops pressed forward at the top of their speed. On entering
the town, they found that the native population had all been forced
to leave and, piling their arms, they set to work to extinguish the
flames; which they did not, however, succeed in doing until nearly
half the town was destroyed. Fortunately the fire was checked
before it reached the great magazines of grain, and other stores,
for the army.

The belief that the negotiations had been only pretexts to arrest
the advance of the troops against the town, until the expected
reinforcements arrived, was confirmed by the natives; who presently
came in from hiding places where they had taken refuge, until their
army retired. They said that, as soon as the news came of the fall
of Donabew, fresh levies were ordered to be collected in every part
of Upper Burma; while the whole population of the province had been
employed in adding to the defences of the town, which had been
already very strongly stockaded.

It was a disappointment to the force, which had hoped that the
occupation of Prome would bring about the submission of the court
of Ava; and enable them to be taken down the river in boats, and
embark, before the rainy season again set in. Nevertheless, the
prospect of passing that season at Prome was vastly more pleasant
than if it had to be spent at Rangoon. They were now inland, beyond
the point where the rains were continuous. The town was situated on
high ground, and the country round was open and healthy. Although
for some little distance round the cattle had been driven off, and
the villages destroyed; it was certain that flying columns would be
able to bring in any amount of cattle, before the wet season began.

For a short time, it was thought that the occupation of Prome would
show the king and court that it was useless to continue the
struggle, any longer; but these hopes were dissipated when it was
known that a further levy of 30,000 men had been called out. The
court, however, was apparently conscious that its commands would no
longer be obeyed with the alacrity before manifested. The early
levies had obeyed the call with cheerfulness; believing in their
invincibility, and confident that they would return home laden with
spoil after driving, without difficulty, the audacious strangers
into the sea. Things, however, had not turned out so. The troops
that had left Ava in high spirits had been routed, with very heavy
losses. Their great general, Bandoola, had been killed; and
fugitives from the army were scattered over the land, bearing with
them reports of the extraordinary fighting powers of these white
enemies, and of the hopelessness of attempting to resist them. The
consequence was that in issuing the order for the new levy a bounty
of twenty pounds, which to the Burmans was a very large sum, was
offered to each man who obeyed the call.

The first step, on the part of the British general, was to send
proclamations through the country; guaranteeing protection to all,
and inviting the population to return to their towns and villages.
The troops were employed in erecting, with the assistance of as
much native labour as could be procured, comfortable huts outside
the town; so that the natives, on returning should find their homes
unoccupied and untouched. It was not long before this excellent
policy had its due effect. As soon as those who first returned sent
the news to their friends, the fugitives came out from their hiding
places in the forests, in great numbers, and returned to the city.
Those whose homes were still standing settled down in them and
resumed their ordinary avocations, just as if their native rulers
were still in authority; while those whose houses had been burned
set to work, with a cheerfulness characteristic of their race, to
re-erect their light wooden dwellings.

So favourable were the reports spread through the country of our
conduct that, in a short time, the population of Prome was
considerably larger than it had been before the advance of our
army. Similar results were speedily manifest throughout the whole
district below the town. From the great forest that covered more
than half of it, the villagers poured out, driving before them
herds of cattle and, in two or three months, the country that had
appeared a desert became filled with an industrious population.
Order was established. The local civil officers were again
appointed to their former posts, but their powers of oppression and
intimidation were abrogated, by the order that no punishment beyond
a short term of imprisonment was to be inflicted on any person,
whatever, until the case had been brought before the British
authorities; and soon the only fear entertained by the people of
the rich district of the lower Irrawaddy was that the British
troops would march away, and leave them again to the oppression and
tyranny of their former masters.

The markets of Prome were abundantly supplied with food of all
sorts and, as everything was liberally paid for, any number of
bullocks were obtainable for, although the Burmese are forbidden by
their religion to kill cattle, and therefore keep them only for
draught purposes, they had no objection to our killing them; or
indeed, to eat the meat, when they could obtain it. Labour of all
kinds was abundant, and great numbers of canoes were constructed
for the purpose of bringing up supplies from the villages on the
river, and for the advance of the force at the end of the wet
season. Until this set in in earnest, small bodies of troops
marched through the forests; driving out the bands that infested
them, and plundered and killed the country people without mercy.

The general's aides-de-camp had a busy time of it, being constantly
employed in carrying orders to the towns and villages, in hearing
complaints and, in Stanley's case, entering into agreements for the
purchase of cattle and grain. When in Prome, he spent a good deal
of his spare time with his cousin who, having bought a horse,
frequently obtained leave to accompany him on his excursions on
duty. A warm friendship had sprung up between them. Harry was two
years older than Stanley, and had been at Eton up to the time that
he entered the army. He was, however, in manner no older than his
cousin; whose work, for the three years previous to the outbreak of
the war, had rendered him graver and more manly than a life spent
among lads of his own age could have done.

Meinik always accompanied Stanley, wherever he went. He had now, to
the latter's quiet amusement, modified his Burmese costume; making
it look like that of some of the whites and, indeed, he would have
passed without notice as one of the Goa-Portuguese mess waiters, in
his suit of white nankeen. When riding, or on any service away from
the headquarter camp, he was dressed in a suit of tough brown khaki
which he had obtained from one of the traders at Rangoon. The coat
differed but little from that of the suit Stanley had handed over
to him; except that it was somewhat shorter and without the small
shoulder cape and, in fact, resembled closely the modern regimental
tunic. Below he wore knee breeches of the same material; with
putties, or long bands of cloth, wound round and round the leg, and
which possessed many advantages over gaiters. He still clung to the
turban but, instead of being white, it was of the same colour as
his clothes, and was much larger than the Burmese turban.

"Burmese are great fools," he often said to Stanley. "They think
they know a great deal; they know nothing at all. They think they
are great fighters; they are no good at fighting, for one
Englishman beats ten of them. Their government is no good--it keeps
everyone very poor and miserable. You come here; you know nothing
of the country, and yet you make everyone comfortable. We ride
through the villages; we see everyone rejoicing that they are
governed by the English, and hoping that the English will never go
away again.

"What do you think, sir--will you stay here always? You have had
much trouble to take the country. A great many people have been
ill; a great many died. Now you have got it, why should you go away
again?"

"It is quite certain that we shall not give it all up, Meinik. It
has been, as you say, a troublesome and very expensive business;
and the farther the king obliges us to go up, before he makes
peace, the more he will have to pay, either in money or territory.
Of course, I cannot say what the terms of peace will be; but I
should think that, very likely, we shall hold the country from the
sea up to here, with Aracan and a strip along the sea coast of
Tenasserim."

"That will be good," Meinik said. "I shall never go outside the
English land, again. There will be plenty to do, and a great trade
on the river; everyone will be happy and contented. I should be a
fool to go back to Upper Burma; where they would chop off my head,
if they knew that I had been down to Rangoon when the English were
there."



Chapter 12: Harry Carried Off.


Early in September, Stanley was sent to purchase cattle from some
of the villages near the foot of the hills and, at the same time,
to make inquiries as to the movements of a large band of marauders
who had been making raids in that neighbourhood. He had with him
four troopers of the bodyguard. Harry Brooke accompanied him.
Although from the healthier situation of Prome, the amount of
illness during the wet season did not approach that which had been
suffered at Rangoon, a great many men were in hospital, and there
were many deaths. Harry had had a sharp attack of fever and, as he
had now recovered, to a certain extent, the medical officer of his
regiment strongly recommended that he should have a change; and he
therefore, without difficulty, obtained his colonel's leave to
accompany Stanley, as the ground would be much higher than that on
the river, and the mere fact of getting away from a camp where so
many deaths took place every day would, in itself, be of great
value.

Stanley's daily journeys were not likely to be long ones, as he had
instructions to stop at all villages; and to see how things were
going on, and whether the people had any complaints to make of
oppression and exaction by their local authorities.

