"Never!" returned the chief vehemently.  "The palefaces shall die; but
they shall live one day longer while this matter is considered in
council, for it is only children who act in haste.  Go!  Bearpaw has
spoken."

To have secured even the delay of a single day was almost more than the
prisoners' friends had hoped for, and they resolved to make the most of
it.

"Now, Hendrick," said Paul, when they were in the tent that had been set
aside for their use, "we must be prepared, you and I, to give the chief
a full account of our religion; for, depend on it, his mind has been
awakened, and he won't rest satisfied with merely discussing the subject
with his men of war."

"True, Paul; what do you propose to do?"

"The first thing I shall do is to pray for guidance.  After that I will
talk with you."

"For my part," said Captain Trench, as Paul rose and left the tent, "I
see no chance of moving that savage by religion or anything else, so
I'll go an' make arrangements for the carryin' out o' _my_ plans.  Come
along to the woods with me, Olly, I shall want your help."

"Father," said the boy, in a serious tone, as they entered the forest,
"surely you don't mean to carry out in earnest the plan you spoke of to
Grummidge and the others yesterday?"

"Why not, my son?"

"Because we are sure to be all killed if you do.  As well might we try
to stop the rising tide as to subdue a whole tribe of savages."

"And would you, Olly," said the seaman, stopping and looking sternly at
the boy, "would you advise me to be so mean as to look on at the
slaughter of my shipmates without making one effort to save them?"

"I would never advise you to do anything mean, father; an' if I did so
advise you, you wouldn't do it; but the effort you think of makin' would
not save the men.  It would only end in all of us bein' killed."

"Well, and what o' that?  Would it be the first time that men have been
killed in a good cause?"

"But a cause can't be a good one unless some good comes of it!  If there
was a chance at all, I would say go at 'em, daddy, an' bowl 'em down
like skittles, but you know there's no chance in your plan.  Boltin'
into the woods an' gittin' lost would be little use in the face o'
savages that can track a deer by invisible footprints.  An' fighting
them would be like fighting moskitoes--one thousand down, another
thousand come on!  Besides, when you an' I are killed--which we're sure
to be--what would come o' mother, sittin' there all alone, day after
day, wonderin' why we never come back, though we promised to do so?
Think how anxious it'll make her for years to come, an' how
broken-hearted at last; an' think how careful she always was of you.
Don't you remember in that blessed letter she sent me, just before we
sailed, how she tells me to look well after you, an' sew the frogs on
your sea-coat when they git loose, for she knows you'll never do it
yourself, but will be fixin' it up with a wooden skewer or a bit o'
rope-yarn.  An' how I was to see an' make you keep your feet dry by
changin' your hose for you when you were asleep, for you'd never change
them yourself till all your toes an' heels came through 'em.  Ah! daddy,
it will be a bad job for mother if they kill you and me!"

"But what can I do, Olly?" said the mariner, in a somewhat husky voice,
when this pathetic picture was presented to his view.  "Your mother
would be the last to advise me to stand by and look on without moving a
finger to save 'em.  What can I do, Olly?  What can I do?"

This question was more easily put than answered.  Poor Oliver looked as
perplexed as his sire.

"Pr'aps," he said, "we might do as Paul said he'd do, an' pray about
it."

"Well, we might do worse, my son.  If I only could believe that the
Almighty listens to us an' troubles Himself about our small affairs,
I--"

"Don't you think it likely, father," interrupted the boy, "that if the
Almighty took the trouble to make us, He will take the trouble to think
about and look after us?"

"There's somethin' in that, Olly.  Common sense points out that there's
somethin' in that."

Whether or not the captain acted on his son's suggestion, there is no
record to tell.  All we can say is that he spent the remainder of that
day in a very disturbed, almost distracted, state of mind, now paying
short visits to the prisoners, anon making sudden rushes towards the
chief's tent with a view to plead their cause, and checking himself on
remembering that he knew no word of the Indian tongue; now and then
arguing hotly with Paul and Hendrick, that all had not been done which
might or ought to have been done, and sometimes hurrying into the woods
alone.

Meanwhile, as had been anticipated, the chief sent for Hendrick and Paul
to demand an explanation of the strange words which they had used about
forgiveness and the broken law of the Great Spirit and Jesus Christ.

It would be out of place here to enter into the details of all that was
said on both sides, but it may not be uninteresting to state that,
during the discussion, both the palefaces and the red men became so
intensely absorbed in contemplation of the vast region of comparatively
new thought into which they were insensibly led, that they forgot for
the time being the main object of the meeting, namely, the ultimate fate
of the captives.

That the chief and his warriors were deeply impressed with the Gospel
message was evident, but it was equally evident that the former was not
to be moved from his decision, and in this the warriors sympathised with
him.  His strong convictions in regard to retributive justice were not
to be shaken.

"No," he said, at the end of the palaver, "the blood of a Bethuck has
been shed; the blood of the palefaces must flow."

"But tell him that that is not just even according to his own views,"
said Paul.  "The blood of one paleface ought to suffice for the blood of
one Bethuck."

This was received in silence.  Evidently it had some weight with the
chief.

"The paleface is right," he said, after a minute's thought.  "Only one
shall die.  Let the prisoners decide among themselves who shall be
killed.  Go, Bearpaw has spoken--waugh!"

A few minutes later, and the prisoners, with their friends, were
assembled in the cave discussing this new phase of their case.

"It's horrible!" said Grummidge.  "D'ye think the chief is really in
earnest?"

"There can be no doubt of it," said Hendrick.

"Then, my lads, I'll soon bid ye all farewell, for as I was your leader
when the so-called murder was done, I'm bound in honour to take the
consequences."

"Not at all," cried Squill, whose susceptible heart was touched with
this readiness to self-sacrifice.  "You can't be spared yet, Grummidge;
if any man shud die it's the Irishman.  Shure it's used we are to bein'
kilt, anyhow!"

"There'll be none o' you killed at all," cried Captain Trench, starting
up with looks of indignation.  "I'll go and carry out _my_ plans--ah!
you needn't look like that, Olly, wi' your poor mother's reproachful
eyes, for I'm determined to do it, right or wrong!"



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

DELIVERANCE.

Fortunately for Captain Trench, and indeed for the whole party, the
execution of his plan was rendered unnecessary by an incident the full
significance of which requires that we should transport the reader to
another, but not far distant, part of the beautiful wilderness of
Newfoundland.

Under the boughs of a spreading larch, on the summit of a mound which
commanded a wide prospect of plain and morass, sat an Indian woman.  She
might have been taken for an old woman, so worn and thin was she, and so
hollow were her cheeks; but the glossy blackness of her hair, the
smoothness of her brow, and the glitter of her dark eyes told that she
was yet in her youthful years.

She sat perfectly listless, with a vacant yet steadfast expression on
her thin features, as if she were dreaming with her eyes open.  The view
before her was such as might indeed arouse the admiration of the most
stolid; but it was evident that she took no notice of it, for her eyes
were fixed on the clouds above the horizon.

Long she sat, almost motionless, thus gazing into space.  Then she began
to sing in a low sweet voice a plaintive air, which rose and fell for
some time more like a tuneful wail than a song.  Suddenly, and in the
very midst of her song, she burst into a wild laugh, which increased in
vehemence until it rang through the forest in a scream so terrible that
it could be accounted for by nothing but insanity.  That the poor
creature's reason was indeed dethroned became evident from her
subsequent movements, for after falling backwards from the exhaustion
produced by her effort, or, it might be, from the sheer weakness
resulting from partial starvation, she got up and began quietly to cut
up and devour raw a small bird which she had killed with a stone.
Strengthened a little by this food, she rose and made a futile effort to
draw more closely around her a little shawl, or rather kerchief of
deerskin, which covered her shoulders, shuddering with cold as she did
so.

Her short leathern gown and leggings were so soiled and torn that the
ornamental work with which they had been originally decorated was almost
invisible, and the moccasins she had worn hung in mere shreds upon her
little feet.

Rising slowly, and with a weary sigh, the poor creature descended the
side of the hill and entered the forest at the foot of it.

Lying concealed in a neighbouring thicket an Indian youth had watched
the motions of the girl.  It was evident, from his gaze of surprise,
that he had just discovered her.  It was equally evident, from his
expression of perplexity, that he hesitated to intrude upon one who, he
could not help seeing, was mad; but when she moved forward he followed
her with the soft wary tread of a panther.

At first the girl's step was slow and listless.  Then it became rapid.
A fit of excitement seemed to come on, and she began to run.  Presently
the excitement seemed to have passed, for she fell again into the
listless walk.  After a time she sat down, and recommenced her low
wailing song.

At this point, taking advantage of a neighbouring thicket, the young
Indian drew as near to the girl as possible, and, in a low voice,
uttered the Indian word for--"Rising Sun!"

Starting violently, the girl turned round, stretched out both arms, and,
with intense hope expressed in every feature, took a step forward.  In
an instant the expression vanished.  Another terrible scream resounded
in the air, and, turning quickly away, she fled like a hunted deer.

The young man pursued, but he evidently did not try to overtake her--
only to keep her in sight.  The maniac did not choose her course, but
ran straight before her, leaping over fallen trees and obstructions with
a degree of agility and power that seemed marvellous.  Sometimes she
shrieked as she ran, sometimes she laughed fiercely, but she never
looked back.  At last she came to a small lake--about a quarter of a
mile wide.  She did not attempt to skirt it, but went straight in with a
wild rush, and, being well able to swim, struck out for the opposite
shore.  The young man followed without hesitation, but could not
overtake her, and when he landed she had disappeared in the woods
beyond.

Skilled to follow a trail, however, the youth soon recovered sight of
her, but still did not try to overtake her--only to keep her in view.

At length the fire which had sustained the poor creature seemed to have
burned itself out.  In attempting to leap over a low bush Rising Sun
stumbled, fell, and lay as if dead.

The Indian youth came up and, raising her in his arms, looked very sadly
into her face.  She still breathed, but gave no other sign of life.  The
youth, therefore, lifted her from the ground.  He was tall and strong.
She was small in person, and reduced almost to skin and bone.  He
carried her in his arms as though she had been but a little child, and,
an hour later, bore her into the Indian camp, for which for many days
past she had been making--straight as the arrow flies from the bow.

He carried her at once to the chief's tent and laid his burden softly
down, at the same time explaining how and where he had found her.

Bearpaw sprang up with an air of excitement which an Indian seldom
displays.  Evidently his feelings were deeply touched, as he knelt and
raised the girl's head.  Then he ordered his chief squaw to supply
Rising Sun with some warm food.

It was evening when this occurred.  Most of the people were supping in
their tents.  No one was with the chief save his own family and two of
his braves.

When the poor maniac revived under the influence of the warm food, she
started up with wild looks and sought again to fly, but was forcibly
detained by one of the braves.

"Oh, let me go--let me go!--to his mother!" she wailed piteously, for
she felt herself to be helpless in the youth's strong grasp.

"Has Rising Sun forgotten Bearpaw?" said the chief tenderly, as he stood
before her.

"Yes--yes--no.  I have not forgotten," she said, passing her hand over
her brow; "but, oh! let me go to her before I die!"

"Rising Sun shall not die.  She is among friends now.  The pale-faced
enemies who killed Little Beaver can do her no harm."

"Killed him--enemies!" murmured the poor girl, as if perplexed; then,
quickly, "Yes--yes--he is dead.  Does not Rising Sun know it?  Did she
not see it with her own eyes?  He was killed--killed!"

The poor girl's voice rose as she spoke until it was almost a shriek.

"Rising Sun," said the chief, in a tone which the girl could not choose
but obey, "tell us who killed him?"

"Killed him?  No one killed him!" she answered, with a return of the
perplexed look.  "He missed his footing and fell over the cliff, and the
Great Spirit took him."

"Then the palefaces had nothing to do with it?" asked the chief eagerly.

"Oh! yes; the palefaces had to do with it.  They were there, and Rising
Sun saw all that they did; but they did not see her, for when she saw
them coming she hid herself, being in great fear.  And she knew that
Little Beaver was dead.  No man could fall from such a cliff and live.
Dead--dead!  Yes, he is dead.  Oh! let me go."

"Not yet, Rising Sun.  What did the palefaces do?  Did they take his
scalp?"

"No; oh! no.  The palefaces were kind.  They lifted him tenderly.  They
dug his grave.  They seemed as if they loved him like myself.  Then they
went away, and then--Rising Sun forgets!  She remembers running and
bounding like the deer.  She cannot--she forgets!"

The poor girl stopped speaking, and put her hand to her brow as if to
restrain the tumult of her thoughts.  Then, suddenly, she looked up with
a wild yet intelligent smile.

"Yes, she remembers now.  Her heart was broken, and she longed to lay it
on the breast of Little Beaver's mother--who loved him so well.  She
knew where the wigwams of Bearpaw stood, and she ran for them as the bee
flies when laden with honey to its home.  She forgets much.  Her mind is
confused.  She slept, she fell, she swam, she was cold--cold and
hungry--but--but now she has come home.  Oh, let me go!"

"Let her go," said the chief, in a low voice.

The young brave loosed his hold, and Rising Sun bounded from the tent.

It was dark by that time, but several camp-fires threw a lurid glare
over the village, so that she had no difficulty in finding the hut of
her dead husband's mother, for, during the interchange of several visits
between members of the two tribes, she had become very familiar with the
camp.  All ignorant of the poor maniac's arrival, for the news had not
yet spread, the mother of Little Beaver sat embroidering a moccasin with
dyed quill-work.  The traces of profound grief were on her worn face,
and her meek eyes were dim as she raised them to see who lifted the
curtain of the tent so violently.

Only one word was uttered by Rising Sun as she sprang in and fell on her
knees before the old woman:--"Mother!"

No cry was uttered, not even an expression of surprise moved the old
woman's face; but her ready arms were extended, and the girl laid her
head, with a long-drawn sigh, upon the old bosom.

Long did she lie there that night, while a tender hand smoothed her
coal-black hair, and pressed the thin cheek to a warm throbbing heart,
which feared to move lest the girl's rest should be disturbed; but there
was no need to fear that.  Even the loving old heart could no longer
warm the cheek that was slowly but surely growing cold.  When the face
was at last turned anxiously towards the firelight it was seen that a
rest which could not be disturbed had been found at last--for Rising Sun
