safety-valve of a furious pace.  Presently the cavalcade came sweeping
into the pass, and went crashing through it--Rushing River, of course,
in advance.

No cannon ball was ever stopped more effectually by mountain or
precipice than was our Indian chief's career by Moonlight's kerchief and
knife.  He reined in with such force as to throw his steed on its
haunches, like the equestrian statue of Peter the Great; but, unlike the
statuesque animal, Rushing River's horse came back to the position of
all-fours, and stood transfixed and trembling.  Vaulting off, the chief
ran to the kerchief, and picked it up.  Then he and Eaglenose examined
it and the knife carefully, after which they turned to the track through
the bushes.  But here caution became necessary.  There might be an
ambuscade.  With tomahawk in one hand, and scalping-knife in the other,
the chief advanced slowly, step by step, gazing with quick intensity
right and left as he went.  Eaglenose followed, similarly armed, and
even more intensely watchful.  Umqua brought up the rear, unarmed, it is
true, but with her ten fingers curved and claw-like, as if in readiness
for the visage of any possible assailant, for the old woman was strong
and pugnacious as well as kindly and intellectual.

All this was what some people call "nuts" to Moonlight.  It was equally
so to the Bounding Bullers, who, although mightily taken by surprise,
were fully alive to the fact that here were two men and two women of
their hated Blackfoot foes completely at their mercy.  They had only to
twang their bowstrings and the death-yells of the men would instantly
resound in the forest.  But burning curiosity as to what it could all
mean, and an intense desire to see the play out, restrained them.

Soon Rushing River came upon the tied-up horse, and of course
astonishment became intensified, for in all his varied experience of
savage warfare he had never seen the evidence of a deadly skirmish
terminate in a peacefully tied-up horse.

While he and his companions were still bending cautiously forward and
peering around, the hoot of an owl was heard in the air.  Eaglenose
looked up with inquiring gaze, but his chief's more practised ear at
once understood it.  He stood erect, stuck his weapons into his belt,
and, with a look of great satisfaction, repeated the cry.

Moonlight responded, and at once ran down to him with a merry laugh.  Of
course there was a good deal of greeting and gratulation, for even
Indians become demonstrative at times, and Moonlight had much of
importance to tell.

But now an unforeseen difficulty came in the way of the bloody-minded
Bullers.  In the group which had been formed by the friendly evolutions
of their foes, the women chanced to have placed themselves exactly
between them and the men, thus rendering it difficult to shoot the
latter without great risk of injury, if not death, to the former, for
none of them felt sufficiently expert to emulate William Tell.

In these circumstances it occurred to them, being courageous braves,
that four men were more than a match for two, and that therefore it
would be safer and equally effective to make a united rush, and brain
their enemies as they stood.

No sooner conceived than acted on.  Dispensing with the usual yell on
this occasion, they drew their knives and tomahawks, and made a
tremendous rush.  But they had reckoned too confidently, and suffered
the inevitable disgrace of bafflement that awaits those who underrate
the powers of women.  So sudden was the onset that Rushing River had not
time to draw and properly use his weapons, but old Umqua, with the speed
of light, flung herself on hands and knees in front of the leading
Buller, who plunged over her, and drove his head against a tree with
such force that he remained there prone and motionless.  Thus the chief
was so far ready with his tomahawk that a hastily-delivered blow sent
the flat of it down on the skull of the succeeding savage, and, in
sporting language, dropped him.  Thus only two opponents were left, of
whom Eaglenose choked one and his chief felled the other.

In ordinary circumstances the victors would first have stabbed and then
scalped their foes, but we have pointed out that the spirit of our chief
had been changed.  He warned Eaglenose not to kill.  With his assistance
and that of the women, he bound the conquered braves, and laid them in
the middle of the track, so that no one could pass that way without
seeing them.  Then, addressing the one who seemed to be least stunned,
he said--

"Rushing River is no longer at war with Bounding Bull.  He will not slay
and scalp his young men; but the young men have been hasty, and must
suffer for it.  When your friends find you and set you free, tell them
that it was Rushing River who brought Skipping Rabbit to her father and
left her near the camp."

"If Rushing River is no longer at war with Bounding Bull," returned the
fallen savage sulkily, "how comes it that we have crossed the trail of a
war-party of Blackfeet on their way to the block-house of the
pale-face?"

This question roused both surprise and concern in the Blackfoot chief,
but his features betrayed no emotion of any kind, and the only reply he
condescended to make was a recommendation to the youth to remember what
he had been told.

When, however, he had left them and got out of hearing, he halted and
said--

"Moonlight has travelled in the region of her father's fort since she
was a little child.  Will she guide me to it by the shortest road she
knows!"

The girl of course readily agreed, and, in a few minutes, diverging from
the pass, went off in another direction where the ground permitted of
their advancing at a swift gallop.

We must turn now to another part of those western wilds, not far from
the little hut or fortress named.

In a secluded dell between two spurs of the great mountain range, a
council of war was held on the day of which we write by a party of
Blackfoot Indians.  This particular band had been absent on the war-path
for a considerable time, and, having suffered defeat, were returning
home rather crestfallen and without scalps.  In passing near the
fortress of Little Tim it occurred to them that they might yet retrieve
their character by assaulting that stronghold and carrying off the booty
that was there, with any scalps that chance might throw in their way.

That night the prairie chief, Little and Big Tim, Bounding Bull, and
Softswan were sitting in a very disconsolate frame of mind beside their
friend the pale-face preacher, whose sunken eye and hollow cheek told of
his rapidly approaching end.  Besides the prospect of the death of one
whom they had known and loved so long, they were almost overwhelmed by
despair at the loss of Moonlight and Skipping Rabbit, and their failure
to overtake and rescue them, while the difficulty of raising a
sufficient number of men at the time to render an attempt upon the
Blackfoot stronghold possible with the faintest hope of success still
further increased their despair.

Even the dying missionary was scarcely able to give them hope or
encouragement, for by that time his voice was so weak that he could only
utter a word or two at long intervals with difficulty.

"The clouds are very dark, my father," said Whitewing.

"Very dark," responded his friend, "but on the other side the sun is
shining brightly."

"Sometimes I find it rather hard to believe it," muttered Little Tim.

Bounding Bull did not speak, but the stern look of his brow showed that
he shared the feelings of the little hunter.  Big Tim was also silent
but he glanced at Softswan, and she, as if in reply to his thoughts,
said, "He doeth all things well."

"Ha!" exclaimed the missionary, with a quick glance of pleased surprise
at the girl; "you have learned a good lesson, soft one.  Treasure it.
`He doeth all things well.'  We may think some of them dark, some even
wrong, but--`Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?'"

Silence again ensued, for they were indeed very low, yet they had by no
means reached the lowest point of human misery.  While they were sitting
there the Blackfoot band, under cover of the night, was softly creeping
up the zigzag path.  Great events often turn on small points.  Rome was
saved by the cackling of geese, and Tim's Folly was lost by the
slumbering of a goose!  The goose in question was a youth, who was so
inflated with the miraculous nature of the deeds which he intended to do
that he did not give his mind sufficiently to those which at that time
had to be done.  He was placed as sentinel at the point of the little
rampart furthest from the hut and nearest the forest.  Instead of
standing at his post and gazing steadily at the latter, he sat down and
stared dreamily at the future.  As might have been expected, the first
Blackfoot that raised his head cautiously above the parapet saw the
dreamer, tapped his cranium, and rendered him unconscious.  Next moment
a swarm of black creatures leaped over the wall, burst open the door of
the hut and, before the men assembled there could grasp their weapons,
overpowered them by sheer weight of numbers.  All were immediately
bound, except the woman and the dying man.

Thus it happened that when Rushing River arrived he found the place
already in possession of his own men.

"I will go up alone," he said, "to see what they are doing.  If they
have got the fire-water of the pale-faces they might shoot and kill
Moonlight in their mad haste."

"If Rushing River wishes to see his men, unseen by them, Moonlight can
guide him by a secret way that is known only to her father and her
father's friends," said the girl.

The chief paused, as if uncertain for a moment how to act.  Then he said
briefly, "Let Moonlight lead; Rushing River will follow."

Without saying a word, the girl conducted her companion round by the
river's bed, and up by the secret path into the cavern at the rear of
the little fortress.  Here Eaglenose and Umqua were bidden to remain,
while the girl raised the stone which covered the upper opening of the
cave, and led the chief to the back of the hut whence issued the sound
of voices, as if raised in anger and mutual recrimination.

Placing his eye to a chink in the back door, the Blackfoot chief
witnessed a scene which filled him with concern and surprise.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE LAST.

The sight witnessed by Rushing River was one which might indeed have
stirred the spirit of a mere stranger, much more that of one who was
well acquainted with, and more or less interested in, all the actors in
the scene.

Seated on the floor in a row, with their backs against the wall of the
hut, and bound hand and foot were his old enemies Bounding Bull, Little
Tim and his big son, and Whitewing, the prairie chief.  In a corner lay
a man with closed eyes, clasped hands, and a face, the ashy paleness of
which indicated the near approach of death, if not its actual presence.
In him he at once recognised the preacher, who, years ago, had directed
his youthful mind to Jesus, the Saviour of mankind.

In front of these stood one of the warriors of his own nation,
brandishing a tomahawk, and apparently threatening instant destruction
to Little Tim, who, to do him justice, met the scowls and threats of the
savage with an unflinching gaze.  There was, however, no touch of pride
or defiance in Tim's look, but in the frowns of Bounding Bull and Big
Tim we feel constrained to say that there were both pride and defiance.
Several Blackfoot Indians stood beside the prisoners with knives in
their hands, ready at a moment's notice to execute their leader's
commands.  Rushing River knew that leader to be one of the fiercest and
most cruel of his tribe.  Softswan was seated at the feet of the
missionary, with her face bowed upon her knees.  She was not bound, but
a savage stood near to watch her.  Whitewing's old mother sat or rather
crouched, close to her.

What had already passed Rushing River of course could only guess.  Of
what followed his ears and eyes took note.

"You look very brave just now," said the Blackfoot leader, "but I will
make you change your looks before I take your scalps to dry in the
Blackfoot wigwams."

"You had better take our lives at once," said Big Tim fiercely, "else we
will begin to think that we have had the mischance to fall into the
hands of cowardly squaws."

"Wah!" exclaimed Bounding Bull, with a nod of assent as he directed a
look of scorn at his adversary.

"Tush, tush, boy," said Little Tim to his son reprovingly, in an
undertone.  "It ill becomes a man with white blood in his veins, an' who
calls hisself a Christian, to go boastin' like an or'nary savage.  I
thowt I had thrashed that out of 'ee when ye was a small boy."

"Daddy," remonstrated Big Tim, "is not Softswan sittin' there at his
marcy?"

"No, lad, no.  We are at the marcy of the Lord, an' His marcies are
everlastin'."

A faint smile flickered on the lips of the missionary at that moment,
and, opening his eyes, he said solemnly--

"My son, hope thou in God, for thou shalt yet praise Him who is the
health of thy countenance and thy God."

The savage leader was for the moment startled by the words, uttered in
his own language, by one whom he had thought to be dead, but recovering
himself quickly, he said--

"Your trust will be vain, for you are now in my power, and I only spare
you long enough to tell you that a Blackfoot brave has just met us, who
brings us the good news of what our great Blackfoot chief did when he
crept into the camp of Bounding Bull and carried away his little
daughter from under his very nose, and also the daughter of Leetil Tim.
Wah!  Did I not say that I would make you change your looks?"

The savage was so far right that this reference to their great loss was
a terrible stab, and produced considerable change of expression on the
faces of the captives; but with a great effort Bounding Bull resumed his
look of contempt and said that what was news to the Blackfoot leader was
no news to him, and that not many days would pass before his warriors
would pay a visit to the Blackfoot nation.

"That may be so," retorted the savage, "but they shall not be led by
Bounding Bull, for his last hour has come."

So saying, the Blackfoot raised his tomahawk, and advanced to the chief,
who drew himself up, and returned his glare of hate with a smile of
contempt.  Softswan sprang up with a shriek, and would have flung
herself between them, but was held back by the savage who guarded her.
At that moment the back door of the hut flew open, and Rushing River
stood in the midst of them.

One word from him sent all the savages crestfallen out of the hut.  He
followed them.  Returning alone a few seconds later, he passed the
astonished captives, and, kneeling down by the couch of the missionary,
said, in tones that were too low to be heard by the others--

"Does my white father remember Rushing River?"

The missionary opened his eyes with a puzzled look of inquiry, and gazed
at the Indian's face.

"Rushing River was but a boy," continued the chief, "when the pale-face
preacher came to the camp of the Blackfeet."

A gleam of intelligence seemed to shoot from the eyes of the dying man.

"Yes, yes," he said faintly; "I remember."

"My father," continued the chief, "spoke to Rushing River about his
sins--about the Great Manitou; about Jesus, the Saviour of all men, and
about the Great Spirit.  Rushing River did not believe then--he could
not--but the Great Spirit must have been whispering to him since, for he
believes _now_."

A look of quiet joy settled on the preacher's face while the chief
spoke.

Rousing himself with an effort, he said, as he turned a glance towards
