"Go over that!" cried Barney, endeavouring to rein in his horse, and
looking with an anxious expression at the chasm.  "It's all very well
for you to talk o' goin' over, ye feather; but fifteen stun--Ah, then,
_won't_ ye stop?  Bad luck to him, he's got the bit in his teeth!  Oh
then, ye ugly baste, go, and my blissin' go with ye!"

The leap was inevitable.  Martin went over like a deer.  Barney shut his
eyes, seized the pommel of the saddle, and went at it like a
thunder-bolt.  In the excitement of the moment he shouted, in a
stentorian voice, "Clap on all sail! d'ye hear?  Stu'n sails and
skyscrapers!  Kape her steady!  Hooray!"

It was well for Barney that he had seized the saddle.  Even as it was,
he received a tremendous blow from the horse's head as it took the leap,
and was thrown back on its haunches when it cleared the ditch, which it
did nobly.

"Hallo! old boy, not hurt, I hope," said Martin, suppressing his
laughter as his comrade scrambled on to the saddle.  "You travel about
on the back of your horse at full gallop like a circus rider."

"Whist, darlint, I do belave he has damaged my faygur-head.  What a nose
I've got!  Sure I can see it mesilf without squintin'."

"So you have, Barney.  It's a little swelled, but never mind.  We must
all learn by experience, you know.  So come alone."

"Hould on, ye spalpeen, till I git my wind!"

But Martin was off again at full speed; and Barney's horse, scorning to
be left behind, took the bit again in its teeth and went--as he himself
expressed it,--"screamin' before the wind."

A new sensation is not always and necessarily an agreeable thing.
Martin and Barney found it so on the evening of that same day, as they
reclined (they could not sit) by the side of their fire on the campo
under the shelter of one of the small trees which grew here and there at
wide intervals on the plain.  They had left the diamond mine early that
morning, and their first day on horseback proved to them that there are
shadows, as well as lights, in equestrian life.  Their only baggage was
a single change of apparel and a small bag of diamonds,--the latter
being the product of the mine during the Baron Fagoni's reign, and which
that worthy was conveying faithfully to his employer.  During the first
part of the day they had ridden though a hilly and woody country, and
towards evening they emerged upon one of the smaller campos, which occur
here and there in the district.

"Martin," said Barney, as he lay smoking his pipe, "'tis a pity that
there's no pleasure in this world without _something_ crossgrained into
it.  My own feelin's is as if I had been lately passed through a
stamping machine."

"Wrong, Barney, as usual," said Martin, who was busily engaged
concluding supper with an orange.  "If we had pleasures without
discomforts, we wouldn't half enjoy them.  We need lights and shadows in
life--what are you grinning at Barney?"

"Oh! nothin', only ye're a remarkable philosopher, when ye're in the
vein."

"'Tis always in vain to talk philosophy to you, Barney, so good night
t'ye.  Oh, dear me, I wish I could sit down! but there's no
alternative,--either bolt upright or quite flat."

In quarter of an hour they both forgot pleasures and sorrows alike in
sleep.  Next day the sun rose on the edge of the campo as it does out of
the ocean, streaming across its grassy billows, and tipping the ridges
as with ruddy gold.  At first Martin and Barney did not enjoy the lovely
scene, for they felt stiff and sore; but, after half an hour's ride,
they began to recover; and when the sun rose in all its glory on the
wide plain, the feelings of joyous bounding freedom that such scenes
always engender obtained the mastery, and they coursed along in silent
delight.

The campo was hard, composed chiefly of a stiff red clay soil, and
covered with short grass in most places; but here and there were rank
bushes of long hairy grasses, around and amongst which grew a multitude
of the most exquisitely beautiful flowerets and plants of elegant forms.
Wherever these flowers flourished very luxuriantly there were single
trees of stunted growth and thick bark, which seldom rose above fifteen
or twenty feet.  Besides these there were rich flowering myrtles, and
here and there a grotesque cactus or two.

Under one of these trees they reined up after a ride of two hours, and
picketing their horses, prepared breakfast.  It was soon despatched, and
then remounting, away they went once more over the beautiful plains.

About mid-day, as they were hasting towards the shelter of a grove which
appeared opportunely on the horizon, Barney said suddenly--

"Martin, lad, we're lost!  We're out of our course, for sartin."

"I've been thinking that for some time, Barney," replied Martin; "but
you have your compass, and we can surely make the coast by dead
reckoning--eh?"

"True, lad, we can; but it'll cost us a dale o' tackin' to make up for
lee-way.  Ah, good luck to ye! here's a friend'll help us."

As he spoke a herd of wild cattle dashed out of the grove and scampered
over the plain, followed by a herdsman on horseback.  Seeing that he was
in eager pursuit of an animal which he wished to lasso, they followed
him quietly and watched his movements.  Whirling the noose round his
head, he threw it adroitly in such a manner that the bull put one of its
legs within the coil.  Then he reined up suddenly, and the animal was
thrown on its back.  At the same moment the lasso broke, and the bull
recovered its feet and continued its wild flight.

"Good day, friend," said Barney, galloping towards the disappointed
herdsman and addressing him in Portuguese, "could you show us the road
to Rio?  We've lost it intirely."

The man pointed sulkily in the direction in which they were going, and,
having mended his lasso, he wheeled about and galloped after the herd of
cattle.

"Bad luck to yer manners!" said Barney, as he gazed after him.  "But
what can ye expect from the poor critter?  He niver larned better.  Come
along, Martin, we'll rest here a while."

They were soon under the shelter of the trees, and having fastened their
horses to one of them, they proceeded to search for water.  While thus
employed, Barney shouted to his companion, "Come here, lad; look here."

There was something in the tone of the Irishman's voice that startled
Martin, and he sprang hastily towards him.  Barney was standing with his
arms crossed upon his chest and his head bowed forward, as he gazed with
a solemn expression on the figure of a man at his feet.

"Is he ill?" inquired Martin, stooping and lifting his hand.  Starting
back as he dropped it, he exclaimed, "Dead!"

"Ay, boy, he has gone to his last account.  Look at him again, Martin.
It was he who came to the mine a week ago to buy a horse, and now--."
Barney sighed as he stooped and turned the body over in order to
ascertain whether he had been murdered; but there were no marks of
violence to be seen.  There was bread too in his wallet; so they could
come to no other conclusion than that the unhappy man had been seized
with fatal illness in the lonesome wood and died there.

As they searched his clothes they found a small leathern bag, which, to
their amazement was filled with gold-dust; and in the midst of the gold
was another smaller bag containing several small diamonds.

"Ha!" exclaimed Martin, "that explains his hurry.  No doubt he had made
off with these, and was anxious to avoid pursuit."

"No doubt of it," said Barney.  "Well, thief or no thief, we must give
the poor cratur' dacent burial.  There's not a scrap o' paper to tell
who he is or where he came from,--a sure sign that he wasn't what he
should ha' been.  Ah!  Martin, what will we not do for the sake o'
money! and, after all, we can't keep it long.  May the Almighty niver
let you or me set our hearts on it."

They dug a shallow grave with their hands in a sandy spot where the soil
was loose, in which they deposited the body of the unfortunate man; and
then remounting their horses, rode away and left him in his lonely
resting-place.

For many days did Martin and Barney travel through the land on
horseback, now galloping over open campos, anon threading their way
through the forest, and sometimes toiling slowly up the mountain sides.
The aspect of the country varied continually as they advanced, and the
feelings of excessive hilarity with which they commenced the journey
began to subside as they became accustomed to it.

One evening they were toiling slowly up a steep range of hills, which
had been the prospect in front of them the whole of that day.  As they
neared the summit of the range Martin halted at a stream to drink, and
Barney advanced alone.  Suddenly Martin was startled by a loud cry, and
looking up he saw Barney on his knees with his hands clasped before him!
Rushing up the hill, Martin found his comrade with his face flushed and
the tears coursing down his cheeks as he stared before him.

"Look at it Martin, dear!" he cried, starting up and flinging his cap in
the air, and shouting like a madman.  "The say! my own native illiment!
the beautiful ocean!  Och, darlint my blessing on ye!  Little did I
think to see you more,--hooray!"

Barney sang and danced till he sank down on the grass exhausted; and, to
say truth, Martin felt much difficulty in restraining himself from doing
likewise, for before him was spread out the bright ocean, gleaming in
the light of the sinking sun, and calm and placid as a mirror.  It was
indeed a glorious sight to these two sailors, who had not seen the sea
for nearly two years.  It was like coming suddenly face to face--after a
long absence--with an old and much-loved friend.

Although visible, the sea, however, was still a long way off from the
Serra dos Orgos, on which they stood.  But their steeds were good, and
it was not long ere they were both rolling like dolphins in the
beautiful bay of Rio de Janeiro.

Here Barney delivered up the gold and diamonds to his employer, who paid
him liberally for his services and entertained them both hospitably
while they remained in the city.  The bag of gold and diamonds, which
had been found on the body of the dead man, they appropriated, as it was
absolutely impossible to discover the rightful owner.  Barney's friend
bought it of them at full price; and when they embarked, soon after, on
board a homeward bound ship, each had four hundred pounds in his pocket!

As they sailed out of the noble harbour Martin sat on the poop gazing at
the receding shore while thick-coming memories crowded on his brain.

His imagination flew back to the day when he first landed on the coast,
and escaped with his friend Barney from the pirates,--to the hermit's
cottage in the lonely valley, where he first made acquaintance with
monkeys, iguanas, jaguars, armadillos, and all the wonderful, beautiful,
and curious birds, beasts, and reptiles, plants, trees, and flowers,
that live and flourish in that romantic country.  Once more, in fancy,
he was sailing up the mighty Amazon, shooting alligators on its banks,
spearing fish in its waters, paddling through its curious gapo, and
swinging in his hammock under its luxuriant forests.  Once again he was
a prisoner among the wild Indians, and he started convulsively as he
thought of the terrible leap over the precipice into the stream that
flowed into the heart of the earth.  Then he wandered in the lonely
forest.  Suddenly the diamond mines were before him, and Barney's jovial
voice rang in his ears; and he replied to it with energy, for now he was
bounding on a fiery steed over the grassy campos.  With a deep sigh he
awoke from his reverie to find himself surrounded by the great wide sea.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE RETURN.

Arthur Jollyboy, Esquire, of the Old Hulk, sat on the top of a tall
three-legged stool in his own snug little office in the sea-port town of
Bilton, with his legs swinging to and fro; his socks displayed a
considerable way above the tops of his gaiters; his hands thrust deep
into his breeches pockets; his spectacles high on his bald forehead, and
his eyes looking through the open letter that lay before him; through
the desk underneath it; through the plank floor, cellars and foundations
of the edifice; and through the entire world into the distant future
beyond.

"Four thousand pair of socks," he murmured, pulling down his spectacles
and consulting the open letter for the tenth time: "four thousand pair
of socks, with the hitch, same as last bale, but a very little coarser
in material."

"Four thousand pair! and who's to make them, I wonder.  If poor Mrs
Dorothy Grumbit were here--ah! well, she's gone, so it can't be helped.
Four thousand!--dear me who _will_ make them.  Do _you_ know?"

This question was addressed to his youngest clerk, who sat on the
opposite side of the desk staring at Mr Jollyboy with that open
impudence of expression peculiar to young puppy-dogs whose masters are
unusually indulgent.

"No, sir, I don't," said the clerk with a broad grin.

Before the perplexed merchant could come at any conclusion on this
knotty subject the door opened and Martin Rattler entered the room,
followed by his friend Barney O'Flannagan.

"You've come to the wrong room, friends," said Mr Jollyboy with a
benignant smile.  "My principal clerk engages men and pays wages.  His
office is just opposite; first door in the passage."

"We don't want to engage," said Martin; "we wish to speak with you,
sir."

"Oh, beg pardon!" cried Mr Jollyboy, leaping off the stool with
surprising agility for a man of his years.  "Come in this way.  Pray be
seated--Eh! ah, surely I've seen you before, my good fellow?"

"Yis, sir, that ye have.  I've sailed aboard your ships many a time.  My
name's Barney O'Flannagan, at yer sarvice."

"Ah!  I recollect; and a good man you are, I've been told, Barney; but I
have lost sight of you for some years.  Been on a long voyage, I
suppose?"

"Well, not 'xactly; but I've been on a long cruise, an' no mistake, in
the woods o' Brazil I wos wrecked on the coast there, in the Firefly."

"Ah, to be sure.  I remember.  And your young messmate here, was he with
you?"

"Yes, sir, I was," said Martin, answering for himself; "and I had once
the pleasure of your acquaintance.  Perhaps if you look steadily in my
face you may--"

"Ah, then! don't try to bamboozle him.  He might as well look at a bit
o' mahogany as at your faygur-head.  Tell him at wance, Martin, dear."

"Martin?" exclaimed the puzzled old gentleman, seizing the young sailor
by the shoulders and gazing intently into his face.  "Martin!  Martin!
Surely not--yes! eh!  Martin Rattler?"

"Ay that am I, dear Mr Jollyboy, safe and sound, and--"

Martin's speech was cut short in consequence of his being violently
throttled by Mr Jollyboy, who flung his arms round his neck and
staggered recklessly about the office with him!  This was the great
point which Barney had expected; it was the climax to which he had been
looking forward all the morning: and it did not come short of his
anticipations; for Mr Jollyboy danced round Martin and embraced him for
at least ten minutes, asking him at the same time a shower of questions
which he gave him no time to answer.  In the excess of his delight
Barney smote his thigh with his broad hand so forcibly that it burst
upon the startled clerk like a pistol-shot, and caused him to spring off
his stool!

"Don't be afeared, young un," said Barney, winking and poking the small
clerk jocosely in the ribs with his thumb.  "Isn't it beautiful to see
them?  Arrah, now! isn't it purty?"

"Keep your thumbs to yourself, you sea monster," said the small clerk,
angrily, and laying his hand on the ruler.  But Barney minded him not,
and continued to smite his thigh and rub his hands, while he performed a
sort of gigantic war-dance round Mr Jollyboy and Martin.

In a few minutes the old gentleman subsided sufficiently to understand
questions.

"But, my aunt," said Martin, anxiously; "you have said nothing about
Aunt Dorothy.  How is she? where is she? is she well?"

To these questions Mr Jollyboy returned no answer, but sitting suddenly
down on a chair, he covered his face with his hands.

"She is not ill?" inquired Martin in a husky voice, while his heart beat
violently.  "Speak, Mr Jollyboy, is she--is she--"

"No, she's not ill," returned the old gentleman; "but she's--"

