The chief of the Indians, unlike his fellows, was dressed in a costume
of the most grotesque and brilliant character, and, certainly, one
which, however much it might raise the admiration of his savage
companions, did not add to his dignity in the eyes of the traders.  He
wore a long, bright scarlet coat, richly embroidered with gold lace,
with large cuffs, and gilt buttons; a pair of blue cloth trousers, and a
vest of the same material; a broad worsted sash, and a hat in the form
of the ordinary beaver or silk hat of Europe.  The material, however,
was very coarse; but this was made up for by the silver, and gilt cords,
and tassels with which it was profusely decorated.  He evidently felt
his own importance, and stood with a calm, dignified gaze, waiting to be
addressed.

Hailing Ma-istequan, who leaned on the axe with which he had been
cutting firewood when the volley of the Indians arrested him, Stanley
bade him invite them to enter the fort.

"We cannot come down," replied the chief, after Ma-istequan had given
the invitation.  "The Eskimos are in numbers like the stars; we are few.
If the pale-faces are our friends, let them come up here and take us by
the hand and bring us down."

"Very reasonable," said Stanley to Frank, who stood beside him; "we must
take care that the Esquimaux do not take advantage of their numbers to
avenge their ancient wrongs."

Then, turning to the natives, who had now crowded in large numbers into
the fort, Stanley addressed them in a serious tone; told them that the
time had now come when he hoped to reconcile the Innuit and the Allat
[Esquimau name for Indians] together; and that he expected they would
show their gratitude for his many kindnesses to them by treating the
Indians, who were his friends, with hospitality.  The Esquimaux promised
obedience, after which Stanley ascended to the promenade, and taking the
Indian chief by the hand, led him towards the fort, followed by the
whole band in single file.

It is not necessary to detail the speeches that followed on both sides
on this occasion, and the eloquence that was expended that evening in
the cause of peace.  Suffice it to say that the Indians and Esquimaux
shook hands and exchanged gifts in the presence of the assembled
garrison of Fort Chimo.  But although the traders had reason to
congratulate themselves on having so far succeeded in the establishment
of peace, they could not conceal from themselves the fact that while, on
the one hand, the Esquimaux appeared to be perfectly sincere and cordial
in their professions, on the other hand the Indians evinced a good deal
of taciturnity at first, and even after their reserve was overcome,
seemed to act as men do who are constrained to the performance of a
distasteful action.

In general character, the Indians of Labrador do not contrast well with
the Esquimaux--at least this may with truth be said of those who
afterwards became attached to the district of Ungava.  The Indian is
reserved and taciturn, while the Esquimau is candid, frank, and
communicative.  Of course there are exceptions on both sides.

On the evening of the same day, Stanley had much difficulty in
overcoming the reserve of the Indians, so as to procure information
regarding the interior; and it was not until their hearts were opened by
the influence of tobacco, that they condescended to give the required
information.  This was to the effect that there were not many
fur-bearing animals in the immediate vicinity of Ungava, but that there
were a good many in the wooded country lying to the southward and
eastward.  Here, however, the Indians do not care to hunt, preferring
rather to keep to the heights of land, and near the coast, where the
deer are numerous.  In fact, Stanley afterwards found that the facility
with which the Indians procured deer in this part of the country was a
serious drawback to the fur trade, as they contented themselves with
trapping just enough of otters, foxes, etcetera, to enable them to
procure a supply of ammunition with which to hunt the deer.

The Indians had brought a few beaver and other furs to trade, and, after
receiving a good meal and a few presents, they took up their quarters on
a plot of ground close to the fort.  Here they lived a short time in
perfect friendship with the Esquimaux, visiting them, and hunting in
company; but more than once they exhibited their natural disposition by
stealing the goods of their neighbours.  On one occasion, two Esquimau
children were missed from the camp, and in the course of the day they
returned to their parents clothed in Indian costume!  This was a very
polite piece of attention on the part of the Indians, but the effect of
it was much marred, the same day, by the abstraction of a knife from an
Esquimau tent.  Stanley insisted on the article being restored, and
severely reprimanded the offender.  But, although the general harmony of
the camp was sometimes broken by such events, the friendship between the
two parties seemed to be gradually increasing, and Stanley saw with
satisfaction that the Allat and the Innuit bade fair to become fast
friends for the future.

But an event occurred at this time which put an end to their
intercourse, and very much altered the aspect of affairs.  For some time
past the men at the fort had been subject to rather severe attacks of
cold, or a species of influenza.  This they unfortunately communicated
to the Esquimaux, who seemed to be peculiarly susceptible of the
disease.  Being very fat and full-blooded, it had the most dreadful
effect on the poor creatures, and at a certain stage almost choked them.
At last one night it was reported that ten of their number had died
from absolute suffocation.  All of these had been strong and robust, and
they died after two days' illness.

One of those who were attacked was Edith's little friend, Arnalooa, and
just before the ten Esquimaux died, Edith had gone down to the camp with
a present of beads to console her.  She found her much better, and,
after talking to her for some time, she took her leave, promising to pay
her another visit next day.  True to her promise, Edith sallied forth
after breakfast with a little native basket on her arm.  About half an
hour afterwards, while Stanley was sitting in the hall with his wife and
Frank, they were startled by the sudden appearance of Edith, out of
breath from the speed with which she had run home, and her face
overspread with a deadly paleness.

"What is the matter, my darling?" cried her mother, starting up in
alarm.

"Oh! the Esquimaux are lying dead on the sand," gasped Edith, as she
laid her head on her mother's breast, "and the rest are all gone."

Without waiting to hear more, Frank and Stanley took down their guns and
hastened to the camp.  Here a scene of the most horrible kind presented
itself.  The whole camp exhibited evidences of a hasty flight, and eight
of the people who had died during the night were lying exposed on the
rocks, with their white faces and ghastly eyeballs turned towards the
sky.  The other two had been buried on the rocks under a heap of stones,
which did not conceal them entirely from view.

"No wonder poor Edith was alarmed," said Stanley sadly, as he leaned on
his fowling-piece and surveyed the scene of desolation and death.

"I have been told," remarked Frank, "that the Esquimaux have a
superstitious dread of this river.  Oolibuck mentioned to me this
morning that he has had a good deal of conversation with the natives
about this disease, and they told him that it invariably attacks them
when they enter this river, and carries them off by dozens; so that they
never come into it except when they require wood, and always stay as
short a time as possible."

"Ah! that's bad," said Stanley; "I fear that it will go much against the
success of the establishment.  But we must hope better things; and,
truly, with this exception, all has gone well hitherto.  Said they
anything more, Frank?"

"Yes; they hinted, it seems, their intention of flying away from this
fatal spot, and taking up their abode for the winter at the mouth of
False River, where they can obtain a livelihood by seal-fishing; but
Oolibuck thought they did not mean to put the threat in execution, and
did not imagine that they were in such alarm that they would go off
without burying their dead."

"We must do that for them, Frank," said Stanley, turning to retrace his
steps to the fort; "send down as many of the men as you can spare
to-day, and get it done at once."

"By the way," said Frank, as they walked along the beach, "it seems that
many years ago the Moravian missionaries came to the mouth of this
river, and talked of setting up a trading-fort here; but, from some
cause unknown, they gave up their design and went away.  Maximus has
been telling me all he knows about the matter; but his reports are
vague, and the event must have occurred, if it occurred at all, when he
was a child."

"Very possibly, Frank.  You know the Moravians have settlements along
the coasts of Labrador, to the eastward of this.  They may have made an
attempt long ago to push as far as this.  I have always had a high
opinion of the energy and perseverance of these missionaries, but I
cannot get over the incongruity of their strange way of mingling trade
with religion.  It seems to me an unnatural sort of thing for
missionaries to be fur-traders.  I do not mean by this to object to
their system, however; I daresay it works well, but I've had no means of
judging."

"It is strange," replied Frank; "yet it seems a good plan.  The
missionaries trade there in order that they may live and preach.
'Twould be a good thing for the Indian country if the same principles
and practice actuated the traders; with this difference, that instead of
missionaries becoming fur-traders, the fur-traders would become
missionaries.  It does seem a species of infatuation," continued Frank,
energetically, as he warmed with the subject, "that men, calling
themselves Christians, should live for years and years among the poor
Indians of America and never once name to them the great and saving name
of Christ.  Of course I do not wonder at those who make little or no
profession of Christianity; but there are men in the fur-trade who seem
to be deeply impressed with the truths of God's Word--who are alive to
the fact that there is no name under heaven given among men whereby we
can be saved except the name of Christ--who know and feel that the
Indians around them are living without God, and therefore without hope
in the world--who feel that _Christ_ is _all in all_, and that the
Christian religion, however perfect and beautiful as a code of morals,
is utterly worthless as to salvation unless there be in the heart the
special love of Jesus Christ;--men who admit and profess to believe all
this, yet never speak of Christ to the natives--never mention the name
that can alone save them from eternal destruction."

"Be not hasty, Frank," replied Stanley.  "I agree with you, that it is
strange indeed we do not see and hear more of this missionary spirit
among the traders, and I, for one, take your words as a deserved rebuke
to myself; but if there are, as you say, many among us who are deeply
impressed with the truths of God's Word, how know you that we never
mention our Saviour's name to the Indians?  Although fur-traders do not
mount the pulpit, they may, in private, make mention of that name, and
do an amount of good that will only be fully known when the trader, the
trapper, and the Indian shall stand side by side before the
judgment-seat of Christ.  Observe, I do not say that this is actually
the case; I only suggest that it is possible--may I not add, probable?"

"It may be so," returned Frank, "it may be so, and God forgive me if I
have judged the men of the fur-trade unjustly; but I certainly know one
who has made somewhat of a profession of Christianity in his day, and
yet has done next to nothing, and that one is Frank Morton."

"I'll not gainsay that, Frank," said Stanley, with a quiet smile; "and I
think we are not likely to err much when we apply censure to ourselves.
It is curious that you and I should have been thinking of the very same
subject.  A few days ago, while my wife and I were conversing together
about the Esquimaux, we agreed to devote a good deal of our leisure time
next winter to reading and explaining the Bible to our Esquimau
interpreters, in the hope that they may afterwards be the means of much
good among their poor countrymen."

Whether or not the good resolutions made at this time were ever put in
practice we cannot say.  Let us hope that they were.

Not long after the sudden flight of the Esquimaux, the Indians struck
their tents and took their departure for the interior, with the
intention, as they said, of hunting for furs, but more probably, as
Ma-istequan suggested, to hunt the deer.  During all the time of their
residence at the fort, Maximus had kept out of their way as much as
possible.  He seldom met them without a frown of hatred, for he regarded
them as the representatives of a race which had robbed him of his bride;
and there were times when the giant's spirit chafed so fearfully at the
sight of the red men, that nothing but the remembrance of his promise to
Stanley, to offer them no injury, prevented him from stirring up his
tribe to overwhelm and destroy them.  It was, therefore, with a feeling
of relief that Maximus beheld them march single file over the rocky
platform, and disappear in the ravine that led into the mountains.

The traders of Ungava were once more left in solitude, and from this
time forward, until the winter set in, they devoted all their energies
to laying up a stock of provisions sufficient to last till spring.

Dick Prince and Massan were sent after the deer in company.  Augustus
and Bryan were dispatched to a small lake to establish a fishery; in
which they were very successful, and soon caught a large supply of
excellent white-fish, trout, and carp, which they gutted and hung up by
their tails to dry and freeze.  Frank and Moses went to another small
lake, about ten miles down the river, and built a hut of willows, in
which they dwelt while engaged at the fishery.  As there was still much
to be done in the way of completing the fort, and making furniture,
Stanley retained La Roche, Oolibuck, and the two Indians to assist him
in this, as well as in the performance of the miscellaneous minor duties
about the station, such as cutting up firewood, covering the roofs of
the stores with tarpaulin, shooting such birds and animals as came near
the fort, constructing rude chairs and tables, cooking, etcetera,
etcetera; while Francois and Gaspard were sent up the river to fell
trees, for the purposes both of building and firewood.  Edith and her
mother found ample occupation--the latter in the use of her needle and
the cares of the household; the former in learning her lessons, visiting
her berry-ravine, dressing her doll (for she had a doll, as a matter of
course), and in holding long and frequent converse with Chimo.

Thus they spent their time; too busily occupied to take much note of its
rapid flight, and scarce noticing the lengthening nights and shortening
days, until needles of ice began with slow and silent progress to shoot
across and solidify the waters of the bay.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

EFFECT OF SNOW ON THE FEELINGS, NOT TO MENTION THE LANDSCAPE--A
WONDERFUL DOME OF ICE.

There are times and seasons, in this peculiar world of ours, when the
heart of man rejoices.  The rejoicing to which we refer is not of the
ordinary kind.  It is peculiar; and, whether its duration be long or
short, its effect powerful or slight, it is quite distinct and emphatic.
We do not intend to enter into a detail of the occasions that call
forth this feeling of exultation.  Far be it from us to venture into
such perilous depths of philosophy.  Our sole reason for making these
preliminary observations is, that we may, with proper emphasis,
introduce the statement, that one of these occasions of rejoicing is,
when man arises from his couch, on a brilliant, sunny, sparkling
morning, gazes forth from his window, and beholds the landscape--which
yesterday was green, and red, and brown, and blue--clad in a soft mantle
of whitest snow!

What! you don't agree with us?  You shudder at the preposterous idea of
such a sight being fitted to rejoice the heart of man in any degree
whatever?  Well, well; do not sneer at our weakness.  If we cannot
sympathise with each other on this subject, perchance there are other
things in which we can.  But whatever be _our_ opinion in regard to
this, the point that we have to deal with at present is, the opinion of
Edith Stanley, who, on rising hastily one morning, and looking forth
from her little window, evinced the rejoicing of her heart most
emphatically, by her loud exclamation of delight and the sparkling of
her bright blue eyes.

Independently of the cheerful lightness and the virgin purity of the
mantle, which in itself tended to awaken emotions of gladness in Edith's
heart, there was something in its sudden appearance that carried her
back violently and vividly to bygone days.  The winter garb had no
associations, yet, with Ungava; but it had with Moose Fort, and the dear
companions she used to play with there.  It recalled the time when she
and her little friends sallied forth, each with her small wooden sledge
drawn after her by a line, to slide thereon down the banks of the frozen
river with headlong speed, and upset at the bottom amid shouts of
laughter.  It recalled the time when she made the first attempt to walk
in snow-shoes, upon which occasion she tripped and fell into the snow,
as a matter of course, and was advised to wait till she was older.  It
recalled the memory of her father's team of dogs, and the delightful
drives she used to have over the frozen river; which drives often
resulted in an upset, perhaps several, and always resulted in fun.  It
recalled the house in the old fort that used to be her home; the row of
houses belonging to the men, to which she often went, and was always
welcomed as a great favourite; the water-hole on the river from which
the old Canadian drew his daily supply; and the snow-house in the yard
which she built in company with Frank Morton, and which stood the whole
winter through, but gave way at last before the blazing sun of spring,
and fell--as ill luck would have it--when she and Chimo were sitting
there, so that she and the dog together had a hard struggle ere they got
free.  All these, and many more thick-coming memories of other days,
were aroused by the vision of snow that met Edith's gaze that morning,
and caused her heart with peculiar fervour to rejoice.

Winter had now descended with iron grasp upon Ungava.  For some weeks
the frost had been so intense that every lake and pool was frozen many
inches thick, and the salt bay itself was fringed with a thick and
ever-accumulating mass of ice.  The snow which now fell was but the
ceremonial coronation of a king whose reign had commenced in reality
long before.

But the sunshine did not last long.  The rolling fogs and vapours of the
open and ice-laden sea beyond ascended over the wild mountains, obscured
the bright sky, and revealed the winter of the north in all its stern,
cold reality.  Every cliff and crag and jagged peak had its crown of
snow, and every corrie, glen, and gorge its drifted shroud.  In places
where the precipices were perpendicular, the grey rocks of the mountains
formed dark blotches in the picture; but, dark although they were, they
did not equal in blackness the river, on which floated hundreds of
masses of ice and several ponderous icebergs, which had been carried up
from the sea by the flood-tide.  Over this inky expanse the frost-smoke
hung like a leaden pall--an evil spirit, as it were, which never left
the spot till protracted and intense frost closed the waters of the
river altogether, and banished it farther out to sea.  But this entire
closing of the river very seldom happened, and never lasted long.

Fort Chimo itself, at least as much of it as remained unburied, was a
mere speck on the edge of the white plain at the mountain's foot, scarce
distinguishable, at a short distance, from the straggling black pines
and willow bushes that seemed thrust out into the waste from the ravines
above and below the fort.  But on a nearer approach, the fort assumed an
air of greater importance; the influences, too, of the cold, cheerless
scene we have described, were broken and dissipated by the sights of
comfort and sounds of cheerfulness within.  The shout of the
water-drawer, as he roused the dogs and went forth with his empty cask,
hauled on a little sledge, to draw from the bubbling spring behind the
fort; the sounds of the hammer, the chisel, and the axe, in the
carpenter's shop; the merry clank of Bryan's hammer, and the bright
flame that gleamed from the window of the forge,--all bore evidence of
the fact, that however powerful the influence of winter might be
without, it had little power within the wooden walls of Fort Chimo, and
could not check the life, or heart, or industry of man.

The only other human being visible in the open air, besides the
water-drawer, was La Roche, who, with a fur cap covering his head and
ears, and leathern mittens on his hands, hewed and hacked the billets
with which he purposed to replenish the fire for cooking the mid-day
meal.

Pausing in his labour, and dusting off the hoar-frost that covered his
eyebrows and whiskers, he looked at the edge of his hatchet for a few
seconds with an expression of contempt.  Then, throwing the implement on
his shoulder, he crossed the yard and entered the blacksmith's shop.

"Bryan," said he, seating himself on the edge of the forge and filling
his pipe, while Vulcan's votary scattered a shower of gems from a
white-hot bar of iron at every blow of his hammer--"Bryan, you no fit
for not'ing.  Dat axe is blont encore.  Oui, c'est vrai.  Now dat is
tres mal.  How you not can temper him edge better?"

"Timper it better, is it?" answered Bryan, putting the iron bar in the
fire, and regarding his companion earnestly while he blew the bellows.
"Faix, 'tis mysilf I'd need to timper better, in order to put up wi' the
likes o' you, ye wretched crature.  How can ye expict it to kape its
idge when ye lave it for iver lyin' among yer pots and kittles?"

"Dat is not it," replied La Roche, applying a glowing coal to his pipe.
"'Tis de mauvais steel.  But I not com for to fight wid you.  Your
tongue trop long pour dat.  I com for ax you to give me turn ov de
grindstone, s'il vous plait."

"Ye don't desarve it, Losh; but wait till I've finished this job and
I'll lind ye a hand."

"Be-the-bye," resumed Bryan, when the metal was cooled, "has Francois
finished that sled for Miss Edith?"
