But although Harold felt strong sympathy with the man, and would have
gone a long way out of his course to aid him, he could not avoid
perceiving that the case was almost, if not altogether, a hopeless one.
He had no idea to what part of the coast Azinte had been taken.  For all
he knew to the contrary, she might have been long ago shipped off to the
northern markets, and probably was, even while he talked of her, the
inmate of an Arab harem, or at all events a piece of goods--a
"chattel"--in the absolute possession of an irresponsible master.
Besides the improbability of Kambira ever hearing what had become of his
wife, or to what part of the earth she had been transported, there was
also the difficulty of devising any definite course of action for the
chief himself, because the instant he should venture to leave the
protection of the Englishmen he would be certain to fall into the hands
of Arabs or Portuguese, and become enslaved.

Much of this Harold had not the heart to explain to him.  He dwelt,
however, pretty strongly on the latter contingency, though without
producing much effect.  Death, the chief replied, he did not fear, and
slavery could easily be exchanged for death.

"Alas! not so easily as you think," said Harold, pointing to Chimbolo,
whose sad story he had heard; "they will try _every_ kind of torture
before they kill you."

Chimbolo nodded his head, assenting, and ground his teeth together
fiercely when this was said.

Still Kambira was unmoved; he did not care what they did to him.  Azinte
was as life to him, and to search for her he would go in spite of every
consideration.

Harold prevailed on him, however, to agree to wait until he should have
spent another month in visiting Chimbolo's tribe, after which he
promised faithfully to return and take him along with his party to the
coast.

Neither Harold nor Disco was quite at ease in his mind after making this
arrangement, but they both agreed that no other course could be pursued,
the former saying with a sigh that there was no help for it, and the
latter asserting with a grunt that the thing "wos unawoidable."

On the following day the journey of exploration was resumed.  Kambira
accompanied his friends a few miles on the road, and then bade them
farewell.  On the summit of an elevated ridge the party halted and
looked back.  Kambira's manly form could be seen leaning on his spear.
Behind him the little village lay embosomed in luxuriant verdure, and
glowing in the bright sunshine, while songs and sounds of industry
floated towards them like a sweet melody.  It was with a feeling of keen
regret that the travellers turned away, after waving their hands in
reply to a parting salute from the stalwart chief, and, descending to
the plain, pushed forward into the unknown wilderness beyond.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

CAMPING, TRAVELLING, SHOOTING, DREAMING, POETISING, PHILOSOPHISING, AND
SURPRISING, IN EQUATORIAL AFRICA.

At sunset the travellers halted in a peculiarly wild spot and encamped
under the shelter of a gigantic baobab tree.

Two rousing fires were quickly kindled, round which the natives busied
themselves in preparing supper, while their leaders sat down, the one to
write up his journal, the other to smoke his pipe.

"Well, sir," said Disco, after a few puffs delivered with extreme
satisfaction, "you do seem for to enjoy writin'.  You go at that log of
yours every night, as if it wos yer last will and testament that ye
couldn't die happy without exikootin' an' signin' it with yer blood."

"A better occupation, isn't it," replied Harold, with a sly glance,
"than to make a chimney-pot of my mouth?"

"Come, sir," returned Disco, with a deprecatory smile, "don't be too
hard on a poor feller's pipe.  If you can't enjoy it, that's no argiment
against it."

"How d'you know I can't enjoy it?"

"Why? cos I s'pose you'd take to it if you did."

"Did _you_ enjoy it when you first began?" asked Harold.

"Well, I can't 'zactly say as I did."

"Well, then, if you didn't, that proves that it is not _natural_ to
smoke, and why should I acquire an unnatural and useless habit?"

"Useless! why, sir, on'y think of wot you loses by not smokin'--wot a
deal of enjoyment!"

"Well, I _am_ thinking," replied Harold, affecting a look of profound
thoughtfulness, "but I can't quite make it out--enjoyment? let me see.
Do I not enjoy as good health as you do?"

"O, cer'nly, sir, cer'nly.  You're quite up to the mark in that
respect."

"Well then, I enjoy my food as well, and can eat as much, can't I?"

"No doubt of it," replied Disco, with a grin; "I was used to be
considered raither a dab at wittles, but I must say I knocks under to
_you_, sir."

"Very good," rejoined Harold, laughing; "then as to sleep, I enjoy sleep
quite as soundly as yourself; don't I?"

"I can't say as to that," replied Disco.  "You see, sir, as I never
opens my eyes arter shuttin' of 'em till the bo's'n pipes all hands
ahoy, I've no means of knowin' wot you accomplish in that way."

"On the whole, then, it seems that I enjoy everything as much as you do,
and--"

"No, not everything; you don't enjoy baccy, you know.--But please, sir,
don't go for to moralise; I can't stand it.  You'll spile my pipe if ye
do!"

"Well, I shall spare you," said Harold, "all the more that I perceive
supper is about--"

At that moment Antonio, who had gone down to a streamlet which trickled
close at hand, gave utterance to a hideous yell, and came rushing into
camp with a face that was pea-green from terror.

"Ach!" he gasped, "a lion! queek! your guns!"  Every one leaped up and
seized his weapon with marvellous alacrity on receiving an alarm so
violent and unlooked-for.

"Where away?" inquired Disco, blazing with excitement, and ready at a
moment's notice to rush into the jungle and fire both barrels at
whatever should present itself.

"No, no, don' go," cried Antonio in alarm; "be cautionous."

The interpreter's caution was enforced by Chimbolo, who laid his hand on
Disco's arm, and looked at him with such solemnity that he felt it
necessary to restrain his ardour.

Meanwhile Antonio with trembling steps led Harold to a point in the
thicket whence he beheld two bright phosphoric-looking objects which his
companion said were the lion's eyes, adding that lion's eyes always
shone in that way.

Harold threw forward his rifle with the intention of taking aim, but
lowered it quickly, for he felt convinced that no lion could possibly
have eyes so wide apart unless its head were as large as that of an
elephant.

"Nonsense, Antonio!" he said, laughing; "that cannot be a lion."

"Ho, yis, him's a lion, for sure," Antonio returned, positively.

"We shall see."

Harold raised his rifle and fired, while Antonio turned and fled, fully
expecting the wounded beast to spring.  Harold himself half looked for
some such act, and shrank behind a bush by way of precaution, but when
the smoke cleared away, he saw that the two glowing eyes were gazing at
him as fixedly as ever.

"Pooh!" exclaimed Disco, brushing past; "I knows wot it is.  Many a time
I've seed 'em in the West Injies."

Saying which, he went straight up to the supposed lion, picked up a
couple of glow-worms, and brought them to the camp-fires, much to the
amusement of the men, especially of Jumbo, and greatly to the confusion
of the valorous interpreter, who, according to his invariable custom
when danger threatened, was found to have sought refuge in a tree.

This incident furnished ground for much discussion and merriment during
supper, in which Antonio, being in no wise ashamed of himself, joined
noisily; and Chimbolo took occasion to reprove Disco for his rashness,
telling him that it was impossible to kill lions in the jungle during
the darkness of night, and that, if they did pay them a visit, it would
be wise to let them be, and trust to the camp-fires keeping them at a
respectful distance.  To which Disco retorted that he didn't believe
there was any lions in Afriky, for he'd heard a deal about 'em an'
travelled far, but had not yet heard the sound of their woices, an', wot
was more, didn't expect to.

Before that night was far advanced, Disco was constrained to acknowledge
himself in error, for a veritable lion did actually prowl down to the
camp, and salute them with a roar which had a wonderfully awe-inspiring
effect on every member of the party, especially on those who heard it
for the first time in their lives.

Just before the arrival of this nocturnal visitor, one of the men had
been engaged in some poetic effusions, which claim preliminary notice
here, because they were rudely terminated by the lion.

This man was one of Kambira's people, and had joined the party by
permission.  He was one of those beings who, gifted with something like
genius, or with superior powers of some sort, have sprung up in Africa,
as elsewhere, no doubt from time immemorial, to dazzle their fellows for
a little, and then pass away, leaving a trail of tradition behind them.
The existence there, in time past, of men of mind far in advance of
their fellows, as well as of heroes whose physical powers were
marvellous, may be assumed from the fact that some such exist at the
present time, as well as from tradition.  Some of these heroes have
excited the admiration of large districts by their wisdom, others by
their courage or their superior dexterity with the spear and bow, like
William Tell and Robin Hood, but the memory of these must soon have been
obliterated for want of literature.  The man who had joined Harold was a
poet and a musician.  He was an _improvvisatore_, composed verses on the
incidents that occurred as they travelled along, and sang them with an
accompaniment on an instrument called the _sansa_, which had nine iron
keys and a calabash for a sounding-board.

The poet's name was Mokompa.  With the free and easy disposition of his
race, he allowed his fancy to play round the facts of which he sang, and
was never at a loss, for, if the right word did not come readily, he
spun out the measure with musical sounds which meant nothing at all.

After supper was over, or rather when the first interval of repose
occurred, Mokompa, who was an obliging and hearty little fellow, was
called on for a song.  Nothing loath, he seized his sansa and began a
ditty, of which the following, given by Antonio, may be regarded as a
remarkably free, not to say easy, translation:--

  MOKOMPA'S SONG.

  Kambira goes to hunt,
  Yo ho!
  Him's spear am nebber blunt,
  Yo ho!
  Him kill de buff'lo quick,
  An' lub de porridge thick;
  Him chase de lion too,
  An' stick um troo an' troo.
  De 'potimus as well,
  An' more dan me can tell,
  Hab down before um fell,
  Yo ho!
  De English come to see,
  Yo ho!
  Dat werry good for we,
  Yo ho!
  No' take us 'way for slaves,
  Nor put us in our graves,
  But set de black mans free,
  W'en cotch um on de sea.
  Dem splendid shooters, too,
  We knows what dey can do
  Wid boil an' roast an' stew,
  Yo ho!
  One makes um's gun go crack,
  Yo ho!
  An elephant on um's back,
  Yo ho!
  De drefful lion roar,
  De gun goes crack once more,
  De bullet fly an' splits
  One monkey into bits,
  Yo ho!
  De glow-worm next arise,
  De Englishman likewise
  Wid werry much surprise,
  An' hit um 'tween de eyes,
  "Hooray! hooray!" um cries,
  An' run to fetch um's prize--
  Yo ho!

The last "Yo ho!" was given with tremendous energy, and followed by
peals of laughter.

It was at this point that the veritable lion thought proper to join in,
which he did, as we have said, with a roar so tremendous that it not
only put a sudden stop to the music, but filled the party with so much
alarm that they sprang to their arms with surprising agility.

Mindful of Chimbolo's previous warning, neither Harold nor Disco sought
to advance, but both looked at their savage friend for advice.

Now, in some parts of Africa there exists a popular belief that the
souls of departed chiefs enter into lions and render them sacred, and
several members of Harold Seadrift's party entertained this notion.
Chimbolo was one of these.  From the sounds of growling and rending
which issued from the thicket, he knew that the lion in question was
devouring part of their buffalo-meat which had been hung on the branch
of a neighbouring tree, not, however, near enough to the fires to be
visible.  Believing that the beast was a chief in disguise, Chimbolo
advanced a little towards the place where he was, and, much to our
traveller's amusement, gave him a good scolding.

"_You_ call yourself a chief, do you--eh?" he said sternly.  "What kind
of a chief can _you_ be, to come sneaking about in the dark like this,
trying to steal our buffalo-meat!  Are you not ashamed of yourself?  A
pretty chief, truly; you are like the scavenger-beetle, and think of
yourself only; you have not the heart of a chief.  Why don't you kill
your own beef?  You must have a stone in your chest, and no heart at
all."

"That's werry flowery lingo, but it don't seem to convince him," said
Disco, with a quiet smile, as the lion, which had been growling
continuously over its meal all the time, wound up Chimbolo's speech with
another terrific roar.

At this point another believer in transmigration of souls, a quiet man
who seldom volunteered remarks on any subject, stepped forward and began
seriously to expostulate with the lion.

"It is very wrong of you," he said, "to treat strangers in this fashion.
You might have more respect for Englishmen who have come to see your
land, and never did you any harm.  We are travelling peaceably through
the country; we never kill anybody, and never steal anything; the
buffalo-meat is ours, not yours, and it ill becomes a great chief like
you to be prowling about in the dark, like a hyena, trying to steal the
meat of strangers.  Surely you can hunt for yourself--there is plenty of
meat in the forest."  [See Livingstone's _Zambesi and its Tributaries_,
page 160.]

As the lion was equally deaf to this man's reasoning, Harold thought it
right to try a more persuasive plan.  He drew up in a line all the men
who had guns, and at a word of command they fired a volley of balls into
the jungle, in the direction whence the sounds issued.  A dead silence
followed, but it was deemed advisable not to venture in to see the
effect, as men had frequently lost their lives by so doing.  A watch,
however, was kept during the night, and the fires were well replenished,
for they knew that the king of the forest usually shrinks from doing his
evil deeds in the light of a strong camp-fire.  We say usually--because
they are not always thus shy.  Authentic instances are on record of
lions having leaped into the centre of a bivouac, and carried off one of
the men in spite of being smitten in the face with flaming firebrands.
Fortunately the lion of which we write thought "discretion the better
part of valour."  He retired peaceably, nevertheless Disco and his
friend continued to dream of him all night so vividly that they started
up several times, and seized their rifles, under the impression that he
had roared his loudest into their very ears, and after each of these
occasions they crept back into their sleeping bags to re-dream of the
lion!

The "bag" which formed each man's couch was made simply of two mats
sewed together, and left open, not at one of the ends but at one of the
sides, so that a man could roll out of or into it more easily than he
could have slid, feet first, into a sack.  It was large enough also for
two to sleep inside together, always supposing that the two were of
accommodating dispositions!

That they had now reached a land which swarmed with wild animals was
intimated to some extent by the running past, within fifty yards of
their bivouac, of a troop of elephants.  It was daybreak at the time, so
that, having been thus rudely aroused, they did not deem it necessary to
return to rest but after taking a hasty mouthful of food, set forth on
their journey.

The usual mode of proceeding on the march was as follows:--They rose
about five o'clock, or soon after the appearance of dawn, and swallowed
a cup of tea, with a bit of biscuit, then some of the men folded up the
blankets and stowed them away in the bags, others tied up the cooking
