
In the first place, Cranford is in possession of the Amazons; all the
holders of houses above a certain rent are women. If a married couple
come to settle in the town, somehow the gentleman disappears; he is
either fairly frightened to death by being the only man in the
Cranford evening parties, or he is accounted for by being with his
regiment, his ship, or closely engaged in business all the week in the
great neighbouring commercial town of Drumble, distant only twenty
miles on a railway. In short, whatever does become of the gentlemen,
they are not at Cranford. What could they do if they were there? The
surgeon has his round of thirty miles, and sleeps at Cranford; but
every man cannot be a surgeon. For keeping the trim gardens full of
choice flowers without a weed to speck them; for frightening away
little boys who look wistfully at the said flowers through the
railings; for rushing out at the geese that occasionally venture into
the gardens if the gates are left open; for deciding all questions of
literature and politics without troubling themselves with unnecessary
reasons or arguments; for obtaining clear and correct knowledge of
everybody's affairs in the parish; for keeping their neat maidservants
in admirable order; for kindness (somewhat dictatorial) to the poor,
and real tender good offices to each other whenever they are in
distress--the ladies of Cranford are quite sufficient. "A man," as one
of them observed to me once, "is _so_ in the way in the house!"
Although the ladies of Cranford know all each other's proceedings,
they are exceedingly indifferent to each other's opinions. Indeed, as
each has her own individuality, not to say eccentricity, pretty
strongly developed, nothing is so easy as verbal retaliation; but,
somehow, good-will reigns among them to a considerable degree.

Then there were rules and regulations for visiting and calls; and they
were announced to any young people who might be staying in the town,
with all the solemnity with which the old Manx laws were read once a
year on the Tinwald Mount.

"Our friends have sent to inquire how you are after your journey
to-night, my dear" (fifteen miles in a gentleman's carriage). "They
will give you some rest to-morrow; but the next day, I have no doubt,
they will call; so be at liberty after twelve--from twelve to three
are our calling hours."

Then, after they had called--

"It is the third day, I dare say your mamma has told you, my dear,
never to let more than three days elapse between receiving a call and
returning it; and also, that you are never to stay longer than a
quarter of an hour."

"But am I to look at my watch? How am I to find out when a quarter of
an hour has passed?"

"You must keep thinking about the time, my dear, and not allow
yourself to forget it in conversation."

As everybody had this rule in their minds, whether they received or
paid a call, of course no absorbing subject was ever spoken about. We
kept ourselves to short sentences of small talk, and were punctual to
our time.

I imagine that a few of the gentlefolks of Cranford were poor, and had
some difficulty in making both ends meet; but they were like the
Spartans, and concealed their smart under a smiling face. We none of
us spoke of money, because that subject savoured of commerce and
trade; and though some might be poor, we were all aristocratic. The
Cranfordians had that kindly _esprit de corps_ which made them
overlook all deficiencies in success when some among them tried to
conceal their poverty. When Mrs. Forrester, for instance, gave a party
in her baby-house of a dwelling, and the little maiden disturbed the
ladies on the sofa by a request that she might get the tea-tray out
from underneath, every one took this novel proceeding as the most
natural thing in the world, and talked on about household forms and
ceremonies as if we all believed that our hostess had a regular
servants' hall, second table, with house-keeper and steward, instead
of the one little charity-school maiden, whose short ruddy arms could
never have been strong enough to carry the tray upstairs, if she had
not been assisted in private by her mistress, who now sat in state,
pretending not to know what cakes were sent up, though she knew, and
we knew, and she knew that we knew, and we knew that she knew that we
knew, she had been busy all morning making tea-bread and
sponge-cakes.

There were one or two consequences arising from this general but
unacknowledged poverty, and this very much acknowledged gentility,
which were not amiss, and which might be introduced into many circles
of society to their great improvement. For instance, the inhabitants
of Cranford kept early hours, and clattered home in their pattens,
under the guidance of a lantern-bearer, about nine o'clock at night;
and the whole town was abed and asleep by half-past ten. Moreover, it
was considered "vulgar" (a tremendous word in Crawford) to give
anything expensive, in the way of eatable or drinkable, at the evening
entertainments. Wafer bread-and-butter and sponge-biscuits were all
that the Honourable Mrs. Jamieson gave; and she was sister-in-law to
the late Earl of Glenmire, although she did practise such "elegant
economy."

"Elegant economy!" How naturally one falls back into the phraseology
of Cranford! There, economy was always "elegant," and money-spending
always "vulgar and ostentatious;" a sort of sour-grapeism which made
us very peaceful and satisfied. I never shall forget the dismay felt
when a certain Captain Brown came to live at Cranford, and openly
spoke about his being poor--not in a whisper to an intimate friend,
the doors and windows being previously closed, but in the public
street, in a loud military voice, alleging his poverty as a reason for
not taking a particular house. The ladies of Cranford were already
rather moaning over the invasion of their territories by a man and a
gentleman. He was a half-pay captain, and had obtained some situation
on a neighbouring railway, which had been vehemently petitioned
against by the little town; and if, in addition to his masculine
gender, and his connection with the obnoxious railway, he was so
brazen as to talk of being poor--why, then, indeed, he must be sent to
Coventry. Death was as true and as common as poverty; yet people never
spoke about that loud out in the streets. It was a word not to be
mentioned to ears polite. We had tacitly agreed to ignore that any
with whom we associated on terms of visiting equality could ever be
prevented by poverty from doing anything that they wished. If we
walked to or from a party, it was because the night was _so_ fine, or
the air _so_ refreshing, not because sedan-chairs were expensive. If
we wore prints instead of summer silks, it was because we preferred a
washing material; and so on, till we blinded ourselves to the vulgar
fact that we were, all of us, people of very moderate means. Of
course, then, we did not know what to make of a man who could speak of
poverty as if it was not a disgrace. Yet, somehow, Captain Brown made
himself respected in Cranford, and was called upon, in spite of all
resolutions to the contrary.

      --_Mrs. Gaskell_


  Give examples of momentary completeness in the second
  and sixth sentences of Par. 1. (Introduction, p. 16.)

  What Inflection is placed on the Interrogative sentence
  in Par. 1? (Introduction, p. 19.)

  Select words throughout the lesson which are emphatic
  through contrast and tell what Inflection is placed on
  them. (Introduction, pp. 20 and 21.)

  How are the parenthetical clauses kept in the
  background? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  WHEN MRS FORRESTER ... SPONGE-CAKES. Account for the
  Inflection on the various phrases and clauses of this
  sentence.

  THOUGH SHE KNEW, AND WE KNEW, AND SHE KNEW THAT WE KNEW.
  Explain the Emphasis. (Introduction, pp. 30-32.)

       *       *       *       *       *


SIR GALAHAD


  My good blade carves the casques of men,
    My tough lance thrusteth sure,
  My strength is as the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure.
  The shattering trumpet shrilleth high,                               5
    The hard brands shiver on the steel,
  The splinter'd spear-shafts crack and fly,
    The horse and rider reel:
  They reel, they roll in clanging lists,
    And when the tide of combat stands,                               10
  Perfume and flowers fall in showers,
    That lightly rain from ladies' hands.

  How sweet are looks that ladies bend
    On whom their favours fall!
  For them I battle till the end,                                     15
    To save from shame and thrall:
  But all my heart is drawn above,
    My knees are bow'd in crypt and shrine:
  I never felt the kiss of love,
    Nor maiden's hand in mine.                                        20
  More bounteous aspects on me beam,
    Me mightier transports move and thrill;
  So keep I fair thro' faith and prayer
    A virgin heart in work and will.

  When down the stormy crescent goes,                                 25
    A light before me swims,
  Between dark stems the forest glows,
    I hear a noise of hymns:
  Then by some secret shrine I ride;
    I hear a voice but none are there;                                30
  The stalls are void, the doors are wide,
    The tapers burning fair.
  Fair gleams the snowy altar-cloth,
    The silver vessels sparkle clean,
  The shrill bell rings, the censer swings,                           35
    And solemn chaunts resound between.

  Sometimes on lonely mountain-meres
    I find a magic bark;
  I leap on board: no helmsman steers:
    I float till all is dark.                                         40
  A gentle sound, an awful light!
    Three angels bear the Holy Grail;
  With folded feet, in stoles of white,
    On sleeping wings they sail.
  Ah, blessed vision! blood of God!                                   45
    My spirit beats her mortal bars,
  As down dark tides the glory slides,
    And star-like mingles with the stars.

  When on my goodly charger borne
    Thro' dreaming towns I go,                                        50
  The cock crows ere the Christmas morn,
    The streets are dumb with snow.
  The tempest crackles on the leads,
    And, ringing, springs from brand and mail;
  But o'er the dark a glory spreads,                                  55
    And gilds the driving hail.
  I leave the plain, I climb the height;
    No branchy thicket shelter yields;
  But blessed forms in whistling storms
    Fly o'er waste fens and windy fields.                             60

  A maiden knight--to me is given
    Such hope, I know not fear;
  I yearn to breathe the airs of heaven
    That often meet me here.
  I muse on joy that will not cease.                                  65
    Pure spaces clothed in living beams,
  Pure lilies of eternal peace,
    Whose odours haunt my dreams;
  And, stricken by an angel's hand,
    This mortal armour that I wear,                                   70
  This weight and size, this heart and eyes,
    Are touch'd, are turn'd to finest air.

  The clouds are broken in the sky,
    And thro' the mountain-walls
  A rolling organ-harmony                                             75
    Swells up, and shakes and falls.
  Then move the trees, the copses nod,
    Wings flutter, voices hover clear:
  "O just and faithful knight of God!
    Ride on! the prize is near."                                      80
  So pass I hostel, hall, and grange;
    By bridge and ford, by park and pale,
  All-arm'd I ride, whate'er betide,
    Until I find the Holy Grail.

      --_Alfred Tennyson_


  PREPARATORY.--Point out the contrast of scene in stanza
  i. How has the poet obtained contrast of sound? Note the
  difficulties of Articulation.

  Enumerate the manifestations by means of which Sir
  Galahad apprehends the continual proximity of the Holy
  Grail.

  Select the lines in which the mystical element is most
  strongly marked. What feeling is aroused in reading
  these lines?

  In what Quality of voice does this feeling find
  expression? (Introduction, p. 34.)

  What is the prevailing Quality of voice?

  A ROLLING ORGAN-HARMONY, ETC. What idea predominates?
  How does it affect the Quality of voice?

       *       *       *       *       *


SONG FOR SAINT CECILIA'S DAY

November 22, 1687


  From harmony, from heavenly harmony
      This universal frame began;
    When Nature underneath a heap
        Of jarring atoms lay,
        And could not heave her head,                                  5
  The tuneful voice was heard from high,
      Arise ye more than dead.
  Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry,
  In order to their stations leap,
        And Music's power obey.                                       10
  From harmony, from heavenly harmony,
      This universal frame began;
      From harmony to harmony
  Through all the compass of the notes it ran,
  The diapason closing full in Man.                                   15

  What passion cannot Music raise and quell?
      When Jubal struck the chorded shell,
    His listening brethren stood around,
      And, wondering, on their faces fell
    To worship that celestial sound;                                  20
  Less than a God they thought there could not dwell
      Within the hollow of that shell,
    That spoke so sweetly and so well.
  What passion cannot Music raise and quell?

  The trumpet's loud clangour                                         25
    Excites us to arms
  With shrill notes of anger
    And mortal alarms.
  The double double double beat
    Of the thundering drum                                            30
    Cries, Hark! the foes come;
  Charge, charge, 'tis too late to retreat!

    The soft complaining flute
    In dying notes discovers
    The woes of hopeless lovers,                                      35
  Whose dirge is whisper'd by the warbling lute.
    Sharp violins proclaim
  Their jealous pangs and desperation,
  Fury, frantic indignation,
  Depth of pains, and height of passion                               40
    For the fair, disdainful dame.

    But oh! what art can teach,
    What human voice can reach
      The sacred organ's praise?
    Notes inspiring holy love,                                        45
  Notes that wing their heavenly ways
    To mend the choirs above.

  Orpheus could lead the savage race,
  And trees unrooted left their place,
    Sequacious of the lyre:                                           50
  But bright Cecilia rais'd the wonder higher:
  When to her organ vocal breath was given
  An angel heard, and straight appear'd
    Mistaking Earth for Heaven.


GRAND CHORUS

  As from the power of sacred lays                                    55
    The spheres began to move,
  And sung the great Creator's praise
    To all the blessed above;
  So when the last and dreadful hour
  This crumbling pageant shall devour,                                60
  The trumpet shall be heard on high,
  The dead shall live, the living die,
  And Music shall untune the sky.

      --_John Dryden_


  What feeling pervades the first and last stanzas? The
  second stanza? In what Quality of voice does each of
  these feelings find expression? (Introduction, pp.
  33-35.)

  Illustrate by means of the third, fourth, and fifth
  stanzas the extent to which Imitation enters into
  reading. (Introduction, pp. 4 and 5.)

  Account for the gradually increasing Emphasis in ll.
  11-15, 48-54, and 60-63. (Introduction, p. 31.)

  3-6. What is the Shading and Inflection? (Introduction,
  pp. 16 and 33.) Compare with these ll. 55-61.

  16. What is the Inflection on this question?
  (Introduction, p. 19.) Compare with this ll. 42-44.

  21. THEY THOUGHT. How does the reader give to these
  words the force of a parenthetical clause?
  (Introduction, p. 33.)

  22-23. Note the Grouping.

  31. How does the voice make the transition to direct
  discourse? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  42-54. What is the mental attitude? What is the
  corresponding Stress? (Introduction, p. 29.)

  44. ORGAN'S. Account for the marked Emphasis on this
  word. Compare BRIGHT CECILIA, l. 51.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE DAY WAS LINGERING


  The day was lingering in the pale northwest,
    And night was hanging o'er my head,--
    Night where a myriad stars were spread;
  While down in the east, where the light was least,
    Seem'd the home of the quiet dead.                                 5
  And, as I gazed on the field sublime,
    To watch the bright, pulsating stars,
    Adown the deep where the angels sleep
  Came drawn the golden chime
    Of those great spheres that sound the years                       10
  For the horologe of time.
    Millenniums numberless they told,
    Millenniums a million-fold
  From the ancient hour of prime.

