ground. It was a lucky inspiration. Some shining particles attracted the
attention of Russell.

"Tom," he exclaimed, in excitement, "do you see that, and that? I
believe you've struck a bonanza."

Upon that both set to work in earnest. A further investigation showed
that Russell was right. Tom, by good luck, had chanced upon a deposit of
far greater richness than any they had yet encountered.

"If it holds out, our fortunes are made, Tom," said Russell. "Go and
call Ferguson, and I will remain on guard till you come back."

Tom stood not on the order of his going, but went at once.

"What's the matter, Tom?" asked the Scotchman, as, panting and
breathless, Tom stood before him. "Has anything happened to Russell?"

"No; it's good news--splendid news, Mr. Ferguson. We've found a place
ten times as rich as this. Come at once, and see."

Ferguson made preparations to accompany Tom with what seemed to our hero
to be provoking deliberation. In truth the Scotchman, with his national
caution, was rather skeptical as to Tom's news, and did not suffer
himself to become enthusiastic or excited. Tom had hard work to
accommodate his impatient steps to the measured pace of his more sedate
companion. When at length they reached the spot they found Russell no
less impatient.

"I thought you would never come," he said.

"Tom wanted to fly," said Ferguson; "but I am too old for that. Now,
what is it you have found?"

When he was shown what had been discovered he admitted that it was very
promising.

"If it holds out, we shall be lucky," he said.

"It _will_ hold out," said Russell, enthusiastically.

"It isn't well to be too confident," said Ferguson, cautiously.

"You are very cold-blooded, Mr. Ferguson," said Russell, impatiently.
"Won't anything excite you?"

"What good would it do to become excited?" returned the Scotchman. "I am
as ready to test the matter as you are, and I shall rejoice if your
sanguine expectations are realized. Do not expect too much, however, and
you will guard against possible disappointment."

But there was no disappointment awaiting them. They worked steadily for
two weeks, with marvelous results. In this time they unearthed six
thousand dollars' worth of gold, which by arrangement they divided
equally between them; and still the gold deposit was far from being
exhausted.

At the end of the fortnight they were visited by a party of capitalists
from San Francisco, who were out on an exploring expedition. They
recognized the richness of the new discoveries, and after some
negotiation offered the three friends ten thousand dollars for their
claims. One consideration decided them to accept. It was absolutely
necessary for them to go to the city for clothing and other articles, of
which they stood in imperative need. They closed the bargain and started
on their return.




CHAPTER XXIX.

BAD NEWS FROM HOME.


Arriving in the city late in the afternoon, Tom went at once to see John
Miles. When the latter caught sight of Tom, in his ragged attire, he
came to the natural conclusion that our hero had met with hard luck.

"Why, Tom, where did you spring from?" he exclaimed, grasping the hand
of his young partner.

"I am just in from the mines."

"I suppose you are in want of money," said Miles, his voice betraying
sympathy.

Tom laughed.

"How do you like my appearance, John?" he asked.

"Never mind that, Tom. I see you have had a rough time; but I have been
earning money for you."

"Did you send money regularly to father?"

"Yes; I have sent him three hundred dollars in all."

"That's good," said Tom, in a tone of satisfaction. "That has made him
easy. I suppose that took up about all I was entitled to?"

"No; I have as much more to your credit. I am ready to pay it to you at
once."

"I see, John, you think I have not been doing well."

"You don't look very prosperous, Tom, I must acknowledge."

"Well, John, appearances are deceitful. I have been wonderfully lucky."

"I am delighted to hear it, Tom," said Miles, cordially. "How much is it
now?"

"What do you say to a thousand dollars?"

"Excellent."

"Two thousand?"

"You don't mean it!"

"I won't keep you in suspense, John. I don't know exactly how much I've
got, but it's over six thousand dollars!"

John Miles stared at our hero in undisguised astonishment.

"Are you sure you're quite right _here_?" he said, touching his
forehead. "You haven't been sun-struck, have you?"

"No, John, it's all as I tell you. Let me explain how my luck came."

In a few sentences Tom made it clear to his partner that his luck was
real.

"As to the three hundred dollars due me from you, John," concluded Tom,
"I make you a present of it."

"But, Tom--" protested Miles.

"Let it be so, and for the future you shall pay me my share. Have you
any letters for me?"

"I have three."

"Give them to me, quick. I am hungry for news from home."

Tom sat down on a keg, and fairly devoured the letters, two of which
were from his father. One of these gave him much to think of. I will
transcribe the passages which gave Tom most concern:--

"Yesterday I paid Squire Hudson his regular semi-annual interest,
amounting to sixty-six dollars. Thanks to your liberal remittances, I
had no difficulty in making the payment. Indeed, I had two hundred
dollars left over. Imagine my dismay when the squire told me he had made
up his mind to call in the mortgage, having another use for the money.

"'But I can't pay it up,' said I.

"'You ought to be able to obtain the money somewhere,' he returned.

"'You are the only capitalist with whom I am acquainted,' said I.
'Since I have paid you the interest promptly, what more can you desire?'

"He insisted that he needed the money. I offered to pay him the two
hundred dollars which he had advanced for your journey. He seemed
surprised, but repeated that he must have the whole. The upshot of it
was that he gave me a formal notice of three months, as stipulated in
the mortgage. At the end of that time, unless I am ready to pay the
twenty-two hundred dollars, he will foreclose, and the old farm must be
sold. Of course it will be sold much below its real value. Probably the
squire will get it for the amount of the mortgage, and we shall be
thrown upon the world, without a home. It seems hard, Tom, and very
selfish; but might makes right, and Squire Hudson has the power on his
side."

In a postscript Mark Nelson added, "I understand that Squire Hudson has
a connection, his wife's brother, for whom he wants the farm. That
explains his resolute refusal to give me time to redeem it. Of course it
is too early to decide upon any plans. I must hire some tenement to move
into when I have to leave here. It will be hard upon us all to give up
the old farm. Walter, who has a taste for farming, and whom I look to be
my successor, feels very sad. Don't let this news depress you too much,
Tom. We shall not suffer. Thanks to you, I have some money ahead, and we
shall not lack for comfort."

Tom looked up when he had finished reading the letter.

"John," he said, quickly, "when does the next steamer start for New
York?"

"Day after to-morrow."

"Where can I engage passage?"

"Are you going home?"

"Yes, John, it is absolutely necessary. Squire Hudson is about to
foreclose the mortgage on my father's farm. I must be there to stop it."

"Have you money enough?"

"Three times over. He shall be defeated in his wicked purpose, or my
name isn't Tom Nelson."

Tom spoke in a quick, indignant tone, and his voice had a manly ring.

"Wait, John, let me read you the letter."

"The man's a mean rascal!" said Miles. "A rich man who will take
advantage of a poor man's necessity to deprive him of his home deserves
to be horsewhipped."

"I shan't attempt that," said Tom, smiling; "but I will disappoint him.
He little thinks I have it in my power to defeat his plans."

That very evening Tom engaged passage to New York, and two days later he
sailed out of the Golden Gate.

"I don't know how long I shall be gone, John," he said. "You need send
me no remittances, for I have money enough with me. You will hear from
me as soon as I have reached home, and transacted my business with
Squire Hudson."

"You will come out here again, Tom, won't you?"

"Yes, and before long. I have been so busily occupied making money that
I have seen almost nothing of San Francisco."

Tom did not journey alone. Ferguson, having thriven beyond his
expectations, decided to sail to New York, and thence to Scotland, on a
visit to his relatives, though he thought it probable he should come
back within a year. Dick Russell also was now in a position to study law
at home, and gave up the business of gold-mining forever.

"I owe all my present prosperity to you two," he said. "But for you I
should have blown my brains out five months since."

"We owe our prosperity to you also," said Tom. "You guided us to the
mines from which we gathered a golden harvest."

"We have worked together, and been mutual helpers," said Ferguson. "God
has favored us all, and to Him be the thanks!"




CHAPTER XXX.

THE NIGHT BEFORE THE AUCTION.


It was a sad household, that of Mark Nelson, on the day preceding the
departure from the farm. There was to be an auction the next day, at
which the farm-stock and farm-implements were to be sold. It was well
understood that Squire Hudson was to be the buyer of the farm, and as he
was not likely to have any competitor there was little hope that it
would fetch more than the amount of the mortgage.

During the afternoon Mr. Nelson called on Squire Hudson to make the best
terms he could at private sale.

"The farm is worth at least a thousand dollars more than the mortgage,
Squire Hudson," said the farmer.

"It is worth what it will fetch, Mr. Nelson," said the squire.

"Do you mean that an article always commands its full value at auction,
Squire Hudson?"

"Ahem! it brings its market value, Mr. Nelson."

"Which may be far below its intrinsic value. Suppose a diamond worth ten
thousand dollars were put up at auction in our village, do you consider
that it would bring a fair price?"

"Ahem! you are wandering from the subject. We are talking of farms, not
diamonds."

"As to the farm, then, you are likely to be the only bidder, unless you
allow the mortgage to remain."

"If I were inclined to do that I would not disturb you as long as you
paid the interest promptly."

"Then you decline to buy the farm at private sale?"

"I do."

"I don't think you will be any better off in the end, Squire Hudson, for
oppressing a poor man, and robbing him of his little all," said Mark
Nelson, bitterly.

"You don't look at the matter from a business point of view," said the
squire, coldly. "I am acting as any business man would under the
circumstances."

"I cannot believe you, sir. All business men are not so hard-hearted."

"I really don't think there is any use in prolonging this interview,"
said Squire Hudson, stiffly. "I have resolved upon my course, in which I
am perfectly justified, however you may choose to regard it."

This removed the farmer's last hope, and he had only to look about for
another home for his family. There was small choice of houses in the
little farming town. In fact there was but one house,--a shabby,
dilapidated building, a mile from the church and store. This, Mr.
Nelson, having no choice, engaged for a period of three months.

"It makes me homesick to think of going to live in that barn," said
Sarah, as they were sitting together after supper.

"It may not be so bad as you think for, Sarah," said her mother; but
she secretly sympathized with her daughter.

"I wish Squire Hudson had to live there himself," said Walter, in an
angry outburst.

Usually Walter was checked by his father when uttering such speeches;
but to-night Mark Nelson took no notice of his son's angry remark. He
felt that it would only be a righteous retribution upon the squire for
his cold selfishness.

While they were sitting in the plain room endeared to them by the
association of years, a sound of wheels was heard, and the village stage
stopped before the door.

"Who can it be?" said Sarah, wonderingly.

The whole family hurried to the window. What youthful, yet manly figure,
was that actively descending from his perch beside the driver?

"It's Tom!" exclaimed Mrs. Nelson. "Heaven be praised! It is my dear
boy."

Tom was almost suffocated by the embraces which he received on entering
the house.

