so fearfully out of repair that no one will take it until it is put in
order; but the real thing which has made it necessary to sell the Towers
is, that father went security a long time ago for a very large sum of
money, and all the other sureties have died or lost their money, and so
father has to pay. I know there was a great fear of that, because mother
told me of it more than a year ago. She said that father always
intended, if the worst came, to try and borrow the money. I suppose he
has failed to do so, and that must be the reason why the Towers has to
be sold."

"It's a bad business," said Guy, "and I can't realise it a bit yet; of
course we young ones must be as plucky as we can about it, that goes
without saying, but I can't take it in yet. I'm glad it's holiday time,
and I needn't go to school. I couldn't face the other fellows just for a
bit."

"I know you'll be splendid about it, Guy darling," said Molly looking
affectionately at her brother; "and now do you mind coming with me to
the Grange, for, of course, poor Nonie must be told? We won't stay there
long, for we must do what we can to help mother when she comes home."

"Yes, I'll come with you," said Guy; "we'd best start at once, it's not
too early."

"Stay where you are, then, for a moment," said Molly. "I'll run into the
house and tell them we are going."

She went back to the breakfast-room, where an animated conversation was
going on.

Nell was lying on a sofa with a shawl over her, and Jane Macalister was
sitting by her side and holding her hand. Harry, Boris, and Kitty were
standing in a little knot by the open window eagerly discussing a
subject which was causing them intense pain, and obliging them to use
many bickering words. They were feverishly anxious about the removal of
their several pets.

"I know the big rabbit will die," exclaimed Boris. "Unless we can take
the hutch which is built into the wall he'll die. He never will sleep
anywhere except in that one corner of his hutch. It makes him ill, I
know it does, to sleep anywhere else. He'll die if he's moved."

"No he won't die," said Kitty roundly; "rabbits have got no souls, and
you can't be affectionate and fond of a thing if you haven't got a
soul."

"Oh, what a lie," interrupted Harry; "and you mean to tell me that my
dormice aren't fond of me, and that they don't prefer me to you--you
clumsy monkey."

Kitty looked nonplussed for a moment.

"That's only because you feed them," she said then. "If you didn't feed
them, they'd love me just as well. Ah, yah; who's right? You can't
answer me now, can you? It's only cupboard-love animals have got, and
that proves that they have no souls."

"It seems to me," said Harry, in a would-be sarcastic voice, "that very
much the same thing may be said of some girls. Who caught you stealing a
peach a week ago? Ha, ha, Miss Kitty."

"Oh, for pity's sake, children, don't quarrel," exclaimed Molly.

"That's what I'm telling 'em," said Boris in a tearful voice; "and I
think my big rabbit _has_ a soul, and I'm awful 'feared it will kill him
if he leaves his corner of the hutch."

"Jane," interrupted Molly, "Guy and I are going over to the Grange to
tell poor Nora about mother's letter, but we'll both be home before
mother returns."

"Very well, my dear," replied Jane Macalister. "You'd better not have
Nora back, though, Molly, for she's quite certain not to be sensible
about matters, and that's the only thing left to us now. For heaven's
sake, I say, let us keep our senses and not give way to sentiment at a
crisis like this. Go, my dear; tell her that she must take it in a
quiet, matter-of-fact way, and not consider herself in the very least.
The Squire and your mother, and Guy are the three victims; the rest of
us are of no consequence; go, Molly."

Jane blew her nose very hard after uttering this oration, and there were
suspicious red rims round her eyes.

Molly joined Guy, and they started on their walk to the Grange.

Guy had now quite got over the stunned feeling which oppressed him.
There was a great deal of grit in all the Lorrimers, and Guy and Molly
had both even a larger amount of this most valuable quality than the
younger children. The ground, therefore, no longer swam under the brave
boy's feet, and Molly, now that she was obliged to act, and now that she
knew exactly what was going to happen, felt really less unhappy than
before the blow had fallen.

It was little after ten o clock when the children reached the Grange.
They found Hester and Annie out in the garden picking flowers, and Nora,
looking very happy and very pretty in her new pink cambric, was lying
under a shady tree on the lawn.

"Hullo, what have you come over so early for?" she asked of the two,
as, dusty and hot, they came up to her side. Mrs. Willis was sitting
near Nora, and reading aloud to her. Nora felt immensely flattered by
her attentions, and yet at the same time not absolutely at home with
her. Mrs. Willis could read character at a glance. She had taken an
immense fancy to Molly, and pitied Nora without admiring her.

"She is a shallow little thing," she murmured to herself. "Pretty, of
course, but nothing will ever make her either great or wise. Sweet Molly
is one of the angels of the world."

She rose now to greet the brother and sister as they approached. The
trouble round Guy's handsome eyes was not lost upon her. Poor Molly
looked untidy, and quite worn and old.

"Oh, how the ball has fagged you!" exclaimed Nora; "see how fresh I am,
and kind Mrs. Willis is reading me a charming story."

"I won't read any more at present, my dear," said Mrs. Willis, "as no
doubt your brother and sister want to talk to you."

"Oh, I'm sure they don't," said Nora; "they can't have anything at all
particular to say, and I am so immensely interested. I want to know how
Lucile conquered her difficulties with the French grammar. I have such a
fellow feeling for her, for I always detest grammar. Please, Mrs.
Willis, don't go away."

"I'll come back presently," said Mrs. Willis; she crossed the lawn as
she spoke, leaving the fascinating book open on Nora's sofa.

"How tiresome of you both to come and interrupt," said Nora in her
crossest tone. "Molly, you look positively dishevelled; and Guy, you
needn't wear those worn-out tennis shoes when you come to the Grange.
You really, neither of you, have the least idea of what is due to our
position."

"Our position be hanged," growled Guy. "Look here, we have come to say
something, and as it's particularly unpleasant, you had better listen as
quietly as you can."

"Then I'm sure I don't want to hear it; I hate and detest unpleasant
things. You know I do, don't you, Molly?"

"Yes, darling," said Molly, kneeling down by her; "but sometimes bad
things must come and we must be brave and bear them."

She knelt down by Nora as she spoke, and laid her hot, and not too clean
hand, on Nora's pretty fresh sleeve.

"I do think its unkind of you to rumple up my frock like that," said
Nora; "if you don't care to look nice, I do, and if you've got
unpleasant news, you shouldn't tell it to me; for the doctor says that
I'm not to be worried at present. I'm getting well nicely, but I'll be
thrown back awfully if I'm worried."

"That can't be helped," said Guy in a firm voice. "Sometimes unpleasant
things have to be borne. It's no worse for you than for the others."

"Oh, Nonie, Nonie," sobbed Molly, burying her head on her sister's
shoulder; "it's this, it's this: Guy, you mustn't be cruel; remember she
is weak. Nora, darling, we wouldn't tell you if we could help it, but
you must know, because everyone else will know. The Towers is sold. The
dear old home is ours no longer. We are not the Lorrimers of the Towers
any more."




CHAPTER XIX.

TOPSY-TURVEY.


While Guy and Molly were in vain endeavouring to comfort Nora, who,
after uttering shriek after shriek, closed her eyes and lay perfectly
still, so much so, that Molly thought for a moment that she had fainted,
Sir John Thornton left his own private study, where he had been busily
writing letters, and stepping out on the lawn, approached the spot where
Hester and Annie, in their cool white dresses, were picking flowers to
replenish the vases in the different sitting-rooms. The girls made a
pretty picture, and Sir John always admired beauty in any form and under
any guise.

"Really, Hester is becoming quite distinguished looking," he said to
himself; "she inherits a good deal of her mother's grace, and although
she will never be exactly pretty, she is very aristocratic in
appearance. She has a good figure, too--graceful and lithe. Even beside
Miss Forest, who is a regular beauty of the piquant gipsy order, she
quite shows to advantage. Presently we may be able to get her presented,
and, if necessary, we must have a house in town for three months in the
season. (I shall detest it, but Laura says it is inevitable.) Yes, I'm
sure I have done right. Hester is such a sensible girl that she will
probably be glad of my news; yes, it is evidently my duty to take Hester
into society, and Laura is just the woman to take all the care and worry
off my hands. I should never have thought of marrying again if it were
not for Hester and Nan, but no one can say that I shirk a father's
duties. Now I must break it to Hetty, for Laura says she will be here on
Saturday. I would rather she did not bring her daughter with her, but
she evidently has not the least intention of coming anywhere without
Antonia. Dear, dear, I hope Hester will be sensible. I don't want a bad
quarter of an hour."

Sir John had now reached the two girls. He had quite forgotten his
dislike to Annie, and smiling at her, asked her in his gracious way why
she did not offer him a rosebud.

She picked one at once, and he got her to place it in his button-hole.

"Thank you," he said with a smile; "your taste is admirable, and now I
have a favour to ask of you."

"Granted, of course," said Annie with a smile.

"I want to deprive you of Hetty's company for a quarter of an hour. I
have some domestic matters to discuss with my fair housekeeper."

"You can arrange the flowers, Annie," called Hester, dropping her basket
as she spoke, and going up to her fathers side.

He drew her hand through his arm and they walked across the lawn
together.

"I have just been admiring you and your friend," he said. "Do you know,
Hester, that you really grow very nice looking."

Hester flushed with a strange mingling of irritation and elation.

To be praised by her fastidious father was something to be remembered,
but she always shrank from having her personal appearance commented
upon.

Sir John turned round now and smiled into her blushing face.

"Come down this shady walk with me," he said. "I have a good deal to
talk over with you. Hester, you and Nan have always found me a kind,
indulgent father, have you not?"

"You have been very good to us," replied Hester.

"Oh, perhaps not so good as some fathers, but good according to my
lights, eh?"

"You have been very good to us," repeated Hester.

"And you are a good, dear daughter," replied Sir John, with almost
enthusiasm; "you never complain of the dull life I give you at the
Grange."

"The life is not dull, father."

"My dear, my dear," Sir John patted Hester's long slim fingers as they
rested on his arm, "I was young once myself and I know what youth wants,
and I have seen other girls, and I know what my girl requires. Hester, I
am not unmindful of you; and the step--the step I am about to take is
taken not wholly, but mainly, on your account and Nan's."

Hester suddenly withdrew her hand from Sir John's arm. A kind of
intuition told her what was coming. Like a flash a sword seemed to
pierce right through her heart. She had a memory of her mother, of the
loving eyes now closed--the voice so full of sympathy now silent. Was
her mother to be supplanted and because of her? For once passion got the
upper hand of prudence.

"Do it," she said, suddenly flashing round upon Sir John; "do it,
certainly, if you wish, but do not do it for Nan's sake and mine.
Nothing in all the wide world could pain us more."

Sir John looked as astonished as if Hester had suddenly slapped him in
the face.

"Your words are extremely vigorous, my dear," he said in a voice of ice;
"and I am not aware that I have yet told you what I mean to do."

"Oh, I know, I know," answered Hester; "you are going to marry again.
Oh, don't do it for our sakes; that is all I have to say."

Sir John was quite silent for nearly a minute. Then he said quietly: "As
you have been so clever as to guess my intention, you have of course
saved me the trouble of breaking my news to you. Young girls sometimes
resent the presence of a stepmother, but as a rule they appreciate the
advantage of one when once they have become accustomed to the change.
The lady who has honoured me by promising to accept my hand is Mrs.
Bernard Temple. She is about my own age and has one daughter of
seventeen--your age, Hester--whose name is Antonia. I have not yet seen
Antonia, but I am told that she is a most charming, ladylike girl. Mrs.
Bernard Temple has written to me to say she will come here on a visit on
Saturday with Antonia. This is Thursday, and I expect you, Hester, in
the meantime, to break the news to Nan, and to get everything ready for
the honoured guests who will then arrive. I expect this is a surprise to
you, my dear, so I forgive the excited words you have just made use of.
You will doubtless have reason to rejoice yet at my decision. You are
too young to be at the head of a great establishment like this, Hetty. I
am doing wisely in removing such a burden from such young shoulders."

"I have never felt it a burden," said Hester in a choked voice.

"No; you have been good, very good, and now you will reap your reward.
My marriage will probably take place in October, and my wife and I will
return to the Grange for Christmas. Next season we shall probably have a
house in town, when my dear Laura will present you and Antonia at one of
the drawing-rooms."

Hester made no remark.

"I think that is all, my love," said Sir John; "you can now return to
your friends. I have several letters to attend to."

"May I tell Mrs. Willis, and--and the others?" asked Hester.

"You may tell everyone; it is no secret."

Sir John took out his cigar case as he spoke, and Hester, with a sinking
heart, turned away.

Annie, full of trouble on her account, dreading inexpressibly the moment
when Mrs. Willis should ask her for the ring, was sauntering up and
down, lost in anxious thought in front of the house.

She caught sight of Hester coming slowly towards her.

"Good gracious, Hetty, whatever is the matter?" she exclaimed. "I never
saw your pale face with peonies on it before, and your eyes look as if
you had been crying. I cannot imagine what has come to everyone,"
continued Annie; "the whole place seems to be in a ferment. Nora, I
know, has been crying about something, and Molly's face looks positively
blotchy."

"Oh, I should like to see Molly; is she here?" exclaimed Hester.

"Yes, she's on the lawn talking to Nora, and Guy is with them, and Mrs.
Willis joined them half an hour ago. I was running up to them, but Nora
