
"They haven't passed yet," replied Jack, with deep sarcasm, at the same
time quietly lifting his leg, and swaying it gently to and fro; "whether
they'll pass without a licking remains to be seen."

"Look 'ee, lads, we'll pay you for this," shouted the men as they turned
away.  "We've not time to waste now, _but we'll come back_."

I remonstrated with my friend.  "You're too rash, Jack."

"Why?  We don't need to fear _two_ men!"

"Ay, but there may be more in the woods."

My surmise was correct.  Half an hour after, the hound was heard
returning.  It came straight at us, followed by at least a dozen men.
Jack killed the dog with one blow, and felled the first man that came
up, but we were overwhelmed by numbers, and, in a much shorter time than
it takes to tell it, both of us were knocked into the mud and rendered
insensible.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 9.

On recovering from the stunning effects of the blow that had felled me,
I found myself lying on a hard earthen floor, surrounded by deep
impenetrable darkness.

"Are you there, Jack?"  I sighed faintly.

"Ay, Bob, I'm here--at least, all o' me that's left.  I confess to you
that I do feel a queer sensation, as if the one half of my head were
absent and the other half a-wanting, while the brain lies exposed to the
atmosphere.  But I suppose that's impossible."

"Where are we, Jack?"

"We're in an outhouse, in the hands of planters; so I made out by what I
heard them say when I got my senses back; but I've no notion of what
part o' the world we're in.  Moreover, I don't care.  A man with only
one leg, no head, and an exposed brain, isn't worth caring about.  _I_
don't care for him--not a button."

"Oh, Jack, dear, don't speak like that--I can't stand it."

"You're lying down, ain't you?" inquired Jack.

"Yes."

"Then how d'you know whether you can stand it or not?"

I was so overcome, and, to say the truth, surprised, at my companion's
recklessness, that I could not reply.  I lay motionless on the hard
ground, meditating on our forlorn situation, when my thoughts were
interrupted by the grating sound of a key turning in a lock.  The door
of the hut opened, and four men entered, each bearing a torch, which
cast a brilliant glare over the hovel in which we were confined.  There
was almost nothing to be seen in the place.  It was quite empty.  The
only peculiar thing that I observed about it was a thick post, with iron
hooks fixed in it, which rose from the centre of the floor to the
rafters, against which it was nailed.  There were also a few
strange-looking implements hanging round the walls, but I could not at
first make out what these were intended for.  I now perceived that Jack
and I were chained to the wall.

Going to the four corners of the apartment, the four men placed their
four torches in four stands that seemed made for the purpose, and then,
approaching us, ranged themselves in a row before us.  Two of them I
recognised as being the men we had first seen in the swamp; the other
two were strangers.

"So, my bucks," began one of the former,--a hideous-looking man, whose
personal appearance was by no means improved by a closed eye, a
flattened nose, and a swelled cheek, the result of Jack's first flourish
of his wooden leg,--"so, we've got you, have we?  The hounds have got
you, eh?"

"So it appears," replied Jack, in a tone of quiet contempt, as he sat on
the ground with his back leaning against the wall, his hands clasped
above his solitary knee, and his thumbs revolving round each other
slowly.  "I say," continued Jack, an expression of concern crossed his
handsome countenance, "I'm afraid you're damaged, rather, about your
head-piece.  Your eye seems a little out of order, and, pardon me, but
your nose is a little too flat--just a little.  My poor fellow, I'm
quite sorry for you; I really am, though you _are_ a dog."

The man opened his solitary eye and stared with amazement at Jack, who
smiled, and, putting his head a little to the other side, returned the
stare with interest.

"You're a bold fellow," said the man, on recovering a little from his
surprise.

"I'm sorry," retorted Jack, "that I cannot return you the compliment."

I was horrified.  I saw that my poor friend, probably under the
influence of madness, had made up his mind to insult and defy our
captors to their teeth, regardless of consequences.  I tried to speak,
but my lips refused their office.  The man grinned horribly and gnashed
his teeth, while the others made as though they would rush upon us and
tear us limb from limb.  But their chief, for such the spokesman seemed
to be, restrained them.

"Hah!" he gasped, looking fiercely at Jack, and at the same time
pointing to the implements on the wall, "d'ye see these things?"

"Not being quite so blind as you are, I do."

"D'ye know what they're for?"

"Not being a demon, which you seem to be, I don't."

"Hah! these--are," (he spoke very slowly, and hissed the words out
between his teeth),--"torterers!"

"What?" inquired Jack, putting his head a little more to one side and
revolving his thumbs in a contrary direction, by way of variety.

"Torterers--man-torterers!  What d'ye twirl your thumbs like that for,
eh?"

"Because it reminds me how easily, if I were unchained and had on my
wooden leg, I could twirl you round your own neck, and cram your heels
into your own mouth, and ram you down your own throat, until there was
nothing of you left but the extreme ends of your shirt-collar sticking
out of your eyes."

The mention of this peculiarly complicated operation seemed to be too
much for the men: setting up a loud yell, they rushed upon Jack and
seized him.

"Quick--the screws!" cried the man with the flattened nose.

A small iron instrument was brought, Jack's thumbs inserted therein, and
the handle turned.  I heard a harsh, grating sound, and observed my poor
companion's face grow deadly pale and his lips turn blue.  But he
uttered no cry, and, to my surprise, he did not even struggle.

"Stop!"  I shouted in a voice of thunder.

The men looked round in surprise.  At that moment a great idea seemed to
fill my soul.  I cannot explain what it was.  To this day I do not know
what it was.  It was a mystery--an indescribable mystery.  I felt as one
might be supposed to feel whose spirit were capable of eating material
food, and had eaten too much.  It was awful!  Under the impulse of this
sensation, I again shouted--

"_Stop_!"

"Why?"

"I cannot tell you why, until you unscrew that machine.  Quick! it is of
the deepest, the most vital importance to yourselves."

The extreme earnestness of my voice and manner induced the men to comply
almost, I might say, in spite of themselves.

"Now, lad, what is it?  Mind, _your_ turn is coming; so don't trifle
with us."

"_Trifle_ with you!"  I said, in a voice so deep, and slow, and
solemn,--with a look so preternaturally awful,--that the four men were
visibly impressed.

"Listen!  I have a secret to tell you,--a secret that intimately
concerns yourselves.  It is a fearful one.  You would give all you
possess--your wealth, your very lives--rather than not know it.  I can
tell it to you; _but not now_.  All the tortures of the Inquisition
could not drag it out of me.  Nay, you need not smile.  If you did
torture me _before_ I told you this secret, that would have the effect
of rendering my information useless to you.  Nothing could then save
you.  I must be left alone with my friend for an hour.  Go!  You may
leave us chained; you may lock and bar your door; you may watch and
guard the house; but go, leave us.  Much--too much--valuable time has
been already lost.  Come back in one hour," (here I pulled out my
watch),--"in one hour and three minutes and five seconds, exactly; not
sooner.  Go! quick! as you value your lives, your families, your
property.  And hark, in your ear," (here I glared at them like a maniac,
and sank my voice to a deep hoarse whisper), "as you value the very
existence of your slaves, go, leave us instantly, and return at the hour
named!"

The men were evidently overawed by the vehemence of my manner and the
mysterious nature of my remarks.  Without uttering a word they withdrew,
and locked the door behind them.  Happily they left the torches.

As soon as they were gone I threw my arms round my comrade's neck, and,
resting my head on his shoulder, bemoaned our sad lot.

"Dear, dear Jack, have they hurt you?"

"Oh! nothing to speak of.  But I say, Bob, my boy, what on earth can
this monstrous secret be?  It must be something very tremendous?"

"My poor Jack," said I, regardless of his question, "your thumbs are
bruised and bleeding.  Oh that I should have lived to bring you to
this!"

"Come, come, Bob, enough of that.  They _are_ a little soreish, but
nothing to what they would have been had you not stopped them.  But, I
say, what _is_ this secret?  I'm dying to know.  My dear boy, you've no
idea how you looked when you were spouting like that.  You made my flesh
creep, I assure you.  Come, out with it; what's the secret?"

I felt, and no doubt looked, somewhat confused.

"Do you know, Jack," said I, solemnly, "I have no secret whatever!"

Jack gasped and stared--

"No secret, Bob!"

"Not the most distant shadow of one."

Jack pulled out his watch, and said in a low voice--

"Bob, my boy, we have just got about three-quarters of an hour to live.
When these villains come back, and find that you've been humbugging
them, they'll brain us on the spot, as sure as my name is John Brown and
yours is Robert Smith--romantic names, both of 'em; especially when
associated with the little romance in which we are now involved.  Ha!
ha! ha!"

I shrank back from my friend with the terrible dread, which had more
than once crossed my mind, that he was going mad.

"Oh, Jack, don't laugh, pray.  Could we not invent some secret to tell
them?"

"Not a bad idea," returned my friend, gravely.

"Well, let us think; what could we say?"

"Ay, that's the rub!  Suppose we tell them seriously that my wooden leg
is a ghost, and that it haunts those who ill-treat its master, giving
them perpetual bangs on the nose, and otherwise rendering their lives
miserable?"

I shook my head.

"Well, then, suppose we say we've been sent by the Queen of England to
treat with them about the liberation of the niggers at a thousand pounds
a head; one hundred paid down in gold, the rest in American
shin-plasters?"

"That would be a lie, you know, Jack."

"Come, that's good!  You're wonderfully particular about truth, for a
man that has just told such tremendous falsehoods about a secret that
doesn't exist."

"True, Jack," I replied, seriously, "I confess that I have lied; but I
did not mean to.  I assure you I had no notion of what I was saying.  I
think I was bewitched.  All your nonsense rolled out, as it were,
without my will.  Indeed, I did not mean to tell lies.  Yet I confess,
to my shame, that I did.  There is some mystery here, which I can by no
means fathom."

"Fathom or not fathom," rejoined my friend, looking at his watch again,
"you got me into this scrape, so I request you to get me out of it.  We
have exactly twenty-five minutes and a half before us now."

Jack and I now set to work in real earnest to devise some plan of
escape, or to invent some plausible secret.  But we utterly failed.
Minute after minute passed; and, as the end of our time drew near, we
felt less and less able to think of any scheme, until our brains became
confused with the terror of approaching and inevitable death, aggravated
by previous torture.  I trembled violently, and Jack became again
uproarious and sarcastic.  Suddenly he grew quiet, and I observed that
he began to collect a quantity of straw that was scattered about the
place.  Making a large pile of it, he placed it before us, and then
loosened one of the torches in its stand.

"There," said he, with a sigh of satisfaction, when all was arranged,
"we shall give our amiable friends a warm reception when they come."

"But they will escape by the door," said I, in much anxiety, "and we
only shall perish."

"Never mind that, Bob; we can only die once.  Besides, they sha'n't
escape; trust me for that."

As he spoke we heard approaching footsteps.  Presently the key turned in
the lock, and the door opened.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 10.

Punctually, to a minute, our jailors returned, and once again drew up in
a row before us.

"Now, lads, wot have ye got to say?"

"My friends," began Jack, standing up and balancing himself on his one
leg as well as he could, at the same time speaking with the utmost
gravity and candour of expression, "my companion here in _temporary_
distress--for I feel that it will be but temporary--has devolved upon me
the interesting duty of making known to you the secret which has
burthened his own mind for some time, and which has had so impressive
and appropriate an effect upon yours.  But first I must request you to
lock the door, and hang the key on this nail at my elbow.  You hesitate.
Why?  I am in chains; so is my comrade.  We are two; you are four.  It
is merely a precaution to prevent the possibility of any one entering by
stealth, and overhearing what I say."

The man with the battered face locked the door, and hung up the key as
directed, merely remarking, with a laugh, that we were safe enough
anyhow, and that if we were humbugging him it would be worse for us in
the long-run.

"Come, now, out with yer secret," he added, impatiently.

"Certainly," answered Jack, with increased urbanity, at the same time
taking down the key, (which caused the four men to start), and gazing at
it in a pensive manner.  "The secret!  Ah! yes.  Well, it's a wonderful
one.  D'you know, my lads, there would not be the most distant chance of
your guessing it, if you were to try ever so much?"

"Well, but what is it?" cried one of the men, whose curiosity was now
excited beyond endurance.

"It is this," rejoined Jack, with slow deliberation, "that you four men
are--"

"Well," they whispered, leaning forward eagerly.

"The most outrageous and unmitigated asses we ever saw!  Ha!  I thought
it would surprise you.  Bob and I are quite agreed upon it.  Pray don't
open your eyes too wide, in case you should find it difficult to shut
them again.  Now, in proof of this great, and to you important truth,
let me show you a thing.  Do you see this torch," (taking it down), "and
that straw?"  (lifting up a handful), "Well, you have no idea what an
astonishing result will follow the application of the former to the
latter--see!"

To my horror, and evidently to the dismay of the men, who did not seem
to believe that he was in earnest, Jack Brown thrust the blazing torch
into the centre of the heap of straw.

The men uttered a yell, and rushing forward, threw themselves on the
smoking heap in the hope of smothering it at once.  But Jack applied the
torch quickly to various parts.  The flames leaped up!  The men rolled
off in agony.  Jack, who somehow had managed to break his chain, hopped
after them, showering the blazing straw on their heads, and yelling as
never mortal yelled before.  In two seconds the whole place was in a
blaze, and I beheld Jack actually throwing somersets with his one leg
over the fire and through the smoke; punching the heads of the four men
most unmercifully; catching up blazing handfuls of straw, and thrusting
them into their eyes and mouths in a way that quite overpowered me.  I
could restrain myself no longer.  I began to roar in abject terror!  In
the midst of this dreadful scene the roof fell in with a hideous crash,
and Jack, bounding through the smoking _debris_, cleared the walls and
vanished!

At the same moment I received a dreadful blow on the side, and _awoke_--
to find myself lying on the floor of my bedroom, and our man-servant
Edwards furiously beating the bed-curtains, which I had set on fire by
upsetting the candle in my fall.

"Why, Master Robert," gasped Edwards, sitting down and panting
vehemently, after having extinguished the flames, "wot have you been
a-doin' of?"  I was standing speechless in the midst of my upset chair,
table, and books, glaring wildly, when the man said this.

"Edwards," I replied, with deep solemnity, "the mystery's cleared up at
last.  _It has been all a dream_!"

"Wot's been all a dream?  You hain't bin a bed all night, for the clo'se
is never touched, an' its broad daylight.  Wot has bin up?"

I might have replied, that, according to his own statement, I had been
"up," but I did not.  I began gradually to believe that the dreadful
scenes I had witnessed were not reality; and an overpowering sense of
joy kept filling my heart as I continued to glare at the man until I
thought my chest would rend asunder.  Suddenly, and without moving hand,
foot, or eye, I gave vent to a loud, sharp, "Hurrah!"

Edwards started--"Eh?"

"Hurrah! hurrah! it's a DREAM!"

"Hallo!  I say, you know, come, this won't--"

"Hurrah!"

"Bless my 'art, Master Ro--"

Again I interrupted him by seizing my cap, swinging it round my head in
an ecstasy of delight, and uttering cheer upon cheer with such
outrageous vehemence, that Edwards, who thought me raving mad, crept
towards the door, intending to bolt.

He was prevented from carrying out his intention, and violently
overturned by the entrance of my father in dishabille.  I sprang
forward, plucked the spectacles off his nose, threw my arms round his
neck, and kissed him on both eyes.

"I won't run away now, father, no, no, no! it's all a dream--a horrid
dream! ha! ha! ha!"

"Bob, my dear boy!"

At this moment Jack, also in dishabille, rushed in.  "Hallo!  Bob,
what's all the row?"

I experienced a different, but equally powerful gush of feeling on
seeing my friend.  Leaving my father, I rushed towards him, and, falling
on his neck, burst into tears.  Yes, I confess it without shame.
Reader, if you had felt as I did, you would have done the same.

Jack led me gently to my bed, and, seating me on the edge of it, sat
down beside me.  I at once perceived from their looks that they all
thought me mad, and felt the necessity of calming me before taking more
forcible measures.  This tickled me so much that I laughed again
heartily, insomuch that Jack could not help joining me.  Suddenly a
thought flashed into my mind.  My heart leaped to my throat, and I
glanced downwards.  _It was there_!  I seized Jack's right leg, tumbled
him back into the bed, and laying the limb across my knee, grasped it
violently.

"All right!"  I shouted, "straight, firm, muscular, supple as ever."  I
squeezed harder.

