Coulters. I've some regard for the family dignity if you haven't. And
since you'll be at home anyway, you may as well take the chance to do a
kindly deed and let Frankie O'Dowd wear your clothes. You don't want to
grow up to be selfish."

"My pants will be miles too long for that O'Dowd kid," responded the
unwilling altruist grudgingly.

"Oh, his mother can baste them up so they'll do for one afternoon," was
the serene answer.

"Huh! I don't envy Frank going to that party with two thicknesses of
trousers on his legs," Carl declared. "If it's a hot day he'll melt."

"Beggars cannot be choosers," Mrs. McGregor asserted. "Likely Frankie
will be that tickled to go to the lawn party that he won't care what he
has on any more than you would. You'd go quicker than a wink in
basted-up trousers if you got the chance."

"You bet I would! Why, I'd go in--in--in _anything_!" was the fervent
affirmation. "Somehow, Ma, it just seems as if I couldn't give up the
idea of going. I feel as if something _must_ happen so we'd get asked."

"Why, Carl--you silly boy! You don't mean to say you are actually
cherishing the thought you may be invited yet?" his mother exclaimed
incredulously. "Put it out of your head, son, like a sensible lad.
There isn't a chance of it, dear. The invitations were sent out last
week and had you been going to get one you would have received it days
ago. There'll be no more people asked now."

"There might be--some might have been forgotten by mistake. Or the
invitation might have got stuck in the letter box and delayed."

"I'm afraid not, Carlie!" his mother said gently. "Mark my words, all
the invitations there are going to be to that garden party have gone
out. There won't be any more. The folks that haven't had theirs already
won't have none and if you're wise you will face that fact and give up
thinking about Mr. Coulter and his wedding."

The corners of Carl's mouth drooped but he stubbornly insisted:

"Well, anyhow, Ma, don't you tell Frankie O'Dowd he can have my clothes
until the very last minute, will you? Promise me that."

"Aye! I'll not mention the clothes yet awhile. I'll wait at least a day
or two. Most likely Julie or the Murphys will be up by that time and
ask for 'em."

And with this scanty comfort Carl was obliged to be content.

Even the concession that he would be allowed to wear his bathing suit
while at home was but feeble consolation. What did it matter what he
wore if he couldn't go to the Coulter fete?




CHAPTER XVII

AN ORDEAL


As the date for the Coulters' fete approached the weather was
breathlessly scanned in practically every home in Baileyville and
throbbing hearts almost ceased to beat lest the day be stormy or too
cold to wear the finery that awaited the great occasion. Could one have
taken off the roofs of the houses between his thumb and forefinger as
he would lift the cover off a sugar-bowl, what a bewildering array of
freshly starched muslins, clean shirts and collars, shining shoes, and
rose-encircled hats would have met his gaze!

Carl McGregor had spoken truly when he had affirmed to his mother that
everybody in the town was going to the wedding festival. All
Baileyville was on tiptoe with excitement. The schools were to be
closed for the afternoon, not alone to do Mr. Coulter honor, but
because it was quite evident that no children would be found in their
seats on the great day.

"We McGregors would be the only kids in the whole place, I bet, if they
did have school," declared Carl gloomily. "You see, Ma, it's just as I
told you--everybody's going to the Coulters'."

"I should think, hating school as you do, you'd be thankful to have a
holiday," commented Mary.

"Ordinarily I would," was the prompt reply. "But what good is this
holiday going to do me, I'd like to know, with Frankie O'Dowd wearing
all my clothes, and Mother forbidding me to go out of the house in my
bathing suit?"

"Well, at least you won't have to study," said his optimistic sister,
making an effort to comfort her morose companion.

"I might as well study; it would take up my mind," fretted Carl. "I've
nothing better to do."

His ill humor was so tragic that in spite of herself Mary laughed.

"Well, you needn't grin so over it, Miss Superiority, or go pretending
you don't wish you could go to the lawn party."

"Of course I'd love to go," Mary confessed honestly. "But if we can't I
don't see any use in mourning about it and talking of nothing else."

"I _have_ to talk about it. I think of it every minute."

"Put it out of your head."

"I can't."

"Nonsense! You don't try. Why don't you set about doing something and
forget it instead of sitting round mooning and working yourself all up?
You can run down and get the mail right now. There's the bell. Maybe
it's a letter from Uncle Frederick."

Welcoming the diversion her brother rose with alacrity. He was in a
mood when any excitement, no matter how trivial, was a boon. Down the
stairs he ran only to return a second later with a square white
envelope in his hand.

"Is it from Uncle Frederick?" queried Mary eagerly.

"Nope!"

"Oh, I'm sorry, we haven't heard from him for ever so long. I do hope
nothing's the matter. Who is the letter from?"

"I don't know."

Something in the reticence of the reply caused the girl to glance up.

"I'll take it in to Mother," volunteered she, holding out her hand.

"It isn't for Mother," Carl answered slowly.

"Not for Mother? How funny! None of the rest of us ever have letters.
Who is it for?"

"It happens to be mine."

"Carl!" Dismay and apprehension vibrated in the word.

"Yes, it's mine," her brother repeated. His obvious attempt to carry
off the episode in jaunty fashion failed, however, and it was evident
by his tense tones that he echoed Mary's alarm.

"But who on earth can be writing to you?" demanded his sister.

"I--I--don't know." The boy fingered the envelope with uneasiness. Mary
came nearer.

"Carl, what have you been up to now?" asked she. "That looks like the
teacher's writing. Aren't you going to be promoted or what is the
matter?"

"How do I know until I read the thing?" snapped Carl.

"You're not in any scrape?"

"Not that I know of."

"Honestly?"

"I tell you I can't think of any. On my honor I can't."

"Oh, well then, it's probably about your work. Most likely you're
behind the class in something and Miss Dewey wants to see you. Why
don't you buck up and find out what she has to say?"

"I'm going to in a minute."

"You're afraid to open that letter. You've done something at school you
don't want Mother and me to know about."

"I tell you I haven't."

"Then why, for pity's sake, don't you read what Miss Dewey has written
instead of looking at the note as if it was a bomb? Maybe she's
inviting you to supper. She does ask the boys sometimes."

This possibility was so encouraging that the startled expression in the
lad's eyes gave place to a serener light. Perhaps after all the
missive did not portend the calamity that a note from school usually
did. Maybe his algebra was all right and he had not flunked his Latin.
The fates may have graciously intervened.

Courageously he tore open the envelope; then a sharp cry came from his
lips.

"Hurrah!" he cried. "Mother! Mother! Where are you?"

"Here, dear, in my room. Is anything the matter?"

Carl rushed off unceremoniously, leaving the mystified Mary alone in
the middle of the kitchen.

"Oh, Ma," he panted, "what do you suppose? We're going, after
all--every one of us! Think of it! We're going!"

"Going where? Have you taken leave of your senses, sonny? What are you
talking about, pray?"

"We're going to the Coulters', Ma," asserted Carl, waving the white
envelope above his head in a frenzy of delight. "Look! Here's the bid.
And across the bottom of the paper Mr. Coulter himself has written to
say that he's sorry the invitation has been so delayed and he hopes my
mother and all of us--even the baby--will come. Gee!"

Quite exhausted, Carl dropped into a chair.

"But why should Mr. Coulter send this invitation to you?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. Maybe Hal Harling or somebody told him how
disappointed I was at not being asked," returned Carl serenely.

"Mercy! I hope not," ejaculated his horrified mother.

"Why not?"

"Why, it would be almost like asking Mr. Coulter for an invitation."

"He wouldn't care, I guess," came comfortably from Carl. "There's
plenty of room and there'll be food enough so a few people more or less
wouldn't bother him."

"But I wouldn't think of going to a party, or letting you, if you had
demanded in so many words to be invited," returned Mrs. McGregor with a
toss of her head.

"You don't mean to say, Ma, that you're thinking of not going," her son
gasped.

"I certainly shall not stir a step to Mr. Coulter's until I find out
how we happened to receive this remarkable invitation."

"Ma!"

"I sha'n't," repeated his mother. "Why, the bare idea of your trying to
get a card to that wedding reception!"

"I didn't try to, Mother; honest, I didn't," protested Carl. "I didn't
ask anybody to do a thing for me. I was only fooling when I said that.
Of course Hal Harling knows well enough that I've been crazy to go. He
and Louise couldn't help seeing how sore I was about it. But I never
said anything else."

"I'm thankful to hear that. One never knows what you will do."

Mrs. McGregor gave a sigh of relief and taking the card examined it.

"Perhaps," she presently observed in a gentler tone, "this invitation
has nothing to do with you. It may be possible that young Mr. Coulter
remembered how long your father worked in the mills and thought it
would be nice to ask us because of that. If so, it was very thoughtful
of him. And most likely the card was sent to you because he happened to
have heard your name. Goodness knows, with the messes you're in, I
should think all the town might be aware of it."

"And you'll go, Ma?" In his eagerness Carl brushed aside the
unflattering picture his mother's words presented.

"If I find it's a bona fide invitation and not some of your concocting
I'll go--not otherwise. It would be ungrateful to snub Mr. John if he
is trying to be kind. But the thing that makes me doubtful is that the
envelope should be addressed to you. Why wasn't the invitation sent to
me? I am the head of the family--or at least I attempt to be," amended
she with an upward curve of her lips.

"Oh, who cares, Ma, who the invitation was addressed to?" cut in Carl
impatiently. "The main thing is that it's come and we are going to the
party. I'd go had it been sent to James Frederick. What does it matter?
Say, Ma, isn't it lucky you hadn't loaned our clothes? We'll need 'em
ourselves now."

"When is the wedding?" Mary asked.

"Do you mean to say you don't even know?" inquired her brother with
scorn.

"I've forgotten."

"You have! Then you are the only person in Baileyville who has," was
the sarcastic rejoinder. "Well, if you must know, it's the day after
to-day."

"It will be a scramble to get ready, won't it, Mother?" commented the
practical Mary.

"There certainly will be a lot to do," Mrs. McGregor agreed. "However,
I guess we can manage if everybody will turn to."

"I'll help," announced Carl in a burst of magnanimousness. "I'll wash
and iron all my own clothes."

"I'd like a peep at the shirt you washed and ironed," taunted Mary in
derision.

"I fancy a peep would be enough," put in her mother, laughing. "No,
son, your talent does not lie in washing or ironing. But you can take
care of the youngsters while Mary and I do it. And, Mary, we'll have to
get a bunch of fresh flowers for your best hat; those pink daisies are
too faded to wear. We'll get a new hair ribbon, too. And I must have
some other lace in the neck of my silk waist and----"

"Oh, if you're going to talk ribbon, artificial flowers, and all that
rot I'm going over to Harlings," announced Carl, rising.

"Indeed you're not," objected his mother. "You're going to get out the
blacking bottle and start cleaning and polishing the shoes. There'll be
seven pairs to get ready and I want a fine shine on every one of them."

"But what's the use of doing it now? They'll get all dusty again before
the day after to-morrow," Carl grumbled.

"Not if they're put away," came in even accents from his mother. "We'll
just have to wear slippers, sneakers and things until Tuesday. I guess
we can get along. We can't go leaving everything until the last minute
or we shall be all up in a heap. We must begin directly to get things
done. I shall braid your hair, Mary, and Nell's right away, so it will
be well crimped. And Timmie, you and Carl and Martin have all got to
have baths. Yes, you have, whether you like it or not. If you don't you
can't go. That's all there is about that, so stop fussing. Carl, you
put some kettles of water on the stove to heat. You boys must be
scrubbed whether the rest of us are or not. You need it most. And Mary,
run like a good girl and see if you can hunt up a clean pair of
stockings for everybody--stockings without too many holes. Mercy on us!
I wish Mr. Coulter had given us a little more notice--indeed I do!"

"I don't see who's going to know, in that push, whether I've had a bath
or not," persisted the argumentative Tim.

"You don't? Have you happened to get a glimpse of that ebony ring round
your neck?" interrogated his mother significantly. "Anybody who saw
that would have some notion."

"I hate a bath!"

"You look it."

"Oh, shut up, Timmie," cautioned Carl in an undertone. "Don't go rowing
at Ma now. If you do she may get her back up and not take you to the
party at all. I hate to be scrubbed within an inch of my life as much
as you do, but I'm not saying so to-day. I'd be boiled in oil sooner
than not go to this party. Besides, your neck is black. I'll bet it
will take sapolio to get it clean. But don't go yammering about it.
Just hop and do as Ma tells you. It's the only way."

Heeding the wisdom of his elder brother Tim ceased further protests and
_hopped_.

Indeed the hopping became very spirited and general during the short
interval that preceded the wedding day. And when at last that glorious
morning dawned cloudless and fair, what a scarlet, shining, spotless
cavalcade of McGregors its radiant light shone upon!

First there was Mrs. McGregor, hot but triumphant in a petticoat that
crackled like brittle ice beneath her black alpaca skirt and a pair of
white cotton gloves at the fingers of which she was continually
tugging. Both her hat and Mary's gleamed ebon under a recent coat of
blacking--so recent that they entertained some concern lest it trickle
down their heated faces in disfiguring rivulets. Mary's white dress
rustled as crisply as did her mother's petticoat and her hair, crimped
and ironed until it was fuzzy as a bushman's, drifted out behind her, a
hempen whirlwind. New flowers on her hat and accompanying pink
streamers afforded her tranquil satisfaction as did also the string of
coral beads Uncle Frederick had once sent from Naples, a gift worn only
on very special occasions.

As for the boys, every hair of their heads had been plastered securely
into place, and blistered with scrubbing, they stood wretched but
hopeful in a row waiting with patience the moment when clean shirts,
creased trousers, and sparkling boots might be forgotten in the
delights the Coulter party promised.

Even Nell and the baby looked unnatural and reflected the general
discomfort and self-consciousness.

The getting-ready had been a fatiguing ordeal and everybody's nerves
were at the breaking point. Systematically Mrs. McGregor had proceeded
with the process, beginning with the eldest of the family, and as each
work of art was completed it was set aside much as a frosted cake is
set away to cool, and the next victim was summoned.

In the meantime those who had been _finished_, motionless in chairs,
were allowed the entertainment of watching each succeeding martyr put
through his round of torture. Yet diverting as this had been, the
waiting had been tedious, particularly for those who stood at the head
of the line.

Now, the rite over, everybody drew a long breath and struggled to
forget past miseries. Therefore when Hal and Louise Harling, who were
to augment the procession, arrived, every cloud was put to flight and
the delegation set forth in the highest of spirits.

"What a pity it is Uncle Frederick Dillingham isn't here!" commented
Mrs. McGregor, as they went along. "And what a shame, too, that
Grandfather Harling and your mother, Louise, cannot see this day! It
would furnish them with something to talk of for weeks."

"Hal and I will tell them all about it," returned the girl brightly.
"Isn't it splendid you all could go? Poor Carl was so disappointed when
he thought he was to be out of it."

"I know he was," nodded the lad's mother. "In fact, it worried me not a
little lest it was because he made his disappointment so evident that
