
"It is useless to remain here idle," said the guide, as they resumed
their seat on the ledge.

"It is useless to go into the town," returned Laihova.  "I am known now
as one of those who aided Mamba to escape."

"But I am not known--at least not in my present guise," said Ravonino.
"Have you seen Rafaravavy?"

"No; I tell you we had not been long in the town when this mischance
befell."

"Did not Mamba tell you why he has undertaken so long a journey?"

"He did not, but I can guess," answered Laihova, with a slight smile.
"The night before we left our friends in the cave in Betsilio-land I
heard his mother urging him to accompany us to the capital and fetch
her, if possible, a copy of the Word of God.  She was joined in her
persuasions by my sister Ramatoa, and you know he loves Ramatoa.  I have
no doubt that the two overcame his objections."

"Do you know why he objected?" asked Ravonino.

"He _said_ that he was afraid to quit his mother and the others at a
time when she might sorely need his protection, but other motives may
have influenced him."

"If he _said_ it he _meant_ it," returned the guide, with some decision,
"for Mamba is open and true of heart.  No doubt he had other motives,
but these were secondary.  God grant him success and safe deliverance
from the hands of his enemies!"

"Amen!" responded Laihova.

For some time the two friends sat there in silence, meditating as to
what they should do in the circumstances, for each felt that action of
some sort was absolutely necessary.

"My friend," said the guide at last, "it seems to me that the Lord
requires me at this time to go with my life in my hand, and give it to
Him if need be.  I have led these Englishmen into danger.  I must do my
best to succour them.  Rafaravavy also is in great danger of losing her
life--for the Queen's fondness for her may not last through the
opposition to her will which she is sure to meet with.  At all risks I
will enter the town and try to meet with Rafaravavy.  But you, my
friend, have no need to run so great a risk.  The Englishmen have no
claim upon you.  My sister Ra-Ruth, as well as the other banished ones,
need your arm to defend them, all the more that Mamba has left for a
time.  I counsel you to return to the Betsilio country and leave me.
There is no fear.  I am in the hands of God."

For a few moments Laihova was silent.  Then he spoke, slowly.  "No.  I
will not leave you.  Are not our friends also in the hands of God?  For
them, too, there is no fear.  At present they are far from danger and in
safe hiding, for even the outlaws--the robbers who infest the forests--
understand something of their case; they have sympathy and will not
molest them.  Besides all that, Ravoninohitriniony, is there not the
Blood-covenant between you and me?  No, I will _not_ leave you!  Where
you go I will go, and if you die I will not live!"

Seeing that his friend's mind was made up, the guide made no further
effort to influence him, and both men prepared themselves to go to the
city.

We return now to our friends Mark Breezy, John Hockins, and James
Ginger, whom we left in the act of quitting their prison after being the
means of obtaining some extension of mercy to an unfortunate sufferer
whom they left behind them there.

The Interpreter led them up several steep streets, and finally brought
them to a court-yard in which were several small houses.  Into one of
these he ushered them, having previously pointed out to them that the
building occupied a prominent position not far from the great palace of
the Queen.

"So--if you out goes--git losted--know how to finds you'self agin!"

"Das so," said Ebony.  "You's a clibber man."

"Now you stop," continued the Interpreter, paying no attention to the
remark, "for git some--some--vik--vik--vikles--eh?"

"Vikles!" repeated Mark, with a puzzled air.

"Yis--yis--vikles," repeated the Interpreter, nodding his head, smiling,
opening his mouth very wide, and pointing to it.

"P'r'aps he means victuals," suggested Hockins.

"Yis--yis--jus' so--vittles," cried the Interpreter, eagerly, "wait for
vittles.  Now--good-boy--by-by!" he added, with a broad grin at his
blunder, as he left the room and shut the door.

The three friends stood in the middle of the room for a few seconds in
silence, looked at each other, and smiled dubiously.

"Let's see if we really _are_ free to go and come as we choose," said
Mark, suddenly stepping to the door and trying it.  Sure enough it was
open.  They passed out and went a short distance along the street, in
which only a few natives were moving about.  These, strange to say,
instead of gazing at them in idle curiosity, seemed to regard them with
some show of respect.

"Hold on, sir," said Hockins, coming to an abrupt halt, "you know that
feller told us to wait for victuals, and I am uncommon disposed for them
victuals; for, to say truth, the trifle of rice they gave us this
mornin' was barely enough to satisfy an average rat.  Better come back
an' do as we're bid.  Obedience, you know, is the first law of natur'."

"Das w'at I says too.  Wait for de wittles."

"Agreed," said Mark, turning on his heel.

On reaching the house they found that two slaves had already begun
preparations for the hoped-for feast.  In a few minutes they had spread
on the mat floor several dishes containing rice, mingled with bits of
chicken and other meats, the smell of which was exceedingly appetising.
There was plain beef also, and fowls, and cooked vegetables, and fruits
of various kinds, some of which were familiar to them, but others were
quite new.

Slaves being present, our three travellers did not give full and free
expression to their feelings; but it was evident from the way that
Hockins smacked his lips and Ebony rolled his tongue about, not to
mention his eyes, and Mark pursed his mouth, that they were smitten with
pleased anticipation, while the eyes of all three indicated considerable
surprise!

There were no knives or forks--only horn spoons for the rice; but as
each man carried a large clasp-knife in his pocket, the loss was not
felt.

In any other circumstances the singularity and unexpected nature of this
good treatment would have stirred up the fun of Ebony and the latent
humour of Hockins, but they could not shake off the depression, caused
by the memory of what they had seen in the prison--the heavy iron
collars and the cruel binding chains.  They tried to put the best face
possible on it, but after a few faint sallies relapsed into silence.
This, however, did not prevent their eating a sufficiently hearty meal.

"There's no sayin' when we may git the chance of another," was Hockins's
apologetic remark as he helped himself to another fowl.

"It is very mysterious that we should receive such treatment," said
Mark.  "I can only account for it by supposing that our friend Ravelo is
an officer of some power.  If so, it was doubly fortunate that we had
the opportunity of doing him a good turn."

"Now, you leave dem two drumsticks for me, 'Ockins," said Ebony, wiping
his mouth with the back of his hand.  "You'll do yourself a injury if
you heat de whole ob 'im."

"Well, I must confess to bein' surprised summat," said the seaman,
referring to Mark's observation, not to Ebony's.

They were destined to receive some additional surprises before that day
was over.  The meal which they had been discussing was barely finished
when their friend the Interpreter again entered and bade them follow
him.

"Queen Ranavalona wish sees you," he said.

"What! all on us?" exclaimed Hockins, with elevated eyebrows.

"Yis--all."

"Oh! nonsense," he cried, turning to Mark.  "It must be you, doctor, she
wants to see.  What can she want with a or'nary seaman like me?"

"Or a extraor'nary nigger like me?" said Ebony, with a look of extreme
contempt.

"You kin stop in house if you choose," remarked the Interpreter, with a
quiet grin, "but you heads be splitted if you do."

"Then I think I'll go," said Hockins, quietly.

"Me too," remarked the negro.

Accordingly they all went--with a slight qualm, however, for they felt
slightly doubtful whether, under existing circumstances, they might not
after all be going to execution.

The royal palaces, to which they were led, occupy a very conspicuous and
commanding position on the summit of the hill, and stand at an elevation
of more than 500 feet above the surrounding plains.  They are
conspicuously larger than any of the other houses in the city, are
grouped together in a large court-yard, and number about a dozen
houses--large and small.  The chief palace, named Manjaka-Miadana, is
about 100 feet long by 80 broad, and 120 high to the apex of its lofty
roof.  A wide verandah, in three stories, runs all round it.  All is
painted white except the balustrade.  The building next in size to this
is the Silver House.  On the eastern side of the court-yard are the
palace gardens, and around it stand a number of houses which are the
residences of the chief officers of the army, the Secretaries of State,
and other members of the Government.

On reaching the palace gate two young officers approached to receive the
visitors.  They were dressed in splendid European regimentals, much
bedecked with gold-lace, tight-fitting trousers, Wellington boots, sash,
sword, and cocked hat, all complete!  One of these, to their surprise,
spoke English remarkably well.

"I learned it from the missionaries when I was leetle boy," he explained
to Mark, as he conducted the visitors through the archway and across the
spacious court-yard into the palace.  In the second storey of the
verandah the Queen was seen seated beneath that emblem of royalty the
scarlet umbrella, with her Court around her.  Before entering the court
the visitors had removed their hats.  They were now directed to make a
profound reverence as they passed, and proceeded along the side of the
building to the further end.

A line of native troops was drawn up across the court, but these wore no
uniform, only the lamba wound round their waists, and white cross-belts
on their naked bodies.  They were armed with the old flint-lock muskets
and bayonets of the period.

Their conductor, who was an Under-Secretary of State, led them by a dark
narrow stair to the balcony where the Queen sat, and in a few moments
they found themselves in the presence of the cruel Ranavalona, of whom
they had heard so much.

She did not look cruel at that time, however.  She was dressed in a rich
satin gown, over which she wore the royal scarlet lamba, and jewels of
various kinds ornamented her person.  She was seated in a chair raised
two or three steps above the floor, with her ladies on one side and her
gentlemen on the other.  The former, among whom were some really
good-looking brunettes, had all adopted the English fashion of dress,
with parts of native costume retained.  Some wore head-dresses of
gorgeous colouring, composed of ribbons, flowers, and feathers in great
profusion, but as no head-dress, however strongly marked by barbaric
splendour, can excel the amazing feminine crests in present use among
the civilised, we refrain from attempting description!  Most of the men
also wore European costume, or portions thereof, some being clad in
suits of black broad-cloth.

The amount of ceremony displayed on all hands at Court seemed to have
infected our three adventurers, for, when led before the Queen, they
approached with several profound bows, to which Hockins added the
additional grace of a pull at his forelock.  In this he was imitated by
Ebony.

For some moments Ranavalona eyed her visitors--perhaps we should say her
captives--sternly enough, but there was also a slight touch of softness
in her expression, from which Mark drew much comfort; in silence, for as
yet the Queen had given no indication, as to whether the new-comers were
to be treated as friends or spies, and the recent banishment of the
missionaries, and harsh treatment of Europeans by the Queen, left their
minds in some doubt on the point.

Turning to the Secretary who had introduced the party, Ranavalona spoke
to him a few words.  When she had finished, the Secretary turned to
Mark, whom he at once recognised as the chief and spokesman of the trio.

"Queen Ranavalona bid me ask where you comes from," he said.

To which Mark replied that they came from England, that they were all
English subjects, though one was an African by descent.

"I have heard," continued the Queen, through her interpreter, "that you
have been shipwrecked, that one of your number is a Maker of Medicine,
and that you helped one of my people--even saved his life--soon after
your arrival in my country.  Is that so?"

Mark explained that they had not been shipwrecked, but had been left on
shore, and obliged to fly from the natives of the coast; that he was
indeed a maker of medicine, though his training had not been quite
completed when he left England, and that he had rendered a trifling
service to an unfortunate man who had slipped in climbing a cliff, but
he could hardly be said to have saved the man's life.

While he was speaking, Mark observed that his friend Ravelo stood close
to the Queen's chair, in front of a group of officers, from which
circumstance he concluded that he must be a man of some note, and that
it was he who had procured the deliverance of himself and his friends
from prison.

"Tell the young Maker of Medicine," said the Queen, in a loud voice, so
that all the Court might hear, "that Europeans have behaved very ill
here of late, so ill that they had to be banished from my country; for
I, Ranavalona, permit no one, whether his face be black, brown, or
white, to meddle with my government.  They fancied, I suppose, that
because I am a woman I am weak and ignorant, and unable to rule!  They
have now found their mistake, and Christians shall not again be
permitted to dwell in my country.  But I am Ranavalona, and I will do
what I please.  If I choose to make an exception I will do it.  If any
one thinks to oppose my will he shall die.  The man whose life was saved
by this young Maker of Medicine is my son Rakota--my beloved son.  Is it
not so?"

The Queen looked round as she spoke, and the man whom we have hitherto
styled Ravelo bent his head and replied, "It is so," whereupon there
were murmurs of surprise and approval among the courtiers.

"Now," continued the Queen, "as I am grateful, and as I want a physician
at Court just now, I appoint this young Maker of Medicine to that post,
and I appoint his black companion to be his servant.  Do you all hear
that?"

All the courtiers made murmurs of assent.

"Tell them all that, Secretary," said the Queen.

Mark Breezy and his friends had considerable difficulty in concealing
their astonishment when "all that" was explained to them, but they had
the presence of mind to acknowledge the information with a profound
obeisance.  At the same time Mark explained, with much modesty, that he
was not entitled to aspire to or to accept so high and honourable a
position, as he had not yet obtained the standing which entitled him to
practise in his own country.

"Tell him," said the Queen, sternly, "that I, Ranavalona, have nothing
to do with the customs of England, and have no regard for them.  If he
does not accept what I offer, instant banishment--perhaps worse--will be
his portion!"

"Oh! massa, accep' him _at once_!" murmured Ebony in an undertone, and
in much anxiety.

Mark took his advice, and agreed to become Physician to the Court of the
Queen of Madagascar, without stipulating either as to salary or
privileges!

"I am also told," said the Queen, with a smile of condescension to her
physician, "that your English companion is full of music, and performs
on a wonderful little instrument.  I have a good band, which was trained
by your countrymen, but they have no such little instrument.  Let the
Man of the Sea perform."

On this being translated Mark looked at the Man of the Sea, and could
with difficulty restrain a burst of laughter at the expression of his
countenance.

"What!" exclaimed Hockins, "me play my whistle afore this here Court?
Unpossible!"

"You'll have to try," said Mark, "unless you wish for instant
banishment--or something worse!"

"Oh!  'Ockins, blaze away at _once_!" murmured Ebony, with renewed
anxiety, for the "something worse" was to him suggestive of
imprisonment, torture, and death!

Thus pressed, the seaman put his hand into the inner pocket of his
jacket and drew forth his cherished flageolet.  In a few minutes the
Queen and all her courtiers were enthralled by the music.  It was not
only the novelty and bird-like sweetness of the instrument itself that
charmed, but also the fine taste and wonderful touch of the sailor.  The
warbling notes seemed to trill, rise and fall, and float about on the
atmosphere, as it were, like fairy music, filling the air with melody
and the soul with delight.

"Good! let the Man of the Sea be also cared for.  Give them quarters in
the palace, and see that they all attend upon us in the garden
to-morrow."

So saying, the Queen arose, swept into the palace, and left her
courtiers to follow.

Immediately Prince Rakota came forward and shook hands with Mark.

"So then, your Highness," said the latter, "_we_ are indebted to you for
all this kindness."

"It is only one small ting," returned the Prince in broken English.  "Am
I not due to you my life?  Come, I go show you your house."

On the way, and after entering the house which was appropriated to their
use, Mark learned from the Prince that their approach to the capital had
been discovered and announced by spies long before their arrival; that
it was they who had discovered and revealed to the Queen Hockins's
wonderful powers with the "little tube."  Also that it was well-known
who had guided them through the country, and that Ravoninohitriniony was
