King then sent another pig, in one of the small canoes, on board the
_Unity_, for which Captain Schouten returned him an old hatchet, some
rusty nails, some glass beads, and a piece of linen cloth, with which he
seemed highly pleased.

They then invited him by signs to come on board.  He would not, however,
trust himself with the strangers; but, after satisfying his curiosity,
he, followed by the rest of the canoes, took his departure.

At noon on the 13th, fully twenty-three double canoes and forty-five
single ones, in each of which there could not have been less than seven
or eight men, were seen coming off from the shore, and soon perfectly
surrounded the ship.  At first the savages pretended to come for the
purpose of trading, making signs of friendship, and endeavouring to
persuade their visitors to remove the ship to another island, where
there was better anchorage.  Captain Schouten suspected, however, in
spite of this, that there was some mischief intended.  He therefore
ordered his men to arm themselves, and load their guns as well as their
muskets, to be ready for an attack.  He was not mistaken, for in a short
time the savages, finding their signs not attended to, began to shout in
the most fearful manner, and then the crew of the King's ship, which was
nearest, plying her paddles, forced her with such force against the
_Unity_, that the heads of the two canoes composing it were both dashed
to pieces.

The rest of the canoes came rushing on from every side, the people in
them throwing showers of heavy stones on board.  As they did so Captain
Schouten ordered his crew to open upon them with musketry, and at the
same time the great guns, which had been loaded with bullets and nails,
were fired right down on the surrounding canoes.  This had the desired
effect, for the savages in the nearest canoes, leaping overboard,
endeavoured to make for the shore, while the others paddled off as fast
as they could, endeavouring to escape from the anger of the white men,
whom they had so treacherously endeavoured to destroy.  It was found
that their assailants came from the lower or more southerly of the two
islands, which the Dutchmen, therefore, named Traitors' Island.

Not wishing to have anything more to do with such people, Captain
Schouten ordered the anchor to be weighed, and the _Unity_ stood towards
another island about thirty leagues off, where he hoped to be more
fortunate in obtaining refreshments.  As the ship approached the island
the boat was sent along the shore to sound, for the purpose of
discovering good anchorage ground.

While the ship was standing off the shore about a dozen canoes came off,
bringing a small quantity of flying-fish.  These the natives willingly
exchanged for beads; but Captain Schouten, deeming it unwise to allow
them to come alongside, ordered them under the stern, when the exchange
was made by means of a rope, the beads being let down and the fish
hauled up.  The savages, having disposed of their fish, paddled away for
the _Unity's_ boat, which was engaged in sounding.  Getting up to her,
they suddenly made an attempt to board, but their intention being
perceived, they were met with so warm a reception from the Dutchmen's
guns, pikes, and cutlasses, that two were killed, and the rest were glad
to hurry away as fast as they could.

The shores of this island were composed of black cliffs with green
summits, and numbers of cocoa-nut-trees growing on them.  Several huts
were seen scattered about, and at one place there was a large village,
close to a shelving beach.

As no convenient anchorage was found, Captain Schouten now stood away to
the south-west, hoping to discover the great southern land of which he
was in search.

At length, however, on the 18th of May, being in latitude 16 degrees 5
minutes south, and at least one thousand six hundred leagues westward of
the coast of Peru, without having seen any signs of a continent, Captain
Schouten called his officers together, and observed that if they
continued on their present course they would reach the southern side of
New Guinea, and that if they were unable to find a passage beyond that
country, either to the west or north, they would inevitably be lost, as
it would be impossible for them to get back, in consequence of the east
winds which prevailed in those seas.  He proposed, therefore, that they
should now alter their course to the northward, so as to fall in with
the north side of New Guinea.

Had he continued on he would have fallen in with the group of islands
now called the New Hebrides, and afterwards probably have become the
discoverer of New South Wales, and perhaps have made his way through
Torres Straits, between New Holland and New Guinea, which had a short
time before been discovered by Luis Vaez de Torres.  It must be
remembered, however, that at this period the whole of the vast region to
the south of the East Indian Archipelago was totally unknown to the
civilised world.

Le Maire and the other officers willingly agreed to this proposal, and
the course was accordingly shaped to north-north-west.  Before long they
fell in with another island, but could only get within a league of it,
when they were visited by two canoes, some of the people in them being
allowed to come on board.  The natives had not been long in the ship
before, one of them carrying off a shirt, the whole leapt back into
their canoes, and then began shouting and threatening to throw their
spears.  To show them their folly some muskets were discharged, by which
two of the unfortunate savages were killed, while the rest made off at a
rapid rate.

It strikes one that the Dutchmen were apt to fire unnecessarily at the
savages; but then again it must be remembered that the latter were so
ignorant of the power of firearms that unless the pieces were shotted
they only laughed at the senseless noise, and that they hurled their
spears with such unerring aim that some of the Dutchmen might have been
killed had they not employed the means of defence in their power.

Notwithstanding the death of these two savages, some more canoes came
off on the 22nd from another part of the island, apparently with
peaceable intentions, bringing cocoa-nuts, roots, and roasted hogs,
which they bartered for knives, beads, and nails.

They were, however, quite as well versed in stealing as their
countrymen.  Their huts in considerable numbers were seen along the
shore, the roofs being conical and covered with leaves.  As Captain
Schouten here found a good place for watering, he detained six of the
islanders on board, and sent three of his own people as hostages to the
King, who treated them with great respect and presented them with four
hogs, giving also strict orders to his people not to interfere with the
boat while watering.  The natives stood in great awe of him.  One of
them having stolen a cutlass, and a complaint being made to one of his
officers, the thief was pursued and soundly thrashed, besides being
compelled to make restitution.  The officer signified that it was well
for the culprit that the King did not know of his crime, for had that
been the case his life, to a certainty, would have been forfeited.

Their houses were about twelve feet high and twenty in circumference,
the only furniture seen in them being beds of dry leaves, a fishing-rod
or two, and a large club.

These islanders appeared to hold firearms in great dread.  On one
occasion the King desired to hear one of the great guns let off, and for
this purpose he took his seat under a canopy in state, having on his
head a crown of white, red, and green feathers of parrots and doves,
with his courtiers about him, trying to look unconcerned.  No sooner,
however, was the gun fired, than jumping up, he ran off as fast as his
legs could carry him into the woods, followed by his attendants, and no
persuasions could stop them.

On the 25th and 26th Captain Schouten sent on shore to procure hogs, but
the islanders having only a few left, would not part with any, and would
only sell cocoa-nuts, bananas, and roots.  The King, notwithstanding,
continued to treat his guests with kindness, and as a mark of his regard
he and his principal minister took the crowns off their heads and put
them on two of the party.

The doves seen here were white on the back, and black everywhere else,
except the breast.  Each of the King's councillors had one of these
birds sitting beside him on a stick.

An ample supply of fresh water having been taken on board, preparations
were made for sailing.  Before leaving, Captain Schouten and Le Maire
went on shore, accompanied by their trumpeters, whose music highly
pleased the King.  The friendly disposition exhibited by the tawny
sovereigns was, they suspected, as much from fear as love, for he
offered them ten hogs and a large quantity of cocoa-nuts, if they would
quit his island in a couple of days.  It was evident that he suspected
the Dutch of having some design to seize his country.  He requested
them, notwithstanding this, to assist him in a war he was carrying on
with the inhabitants of another part of the island.  This they declined
doing.  He, however, fearlessly paid them a return visit on board the
_Unity_.  On coming up the side he made some cabalistic signs, or, as
the Dutch supposed, offered up prayers to his idols, and he did the same
at the door of every cabin he entered.  When the Dutchmen went on shore
the inhabitants showed them the most abject marks of respect, by kissing
their feet and placing them on their necks.

The name of _Horn_ was given to this island.  It is divided into two
portions, joined by a narrow low neck of land, which gives it the
appearance of two islands.

The friendly King sent on board on the morning of the 30th of May to say
that another King was coming to visit him, and to request that drums and
trumpets from the ship might be in attendance to do his visitor honour.

This request was readily granted.  Soon after the other King made his
appearance, accompanied by a train of three hundred naked Indians,
having bunches of green herbs stuck about their waists, of which herb
they make their drink.  They brought also a present of sixteen hogs.
When the two Kings came in sight of each other, they began to bow and to
utter certain prayers.  As they met, they both fell prostrate on the
ground, and after making several strange gestures, they got up and
walked to two seats provided for them.  Having uttered more prayers and
bowed reverently to each other, they sat down under the same canopy,
while the drums and trumpets from the ship played a march, to their
great entertainment.

After this preparations were commenced for a solemn banquet.  The liquor
to be consumed at it was concocted in the following strange and
disagreeable manner.  A number of young Indians quickly collected in the
presence of the two Kings, bringing with them a large quantity of kava,
a sort of herb.  Each person then filled his mouth with it, and having
chewed it for some time, spat it into a large wooden trough, on which
water was poured.  After stirring this for some time, they squeezed out
the liquor, which was presented in cups to the two Kings.  They also
offered some to the Dutch, who turned away with a disgust which must
have astonished their hosts.  The substantial part of the entertainment
consisted of roasted roots and hogs, the latter nicely dressed in the
following manner.  The entrails being taken out, the hair was singed
off, when a pit having been dug and lined with leaves, the bottom was
covered with heated stones, on which the hog was placed, the inside
being also filled with hot stones.  It was then covered with other
stones, and on the top with a thick layer of leaves.  The whole was then
covered up, so as to prevent the escape of heat.  By this means the
animal was perfectly dressed.  The natives presented the Dutchmen with
two hogs dressed in this manner, with the same forms and ceremonies they
used to their Kings, placing them on their heads, and then humbly
kneeling, left them at their feet.

They also presented their guests with eleven live hogs, for which they
were given in return some knives, old nails, and glass beads.  These
natives were of a dark yellow colour, tall, strongly built, and so well
proportioned that the tallest Dutchman was of the size of the smallest
of them.  Some wore their hair curled, others frizzled or tied up in
knots, while several had it standing bolt upright on their heads like
hogs' bristles, a quarter of an ell long.  The women were short,
ill-shaped, and exceedingly ugly.

The Dutchmen bidding the friendly natives farewell, the _Unity_ sailed
on the ist of June, and stood on until she came off a low island, with
three or four small islands near it, covered by trees.  Here a canoe
similar to those formerly described came off from the shore.  The people
were black and armed with bows and arrows, being the first weapons of
that description the Dutchmen had seen among the Indians of the South
Sea.

These people made the voyagers understand by signs that there was more
land to the westward, where another King dwelt, who would provide them
with good refreshment.

Passing numerous islands, some of which were rugged and full of cliffs,
they at length made some high land, which they supposed to be a headland
on the coast of New Guinea.  They stood towards it, but could find no
bottom to anchor.

Here two or three canoes came off full of black naked people, who spoke
a language differing entirely from that before heard.  On seeing the
boat sounding they attacked her with their slings, but, frightened by a
few shots, quickly took to flight.

During the night fires were seen burning along the coast, probably as
alarm signals.  Soon after it was dark more canoes came off, and kept
lurking about the ship; but though the Dutch tried to make them
understand that they wished to be friendly and were anxious to purchase
provisions, the savages only replied by the most horrible noises and
outcries.

The _Unity_ anchored that night off a bay in forty-five fathoms.  In the
morning a fleet of canoes came off, full of savages armed with clubs,
wooden swords, and slings.  The Dutch tried to propitiate them by
offering them trinkets and toys, but this had not the slightest effect
on the savages, who began hurling their missiles and approaching so
near--one of the Dutchmen being wounded, the first who had been hurt
during the voyage--that it became necessary to fire at them.  Not,
however, until several of them had been killed did they take to flight,
when they leapt overboard, and dived and swam for their lives.  On this
the Dutch, pursuing them in their boat, with what was certainly wanton
cruelty, knocked several on the head, and took three prisoners and four
of their canoes, the latter serving as fuel, of which they were in want.

Having made, one of the wounded men understand that if his countrymen
would bring off hogs and bananas the rest of the prisoners would be set
at liberty, they sent him on shore, telling him that ten hogs must be
paid as a ransom for each of the others; but as the natives refused to
agree to this arrangement, one of the captives, who was named after the
wounded Dutchman Moses, was carried off.

They here procured some beautiful birds, the plumage of which was
entirely red.  From the appearance of the people they concluded that
they were Papuans.  Sailing on along the coast, they saw three other
high islands, being then in 3 degrees 20 minutes south latitude.

On the night of the 29th, as the ship was sailing calmly on, she was
suddenly shaken so violently that the crew rushed up on deck, fully
expecting to find that she had run aground; but on sounding, no bottom
was found, and it was seen that no rocks nor shallows were in the
neighbourhood.  They therefore came to the conclusion that the shaking
had been caused by a submarine earthquake, such as often takes place in
that volcanic region.  The following night the same fearful phenomenon
again occurred, accompanied by terrific claps of thunder, while the
lightning darted so fiercely from the sky that, had not a heavy downpour
of rain come on there seemed every probability that the ship would have
been set on fire.

In the morning several canoes appeared full of blacks, who were allowed
to come on board.  As a token that they wished to be friendly, they
broke some sticks they carried over the Dutchmen.  Their canoes were
very neatly formed, and they themselves were more civilised than the
savages last visited.  Their black hair was covered over with chalk.
They came only to beg, having brought nothing with them, though
cocoa-nut trees were seen in abundance on the shore.

On the 1st of July the _Unity_ again anchored between an island and the
coast of New Guinea.  She was almost immediately surrounded by
twenty-five canoes, carrying the same people who had before given tokens
of peace.  They now, however, came in a very different spirit; for
several of them caught hold of two anchors which hung over the bows, and
began tugging away, expecting to draw the ship ashore.  The rest, coming
up on either side, began, with loud shouts and cries, to hurl stones
from their slings, and to cast their darts.  On this Captain Schouten
ordered the guns to be fired, when the shot quickly knocked the canoes
to pieces, killed twelve or thirteen men, and wounded a much larger
number, when the rest at once took to flight.

The Dutch now continued their cruise round the northern end of New
Guinea.  Passing a large group of islands, twenty-three in number, of
different sizes, some high, others low, most of them being left on the
starboard side, their hearts were cheered by coming in sight of a lofty
mountain, which they took to be the hill of Banda, but which was in
reality several degrees of latitude off from it.

On the 7th they approached a range of lofty hills, some of which they
found were volcanoes, for which reason they named the island Volcano
Island.  It was thickly inhabited, and abounded in cocoa-nut trees.  The
people regarded the ship with evident terror, and would not come near
her.  Steering west-south-west, and occasionally altering their course
to the west-north-west, they anchored on the 8th about a cannon-shot
from the shore between two islands, one lofty and the other somewhat
lower.  It was inhabited by Papuans, whose mode of bedecking themselves,
owing to their natural deformity, made them literally appear like
monsters.  Nearly the whole of them had their limbs fearfully misshapen,
besides which they had strings of hogs'-teeth hung about their necks,
rings in their noses, their hair frizzled, and their faces black and
ugly.  Their habitations were remarkable, being light structures of
bamboo, mounted on stakes eight or nine feet above the ground, and close
to the water.  There were two villages near the shore, from whence the
inhabitants brought off hogs and cocoa-nuts, but so high a price was
demanded that none were purchased.

By the morning of the 5th they reckoned that they were off the extreme
western part of New Guinea, along which they had sailed two hundred and
eighty leagues.  Here several canoes came off, bringing beans, rice,
tobacco, and two beautiful birds of paradise.  The natives spoke the
language of Ternate, and some of them a little Spanish and Malayan.
They were clothed from the waist down, some with loose silken robes, and
others with trousers, while some, who were Mohammedans, wore silken
turbans on their heads; many also had gold and silver rings on their
fingers.  They bartered their provisions for beads and other toys, but
seemed more desirous of having linen than anything else.  Suspicious of
the Dutch, they would not tell the name of their country.  It was
afterwards found that they were natives of Tidore.

Captain Schouten now shaped a course, intending to go round the north
point of Gilolo, and, having touched at Soppy, anchored on the 5th off
the coast of that island.  At this place some of the seamen went on
shore several times to catch fish.  On one occasion, when they were
drawing their net, four soldiers from Ternate rushed suddenly out of a
wood, sword in hand, and had not the surgeon, who was present, cried
out, "These are Holland men!" would have killed them.  The soldiers
instantly stopped, and, throwing water on their heads, in token of
peace, approached in a friendly manner, saying that they had mistaken
the Dutchmen for Spaniards.  They at once accompanied the seamen on
board, and, being well treated, undertook to bring off provisions, which
promise they fulfilled.

Having sighted Ternate and Tidore, the _Unity_ anchored, on the evening
of the 17th, off the former island.  Here Captain Schouten with Le Maire
went on shore, and were kindly entertained by the King of Amboyna and
the admiral and general of the station.

At this place the pinnaces and the stores of the unfortunate _Horn_ were
sold for one thousand three hundred and fifty reals, with which Captain
Schouten obtained some provisions.  On the 28th he anchored at Batavia,
then called Jacutra.  Here John Paterson Koen, President of the Dutch
East India Company, arrived on the 31st of October; but instead of the
friendly reception the voyagers expected he would offer, to their bitter
grief he the next day sequestered the _Unity_ and her cargo, declaring
that she was forfeited to the East India Company for illegally sailing
within the bounds of their charter.

In vain Le Maire protested against this arbitrary proceeding, and
declared that the seizure was unlawful, as they had not offended against
the letter nor intention of the company's charter, since they had not
come to India by either of the forbidden passages,--the Straits of
Magellan or the Cape of Good Hope,--but by a passage they themselves had
discovered, and which must be extremely advantageous to the commerce of
their own countrymen and to the trading world.

Finding, however, all his efforts vain, he and Captain Schouten, with
some of their people, embarked on board the _Amsterdam_ on the 14th of
December, 1616, and others on board the _Zealand_, while the rest
entered the service of the company.  On the 31st of the same month poor
Jacques Le Maire died, chiefly of grief and vexation at the failure of
the enterprise, which had been so successful until the arrest of the
ship and cargo.  He had kept a journal with great care during the
voyage, and he left an earnest request that it should be published, that
the world might know and judge of the usage he and his companions had
received.  The voyagers arrived on the 1st of July, 1617, in Holland,
from which they had been absent, during their circumnavigation of the
globe, two years and seventeen days.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF WILLIAM DAMPIER--FROM A.D. 1674.

His parentage--Early voyages--Sails for Jamaica as a planter--Visits Bay
of Campeachy--Turns logwood-cutter--His adventures--Joins the
buccaneers--Succeeds--Returns to England--Marries--Again goes to
Jamaica--Captured by buccaneers, and takes part in several expeditions
in the South Sea--Recrosses the Isthmus of Darien, and reaches the
Samballas Islands--Joins Captain Tristan--The prizes sold to the Dutch--
Goes to Virginia--Joins the _Revenge_--Captain Cook sails for the South
Seas--Puts into the Sherbro' River--Cook treacherously captures a Dane--
The name of the _Bachelor's Delight_ given to her--Cape Horn doubled--
Steers for Juan Fernandez--Falls in with the _Nicholas_--Meeting of the
Mosquito Indians, Will and Robin, at Juan Fernandez--Several vessels
captured on the coast--A design on Truxillo abandoned--Death of Cook--
Buried on shore--Narrow escape of the party on shore--Davis elected
captain--Transactions at Amapalla--Eaton and Davis separate--Davis
joined by other pirates--Paita attacked and burnt--Attempt on Guayaquil
abandoned--A packet-boat captured--Hear of the sailing of the Plata
fleet--Lay in wait for it off New Panama--Attempts of the Spaniards with
a fire-ship--Large parties of pirates unite--Plan to attack Panama--
Encounters a Spanish fleet--Stratagem of the Spaniards to place the
pirates in a disadvantageous position--The Spanish fleet escapes--Lexa
and Leon plundered--Swan proposes to cross the Pacific--Santa Pecaque
plundered--A large body of the rovers massacred--The prisoners set on
shore on a desert island--The _Cygnet_ prepared for crossing the
Pacific--Dampier cured of a dropsy.

Few British seamen have seen so much of the world, or have gone through
more remarkable adventures, with the power of describing them, than
William Dampier.  He was born in 1652, near Yeovil, in Somersetshire, on
the farm of his father, a well-to-do yeoman, who sent him at an early
age to a good school, where he acquired some classical knowledge.  He
was afterwards removed to another, where he learned writing and
arithmetic.

Having shown a strong inclination for the sea, on the death of his
parents his guardians apprenticed him to a shipmaster at Weymouth, with
whom he made a voyage to France, and in the following year one to
Newfoundland; but suffering from the cold, he got disgusted with a
sailor's life, and settled for a short time with a brother in
Somersetshire.

His longing for adventure, however, soon revived, and hearing of an
outward-bound East Indiaman about to sail for Bantam in Java, knowing
that at all events he should be warm enough there, he shipped on board
of her before the mast.

Having gained considerable nautical experience, he returned home, and
after again living on shore with his brother, he entered on board the
_Royal Princess_ man-of-war, commanded by Sir Edward Spragge.  In this
ship he took part in two sanguinary fights; but falling ill, he was sent
to hospital on shore, thus missing the last engagement in which his
brave commander was killed.

On his recovery he accepted an offer from his brother's landlord,
Colonel Hellier, to go out as under-manager to an estate in Jamaica.  He
accordingly sailed, and after visiting several islands, reached Jamaica.
Growing weary, however, of a planter's life, he made trips in different
traders, carrying goods along the coast, by which he gained a thorough
knowledge of the harbours and bays of the island.

In August, 1675, he sailed on board a vessel bound for the island of
Trist, in the Bay of Campeachy.  He here became enamoured of the free
life of the logwood-cutters, and after his return to Jamaica, having
supplied himself with tools, a gun, and store of powder and shot, as
well as a tent, he again sailed for the island of Trist.  He now began
to keep a regular journal, which tells us of his adventures while
engaged as a logwood-cutter.  They are amongst the most interesting of
his life, while his notes on the natural history of the country show his
accuracy as an observer.  The logwood-cutters varied their occupation by
hunting the wild cattle, and on one occasion Dampier nearly perished by
having lost his way in the woods.  During his wanderings he had the
unpleasant reflection that a short time before six or seven of the crew
of a Boston ship had died, in the vain endeavour to find their way to
the shore.

On another occasion he was, while crossing a small savannah with his
companions, who had gone on ahead, nearly losing his life.  He perceived
the strong scent of an alligator; directly afterwards he stumbled over
one, and fell into the water.  Recovering, he shouted to the other men,
but they, terror-stricken, were flying towards the woods.  A second, and
even a third time he fell, every moment expecting to be seized by the
jaws of the horrid monster; but he at length got safely on shore.  An
alligator had a few days before actually seized one of his comrades by
the knee, but the man had the presence of mind to wait until the brute
relinquished his grip to take a firmer hold, when he rammed the butt-end
of his musket down its throat, and scampered off.

During a hurricane he was deprived of his stock of provisions.  Having
no means of procuring a fresh supply, he was compelled to join a company
of buccaneers, or privateers as he called them, with whom he spent a
year before he could make his escape, pillaging the Spaniards and making
descents on native villages.  While with the freebooters a Spanish fort
was attacked, but they lost ten men killed or desperately wounded, and
obtained little booty, except the flesh of some thirty bullocks, some
Indian corn, poultry, and a number of tame parrots.

While the vessels of the buccaneers were encumbered by the live stock
and provisions they had obtained, they were attacked by some Spanish
armadillos, which they succeeded, however, in beating off.  After this
adventure Dampier returned to the island of Trist, and was so successful
in his occupation as a woodcutter, that he was enabled to return to
England in 1678.  Here he married a young woman attached to the Duchess
of Grafton's family, but after spending about half a year at home he
again sailed for Jamaica, carrying out a quantity of goods to exchange
for the commodities most in request among the woodcutters.

He spent nearly a year in Jamaica, where he was so successful in his
mercantile transactions that he was able to send over money sufficient
to purchase a small property in Dorsetshire.  He was about to return
home and take possession of it, when he was persuaded to engage in a
voyage to the Mosquito shore.  On the way the vessel fell in with a
squadron of three noted pirates, Coxon, Sawkins, and Sharp.  The whole
of the crew of the merchantman joining them, Dampier was compelled to go
with them also.

Soon afterwards Porto Bello was sacked by two hundred of the pirates,
each of whom obtained as his share one hundred and sixty pieces of
eight.  After this the buccaneers marched across the Isthmus of Panama,
three hundred and thirty strong, under the command of Captain Sharp,
accompanied by a band of Mosquito Indians.  On their way they attacked
the town of Santa Maria, where the Indians put many of the inhabitants
to death.  They then embarked in a fleet of canoes and boats, and,
having deposed Sharp, chose Captain Coxon for their commander.

Shortly afterwards they separated, Dampier accompanying Sharp.  Again
uniting preparatory to an attack on Panama, they encountered three
Spanish ships, and, after a severe action, in which many on both sides
fell, they captured them.  Sawkins was now raised to the command, but
was killed while leading on his men in an attack on Puebla Nueva.

The pirates at length repaired to the island of Juan Fernandez to refit,
and William, one of the Mosquito Indians, was left behind.

Captain Watling, who had been elected chief, was shortly afterwards
killed in an attempt to capture Arica, and Sharp was once more placed at
the head of the band.  He managed, in one of the vessels he had
captured, to double Cape Horn, and return in safety to England, where he
narrowly escaped being hung as a pirate.  Dampier, meantime, with a
minority of the party, consisting of forty-four Europeans, two Mosquito
men, and a Spanish Indian, after undergoing great hardships and perils,
crossed the isthmus to the mouth of the river Concepcion, where they
obtained canoes, in which they proceeded to one of the Samballas
Islands.  Here they found a French privateer, commanded by Captain
Tristan, whom they joined.  Having captured a large Spanish ship, with
twelve guns and forty men, laden with sugar, tobacco, and marmalade, the
cargo was offered to the Dutch Governor of Curacoa, who was too cautious
to purchase it himself, but recommended them to go to Saint Thomas's,
which belonged to the Danes, saying that he would send a sloop to take
the sugar off their hands.

Declining his suggestion, they sailed to another Dutch colony, where
they easily disposed of their booty.

Dampier some time after this found his way to Virginia, where he was
residing with several of his former companions, when a ship, captured by
a party of English buccaneers under Captain Cook, and named the
_Revenge_, put into the harbour.  As she carried eighteen guns, and was
equipped for a long voyage--and it was necessary to get away from those
seas as soon as possible, lest they should be treated as pirates--it was
proposed that a voyage should be made to the South Seas.

Besides Dampier, the ship's company consisted of Lionel Wafer, the
surgeon, Ambrose Cowley, and many adventurers who had lately crossed the
Isthmus of Panama.  The ship being well stored, sailed from Achamack in
Virginia on the 23rd of August, 1683.

Having helped themselves to some casks of wine from a Dutch vessel, they
steered for the Cape de Verde Islands, and thence were intending to hold
a course for the Straits of Magellan, but, as they were driven east by
foul weather, they put into the river Sherbro'.  The natives, being in
no way shy, brought off an abundance of plantains, sugar-cane, rice,
fowls, honey, and palm wine.  Here they found at anchor a large Danish
ship, which, being far superior to their own vessel, Captain Cook
resolved to capture.  Concealing most of his crew, who were well armed,
and allowing only a few to appear on deck, he steered for the stranger.
He had given directions to the helmsman to run her aboard,
notwithstanding whatever command he might issue.  The helmsman doing as
he had been ordered, ran her alongside, when the pirate crew, springing
from their places of concealment, rushed, cutlass in hand, over the
bulwarks of the Dane, which they captured after a short struggle, with
the loss, however, of five men.

Dampier, justly ashamed of the nefarious proceeding, does not mention it
in his journal, but it is found in that of Cowley, who wrote an account
of the voyage.  The crew of the captured ship being sent on shore to
shift for themselves, she was towed out of the harbour; and such stores,
guns, and ammunition as were required being moved out of the _Revenge_
into her, the pirates set fire to their old ship, that she might tell no
tales, and sailed away in their prize.  She carried thirty-six guns, and
was victualled for a long voyage.

The name of the _Bachelor's Delight_ was bestowed upon her, and with
exulting hearts the buccaneers directed their course for the Straits of
Magellan.  On their way two or three of the crew died, and among them
one of the surgeons, greatly to their regret, as they had now only one
remaining.

Having touched at the Falkland Islands, then known under the name of
Sibald de Weert, to obtain water and fresh provisions, they steered for
the entrance of the straits.  Dampier, knowing the want of discipline
