"Going home, lad?" asked Fred.

"Yes, sir--at least in a permiscuous sort of way entertainin' myself as
I goes with agreeable talk, and improvin' obsarvation of the shop
winders, etceterrer."

"Will you take a message to your mother?"

"Sure-ly," answered Willie.

"Well, say to her that I have several calls to make to-night and may be
late in getting home, but she need not sit up for me as I have the
door-key; tell her not to forget to leave the door on the latch."

"Wery good, sir," said Willie.  "May I make so bold as to ask how Miss
Loo was when you seed her last?"

"Not well, I regret to say," replied Fred.

"Indeed!  I'm surprised to hear that, for she's agoin' out to tea
to-morrow night, sir."

"My surprise is greater than yours, lad; how d'you know that, and where
is she going to?" asked Auberly.

Here Willie explained in a very elaborate manner that a note had arrived
that forenoon from Miss Tippet, inviting Mr Tippet to tea the following
evening, and expressing a hope that he would bring with him his clerk,
"_Mister_" Willders, the brother of the brave fireman who had saved
Loo's life, and that Miss Louisa Auberly was to be there, and that Mr
Tippet had written a note accepting the same.

"Then you'll have to take another message from me, Willie.  Tell Miss
Tippet when you go to-morrow that I will give myself the pleasure of
looking in on her in the course of the evening," said Fred.  "Mr
Auberly is not to be there, is he?"

"No, not as I knows of."

"Well, good-night, Willie."

Willie took his departure, marching to the usual national air, and soon
after Fred Auberly bade his friend good-night and left him.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

A SMALL TEA-PARTY.

Miss Tippet's tea-party began by the arrival of Willie Willders, who,
being fond of society, and regardless of fashion, understood his hostess
literally when she named her tea-hour!  For full half an hour,
therefore, he had the field to himself, and improved the occasion by
entertaining Miss Tippet and Emma Ward with an account of the wonderful
inventions that emanated from the fertile brain of Mr Thomas Tippet.

Strange to say, a deep and lasting friendship had sprung up between the
eccentric old gentleman and his volatile assistant.  Willie sympathised
so fully with his master in his wild schemes, and displayed withal such
an aptitude for mechanical contrivance, and such a ready appreciation of
complex theories, that Mr Tippet soon came to forget his extreme youth,
and to converse with him, propound schemes and new ideas to him, and
even to ask his advice; with as much seriousness as though he had been a
full-grown man.

This was of course very gratifying to Willie, who repaid his master's
condescension and kindness by devoting himself heart and soul to the
duties of what he styled his "profession."  He was a good deal put out
when his brother Frank asked him one day what his "profession" was, and
resolving never again to be placed in such an awkward position of
ignorance, asked his employer what was the name of his business, to
which the employer replied that it had no particular name; but, on being
urged by his assistant to give it a name, he suggested that he might, if
so disposed, style himself a poly-artist, which, he explained, meant an
artist of many occupations.  Willie felt that this might be translated
"jack-of-all-trades," but on mature consideration he resolved to adopt
it, in the belief that few people would understand what it meant, and
that thereby he would be invested with a halo of mystery, which was,
upon the whole, a gratifying reflection.

Gradually, however, Willie was led to diverge from his employer to his
brother Frank, in regard to whom Miss Tippet entertained the strongest
feelings of admiration, because of his courageous conduct in saving
Louisa Auberly.  Willie pursued this theme all the more willingly that
Emma appeared to be deeply interested in it.

Emma Ward was very romantic in her nature; yet she had a keen
appreciation of the ludicrous,--which caused her to appear somewhat
light-headed and giddy in the eyes of superficial observers; but she
possessed an underlying earnestness of soul, which displayed itself in a
thousand ways to those who had much intercourse with her.  She was an
ardent hero-worshipper; and while Miss Tippet was her heroine, Frank
Willders was, at that time, her _beau ideal_ of a hero, although she
only knew him from description.

Willie was still in the middle of a glowing account of a fire, in which
Frank and his friends Dale and Baxmore were the chief actors; and Emma
was listening with heightened colour, parted lips, and sparkling eyes,
when Matty Merryon opened the door and announced Mr Tippet.

That gentleman was still in the act of shaking his sister's hands with
both of his, and kissing her on both cheeks heartily, when Matty
announced Miss Deemas.

Matty, being Irish, allowed her soul to gush out too obviously in her
tones; so that her feelings towards the Eagle, though unexpressed, were
discernible.

Miss Deemas strode up to Miss Tippet, and pecked her on the right cheek,
much as an eagle might peck a tender rabbit, which it could slay and
devour if it chose, but which it preferred to spare for a time.  She was
immediately introduced to Mr Tippet, whom she favoured with a stiff
bow, intended to express armed neutrality in the meantime; with a
possibility, if not a probability, of war in the future.  The eccentric
gentleman felt chilled, but ventured to express an opinion in regard to
the weather, glancing for confirmation of the same towards the window,
through which he naturally enough expected to see the sky; but was
baffled by only seeing the green venetian blinds, which ruled off the
opposite houses in narrow stripes.  Before he had recovered himself to
make any further observation, Miss Deemas had attempted, in a
condescending way, to peck the cheek of Emma Ward; but that young lady,
feeling disinclined, so managed that she received the peck on her
forehead.

On Willie, Miss Deemas bestowed a glance of utter indifference, which
Willie replied to with a gaze of desperate defiance.

Then Miss Deemas seated herself on the sofa, and asked her "dear friend"
how she did, and how she felt, and whether things in general were much
as usual; from which elevated region of generalities she gradually
descended into the more particular sphere of gossip and scandal.

It is only just to Miss Tippet to say that the Eagle did not find her a
congenial bird of prey in this region.  On the contrary, she had to drag
her unwilling friend down into it; and as Miss Tippet was too
conscientious and kind-hearted to agree with her in her sweeping
censures and caustic observations and wilful misconstructions, it is
difficult to conceive wherein she (the Eagle) found pleasure in her
society.  Probably it was because she found in her one who would submit
meekly to any amount of contradiction, and listen patiently to any
amount of vituperative declamation.

"So it seems Mr Auberly has disinherited and dismissed his son, my
dear," said Miss Deemas, smoothing her dress with both hands, as though
she were about to lay Mr Auberly in her lap, and analyse him.

"I'm sorry to say that it is too true, Julia," answered Miss Tippet,
with a sigh.

"Ha! it's so like one of these creatures," said Miss Deemas, pursing her
thin lips; "so domineering, so towering, in their pride of mere physical
power."

Mr Tippet glanced at the Eagle in surprise, not being able to
understand to what sort of "creatures" she made reference.

"Poor Frederick," sighed Miss Tippet, "I don't know what he'll do (ring
the bell, Emma, darling); he's such a bold, high-spirited young man, and
it's all owing to his determination to take to--to what's-'is-name as a
profession (bring the tea, Matty).  It's very sad."

"That must be a new sort of profession," observed Miss Deemas pointedly.

"Oh!  I mean painting, you know.  It's impossible to arrange one's
things in such very correct language, you know, dear Julia; you are
really too--oh! did you hear of Joe Corney, and what's-his--fireman's
visit to Mrs Denman?  To be sure you did; I forgot it was in your
house.  It was such a funny account; you heard of it, brother (ring the
bell again, dear), didn't you?"

Mr Tippet, whose wonted vivacity was quite subdued by the freezing
influence of the Eagle, said that he had not heard of it; whereupon Miss
Tippet said that she had heard of it, and so had Willie Willders, who
had heard of it from his brother Frank, who had heard of it from Joe
Corney himself; and then she attempted to relate the matter, but failed,
and finally asked Willie to tell the story, which Willie did with much
gusto; looking at Miss Deemas all the time, and speaking in a very
positive tone, as if he thought she was doubting every word he said, and
was resolved to hurl it in her teeth, whether she chose to believe it or
not.

"Capital!" exclaimed Mr Tippet, laughing heartily, when Willie had
concluded; "what an energetic old lady she must be!  Really, I must get
introduced to her, and show her the self-acting fire-extinguisher I have
just invented.  You remember it, Willie?"  Willie nodded.  "I've laid it
aside for some time; but it is very nearly complete now.  A little more
work on it will finish it.  My only difficulty in regard to it is,
madam," he addressed himself to Miss Deemas here, "that it is apt to
burst, and I am uncertain whether or not to add a safety-valve to
prevent such a catastrophe, or to make the metal so very strong, that
nothing short of gunpowder would burst it; but then, you see, that would
make the whole affair too heavy.  However, these are only minor
difficulties of detail, which a little thought will overcome."

Miss Deemas received all this with a sinister smile, and replied with
the single word, "Oh!" after which she turned immediately to Miss
Tippet, and remarked that the weather had been unusually warm of late
for the season of the year, which remark so exasperated Willie Willders
that he turned with a face of crimson to Emma, and asked her if she
didn't feel a draught of cold air coming over her from somewhere, and
whether she would not sit nearer the fire, and farther away from the
window!

Willie meant this for an uncommonly severe cut; for Miss Deemas sat at
the end of the sofa, near the window!

Fortunately, at this point, Matty Merryon ushered in Loo Auberly, who
was instantly enfolded in Miss Tippet's arms, and thence transferred to
Emma's, in which she was led to the sofa, and gently deposited in the
softest corner.

"Darling Loo!" exclaimed Miss Tippet, with tears in her eyes; "you look
_so_ thin and pale."

There could be no doubt on that point.  Little Loo, as Emma styled her,
was worn to a shadow by sickness, which had hitherto baffled the
doctor's skill.  But she was a beautiful shadow; such a sweet, gentle
shadow, that one might feel thankful, rather than otherwise, to be
haunted by it.

"Pray don't mind me; I'm too tired to speak to you yet; just go on
talking.  I like to listen," said Loo softly.

With ready kindness, Miss Tippet at once sought to draw attention from
the child, by reverting to Mrs Denman; and Matty created a little
opportune confusion by stumbling into the room with the tea.

Matty usually tripped over the carpet at the door, and never seemed to
become wiser from experience.

"Poor Mrs Denman," said Miss Tippet, pouring out the tea; "it must have
been an awful shock; think of a (Sugar, brother?  I always forget), what
was I--oh, yes; think of a fireman seizing one round the (Cream, Willie?
I know you have a sweet tooth, so I don't need to ask if you take
sugar)--yes, he carried her down that dreadful what-d'ye-call-it, and
into the next house with nothing (A little more sugar, Julia?  No? )--
nothing on but her what's-'is-name.  Oh! it was sad; sad to lose all her
fine things, too--her furniture, and--and thingumies.  Do try a piece of
cake, brother."

"I know a worse case than hers," said Willie, with a knowing look.

"Do you?" exclaimed Miss Tippet.

"Oh! do tell it," cried Emma earnestly; "he's just been telling it to
me, and it is _so_ sad and interesting."

"Come, let's hear about it, lad," said Mr Tippet.

Thus encouraged, Willie related his adventure with the clown's family,
and told his tale with such genuine feeling, that Miss Tippet, Loo, and
Emma found their eyes moist when he had concluded.

There was a good deal of comment upon this subject, and Miss Deemas
animadverted very strongly upon actors in general and clowns in
particular.  As to ballet-girls, she could not find words to express her
contempt for them; but in reference to this Miss Tippet ventured to
rebuke her friend, and to say that although she could not and would not
defend the position of these unfortunates, yet she felt that they were
very much to be pitied, seeing that they were in many cases trained to
their peculiarly indelicate life by their parents, and had been taught
to regard ballet-dancing as quite a proper and legitimate
what's-its-name.  No doubt this was only a palliation of the life they
led, but she thought that if anyone was to be severely blamed in the
matter it was the people who went to witness and encourage such wicked
displays.

Miss Deemas dissented generally from all her friend's observations, and,
wishing to change the subject, asked Loo if her father was coming to
fetch her home.

"No," said Loo; "dear papa is not well to-night, but he is to send the
carriage for me.  Oh, I wish," she continued, reverting to the previous
subject, "I _wish_ I could do something for these poor people.  I'm so
very, very sorry for the fairy."

"So you can, if you choose," said Miss Deemas sharply.

"No, indeed I cannot," replied Loo in an earnest voice; "I'm too ill and
weak now to be of any use to anyone.  Once I was useful to dear papa,
but ever since the fire I have not been of use to anybody; only a
hindrance to them.  Since I have been ill I have thought much more about
what I read in the Bible, and I've had a great desire to do good in some
way or other, but how can I--so weak and helpless?"

Loo almost sobbed, for her sympathies had been awakened by Willie, and a
chord had been touched which had been vibrating in her breast for some
weeks past.

"Your father is rich, is he not?" asked the Eagle.

"Yes, I believe so."

"Well, a word to him may be the cause of much good, in the shape of
money at least, to people in distress; but rich people don't always like
to spend their money in that way."

Loo hung down her head and made no reply, for she knew that her father
did not like to part with money.  She had often heard him refuse to do
so in days gone by, even when very pathetic appeals (as she thought)
were made to him; and experience told her that it was in vain to look
for help in that quarter.

The party was now increased by the arrival of Frederick Auberly, who at
once infused life into everybody, except Miss Deemas, who had life
enough of her own, and would by no means accept the loan of any from
anyone else.  Fred therefore ignored her altogether, and told stories
and cracked jokes and sang songs as if no such female iceberg were
present.

Poor Loo was overjoyed to see him, and laying her head on his breast,
bade him speak away and not ask questions; only speak, and allow her to
listen and rest.

Fred obeyed, and at once began an earnest discussion with Willie as to
the best method of getting a stout gentleman out of a third-floor window
in case of fire, when Matty Merryon entered with a flushed face and said
that a fireman who would not give his name wished to see Willie Willders
for a minute; and she was inclined to think it was his brother.

"What!  Frank?" exclaimed Willie, rising to go downstairs.

"Stay, Willie," cried Miss Tippet eagerly; "don't go down.  Pray let me
have him up; I should so like to see him, and I'm sure so would Loo; the
man, you know, who went up the what's-its-name, and brought you--yes,
send him up, Matty."

"Plaze, mim, he won't come," replied the girl, "I know'd ye would like
to see him, an' axed him in."

"Tell him," said Miss Tippet, "that I request it as a favour."

While Matty was delivering this message, the Eagle took occasion to
sniff once or twice in a contemptuous manner, and wondered why people
worshipped men just because they happened to be big, and what they
called handsome.  For her part, she hated all men, but if she were to be
obliged to choose between any class (which she was thankful to say was
_not_ necessary in her case), she would certainly give the preference to
ugly men and small.

Willie Willders nodded his head approvingly, and, being exasperated into
a savage serio-comic condition, as well by the Eagle's voice and aspect
as by her sentiments, he said that she was quite right, and that if _he_
were a lady like her he would hold the same opinions, because then, said
he, "being stout, I could wallop my husband an' keep him down, an' the
contrast of his ugly face with mine would not be so obvious."

Frank's step on the stair fortunately prevented this open and desperate
attack being noticed.  Next moment all turned their eyes in breathless
expectation towards the door.

Being on duty, Frank appeared in fireman's costume, with the sailor-like
undress cap in his hand.  He bowed to the company, and apologised to
Miss Tippet for intruding, but he had wished to ask his brother Willie
to call at the fire station on his way home to convey a letter to his
mother, and merely meant to see him at the door.

"I'm _very_ glad you came, Mr Willders," said Miss Tippet, "for I
