
"His greatest enemy is the hunter with his terrible gun.  How any
one can look into those great soft eyes of Lightfoot and then even
think of trying to kill him is more than I can understand.  Dogs
are his next worst enemies when he lives near the homes of men.
When he lives where Wolves, Panthers and Bears are found, he has
to be always on the watch for them.  Tufty the Lynx is ever on the
watch for Lightfoot's babies.

"The White-tailed Deer is the most widely distributed of all the
Deer family.  He is found from the Sunny South to the great forests
of the North--everywhere but in the vast open plains of the middle
of this great country.  That is, he used to be.  In  many places
he has been so hunted by man that he has disappeared.  When he
lives in the Sunny South he never grows to be as big as when he
lives in the North.

"In the great mountains of the Far West lives a cousin, Blacktail,
also called Columbian Blacktailed Deer, and another cousin, Forkhorn
the Mule Deer.  Blacktail is nearly the size of Lightfoot.  He is not
quite so graceful, his ears are larger, being much like those of
Forkhorn the Mule Deer, to whom he is closely related, and his tail
is wholly black on the upper surface.  It is from this he gets his
name.  His antlers vary, sometimes being much like those of Lightfoot
and again like those of Forkhorn.  He is a lover of dense forests and
is not widely distributed.  He is not nearly so smart as Lightfoot in
outwitting hunters.

"Forkhorn the Mule Deer, sometimes called Jumping Deer, is larger
than Lightfoot and much more heavily built.  His big ears, much
like those of a Mule, have won for him the name of Mule Deer.  His
face is a dull white with a black patch on the forehead and a black
band under the chin.  His tail is rather short and is not broad at
the base like Lightfoot's.  It is white with a black tip.  Because
of this he is often called Blacktailed Deer, but this is wrong
because that name belongs to his cousin, the true Blacktail.

"Forkhorn's antlers are his glory.  They are even finer than
Lightfoot's.  The prongs, or tines, are in pairs like the letter Y
instead of in a row as are those of Lightfoot, and usually there
are two pairs on each antler.  Forkhorn prefers rough country and
there he is very much at home, his powers of jumping enabling him
to travel with ease where his enemies find it difficult to follow.
Like Blacktail he is not nearly so clever as Lightfoot the White-tail
and so is more easily killed by hunters.

"All these members of the Deer family belong to the round-horn
branch, and are very much smaller than the members of the flat-horn
branch.  But there is one who in size makes all the others look
small indeed.  It is Bugler the Elk, or Wapiti, of whom I shall
tell you to-morrow."



CHAPTER XXXVI  Bugler, Flathorns and Wanderhoof

Lightfoot the Deer was the first one on hand the next morning.  In
fact, he arrived before sun-up and, lying down in a little thicket
close at hand, made himself very comfortable to wait for the
opening of school.  You see, not for anything would he have missed
that lesson about his big cousins.  There the others found him
when they arrived.

"The Deer family," began Old Mother Nature, "is divided into two
branches--the round-horned and the flat-horned.  I have told you
about the round-horned Deer with the exception of the largest and
noblest, Bugler the Elk.  He is commonly called Elk, but his
right name is Wapiti.

"Bugler is found only in the great mountains of the Far West, but
once, before hunters with terrible guns came, Elk were found in
nearly all parts of this country excepting the Far South and the
Far North--even on the great plains.  Now Bugler lives only in the
forests of the great mountains."

"How big is he?" asked Lightfoot.

"So big that beside him you would look very small," replied Old
Mother Nature.  "Have you ever seen Farmer Brown's Horse?"

Lightfoot nodded.  "Well, Bugler stands as high as that Horse,"
replied Old Mother Nature.  "He isn't as heavy, for his body is of
different shape, not so big around, but at that he weighs three
times as much as you do.  In summer his coat is a light
yellowish-brown, becoming very dark on his neck and underneath.  His
legs are dark brown.  The hair on his neck is long and coarse.  His tail
is very small, and around it is a large patch so light in color as to be
almost whitish.  In winter his coat becomes dark gray.

"Bugler's crowning glory are his antlers.  They are very large and
wide-spreading, sweeping backward and upward, the long prongs, or
tines, curving upward from the front instead of from the back, as
in the case of Lightfoot's antlers.  Above each eye is a long sharp
prong.  So big are these antlers that Bugler looks almost as if
he were carrying a small, bare tree on his head.

"Big as these antlers are, they are grown in a few months for
Bugler is like his small cousins in that he loses his antlers at
the end of every winter and must grow a new pair.  While they are
growing, he hides in the wildest places he can find, high up on
the mountains.  Mrs. Bugler is at that time down in a valley with
her baby or babies.  Usually she has one, but sometimes twins.
She has no antlers.

"In the fall, when his antlers have hardened, Bugler moves down
to join his family.  The bigger and stronger he is, the bigger his
family is, for he has a number of wives and they all live together
in a herd or band of which Bugler is lord and master.  He is ready
and eager to fight for them, and terrible battles take place when
another disputes his leadership.  At this season he has a habit of
stretching his neck out and emitting a far-reaching trumpet-like
sound from which he gets the name of Bugler.  It is a warning that
he is ready to fight.

"When the snows of winter come, many families get together and form
great bands.  Then they move down from the mountains in search of
shelter and food.  When a winter is very bad, many starve to death,
for man has fenced in and made into farms much of the land where
the elk once found ample food for winter.

"But big as is Bugler the Elk, there is a cousin who is bigger, the
biggest of all the Deer family.  It is Flathorns the Moose.  As you
must guess by his name he is a member of the flat-horned branch of
the family.  His antlers spread widely and are flattened instead
of being round.  From the edges of the flattened part many sharp
points spring out.

"Flathorns, wearing his crown of great spreading antlers, is a
noble appearing animal because of his great size, but when his
antlers have dropped he is a homely fellow.  Mrs. Flathorns, who
has no antlers, is very homely.  As I have said, Flathorns is the
biggest member of the Deer family.  He is quite as big as Farmer
Brown's Horse and stands much higher at the shoulders.  Indeed, his
shoulders are so high that he has a decided hump there, for they are
well above the line of his back.  His neck is very short, large and
thick, and his head is not at all like the heads of other members
of the Deer family.  Instead of the narrow, pointed face of other
members of the Deer family, he has a broad, long face, rather more
like that of a Horse.  Towards the nose it humps up, and the great
thick upper lip overhangs the lower one.  His nose is very broad,
and for his size his eyes are small.  His ears are large.

"From his throat hangs a hairy fold of skin called a bell.  He has
a very short tail, so short that it is hardly noticeable.  His legs
are very long and rather large.  His hoofs are large and rounded,
more like those of Bossy the Cow than like those of Lightfoot the
Deer.  Seen at a little distance in the woods, he looks to be almost
black, but really is for the most part dark brown.  His legs are gray
on the inside.

"Flathorns lives in the great northern forests clear across the
country, and is especially fond of swampy places.  He is fond of
the water and is a good swimmer.  In summer he delights to feed
on the pads, stems and roots of water lilies, and his long legs
enable him to wade out to get them.  For the most part his food
consists of leaves and tender twigs of young trees, such as
striped maple, aspen, birch, hemlock, alder and willow.  His great
height enables him to reach the upper branches of young trees.  When
they are too tall for this, he straddles them and bends or breaks
them down to get at the upper branches.  His front teeth are big,
broad and sharp-edged.  With these he strips the bark from the
larger branches.  He also eats grass and moss.  Because of his
long legs and short neck he finds it easiest to kneel when feeding
on the ground.

"Big as he is, he can steal through thick growth without making a
sound.  He does not jump like other Deer, but travels at an awkward
trot which takes him over the ground very fast.  In the winter
when snow is deep, the Moose family lives in a yard such as I told
you Lightfoot makes.  The greatest enemy of Flathorns is the hunter,
and from being much hunted Flathorns has learned to make the most of
his ears, eyes and nose.  He is very smart and not easily surprised.
When wounded he will sometimes attack man, and occasionally when not
wounded.  Then he strikes with his sharp-edged front hoofs, and they
are terrible weapons.  Altogether he is a wonderful animal, and it
is a matter for sorrow that man persists in hunting him merely to get
his wonderful head.

"In parts of these same northern forests lives another big member
of the Deer family, Wanderhoof the Woodland Caribou.  He is bigger
than Lightfoot the Deer, but smaller than Bugler the Elk, rather
an awkward-looking fellow.  His legs are quite long but stout.  His
neck is rather short, and instead of carrying his head proudly as
does Lightfoot, he carries it stretched out before him or hanging
low.  The hair on the lower part of his neck is long.

"Wanderhoof wears a coat of brown.  His neck being much lighter or
almost gray.  He has an undercoat which is very thick and woolly.
In winter his whole coat becomes grayish and his neck white.  Above
each hoof is a band of white.  His tail is very short, and white
on the under side.  His antlers are wonderful, being very long and
both round and flat.  That is, parts of them are round and parts
flattened.  They have more prongs than those of any other Deer.

"His hoofs are very large, deeply slit, and cup-shaped.  When he
walks they make a snapping or clicking sound.  These big feet were
given him for a purpose.  He is very fond of boggy ground, and
because of these big feet and the fact that the hoofs spread when
he steps, he can walk safely where others would sink in.  This is
equally true in snow, when they serve as snowshoes.  As a result
he is not forced to live in yards as are Lightfoot and Flathorns
when the snow is deep, but goes where he pleases.

"He is very fond of the water and delights to splash about in it,
and is a splendid swimmer.  His hair floats him so that when
swimming he is higher out of water than any other member of the
family.  In winter he lives in the thickest parts of the forest
among the hemlocks and spruces, and feeds on the mosses and lichens
which grow on the trees.  In summer he moves to the open, boggy
ground around shallow lakes where moss covers the ground, and on
this he lives.

"He is a great wanderer, hence his name Wanderhoof.  Mrs. Caribou
has antlers, wherein she differs from Mrs. Lightfoot, Mrs. Flathorns
and Mrs. Bugler.  Wanderhoof is fond of company and usually is
found with many companions of his own kind.  When they are moving
from their summer home to their winter home, or back again, they
often travel in very large bands.

"In the Far North beyond the great forests Wanderhoof has a cousin
who looks very much like him, called the Barren Ground Caribou.
The name comes from the fact that way up there little excepting
moss grows, and on this the Caribou lives.  In summer this Caribou
is found almost up to the Arctic Ocean, moving southward in great
herds as the cold weather approaches.  No other animals of to-day
get together in such great numbers.  In the extreme North is another
Caribou, called Peary's Caribou, whose coat is wholly white.  The
Caribou are close cousins of the Reindeer and look much like them.

"All male members of the smaller Deer are called bucks, the female
members are called does, and the young are called fawns.  All male
members of the big Deer, such as Bugler the Elk, Flathorns the
Moose and Wanderhoof the Caribou, are called bulls.  The females
are called cows and the young are called calves.  All members of
the Deer family, with the exception of the Barren Ground Caribou,
are forest-loving animals and are seldom seen far from the
sheltering woods.

"This, I think, will do for the Deer family.  To-morrow I shall
tell you about Thunderfoot the Bison, Fleetfoot the Antelope, and
Longcoat the Musk Ox."



CHAPTER XXXVII  Thunderfoot, Fleetfoot and Longcoat

"Who remembers the name of the order to which all members of the
Deer family belong?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"I remember what it means, but not the name," spoke up Happy Jack
Squirrel.  "It means hoofed."

"It is Un--Un-Ungu--" began Peter Rabbit and then stopped.  For
the life of him he couldn't think of the rest.

"Ungulata," Old Mother Nature finished for him.  "And Happy Jack
has the meaning right.  It is the order to which all hoofed animals
belong.  There are several families in the order, one of which you
already have learned about--the Deer family.  Now comes the family
of Cattle and Sheep.  It is called the Bovidae family, and the
biggest and most important member is Thunderfoot the Bison,
commonly called Buffalo.

"Thunderfoot is more closely related to Bossy, Farmer Brown's Cow,
than are the members of the Deer family, for he has true horns, not
antlers.  These are hollow and are not dropped each year, but are
carried through life.  Mrs. Thunderfoot has them also.  The horns
grow out from the sides of the forehead and then curve upward and
inward, and are smooth and sharp.  They are never branched.

"Thunderfoot is a great, heavy fellow the size of Farmer Brown's
Ox, and has a great hump on his shoulders.  He carries his head
low and from his throat hangs a great beard.  His head is large
and is so covered with thick, curly hair that it appears much
larger than it really is.  His tail is rather short and ends in a
tassel of hair.  The hair on his body and hind quarters is short
and light brown, but on his shoulders and neck and his fore legs
to the knees it is long and shaggy, dark brown above and almost
black below."

"He must be a queer looking fellow," spoke up Chatterer the
Red Squirrel.

"He is," replied Old Mother Nature.  "The front half of him looks
so much bigger than the rear half that it almost seems as if they
didn't belong together."

"What does he eat?" asked Jumper the Hare.

"Grass," replied Old Mother Nature promptly.  "He grazes just as
does Bossy.  When the weather becomes hot his thick coat, although
much of it has been shed, becomes most uncomfortable.  Also he is
tormented by flies.  Then he delights in rolling in mud until he
is plastered with it from head to feet.

"Many years ago there were more Bison than any other large animal
in this country, and they were found in nearly all parts of it.
Some lived in the woods and were called Wood Buffaloes, but the
greatest number lived on the great plains and prairies, where the
grass was plentiful.  I have told you about the great herd of
Barren Ground Caribou, but this is nothing to the great herds of
Bison that used to move north or south, according to the season,
across the great prairies.  In the fall they moved south.  In the
spring they moved north, following the new grass as it appeared.
When they galloped, the noise of their feet was like thunder.

"But the hunters with terrible guns came and killed them for their
skins, killed them by hundreds of thousands, and in just a few years
those great herds became only a memory.  Thunderfoot, once Lord of
the Prairies, was driven out of all his great kingdom, and the Bison,
from being the most numerous of all large animals, is to-day reduced
to just a few hundreds, and most of these are kept in parks by man.
Barely in time did man make laws to protect Thunderfoot.  Without
this protection he would not exist to-day.

"A close neighbor of Thunderfoot's in the days when he was Lord
of the Prairies was Fleetfoot the Antelope.  Fleetfoot is about
the size of a small Deer, and in his graceful appearance reminds
one of Lightfoot, for he has the same trim body and long slim legs.
He is built for speed and looks it.  From just a glance at him you
would know him for a runner just as surely as a look at Jumper the
Hare would tell you that he must travel in great bounds.  The truth
is, Fleetfoot is the fastest runner among all my children in this
country.  Not one can keep up with him in a race.

"Fleetfoot's coat is a light yellowish-brown on the back and white
underneath.  His forehead is brown and the sides of his face white.
His throat and under side of his neck are white, crossed by two bands
of brown.  His hoofs, horns and eyes are black, and there is a black
spot under each ear.  Near the end of his nose he is also black, and
down the back of his neck is a black line of stiff longer hairs.  A
large white patch surrounds his short tail.  Who remembers what I
told you about Antelope Jack, the big Jack Hare of the Southwest?"

"I do!" cried Peter Rabbit and Jumper the Hare together.

"What was it, Jumper?" asked Old Mother Nature.

"You said that he has a way of making the white of his sides seem
to grow so that he seems almost all white, and can signal his
friends in this way," replied Jumper.

"Quite right," replied Old Mother Nature.  "I am glad to find that
you remember so well.  Fleetfoot does the same thing with this
white patch around his tail.  The hairs are quite long and he can
make them spread out so that that white patch becomes much larger,
and when he is running it can be seen flashing in the sun long after
he is so far away that nothing else of him can be seen.  His eyes
are wonderfully keen, so by means of these white patches he and his
friends can signal each other when they are far apart.

"Fleetfoot has true horns, but they are unlike any other horns in
that they are shed every year, just like the antlers of the Deer
family.  They grow straight up just over the eyes, are rather short,
and fork.  One branch is much shorter than the other, and the longer
one is turned over at the end like a hook.  From these horns he gets
the name of Pronghorn.

"When running from danger he carries his head low and makes long
leaps.  When not frightened he trots and holds his head high and
proudly.  He prefers flat open country, and there is no more
beautiful sight on all the great plains of the West than a band of
Fleetfoot and his friends.  He is social and likes the company of
his own kind.

"The time was when these beautiful creatures were almost as numerous
as the Bison, but like the latter they have been killed until now
there is real danger that unless man protects them better than he
is doing there will come a day when the last Antelope will be killed,
and one of the most beautiful and interesting of all my children will
be but a memory."

There was a note of great sadness in Old Mother Nature's voice.
For a few minutes no one spoke.  All were thinking of the terrible
thing that had happened at the hands of man to the great hosts of
two of the finest animals in all this great land, the Bison and
Antelope, and there was bitterness in the heart of each one, for
there was not one there who did not himself have cause to fear man.

Old Mother Nature was the first to break the silence.  "Now," said
she, "I will tell you of the oddest member of the Cattle and Sheep
family.  It is Longcoat the Musk Ox, and he appears to belong
wholly neither to the Cattle nor the Sheep branch of the family,
but to both.  He connects the two branches in appearance, reminding
one somewhat of a small Bison and at the same time having things
about him very like a Sheep.

"Longcoat the Musk Ox lives in the Farthest North, the land of snow
and ice.  He has been found very near the Arctic Ocean, and how he
finds enough to eat in the long winter is a mystery to those who
know that snow-covered land.  He is a heavily built, round-bodied
animal with short, stout legs, shoulders so high that they form a
hump, a low-hung head and sheeplike face, heavy horns which are
flat and broad at the base and meet at the center of the forehead,
sweeping down on each side of the head and then turning up in sharp
points.  His tail is so short that it is hidden in the long hair
which covers him.

"This hair is so long that it hangs down on each side so that often
it touches the snow and hides his legs nearly down to his feet.  In
color it is very dark-brown, almost black, and on his sides is
straight.  But on his shoulders it is curly.  In the middle of the
back is a patch of shorter dull-gray hair.

"Underneath this coat of long hair is another coat of woolly, fine
light-brown hair, so close that neither cold nor rain can get through
it.  It is this warm coat that makes it possible for him to live in
that terribly cold region.  He is about twice as heavy as a big Deer.
At times he gives off a musky odor, and it is from this that he gets
his name of Musk Ox.

"Longcoat is seldom found alone, but usually with a band of his
friends.  This is partly for protection from his worst enemies, the
Wolves.  When the latter appear, Longcoat and his friends form a
circle with their heads out, and it is only a desperately hungry
Wolf that will try to break through that line of sharp-pointed horns.

"In rough, rocky country he is as sure-footed as a Sheep.  In the
short summer of that region he finds plenty to eat, but in winter he
has to paw away the snow to get at the moss and other plants buried
beneath it.  Practically all other animals living so far North have
white coats, but Longcoat retains his dark coat the year through.

"My, how time flies!  This is all for to-day.  To-morrow I will
tell you of two wonderful mountain climbers who go with ease where
even man cannot follow."



CHAPTER XXXVIII  Two Wonderful Mountain Climbers
