the books interfere with the duties."

As Aunt Plenty spoke, with her kind old face beaming approvingly upon
the girls, Phebe glanced at the clock, saw that it pointed to five, knew
that Dolly would soon be down, expecting to find preparations for supper
under way, and, hastily dropping her pencil, she jumped up, saying,

"Please, can I go? I'll clear up after I've done my chores."

"School is dismissed," answered Rose, and with a grateful "Thank you,
heaps and heaps!" Phebe ran away singing the multiplication table as she
set the tea ditto.

That was the way it began, and for a week the class of one went on
with great pleasure and profit to all concerned; for the pupil proved
a bright one, and came to her lessons as to a feast, while the young
teacher did her best to be worthy the high opinion held of her, for
Phebe firmly believed that Miss Rose knew everything in the way of
learning.

Of course the lads found out what was going on, and chaffed the girls
about the "Seminary," as they called the new enterprise; but they
thought it a good thing on the whole, kindly offered to give lessons in
Greek and Latin gratis, and decided among themselves that "Rose was a
little trump to give the Phebe-bird such a capital boost."

Rose herself had some doubts as to how it would strike her uncle, and
concocted a wheedlesome speech which should at once convince him that
it was the most useful, wholesome, and delightful plan ever devised. But
she got no chance to deliver her address, for Dr. Alec came upon her so
unexpectedly that it went out of her head entirely. She was sitting on
the floor in the library, poring over a big book laid open in her lap,
and knew nothing of the long-desired arrival till two large, warm hands
met under her chin and gently turned her head back, so that someone
could kiss her heartily on either cheek, while a fatherly voice said,
half reproachfully, "Why is my girl brooding over a dusty Encyclopedia
when she ought to be running to meet the old gentleman who couldn't get
on another minute without her?"

"O uncle! I'm so glad! and so sorry! Why didn't you let us know what
time you'd be here, or call out the minute you came? Haven't I been
home-sick for you? and now I'm so happy to have you back I could hug
your dear old curly head off," cried Rose, as the Encyclopedia went down
with a bang, and she up with a spring that carried her into Dr. Alec's
arms, to be kept there in the sort of embrace a man gives to the dearest
creature the world holds for him.

Presently he was in his easy chair with Rose upon his knee smiling up
in his face and talking as fast as her tongue could go, while he watched
her with an expression of supreme content, as he stroked the smooth
round cheek, or held the little hand in his, rejoicing to see how rosy
was the one, how plump and strong the other.

"Have you had a good time? Did you save the poor lady? Aren't you glad
to be home again with your girl to torment you?"

"Yes, to all those questions. Now tell me what you've been at, little
sinner? Aunty Plen says you want to consult me about some new and
remarkable project which you have dared to start in my absence."

"She didn't tell you, I hope?"

"Not a word more expect that you were rather doubtful how I'd take it,
and so wanted to 'fess' yourself and get round me as you always try
to do, though you don't often succeed. Now, then, own up and take the
consequences."

So Rose told about her school in her pretty, earnest way, dwelling
on Phebe's hunger for knowledge, and the delight it was to help her,
adding, with a wise nod,

"And it helps me too, uncle, for she is so quick and eager I have to do
my best or she will get ahead of me in some things. To-day, now, she had
the word 'cotton' in a lesson and asked all about it, and I was ashamed
to find I really knew so little that I could only say that it was a
plant that grew down South in a kind of a pod, and was made into cloth.
That's what I was reading up when you came, and to-morrow I shall tell
her all about it, and indigo too. So you see it teaches me also, and is
as good as a general review of what I've learned, in a pleasanter way
than going over it alone."

"You artful little baggage! that's the way you expect to get round me,
is it? That's not studying, I suppose?"

"No, sir, it's teaching; and please, I like it much better than having a
good time by myself. Besides, you know, I adopted Phebe and promised to
be a sister to her, so I am bound to keep my word, am I not?" answered
Rose, looking both anxious and resolute as she waited for her sentence.

Dr. Alec was evidently already won, for Rose had described the old slate
and brown paper copy-book with pathetic effect, and the excellent man
had not only decided to send Phebe to school long before the story was
done, but reproached himself for forgetting his duty to one little girl
in his love for another. So when Rose tried to look meek and failed
utterly, he laughed and pinched her cheek, and answered in that genial
way which adds such warmth and grace to any favour,

"I haven't the slightest objection in the world. In fact, I was
beginning to think I might let you go at your books again, moderately,
since you are so well; and this is an excellent way to try your powers.
Phebe is a brave, bright lass, and shall have a fair chance in the
world, if we can give it to her, so that if she ever finds her friends
they need not be ashamed of her."

"I think she has found some already," began Rose eagerly.

"Hey? what? has anyone turned up since I've been gone?" asked Dr. Alec
quickly, for it was a firm belief in the family that Phebe would prove
to be "somebody" sooner or later.

"No, her best friend turned up when you came home, uncle," answered Rose
with an approving pat, adding gratefully, "I can't half thank you for
being so good to my girl, but she will, because I know she is going to
make a woman to be proud of, she's so strong and true, and loving."

"Bless your dear heart, I haven't begun to do anything yet, more shame
to me! But I'm going at it now, and as soon as she gets on a bit,
she shall go to school as long as she likes. How will that do for a
beginning?"

"It will be 'just heavenly,' as Phebe says, for it is the wish of her
life to 'get lots of schooling,' and she will be too happy when I tell
her. May I, please? it will be so lovely to see the dear thing open her
big eyes and clap her hands at the splendid news."

"No one shall have a finger in this nice little pie; you shall do it all
yourself, only don't go too fast, or make too many castles in the air,
my dear; for time and patience must go into this pie of ours if it is to
turn out well."

"Yes, uncle, only when it is opened won't 'the birds begin to sing?"'
laughed Rose, taking a turn about the room as a vent for the joyful
emotions that made her eyes shine. All of a sudden she stopped and asked
soberly,

"If Phebe goes to school who will do her work? I'm willing, if I can."

"Come here and I'll tell you a secret. Dolly's 'bones' are getting so
troublesome, and her dear old temper so bad, that the aunts have decided
to pension her off and let her go and live with her daughter, who has
married very well. I saw her this week, and she'd like to have her
mother come, so in the spring we shall have a grand change, and get
a new cook and chamber-girl if any can be found to suit our honoured
relatives."

"Oh, me! how can I ever get on without Phebe? Couldn't she stay, just so
I could see her? I'd pay her board rather than have her go, I'm so fond
of her."

How Dr. Alec laughed at that proposal, and how satisfied Rose was when
he explained that Phebe was still to be her maid, with no duties except
such as she could easily perform between school-hours.

"She is a proud creature, for all her humble ways, and even from us
would not take a favour if she did not earn it somewhere. So this
arrangement makes it all square and comfortable, you see, and she will
pay for the schooling by curling these goldilocks a dozen times a day if
you let her."

"Your plans are always so wise and kind! That's why they work so well,
I suppose, and why people let you do what you like with them. I really
don't see how other girls get along without an Uncle Alec!" answered
Rose, with a sigh of pity for those who had missed so great a blessing.

When Phebe was told the splendid news, she did not "stand on her head
with rapture," as Charlie prophesied she would, but took it quietly,
because it was such a happy thing she had no words "big and beautiful
enough to thank them in," she said; but every hour of her day was
brightened by this granted wish, and dedicated to the service of those
who gave it.

Her heart was so full of content that if overflowed in music, and the
sweet voice singing all about the house gave thanks so blithely that
no other words were needed. Her willing feet were never tired of taking
steps for those who had smoothed her way; her skilful hands were always
busy in some labour of love for them, and on the face fast growing in
comeliness there was an almost womanly expression of devotion, which
proved how well Phebe had already learned one of life's great lessons
gratitude.



Chapter 23--Peace-Making

"Steve, I want you to tell me something," said Rose to Dandy, who was
making faces at himself in the glass, while he waited for an answer to
the note he brought from his mother to Aunt Plenty.

"P'raps I will, and p'raps I won't. What is it?"

"Haven't Arch and Charlie quarrelled?"

"Dare say; we fellows are always having little rows, you know. I do
believe a sty is coming on my star-board eye," and Steve affected to be
absorbed in a survey of his yellow lashes.

"No, that won't do; I want to know all about it; for I'm sure something
more serious than a 'little row' is the matter. Come, please tell me,
Stenie, there's a dear."

"Botheration! you don't want me to turn telltale, do you?" growled
Steve, pulling his top-knot, as he always did when perplexed.

"Yes, I do," was Rose's decided answer for she saw from his manner that
she was right, and determined to have the secret out of him if coaxing
would do it. "I don't wish you to tell things to everyone, of course,
but to me you may, and you must, because I have a right to know. You
boys need somebody to look after you, and I'm going to do it, for girls
are nice peacemakers, and know how to manage people. Uncle said so, and
he is never wrong."

Steve was about to indulge in a derisive hoot at the idea of her looking
after them, but a sudden thought restrained him, and suggested a way in
which he could satisfy Rose, and better himself at the same time.

"What will you give me if I'll tell you every bit about it?" he asked,
with a sudden red in his cheeks and an uneasy look in his eyes, for he
was half ashamed of the proposition.

"What do you want?" and Rose looked up rather surprised at his question.

"I'd like to borrow some money. I shouldn't think of asking you, only
Mac never has a cent. since he's set up his old chemical shop, where
he'll blow himself to bits some day, and you and uncle will have the fun
of putting him together again," and Steve tried to look as if the idea
amused him.

"I'll lend it to you with pleasure, so tell away," said Rose, bound to
get at the secret.

Evidently much relieved by the promise, Steve set his top-knot
cheerfully erect again, and briefly stated the case.

"As you say, it's all right to tell you, but don't let the boys know
I blabbed, or Prince will take my head off. You see, Archie don't like
some of the fellows Charlie goes with, and cuts 'em. That makes Prince
mad, and he holds on just to plague Arch, so they don't speak to one
another, if they can help it, and that's the row."

"Are those boys bad?" asked Rose, anxiously.

"Guess not, only rather wild. They are older than our fellows, but
they like Prince, he's such a jolly boy; sings so well, dances jigs and
breakdowns, you know, and plays any game that's going. He beat Morse at
billiards, and that's something to brag of, for Morse thinks he knows
everything. I saw the match, and it was great fun!"

Steve got quite excited over the prowess of Charlie, whom he admired
immensely, and tried to imitate. Rose did not know half the danger
of such gifts and tastes as Charlie's, but felt instinctively that
something must be wrong if Archie disapproved.

"If Prince likes any billiard-playing boy better than Archie, I don't
think much of his sense," she said severely.

"Of course he doesn't; but, you see, Charlie and Arch are both as proud
as they can be, and won't give in. I suppose Arch is right, but I don't
blame Charlie a bit for liking to be with the others sometimes, they are
such a jolly set," and Steve shook his head morally, even while his eye
twinkled over the memory of some of the exploits of the "jolly set."

"Oh, dear me!" sighed Rose, "I don't see what I can do about it, but
I wish the boys would make up, for Prince can't come to any harm with
Archie, he's so good and sensible."

"That's the trouble; Arch preaches, and Prince won't stand it. He
told Arch he was a prig and a parson, and Arch told him he wasn't a
gentleman. My boots! weren't they both mad, though! I thought for a
minute they'd pitch into one another and have it out. Wish they had, and
not gone stalking round stiff and glum ever since. Mac and I settle our
rows with a bat or so over the head, and then we are all right."

Rose couldn't help laughing as Steve sparred away at a fat sofa-pillow,
to illustrate his meaning; and, having given it several scientific
whacks, he pulled down his cuffs and smiled upon her with benign pity
for her feminine ignorance of this summary way of settling a quarrel.

"What droll things boys are!" she said, with a mixture of admiration and
perplexity in her face, which Steve accepted as a compliment to his sex.

"We're a pretty clever invention, miss, and you can't get on without
us," he answered, with his nose in the air. Then, taking a sudden plunge
into business, he added, "How about that bit of money you were going to
lend me? I've told, now you pay up."

"Of course I will! How much do you want?" and Rose pulled out her purse.

"Could you spare five dollars? I want to pay a little debt of honour
that is rather pressing," and Steve put on a mannish air that was
comical to see.

"Aren't all debts honourable?" asked innocent Rose.

"Yes, of course; but this is a bet I made, and it ought to be settled up
at once," began Steve, finding it awkward to explain.

"Oh, don't bet, it's not right, and I know your father wouldn't like it.
Promise you won't do so again; please promise!" and Rose held fast the
hand into which she had just put the money.

"Well, I won't. It's worried me a good deal, but I was joked into it.
Much obliged, cousin, I'm all right now," and Steve departed hastily.

Having decided to be a peace-maker, Rose waited for an opportunity, and
very soon it came.

She was spending the day with Aunt Clara, who had been entertaining some
young guests, and invited Rose to meet them, for she thought it high
time her niece conquered her bashfulness and saw a little of society.
Dinner was over, and everyone had gone. Aunt Clara was resting before
going out to an evening party, and Rose was waiting for Charlie to come
and take her home.

She sat alone in the elegant drawing-room, feeling particularly nice and
pretty, for she had her best frock on, a pair of gold bands her aunt had
just given her, and a tea-rose bud in her sash, like the beautiful Miss
Van Tassel, whom everyone admired. She had spread out her little skirts
to the best advantage, and, leaning back in a luxurious chair, sat
admiring her own feet in new slippers with rosettes almost as big as
dahlias. Presently Charlie came lounging in, looking rather sleepy and
queer, Rose thought. On seeing her, however, he roused up and said with
a smile that ended in a gape,

"I thought you were with mother, so I took forty winks after I got those
girls off. Now, I'm at your service, Rosamunda, whenever you like."

"You look as if your head ached. If it does, don't mind me. I'm not
afraid to run home alone, it's so early," answered Rose, observing the
flushed cheeks and heavy eyes of her cousin.

"I think I see myself letting you do it. Champagne always makes my
headache, but the air will set me up."

"Why do you drink it, then?" asked Rose, anxiously.

"Can't help it, when I'm host. Now, don't you begin to lecture; I've had
enough of Archie's old-fashioned notions, and I don't want any more."

Charlie's tone was decidedly cross, and his whole manner so unlike his
usual merry good-nature, that Rose felt crushed, and answered meekly,

"I wasn't going to lecture, only when people like other people, they
can't bear to see them suffer pain."

That brought Charlie round at once, for Rose's lips trembled a little,
though she tried to hide it by smelling the flower she pulled from her
sash.

"I'm a regular bear, and I beg your pardon for being so cross, Rosy," he
said in the old frank way that was so winning.

"I wish you'd beg Archie's too, and be good friends again. You never
were cross when he was your chum," Rose said, looking up at him as he
bent toward her from the low chimney-piece, where he had been leaning
his elbows.

In an instant he stood as stiff and straight as a ramrod, and the heavy
eyes kindled with an angry spark as he said, in his high and mighty
manner,

"You'd better not meddle with what you don't understand, cousin."

"But I do understand, and it troubles me very much to see you so cold
and stiff to one another. You always used to be together, and now you
hardly speak. You are so ready to beg my pardon I don't see why you
can't beg Archie's, if you are in the wrong."

"I'm not!" this was so short and sharp that Rose started, and Charlie
added in a calmer but still very haughty tone: "A gentleman always begs
pardon when he has been rude to a lady, but one man doesn't apologize to
another man who has insulted him."

"Oh, my heart, what a pepperpot!" thought Rose, and, hoping to make him
laugh, she added slyly: "I was not talking about men, but boys, and one
of them a Prince, who ought to set a good example to his subjects."

But Charlie would not relent, and tried to turn the subject by saying
gravely, as he unfastened the little gold ring from his watch-guard,

"I've broken my word, so I want to give this back and free you from the
bargain. I'm sorry, but I think it a foolish promise, and don't intend
to keep it. Choose a pair of ear-rings to suit yourself, as my forfeit.
You have a right to wear them now."

"No, I can only wear one, and that is no use, for Archie will keep his
word I'm sure!" Rose was so mortified and grieved at this downfall
of her hopes that she spoke sharply, and would not take the ring the
deserter offered her.

He shrugged his shoulders, and threw it into her lap, trying to look
cool and careless, but failing entirely, for he was ashamed of himself,
and out of sorts generally. Rose wanted to cry, but pride would not
let her, and, being very angry, she relieved herself by talk instead of
tears. Looking pale and excited, she rose out of her chair, cast away
the ring, and said in a voice that she vainly tried to keep steady,

"You are not at all the boy I thought you were, and I don't respect you
one bit. I've tried to help you be good, but you won't let me, and I
shall not try any more. You talk a great deal about being a gentleman,
but you are not, for you've broken your word, and I can never trust
you again. I don't wish you to go home with me. I'd rather have Mary.
Good-night."

And with that last dreadful blow, Rose walked out of the room, leaving
Charlie as much astonished as if one of his pet pigeons had flown in his
face and pecked at him. She was so seldom angry, that when her temper
did get the better of her it made a deep impression on the lads, for
it was generally a righteous sort of indignation at some injustice or
wrong-doing, not childish passion.

Her little thunderstorm cleared off in a sob or two as she put on her
things in the entry-closet, and when she emerged she looked the brighter
for the shower. A hasty good-night to Aunt Clara now under the hands of
the hairdresser and then she crept down to find Mary the maid. But
Mary was out, so was the man, and Rose slipped away by the back-door,
flattering herself that she had escaped the awkwardness of having
Charlie for escort.

There she was mistaken, however, for the gate had hardly closed behind
her when a well-known tramp was heard, and the Prince was beside her,
saying in a tone of penitent politeness that banished Rose's wrath like
magic,

"You needn't speak to me if you don't choose, but I must see you safely
home, cousin."

She turned at once, put out her hand, and answered heartily,

"I was the cross one. Please forgive me, and let's be friends again."

Now that was better than a dozen sermons on the beauty of forgiveness,
and did Charlie more good, for it showed him how sweet humility was, and
proved that Rose practised as she preached.
