honour placing with him the Earl of Warwick, Sir John Chandos, and many
of his best knights.

The ground which had been chosen for the battle was an irregular slope
between the forest of Cressy and the river Maie near the little village
of Canchy. The slope looked towards the south and east, from which
quarters the enemy was expected to arrive, and some slight defences were
added to the natural advantages of the ground.

On the night of the 25th all the principal leaders of the British host
were entertained by King Edward. Next morning, Mass was celebrated,
and the king, the prince, and many knights and nobles received the
Sacrament, after which the trumpet sounded, and the army marched to
take up its position. Its numbers are variously estimated, but the best
account puts it at about 30,000 men which, considering that 32,000 had
crossed the Channel to La Hogue, is probably about the force which would
have been present allowing that 2000 had fallen in the various actions
or had died from disease.

The division of the Black Prince consisted of 800 men-at-arms, 4000
archers, and 6000 Welsh foot. The archers, as usual, were placed in
front, supported by the light troops of Wales and the men-at-arms; on
his left was the second division, commanded by the Earls of Arundel and
Northampton; its extreme left rested on Canchy and the river, and it was
further protected by a deep ditch; this corps was about 7000 strong.

The king himself took up his position on a knoll of rising ground
surmounted by a windmill, and 12,000 men under his personal command were
placed here in reserve.

In the rear of the Prince's division an enclosure of stakes was formed;
in this, guarded by a small body of archers, were ranged the wagons
and baggage of the army, together with all the horses, the king having
determined that the knights and men-at-arms on his side should fight on
foot.

When the army had taken up its position, the king, mounted on a
small palfrey, with a white staff in his hand, rode from rank to rank
exhorting his soldiers to do their duty gallantly. It was nearly noon
before he had passed through all the lines, and permission was
then given to the soldiers to fall out from their ranks and to take
refreshments while waiting for the coming of the enemy. This was
accordingly done, the men eating and drinking at their ease and lying
down in their ranks on the soft grass with their steel caps and their
bows or pikes beside them.

In the meantime the French had, on their side, been preparing for the
battle. Phillip had crossed the Somme at Abbeyville late on Thursday
afternoon, and remained there next day marshalling the large
reinforcements which were hourly arriving. His force now considerably
exceeded 100,000 men, the number with which he had marched from Amiens
three days previously.

Friday was the festival of St. Louis, and that evening Phillip gave a
splendid banquet to the whole of the nobles of his army.

On the following morning the king, accompanied by his brother the Count
d'Alencon, the old King of Bohemia and his son, the King of Rome, the
Duke of Lorraine, the Count of Blois, the Count of Flanders, and a
great number of other feudal princes, heard Mass at the Abbey, and then
marched with his great army towards Cressy. He moved but slowly in order
to give time to all the forces scattered over the neighbourhood to come
up, and four knights, headed by one of the King of Bohemia's officers,
went forward to reconnoitre the English position. They approached within
a very short distance of the English lines and gained a very exact
knowledge of the position, the English taking no measures to interrupt
the reconnaissance. They returned with the information they had
gathered, and the leader of the party, Le Moyne de Basele, one of the
most judicious officers of his time, strongly advised the king to halt
his troops, pointing out that as it was evident the English were ready
to give battle, and as they were fresh and vigorous while the French
were wearied and hungry, it would be better to encamp and give battle
the next morning.

Phillip saw the wisdom of the advice and ordered his two marshals the
Lord of St. Venant and Charles de Montmorency to command a halt. They
instantly spurred off, one to the front and the other to the rear,
commanding the leaders to halt their banners. Those in advance at once
obeyed, but those behind still pressed on, declaring that they would not
halt until they were in the front line. All wanted to be first, in order
to obtain their share of the honour and glory of defeating the English.
Those in front, seeing the others still coming on, again pressed
forward, and thus, in spite of the efforts of the king and his marshals,
the French nobles with their followers pressed forward in confusion,
until, passing through a small wood, they found themselves suddenly in
the presence of the English army.





CHAPTER XIV: CRESSY


The surprise of the French army at finding themselves in the presence
of the English was so great that the first line recoiled in confusion.
Those marching up from behind imagined that they had been already
engaged and repulsed by the English, and the disorder spread through the
whole army, and was increased by the common people, who had crowded to
the field in immense numbers from the whole country round to see the
battle and share in the plunder of the English camp.

From King Edward's position on the rising ground he could see the
confusion which prevailed in the French ranks, and small as were his
forces he would probably have obtained an easy victory by ordering a
sudden charge upon them. The English, however, being dismounted, but
small results would have followed the scattering of the great host of
the French. The English army therefore remained immovable, except that
the soldiers rose from the ground, and taking their places in the ranks,
awaited the onslaught of the enemy.

King Phillip himself now arrived on the field and his hatred for the
English led him at once to disregard the advice which had been given him
and to order the battle to commence as soon as possible.

The army was divided into four bodies, of which Phillip commanded one,
the Count D'Alencon the second, the King of Bohemia the third, and
the Count of Savoy the fourth. Besides these were a band of 15,000
mercenaries, Genoese crossbow-men, who were now ordered to pass between
the ranks of cavalry and to clear the ground of the English archers, who
were drawn up in the usual form in which they fought--namely, in very
open order, line behind line, the men standing alternately, so that each
had ample room to use his bow and to fire over the heads of those in
front. The formation was something like that of a harrow, and, indeed,
exactly resembled that in which the Roman archers fought, and was called
by them a quincunx.

The Genoese had marched four leagues beneath a hot sun loaded with their
armour and heavy cross-bows, and they remonstrated against the order,
urging that they were in no condition to do good service without some
repose. The Count D'Alencon, furious at their hesitation, ordered them
up, but as they advanced a terrible thunderstorm, with torrents of rain,
broke over the armies, and wetting the cords of the crossbows rendered
many of them unserviceable. At length the crossbow-men were arranged in
front, while behind them were the vast body of French cavalry, and the
order was given for the battle to begin.

The Genoese advanced with loud shouts but the English archers paid no
attention to the noise, but waited calmly for the attack. At this moment
the sun, now approaching the west, shone out brightly between the clouds
behind the English, its rays streaming full in the faces of the French.
The Genoese were now within distance, and began to discharge their
quarrels at their impassive enemies, but as they opened fire the English
archers drew their bows from the cases which had protected them from the
rain, and stepping forward poured their arrows among the Genoese. The
crossbow-men were smitten as with a storm, numbers were struck in the
face and other unprotected parts, and they were instantly thrown into
confusion, and casting away their cross-bows they recoiled in disorder
among the horsemen behind them.

Phillip, passionate and cruel as ever, instead of trying to rally the
Genoese, ordered the cavalry behind them to fall upon them, and
the men-at-arms at once plunged in among the disordered mass of the
crossbow-men, and a wild scene of carnage and confusion ensued, the
English archers continuing to pour their unerring arrows into the midst.

The Count D'Alencon, who was behind, separated his division into two
bodies, and swept round on one side himself, while the Count of Flanders
did the same on the other to attack the Prince of Wales in more regular
array. Taking a circuitous route, D'Alencon appeared upon a rising
ground on the flank of the archers of the Black Prince, and thus,
avoiding their arrows, charged down with his cavalry upon the 800
men-at-arms gathered round the Black Prince, while the Count of Flanders
attacked on the other flank. Nobly did the flower of English chivalry
withstand the shock of the French, and the prince himself and the
highest nobles and simple men-at-arms fought side by side. None gave
away a foot.

In vain the French, with impetuous charges, strove to break through the
mass of steel. The spear-heads were cleft off with sword and battle-axe,
and again and again men and horses recoiled from the unbroken line.
Each time the French retired the English ranks were formed anew, and
as attack followed attack a pile of dead rose around them. The Count
D'Alencon and the Duke of Lorraine were among the first who fell. The
young Count of Blois, finding that he could not ride through the wall
of steel, dismounted with his knights and fought his way on foot
towards the banner of the Prince of Wales. For a time the struggle was
desperate, and the young prince, with his household knights, was for a
time well-nigh beaten back.



Walter, fighting close beside the prince, parried more than one blow
intended for him, and the prince himself slew the Count of Blois, whose
followers all fell around him. The Count of Flanders was also slain, and
confusion began to reign among the assailants, whose leaders had now
all fallen. Phillip himself strove to advance with his division into
the fight, but the struggle between the Genoese and the men-at-arms was
still continuing, and the very multitude of his troops in the narrow and
difficult field which the English had chosen for the battle embarrassed
his movements.

Charles of Luxembourg, King of the Romans, and afterwards Emperor of
Germany, son of the old King of Bohemia, with a large body of German and
French cavalry, now assailed the English archers, and in spite of their
flights of arrows came to close quarters, and cutting their way through
them joined in the assault upon the men-at-arms of the Black Prince.
Nearly 40,000 men were now pressing round the little body, and the Earls
of Northampton and Arundel moved forward with their divisions to his
support, while the Earl of Warwick, who was with the prince, despatched
Sir Thomas of Norwich to the king, who still remained with his powerful
reserve, to ask for aid.

"Sir Thomas," demanded the king, "is my son killed, overthrown, or
wounded beyond help?"

"Not so, sire," replied the knight, "but he is in a rude fight, and much
needs your aid."

"Go back, Sir Thomas, to those who sent you and tell them from me that
whatsoever happens they require no aid from me so long as my son is in
life. Tell them also that I command them to let the boy win his spurs,
for, God willing, the day shall be his, and the honour shall rest with
him and those into whose charge I have given him."

The prince and those around him were filled with fresh ardour when
they received this message. Each man redoubled his efforts to repel the
forces that were incessantly poured down upon them by the French. On all
sides these pressed around them, striving desperately, but ever in vain,
to break through the solid ranks of the English. The French men-at-arms
suffered, moreover, terribly from the attacks of the Welsh infantry.
These men, clad in thick leather jerkins, nimble of foot, accustomed to
a life of activity, were armed with shortened lances and knives, mingled
fearlessly among the confused mass of French cavalry, creeping beneath
the horses' bellies, standing up when they got a chance, and stabbing
horses and men with their knives and pikes. Many were trampled upon or
struck down, but numbering, as they did, 6000, they pervaded the whole
mass of the enemy, and did terrible execution, adding in no small degree
to the confusion caused by the shower of arrows from the archers within
the circle of the men-at-arms. The instant a French knight fell, struck
from his horse with a battle-axe or arrow, or by the fall of a wounded
steed, the half-wild Welsh were upon him, and slew him before he could
regain his feet.

The slaughter was immense. The Count of Harcourt, with his nephew the
Count D'Aumale and his two gallant sons, fell together, and at last
Charles of Luxembourg, seeing his banner down, his troops routed, his
friends slain, and the day irreparably lost, and being himself severely
wounded in three places, turned his horse and fled, casting off his
rich emblazoned surcoat to avoid recognition. In the meantime Prince
Charles's father, the veteran King of Bohemia, once one of the most
famous warriors of Europe, but now old and blind, sat on horseback at
a little distance from the fight; the knights around him told him the
events as they happened, and the old monarch soon saw that the day was
lost. He asked them for tidings of his son Charles of Luxembourg, but
they were forced to reply that the banner of the King of the Romans was
no longer in sight, but that, doubtless, he was somewhere engaged in the
melee.

"Lords," said the old man, "you are my vassals, my friends, and my
companions, and on this day I command and beseech you to lead me forward
so far that I may deal one blow of my sword in the battle."

His faithful friends obeyed him, a number of knights arranged themselves
around him, and lest they should lose him in the fight they tied their
horses together by the bridles and charged down into the fray. Advancing
directly against the banner of the Prince of Wales, the blind monarch
was carried into the midst of the thickest strife.

There the little group of knights fought gallantly, and after the
battle was over, the bodies of the king and his friends were found lying
together, their dead horses still linked by the bridles.

During this terrible battle, which had been raging since three o'clock,
Phillip had made strenuous efforts to aid his troops engaged in the
front by continually sending fresh bodies to the assault. It was now
growing dark, terror and confusion had already spread among the French,
and many were flying in all directions, and the unremitting showers of
English arrows still flew like hail among their ranks. As the king made
his way forward, surrounded by his personal attendants to take part
himself in the fight, his followers fell thick around him, and his horse
was slain by an arrow. John of Hainault, who had remained by his side
during the whole day, mounted upon a fresh horse and urged him to fly,
as the day was lost. Phillip, however, persisted, and made his way into
the melee, where he fought for some time with extreme courage, until
almost all around him were slain, the royal standard bearer killed, and
himself wounded in two places. John of Hainault then seized his bridle
exclaiming "Come away, sire, it is full time; do not throw your life
away foolishly; if you have lost this day you will win another," and so
almost forced the unwilling king from the field. Phillip, accompanied by
the lords of Montmorency, Beaujeu, Aubigny, and Mansault, with John of
Hainault, and sixty men-at-arms, rode to the Castle of Broye, and there
halted for a few hours. At midnight he again set out, and in the morning
arrived safely at Amiens.

The Black Prince held his station until night without yielding a
single step to all the efforts of the French. Gradually, however, the
assailants became less and less numerous, the banners disappeared,
and the shouts of the leaders and the clang of arms died away, and
the silence which prevailed over the field at once announced that the
victory was complete and the enemy in full flight. An immense number
of torches were now lighted through the English lines, and the king,
quitting for the first time his station on the hill, came down to
embrace his gallant son. Edward and his host rejoiced in a spirit
of humility over the victory. No songs of triumph, no feastings or
merriment were permitted, but a solemn service of the church was held,
and the king and his soldiers offered their thanks to God for the
victory He had given them. The English army lay all night under arms,
and a number of scattered parties of the French, wandering about in the
darkness, entered the lines and were slain or taken prisoners.

The dawn of the next morning was thick and foggy, and intelligence
coming in that a large body of the enemy were advancing upon them, the
Earls of Northampton, Warwick, and Norfolk, with 500 men-at-arms and
2000 archers, went out to reconnoitre, and came in the misty twilight
upon an immense force composed of the citizens of Beauvais, Rouen, and
some other towns, led by the Grand Prior of France and the Archbishop of
Rouen, who were approaching the field.

By some extraordinary accident they had not met any of the fugitives
flying from Cressy, and were ignorant that a battle had been fought.
The English charged them at once. Their advance-guard, consisting of
burghers, was easily overthrown. The second division, which was composed
of men-at-arms, fought bravely, but was unable to withstand the charge
of the triumphant English, and was completely broken and defeated.
The Grand Prior was killed and a vast number of his followers slain or
captured. During the whole of the morning detached parties from Edward's
army scoured the country, dispersing and slaughtering bands of French
who still remained together, and towards night the Earl of Northampton
returned to the camp with the news that no enemy remained in the
vicinity that could offer a show of resistance to the English force.

It is said that a far greater number of French were killed upon the
second day than upon the first. This can be accounted for by the fact
that on the first day but a small portion of the English army were
engaged, and that upon the second the English were fresh and vigorous,
and their enemy exhausted and dispirited.

The greater number of the French nobles and knights who fell, died in
their attempts to break through the Black Prince's array. Besides the
King of Bohemia, nine sovereign princes and eighty great nobles were
killed, with 1200 knights, 1500 men-at-arms, and 30,000 foot; while on
the English side only three knights and a small number of men-at-arms
