the first thing of a morning to open and sort the letters and lay
them in piles upon the table used by Robespierre himself, and he
managed every day to slip quietly into his pockets several of the
letters of denunciation against persons as aristocrats in disguise
or as being suspected of hostility to the Commune. When Robespierre
left him to go to the Club or the Assembly Harry would write short
notes of warning in a disguised hand to the persons named, and
would, when he went out, leave these at their doors. Thus he had
the satisfaction of saving a considerable number of persons from
the clutches of the revolutionists. He would then, two or three
days later, slip the letters of denunciation, very few of which
were dated, among the rest of the correspondence, satisfied that
when search was made the persons named would already have shifted
their quarters and assumed some other disguise.

February had come and Harry was still working and waiting, busy
for several hours each day writing and examining reports with
Robespierre, striving of an evening to keep up the courage and
spirits of the girls, calling in for a few minutes each day to see
Victor, who, after passing through a long and terrible fever, now
lay weak and apparently unconscious alike of the past and present,
his mind completely gone; but the doctor told Harry that in this
respect he did not think the case was hopeless.

"His strength seems to have absolutely deserted him," he said,
"and his mind is a blank like that of a little child, but I by no
means despair of his gradually recovering; and if he could hear the
voice of the lady you tell me he is engaged to, it might strike a
chord now lying dormant and set the brain at work again."

But as to Marie, Harry could do nothing. Do what he would, he
could hit upon no plan whatever for getting her out of prison; and
he could only wait until some change in the situation or the appearance
of her name in the fatal list might afford some opportunity for
action.  It was evident to him that Lebat was not pushing matters
forward, but that he preferred to wait and leave  the horror of
months in prison to work upon Marie's mind, and so break her down
that she would be willing enough to purchase her life by a marriage
with him.

There had been some little lull in the work of blood, for in
December all eyes had been turned to the spectacle of the trial of
the king.  From the 10th of August he had remained a close prisoner
in the Temple, watched and insulted by his ruffian guards, and
passing the time in the midst of his family with a serenity of mind,
a calmness, and tranquility which went far to redeem the blunders
he had made during the preceding three years. The following is the
account written by the princess royal in her journal of the manner
in which the family passed their days:  "My father rose at seven
and said prayers till eight; then dressing himself he was with my
brother till nine, when he came to breakfast with my mother. After
breakfast my father gave us lessons till eleven o'clock; and then
my brother played till midday, when we went to walk together,
whatever the weather was, because at that hour they relieved guard
and wished to see us to be sure of our presence. Our walk was
continued till two o'clock, when we dined. After dinner my father
and mother played at backgammon, or rather pretended to play, in
order to have an opportunity of talking together for a short time.

"At four o'clock my mother went up stairs with us, because the king
then usually took a nap. At six o'clock my brother went down, and
my father gave us lessons till supper at nine. After supper my
mother soon went to bed. We then went up stairs, and the king went
to bed at eleven. My mother worked much at tapestry and made me
study, and frequently read alone. My aunt said prayers and read
the service; she also read many religious books, usually aloud."

But harmless as was the life of the royal family, Danton and the
Jacobins were determined upon having their lives. The mockery of
the trial commenced on the 10th of December. Malesherbes, Tronchet,
and Deseze defended him fearlessly and eloquently, but it was
useless--the king was condemned beforehand. Robespierre and Marat
led the assault. The Girondists, themselves menaced and alarmed,
stood neutral; but on the 15th of January  the question was put to
the Assembly, "Is Louis Capet, formerly King of the French, guilty
of conspiracy and attempt against the general safety of the state?"

With scarcely a single exception, the Assembly returned an affirmative
answer, and on the 17th the final vote was taken. Three hundred
and sixty-one voted for death, two for imprisonment, two hundred
and eighty-six for detention, banishment, or conditional death,
forty-six for death but after a delay, twenty-six for death but
with a wish that the Assembly should revise the sentence.

Sentence of death was pronounced. After a sitting which lasted for
thirty-seven hours there was another struggle between the advocates
of delay and those of instant execution, but the latter won; and
after parting with noble resignation from his wife and family, the
king, on the 21st, was executed. His bearing excited the admiration
even of his bitterest foes.

France looked on amazed and appalled at the act, for Louis had
undoubtedly striven his best to lessen abuses and to go with the
people in the path of reform. It was his objection to shed blood,
his readiness to give way, his affection for the people, which had
allowed the Revolution to march on its bloody way without a check.
It was the victims--the nobles, the priests, the delicate women and
cultured men--who had reason to complain; for it was the king's
hatred to resistance which left them at the mercy of their foes.
Louis had been the best friend of the Revolution that slew him.

The trial and execution of the king had at least the good effect of
diverting the minds of Jeanne and Virginie from their own anxieties.
Jeanne was passionate and Virginie tearful in their sorrow and
indignation. Over and over again Jeanne implored Harry to try to
save the king. There were still many Royalists, and indeed the bulk
of the people were shocked and alienated by the violence of the
Convention; and Jeanne urged that Harry might, from his connection
with Robespierre, obtain some pass or document which would enable
the king to escape. But Harry refused to make any attempt whatever
on his behalf.

"In the first place, Jeanne, it would be absolutely impossible for
the king, watched as he is, to escape; and no pass or permit that
Robespierre could give would be of the smallest utility. You must
remember, that although all apparently unite against the king, there
is a never-ending struggle going on in  the Convention between the
various parties and the various leaders. Robespierre is but one
of them, although, perhaps, the most prominent; but could I wring
a pass from him even if only to see the king, that pass would not
be respected.

"In the next place, Jeanne, I have nothing to do with these struggles
in France. I am staying here to do what little I can to watch over
you and Virginie, for the sake of your dear parents and because I
love you both; and I have also, if possible, to rescue Marie from
the hands of these murderers. The responsibility is heavy enough;
and could I, by merely using Robespierre's name, rescue the king
and queen and their children and pass them across the frontier, I
would not do it if the act in the slightest degree interfered with
my freedom of action towards you and Marie."

"But Virginie and I would die for the king!" Jeanne said passionately.

"Happily, Jeanne," Harry replied coolly, "your dying would in no
respect benefit him; and as your life is in my eyes of a thousand
times more consequence than that of the king, and as your chances
of safety to some extent depend upon mine, I do not mean to risk
one of those chances for the sake of his majesty. Besides, to tell
you the truth, I have a good deal of liking for my own life, and
have a marked objection to losing my head. You see I have people
at home who are fond of me, and who want to see me back again with
that head on my shoulders."

"I know, Harry; I know," Jeanne said with her eyes full of tears.
"Do not think that I am ungrateful because I talk so. I am always
thinking how wrong it is that you should be staying here risking
your life for us instead of going home to those who love you. I
think sometimes Virginie and I ought to give ourselves up, and then
you could go home." And Jeanne burst into tears.

"My dear Jeanne," Harry said soothingly, "do not worry yourself
about me. It would have been just as dangerous at the time your
father was taken prisoner for me to have tried to escape from
the country as it was to stay here--in fact I should say that it
was a good deal more dangerous; and at present, as Robespierre's
secretary, I am in no danger at all. It is a little disagreeable
certainly serving a man whom one regards in some respects as  being
a sort of wild beast; but at the same time, in his own house, I
am bound to say, he is a very decent kind of man and not at all a
bad fellow to get on with.

"As to what I have done for you, so far as I see I have done nothing
beyond bringing you here in the first place, and coming to have a
pleasant chat with you every evening. Nor, with the best will in
the world, have I been able to be of the slightest assistance to
Marie. As we say at home, my intentions are good; but so far the
intentions have borne no useful fruit whatever. Come, Jeanne, dry
your eyes, for it is not often that I have seen you cry. We have
thrown in our lot together, and we shall swim or sink in company.

"You keep up my spirits and I keep up yours. Don't let there be any
talk about gratitude. There will be time enough for that if I ever
get you safely to England. Then, perhaps, I may send in my bill
and ask for payment."

Harry spoke lightly, and Jeanne with a great effort recovered her
composure; and after that, although the trial and danger of the
king were nightly discussed and lamented, she never said a word as
to any possibility of the catastrophe being averted.

One day towards the end of February Harry felt a thrill run through
him as, on glancing over the list of persons to be tried on the
following day, he saw the name of Marie, daughter of the ci-devant
Marquis de St. Caux. Although his knowledge of Robespierre's character
gave him little ground for hope, he determined upon making a direct
appeal.

"I see, citizen," he said--for such was the mode of address universal
at that time--"that among the list of persons to be tried is the
name of Marie de St. Caux."

"Say Marie Caux," Robespierre said reprovingly. "You know de and St.
are both forbidden prefixes. Yes; what would you say about her?"

"I told you, citizen, upon the first night when I came here, that
I had been in the service of the father of this female citizen.
Although I know now that he was one of those who lived upon the
blood of the people, I am bound to say that he always treated his
dependants kindly.  His daughter also showed me many marks of kindness,
and this I would now fain return. Citizen, I did you some service
on the night when we first met; and I ask you now, as a full
quittance for that aid, that you will grant me the freedom of  this
young woman. Whatever were the crimes of her father, she cannot have
shared in them. She is young, and cannot do harm to any;  therefore
I implore you to give me her life."

"I am surprised at your request," Robespierre said calmly. "This
woman belongs to a race who have for centuries oppressed France,
and it is better that they should perish altogether. If she can
convince the tribunal that she is innocent of all crime, undoubtedly
she will be spared; but I cannot, only on account of the obligation
I am under to you, interfere on her behalf; such an act would be
treason to the people, and I hope you know me well enough by this
time to be aware that nothing whatever would induce me to allow my
private inclinations to interfere with the course of justice. Ask
of me all I have, it is little enough, but it is yours; but this
thing I cannot grant you."

For a moment Harry was on the point of bursting out indignantly,
but he checked himself and without a word went on with his writing,
although tears of disappointment for a time almost blinded him; but
he felt it would be hopeless to urge the point further, and that
did he do so he might forfeit the opportunity he now had of learning
what was going on.

Another month passed before the name appeared on the fatal list. In
the meantime Harry had corresponded regularly with Marie by means
of the warder, and had even once seen her and exchanged a few
words with her, having been sent by Robespierre with a letter to
the governor of the prison.

Marie was greatly changed: her colour had faded away, the former
somewhat haughty air and carriage had disappeared, and there was
an expression of patient resignation on her face. Harry had only
the opportunity to whisper to her "Hope always, all is not lost
yet." He had spent hours each day in his lodging imitating the
signature of Robespierre, and he had made up his mind that, should
all other efforts fail, he would boldly present himself at the prison
with an order for Marie's release, with Robespierre's signature
forged at the bottom.

He thought he could write it now plainly enough for it to pass; his
fear was that the prison authorities would not act upon it, unless
presented by a well-known official personage, without sending to
Robespierre to have it verified.

Still but little change had taken place in Victor de Gisons' condition.
He remained in a state almost of lethargy, with an expression of
dull hopelessness on his face; sometimes he passed his hand wearily
across his forehead as if he were trying to recollect something he
had lost; he was still too weak to stand, but Jacques and his wife
would dress him and place him on a couch which Harry purchased for
his use. The worthy couple ran no risk now, for the sharpest spy
would fail to recognize in the bowed-down invalid with vacant face,
the once brilliant Victor de Gisons.

Harry had many talks with Jeanne concerning him. "What should we
do, Harry," the girl said over and over again, "if we could get
Marie away and all get safe together to England, which I begin to
despair now of our ever doing, but if we should do it what should
we say to Marie? She thinks Victor is safe there. Only the other
day, as you know, she sent us out a letter to him. What would she
say when she learned on her arrival in England that Victor has all
this time been lying broken down and in suffering in Paris?"

To this question Harry, for a long time, could give no answer.  At
last he said, "I have been thinking it over, Jeanne, and I feel
that we have no right to take Marie away without her knowing the
truth about Victor. His misfortunes have come upon him because he
would stop in Paris to watch over her. I feel now that she has the
right, if she chooses, of stopping in Paris to look after him."

"Oh, Harry, you would never think of our going away and leaving
her!"

"I don't know, Jeanne, if it would not be best. She could stay
in the disguise of a peasant girl with Jacques and his wife; they
would give out that she was Victor's sister who had come to nurse
him. I have great hopes that her voice and presence would do what
we have to do, namely, awaken him from his  sad state of lethargy.
They could stay there for months until these evil days are over.
Jacques' workmen friends are accustomed now to Victor being with
him, and there is no chance of any suspicion arising that he is
not what he seems to be, a workman whom Jacques picked up injured
and insensible on that terrible night. It would seem natural that
his sister or his fiance--Marie could pass for whichever she
chose--should come and help take care of him."

"Then if she can stop in Paris with Victor, of course we can stop
with Louise?"

"I am afraid not," Harry said. "Every day the search for suspects
becomes stricter; every day people are being seized and called upon
to produce the papers proving their identity; and I fear, Jeanne,
there is no hope of permanent safety for you save in flight."

It was just a month from the mock trial, at which Marie had been
found guilty and sentenced to death, that Harry received a double
shock. Among the letters of denunciation was the following: "Citizen,
I know that you watch over the state. I would have you know that
for more than seven months two girls have been dwelling with one
Louise Moulin of 15 Rue Michel; there were three of them, but the
eldest has disappeared. This, in itself, is mysterious; the old
woman herself was a servant in the family of the ci-devant Marquis
de St.  Caux. She gives out that the girls are relatives of hers,
but it is believed in the neighbourhood that they are aristocrats
in disguise. They receive many visits from a young man of whom no
one knows anything."

Harry felt the colour leave his cheeks, and his hand shook as
he hastily abstracted the note, and he could scarcely master the
meaning of the next few letters he opened.

This was a sudden blow for which he was unprepared. He could not
even think what was best to be done. However, saying to himself
that he had at any rate a few days before him, he resolutely put the
matter aside, to be thought over when he was alone, and proceeded
with his work. After a time he came to the list of those marked
out for execution on the following day, and saw with a fresh pang
the name of Marie de St. Caux.

So the crisis had arrived. That night or never Marie must be rescued,
and his plan of forging Robespierre's signature must be put into
effect that day. He opened the next few papers mechanically, but
steadied himself upon Robespierre asking him a question. For a time
he worked on; but his brain was swimming, and he was on the point
of saying that he felt strangely unwell, and must ask to be excused
his work for that day, when he heard a ring at the bell, and a
moment later Lebat entered the room.

"I have just come from the tribunal, citizen," he said, "and have
seen the list for to-morrow. I have come to you, as I know you are
just, and abhor the shedding of innocent blood. There is among the
number a young girl, who is wholly innocent. I know her well, for
she comes from my province, and her father's chateau was within a
few miles of Dijon. Although her father was a furious aristocrat,
her heart was always with the people. She was good to the poor, and
was beloved by all the tenants on the estate. It is not just that
she should die for the sins of her parents. Moreover, henceforth,
if pardoned, she will be no longer an aristocrat. I respond for
her; for she has promised to marry me, the delegate of Burgundy
to the Commune.  The young woman is the daughter of the man called
the Marquis de St. Caux, who met his deserved fate on the 2d of
September."
