"Susan, what has happened?" cried Mrs. Blythe in alarm. "Did you fall?
Are you hurt?"

Susan picked herself up.

"No," she said grimly, "I am not hurt, though I am jarred all over. Do
not be alarmed. As for what has happened--I tried to kick that darned
cat with both feet, that is what happened."

Everybody shrieked with laughter. The doctor was quite helpless.

"Oh, Susan, Susan," he gasped. "That I should live to hear you swear."

"I am sorry," said Susan in real distress, "that I used such an
expression before two young girls. But I said that beast was darned,
and darned it is. It belongs to Old Nick."

"Do you expect it will vanish some of these days with a bang and the
odour of brimstone, Susan?"

"It will go to its own place in due time and that you may tie to," said
Susan dourly, shaking out her raddled bones and going to her oven. "I
suppose my plunking down like that has shaken my cake so that it will
be as heavy as lead."

But the cake was not heavy. It was all a bride's cake should be, and
Susan iced it beautifully. Next day she and Rilla worked all the
forenoon, making delicacies for the wedding-feast, and as soon as
Miranda phoned up that her father was safely off everything was packed
in a big hamper and taken down to the Pryor house. Joe soon arrived in
his uniform and a state of violent excitement, accompanied by his best
man, Sergeant Malcolm Crawford. There were quite a few guests, for all
the Manse and Ingleside folk were there, and a dozen or so of Joe's
relatives, including his mother, "Mrs. Dead Angus Milgrave," so called,
cheerfully, to distinguish her from another lady whose Angus was
living. Mrs. Dead Angus wore a rather disapproving expression, not
caring over-much for this alliance with the house of
Whiskers-on-the-moon.

So Miranda Pryor was married to Private Joseph Milgrave on his last
leave. It should have been a romantic wedding but it was not. There
were too many factors working against romance, as even Rilla had to
admit. In the first place, Miranda, in spite of her dress and veil, was
such a flat-faced, commonplace, uninteresting little bride. In the
second place, Joe cried bitterly all through the ceremony, and this
vexed Miranda unreasonably. Long afterwards she told Rilla, "I just
felt like saying to him then and there, 'If you feel so bad over having
to marry me you don't have to.' But it was just because he was thinking
all the time of how soon he would have to leave me."

In the third place, Jims, who was usually so well-behaved in public,
took a fit of shyness and contrariness combined and began to cry at the
top of his voice for "Willa." Nobody wanted to take him out, because
everybody wanted to see the marriage, so Rilla who was a bridesmaid,
had to take him and hold him during the ceremony.

In the fourth place, Sir Wilfrid Laurier took a fit.

Sir Wilfrid was entrenched in a corner of the room behind Miranda's
piano. During his seizure he made the weirdest, most unearthly noises.
He would begin with a series of choking, spasmodic sounds, continuing
into a gruesome gurgle, and ending up with a strangled howl. Nobody
could hear a word Mr. Meredith was saying, except now and then, when
Sir Wilfrid stopped for breath. Nobody looked at the bride except
Susan, who never dragged her fascinated eyes from Miranda's face--all
the others were gazing at the dog. Miranda had been trembling with
nervousness but as soon as Sir Wilfrid began his performance she forgot
it. All that she could think of was that her dear dog was dying and she
could not go to him. She never remembered a word of the ceremony.

Rilla, who in spite of Jims, had been trying her best to look rapt and
romantic, as beseemed a war bridesmaid, gave up the hopeless attempt,
and devoted her energies to choking down untimely merriment. She dared
not look at anybody in the room, especially Mrs. Dead Angus, for fear
all her suppressed mirth should suddenly explode in a most
un-young-ladylike yell of laughter.

But married they were, and then they had a wedding-supper in the
dining-room which was so lavish and bountiful that you would have
thought it was the product of a month's labour. Everybody had brought
something. Mrs. Dead Angus had brought a large apple-pie, which she
placed on a chair in the dining-room and then absently sat down on it.
Neither her temper nor her black silk wedding garment was improved
thereby, but the pie was never missed at the gay bridal feast. Mrs.
Dead Angus eventually took it home with her again.
Whiskers-on-the-moon's pacifist pig should not get it, anyhow.

That evening Mr. and Mrs. Joe, accompanied by the recovered Sir
Wilfrid, departed for the Four Winds Lighthouse, which was kept by
Joe's uncle and in which they meant to spend their brief honeymoon. Una
Meredith and Rilla and Susan washed the dishes, tidied up, left a cold
supper and Miranda's pitiful little note on the table for Mr. Pryor,
and walked home, while the mystic veil of dreamy, haunted winter
twilight wrapped itself over the Glen.

"I would really not have minded being a war-bride myself," remarked
Susan sentimentally.

But Rilla felt rather flat--perhaps as a reaction to all the excitement
and rush of the past thirty-six hours. She was disappointed
somehow--the whole affair had been so ludicrous, and Miranda and Joe so
lachrymose and commonplace.

"If Miranda hadn't given that wretched dog such an enormous dinner he
wouldn't have had that fit," she said crossly. "I warned her--but she
said she couldn't starve the poor dog--he would soon be all she had
left, etc. I could have shaken her."

"The best man was more excited than Joe was," said Susan. "He wished
Miranda many happy returns of the day. She did not look very happy, but
perhaps you could not expect that under the circumstances."

"Anyhow," thought Rilla, "I can write a perfectly killing account of it
all to the boys. How Jem will howl over Sir Wilfrid's part in it!"

But if Rilla was rather disappointed in the war wedding she found
nothing lacking on Friday morning when Miranda said good-bye to her
bridegroom at the Glen station. The dawn was white as a pearl, clear as
a diamond. Behind the station the balsamy copse of young firs was
frost-misted. The cold moon of dawn hung over the westering snow fields
but the golden fleeces of sunrise shone above the maples up at
Ingleside. Joe took his pale little bride in his arms and she lifted
her face to his. Rilla choked suddenly. It did not matter that Miranda
was insignificant and commonplace and flat-featured. It did not matter
that she was the daughter of Whiskers-on-the-moon. All that mattered
was that rapt, sacrificial look in her eyes--that ever-burning, sacred
fire of devotion and loyalty and fine courage that she was mutely
promising Joe she and thousands of other women would keep alive at home
while their men held the Western front. Rilla walked away, realising
that she must not spy on such a moment. She went down to the end of the
platform where Sir Wilfrid and Dog Monday were sitting, looking at each
other.

Sir Wilfrid remarked condescendingly: "Why do you haunt this old shed
when you might lie on the hearthrug at Ingleside and live on the fat of
the land? Is it a pose? Or a fixed idea?"

Whereat Dog Monday, laconically: "I have a tryst to keep."

When the train had gone Rilla rejoined the little trembling Miranda.
"Well, he's gone," said Miranda, "and he may never come back--but I'm
his wife, and I'm going to be worthy of him. I'm going home."

"Don't you think you had better come with me now?" asked Rilla
doubtfully. Nobody knew yet how Mr. Pryor had taken the matter.

"No. If Joe can face the Huns I guess I can face father," said Miranda
daringly. "A soldier's wife can't be a coward. Come on, Wilfy. I'll go
straight home and meet the worst."

There was nothing very dreadful to face, however. Perhaps Mr. Pryor had
reflected that housekeepers were hard to get and that there were many
Milgrave homes open to Miranda--also, that there was such a thing as a
separation allowance. At all events, though he told her grumpily that
she had made a nice fool of herself, and would live to regret it, he
said nothing worse, and Mrs. Joe put on her apron and went to work as
usual, while Sir Wilfrid Laurier, who had a poor opinion of lighthouses
for winter residences, went to sleep in his pet nook behind the
woodbox, a thankful dog that he was done with war-weddings.



CHAPTER XIX

"THEY SHALL NOT PASS"

One cold grey morning in February Gertrude Oliver wakened with a
shiver, slipped into Rilla's room, and crept in beside her.

"Rilla--I'm frightened--frightened as a baby--I've had another of my
strange dreams. Something terrible is before us--I know."

"What was it?" asked Rilla.

"I was standing again on the veranda steps--just as I stood in that
dream on the night before the lighthouse dance, and in the sky a huge
black, menacing thunder cloud rolled up from the east. I could see its
shadow racing before it and when it enveloped me I shivered with icy
cold. Then the storm broke--and it was a dreadful storm--blinding flash
after flash and deafening peal after peal, driving torrents of rain. I
turned in panic and tried to run for shelter, and as I did so a man--a
soldier in the uniform of a French army officer--dashed up the steps
and stood beside me on the threshold of the door. His clothes were
soaked with blood from a wound in his breast, he seemed spent and
exhausted; but his white face was set and his eyes blazed in his hollow
face. 'They shall not pass,' he said, in low, passionate tones which I
heard distinctly amid all the turmoil of the storm. Then I awakened.
Rilla, I'm frightened--the spring will not bring the Big Push we've all
been hoping for--instead it is going to bring some dreadful blow to
France. I am sure of it. The Germans will try to smash through
somewhere."

"But he told you that they would not pass," said Rilla, seriously. She
never laughed at Gertrude's dreams as the doctor did.

"I do not know if that was prophecy or desperation, Rilla, the horror
of that dream holds me yet in an icy grip. We shall need all our
courage before long."

Dr. Blythe did laugh at the breakfast table--but he never laughed at
Miss Oliver's dreams again; for that day brought news of the opening of
the Verdun offensive, and thereafter through all the beautiful weeks of
spring the Ingleside family, one and all, lived in a trance of dread.
There were days when they waited in despair for the end as foot by foot
the Germans crept nearer and nearer to the grim barrier of desperate
France.

Susan's deeds were in her spotless kitchen at Ingleside, but her
thoughts were on the hills around Verdun. "Mrs. Dr. dear," she would
stick her head in at Mrs. Blythe's door the last thing at night to
remark, "I do hope the French have hung onto the Crow's Wood today,"
and she woke at dawn to wonder if Dead Man's Hill--surely named by some
prophet--was still held by the "poyloos." Susan could have drawn a map
of the country around Verdun that would have satisfied a chief of staff.

"If the Germans capture Verdun the spirit of France will be broken,"
Miss Oliver said bitterly.

"But they will not capture it," staunchly said Susan, who could not eat
her dinner that day for fear lest they do that very thing. "In the
first place, you dreamed they would not--you dreamed the very thing the
French are saying before they ever said it--'they shall not pass.' I
declare to you, Miss Oliver, dear, when I read that in the paper, and
remembered your dream, I went cold all over with awe. It seemed to me
like Biblical times when people dreamed things like that quite
frequently.

"I know--I know," said Gertrude, walking restlessly about. "I cling to
a persistent faith in my dream, too--but every time bad news comes it
fails me. Then I tell myself 'mere coincidence'--'subconscious memory'
and so forth."

"I do not see how any memory could remember a thing before it was ever
said at all," persisted Susan, "though of course I am not educated like
you and the doctor. I would rather not be, if it makes anything as
simple as that so hard to believe. But in any case we need not worry
over Verdun, even if the Huns get it. Joffre says it has no military
significance."

"That old sop of comfort has been served up too often already when
reverses came," retorted Gertrude. "It has lost its power to charm."

"Was there ever a battle like this in the world before?" said Mr.
Meredith, one evening in mid-April.

"It's such a titanic thing we can't grasp it," said the doctor. "What
were the scraps of a few Homeric handfuls compared to this? The whole
Trojan war might be fought around a Verdun fort and a newspaper
correspondent would give it no more than a sentence. I am not in the
confidence of the occult powers"--the doctor threw Gertrude a
twinkle--"but I have a hunch that the fate of the whole war hangs on
the issue of Verdun. As Susan and Joffre say, it has no real military
significance; but it has the tremendous significance of an Idea. If
Germany wins there she will win the war. If she loses, the tide will
set against her."

"Lose she will," said Mr. Meredith: emphatically. "The Idea cannot be
conquered. France is certainly very wonderful. It seems to me that in
her I see the white form of civilization making a determined stand
against the black powers of barbarism. I think our whole world realizes
this and that is why we all await the issue so breathlessly. It isn't
merely the question of a few forts changing hands or a few miles of
blood-soaked ground lost and won."

"I wonder," said Gertrude dreamily, "if some great blessing, great
enough for the price, will be the meed of all our pain? Is the agony in
which the world is shuddering the birth-pang of some wondrous new era?
Or is it merely a futile

  struggle of ants
  In the gleam of a million million of suns?

We think very lightly, Mr. Meredith, of a calamity which destroys an
ant-hill and half its inhabitants. Does the Power that runs the
universe think us of more importance than we think ants?"

"You forget," said Mr. Meredith, with a flash of his dark eyes, "that
an infinite Power must be infinitely little as well as infinitely
great. We are neither, therefore there are things too little as well as
too great for us to apprehend. To the infinitely little an ant is of as
much importance as a mastodon. We are witnessing the birth-pangs of a
new era--but it will be born a feeble, wailing life like everything
else. I am not one of those who expect a new heaven and a new earth as
the immediate result of this war. That is not the way God works. But
work He does, Miss Oliver, and in the end His purpose will be
fulfilled."

"Sound and orthodox--sound and orthodox," muttered Susan approvingly in
the kitchen. Susan liked to see Miss Oliver sat upon by the minister
now and then. Susan was very fond of her but she thought Miss Oliver
liked saying heretical things to ministers far too well, and deserved
an occasional reminder that these matters were quite beyond her
province.

In May Walter wrote home that he had been awarded a D.C. Medal. He did
not say what for, but the other boys took care that the Glen should
know the brave thing Walter had done. "In any war but this," wrote
Jerry Meredith, "it would have meant a V.C. But they can't make V.C.'s
as common as the brave things done every day here."

"He should have had the V.C.," said Susan, and was very indignant over
it. She was not quite sure who was to blame for his not getting it, but
if it were General Haig she began for the first time to entertain
serious doubts as to his fitness for being Commander-in-Chief.

Rilla was beside herself with delight. It was her dear Walter who had
done this thing--Walter, to whom someone had sent a white feather at
Redmond--it was Walter who had dashed back from the safety of the
trench to drag in a wounded comrade who had fallen on No-man's-land.
Oh, she could see his white beautiful face and wonderful eyes as he did
it! What a thing to be the sister of such a hero! And he hadn't thought
it worth while writing about. His letter was full of other
things--little intimate things that they two had known and loved
together in the dear old cloudless days of a century ago.

"I've been thinking of the daffodils in the garden at Ingleside," he
wrote. "By the time you get this they will be out, blowing there under
that lovely rosy sky. Are they really as bright and golden as ever,
Rilla? It seems to me that they must be dyed red with blood--like our
poppies here. And every whisper of spring will be falling as a violet
in Rainbow Valley.

"There is a young moon tonight--a slender, silver, lovely thing hanging
over these pits of torment. Will you see it tonight over the maple
grove?

"I'm enclosing a little scrap of verse, Rilla. I wrote it one evening
in my trench dug-out by the light of a bit of candle--or rather it came
to me there--I didn't feel as if I were writing it--something seemed to
use me as an instrument. I've had that feeling once or twice before,
but very rarely and never so strongly as this time. That was why I sent
it over to the London Spectator. It printed it and the copy came today.
I hope you'll like it. It's the only poem I've written since I came
overseas."

The poem was a short, poignant little thing. In a month it had carried
Walter's name to every corner of the globe. Everywhere it was
copied--in metropolitan dailies and little village weeklies--in
profound reviews and "agony columns," in Red Cross appeals and
Government recruiting propaganda. Mothers and sisters wept over it,
young lads thrilled to it, the whole great heart of humanity caught it
up as an epitome of all the pain and hope and pity and purpose of the
mighty conflict, crystallized in three brief immortal verses. A
Canadian lad in the Flanders trenches had written the one great poem of
the war. "The Piper," by Pte. Walter Blythe, was a classic from its
first printing.

Rilla copied it in her diary at the beginning of an entry in which she
poured out the story of the hard week that had just passed.

"It has been such a dreadful week," she wrote, "and even though it is
over and we know that it was all a mistake that does not seem to do
away with the bruises left by it. And yet it has in some ways been a
very wonderful week and I have had some glimpses of things I never
realized before--of how fine and brave people can be even in the midst
of horrible suffering. I am sure I could never be as splendid as Miss
Oliver was.

"Just a week ago today she had a letter from Mr. Grant's mother in
Charlottetown. And it told her that a cable had just come saying that
Major Robert Grant had been killed in action a few days before.

"Oh, poor Gertrude! At first she was crushed. Then after just a day she
pulled herself together and went back to her school. She did not cry--I
never saw her shed a tear--but oh, her face and her eyes!

"'I must go on with my work,' she said. 'That is my duty just now.'

"I could never have risen to such a height.

"She never spoke bitterly except once, when Susan said something about
spring being here at last, and Gertrude said,

"'Can the spring really come this year?'

"Then she laughed--such a dreadful little laugh, just as one might
