

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE TURNS UP.


In his new position Rodney could easily hear the conversation which took
place between the Western man and his old railroad acquaintance.

"I am quite a man of leisure," said Wheeler, "and it will give me great
pleasure to go about with you and show you our city."

"You are very obliging."

"Oh, don't mention it. I shall really be glad to have my time occupied.
You see I am a man of means--my father left me a fortune--and so I am
not engaged in any business."

"You are in luck. I was brought up on a farm in Vermont, and had to
borrow money to take me to Montana four years ago."

"I hope you prospered in your new home?"

"I did. I picked up twenty five thousand dollars at the mines, and
doubled it by investment in lots in Helena."

"Very neat, indeed. I inherited a fortune from my father--a hundred and
twenty five thousand dollars--but I never made a cent myself. I don't
know whether I am smart enough."

"Come out to Montana and I'll put you in a way of making some money."

"Really, now, that suggestion strikes me favorably. I believe I will
follow your advice. When shall you return to your Western home?"

"In about a fortnight I think."

"You must go to the theater tonight. There is a good play on at the
Madison Square."

"I don't mind. When can I get ticket?"

"I'll go and secure some. It is only a few blocks away."

"Do so. How much are the tickets?"

"A dollar and a half or two dollars each."

"Here are five dollars, if it won't trouble you too much."

"My dear friend, I meant to pay for the tickets. However, I will pay
next time. If you will remain here I will be back in twenty minutes."

Louis Wheeler left the hotel with the five dollars tucked away in his
vest pocket.

He had no sooner disappeared than Rodney went forward and occupied his
seat.

"Excuse me, sir," he said to the miner, "but do you know much of the man
who has just left you?"

"I only met him here. He seems a good natured fellow. What of him?"

"He said he was a man of independent means."

"Isn't he?"

"He is a thief and an adventurer."

The miner was instantly on the alert.

"How do you know this?" he asked.

"Because he stole a box of jewelry from me in the cars some months ago."

"Did you get it again?"

"Yes; he left the train, but I followed him up and reclaimed the
jewelry."

"Was it of much value?"

"They were family jewels, and were worth over a thousand dollars."

"Do you think he wants to bunco me?"

"I have no doubt of it."

"I have given him money to buy theater tickets. Do you think he will
come back?"

"Yes. He wouldn't be satisfied with that small sum."

"Tell me about your adventure with him."

"I will do it later. The theater is so near that he might come back and
surprise us together. I think he would recognize me."

"Do you advise me to go to the theater?"

"Yes, but be on your guard."

"Where can I see you again?"

"Are you staying at this hotel?"

"Yes. Here is my card."

Rodney read this name on the card:


JEFFERSON PETTRIGREW.


"I wish you were going to the theater with us."

"It wouldn't do. Mr. Wheeler would remember me."

"Then come round and breakfast with me tomorrow--at eight o'clock,
sharp."

"I will, sir. Now I will take a back seat, and leave you to receive your
friend."

"Don't call him my friend. He seems to be a mean scoundrel."

"Don't let him suspect anything from your manner."

"I won't. I want to see him expose his plans." Five minutes afterwards
Louis Wheeler entered the hotel.

"I've got the tickets," he said, "but I had to buy them of a speculator,
and they cost me more than I expected."

"How much?"

"Two and a half apiece. So there is no change coming back to you."

"Never mind! As long as you had enough money to pay for them it is all
right."

As a matter of fact Wheeler bought the tickets at the box office at one
dollar and fifty cent each, which left him a profit of two dollars.
When he saw how easily the Western man took it he regretted not having
represented that the tickets cost three dollars each.

However, he decided that there would be other ways of plundering his new
acquaintance. He took his seat again next to the miner.

"It is not very late," he said. "Would you like a run out to Central
Park or to Grant's Tomb?"

"Not today. I feel rather tired. By the way, you did not mention your
name."

"I haven't a card with me, but my name is Louis Wheeler."

"Where do you live, Mr. Wheeler?"

"I am staying with an aunt on Fifth Avenue, but I think of taking board
at the Windsor Hotel. It is a very high toned house, and quite a number
of my friends board there."

"Is it an expensive hotel?"

"Oh, yes, but my income is large and----"

"I understand. Now, Mr. Wheeler, I must excuse myself, as I feel tired.
Come at half past seven and we can start for the theater together."

"Very well."

Wheeler rose reluctantly, for he had intended to secure a dinner from
his new acquaintance, but he was wise enough to take the hint.

After he left the room Rodney again joined Mr. Pettigrew.

"He didn't give me back any change," said the Western man. "He said he
bought the tickets of a speculator at two dollars and a half each."

"Then he made two dollars out of you."

"I suppose that is the beginning. Well, that doesn't worry me. But I
should like to know how he expects to get more money out of me. I don't
understand the ways of this gentry."

"Nor I very well. If you are on your guard I think you won't be in any
danger."

"I will remember what you say. You seem young to act as adviser to a man
like me. Are you in business?"

"At present I am out of work, but I have money enough to last me three
months."

"Are you, like my new acquaintance, possessed of independent means?"

"Not now, but I was six months ago."

"How did you lose your money?"

"I did not lose it. My guardian lost it for me."

"What is your name?"

"Rodney Ropes."

"You've had some pretty bad luck. Come up to my room and tell me about
it."

"I shall be glad to do so, sir."

Mr. Pettigrew called for his key and led the way up to a plain room on
the third floor.

"Come in," he said. "The room is small, but I guess it will hold us
both. Now go ahead with your story."

In a short time Rodney had told his story in full to his new
acquaintance, encouraged to do so by his sympathetic manner. Mr.
Pettigrew was quite indignant, when told of Jasper's mean and
treacherous conduct.

"That boy Jasper is a snake in the grass," he said. "I'd like to give
him a good thrashing."

"There isn't any love lost between us, Mr. Pettigrew, but I think it
will turn out right in the end. Still I find it hard to get a place in
New York with him circulating stories about me."

"Then why do you stay in New York?"

"I have thought it might be better to go to Philadelphia or Boston."

"I can tell you of a better place than either."

"What is that?"

"Montana."

"Do you really think it would be wise for me to go there?"

"Think? I haven't a doubt about it."

"I have money enough to get there, but not much more. I should soon have
to find work, or I might get stranded."

"Come back with me, and I'll see you through. I'll make a bargain with
you. Go round with me here, and I'll pay your fare out to Montana."

"If you are really in earnest I will do so, and thank you for the
offer."

"Jefferson Pettigrew means what he says. I'll see you through, Rodney."

"But I may be interfering with your other friend, Louis Wheeler."

"I shall soon be through with him. You needn't worry yourself about
that."

Mr. Pettigrew insisted upon Rodney's taking supper with him. Fifteen
minutes after Rodney left him Mr. Wheeler made his appearance.



CHAPTER XXIII.


MR. WHEELER HAS A SET BACK.


Louis Wheeler had not seen Rodney in the hotel office, and probably
would not have recognized him if he had, as Rodney was quite differently
dressed from the time of their first meeting. He had no reason to
suppose, therefore, that Mr. Pettigrew had been enlightened as to his
real character.

It was therefore with his usual confidence that he accosted his
acquaintance from Montana after supper.

"It is time to go to the theater, Mr. Pettigrew," he said.

Jefferson Pettigrew scanned his new acquaintance with interest. He
had never before met a man of his type and he looked upon him as a
curiosity.

He was shrewd, however, and did not propose to let Wheeler know that he
understood his character. He resolved for the present to play the part
of the bluff and unsuspecting country visitor.

"You are very kind, Mr. Wheeler," he said, "to take so much trouble for
a stranger."

"My dear sir," said Wheeler effusively, "I wouldn't do it for many
persons, but I have taken a fancy to you."

"You don't mean so?" said Pettigrew, appearing pleased?

"Yes, I do, on my honor."

"But I don't see why you should. You are a polished city gentleman and I
am an ignorant miner from Montana."

Louis Wheeler looked complacent when he was referred to as a polished
city gentleman.

"You do yourself injustice, my dear Pettigrew," he said in a patronizing
manner. "You do indeed. You may not be polished, but you are certainly
smart, as you have shown by accumulating a fortune."

"But I am not as rich as you."

"Perhaps not, but if I should lose my money, I could not make another
fortune, while I am sure you could. Don't you think it would be a good
plan for us to start a business together in New York?"

"Would you really be willing to go into business with me?"

Jefferson Pettigrew asked this question with so much apparent sincerity
that Wheeler was completely deceived.

"I've got him dead!" he soliloquized complacently.

He hooked his arm affectionately in the Montana miner's and said,
"My dear friend, I have never met a man with whom I would rather
