They were running downstairs as mamma spoke, and Effie called out
breathlessly,--

"It won't be a surprise; for I know you are going to ask some poor
children here, and have a tree or something. It won't be like my dream;
for they had ever so many trees, and more children than we can find
anywhere."

"There will be no tree, no party, no dinner, in this house at all, and
no presents for you. Won't that be a surprise?" And mamma laughed at
Effie's bewildered face.

"Do it. I shall like it, I think; and I won't ask any questions, so it
will all burst upon me when the time comes," she said; and she ate
her breakfast thoughtfully, for this really would be a new sort of
Christmas.

All that morning Effie trotted after Nursey in and out of shops,
buying dozens of barking dogs, woolly lambs, and squeaking birds; tiny
tea-sets, gay picture-books, mittens and hoods, dolls and candy. Parcel
after parcel was sent home; but when Effie returned she saw no trace of
them, though she peeped everywhere. Nursey chuckled, but wouldn't give
a hint, and went out again in the afternoon with a long list of more
things to buy; while Effie wandered forlornly about the house, missing
the usual merry stir that went before the Christmas dinner and the
evening fun.

As for mamma, she was quite invisible all day, and came in at night so
tired that she could only lie on the sofa to rest, smiling as if some
very pleasant thought made her happy in spite of weariness.

"Is the surprise going on all right?" asked Effie, anxiously; for it
seemed an immense time to wait till another evening came.

"Beautifully! better than I expected; for several of my good friends are
helping, or I couldn't have done it as I wish. I know you will like it,
dear, and long remember this new way of making Christmas merry."

Mamma gave her a very tender kiss, and Effie went to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day was a very strange one; for when she woke there was no
stocking to examine, no pile of gifts under her napkin, no one said
"Merry Christmas!" to her, and the dinner was just as usual to her.
Mamma vanished again, and Nursey kept wiping her eyes and saying: "The
dear things! It's the prettiest idea I ever heard of. No one but your
blessed ma could have done it."

"Do stop, Nursey, or I shall go crazy because I don't know the secret!"
cried Effie, more than once; and she kept her eye on the clock, for at
seven in the evening the surprise was to come off.

The longed-for hour arrived at last, and the child was too excited
to ask questions when Nurse put on her cloak and hood, led her to the
carriage, and they drove away, leaving their house the one dark and
silent one in the row.

"I feel like the girls in the fairy tales who are led off to strange
places and see fine things," said Effie, in a whisper, as they jingled
through the gay streets.

"Ah, my deary, it _is_ like a fairy tale, I do assure you, and you
_will_ see finer things than most children will tonight. Steady, now,
and do just as I tell you, and don't say one word whatever you see,"
answered Nursey, quite quivering with excitement as she patted a large
box in her lap, and nodded and laughed with twinkling eyes.

They drove into a dark yard, and Effie was led through a back door to a
little room, where Nurse coolly proceeded to take off not only her cloak
and hood, but her dress and shoes also. Effie stared and bit her lips,
but kept still until out of the box came a little white fur coat and
boots, a wreath of holly leaves and berries, and a candle with a frill
of gold paper round it. A long "Oh!" escaped her then; and when she
was dressed and saw herself in the glass, she started back, exclaiming,
"Why, Nursey, I look like the spirit in my dream!"

"So you do; and that's the part you are to play, my pretty! Now whist,
while I blind your eyes and put you in your place."

"Shall I be afraid?" whispered Effie, full of wonder; for as they went
out she heard the sound of many voices, the tramp of many feet, and,
in spite of the bandage, was sure a great light shone upon her when she
stopped.

"You needn't be; I shall stand close by, and your ma will be there."

After the handkerchief was tied about her eyes, Nurse led Effie up some
steps, and placed her on a high platform, where something like leaves
touched her head, and the soft snap of lamps seemed to fill the air.

Music began as soon as Nurse clapped her hands, the voices outside
sounded nearer, and the tramp was evidently coming up the stairs.

"Now, my precious, look and see how you and your dear ma have made a
merry Christmas for them that needed it!"

Off went the bandage; and for a minute Effie really did think she was
asleep again, for she actually stood in "a grove of Christmas trees,"
all gay and shining as in her vision. Twelve on a side, in two rows
down the room, stood the little pines, each on its low table; and behind
Effie a taller one rose to the roof, hung with wreaths of popcorn,
apples, oranges, horns of candy, and cakes of all sorts, from sugary
hearts to gingerbread Jumbos. On the smaller trees she saw many of her
own discarded toys and those Nursey bought, as well as heaps that seemed
to have rained down straight from that delightful Christmas country
where she felt as if she was again.

"How splendid! Who is it for? What is that noise? Where is mamma?" cried
Effie, pale with pleasure and surprise, as she stood looking down the
brilliant little street from her high place.

Before Nurse could answer, the doors at the lower end flew open, and in
marched twenty-four little blue-gowned orphan girls, singing sweetly,
until amazement changed the song to cries of joy and wonder as the
shining spectacle appeared. While they stood staring with round eyes
at the wilderness of pretty things about them, mamma stepped up beside
Effie, and holding her hand fast to give her courage, told the story of
the dream in a few simple words, ending in this way:--

"So my little girl wanted to be a Christmas spirit too, and make this
a happy day for those who had not as many pleasures and comforts as she
has. She likes surprises, and we planned this for you all. She shall
play the good fairy, and give each of you something from this tree,
after which every one will find her own name on a small tree, and can
go to enjoy it in her own way. March by, my dears, and let us fill your
hands."

Nobody told them to do it, but all the hands were clapped heartily
before a single child stirred; then one by one they came to look up
wonderingly at the pretty giver of the feast as she leaned down to offer
them great yellow oranges, red apples, bunches of grapes, bonbons, and
cakes, till all were gone, and a double row of smiling faces turned
toward her as the children filed back to their places in the orderly way
they had been taught.

Then each was led to her own tree by the good ladies who had helped
mamma with all their hearts; and the happy hubbub that arose would have
satisfied even Santa Claus himself,--shrieks of joy, dances of delight,
laughter and tears (for some tender little things could not bear so much
pleasure at once, and sobbed with mouths full of candy and hands full
of toys). How they ran to show one another the new treasures! how they
peeped and tasted, pulled and pinched, until the air was full of queer
noises, the floor covered with papers, and the little trees left bare of
all but candles!

"I don't think heaven can be any gooder than this," sighed one small
girl, as she looked about her in a blissful maze, holding her full apron
with one hand, while she luxuriously carried sugar-plums to her mouth
with the other.

"Is that a truly angel up there?" asked another, fascinated by the
little white figure with the wreath on its shining hair, who in some
mysterious way had been the cause of all this merry-making.

"I wish I dared to go and kiss her for this splendid party," said a lame
child, leaning on her crutch, as she stood near the steps, wondering
how it seemed to sit in a mother's lap, as Effie was doing, while she
watched the happy scene before her.

Effie heard her, and remembering Tiny Tim, ran down and put her arms
about the pale child, kissing the wistful face, as she said sweetly,
"You may; but mamma deserves the thanks. She did it all; I only dreamed
about it."

Lame Katy felt as if "a truly angel" was embracing her, and could only
stammer out her thanks, while the other children ran to see the pretty
spirit, and touch her soft dress, until she stood in a crowd of blue
gowns laughing as they held up their gifts for her to see and admire.

Mamma leaned down and whispered one word to the older girls; and
suddenly they all took hands to dance round Effie, singing as they
skipped.

It was a pretty sight, and the ladies found it hard to break up the
happy revel; but it was late for small people, and too much fun is a
mistake. So the girls fell into line, and marched before Effie and mamma
again, to say goodnight with such grateful little faces that the eyes of
those who looked grew dim with tears. Mamma kissed every one; and many
a hungry childish heart felt as if the touch of those tender lips was
their best gift. Effie shook so many small hands that her own tingled;
and when Katy came she pressed a small doll into Effie's hand,
whispering, "You didn't have a single present, and we had lots. Do keep
that; it's the prettiest thing I got."

"I will," answered Effie, and held it fast until the last smiling face
was gone, the surprise all over, and she safe in her own bed, too tired
and happy for anything but sleep.

"Mamma, it was a beautiful surprise, and I thank you so much! I don't
see how you did it; but I like it best of all the Christmases I ever
had, and mean to make one every year. I had my splendid big present, and
here is the dear little one to keep for love of poor Katy; so even that
part of my wish came true."

And Effie fell asleep with a happy smile on her lips, her one humble
gift still in her hand, and a new love for Christmas in her heart that
never changed through a long life spent in doing good.


[Illustration: "Hollo, what do you want?" he asked, staring at her.]




II.

THE CANDY COUNTRY.


"I shall take mamma's red sun-umbrella, it is so warm, and none of the
children at school will have one like it," said Lily, one day, as she
went through the hall.

"The wind is very high; I'm afraid you'll be blown away if you carry
that big thing," called Nurse from the window, as the red umbrella went
bobbing down the garden walk with a small girl under it.

"I wish it would; I always wanted to go up in a balloon," answered Lily,
as she struggled out of the gate.

She got on very well till she came to the bridge and stopped to look
over the railing at the water running by so fast, and the turtles
sunning themselves on the rocks. Lily was fond of throwing stones at
them; it was so funny to watch them tumble, heels over head, splash into
the water. Now, when she saw three big fellows close by, she stooped for
a stone, and just at that minute a gale of wind nearly took the
umbrella out of her hand. She clutched it fast; and away she went like
a thistle-down, right up in the air, over river and hill, houses and
trees, faster and faster, till her head spun round, her breath was all
gone, and she had to let go. The dear red umbrella flew away like a
leaf; and Lily fell down, down, till she went crash into a tree which
grew in such a curious place that she forgot her fright as she sat
looking about her, wondering what part of the world it could be.

The tree looked as if made of glass or colored sugar; for she could see
through the red cherries, the green leaves, and the brown branches. An
agreeable smell met her nose; and she said at once, as any child
would, "I smell candy!" She picked a cherry and ate it. Oh, how good it
was!--all sugar and no stone. The next discovery was such a delightful
one that she nearly fell off her perch; for by touching her tongue here
and there, she found that the whole tree was made of candy. Think what
fun to sit and break off twigs of barley sugar, candied cherries, and
leaves that tasted like peppermint and sassafras!

Lily rocked and ate till she finished the top of the little tree;
then she climbed down and strolled along, making more surprising and
agreeable discoveries as she went.

What looked like snow under her feet was white sugar; the rocks were
lumps of chocolate, the flowers of all colors and tastes; and every
sort of fruit grew on these delightful trees. Little white houses soon
appeared; and here lived the dainty candy-people, all made of the best
sugar, and painted to look like real people.

Dear little men and women, looking as if they had stepped off of wedding
cakes and bonbons, went about in their gay sugar clothes, laughing
and talking in the sweetest voices. Bits of babies rocked in open-work
cradles, and sugar boys and girls played with sugar toys in the most
natural way. Carriages rolled along the jujube streets, drawn by the
red and yellow barley horses we all love so well; cows fed in the green
fields, and sugar birds sang in the trees.

Lily listened, and in a moment she understood what the song said,--

  "Sweet! Sweet!
  Come, come and eat,
  Dear little girls
  With yellow curls;
  For here you'll find
  Sweets to your mind.
  On every tree
  Sugar-plums you'll see;
  In every dell
  Grows the caramel.
  Over every wall
  Gum-drops fall;
  Molasses flows
  Where our river goes
  Under your feet
  Lies sugar sweet;
  Over your head
  Grow almonds red.
  Our lily and rose
  Are not for the nose;
  Our flowers we pluck
  To eat or suck
  And, oh! what bliss
  When two friends kiss,
  For they honey sip
  From lip to lip!
  And all you meet,
  In house or street,
  At work or play,
  Sweethearts are they.
  So, little dear,
  Pray feel no fear;
  Go where you will;
  Eat, eat your fill.
  Here is a feast
  From west to east;
  And you can say,
  Ere you go away,
  'At last I stand
  In dear Candy-land,
  And no more can stuff;
  For once I've enough.'
  Sweet! Sweet!
  Tweet! Tweet!
  Tweedle-dee!
  Tweedle-dee!"

"That is the most interesting song I ever heard," said Lily, clapping
her sticky hands and dancing along toward a fine palace of white cream
candy, with pillars of striped peppermint stick, and a roof of frosting
that made it look like the Milan Cathedral.

"I'll live here, and eat candy all day long, with no tiresome school or
patchwork to spoil my fun," said Lily.

So she ran up the chocolate steps into the pretty rooms, where all the
chairs and tables were of different colored candies, and the beds
of spun sugar. A fountain of lemonade supplied drink; and floors
of ice-cream that never melted kept people and things from sticking
together, as they would have done had it been warm.

For a long while Lily was quite happy, going about tasting so many
different kinds of sweeties, talking to the little people, who were very
amiable, and finding out curious things about them and their country.

The babies were made of plain sugar, but the grown people had different
flavors. The young ladies were flavored with violet, rose, and orange;
the gentlemen were apt to have cordials of some sort inside of them, as
she found when she ate one now and then slyly, and got her tongue
bitten by the hot, strong taste as a punishment The old people tasted of
peppermint, clove, and such comfortable things, good for pain; but the
old maids had lemon, hoarhound, flag-root, and all sorts of sour, bitter
things in them, and did not get eaten much. Lily soon learned to know
the characters of her new friends by a single taste, and some she
never touched but once. The dear babies melted in her mouth, and the
delicately flavored young ladies she was very fond of. Dr. Ginger was
called to her more than once when so much candy made her teeth ache, and
she found him a very hot-tempered little man; but he stopped the pain,
so she was glad to see him.

A lime-drop boy and a little pink checker-berry girl were her favorite
playmates; and they had fine times making mud-pies by scraping the
chocolate rocks and mixing this dust with honey from the wells near by.
These they could eat; and Lily thought this much better than throwing
away the pies, as she had to do at home. They had candy-pulls very
often, and made swings of long loops of molasses candy, and bird's-nests
with almond eggs, out of which came birds who sang sweetly. They played
football with big bull's-eyes, sailed in sugar boats on lakes of syrup,
fished in rivers of molasses, and rode the barley horses all over the
country.

Lily discovered that it never rained, but snowed white sugar. There was
no sun, as it would have been too hot; but a large yellow lozenge made a
nice moon, and red and white comfits were the stars.

The people all lived on sugar, and never quarrelled. No one was ill; and
if any got broken, as sometimes happened with such brittle creatures,
they just stuck the parts together and were all right again. The way
they grew old was to get thinner and thinner till there was danger of
their vanishing. Then the friends of the old person put him in a neat
coffin, and carried him to the great golden urn which stood in their
largest temple, always full of a certain fine syrup; and here he was
dipped and dipped till he was stout and strong again, and went home to
enjoy himself for a long time as good as new.

This was very interesting to Lily, and she went to many funerals. But
the weddings were better still; for the lovely white brides were so
sweet Lily longed to eat them. The feasts were delicious; and everybody
went in their best clothes, and danced at the ball till they got so warm
half-a-dozen would stick together and have to be taken to the ice-cream
room to cool off. Then the little pair would drive away in a fine
carriage with white horses to a new palace in some other part of the
country, and Lily would have another pleasant place to visit.

But by and by, when she had seen everything, and eaten so much sweet
stuff that at last she longed for plain bread and butter, she began to
get cross, as children always do when they live on candy; and the little
people wished she would go away, for they were afraid of her. No wonder,
when she would catch up a dear sugar baby and eat him, or break some
respectable old grandmamma all into bits because she reproved her for
naughty ways. Lily calmly sat down on the biggest church, crushing it
flat, and even tried to poke the moon out of the sky in a pet one day.
The king ordered her to go home; but she said, "I won't!" and bit his
head off, crown and all.

Such a wail went up at this awful deed that she ran away out of the
city, fearing some one would put poison in her candy, since she had no
other food.

"I suppose I shall get somewhere if I keep walking; and I can't starve,
though I hate the sight of this horrid stuff," she said to herself, as
she hurried over the mountains of Gibraltar Rock that divided the city
of Saccharissa from the great desert of brown sugar that lay beyond.

Lily marched bravely on for a long time, and saw at last a great smoke
in the sky, smelt a spicy smell, and felt a hot wind blowing toward her.

"I wonder if there are sugar savages here, roasting and eating some
poor traveller like me," she said, thinking of Robinson Crusoe and other
wanderers in strange lands.

She crept carefully along till she saw a settlement of little huts very
like mushrooms, for they were made of cookies set on lumps of the brown
sugar; and queer people, looking as if made of gingerbread, were working
very busily round several stoves which seemed to bake at a great rate.

"I'll creep nearer and see what sort of people they are before I show
myself," said Lily, going into a grove of spice-trees, and sitting down
on a stone which proved to be the plummy sort of cake we used to call
Brighton Rock.

Presently one of the tallest men came striding toward the trees with a
pan, evidently after spice; and before she could run, he saw Lily.

"Hollo, what do you want?" he asked, staring at her with his black
currant eyes, while he briskly picked the bark off a cinnamon-tree.

"I'm travelling, and would like to know what place this is, if you
please," answered Lily, very politely, being a little frightened.

"Cake-land. Where do you come from?" asked the gingerbread man, in a
crisp tone of voice.

"I was blown into the Candy country, and have been there a long time;
but I got tired of it, and ran away to find something better."

"Sensible child!" and the man smiled till Lily thought his cheeks would
crumble. "You'll get on better here with us Brownies than with the lazy
Bonbons, who never work and are all for show. They won't own us, though
we are all related through our grandparents Sugar and Molasses. We are
busy folks; so they turn up their noses and don't speak when we meet at
parties. Poor creatures, silly and sweet and unsubstantial! I pity 'em."

"Could I make you a visit? I'd like to see how you live, and what you
do. I'm sure it must be interesting," said Lily, picking herself up
after a tumble, having eaten nearly all the stone, she was so hungry.

"I know you will. Come on! I can talk while I work." And the funny
gingerbread man trotted off toward his kitchen, full of pans,
rolling-pins, and molasses jugs.

"Sit down. I shall be at leisure as soon as this batch is baked. There
are still some wise people down below who like gingerbread, and I have
my hands full," he said, dashing about, stirring, rolling out, and
slapping the brown dough into pans, which he whisked into the oven and
out again so fast that Lily knew there must be magic about it somewhere.

Every now and then he threw her a delicious cooky warm from the oven.
She liked the queer fellow, and presently began to talk, being very
curious about this country.

"What is your name, sir?"

"Ginger Snap."

Lily thought it a good one; for he was very quick, and she fancied he
could be short and sharp if he liked.

"Where does all this cake go to?" she asked, after watching the other
kitchens full of workers, who were all of different kinds of cake, and
each set of cooks made its own sort.

"I'll show you by and by," answered Snap, beginning to pile up the heaps
of gingerbread on a little car that ran along a track leading to some
unknown storeroom, Lily thought.

"Don't you get tired of doing this all the time?"

"Yes; but I want to be promoted, and I never shall be till I've done my
best, and won the prize here."

"Oh, tell me about it! What is the prize, and how are you promoted? Is
this a cooking-school?"

"Yes; the prize for best gingerbread is a cake of condensed yeast. That
puts a soul into me, and I begin to rise till I am able to go over the
hills yonder into the blessed land of bread, and be one of the happy
creatures who are always wholesome, always needed, and without which the
world below would be in a bad way."

"Bless me! that is the queerest thing I've heard yet. But I don't wonder
you want to go; I'm tired of sweets myself, and long for a good piece of
bread, though I used to want cake and candy at home."

"Ah, my dear, you'll learn a good deal here; and you are lucky not to
have got into the clutches of Giant Dyspepsia, who always gets people if
they eat too much of such rubbish and scorn wholesome bread. I leave my
ginger behind when I go, and get white and round and beautiful, as you
will see. The Gingerbread family have never been as foolish as some of
the other cakes. Wedding is the worst; such extravagance in the way of
wine and spice and fruit I never saw, and such a mess to eat when it's
done! I don't wonder people get sick; serves 'em right." And Snap flung
