But in taking out the money she exhibited the watch also, which at once
excited Mrs. Redburn's curiosity.

"What have you been doing with that, Katy?" she asked. "Ah, I fear I
was right. We have no money! Our business is gone! Alas, we have
nothing to hope for!"

"O, no, mother, it is not half so bad as that!" exclaimed Katy. "I went
up to Mrs. Gordon for the purpose of borrowing twenty dollars of her; I
didn't want it to look like charity, so I was going to ask her to keep
the watch till it was paid. That's all, mother."

"And she refused?"

"No; she was not at home."

"But your money is not all gone?"

Katy wanted to say it was not, but her conscience would not let her
practise deception. She had the three dollars which she had just
borrowed of Michael, and that was not all gone. But this was not the
question her mother asked, and it would be a lie to say the money was
not all gone, when she fully understood the meaning of the question.
Perhaps it was for her mother's good to deceive her; but she had been
taught to feel that she had no right to do evil that good might follow.

"It was all gone, but I borrowed three dollars," she replied, after a
little hesitation.

"Of whom?"

"Of Michael."

"Who's he?"

"Mrs. Gordon's man.

"O Katy! How could you do so?" sighed Mrs. Redburn.

"I couldn't help it, mother. He would make me take it;" and she gave
all the particulars of her interview with Michael and reviewed the
considerations which had induced her to accept the loan.

"Perhaps you are right, Katy. My pride would not have let me borrow of
a servant; but it is wicked for me to cherish such a pride. I try very
hard to banish it."

"Don't talk any more now, mother. We are too poor to be too proud to
accept a favor of one who is in a humble station." replied Katy.

"I don't know what will become of us," said Mrs. Redburn, as she turned
her head away to hide the tears that flooded her eyes.

Katy took up the Bible that lay by the bedside, and turning to the
twenty-third psalm, she read, "The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not
want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me beside
the still waters."

"Go on, Katy; those words are real comfort," said Mrs. Redburn, drying
her tears. "I know it is wicked for me to repine."

Katy read the whole psalm, and followed it with others, which produced
a healing influence upon her mother's mind, and she seemed to forget
that the purse was empty, and that they had placed themselves under
obligations to a servant.

The sufferer rested much better than usual that night, and Katy was
permitted to sleep the greater part of the time--a boon which her
exhausted frame very much needed. About ten o'clock in the forenoon,
Michael paid her a visit, to inform her that Mrs. Gordon had just
arrived: and that, when he mentioned her case, she had sent him down to
request her immediate attendance and that his mistress would have come
herself, only she was so much fatigued by her journey.

Katy could not leave then, for she had no one to stay with her mother;
but Mrs. Sneed could come in an hour. Michael hastened home with the
intelligence that Mrs. Redburn was better, and Katy soon followed him.



CHAPTER XX.

MRS. GORDON FEELS FAINT, AND KATY ENTERS A NEW SPHERE.

On her arrival at Temple Street, Katy was promptly admitted by Michael,
and shown in the sitting-room, where Mrs. Gordon and Grace were waiting
for her.

"I was very sorry to hear that your mother is sick, Katy," said the
former; "and I should have paid you a visit, instead of sending for
you, if I had not been so much exhausted by my journey from Baltimore."

"You are very kind, ma'am."

"Did Dr. Flynch call upon you at the first of the month?"

"Yes, ma'am; and we paid the rent as usual," replied Katy.

"I am sorry you did so, Katy; you should have told him you were not in
a condition to pay the rent."

"I couldn't tell him so, he is so cold and cruel."

"I think you misjudge him, for he has a really kind heart, and would
not have distressed you for all the world. Besides, I told him he need
not collect your rent any time when you did not feel ready to pay it. I
hope he gave you no trouble?"

"No, ma'am; I didn't give him a chance, for I paid him as soon as he
demanded it; though it took nearly all the money we had. I hope you
will excuse me, ma'am, but I haven't liked him since the trouble we had
a year ago, when he accused my dear mother of telling a lie."

"Perhaps he was hasty."

"I forgive him, ma'am; but I can't help thinking he is a very wicked
man," answered Katy, with considerable emphasis.

"I hope not so bad as that; for I am sure, if you had told him it was
not convenient for you to pay the rent, he would not have insisted. But
you want some assistance Katy?"

"Yes, ma'am; that is, I want to borrow some money," replied Katy,
blushing deeply.

"That's just like you," interposed Grace, laughing. "I suppose you will
want to give your note this time."

"I don't care about giving a note, but I mean to pay the money back
again, every cent of it."

"And the interest too, I suppose?"

"Yes," said Katy, though she had not a very clear idea of the value of
money, as an article of merchandise.

"Don't distress her, Grace; you forget that her mother is very sick,
and she cannot feel like listening to your pleasantries," said Mrs.
Gordon.

"Forgive me, Katy," replied Grace, tenderly.

Katy burst into tears, though she could not exactly tell why. She was
overcome with emotion as the beautiful young lady took her hand, and
looked so sorrowfully in her face. She was not used to so much
kindness, so much sympathy, so much love; for it seemed as though both
Grace and her mother loved her--that their hearts beat with hers.

"Don t cry, Katy; I am sorry I said a word," pleaded Grace. "I would
not have hurt your feelings for all the world."

"You did not hurt my feelings; you are so kind to me that I could not
help crying. I suppose I am very silly."

"No, you are not, Katy; now dry up your tears, and tell us all about
it," added Mrs. Gordon, in soothing tones. "How long has your mother
been sick?"

"Almost two weeks."

"What ails her?"

"She has got a fever; but she is much better to-day. The doctor says
she hasn't got it very bad; but she has been very sick, I think."

"Who takes care of her?"

"I do, ma'am."

"You! She must need a great deal of attention. But who takes care of
her at night?"

"I do, ma'am. I have been up a great deal every night."

"Poor child! It is enough to wear you out."

"I wouldn't mind it at all, if I had nothing else to trouble me."

"What other troubles have you?"

"I can't make any candy now, and haven't made any for nearly a
fortnight; so that we have no money coming in. We spent nearly all we
had in buying our winter clothing and fuel. It worries me very much,
for we had plenty of money before mother was taken sick."

"I hope you haven't wanted for anything."

"No, ma'am; for when my purse was empty, I came up here, only
yesterday, to borrow some of you, if you would please to lend it me."

"Certainly, I will, my child. I am very glad you came."

"Michael would make me tell what I wanted, and then he let me have
three dollars, and offered to let me have as much as I wanted. I didn't
know as you would like it if I borrowed money of your servant."

"You did just right: and I am glad that Michael has a kind heart. Now,
how much money do you want?"

"I thought I would ask you to lend me twenty dollars; and just as soon,
after mother gets well, as I can gather the money together, I will pay
you--and the interest," she added, glancing at Grace.

"Now, Katy, that is too bad!" exclaimed Grace, catching her by the
hand, while a tear started from her eye. "You know I didn't mean that."

"I know you didn't; but I don't know much about such things, and
thought likely it was right for us to pay interest, if we borrowed
money."

"I should be very glad to give you twenty dollars, Katy, if you would
only let me; for I am rich, as well as mother, and I certainly should
not think of taking interest."

"We will say no more about that," interrupted Mrs. Gordon. "I will let
you have the money with the greatest pleasure, for I know you will make
good use of it."

"I will, indeed."

"And you must promise me that you will not distress yourself to pay it
again," continued the kind lady, as she took out her purse.

"I will not distress myself, but I will pay it as soon as I can."

"You must not be too proud."

"No, ma'am; but just proud enough."

"Yes, that's it," replied Mrs. Gordon, smiling. "Pride is a very good
thing in its place. It keeps people from being mean and wicked
sometimes."

"That's true pride," added Katy.

"Yes; for there is a false pride, which makes people very silly and
vain; which keeps them from doing their duty very often. You have none
of this kind of pride."

"I hope not."

"Your friend Simon Sneed, whom the mayor spoke to me about, affords us
a very good example of the folly of cherishing false pride. Where is
Simon now?"

"He keeps a store in Washington Street. He is a salesman now, and I
don't think he is so foolish as he was."

"Perhaps the lesson he learned did him good. But I am keeping you away
from your mother, Katy. Who stays with her while you are away?"

"Mrs. Sneed--Simon's mother."

"Then she is a good woman."

"And Simon is very kind; he has done a great many things for me, and I
hope I shall be able to do something for him one of these days."

"That's right, Katy. Think well of your friends, though others speak
ill of them," said Grace. "Ah, there comes the carriage. I am going
home with you, Katy, to see your mother."

"You are very kind, Miss Grace."

"Here is the money," added Mrs. Gordon, handing her a little roll of
bills.

"Thank you, ma'am," replied Katy, as she placed the money in her
porte-monnaie. "But----"

Here she came to a full stop, and her face was as crimson as a blush
rose, but she took out the silver watch, and approached Mrs. Gordon.

"What were you going to say, Katy?"

"I brought this watch up," stammered she.

"What for?"

"You know I am a poor girl, my mother is a poor woman, and we didn't
want you to think you were giving us the money, for we are very proud;
that is, my mother is very proud, and so am I; and----"

Here Katy drew a long breath, and came to a full stop again, unable to
say what she wanted to say.

"If you want anything else, Katy, don't hesitate to mention it; for I
will not do anything to mortify your pride, even if it is
unreasonable," said Mrs. Gordon. "I understand you perfectly; the
twenty dollars is not a gift, but a loan."

"Yes, ma'am; but if we should never be able to pay it, then it would be
a gift."

"No, it wouldn't."

"I think so; and so I brought this watch, which you will please to take
as security for the payment of the loan," said Katy, much confused, as
she offered the watch to Mrs. Gordon.

"My dear child, I do not want any security. Your word is just as good
as your bond."

"But I would rather you would take it. My mother is prouder than I am,
for she wasn't always as poor as she is now."

Katy suddenly clapped her hand over her mouth, when she recollected
that this was a forbidden topic.

"Some time you may tell me all about your mother; and I will call and
see her to-morrow, and help you take care of her."

"Please to take the watch, ma'am."

"If you very much desire it, I shall do so, though I cannot take it as
security. Is this the watch you carried to the pawnbroker?" said Mrs.
Gordon as she took the treasure.

"Yes, ma'am. It belonged to my father."

Mrs. Gordon turned over the watch, and looked at it with considerable
