in one of the prizes. Late on the following afternoon a sail was seen
coming from the north, and before the sun set they were able to make
her out to be the craft in which Caretto had sailed. The anchor of
the galley was at once got up, and she rowed out to meet the boat and
conduct her into the little bay. It was almost dark when they came
within hailing distance.

"What news do you bring, Sir Fabricius?"

"Bad news, I regret to say. I do not think that Genoa will be able to
send out any galleys for at least a fortnight. There have been civil
dissensions, and fighting between rival factions, and in consequence her
ships are all dismantled and laid up. Crews will have to be collected
for them, repairs executed, and officers chosen; a fortnight will be the
earliest time in which they can be here. Pisa has no war galleys, and
unless the Pope sends some out directly he gets the news, the corsairs
will have it their own way. Have you discovered them?"

"Yes; they lie but a few miles from here. There were fifteen or sixteen
of them two days ago, and two others joined them that night. You have
lost no time indeed. We had scarce begun to expect you, Sir Fabricius,"
he added, as the knight and his two comrades stepped on board.

"I have done my best," the knight said angrily. "But I am in a rage with
my ill success. All I have accomplished is that no merchant vessels will
put to sea at present. At Ostia they would only send off a message to
Rome, to ask for orders. At Pisa the authorities at first treated my
story as a fiction, and, I believe, took me for an impostor; but on the
news spreading, some knights came forward and recognised me. Then we had
a meeting of the council. All talked, wrangled, and protested. They said
that it was absurd to suppose that they could, at a moment's notice, fit
out ships to cope with a fleet of corsairs; and their sole idea was to
man the forts, and to repel an attack. However, mounted messengers
were sent off at once, up and down the coast, to give warning to the
inhabitants of the towns to put themselves into a posture of defence,
and to the villagers to fly with their wives and families into the
interior as soon as they saw galleys of doubtful appearance approaching.
I was there but four hours, and then started for Genoa."

"There was almost a panic there too, as the members of the council were
mostly merchants, and were filled with dismay for the safety of their
ships and goods at sea. Of course, there was no thought that the
corsairs, however strong, would venture an attack upon Genoa itself.
I told them that you had captured three of the corsairs with a single
galley, and that if they could send you ten others you would probably be
able to make head against the pirates; but, as I have told you, Genoa
is at peace with all the world; her war galleys are laid up, and most of
them would need repair and recaulking before they would be fit to send
to sea. Although they maintained that no more than a week should elapse
before they would be ready to sail I am right sure that it will be
double that time before they are fitted out.

"Of course, in Genoa I was well known, though my family estates lie near
Mantua, and my acquaintances flocked round me and urged me to stay until
the galleys were ready for sea. This I would not hear of, and, six hours
after my arrival, started again. We made the voyage to Corsica at a good
speed, but since then we have had the oars constantly out to help the
sails. The men have well earned their pay, I can assure you. It is
enough to make one mad with rage to think that these pirates will be
able to harry the coast of Italy at their pleasure; for there can
be little chance that they will abide quiet much longer at this
rendezvous."

"It is annoying, indeed," Gervaise agreed; and a murmur of
disappointment ran round the assembled knights. "However, we have the
consolation that we have done all we could, and I am sure that we shall
do so in the future."

Gervaise had charged Ralph to say nothing about the object of his
mission, and the general supposition was that he had sailed to endeavour
to purchase some bullocks, as the supply of meat was nearly exhausted.
Ralph himself had let drop a few words to this effect, and had indeed
been charged by Gervaise to bring off a few oxen if they could be
obtained without loss of time. Gervaise was on deck at midnight, and
soon afterwards the beat of oars was heard. It was a still night,
and one of the knights on watch remarked to him, "It seems to me, Sir
Gervaise, that the sound is a confused one, and that there must be
several vessels rowing. Shall I call up our companions? It may be that
it is the pirate fleet coming out."

"You need not do that," Gervaise replied. "I am expecting Sir Ralph to
bring back with him some fishing boats, for which I think I can find a
use. We should have heard before this if the corsairs had been putting
out. Fosco is in his boat watching the mouth of the inlet, and would
have started with the news had there been any stir on board their
galleys."

It was a quarter of an hour before a number of dark objects entered the
little bay. As soon as they did so, they ceased rowing, and the splashes
of the anchors as they fell into the water were heard. Then came the
sound of a boat's oars, and Ralph was soon alongside.

"I see that you have succeeded, Ralph."

"There is no fear of failing when one is ready to pay the full value of
what one wants to get. I have bought three coasters and eight fishing
boats, and have a sufficient store of pitch and oil, with plenty of
straw and faggots. There was no difficulty in getting men to come with
me. As soon as they heard that a fleet of eighteen Moorish galleys was
in the next bay, they were ready enough to aid in any plan for their
destruction, for they knew well enough that some of them would be sure
to make raids all along the coast, sacking and burning, and carrying off
men, women, and children, as slaves. I said I only wanted two men for
each craft, but so many were willing to come that I have some thirty
more than the number I asked for, and we can divide these among us. They
are strong, active looking fellows."

"We will keep them here then, Ralph. You see, there are one-and-twenty
of our knights in the three prizes, and as we lost two in the
capture, and four others are not fit to put on armour, we have but
six-and-twenty, and the addition will be very welcome. What are they
armed with?"

"They have bows and arrows, and long pikes and axes."

"Good. Have you managed to collect any more arms?"

"Yes. The people are all charcoal burners and woodmen in winter, and
I was therefore able to get together some thirty or forty axes and
hatchets, which will be ample, with the arms we took from the Moors, to
equip the ninety Christians."

"I think we can depend upon these for fighting, Ralph."

"I don't think there is any doubt about that. A few of them are pretty
well worn out with labour and suffering, but all have gained strength
and spirits greatly in the past week, and you may be sure that they
will fight to the death rather than run the risk of another turn in the
galleys."

"And have you got the stuff to make the mantles?"

"Yes. There was plenty of the coarse black cloth which they wear in
summer--in winter, of course, they are clad in sheepskins; and I have
sufficient white cotton cloth to make the crosses."

"We have only one thing to wish for now, Ralph, and that is, that the
corsairs may not take it into their heads to sail tomorrow. Fosco will
bring me news at daybreak, and we will at once send another boat off to
watch the mouth of the bay when he leaves it. If they sail, we cannot
venture to attack them as long as they keep together, the odds are far
too heavy, and our only plan will be to follow them at a distance, when
we can just keep their upper sails in sight, and then to attack any
detachment that may separate from the main body."

"I hope it will not come to that, Gervaise. It would be hard indeed,
when you have devised such a splendid plan, and we have got everything
ready to carry it out, if they were to give us the slip. Do the others
know anything about it yet?"

"No. I thought it better to keep silence till tomorrow. No doubt some of
the galley slaves understand enough of one or other of our languages
to gather what is on foot. Besides, their late captives might, in their
satisfaction at the thought of revenge, say enough to them to let them
know that an attack on their fleet was intended, and one of them might,
in some way, free himself from his irons and swim ashore. We know there
is a small fishing village across the island, and there would be no
difficulty in stealing a boat and making off with the news. I do not say
that the risk is great; still, it were better not to throw away even
a chance. The knights have all turned in in a very gloomy mood, for
Caretto has returned with news that there is no hope of assistance from
Genoa for a fortnight, and it seemed, therefore, that all our pains had
been thrown away. And now we may as well turn in until daylight."



CHAPTER XV A SPLENDID EXPLOIT


Gervaise was up again at dawn. He was amused at the wonder of the
knights, as they came up one by one, at the sight of the little fleet
anchored outside them. As soon as it was fairly daylight, he sent off to
the three prizes to request all the knights to come on board the galley.
When all were assembled there he said, "You are all aware, comrades,
that Sir Fabricius Caretto has brought news that the galleys at Genoa
are all laid up, and that it will be a fortnight before they can put to
sea. Long before that, the corsairs will assuredly be ravaging all the
villages and small towns along the coast of Italy, unless we can prevent
their doing so. It would be simple madness to try to attack them at sea;
of that I feel sure you are all conscious. It would be only throwing
away our lives and our galley."

There was a murmur of assent among the knights. They were ready for any
encounter in which there was a chance, however faint, of success; but
all saw that for a single galley to attack one of the largest corsair
fleets that had ever set out, would be nothing short of insanity. Their
leader's words, however, seemed to show that he had some plan in his
mind by which he hoped to strike a blow at the enemy, and all listened
eagerly for what was coming.

"We have heard from our comrade Fosco that their ships lie moored in two
lines, side by side in a narrow inlet. He has returned this morning with
the news that they are still there. He thinks that three or four more
have arrived during the last two days, and it is probable they are
waiting for the three we captured to join them. Tonight it is my
intention to attack them, but not by rowing in and boarding them, for
that would be hopeless. Yesterday Sir Ralph Harcourt went, as you are
aware, to fetch provisions. But this was a part only of the object of
his trip. He has, as you see, brought back eleven craft with him; these,
I may tell you, are laden with combustibles--pitch, oil, straw, and
faggots. They will be rowed and towed to the inlet tonight, set on fire,
and launched against the pirates."

An enthusiastic cheer broke from the knights. They saw at once that,
lying as the corsairs were, side by side, the destruction of many of
them was certain.

"He has also brought fishermen," Gervaise went on, "two or three of whom
will go in each fire ship, having a boat towing behind, in which they
will escape as soon as the craft are alongside the galleys. The galley
and the three prizes will take their post at the mouth of the inlet.
The fire of our guns will add to the confusion among the pirates, and we
shall endeavour to fall upon any galleys that may extricate themselves
from the mass, and try to make their escape. Sir Ralph has brought back
materials for making ninety mantles of the Order, for the Christians on
board the three prizes, and thirty fishermen to bring the crew of our
galley up to its full strength. The light of the flames will suffice
to show the pirates that, as they will believe, four vessels, manned
by knights of the Order, are barring the entrance. Many will, we may
calculate, jump overboard and swim ashore rather than face us, and we
shall be able, at any rate, to capture three or four of their craft,
for, as they come out, one by one, we can all close round them; and with
nearly fifty knights, ninety released captives, burning for vengeance,
and some fifty or sixty fishermen, for those from the fire ships will,
of course, join us--we shall make short work of them, and may even hope
to entirely destroy their fleet."

Again a joyous shout rose from the knights. This would indeed be an
exploit that all might be proud to share in, and, breaking the ranks in
which they had stood while Gervaise addressed them, they crowded round
him with exclamations of enthusiasm and devotion.

"Now," he said, as soon as silence was a little restored, "the knights
of the langues on board the prizes will send at once to the coaster on
the left of the other two. Sir Ralph will go there now, and supply each
with materials for making the mantles for the Christians; he has brought
thread, and fish bone needles. You will see that the stuff is cut up
into suitable lengths, and handed over to your crews, and that each man
makes up his mantle. There can be but little sewing required for these
sleeveless gowns, nor need it be carefully done. The great thing is that
the white crosses shall be conspicuous. As soon as you have set them
to work, you will examine the state of the arms, see how many more are
needed to complete the list, and then send off to Sir Ralph, who will
furnish as many as are required: the fishermen have brought their
own weapons. See that the slaves are all well fed today, and, before
evening, inspect well their fetters, so that you may be free from all
anxiety as to an attempt by them to escape during the conflict.

"The rest of you will go on board these native craft, and see that
the combustibles are fairly distributed among them, the wood and straw
soaked with pitch and oil, as also the sails and ropes, and that the
decks are well coated; this is a most important duty. Get some torches
made also, so that there shall be two on board each craft; these are to
be lighted the last thing before we get to the point, and will be thrown
down into the straw and faggots in the hold, by the fishermen when they
get close to the corsairs. All this can be prepared before our morning
meal, and when you assemble here I hope to receive your reports that
everything is in readiness. One of the other coasters has some bullocks
on board. Sir Ralph will send one to each of the prizes, and one to us.
They had better be killed and cut up at once, in order that the crews
may have two good meals today of fresh meat. See that the galley slaves
have their share."

No time was lost in carrying out the orders. Ralph, as soon as the
cloth, arms, and meat were distributed, went round in a boat to see that
the combustibles were properly laid for firing, and everything done to
insure that the flames should spread rapidly. The Sards shared in
the work, and rations and wine were distributed to them; and when the
knights sat down to their meal on board the galley, they were able to
report that everything was in perfect readiness, and that the work of
sewing the mantles was making good progress.

The day passed slowly to the young knights, all of whom were burning
with excitement at the thought of the coming fray. The released
Christians were no less exultant at the prospect of taking vengeance for
the sufferings they had so long endured, and the scene on board all four
ships was most animated.

After talking it over with Ralph, Gervaise told off three more of the
knights to each of the prizes, so that there should be ten on board
each. This reduced the strength on board the galley to seventeen; but as
they would have the assistance of a strong band of Sards they considered
this to be ample, under the circumstances. It was arranged that the
galley, with one of the prizes, should close with the first corsair that
came out, and that the other two prizes should attack the second. After
capturing these, they were to assist each other as circumstances might
dictate. Gervaise strongly impressed upon the knights in command of each
prize that they were not, single handed, to attack a corsair unless one
of their consorts was near, and free to give assistance.

"We must run no risk of a reverse," he said. "We are certain of
destroying many of their vessels and of breaking up their fleet, and it
is far better that a few should escape than that we should run the risk
of losing ten of our number, to say nothing of those we have rescued
from captivity. In the excitement of the fight this order must be
strictly borne in mind. Our victory must be marred by no misfortune
brought on by headstrong rashness. The corsairs are bound to be very
strongly manned, and ten knights, even aided by such assistance as
they may get from the Christians, might find themselves altogether over
matched against a crowd of desperate men."

As soon as it was dusk the anchors were drawn up, and the fleet got
under way. They proceeded but slowly, for the wind was light, and the
fishing boats moved heavily through the water. There was, however, no
occasion for speed, for Gervaise did not wish to commence the attack
until past midnight. The guns had all been loaded before starting, and a
pile of ammunition was placed near each. Presently the wind nearly died
out, and the galley and prizes then took the coasters and fishing craft
in tow. It was nearly one o'clock when they got within half a mile of
the inlet. The tow ropes were then thrown off, the fishermen got out
sweeps, and the galley led the way, the fire ships followed in a body,
and the three prizes brought up the rear. The oars had all been muffled,
and slowly they made their way, until Fosco, who was standing next to
Gervaise on board the galley, said that the point just ahead marked the
entrance to the inlet. They then stopped rowing until the fire ships
were all close up.

These were, as had previously been arranged, in two lines. Five fishing
boats, each manned by four men and having its small boat in tow behind
it, formed the first line; the three coasters, each with six men at the
oars, and the three other fishing boats, formed the second. The torches
were now lighted. Ralph took his place in the centre boat of the first
line; Gervaise went on board one of the coasters, and the order was
given to the men to row. What wind there was was favourable, blowing
from the northwest, and therefore right into the inlet. Scarcely had the
first boats reached the entrance when a shout was heard.

"Row, men, your hardest now!" Ralph shouted; the Sards bent to their
oars, and the five boats advanced rapidly towards the corsairs. As they
did so, a babel of shouts and cries rose from the dark mass of ships,
which swelled into a tumult of alarm as on Ralph's order, "Throw your
torches into the straw!" a flash of flame leapt up from each boat. Five
more strokes, and they were alongside the two outside ships. As they
crashed heavily into them, the men leapt from their seats and sprang
over into the small boats, threw off the painters, and rowed astern,
opening on either hand to allow the second line of fire ships to pass.
These, by Gervaise's directions, divided, and three bore along on either
side of the corsairs, and then ran in among them, throwing grapnels to
fasten the fire ships alongside. Then, as the flames sprang up from the
holds, the crews betook themselves to their boats, and rowed out of the
inlet.

By the time they reached the galley and prizes, the eleven fire ships
were a mass of flame, which was spreading to the corsairs. Lying packed
together as these were, the confusion was terrible. Numbers of men
endeavoured to push off the fire ships, but it was too late; others
tried to extricate their galleys from the mass, throwing off the
hawsers, and striving with hand and oar to push their vessels out of the
line. As soon as the boats were alongside the galley, the guns of the
four vessels opened fire with grape into the crowded ships, now lit up
by the flames as clearly as at noontide, while the battle cry of the
Order sounded high above the din.

"Nothing can save the ships near this end of the line," Ralph said, "but
some of those behind may make their way out between the others and the
rocks. I can see that some of them there are lowering their yards and
sails to prevent their catching fire as they pass."

The knights distributed among the guns worked them incessantly,
directing their fire chiefly against the outside ships, so as to hinder
the crews in their endeavours to arrest the progress of the flames; but
they were soon able to fire impartially into the mass. As the heat of
the flames drove the pirates back, scores of men leapt overboard, and
made for the shore. Presently, two or three ships were seen making their
way along the narrow line of water on either side of the flaming group
in front. As the first advanced, the galley and one of the prizes rowed
a short distance forward to meet it. Its deck was crowded with men,
among whom a discharge of the cannon from both ships created terrible
slaughter.

A moment afterwards they closed with it, one on either side, and the
knights, the released captives, and the Sards, sprang down on to its
deck. The fight lasted but a minute. Appalled by the disaster that had
befallen them, by the terrible effect of the broadsides, poured in at a
few yards' distance, and by the sight of so many of the dreaded warriors
of the Cross, some of the corsairs threw down their arms and flung
themselves on the deck or into the hold, crying for quarter; those who
resisted fell either under the swords of the knights, the vengeful axes
of the late captives, or the pikes of the Sards; but the great bulk,
leaping from the bow or stern, swam ashore.

"Back to your ships!" Gervaise shouted, the moment resistance ceased.
"Leave her floating here; she will help to block the way."

Six vessels alone managed to make their escape from the blazing mass of
ships, and all of these were captured almost as easily as the first had
been. As soon as it seemed that all the remainder were involved in
the flames, boats were lowered and sent on board the prizes to take
possession. Save for the wounded on the decks, they were entirely
deserted by their crews, as those who had run below, as soon as they
found that their captors had left the vessels, dropped into the water,
and made their way, either by swimming or with the assistance of oars,
to the shore. There remained only the slaves, chained to their benches.
A few of these had been killed by the broadsides; but the guns had been
aimed at the poops and forecastles, where the corsairs were clustered
together, and consequently the number of galley slaves who had fallen
was comparatively small.

In none of the galleys was the proportion of Christians anything like so
large as that in the three prizes first taken, the greater portion being
men of inland tribes who had been captured in warfare, or malefactors
who, instead of being executed, had been sold to the corsairs.
Nevertheless, in the six galleys some seventy Christians were found,
and at once freed. It was terrible to think that in the galleys that had
been destroyed a large number of Christians must have perished in the
flames, and Gervaise expressed bitter regret that he had not considered
that his attack by fire ships must necessarily involve the loss of so
many Christian lives.

"It can't be helped," Ralph said, as Gervaise poured out his feelings to
him. "To very many of them death must have been welcome, and if we had
not attacked them as we did, and they had sailed for Italy, hundreds,
if not thousands, of Christians would have been killed, and as many more
carried away into captivity; so, you see, the balance is all in favour
of the course we adopted."

Gervaise admitted this, but nevertheless his regret at the fate of
so many unfortunate captives quite overpowered for the time his
satisfaction at the complete success that had been achieved. The victory
had been almost a bloodless one on the part of the assailants. A few of
the knights had received wounds. Two among the Christian crews had been
killed, and four Sards; while two score had received wounds more or less
serious, as, unlike the knights, they had no defensive armour. While
waiting for daylight to appear, all their wounds were dressed and
bandaged by the knights.

In the morning the captured galleys were towed out, and anchored a short
distance away, and then Gervaise rowed up to the head of the inlet,
followed by the other three ships. They found that eleven of the
corsairs had been burnt, and to their satisfaction, they discovered four
uninjured galleys lying there, deserted, save by the slaves.

Seeing the fate of their comrades who had first issued out, the
commanders had, instead of trying to escape, rowed quietly to the head
of the inlet, the movement being covered by the flame and smoke, and had
there landed, having laden themselves with stores for their support on
shore. This was a great satisfaction to the knights, for not only did
it swell the list of prizes, but it reduced by over thirty the number of
Christian slaves who had perished in the flames. Taking the galleys
in tow, they rowed out of the inlet, whose banks were strewn with half
charred timbers, oars, and relics of the fight.

As soon as they had anchored by the side of their first prizes, a
council was held on board the Santa Barbara. It was clearly impossible
to take thirteen prizes to Rhodes, for there would be but three or four
knights to each, and were they to fall in with but one Moorish pirate,
they might suffer great disaster, while, should they meet with a storm,
they would fare badly indeed, as they could not depend upon the rescued
Christians for the management of the sails and oars in heavy weather. At
the same time, all were most anxious that the prizes should be carried
to Rhodes. Never, save as the result of some great battle, had such a
fleet of captured galleys been brought in, and the knights were prepared
to endure all dangers rather than part with one of them. Finally, after
much discussion, it was determined that they should make for Genoa. From
thence the rescued captives would be able to find their way to their
homes. The great majority were Italians and Spaniards; the former could
proceed by land or sea to their respective homes, while the Spaniards
would have no long time to wait before a vessel of their own nationality
entered the port, even if one were not lying there when they arrived.
Moreover, in any case it would be necessary to despatch a vessel to
Genoa, in order that it might be known that the danger was averted, and
that there was no longer any necessity for getting the galleys ready for
sea.

