
She went to her room, and returned with a shabby old blank book in her
hand.  Some of the girls looked disappointed.

"The cover of mine isn't very nice," explained Rose.  "I'm going to
have it rebound one of these days.  You see it's not a new album at
all, nor a school album; but it's very valuable to me."  Here she
heaved a sentimental sigh.  "All my friends have written in it,"
she said.

The girls were quite impressed by the manner in which Rose said this.
But, when they turned over the pages of the album, they were even more
impressed.  Rose had evidently been on intimate terms with a circle of
most distinguished persons.  Half the autographs in the book were from
gentlemen, and they were dated all over the world.

"Just listen to this!" cried Louisa, and she read,--


   "Thou may'st forget me, but never, never shall I forget thee!"
                                             Alphonso of Castile.
    The Escurial, April 1st.


'Who's he?" asked a circle of awe-struck girls.

"Didn't you ever hear of him?  Youngest brother of the King of Spain,"
replied Rose carelessly.

"Oh, my! and just hear this," exclaimed Annie Silsbie.


   If you ever deign to cast a thought in my direction, Miss Rose,
   remember me always as
              Thy devoted servitor,
                       Potemkin Montmorency.

   St. Petersburg, July 10th.


"And this," shrieked Alice White.


      "They say love is a thorn, I say it is a dart,
       And yet I cannot tear thee from my heart."
                         Antonio, Count of Vallambrosa.


"Do you really and truly know a Count?" asked Bella, backing away
from Rose with eyes as big as saucers.

"Know Antonio de Vallambrosa!  I should think I did," replied Rose.
"Nobody in this country knows him so well, I fancy."

"And he wrote that for you?"

"How else could it get into my book, goosey?"

This was unanswerable; and Rose was installed from that time forward
in the minds of Bella and the rest as a heroine of the first water.
Katy, however, knew better; and the first time she caught Rose alone
she attacked her on the subject.

"Now, Rosy-Posy, confess.  Who wrote all those absurd autographs in
your book?"

"Absurd autographs!  What can you mean?"

"All those Counts and things.  No, it's no use.  You shan't wriggle
away till you tell me."

"Oh, Antonio and dear Potemkin, do you mean them?"

"Yes, of course I do."

"And you really want to know?"

"Yes."

"And will swear not to tell?"

"Yes."

"Well, then," bursting into a laugh, "I wrote every one of them myself."

"Did you really?  When?"

"Day before yesterday.  I thought Lilly needed taking down, she was
so set up with her autographs of Wendell Phillips and Mr. Seward, so
I just sat down and wrote a book full.  It only took me half an hour.
I meant to write some more: in fact, I had one all ready,--


                     'I am dead, or pretty near:
                      David's done for me I fear'
                                           Goliath of Gath.


but I was afraid even Bella wouldn't swallow that, so I tore out the
page.  I'm sorry I did now, for I really think the geese would have
believed it.  Written in his last moments, you know, to oblige an
ancestor of my own," added Rose, in a tone of explanation.

"You monkey!" cried Katy, highly diverted.  But she kept Rose's
counsel, and I daresay some of the Hillsover girls believe in that
wonderful album to this day.

It was not long after that a sad piece of news came for Bella.  Her
father was dead.  Their home was in Iowa, too far to allow of her
returning for the funeral; so the poor little girl stayed at school,
to bear her trouble as best she might.  Katy, who was always kind to
children, and had somewhat affected Bella from the first on account
of her resemblance to Elsie in height and figure, was especially
tender to her now, which Bella repaid with the gift of her whole
queer little heart.  Her affectionate demonstrations were rather of
the monkey order, and not un frequently troublesome; but Katy was never
otherwise than patient and gentle with her, though Rose, and even
Clover, remonstrated on what they called this "singular intimacy."

"Poor little soul!  It's so hard for her, and she's only eleven years
old," she told them.

"She has such a funny way of looking at you sometimes," said Rose, who
was very observant.  "It is just the air of a squirrel who has hidden
a nut, and doesn't want you to find out where, and yet can hardly help
indicating it with his paw.  She's got something on her mind, I'm sure."

"Half a dozen things, very likely," added Clover: "she's such a
mischief."

But none of them guessed what this "something" was.

Early in January Mrs. Nipson announced that in four weeks she proposed
to give a "Soiree," to which all young ladies whose records were
entirely free from marks during the intervening period would be
allowed to come.  This announcement created great excitement, and
the school set itself to be good; but marks were easy to get, and
gradually one girl after another lost her chance, till by the
appointed day only a limited party descended to join the festivities,
and nearly half the school was left upstairs to sigh over past sins.
Katy and Rose were among the unlucky ones.  Rose had incurred a mark
by writing a note in study-hour, and Katy by being five minutes late
to dinner.  They consoled themselves by dressing Clover's hair, and
making her look as pretty as possible, and then stationed themselves
in the upper hall at the head of the stairs to watch her career, and
get as much fun out of the occasion as they could.

Pretty soon they saw Clover below on Professor Seccomb's arm.  He was
a kingly, pleasant man, with a bald head, and it was a fashion among
the girls to admire him.

"Doesn't she look pretty?" said Rose.  "Just notice Mrs. Searles, Katy.
She's grinning at Clover like the Cheshire cat.  What a wonderful cap
that is of hers!  She had it when Sylvia was here at school, eight
years ago."

"Hush! she'll hear you."

"No, she won't.  There's Ellen beginning her piece.  I know she's
frightened by the way she plays.  Hark! how she hurries the time!"

"There, they are going to have refreshments, after all!" cried Esther
Dearborn, as trays of lemonade and cake-baskets appeared below on
their way to the parlor.  "Isn't it a shame to have to stay up here?"

"Professor Seccomb!  Professor!" called Rose, in a daring whisper.
"Take pity upon us.  We are starving for a piece of cake."

The Professor gave a jump; then retreated, and looked upward.  When
he saw the circle of hungry faces peering down, he doubled up with
laughter.  "Wait a moment," he whispered back, and vanished into the
parlor.  Pretty soon the girls saw him making his way through the
crowd with an immense slice of pound-cake in each hand.

"Here, Miss Rose," he said,--"catch it."  But Rose ran half-way
downstairs, received the cake, dimpled her thanks, and retreated to
the darkness above, whence sounds proceeded which sent the amused
Professor into the parlor convulsed with suppressed laughter.
Pretty soon Clover stole up the back stairs to report.

"Are you having a nice time?  Is the lemon-ade good?  Who have you
been talking with?" inquired a chorus of voices.

"Pretty nice.  Everybody is very old.  I haven't been talking to
anybody in particular, and the lemonade is only cream-of-tartar water.
I guess it's jollier up here with you," replied Clover.  "I must go
now: my turn to play comes next."  Down she ran.

"Except for the glory of the thing, I think we're having more fun than
she," answered Rose.

Next week came St. Valentine's Day.  Several of the girls received
valentines from home, and they wrote them to each other.  Katy and
Clover both had one from Phil, exactly alike, with the same purple
bird in the middle of the page, and "I love you" printed underneath;
and they joined in fabricating a gorgeous one for Rose, which was
supposed to come from Potemkin de Montmorencey, the hero of the album.
But the most surprising valentine was received by Miss Jane.  It
came with the others, while all the household were at dinner.  The
girls saw her redden and look angry, but she put the letter in her
pocket, and said nothing.

In the afternoon, it came out through Bella that "Miss Jane's letter
was in poetry, and that she was just mad as fire about it."  Just
before tea, Louisa came running down the Row, to No. 5, where Katy
was sitting with Rose.

"Girls, what do you think?  That letter which Miss Jane got this
morning was a valentine, the most dreadful thing, but so funny!"
she stopped to laugh.

"How do you know?" cried the other two.

"Miss Marsh told Alice Gibbons.  She's a sort of cousin, you know; and
Miss Marsh often tells her things.  She says Miss Jane and Mrs. Nipson
are furious, and are determined to find out who sent it.  It was from
Mr. Hardhack, Miss Jane's missionary,--or no, not from Mr. Hardhack,
but from a cannibal who had just eaten Mr. Hardhack up; and he sent
Miss Jane a lock of his hair, and the recipe the tribe cooked him by.
They found him 'very nice,' he said, and 'He turned out quite tender.'
That was one of the lines in the poem.  Did you ever hear of any thing
like it?  Who do you suppose could have sent it?"

"Who could it have been?" cried the others.  Katy had one moment's
awful misgiving; but a glance at Rose's face, calm and innocent as a
baby's, reassured her.  It was impossible that she could have done
this mischievous thing.  Katy, you see, was not privy to that entry
in Rose's journal, "Pay Miss Jane off," nor aware that Rose had just
written underneath, "Did it.  Feb. 14, 1869."

Nobody ever found out the author of this audacious valentine.  Rose
kept her own counsel, and Miss Jane probably concluded that "the
better part of valor was discretion," for the threatened inquiries
were never made.

And now it lacked but six weeks to the end of the term.  The girls
counted the days, and practised various devices to make them pass
more quickly.  Esther Dearborn, who had a turn for arithmetic, set
herself to a careful calculation of how many hours, minutes, and
seconds must pass before the happy time should come.  Annie Silsbie
strung forty-two tiny squares of card-board on a thread and each
night slipped one off and burned it up in the candle.  Others made
diagrams of the time, with a division for each day, and every night
blotted one out with a sense of triumph.  None of these devices made
the time hasten. It never moved more slowly than now, when life
seemed to consist of a universal waiting.

But though Katy's heart bounded at the thought of home till she could
hardly bear the gladness, she owned to Clover,--"Do you know, much as
I long to get away, I am half sorry to go!  It is parting with something
which we shall never have any more.  Home is lovely, and I would rather
be there than anywhere else; but, if you and I live to be a hundred,
we shall never be girls at boarding-school again."




CHAPTER XIII.  PARADISE REGAINED.


"Only seven days more to cross off," said Clover, drawing her pencil
through one of the squares on the diagram pinned beside her looking-
glass, "seven more, and then--oh, joy!--papa will be here, and we
shall start for home."

She was interrupted by the entrance of Katy, holding a letter and
looking pale and aggrieved.

"Oh, Clover," she cried, "just listen to this!  Papa can't come for
us.  Isn't it too bad?"  And she read:--


"Burnet, March 20.

"My dear Girls,--I find that it will not be possible for me to come
for you next week, as I intended.  Several people are severely ill,
and old Mrs. Barlow struck down suddenly with paralysis, so I cannot
leave.  I am sorry, and so will you be; but there is no help for it.
Fortunately, Mrs. Hall has just heard that some friends of hers are
coming westward with their family, and she has written to ask them
to take charge of you.  The drawback to this plan is, that you will
have to travel alone as far as Albany, where Mr. Peters (Mrs. Hall's
friend) will meet you.  I have written to ask Mr. Page to put you
on the train, and under the care of the conductor, on Tuesday morning.
I hope you will get through without embarassment.  Mr. Peters will
be at the station in Albany to receive you; or, if any thing should
hinder him, you are to drive at once to the Delavan House where they
are staying.  I enclose a check for your journey.  If Dorry were five
years older, I should send him after you.

"The children are most impatient to have you back.  Miss Finch has
been suddenly called away by the illness of her sister-in-law, so
Elsie is keeping house till you return.

"God bless you, my dear daughters, and send you safe.

                    "Yours affectionately,
                                     P. Carr."


"Oh, dear!" said Clover, with her lip trembling, "now papa won't see
Rosy."

"No," said Katy, "and Rosy and Louisa and the rest won't see him.
That is the worst of all.  I wanted them to so much.  And just think
how dismal it will be to travel with people we don't know.  It's too,
too bad, I declare."

"I do think old Mrs. Barlow might have put off being ill just one week
longer," grumbled Clover.  "It takes away half the pleasure of going
home."

The girls might be excused for being cross, for this was a great
disappointment.  There was no help for it, however, as papa said.
They could only sigh and submit.  But the journey, to which they
had looked forward so much, was no longer thought of as a pleasure,
only a disagreeable necessity, something which must be endured in
order that they might reach home.

Five, four, three days,--the last little square was crossed off, the
