
After that they remained silent. From a great distance came a shouting,
and the whistling of locomotives. The trees were being hauled from the
car tracks. A little later they heard more whistling and then the two
trains passed on their way.

"The trains have gone," whispered Malone. "Do you think the boy got
aboard one of them?"

"No, I don't," answered his companion. "He is too determined a lad to
give up so easily. He must be still looking for us."



CHAPTER XXVIII.


FROM OUT OF A TREE.


Caven was right, Joe and his newly-made friend were still in the woods,
doing their best to locate the two rascals.

They had found the trail but lost it in the patch of tall timber, and
were gazing around when they heard the trains leaving the cut.

"There goes our outfit, friend," said the westerner. "And there won't be
another train along for several hours."

"It's too bad, but it can't be helped," answered our hero. "But I'll pay
you for all time lost, Mr.--"

"Plain Bill Badger is my handle, stranger."

"My name is Joe Bodley."

"What about these two varmin you are after?"

"They were trying to rob a friend of mine of some mining shares,"
answered Joe, and gave a few details.

"Well, I vow!" cried Bill Badger "That mine is close to one my dad owns.
They say it ain't of much account though."

"Mr. Vane thinks it is valuable. He has had a mining expert go into the
matter with great care."

"Then that's a different thing. Were you bound for the mine?"

"Yes, and so was Mr. Vane. We were on the train together when he was
robbed."

"I see. I was going out to my dad's mine."

"Then perhaps we can journey together--after we get through here," said
Joe.

"I'm willing. I like your looks. Shake." And the pair shook hands.

Although a westerner, Bill Badger knew no more about following a trail
than did our hero, consequently they proceeded on their hunt with
difficulty.

"Reckon we've missed 'em," said Bill Badger, a while later. "Don't see
hide nor hair of 'em anywhere."

"It's too bad if they got away," answered Joe. "Perhaps--What was that?"

The cracking of a tree limb had reached their ears, followed by a cry of
alarm. A limb upon which Pat Malone was standing had broken, causing the
fellow to slip to another branch below.

"Hush! don't make so much noise!" said Caven, in alarm.

"Gosh! I thought I was going to tumble, out of the tree to the ground,"
gasped Malone, when he could catch his breath.

"They are coming--I can see them," whispered Gaff Caven. "Be as quiet as
a mouse."

In a moment more Joe and Bill Badger stood directly under the tree.

"I think the noise came from near here," said Joe.

"I agree," answered the westerner.

At that moment our hero looked up and saw a man's arm circling a tree
limb far over his head.

"They are up there!" he shouted.

"Sure?"

"Yes, I just saw one of them."

"Then we've got 'em treed," came with a broad grin from Bill Badger.
"What's the next turn of the game?"

"We have got to make them both prisoners."

"All right. Have you got a shooting iron?"

"No, but I can get a club."

"Then do it, and I'll use this, if it's necessary," and the young
westerner pulled a pistol from his hip pocket.

"I wish we had some ropes, with which to tie them," continued Joe.

"Here's a good big handkerchief."

"That's an idea. My handkerchief is also good and strong."

"You do the pow-wowing and I'll do the shooting, if it's necessary,"
said Bill Badger.

Joe looked up into the tree again but could see nobody.

"Caven!" he called out. "I know you are up there and I want you to come
down."

To this remark and request there was no reply.

"If you don't come down we may begin to fire at you," went on our hero.

"Oh, say, do you think he'll shoot?" whispered Malone, in sudden alarm.

"No; shut up!" returned Caven.

"Are you coming down or not?" went on Joe.

Still there was no reply.

"I'll give 'em a shot to warn 'em," said Bill Badger, and fired into the
air at random.

"Don't shoot me!" roared Pat Malone. "Please don't! I'll come down!"

"Well, you come down first. Caven, you stay up there for the present."

After this there was a pause, and presently Pat Malone came down out of
the tree looking sheepish enough.

"Up with your hands!" cried Bill Badger, and confronted by the firearms
the hands of the rascal went up in a hurry.

Then Joe took his handkerchief and stepped up behind Malone. The hands
were lowered and crossed and our hero tied them firmly together at the
wrists.

"Now back up to that tree yonder," said our hero. "And don't you dare to
move."

"I'll do just as you say," whined Malone. "Only don't shoot me." He was
a coward at heart.

"Now, Caven, you come down!" shouted Joe.

"I don't think I care to," answered that rascal, coolly.

"If you don't come down I'll come up after you with my pistol," broke in
Bill Badger.

"Maybe I can do a little shooting myself," went on Gaff Caven.

"I'll risk that."

More words followed, but in the end Caven thought it best to descend and
did so. Yet his face still wore a look of defiance. He was compelled to
turn around, and his hands were also tied behind him.

"Now I want those mining shares, Caven," said Joe.

"I haven't got them."

"Where is the satchel?"

"I threw it away when you started after me."

"Down at the railroad tracks?"

"Yes."

"Don't you believe that," broke in Bill Badger. "At least, not unless he
emptied the satchel first."

"Show me the way you came," said Joe.

"Make him point out the satchel, or make him suffer," went on Bill
Badger.

"I've got an idea!" cried our hero, suddenly. "Perhaps he left the
satchel in the tree."

"That's so. Well, if you want to climb up and look around, I'll watch
the pair of 'em."

"Don't let them get away."

"If they try it, they'll go to the hospital or the graveyard," replied
the western young man, significantly.

"The satchel ain't in the tree," growled Caven, but his tone lacked
positiveness.

"I'll soon know for certain," said our hero.

He climbed the tree with ease, having been used to such doings when
living with the old hermit. As he went from branch to branch he kept his
eyes open, and presently saw a bit of leather sticking out of a crotch.
He worked his way over and soon had the satchel in his possession.

"How are you making out?" called up Bill Badger.

"I've got it!" shouted our hero, joyfully.

"Got the papers?"

"Yes,--everything," said Joe, after a hasty examination.

"Hang the luck!" muttered Gaff Caven, much chagrined.

Our hero was soon on the ground once more. Here he examined the contents
of the satchel with care. Everything was there, and, locking the bag, he
slung the strap over his shoulder.

"Now, what's the next move?" queried Bill Badger.

"We ought to have these men locked up. How far is it to the nearest
town?"

"Ten or twelve miles, I reckon. I don't know much about the roads."

"Why can't you let us go?" asked Malone. "You've got what you want."

"If I let you go you'll be trying to make more trouble for Mr. Vane and
myself."

"Don't talk to them," growled Caven. "If you want to lock us up, do so!"

He was in an ugly humor and ready for a fight.

"We'll march 'em along," said Bill Badger, and so it was agreed.



CHAPTER XXIX.


THE FATE OF TWO EVILDOERS.


"Are you going to let them arrest us?" whispered Pat Malone, as the
whole party moved through the woods towards a wagon road which ran
nearly parallel to the railroad tracks.

"Not if I can help it," Caven whispered back. "We must watch our
chances."

Half a mile was covered and they came out on the road. It was growing
dark and there were signs of a storm in the air.

"It's going to rain," said Joe, and he was right.

"See here, I don't want to get wet to the skin," growled Caven. "I'll
catch my death of cold."

"There is a barn just ahead," said Bill Badger. "Let us get inside."

Joe was willing, and soon all were in the barn. It was now raining at a
heavy rate and they were glad to be under shelter.

"With a barn there ought to be a house," remarked our hero. "But I don't
see any."

It grew still darker, and the rain came down in perfect sheets. The roof
of the barn leaked, and they had to move from one spot to another, to
keep out of the drippings.

While this was going on Gaff Caven was working at the handkerchief
that bound his wrists and soon had it loose. Pat Malone also liberated
himself. Caven winked suggestively at his confederate.

"Watch me," he whispered. "When I give the signal we'll knock 'em both
down and run for it."

"But the pistol--" began Malone.

"I'll take care of that."

In moving around the old barn Caven spotted a club and moved close to
it. Suddenly he snatched the weapon up and hit Bill Badger on the arm
with it. The pistol flew into a corner and went off, sending a bullet
into a board.

"Run!" yelled Caven, and leaped for the open doorway. Malone came beside
him, and both ran off through the rain as fast as their legs could carry
them.

Joe was startled and made after the pair. But at a groan from Bill
Badger he paused.

"Are you badly hurt?" he asked.

"He gave me a stiff crack on the arm," growled the young westerner.

Joe ran for the corner and caught up the pistol. Then he leaped for the
open doorway.

"Stop, both of you!" he called out. "Stop, or I'll fire!"

"Don't you dare!" shrieked Pat Malone, and ran faster than ever, behind
the nearest of the trees. Joe aimed the weapon, but before he could pull
the trigger both of the bad men were out of sight.

"Go after them, if you want to," said Bill Badger. "I'll go too."

"You are not badly hurt?" queried our hero, sympathetically.

"No, but if I catch that fellow I'll give it to him good," grumbled the
young westerner.

Both now left the barn and made after Caven and Malone. Once they caught
sight of the rascals, moving in the direction of the railroad tracks.

"They are going to catch a train if they can!" cried our hero. "I hear
one coming."

"It's a freight most likely," was Bill Badger's answer.

He was right, and soon the long line of freight cars hove into sight
around a bend and on an upgrade. Far in the distance they beheld Caven
and Malone scooting for the train with all speed.

"They are going to make it," sighed Joe. "Too bad!"

They continued to run, but before they could get anywhere near the
tracks they saw Caven leap for the train and get between two of the
cars. Then Malone got aboard also, and the freight train passed out of
sight through the cut.

"That ends the chase," said Joe, halting. "They were slick to get away."

"If we only knew where they would get off we could send word ahead,"
suggested his companion.

"Well, we don't know, and after this they will probably keep their eyes
wide open and keep out of sight as much as possible. Anyway, I don't
think they'll bother Mr. Vane any more."

"It's not likely. I'm a witness to what they were up to," answered the
young westerner.

Both Joe and Bill Badger were soaked from the rain and resolved to
strike out for the nearest farmhouse or village. They kept along the
railroad tracks, and presently came to a shanty where there was a
track-walker.

"How far to the nearest village?" asked our hero.

"Half a mile."

"Thank you."

"How is it you are out here in the rain?" went on the track-walker.

"We got off our train and it went off without us."

"Oh, I see. Too bad."

Again our hero and his companion hurried on, and soon came in sight of
a small village. They inquired their way to a tavern, and there dried
their clothing and procured a good, hot meal, which made both feel much
better.

