"Perhaps it is Frank Whitney," suggested Fosdick, after a little
reflection. "Didn't he promise to write to you?"

"Yes," said Dick, "and he wanted me to write to him."

"Where is he now?"

"He was going to a boarding-school in Connecticut, he said. The name
of the town was Barnton."

"Very likely the letter is from him."

"I hope it is. Frank was a tip-top boy, and he was the first that
made me ashamed of bein' so ignorant and dirty."

"You had better go to the post-office to-morrow morning, and ask for
the letter."

"P'r'aps they won't give it to me."

"Suppose you wear the old clothes you used to a year ago, when Frank
first saw you? They won't have any doubt of your being Ragged Dick
then."

"I guess I will. I'll be sort of ashamed to be seen in 'em though,"
said Dick, who had considerable more pride in a neat personal
appearance than when we were first introduced to him.

"It will be only for one day, or one morning," said Fosdick.

"I'd do more'n that for the sake of gettin' a letter from Frank. I'd
like to see him."

The next morning, in accordance with the suggestion of Fosdick, Dick
arrayed himself in the long disused Washington coat and Napoleon
pants, which he had carefully preserved, for what reason he could
hardly explain.

When fairly equipped, Dick surveyed himself in the mirror,--if the
little seven-by-nine-inch looking-glass, with which the room was
furnished, deserved the name. The result of the survey was not on
the whole a pleasing one. To tell the truth, Dick was quite ashamed
of his appearance, and, on opening the chamber-door, looked around
to see that the coast was clear, not being willing to have any of
his fellow-boarders see him in his present attire.

He managed to slip out into the street unobserved, and, after
attending to two or three regular customers who came down-town
early in the morning, he made his way down Nassau Street to the
post-office. He passed along until he came to a compartment on
which he read ADVERTISED LETTERS, and, stepping up to the little
window, said,--

"There's a letter for me. I saw it advertised in the 'Sun'
yesterday."

"What name?" demanded the clerk.

"Ragged Dick," answered our hero.

"That's a queer name," said the clerk, surveying him a little
curiously. "Are you Ragged Dick?"

"If you don't believe me, look at my clo'es," said Dick.

"That's pretty good proof, certainly," said the clerk, laughing. "If
that isn't your name, it deserves to be."

"I believe in dressin' up to your name," said Dick.

"Do you know any one in Barnton, Connecticut?" asked the clerk, who
had by this time found the letter.

"Yes," said Dick. "I know a chap that's at boardin'-school there."

"It appears to be in a boy's hand. I think it must be yours."

The letter was handed to Dick through the window. He received it
eagerly, and drawing back so as not to be in the way of the throng
who were constantly applying for letters, or slipping them into the
boxes provided for them, hastily opened it, and began to read. As
the reader may be interested in the contents of the letter as well
as Dick, we transcribe it below.

It was dated Barnton, Conn., and commenced thus,--


"DEAR DICK,--You must excuse my addressing this letter to 'Ragged
Dick'; but the fact is, I don't know what your last name is, nor
where you live. I am afraid there is not much chance of your getting
this letter; but I hope you will. I have thought of you very often,
and wondered how you were getting along, and I should have written
to you before if I had known where to direct.

"Let me tell you a little about myself. Barnton is a very
pretty country town, only about six miles from Hartford. The
boarding-school which I attend is under the charge of Ezekiel
Munroe, A.M. He is a man of about fifty, a graduate of Yale College,
and has always been a teacher. It is a large two-story house, with
an addition containing a good many small bed-chambers for the boys.
There are about twenty of us, and there is one assistant teacher who
teaches the English branches. Mr. Munroe, or Old Zeke, as we call
him behind his back, teaches Latin and Greek. I am studying both
these languages, because father wants me to go to college.

"But you won't be interested in hearing about our studies. I will
tell you how we amuse ourselves. There are about fifty acres of land
belonging to Mr. Munroe; so that we have plenty of room for play.
About a quarter of a mile from the house there is a good-sized pond.
There is a large, round-bottomed boat, which is stout and strong.
Every Wednesday and Saturday afternoon, when the weather is good, we
go out rowing on the pond. Mr. Barton, the assistant teacher, goes
with us, to look after us. In the summer we are allowed to go in
bathing. In the winter there is splendid skating on the pond.

"Besides this, we play ball a good deal, and we have various other
plays. So we have a pretty good time, although we study pretty hard
too. I am getting on very well in my studies. Father has not decided
yet where he will send me to college.

"I wish you were here, Dick. I should enjoy your company, and
besides I should like to feel that you were getting an education. I
think you are naturally a pretty smart boy; but I suppose, as you
have to earn your own living, you don't get much chance to learn. I
only wish I had a few hundred dollars of my own. I would have you
come up here, and attend school with us. If I ever have a chance to
help you in any way, you may be sure that I will.

"I shall have to wind up my letter now, as I have to hand in a
composition to-morrow, on the life and character of Washington. I
might say that I have a friend who wears a coat that once belonged
to the general. But I suppose that coat must be worn out by this
time. I don't much like writing compositions. I would a good deal
rather write letters.

"I have written a longer letter than I meant to. I hope you will get
it, though I am afraid not. If you do, you must be sure to answer
it, as soon as possible. You needn't mind if your writing does look
like 'hens-tracks,' as you told me once.

"Good-by, Dick. You must always think of me, as your very true
friend,

"FRANK WHITNEY."


Dick read this letter with much satisfaction. It is always pleasant
to be remembered, and Dick had so few friends that it was more to
him than to boys who are better provided. Again, he felt a new sense
of importance in having a letter addressed to him. It was the first
letter he had ever received. If it had been sent to him a year
before, he would not have been able to read it. But now, thanks to
Fosdick's instructions, he could not only read writing, but he could
write a very good hand himself.

There was one passage in the letter which pleased Dick. It was where
Frank said that if he had the money he would pay for his education
himself.

"He's a tip-top feller," said Dick. "I wish I could see him ag'in."

There were two reasons why Dick would like to have seen Frank. One
was, the natural pleasure he would have in meeting a friend; but he
felt also that he would like to have Frank witness the improvement
he had made in his studies and mode of life.

"He'd find me a little more 'spectable than when he first saw me,"
thought Dick.

Dick had by this time got up to Printing House Square. Standing on
Spruce Street, near the "Tribune" office, was his old enemy, Micky
Maguire.

It has already been said that Micky felt a natural enmity towards
those in his own condition in life who wore better clothes than
himself. For the last nine months, Dick's neat appearance had
excited the ire of the young Philistine. To appear in neat attire
and with a clean face Micky felt was a piece of presumption, and an
assumption of superiority on the part of our hero, and he termed it
"tryin' to be a swell."

Now his astonished eyes rested on Dick in his ancient attire, which
was very similar to his own. It was a moment of triumph to him. He
felt that "pride had had a fall," and he could not forbear reminding
Dick of it.

"Them's nice clo'es you've got on," said he, sarcastically, as Dick
came up.

"Yes," said Dick, promptly. "I've been employin' your tailor. If my
face was only dirty we'd be taken for twin brothers."

"So you've give up tryin' to be a swell?"

"Only for this partic'lar occasion," said Dick. "I wanted to make a
fashionable call, so I put on my regimentals."

"I don't b'lieve you've got any better clo'es," said Micky.

"All right," said Dick, "I won't charge you nothin' for what you
believe."

Here a customer presented himself for Micky, and Dick went back to
his room to change his clothes, before resuming business.



CHAPTER XXV

DICK WRITES HIS FIRST LETTER


When Fosdick reached home in the evening, Dick displayed his letter
with some pride.

"It's a nice letter," said Fosdick, after reading it. "I should like
to know Frank."

"I'll bet you would," said Dick. "He's a trump."

"When are you going to answer it?"

"I don't know," said Dick, dubiously. "I never writ a letter."

"That's no reason why you shouldn't. There's always a first time,
you know."

"I don't know what to say," said Dick.

"Get some paper and sit down to it, and you'll find enough to say.
You can do that this evening instead of studying."

"If you'll look it over afterwards, and shine it up a little."

"Yes, if it needs it; but I rather think Frank would like it best
just as you wrote it."

Dick decided to adopt Fosdick's suggestion. He had very serious
doubts as to his ability to write a letter. Like a good many other
boys, he looked upon it as a very serious job, not reflecting that,
after all, letter-writing is nothing but talking upon paper. Still,
in spite of his misgivings, he felt that the letter ought to be
answered, and he wished Frank to hear from him. After various
preparations, he at last got settled down to his task, and, before
the evening was over, a letter was written. As the first letter
which Dick had ever produced, and because it was characteristic
of him, my readers may like to read it.

Here it is,--


"DEAR FRANK,--I got your letter this mornin', and was very glad to
hear you hadn't forgotten Ragged Dick. I aint so ragged as I was.
Openwork coats and trowsers has gone out of fashion. I put on the
Washington coat and Napoleon pants to go to the post-office, for
fear they wouldn't think I was the boy that was meant. On my way
back I received the congratulations of my intimate friend, Micky
Maguire, on my improved appearance.

"I've give up sleepin' in boxes, and old wagons, findin' it didn't
agree with my constitution. I've hired a room in Mott Street, and
have got a private tooter, who rooms with me and looks after my
studies in the evenin'. Mott Street aint very fashionable; but my
manshun on Fifth Avenoo isn't finished yet, and I'm afraid it won't
be till I'm a gray-haired veteran. I've got a hundred dollars
towards it, which I've saved up from my earnin's. I haven't forgot
what you and your uncle said to me, and I'm tryin' to grow up
'spectable. I haven't been to Tony Pastor's, or the Old Bowery, for
ever so long. I'd rather save up my money to support me in my old
age. When my hair gets gray, I'm goin' to knock off blackin' boots,
and go into some light, genteel employment, such as keepin' an
apple-stand, or disseminatin' pea-nuts among the people.

"I've got so as to read pretty well, so my tooter says. I've been
studyin' geography and grammar also. I've made such astonishin'
progress that I can tell a noun from a conjunction as far away as
I can see 'em. Tell Mr. Munroe that if he wants an accomplished
teacher in his school, he can send for me, and I'll come on by the
very next train. Or, if he wants to sell out for a hundred dollars,
I'll buy the whole concern, and agree to teach the scholars all I
know myself in less than six months. Is teachin' as good business,
generally speakin', as blackin' boots? My private tooter combines
both, and is makin' a fortun' with great rapidity. He'll be as rich
as Astor some time, _if he only lives long enough._

"I should think you'd have a bully time at your school. I should
like to go out in the boat, or play ball with you. When are you
comin' to the city? I wish you'd write and let me know when you do,
and I'll call and see you. I'll leave my business in the hands of my
numerous clerks, and go round with you. There's lots of things you
didn't see when you was here before. They're getting on fast at the
Central Park. It looks better than it did a year ago.

"I aint much used to writin' letters. As this is the first one I
ever wrote, I hope you'll excuse the mistakes. I hope you'll write
to me again soon. I can't write so good a letter as you; but, I'll
do my best, as the man said when he was asked if he could swim over
to Brooklyn backwards. Good-by, Frank. Thank you for all your
kindness. Direct your next letter to No. -- Mott Street.

  "Your true friend,
  "DICK HUNTER."


When Dick had written the last word, he leaned back in his chair,
and surveyed the letter with much satisfaction.

"I didn't think I could have wrote such a long letter, Fosdick,"
said he.

"Written would be more grammatical, Dick," suggested his friend.

"I guess there's plenty of mistakes in it," said Dick. "Just look at
it, and see."

Fosdick took the letter, and read it over carefully.

"Yes, there are some mistakes," he said; "but it sounds so much like
you that I think it would be better to let it go just as it is. It
will be more likely to remind Frank of what you were when he first
saw you."

"Is it good enough to send?" asked Dick, anxiously.

"Yes; it seems to me to be quite a good letter. It is written just
as you talk. Nobody but you could have written such a letter, Dick.
I think Frank will be amused at your proposal to come up there as
teacher."

"P'r'aps it would be a good idea for us to open a seleck school here
in Mott Street," said Dick, humorously. "We could call it 'Professor
Fosdick and Hunter's Mott Street Seminary.' Boot-blackin' taught by
Professor Hunter."

The evening was so far advanced that Dick decided to postpone
copying his letter till the next evening. By this time he had come
to have a very fair handwriting, so that when the letter was
complete it really looked quite creditable, and no one would have
suspected that it was Dick's first attempt in this line. Our hero
surveyed it with no little complacency. In fact, he felt rather
proud of it, since it reminded him of the great progress he had
made. He carried it down to the post-office, and deposited it with
his own hands in the proper box. Just on the steps of the building,
as he was coming out, he met Johnny Nolan, who had been sent on an
errand to Wall Street by some gentleman, and was just returning.

"What are you doin' down here, Dick?" asked Johnny.

"I've been mailin' a letter."

"Who sent you?"

"Nobody."

"I mean, who writ the letter?"

"I wrote it myself."

"Can you write letters?" asked Johnny, in amazement.

"Why shouldn't I?"

"I didn't know you could write. I can't."

"Then you ought to learn."

"I went to school once; but it was too hard work, so I give it up."

"You're lazy, Johnny,--that's what's the matter. How'd you ever
