at the Palmer House."

"Thank you, my lord; I will certainly inquire for you there."

"He is a very good fellow, even if he is a lord," thought Carl.

Our young hero was a thorough American, and was disposed to think with
Robert Burns, that

    "The rank is but the guinea, stamp;
    The man's the gold for a' that!"

No incident worth recording befell Carl on his trip to Chicago. As a
salesman he met with excellent success, and surprised Mr. Jennings by
the size of his orders. He was led, on reaching Chicago, to register at
the Sherman House, on Clark Street, one of the most reliable among the
many houses for travelers offered by the great Western metropolis.

On the second day he made it a point to find out the store of John
French, hoping to acquire the information desired by Miss Norris.

It was a store of good size, and apparently well stocked. Feeling the
need of new footgear, Carl entered and asked to be shown some shoes. He
was waited upon by a young clerk named Gray, with whom he struck up a
pleasant acquaintance.

"Do you live in Chicago?" asked Gray? sociably.

"No; I am from New York State. I am here on business."

"Staying at a hotel?"

"Yes, at the Sherman. If you are at leisure this evening I shall be glad
to have you call on me. I am a stranger here, and likely to find the
time hang heavy on my hands."

"I shall be free at six o'clock."

"Then come to supper with me."

"Thank you, I shall be glad to do so," answered Gray, with alacrity.
Living as he did at a cheap boarding house, the prospect of a supper at
a first-class hotel was very attractive. He was a pleasant-faced young
man of twenty, who had drifted to Chicago from his country home in
Indiana, and found it hard to make both ends meet on a salary of nine
dollars a week. His habits were good, his manner was attractive and
won him popularity with customer's, and with patience he was likely to
succeed in the end.

"I wish I could live like this every day," he said, as he rose from a
luxurious supper. "At present my finances won't allow me to board at the
Sherman."

"Nor would mine," said Carl; "but I am allowed to spend money more
freely when I am traveling."

"Are you acquainted in New York?" asked Gray.

"I have little or no acquaintance in the city," answered Carl.

"I should be glad to get a position there."

"Are you not satisfied with your present place?"

"I am afraid I shall not long keep it."

"Why not? Do you think you are in any danger of being discharged?"

"It is not that. I am afraid Mr. French will be obliged to give up
business."

"Why?" asked Carl, with keen interest.

"I have reason to think he is embarrassed. I know that he has a good
many bills out, some of which have been running a long time. If any
pressure is brought to bear upon him, he may have to suspend."

Carl felt that he was obtaining important information. If Mr. French
were in such a condition Miss Norris would be pretty sure to lose her
money if she advanced it.

"To what do you attribute Mr. French's embarrassment?" he asked.

"He lives expensively in a handsome house near Lincoln Park, and draws
heavily upon the business for his living expenses. I think that explains
it. I only wonder that he has been able to hold out so long."

"Perhaps if he were assisted he would be able to keep his head above
water."

"He would need a good deal of assistance. You see that my place isn't
very secure, and I shall soon need to be looking up another."

"I don't think I shall need to inquire any farther," thought Carl. "It
seems to me Miss Norris had better keep her money."

Before he retired he indited the following letter to his Albany
employer:


Miss Rachel Norris.

"Dear Madam:--I have attended to your commission, and have to report
that Mr. French appears to be involved in business embarrassments, and
in great danger to bankruptcy. The loan he asks of you would no doubt be
of service, but probably would not long delay the crash. If you wish to
assist him, it would be better to allow him to fail, and then advance
him the money to put him on his feet. I am told that his troubles come
from living beyond his means.

"Yours respectfully,

"Carl Crawford."


By return mail Carl received the following note:


"My Dear Young Friend:--Your report confirms the confidence I reposed in
you. It is just the information I desired. I shall take your advice and
refuse the loan. What other action I may take hereafter I cannot tell.
When you return, should you stop in Albany, please call on me. If unable
to do this, write me from Milford.

"Your friend,

"Rachel Norris."


Carl was detained for several days in Chicago. He chanced to meet his
English friend, Lord Bedford, upon his arrival, and the nobleman, on
learning where he was staying, also registered at the Sherman House. In
his company Carl took a drive over the magnificent boulevard which is
the pride of Chicago, and rose several degrees in the opinion of those
guests who noticed his intimacy with the English guest.

Carl had just completed his Chicago business when, on entering the
hotel, he was surprised to see a neighbor of his father's--Cyrus
Robinson--a prominent business man of Edgewood Center. Carl was
delighted, for he had not been home, or seen any home friends for over a
year.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Robinson," he said, offering his hand.

"What! Carl Crawford!" exclaimed Robinson, in amazement. "How came you
in Chicago? Your father did not tell me you were here."

"He does not know it. I am only here on a business visit. Tell me, Mr.
Robinson, how is my father?"

"I think, Carl, that he is not at all well. I am quite sure he misses
you, and I don't believe your stepmother's influence over him is
beneficial. Just before I came away I heard a rumor that troubled me. It
is believed in Edgewood that she is trying to induce your father to make
a will leaving all, or nearly all his property to her and her son."

"I don't care so much for that, Mr. Robinson, as for my father's
health."

"Carl," said Robinson, significantly, "if such a will is made I don't
believe your father will live long after it."

"You don't mean that?" said Carl, horror-struck.

"I think Mrs. Crawford, by artful means will worry your father to death.
He is of a nervous temperament, and an unscrupulous woman can shorten
his life without laying herself open to the law."

Carl's face grew stern.

"I will save my father," he said, "and defeat my stepmother's wicked
schemes."

"I pray Heaven you can. There is no time to be lost."

"I shall lose no time, you may be sure. I shall be at Edgewood within a
week."



CHAPTER XXXVI.

MAKING A WILL.


In Edgewood Center events moved slowly. In Carl Crawford's home dullness
reigned supreme. He had been the life of the house, and his absence,
though welcome to his stepmother, was seriously felt by his father, who
day by day became thinner and weaker, while his step grew listless and
his face seldom brightened with a smile. He was anxious to have Carl at
home again, and the desire became so strong that he finally broached the
subject.

"My dear," he said one day at the breakfast table, "I have been thinking
of Carl considerably of late."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Crawford, coldly.

"I think I should like to have him at home once more."

Mrs. Crawford smiled ominously.

"He is better off where he is," she said, softly.

"But he is my only son, and I never see him," pleaded her husband.

"You know very well, Dr. Crawford," rejoined his wife, "that your son
only made trouble in the house while he was here."

"Yet it seems hard that he should be driven from his father's home, and
forced to take refuge among strangers."

"I don't know what you mean by his being driven from home," said Mrs.
Crawford, tossing her head. "He made himself disagreeable, and, not
being able to have his own way, he took French leave."

"The house seems very lonely without him," went on Dr. Crawford, who was
too wise to get into an argument with his wife.

"It certainly is more quiet. As for company, Peter is still here, and
would at any time stay with you."

Peter did not relish this suggestion, and did not indorse it.

"I should not care to confine him to the house," said Dr. Crawford, as
his glance rested on the plain and by no means agreeable face of his
stepson.

"I suppose I need not speak of myself. You know that you can always call
upon me."

If Dr. Crawford had been warmly attached to his second wife, this
proposal would have cheered him, but the time had gone by when he found
any pleasure in her society. There was a feeling of almost repulsion
which he tried to conceal, and he was obliged to acknowledge to himself
that the presence of his wife gave him rather uneasiness than comfort.

"Carl is very well off where he is," resumed Mrs. Crawford. "He is
filling a business position, humble, perhaps, but still one that gives
him his living and keeps him out of mischief. Let well enough alone,
doctor, and don't interrupt his plans."

"I--I may be foolish," said the doctor, hesitating, "but I have not been
feeling as well as usual lately, and if anything should happen to me
while Carl was absent I should die very unhappy."

Mrs. Crawford regarded her husband with uneasiness.

"Do you mean that you think you are in any danger?" she asked.

"I don't know. I am not an old man, but, on the other hand, I am an
invalid. My father died when he was only a year older than I am at
present."

Mrs. Crawford drew out her handkerchief, and proceeded to wipe her
tearless eyes.

"You distress me beyond measure by your words, my dear husband. How can
I think of your death without emotion? What should I do without you?"

"My dear, you must expect to survive me. You are younger than I, and
much stronger."

"Besides," and Mrs. Crawford made an artful pause, "I hardly like to
mention it, but Peter and I are poor, and by your death might be left to
the cold mercies of the world."

"Surely I would not fail to provide for you."

Mrs. Crawford shook her head.

"I am sure of your kind intentions, my husband," she said, "but they
will not avail unless you provide for me in your will."

"Yes, it's only right that I should do so. As soon as I feel equal to
the effort I will draw up a will."

"I hope you will, for I should not care to be dependent on Carl, who
does not like me. I hope you will not think me mercenary, but to Peter
and myself this is of vital importance."

"No, I don't misjudge you. I ought to have thought of it before."

"I don't care so much about myself," said Mrs. Crawford, in a tone of
self-sacrifice, "but I should not like to have Peter thrown upon the
world without means."

"All that you say is wise and reasonable," answered her husband,
wearily. "I will attend to the matter to-morrow."

The next day Mrs. Crawford came into her husband's presence with a sheet
of legal cap.

"My dear husband," she said, in a soft, insinuating tone, "I wished to
spare you trouble, and I have accordingly drawn up a will to submit to
you, and receive your signature, if you approve it."

Dr. Crawford looked surprised.

"Where did you learn to write a will?" he asked.

"I used in my days of poverty to copy documents for a lawyer," she
replied. "In this way I became something of a lawyer myself."

"I see. Will you read what you have prepared?"

Mrs. Crawford read the document in her hand. It provided in the proper
legal phraseology for an equal division of the testator's estate between
the widow and Carl.

"I didn't know, of course, what provision you intended to make for me,"
she said, meekly. "Perhaps you do not care to leave me half the estate."

"Yes, that seems only fair. You do not mention Peter. I ought to do
something for him."

"Your kindness touches me, my dear husband, but I shall be able to
provide for him out of my liberal bequest. I do not wish to rob your
son, Carl. I admit that I do not like him, but that shall not hinder me
from being just."

Dr. Crawford was pleased with this unexpected concession from his wife.
He felt that he should be more at ease if Carl's future was assured.

"Very well, my dear," he said, cheerfully. "I approve of the will as you
have drawn it up, and I will affix my signature at once." "Then, shall I
send for two of the neighbors to witness it?"

"It will be well."

Two near neighbors were sent for and witnessed Dr. Crawford's signature
to the will.

There was a strangely triumphant look in Mrs. Crawford's eyes as she
took the document after it had been duly executed.

"You will let me keep this, doctor?" she asked. "It will be important
for your son as well as myself, that it should be in safe hands."

"Yes; I shall be glad to have you do so. I rejoice that it is off my
mind."

"You won't think me mercenary, my dear husband, or indifferent to your
life?"

"No; why should I?"

"Then I am satisfied."

Mrs. Crawford took the will, and carrying it upstairs, opened her trunk,
removed the false bottom, and deposited under it the last will and
testament of Dr. Paul Crawford.

"At last!" she said to herself. "I am secure, and have compassed what I
have labored for so long."

Dr. Crawford had not noticed that the will to which he affixed his
signature was not the same that had been read to him. Mrs. Crawford had
artfully substituted another paper of quite different tenor. By the will
actually executed, the entire estate was left to Mrs. Crawford, who was
left guardian of her son and Carl, and authorized to make such provision
for each as she might deem suitable. This, of course, made Carl entirely
dependent on a woman who hated him.

"Now, Dr. Paul Crawford," said Mrs. Crawford to herself, with a cold
smile, "you may die as soon as you please. Peter and I are provided for.
Your father died when a year older than you are now, you tell me. It is
hardly likely that you will live to a greater age than he."

She called the next day on the family physician, and with apparent
solicitude asked his opinion of Dr. Crawford's health.

"He is all I have," she said, pathetically, "all except my dear Peter.
Tell me what you think of his chances of continued life."

"Your husband," replied the physician, "has one weak organ. It is his
heart. He may live for fifteen or twenty years, but a sudden excitement
might carry him off in a moment. The best thing you can do for him is to
keep him tranquil and free from any sudden shock."

Mrs. Crawford listened attentively.

"I will do my best," she said, "since so much depends on it."

When she returned home it was with a settled purpose in her heart.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

PETER LETS OUT A SECRET.


"Can you direct me to the house of Dr. Crawford?" asked a stranger.

The inquiry was addressed to Peter Cook in front of the hotel in
Edgewood Center.

"Yes, sir; he is my stepfather!"

"Indeed! I did not know that my old friend was married again. You say
you are his stepson?"

"Yes, sir."

"He has an own son, about your age, I should judge."

"That's Carl! he is a little older than me."

"Is he at home?"

"No," answered Peter, pursing up his lips.

"Is he absent at boarding school?"

"No; he's left home."

"Indeed!" ejaculated the stranger, in surprise. "How is that?"

"He was awfully hard to get along with, and didn't treat mother with
any respect. He wanted to have his own way, and, of course, ma couldn't
stand that."

"I see," returned the stranger, and he eyed Peter curiously. "What did
his father say to his leaving home?" he asked.

"Oh, he always does as ma wishes."

"Was Carl willing to leave home?"

"Yes; he said he would rather go than obey ma."

"I suppose he receives an allowance from his father?"

"No; he wanted one, but ma put her foot down and said he shouldn't have
one."

"Your mother seems to be a woman of considerable firmness."

"You bet, she's firm. She don't allow no boy to boss her."

"Really, this boy is a curiosity," said Reuben Ashcroft to himself. "He
doesn't excel in the amiable and attractive qualities. He has a sort of
brutal frankness which can't keep a secret."
