and into Glinda's camp without anyone having a suspicion that they had
succeeded in their quest.


               Line-Art Drawing



256               The Transformation of Old Mombi


The Witch was at first frightened at finding herself captured by the enemy;
but soon she decided that she was exactly as safe in the Tin Woodman's
button-hole as growing upon the bush. For no one knew the rose and Mombi to
be one, and now that she was without the gates of the City her chances of
escaping altogether from Glinda were much improved.

"But there is no hurry," thought Mombi. "I will wait awhile and enjoy the
humiliation of this Sorceress when she finds I have outwitted her." So
throughout the night the rose lay quietly on the Woodman's bosom, and in the
morning, when Glinda summoned our friends to a consultation, Nick Chopper
carried his pretty flower with him to the white silk tent.



257               Line-Art Drawing


"For some reason," said Glinda, "we have failed to find this cunning old
Mombi; so I fear our expedition will prove a failure. And for that I am
sorry, because without our assistance little Ozma will never be rescued and
restored to her rightful position as Queen of the Emerald City"

"Do not let us give up so easily," said the Pumpkinhead. "Let us do
something else."

"Something else must really be done," replied Glinda, with a smile. "yet I
cannot understand how I have been defeated so easily by an old Witch who
knows far less of magic than I do myself."

"While we are on the ground I believe it would be wise for us to conquer the
Emerald City for Princess Ozma, and find the girl afterward," said the
Scarecrow." And while the girl remains hidden I will gladly rule in her
place, for I understand the business of ruling much better than Jinjur
does."



258

"But I have promised not to molest Jinjur," objected Glinda.

"Suppose you all return with me to my kingdom--or Empire, rather," said
the Tin Woodman, politely including the entire party in a royal wave of his
arm. "It will give me great pleasure to entertain you in my castle, where
there is room enough and to spare. And if any of you wish to be nickel-
plated, my valet will do it free of all expense."

While the Woodman was speaking Glinda's eyes had been noting the rose in his
button-hole, and now she imagined she saw the big red leaves of the flower
tremble slightly. This quickly aroused her suspicions, and in a moment more
the Sorceress had decided that the seeming rose was nothing else than a
transformation of old Mombi. At the same instant Mombi knew she was
discovered and must quickly plan an escape, and as transformations were easy
to her she immediately took the form of a Shadow and glided along the wall
of the tent toward the entrance, thinking thus to disappear.

But Glinda had not only equal cunning, but far more experience than the
Witch. So the Sorceress reached the opening of the tent before the Shadow,
and with a wave of her hand closed the entrance so securely that Mombi could
not find a crack big



259
enough to creep through. The Scarecrow and his friends were greatly
surprised at Glinda's actions; for none of them had noted the Shadow. But
the Sorceress said to them:

"Remain perfectly quiet, all of you! For the old Witch is even now with us
in this tent, and I hope to capture her."

These words so alarmed Mombi that she quickly transformed herself from a
shadow to a Black Ant, in which shape she crawled along the ground, seeking
a crack or crevice in which to hide her tiny body.

Fortunately, the ground where the tent had been pitched, being Just before
the city gates, was hard and smooth; and while the Ant still crawled about,
Glinda discovered it and ran quickly forward to effect its capture But, Just
as her hand was descending, the Witch, now fairly frantic with fear, made
her last transformation, and in the form of a huge Griffin sprang through
the wall of the tent--tearing the silk asunder in her rush--and in a
moment had darted away with the speed of a whirlwind.

Glinda did not hesitate to follow. She sprang upon the back of the Saw-Horse
and cried:

"Now you shall prove that you have a right to be alive! Run--run--run!"

The Saw-Horse ran. Like a flash he followed the



260
Griffin, his wooden legs moving so fast that they twinkled like the rays of
a star. Before our friends could recover from their surprise both the
Griffin and the Saw-Horse had dashed out of sight.

"Come! Let us follow!" cried the Scarecrow.

They ran to the place where the Gump was lying and quickly tumbled aboard.

"Fly!" commanded Tip, eagerly.

"Where to?" asked the Gump, in its calm voice.

"I don't know," returned Tip, who was very nervous at the delay; "but if you
will mount into the air I think we can discover which way Glinda has gone."

               Line-Art Drawing



261

"Very well," returned the Gump, quietly; and it spread its great wings and
mounted high into the air.

Far away, across the meadows, they could now see two tiny specks, speeding
one after the other; and they knew these specks must be the Griffin and the
Saw-Horse. So Tip called the Gump's attention to them and bade the creature
try to overtake the Witch and the Sorceress. But, swift as was the Gump's
flight, the pursued and pursuer moved more swiftly yet, and within a few
moments were blotted out against the dim horizon.

"Let us continue to follow them, nevertheless," said the Scarecrow. "for the
Land of Oz is of small extent, and sooner or later they must both come to a
halt."

Old Mombi had thought herself very wise to choose the form of a Griffin, for
its legs were exceedingly fleet and its strength more enduring than that of
other animals. But she had not reckoned on the untiring energy of the
Saw-Horse, whose wooden limbs could run for days without slacking their speed.
Therefore, after an hour's hard running, the Griffin's breath began to fail,
and it panted and gasped painfully, and moved more slowly than before. Then
it reached the edge of the desert and began racing across the deep sands.
But its tired feet sank far



262
into the sand, and in a few minutes the Griffin fell forward, completely
exhausted, and lay still upon the desert waste.

Glinda came up a moment later, riding the still vigorous Saw-Horse; and
having unwound a slender golden thread from her girdle the Sorceress threw
it over the head of the panting and helpless Griffin, and so destroyed the
magical power of Mombi's transformation.

For the animal, with one fierce shudder, disappeared from view, while in its
place was discovered the form of the old Witch, glaring savagely at the
serene and beautiful face of the Sorceress.

               Line-Art Drawing



263               Full page line-art drawing.



264               Princess Ozma of Oz


"You are my prisoner, and it is useless for you to struggle any longer,"
said Glinda, in her soft, sweet voice. "Lie still a moment, and rest
yourself, and then I will carry you back to my tent."

"Why do you seek me?" asked Mombi, still scarce able to speak plainly for
lack of breath. "What have I done to you, to be so persecuted?"

"You have done nothing to me," answered the gentle Sorceress; "but I suspect
you have been guilty of several wicked actions; and if I find it is true
that you have so abused your knowledge of magic, I intend to punish you
severely."

"I defy you!" croaked the old hag. "You dare not harm me!"

Just then the Gump flew up to them and alighted upon the desert sands beside
Glinda. Our friends



265
were delighted to find that Mombi had finally been captured, and after a
hurried consultation it was decided they should all return to the camp in
the Gump. So the Saw-Horse was tossed aboard, and then Glinda still holding
an end of the golden thread that was around Mombi's neck, forced her
prisoner to climb into the sofas. The others now followed, and Tip gave the
word to the Gump to return.

The Journey was made in safety, Mombi sitting in her place with a grim and
sullen air; for the old hag was absolutely helpless so long as the magical
thread encircled her throat. The army hailed Glinda's return with loud
cheers, and the party of friends soon gathered again in the royal tent,
which had been neatly repaired during their absence.

"Now," said the Sorceress to Mombi, "I want you to tell us why the Wonderful
Wizard of Oz paid you three visits, and what became of the child, Ozma,
which so curiously disappeared."

The Witch looked at Glinda defiantly, but said not a word.

"Answer me!" cried the Sorceress.

But still Mombi remained silent.

"Perhaps she doesn't know," remarked Jack.

"I beg you will keep quiet," said Tip. "You might spoil everything with your
foolishness."



266

"Very well, dear father!" returned the Pumpkinhead, meekly.

"How glad I am to be a Woggle-Bug!" murmured the Highly Magnified Insect,
softly. "No one can expect wisdom to flow from a pumpkin."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "what shall we do to make Mombi speak? Unless
she tells us what we wish to know her capture will do us no good at all."

"Suppose we try kindness," suggested the Tin Woodman. "I've heard that
anyone can be conquered with kindness, no matter how ugly they may be."

At this the Witch turned to glare upon him so horribly that the Tin Woodman
shrank back abashed.

Glinda had been carefully considering what to do, and now she turned to
Mombi and said:

"You will gain nothing, I assure you, by thus defying us. For I am
determined to learn the truth about the girl Ozma, and unless you tell me
all that you know, I will certainly put you to death."

"Oh, no! Don't do that!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman. "It would be an awful
thing to kill anyone--even old Mombi!"

"But it is merely a threat," returned Glinda. "I shall not put Mombi to
death, because she will prefer to tell me the truth."

"Oh, I see!" said the tin man, much relieved.



267

"Suppose I tell you all that you wish to know,". said Mombi, speaking so
suddenly that she startled them all. "What will you do with me then?"

"In that case," replied Glinda, "I shall merely ask you to drink a powerful
draught which will cause you to forget all the magic you have ever learned."

"Then I would become a helpless old woman!"

"But you would be alive," suggested the Pumpkinhead, consolingly.

"Do try to keep silent!" said Tip, nervously.

"I'll try," responded Jack; "but you will admit that it's a good thing to be
alive."

"Especially if one happens to be Thoroughly Educated," added the Woggle-Bug,
nodding approval.

"You may make your choice," Glinda said to old Mombi, "between death if you
remain silent, and the loss of your magical powers if you tell me the truth.
But I think you will prefer to live.

Mombi cast an uneasy glance at the Sorceress, and saw that she was in
earnest, and not to be trifled with. So she replied, slowly:

"I will answer your questions."

"That is what I expected," said Glinda, pleasantly. "You have chosen wisely,
I assure you."

She then motioned to one of her Captains, who brought her a beautiful golden
casket. From this



268
the Sorceress drew an immense white pearl, attached to a slender chain which
she placed around her neck in such a way that the pearl rested upon her
bosom, directly over her heart.

"Now," said she, "I will ask my first question: Why did the Wizard pay you
three visits?"

"Because I would not come to him," answered Mombi.

"That is no answer," said Glinda, sternly. "Tell me the truth."

"Well," returned Mombi, with downcast eyes, "he visited me to learn the way
I make tea-biscuits."

"Look up!" commanded the Sorceress.

Mombi obeyed.

"What is the color of my pearl?" demanded Glinda.

"Why--it is black!" replied the old Witch, in a tone of wonder.

"Then you have told me a falsehood!" cried Glinda, angrily. "Only when the
truth is spoken will my magic pearl remain a pure white in color."

Mombi now saw how useless it was to try to deceive the Sorceress; so she
said, meanwhile scowling at her defeat:

"The Wizard brought to me the girl Ozma, who was then no more than a baby,
and begged me to conceal the child."



269

"That is what I thought," declared Glinda, calmly. "What did he give you for
thus serving him?"

"He taught me all the magical tricks he knew. Some were good tricks, and
some were only frauds; but I have remained faithful to my promise."

"What did you do with the girl?" asked Glinda; and at this question everyone
bent forward and listened eagerly for the reply.

"I enchanted her," answered Mombi.

"In what way?"

"I transformed her into--into--"

"Into what?" demanded Glinda, as the Witch hesitated.

"Into a boy!" said Mombi, in a low tone."

A boy!" echoed every voice; and then, because they knew that this old woman
had reared Tip from childhood, all eyes were turned to where the boy stood.

