He stopped on the great market-place before the town hall, turned his
back on the church and went on with his music, singing:


     'Who lives shall see:
     This is he,
     The ratcatcher.'


The town council had just assembled to consider once more this plague of
Egypt, from which no one could save the town.

The stranger sent word to the counsellors that, if they would make it
worth his while, he would rid them of all their rats before night, down
to the very last.

'Then he is a sorcerer!' cried the citizens with one voice; 'we must
beware of him.'

The Town Counsellor, who was considered clever, reassured them.

He said: 'Sorcerer or no, if this bagpiper speaks the truth, it was he
who sent us this horrible vermin that he wants to rid us of to-day for
money. Well, we must learn to catch the devil in his own snares. You
leave it to me.'

'Leave it to the Town Counsellor,' said the citizens one to another.

And the stranger was brought before them.

'Before night,' said he, 'I shall have despatched all the rats in Hamel
if you will but pay me a gros a head.'

'A gros a head!' cried the citizens, 'but that will come to millions of
florins!'

The Town Counsellor simply shrugged his shoulders and said to the
stranger:

'A bargain! To work; the rats will be paid one gros a head as you ask.'

The bagpiper announced that he would operate that very evening when the
moon rose. He added that the inhabitants should at that hour leave the
streets free, and content themselves with looking out of their windows
at what was passing, and that it would be a pleasant spectacle. When
the people of Hamel heard of the bargain, they too exclaimed: 'A gros a
head! but this will cost us a deal of money!'

'Leave it to the Town Counsellor,' said the town council with a
malicious air. And the good people of Hamel repeated with their
counsellors, 'Leave it to the Town Counsellor.'

Towards nine at night the bagpiper re-appeared on the market place. He
turned, as at first, his back to the church, and the moment the moon
rose on the horizon, 'Trarira, trari!' the bagpipes resounded.

It was first a slow, caressing sound, then more and more lively and
urgent, and so sonorous and piercing that it penetrated as far as the
farthest alleys and retreats of the town.

Soon from the bottom of the cellars, the top of the garrets, from under
all the furniture, from all the nooks and corners of the houses, out
come the rats, search for the door, fling themselves into the street,
and trip, trip, trip, begin to run in file towards the front of the town
hall, so squeezed together that they covered the pavement like the waves
of flooded torrent.

When the square was quite full the bagpiper faced about, and, still
playing briskly, turned towards the river that runs at the foot of the
walls of Hamel.

Arrived there he turned round; the rats were following.

'Hop! hop!' he cried, pointing with his finger to the middle of the
stream, where the water whirled and was drawn down as if through a
funnel. And hop! hop! without hesitating, the rats took the leap, swam
straight to the funnel, plunged in head foremost and disappeared.

The plunging continued thus without ceasing till midnight.

At last, dragging himself with difficulty, came a big rat, white with
age, and stopped on the bank.

It was the king of the band.

'Are they all there, friend Blanchet?' asked the bagpiper.

'They are all there,' replied friend Blanchet.

'And how many were they?'

'Nine hundred and ninety thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine.'

'Well reckoned?'

'Well reckoned.'

'Then go and join them, old sire, and au revoir.'

Then the old white rat sprang in his turn into the river, swam to the
whirlpool and disappeared.

When the bagpiper had thus concluded his business he went to bed at
his inn. And for the first time during three months the people of Hamel
slept quietly through the night.

The next morning, at nine o'clock, the bagpiper repaired to the town
hall, where the town council awaited him.

'All your rats took a jump into the river yesterday,' said he to the
counsellors, 'and I guarantee that not one of them comes back. They were
nine hundred and ninety thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine, at one
gros a head. Reckon!'

'Let us reckon the heads first. One gros a head is one head the gros.
Where are the heads?'

The ratcatcher did not expect this treacherous stroke. He paled with
anger and his eyes flashed fire.

'The heads!' cried he, 'if you care about them, go and find them in the
river.'

'So,' replied the Town Counsellor, 'you refuse to hold to the terms of
your agreement? We ourselves could refuse you all payment. But you have
been of use to us, and we will not let you go without a recompense,' and
he offered him fifty crowns.

'Keep your recompense for yourself,' replied the ratcatcher proudly. 'If
you do not pay me I will be paid by your heirs.'

Thereupon he pulled his hat down over his eyes, went hastily out of the
hall, and left the town without speaking to a soul.

When the Hamel people heard how the affair had ended they rubbed their
hands, and with no more scruple than their Town Counsellor, they laughed
over the ratcatcher, who, they said, was caught in his own trap. But
what made them laugh above all was his threat of getting himself paid by
their heirs. Ha! they wished that they only had such creditors for the
rest of their lives.

Next day, which was a Sunday, they all went gaily to church, thinking
that after Mass they would at last be able to eat some good thing that
the rats had not tasted before them.

They never suspected the terrible surprise that awaited them on their
return home. No children anywhere, they had all disappeared!

'Our children! where are our poor children?' was the cry that was soon
heard in all the streets.

Then through the east door of the town came three little boys, who cried
and wept, and this is what they told:

While the parents were at church a wonderful music had resounded. Soon
all the little boys and all the little girls that had been left at home
had gone out, attracted by the magic sounds, and had rushed to the great
market-place. There they found the ratcatcher playing his bagpipes at
the same spot as the evening before. Then the stranger had begun to
walk quickly, and they had followed, running, singing and dancing to the
sound of the music, as far as the foot of the mountain which one sees on
entering Hamel. At their approach the mountain had opened a little, and
the bagpiper had gone in with them, after which it had closed again.
Only the three little ones who told the adventure had remained outside,
as if by a miracle. One was bandy-legged and could not run fast enough;
the other, who had left the house in haste, one foot shod the other
bare, had hurt himself against a big stone and could not walk without
difficulty; the third had arrived in time, but in harrying to go in with
the others had struck so violently against the wall of the mountain that
he fell backwards at the moment it closed upon his comrades.

At this story the parents redoubled their lamentations. They ran with
pikes and mattocks to the mountain, and searched till evening to find
the opening by which their children had disappeared, without being able
to find it. At last, the night falling, they returned desolate to Hamel.

But the most unhappy of all was the Town Counsellor, for he lost three
little boys and two pretty little girls, and to crown all, the people
of Hamel overwhelmed him with reproaches, forgetting that the evening
before they had all agreed with him.

What had become of all these unfortunate children?

The parents always hoped they were not dead, and that the rat-catcher,
who certainly must have come out of the mountain, would have taken them
with him to his country. That is why for several years they sent in
search of them to different countries, but no one ever came on the trace
of the poor little ones.

It was not till much later that anything was to be heard of them.

About one hundred and fifty years after the event, when there was no
longer one left of the fathers, mothers, brothers or sisters of that
day, there arrived one evening in Hamel some merchants of Bremen
returning from the East, who asked to speak with the citizens. They told
that they, in crossing Hungary, had sojourned in a mountainous country
called Transylvania, where the inhabitants only spoke German, while all
around them nothing was spoken but Hungarian. These people also declared
that they came from Germany, but they did not know how they chanced to
be in this strange country. 'Now,' said the merchants of Bremen, 'these
Germans cannot be other than the descendants of the lost children of
Hamel.'

The people of Hamel did not doubt it; and since that day they regard it
as certain that the Transylvanians of Hungary are their country folk,
whose ancestors, as children, were brought there by the ratcatcher.
There are more difficult things to believe than that.(16)

(16) Ch. Marelles.




THE TRUE HISTORY OF LITTLE GOLDEN HOOD

YOU know the tale of poor Little Red Riding-hood, that the Wolf deceived
and devoured, with her cake, her little butter can, and her Grandmother;
well, the true story happened quite differently, as we know now. And
first of all the little girl was called and is still called Little
Golden-hood; secondly, it was not she, nor the good grand-dame, but the
wicked Wolf who was, in the end, caught and devoured.

Only listen.

The story begins something like the tale.

There was once a little peasant girl, pretty and nice as a star in its
season. Her real name was Blanchette, but she was more often called
Little Golden-hood, on account of a wonderful little cloak with a hood,
gold- and fire-coloured, which she always had on. This little hood was
given her by her Grandmother, who was so old that she did not know
her age; it ought to bring her good luck, for it was made of a ray of
sunshine, she said. And as the good old woman was considered something
of a witch, everyone thought the little hood rather bewitched too.

And so it was, as you will see.

One day the mother said to the child: 'Let us see, my little
Golden-hood, if you know now how to find your way by yourself. You shall
take this good piece of cake to your Grandmother for a Sunday treat
to-morrow. You will ask her how she is, and come back at once, without
stopping to chatter on the way with people you don't know. Do you quite
understand?'

'I quite understand,' replied Blanchette gaily. And off she went with
the cake, quite proud of her errand.

But the Grandmother lived in another village, and there was a big wood
to cross before getting there. At a turn of the road under the trees,
suddenly 'Who goes there?'

'Friend Wolf.'

He had seen the child start alone, and the villain was waiting to devour
her; when at the same moment he perceived some wood-cutters who might
observe him, and he changed his mind. Instead of falling upon Blanchette
he came frisking up to her like a good dog.

''Tis you! my nice Little Golden-hood,' said he. So the little girl
stops to talk with the Wolf, who, for all that, she did not know in the
least.

'You know me, then!' said she; 'what is your name?'

'My name is friend Wolf. And where are you going thus, my pretty one,
with your little basket on your arm?'

'I am going to my Grandmother, to take her a good piece of cake for her
Sunday treat to-morrow.'

'And where does she live, your Grandmother?'

'She lives at the other side of the wood, in the first house in the
village, near the windmill, you know.'

'Ah! yes! I know now,' said the Wolf. 'Well, that's just where I'm
going; I shall get there before you, no doubt, with your little bits of
legs, and I'll tell her you're coming to see her; then she'll wait for
you.'

Thereupon the Wolf cuts across the wood, and in five minutes arrives at
the Grandmother's house.

He knocks at the door: toc, toc.

No answer.

He knocks louder.

Nobody.

Then he stands up on end, puts his two fore-paws on the latch and the
door opens.

Not a soul in the house.

The old woman had risen early to sell herbs in the town, and she had
gone off in such haste that she had left her bed unmade, with her great
night-cap on the pillow.

'Good!' said the Wolf to himself, 'I know what I'll do.'

He shuts the door, pulls on the Grandmother's night-cap down to
his eyes, then he lies down all his length in the bed and draws the
curtains.

In the meantime the good Blanchette went quietly on her way, as little
girls do, amusing herself here and there by picking Easter daisies,
watching the little birds making their nests, and running after the
butterflies which fluttered in the sunshine.

At last she arrives at the door.

Knock, knock.

'Who is there?' says the Wolf, softening his rough voice as best he can.

'It's me, Granny, your little Golden-hood. I'm bringing you a big piece
of cake for your Sunday treat to-morrow.'

'Press your finger on the latch, then push and the door opens.'

'Why, you've got a cold, Granny,' said she, coming in.

'Ahem! a little, a little...' replies the Wolf, pretending to cough.
'Shut the door well, my little lamb. Put your basket on the table, and
then take off your frock and come and lie down by me: you shall rest a
little.'

The good child undresses, but observe this! She kept her little hood
upon her head. When she saw what a figure her Granny cut in bed, the
poor little thing was much surprised.

'Oh!' cries she, 'how like you are to friend Wolf, Grandmother!'

'That's on account of my night-cap, child,' replies the Wolf.

'Oh! what hairy arms you've got, Grandmother!'

'All the better to hug you, my child.'

'Oh! what a big tongue you've got, Grandmother!'

'All the better for answering, child.'

'Oh! what a mouthful of great white teeth you have, Grandmother!'

'That's for crunching little children with! 'And the Wolf opened his
jaws wide to swallow Blanchette.

But she put down her head crying:

'Mamma! Mamma!' and the Wolf only caught her little hood.

Thereupon, oh dear! oh dear! he draws back, crying and shaking his jaw
as if he had swallowed red-hot coals.

It was the little fire-coloured hood that had burnt his tongue right
down his throat.

The little hood, you see, was one of those magic caps that they used to
have in former times, in the stories, for making oneself invisible or
invulnerable.

So there was the Wolf with his throat burnt, jumping off the bed and
trying to find the door, howling and howling as if all the dogs in the
country were at his heels.

Just at this moment the Grandmother arrives, returning from the town
with her long sack empty on her shoulder.

'Ah, brigand!' she cries, 'wait a bit!' Quickly she opens her sack wide
across the door, and the maddened Wolf springs in head downwards.

It is he now that is caught, swallowed like a letter in the post.

For the brave old dame shuts her sack, so; and she runs and empties
it in the well, where the vagabond, still howling, tumbles in and is
drowned.

'Ah, scoundrel! you thought you would crunch my little grandchild! Well,
to-morrow we will make her a muff of your skin, and you yourself shall
be crunched, for we will give your carcass to the dogs.'

Thereupon the Grandmother hastened to dress poor Blanchette, who was
still trembling with fear in the bed.

'Well,' she said to her, 'without my little hood where would you be now,
darling?' And, to restore heart and legs to the child, she made her eat
a good piece of her cake, and drink a good draught of wine, after which
she took her by the hand and led her back to the house.

And then, who was it who scolded her when she knew all that had
happened?

It was the mother.

But Blanchette promised over and over again that she would never more
stop to listen to a Wolf, so that at last the mother forgave her.

And Blanchette, the Little Golden-hood, kept her word. And in fine
weather she may still be seen in the fields with her pretty little hood,
the colour of the sun.

But to see her you must rise early.(17)

(17) Ch. Marelles




THE GOLDEN BRANCH

ONCE upon a time there was a King who was so morose and disagreeable
that he was feared by all his subjects, and with good reason, as for
the most trifling offences he would have their heads cut off. This King
Grumpy, as he was called, had one son, who was as different from his
father as he could possibly be. No prince equalled him in cleverness and
kindness of heart, but unfortunately he was most terribly ugly. He had
crooked legs and squinting eyes, a large mouth all on one side, and a
hunchback. Never was there a beautiful soul in such a frightful little
body, but in spite of his appearance everybody loved him. The Queen, his
mother, called him Curlicue, because it was a name she rather liked, and
it seemed to suit him.

King Grumpy, who cared a great deal more for his own grandeur than for
his son's happiness, wished to betroth the Prince to the daughter of a
neighbouring King, whose great estates joined his own, for he thought
that this alliance would make him more powerful than ever, and as for
the Princess she would do very well for Prince Curlicue, for she was as
ugly as himself. Indeed, though she was the most amiable creature in the
world, there was no concealing the fact that she was frightful, and so
lame that she always went about with a crutch, and people called her
Princess Cabbage-Stalk.

The King, having asked for and received a portrait of this Princess,
had it placed in his great hall under a canopy, and sent for Prince
Curlicue, to whom he said that as this was the portrait of his future
bride, he hoped the Prince found it charming.

The Prince after one glance at it turned away with a disdainful air,
which greatly offended his father.

'Am I to understand that you are not pleased?' he said very sharply.

'No, sire,' replied the Prince. 'How could I be pleased to marry an
ugly, lame Princess?'

'Certainly it is becoming in YOU to object to that,' said King Grumpy,
'since you are ugly enough to frighten anyone yourself.'

'That is the very reason,' said the Prince, 'that I wish to marry
someone who is not ugly. I am quite tired enough of seeing myself.'

'I tell you that you shall marry her,' cried King Grumpy angrily.

And the Prince, seeing that it was of no use to remonstrate, bowed and
retired.

As King Grumpy was not used to being contradicted in anything, he
was very much displeased with his son, and ordered that he should be
imprisoned in the tower that was kept on purpose for rebellious Princes,
but had not been used for about two hundred years, because there had
not been any. The Prince thought all the rooms looked strangely
old-fashioned, with their antique furniture, but as there was a good
library he was pleased, for he was very fond of reading, and he soon got
permission to have as many books as he liked. But when he looked at them
he found that they were written in a forgotten language, and he could
not understand a single word, though he amused himself with trying.

King Grumpy was so convinced that Prince Curlicue would soon get tired
of being in prison, and so consent to marry the Princess Cabbage-Stalk,
that he sent ambassadors to her father proposing that she should come
and be married to his son, who would make her perfectly happy.

The King was delighted to receive so good an offer for his unlucky
daughter, though, to tell the truth, he found it impossible to admire
the Prince's portrait which had been sent to him. However, he had it
placed in as favourable a light as possible, and sent for the Princess,
but the moment she caught sight of it she looked the other way and
began to cry. The King, who was very much annoyed to see how greatly
she disliked it, took a mirror, and holding it up before the unhappy
Princess, said:

'I see you do not think the Prince handsome, but look at yourself, and
see if you have any right to complain about that.'

'Sire,' she answered, 'I do not wish to complain, only I beg of you
