
So saying he cut out the seven tongues, and the princess gave him a
thick cloth to wrap them in; and he mounted his horse and rode away.

Not long after he had gone there arrived at the river a slave who had
been sent by the king to learn the fate of his beloved daughter. And
when the slave saw the princess standing free and safe before him, with
the body of the monster lying at her feet, a wicked plan came into his
head, and he said, 'Unless you promise to tell your father it was I who
slew the serpent, I will kill you and bury you in this place, and no one
will ever know what befell.'

What could the poor girl do? This time there was no knight to come to
her aid. So she promised to do as the slave wished, and he took up the
seven heads and brought the princess to her father.

Oh, how enchanted the king was to see her again, and the whole town
shared his joy!

And the slave was called upon to tell how he had slain the monster, and
when he had ended the king declared that he should have the princess to
wife.

But she flung herself at her father's feet, and prayed him to delay.
'You have passed your royal word, and cannot go back from it Yet grant
me this grace, and let seven years and seven months go by before you
wed me. When they are over, then I will marry the slave.' And the king
listened to her, and seven years and seven months she looked for her
bridegroom, and wept for him night and day.

All this time the young man was riding through the world, and when the
seven years and seven months were over he came back to the town where
the princess lived--only a few days before the wedding. And he stood
before the king, and said to him: 'Give me your daughter, O king, for
I slew the seven-headed serpent. And as a sign that my words are true,
look on these seven tongues, which I cut from his seven heads, and on
this embroidered cloth, which was given me by your daughter.'

Then the princess lifted up her voice and said, 'Yes, dear father, he
has spoken the truth, and it is he who is my real bridegroom. Yet pardon
the slave, for he was sorely tempted.'

But the king answered, 'Such treachery can no man pardon. Quick, away
with him, and off with his head!'

So the false slave was put to death, that none might follow in his
footsteps, and the wedding feast was held, and the hearts of all
rejoiced that the true bridegroom had come at last.

These two lived happy and contentedly for a long while, when one
evening, as the young man was looking from the window, he saw on a
mountain that lay out beyond the town a great bright light.

'What can it be?' he said to his wife.


'Ah! do not look at it,' she answered, 'for it comes from the house of
a wicked witch whom no man can manage to kill.' But the princess had
better have kept silence, for her words made her husband's heart burn
within him, and he longed to try his strength against the witch's
cunning. And all day long the feeling grew stronger, till the next
morning he mounted his horse, and in spite of his wife's tears, he rode
off to the mountain.

The distance was greater than he thought, and it was dark before he
reached the foot of the mountain; indeed, he could not have found the
road at all had it not been for the bright light, which shone like the
moon on his path. At length he came to the door of a fine castle, which
had a blaze streaming from every window. He mounted a flight of steps
and entered a hall where a hideous old woman was sitting on a golden
chair.

She scowled at the young man and said, 'With a single one of the hairs
of my head I can turn you into stone.'

'Oh, what nonsense!' cried he. 'Be quiet, old woman. What could you
do with one hair?' But the witch pulled out a hair and laid it on his
shoulder, and his limbs grew cold and heavy, and he could not stir.

Now at this very moment the younger brother was thinking of him, and
wondering how he had got on during all the years since they had parted.
'I will go to the fig-tree,' he said to himself, 'to see whether he is
alive or dead.' So he rode through the forest till he came where the
fig-tree stood, and cut a slit in the bark, and waited. In a moment a
little gurgling noise was heard, and out came a stream of blood, running
fast. 'Ah, woe is me!' he cried bitterly. 'My brother is dead or dying!
Shall I ever reach him in time to save his life?' Then, leaping on his
horse, he shouted, 'Now, my steed, fly like the wind!' and they rode
right through the world, till one day they came to the town where the
young man and his wife lived. Here the princess had been sitting every
day since the morning that her husband had left her, weeping bitter
tears, and listening for his footsteps. And when she saw his brother
ride under the balcony she mistook him for her own husband, for they
were so alike that no man might tell the difference, and her heart
bounded, and, leaning down, she called to him, 'At last! at last! how
long have I waited for thee!' When the younger brother heard these words
he said to himself, 'So it was here that my brother lived, and this
beautiful woman is my sister-in-law,' but he kept silence, and let her
believe he was indeed her husband. Full of joy, the princess led him to
the old king, who welcomed him as his own son, and ordered a feast to
be made for him. And the princess was beside herself with gladness, but
when she would have put her arms round him and kissed him he held up
his hand to stop her, saying, 'Touch me not,' at which she marvelled
greatly.

In this manner several days went by. And one evening, as the young man
leaned from the balcony, he saw a bright light shining on the mountain.

'What can that be?' he said to the princess.

'Oh, come away,' she cried; 'has not that light already proved your
bane? Do you wish to fight a second time with that old witch?'

He marked her words, though she knew it not, and they taught him where
his brother was, and what had befallen him. So before sunrise he stole
out early, saddled his horse, and rode off to the mountain. But the way
was further than he thought, and on the road he met a little old man who
asked him whither he was going.

Then the young man told him his story, and added. 'Somehow or other I
must free my brother, who has fallen into the power of an old witch.'

'I will tell you what you must do,' said the old man. 'The witch's power
lies in her hair; so when you see her spring on her and seize her by
the hair, and then she cannot harm you. Be very careful never to let her
hair go, bid her lead you to your brother, and force her to bring him
back to life. For she has an ointment that will heal all wounds, and
even wake the dead. And when your brother stands safe and well before
you, then cut off her head, for she is a wicked woman.'

The young man was grateful for these words, and promised to obey them.
Then he rode on, and soon reached the castle. He walked boldly up the
steps and entered the hall, where the hideous old witch came to meet
him. She grinned horribly at him, and cried out, 'With one hair of my
head I can change you into stone.'

'Can you, indeed?' said the young man, seizing her by the hair. 'You old
wretch! tell me what you have done with my brother, or I will cut your
head off this very instant.' Now the witch's strength was all gone from
her, and she had to obey.

'I will take you to your brother,' she said, hoping to get the better of
him by cunning, 'but leave me alone. You hold me so tight that I cannot
walk.'

'You must manage somehow,' he answered, and held her tighter than ever.
She led him into a large hall filled with stone statues, which once had
been men, and, pointing out one, she said, 'There is your brother.'

The young man looked at them all and shook his head. 'My brother is not
here. Take me to him, or it will be the worse for you.' But she tried
to put him off with other statues, though it was no good, and it was
not until they had reached the last hall of all that he saw his brother
lying on the ground.

'That is my brother,' said he. 'Now give me the ointment that will
restore him to life.'

Very unwillingly the old witch opened a cupboard close by filled with
bottles and jars, and took down one and held it out to the young man.
But he was on the watch for trickery, and examined it carefully, and saw
that it had no power to heal. This happened many times, till at length
she found it was no use, and gave him the one he wanted. And when he
had it safe he made her stoop down and smear it over his brother's face,
taking care all the while never to loose her hair, and when the dead
man opened his eyes the youth drew his sword and cut off her head with
a single blow. Then the elder brother got up and stretched himself, and
said, 'Oh, how long I have slept! And where am I?'

'The old witch had enchanted you, but now she is dead and you are free.
We will wake up the other knights that she laid under her spells, and
then we will go.'

This they did, and, after sharing amongst them the jewels and gold they
found in the castle, each man went his way. The two brothers remained
together, the elder tightly grasping the ointment which had brought him
back to life.

They had much to tell each other as they rode along, and at last the
younger man exclaimed, 'O fool, to leave such a beautiful wife to go and
fight a witch! She took me for her husband, and I did not say her nay.'

When the elder brother heard this a great rage filled his heart, and,
without saying one word, he drew his sword and slew his brother, and his
body rolled in the dust. Then he rode on till he reached his home,
where his wife was still sitting, weeping bitterly. When she saw him
she sprang up with a cry, and threw herself into his arms. 'Oh, how long
have I waited for thee! Never, never must you leave me any more!'

When the old king heard the news he welcomed him as a son, and made
ready a feast, and all the court sat down. And in the evening, when the
young man was alone with his wife, she said to him, 'Why would you not
let me touch you when you came back, but always thrust me away when I
tried to put my arms round you or kiss you?'

Then the young man understood how true his brother had been to him, and
he sat down and wept and wrung his hands because of the wicked murder
that he had done. Suddenly he sprang to his feet, for he remembered the
ointment which lay hidden in his garments, and he rushed to the place
where his brother still lay. He fell on his knees beside the body, and,
taking out the salve, he rubbed it over the neck where the wound was
gaping wide, and the skin healed and the sinews grew strong, and the
dead man sat up and looked round him. And the two brothers embraced each
other, and the elder asked forgiveness for his wicked blow; and they
went back to the palace together, and were never parted any more.




Master and Pupil

From the Danish.


There was once a man who had a son who was very clever at reading, and
took great delight in it. He went out into the world to seek service
somewhere, and as he was walking between some mounds he met a man, who
asked him where he was going.

'I am going about seeking for service,' said the boy.

'Will you serve me?' asked the man.

'Oh, yes; just as readily you as anyone else,' said the boy.

'But can you read?' asked the man.

'As well as the priest,' said the boy.

Then I can't have you,' said the man. 'In fact, I was just wanting a boy
who couldn't read. His only work would be to dust my old books.'

The man then went on his way, and left the boy looking after him.

'It was a pity I didn't get that place,' thought he 'That was just the
very thing for me.'

Making up his mind to get the situation if possible, he hid himself
behind one of the mounds, and turned his jacket outside in, so that the
man would not know him again so easily. Then he ran along behind the
mounds, and met the man at the other end of them.

'Where are you going, my little boy?' said the man, who did not notice
that it was the same one he had met before.

'I am going about seeking for service?' said the boy.

'Will you serve me?' asked the man.

'Oh, yes; just as readily you as anyone else,' said the boy.

'But can you read?' said the man.

'No, I don't know a single letter,' said the boy.

The man then took him into his service, and all the work he had to do
was to dust his master's books. But as he did this he had plenty of time
to read them as well, and he read away at them until at last he was just
as wise as his master--who was a great wizard--and could perform all
kinds of magic. Among other feats, he could change himself into the
shape of any animal, or any other thing that he pleased.

When he had learned all this he did not think it worth while staying
there any longer, so he ran away home to his parents again. Soon after
this there was a market in the next village, and the boy told his mother
that he had learned how to change himself into the shape of any animal
he chose.

'Now,' said he, 'I shall change myself to a horse, and father can take
me to market and sell me. I shall come home again all right.'

His mother was frightened at the idea, but the boy told her that she
need not be alarmed; all would be well. So he changed himself to a
horse, such a fine horse, too, that his father got a high price for it
at the market; but after the bargain was made, and the money paid, the
boy changed again to his own shape, when no one was looking, and went
home.

The story spread all over the country about the fine horse that had been
sold and then had disappeared, and at last the news came to the ears of
the wizard.

'Aha!' said he, 'this is that boy of mine, who befooled me and ran away;
but I shall have him yet.'

The next time that there was a market the boy again changed himself to
a horse, and was taken thither by his father. The horse soon found a
purchaser, and while the two were inside drinking the luck-penny the
wizard came along and saw the horse. He knew at once that it was not an
ordinary one, so he also went inside, and offered the purchaser far more
than he had paid for it, so the latter sold it to him.

The first thing the wizard now did was to lead the horse away to a smith
to get a red-hot nail driven into its mouth, because after that it could
not change its shape again. When the horse saw this it changed itself
to a dove, and flew up into the air. The wizard at once changed himself
into a hawk, and flew up after it. The dove now turned into a gold ring,
and fell into a girl's lap. The hawk now turned into a man, and offered
the girl a great sum of money for the gold ring, but she would not part
with it, seeing that it had fallen down to her, as it were, from Heaven.
However, the wizard kept on offering her more and more for it, until at
last the gold ring grew frightened, and changed itself into a grain of
barley, which fell on the ground. The man then turned into a hen, and
began to search for the grain of barley, but this again changed itself
to a pole-cat, and took off the hen's head with a single snap.

The wizard was now dead, the pole-cat put on human shape, and the youth
afterwards married the girl, and from that time forward let all his
magic arts alone.




The Golden Lion

Sicilianische Mahrchen. L. Gonzenbach.


There was once a rich merchant who had three sons, and when they were
grown up the eldest said to him, 'Father, I wish to travel and see the
world. I pray you let me.'

So the father ordered a beautiful ship to be fitted up, and the young
man sailed away in it. After some weeks the vessel cast anchor before a
large town, and the merchant's son went on shore.

The first thing he saw was a large notice written on a board saying that
if any man could find the king's daughter within eight days he should
have her to wife, but that if he tried and failed his head must be the
forfeit.

'Well,' thought the youth as he read this proclamation, 'that ought not
to be a very difficult matter;' and he asked an audience of the king,
and told him that he wished to seek for the princess.

'Certainly,' replied the king. 'You have the whole palace to search in;
but remember, if you fail it will cost you your head.'

So saying, he commanded the doors to be thrown open, and food and drink
to be set before the young man, who, after he had eaten, began to look
for the princess. But though he visited every corner and chest and
cupboard, she was not in any of them, and after eight days he gave it up
and his head was cut off.

All this time his father and brothers had had no news of him, and were
very anxious. At last the second son could bear it no longer, and said,
'Dear father, give me, I pray you, a large ship and some money, and let
me go and seek for my brother.'

So another ship was fitted out, and the young man sailed away, and was
blown by the wind into the same harbour where his brother had landed.

Now when he saw the first ship lying at anchor his heart beat high,
and he said to himself, 'My brother cannot surely be far off,' and he
ordered a boat and was put on shore.

As he jumped on to the pier his eye caught the notice about the
princess, and he thought, 'He has undertaken to find her, and has
certainly lost his head. I must try myself, and seek him as well as her.
It cannot be such a very difficult matter.' But he fared no better than
his brother, and in eight days his head was cut off.

So now there was only the youngest at home, and when the other two never
came he also begged for a ship that he might go in search of his lost
brothers. And when the vessel started a high wind arose, and blew him
straight to the harbour where the notice was set.

