"Oh, yes. I went out twenty years since; in fact, just after I graduated
from the theological school. I spent a year at the mines; but, at the
end of that time, finding an opening in my profession, I accepted the
charge of a church in Sacramento."

"In Sacramento?" exclaimed Hector, eagerly.

"Yes. Have you any associations with that city?"

"It is my birthplace, sir."

"Then you are not a stranger to California?"

"Yes, sir; I came away so early that I have no recollection of the
place."

"What is your name?" asked the clergyman.

"Hector Roscoe."

"Roscoe? The name sounds familiar to me," said the minister,
thoughtfully.

"How long since you went to Sacramento, Mr. Richards?"

"I went there in 1855."

"And I was born there in 1856. My father and mother lived there for some
time afterwards."

"It is probable that I met them, for Sacramento was a small place then.
Shall you go there?"

"Yes, sir. I have a special reason for going--a reason most important to
me."

As Mr. Richards naturally looked inquisitive, Hector confided in him
further.

"You see, sir," he concluded, "that it is most important to me to
ascertain whether I am really the son of the man whom I have always
regarded as my father. If so, I am heir to a large fortune. If not, my
uncle is the heir, and I certainly should not wish to disturb him in the
enjoyment of what the law awards him."

"That is quite proper," said Mr. Richards. "In your investigation, it
is quite possible that I may be able to help you materially, through my
long residence and extensive acquaintance in Sacramento. When you come
there, lose no time in calling upon me. Whatever help I can render you
shall cheerfully be given."

"Thank you, sir."

"Shall you be much disappointed if you find that you are only the
adopted, instead of the real, son of Mr. Roscoe?"

"Yes, sir; but it won't be chiefly on account of the property. I shall
feel alone in the world, without relations or family connections, with
no one to sympathize with me in my successes, or feel for me in my
disappointments."

"I understand you, and I can enter into your feelings."

Arrived in San Francisco, Hector took lodgings at a comfortable hotel on
Kearney Street. He didn't go to the Palace Hotel, or Baldwin's, though
Mr. Newman had supplied him with ample funds, and instructed him to
spend whatever he thought might be necessary.

"I mean to show myself worthy of his confidence," said Hector to
himself.

He arrived in the evening, and was glad to remain quietly at the hotel
the first evening, and sleep off the effects of his voyage. After
the contracted stateroom, in which he had passed over twenty days,
he enjoyed the comfort and luxury of a bed on shore and a good-sized
bedroom. But, in the morning, he took a long walk, which was full of
interest. Less than five minutes' walk from his hotel was the noted
Chinese quarter. Curiously enough, it is located in the central part
of the business portion of San Francisco. Set a stranger down in this
portion of the city, and the traveler finds it easy to imagine himself
in some Chinese city. All around him, thronging the sidewalks, he will
see almond-eyed men, wearing long queues, and clad in the comfortable,
but certainly not elegant, flowing garments which we meet only
occasionally in our Eastern cities, on the person of some laundryman.
Then the houses, too, with the curious names on the signs, speak of a
far-off land. On every side, also, is heard the uncouth jargon of the
Chinese tongue.

There is a part of San Francisco that is known as the Barbary Coast. It
is that part which strangers will do well to avoid, for it is the haunt
of the worst portion of the population. Here floats many a hopeless
wreck, in the shape of a young man, who has yielded to the seductions of
drink and the gaming table--who has lost all hope and ambition, and is
fast nearing destruction.

If Hector allowed himself to explore this quarter, it was not because
he found anything to attract him, for his tastes were healthy, but he
thought, from the description of Gregory Newman, that he would stand a
better chance of meeting him here than in a more respectable quarter.

Hector halted in front of a building, which he judged to be a gambling
house. He did not care to enter, but he watched, with curiosity, those
who entered and those who came out.

As he was standing there, a man of forty touched him on the shoulder.

Hector turned, and was by no means attracted by the man's countenance.
He was evidently a confirmed inebriate, though not at that time under
the influence of liquor. There was an expression of cunning, which
repelled Hector, and he drew back.

"I say, boy," said the stranger, "do you want to go in?"

"No, sir."

"If you do, I know the ropes, and I'll introduce you and take care of
you."

"Thank you," said Hector, "but I don't care to go in."

"Are you afraid?" asked the man, with a slight sneer.

"Yes. Haven't I a reason?"

"Come, sonny, don't be foolish. Have you any money?"

"A little."

"Give it to me and I'll play for you. I'll double it in ten minutes, and
I'll only ask you five dollars for my services."

"Suppose you lose?"

"I won't lose," said the man, confidently. "Come," he said, in a
wheedling tone, "let me make some money for you."

"Thank you, but I would rather not. I don't want to make money in any
such way."

"You're a fool!" said the man, roughly, and with an air of disgust he
left the spot, much to Hector's relief.

Still Hector lingered, expecting he hardly knew what, but it chanced
that fortune favored him. He was just about to turn away, when a youth,
two or three years older than himself in appearance, came out of the
gambling house. He was pale, and looked as if he had kept late hours. He
had the appearance, also, of one who indulges in drink.

When Hector's glance fell upon the face of the youth, he started in
great excitement.

"Surely," he thought, "that must be Gregory Newman!"




CHAPTER XXXV. THE PRODIGAL.



As the best way of getting into communication with the youth whom he
suspected to be the object of his search, Hector asked him the name of
the street.

On receiving an answer, he said, in an explanatory way:

"I am a stranger here. I only arrived on the last steamer."

The other looked interested.

"Where do you come from?"

"From New York."

"I used to live there," said Gregory--for it was he--with a sigh.

"Have you bettered yourself by coming out here?" asked Hector.

Gregory shook his head.

"No," he said; "I begin to think I was a fool to come at all."

"Perhaps you had poor prospects in New York?" said Hector.

"No; my uncle is a rich merchant there. I have some property, also, and
he is my guardian."

"Did he favor your coming?"

"No; he was very much opposed to it."

"Perhaps I ought not to take such a liberty, but I begin to agree with
you about your being a fool to leave such prospects behind you."

"Oh, I am not offended. It is true enough."

"I suppose you haven't prospered, then," said Hector.

"Prospered? Look at me! Do you see how shabby I am?"

Gregory certainly did look shabby. His clothes were soiled and frayed,
and he had the appearance of a young tramp.

"That isn't the worst of it," he added, bitterly. "I have spent my last
cent, and am penniless."

"That is bad, certainly. Did you lose any of it in there?" said Hector,
indicating the gaming house.

"I have lost full half of it there," answered Gregory. "This morning I
found myself reduced to four bits--"

"To what?" inquired Hector, puzzled.

"Oh, I forgot you had just arrived. Four bits is fifty cents. Well, I
was reduced to that, and, instead of saving it for my dinner, I went in
there and risked it. If I had been lucky, I might have raised it to ten
dollars, as a man next to me did; but I'm out of luck, and I don't know
what to do."

"Why don't you go back to your uncle in New York?"

"What! and walk all the way without food?" said Gregory, bitterly.

"Of course you couldn't go without money. Suppose you had the money,
would you go?"

"I should be afraid to try it," said Gregory, smiling.

"Why? Don't you think he would receive you back?"

"He might but for one thing," answered Gregory.

"What is that?"

"I may as well tell you, though I am ashamed to," said Gregory,
reluctantly. "I left New York without his knowledge, and, as I knew he
wouldn't advance me money out of my own property, I took five hundred
dollars from his desk."

"That was bad," said Hector, quietly, but he didn't look shocked or
terror-stricken, for this would probably have prevented any further
confidence.

"It wasn't exactly stealing," said Gregory, apologetically, "for I knew
he could keep back the money from my property. Still, he could represent
it as such and have me arrested."

"I don't think he would do that."

"I don't want to run the risk. You see now why I don't dare to go back
to New York. But what on earth I am to do here I don't know."

"Couldn't you get employment?" asked Hector, for he wished Gregory to
understand his position fully.

"What! in this shabby suit? Respectable business men would take me for a
hoodlum."

Hector knew already that a "hoodlum" in San Francisco parlance is a term
applied to street loafers from fifteen to twenty-five years of age, who
are disinclined to work and have a premature experience of vice.

"Suppose you were assured that your uncle would receive you back and
give you another chance?"

Gregory shook his head.

"I don't believe he would, and I am afraid I don't deserve it. No,
I must try to get to the mines in some way. How are you fixed?" said
Gregory, turning suddenly to Hector. "Could you spare a five-dollar gold
piece for a chap that's been unfortunate?"

"Perhaps I might; but I am afraid you would go back into the gambling
house and lose it, as you did your other money."

"No, I won't; I promise you that. Four bits was nothing. Five dollars
would give me a chance of going somewhere where I could earn a living."

Gregory seemed to speak sincerely, and Hector thought it would do him no
harm to reveal himself and his errand.

"Your name is Gregory Newman, isn't it?" he inquired.

Gregory stared at him in uncontrollable amazement.

"How do you know that?" he inquired.

"And your uncle's name is Titus Newman?"

"Yes, but--"

"He lives on Madison Avenue, does he not?"

"Yes, yes; but who are you that seem to know so much about me?"

"My name is Hector Roscoe."

"Did I know you in New York?"

"No; I never met you, to my knowledge."

"Then how do you recognize me and know my name?"

In answer, Hector took from his pocket a photograph of Gregory and
displayed it.

"How did you come by that?" asked Gregory, hurriedly. "Are you a
detective?"

Gregory looked so startled that Hector had hard work not to laugh. It
seemed ludicrous to him that he should be supposed to be a detective on
Gregory's track, as the boy evidently suspected.

"No," he answered, "I am not a detective, but a friend. I have come out
to San Francisco especially to find you."

"You won't inform against me?" asked Gregory, nervously.

"Not at all. I come as a friend, with a message from your uncle---"

"What is it?" asked Gregory, eagerly.

"He wants you to come back to New York, and he will give you another
chance."

"Is this true?"

"Yes; will you come?"

"I shall be glad to leave San Francisco," said Gregory, fervently. "I
have had no luck since I arrived here."

"Do you think you deserved any?" said Hector, significantly.

"No, perhaps not," Gregory admitted.

"When will you be ready to return?"

"You forget that I have no money."

"I have, and will pay your passage."

Gregory grasped the hands of our hero gratefully.

"You are a trump!" said he.

Then he looked at his wretched and dilapidated suit.

"I don't like to go home like this," he said. "I should be mortified if
I met my uncle or any of my old acquaintances."

"Oh, that can be remedied," said Hector. "If you can lead the way to a
good clothing house, where the prices are moderate, I will soon improve
your appearance."

"That I will!" answered Gregory, gladly.

Within five minutes' walk was a good clothing house, on Kearney Street.
The two entered, and a suit was soon found to fit Gregory. Then they
obtained a supply of underclothing, and Gregory breathed a sigh of
satisfaction. His self-respect returned, and he felt once more like his
old self.

"Now," said Hector, "I shall take you to my hotel, and enter your name
as a guest. You and I can room together."

"Do you know," said Gregory, "I almost fear this is a dream, and that
I shall wake up again a tramp, as you found me half an hour ago? I was
almost in despair when you met me."

Though Gregory seemed quite in earnest in his desire to turn over a new
leaf, Hector thought it prudent to keep the funds necessary for their
journey in his own possession. He gave a few dollars to Gregory as
spending money, but disregarded any hints looking to a further advance.




CHAPTER XXXVI. HOW HECTOR SUCCEEDED IN SACRAMENTO.



Now that Hector had succeeded in the main object of his journey, he had
time to think of his own affairs. It was most important for him to visit
Sacramento and make inquiries into the matter that so nearly concerned
him.

"I must find out," he said to himself, "whether I am entitled to the
name I bear, or whether I only received it by adoption."

The second day after his discovery of Gregory Newman, he said to him:

"Gregory, business of importance calls me to Sacramento. Do you wish to
go with me?"

"Does the business in any way relate to me?" asked Gregory.

"Not at all."
