robber and chief of a band of road agents, whose depredations had been
characterized by audacity and success.

Brown was ostensibly an innkeeper, but this business, honest enough in
itself, only veiled the man's real trade, in which he defied alike the
laws of honesty and of his country. The other was by turns a gentleman
of property, a merchant, a cattle owner, or a speculator, in all of
which characters he acted excellently, and succeeded in making the
acquaintance of men whom he designed to rob.

The two men wore a sober look. In their business, as in those more
legitimate, there are good times and dull times, and of late they had
not succeeded.

"I want some money, captain," said Brown, sullenly, laying down a black
pipe, which he had been smoking.

"So do I, Brown," answered Warner, as we will continue to call him.
"It's a dry time with me."

"You don't understand me, captain," continued Brown. "I want you to give
me some money."

"First you must tell me where I am to get it," answered Warner, with a
shrug of his shoulders.

"Do you mean to say you have no money?" asked Brown, frowning.

"How should I have?"

"Because in all our enterprises you have taken the lion's share, though
you haven't always done the chief part. You can't have spent the whole."

"No, not quite; but I have nothing to spare. I need to travel about,
and--"

"You've got a soft thing," grumbled Brown. "You go round and have a good
time while I am tied down to this fourth-rate tavern in the woods."

"Well, it isn't much more than that," said Warner, musingly.

"Do you expect me to keep a first-class hotel?" demanded Brown,
defiantly.

"No, of course not. Brown," continued Warner, soothingly, "don't let us
quarrel; we can't afford it. Let us talk together reasonably."

"What have you to say?"

"This, that it isn't my fault if things have gone wrong. Was it my fault
that we found so little cash in that last store we broke open?"

"Nineteen dollars!" muttered Brown, contemptuously.

"Nineteen dollars, as you say. It didn't pay us for our trouble. Well, I
was as sorry as you. I fail to see how it was my fault. Better luck next
time."

"When is the next time to be?" asked Brown, somewhat placated.

"As soon as you please."

"What is it?"

"I will tell you. You remember that stagecoach full of passengers that
fooled us some time since?"

"I ought to."

"I always meant to get on the track of that Melville, who spoiled our
plot by overhearing us and giving us away to the passengers. He is very
rich, so the boy who was with him told me, and I have every reason to
rely upon his statement. Well, I want to be revenged upon him, and, at
the same time, to relieve him of the doubtless large sum of money which
he keeps with him."

"I'm with you. Where is he?"

"I have only recently ascertained--no matter how. He lives in a small
cabin, far from any other, about eight miles from the mining town of
Deer Creek."

"I know the place."

"Precisely. No one lives there with him except the boy, and it would be
easy enough to rob him. I saw a man from Deer Creek yesterday. He tells
me that Melville has bought for the boy a half share in a rich mine, and
is thought to have at least five thousand dollars in gold and bills in
his cabin."

Brown's eyes glistened with cupidity.

"That would be a big haul," he said.

"Of course, it would. Now, Brown, while you have been grumbling at me I
have been saving this little affair for our benefit--yours and mine. We
won't let any of the rest of them into it, but whatever we find we will
divide, and share alike."

"Do you mean this, captain?"

"Yes, I mean it, friend Brown. You shan't charge me with taking the
lion's share in this case. If there are five thousand dollars, as my
informant seems to think, your share shall be half."

"Twenty-five hundred dollars!"

"Exactly; twenty-five hundred dollars."

"That will pay for my hard luck lately," said Brown, his face clearing.

"Very handsomely, too."

"When shall we start?"

"To-morrow morning. We will set out early in the morning; and, by the
way, Brown, it's just as well not to let your wife or anyone else know
where we are going."

"All right," answered Brown, cheerfully.

The next morning the two worthies set out their far from meritorious
errand. Brown told his wife vaguely, in reply to her questioning, that
he was called away for a few days on business.

If he expected to evade further question by this answer, he was
mistaken. Mrs. Brown was naturally of a jealous and suspicious
temperament, and doubt was excited in her breast.

"Where shall I say you have gone if I am asked?" she said.

"You may say that you don't know," answered Brown, brusquely.

"I don't think much of a man who keeps secrets from his wife," said Mrs.
Brown, coldly.

"And I don't think much of a man who tells everything to his wife,"
retorted Brown. "It's all right, Kitty, You needn't concern yourself.
But the captain and I are on an expedition, which, to be successful,
needs to be kept secret."

Mrs. Brown was not more than half convinced, but she was compelled to
accept this statement, for her husband would vouchsafe no other.

That part of the State into which they journeyed was not new ground to
either. They were familiar with all the settled portion of Colorado, and
had no difficulty in finding the cabin occupied by George Melville.

Now it happened that they reached the modest dwelling in the woods about
three o'clock in the afternoon. Herbert had ridden over to Deer Creek
to look after his mining property, and it was not yet time to expect him
back. George Melville was therefore left alone.

Knowing, as my young readers do, his literary tastes, they will
understand that, though left alone, he was not lonely. The stock of
books which he had bought from his predecessor was to him an unfailing
resource. Moreover, he had taken up Italian, of which he knew a little,
and was reading in the original the "Divina Comedia" of Dante, a work
which consumed many hours, and was not likely soon to be over. To-day,
however, for some reason Melville found it more difficult than usual to
fix his mind upon his pleasant study. Was it a presentiment of coming
evil that made him so unusually restless? At all events, the hours,
which were wont to be fleet-footed, passed with unusual slowness, and he
found himself longing for the return of his young friend.

"I don't know what has got into me to-day," said Melville to himself.
"It's only three o'clock, yet the day seems very long. I wish Herbert
would return. I feel uneasy. I don't know why. I hope it is not a
presage of misfortune. I shall not be sure that something has not
happened to Herbert till I see him again."

As he spoke George Melville rose from his chair, and was about to put
on his hat and take a short walk in the neighboring woods, when he heard
the tramp of approaching horses. Looking out from the window, he saw two
horsemen close at hand.

He started in dismay, for in the two men he was at no loss in
recognizing his stagecoach companion, Col. Warner, and the landlord who
had essayed the part of a road agent.




CHAPTER XXXV. MELVILLE IN PERIL.



Col. Warner and his companion enjoyed the effect of their presence upon
their intended victim, and smiled in a manner that boded little good to
Melville, as they dismounted from their steeds and advanced to the door
of the cabin.

"How are you, Melville?" said Warner, ironically. "I see you have not
forgotten me."

"No, I have not forgotten you," answered Melville, regarding his visitor
uneasily.

"This is my friend, Mr. Brown. Perhaps you remember him?"

"I do remember him, and the circumstances under which I last saw him,"
replied Melville, rather imprudently.

Brown frowned, but he did not speak. He generally left his companion to
do the talking.

"Being in the neighborhood, we thought we'd call upon you," continued
Col. Warner.

"Walk in, gentlemen, if you see fit," said Melville. "I suppose it would
be only polite to say that I am glad to see you, but I have some regard
for truth, and cannot say it."

"I admire your candor, Mr. Melville. Walk in, Brown. Ha! upon my word,
you have a nice home here. Didn't expect to see anything of the kind
in this wilderness. Books and pictures! Really, now, Brown, I am quite
tempted to ask our friend, Melville, to entertain us for a few days."

"I don't think it would suit you," said Melville, dryly. "You are
probably more fond of exciting adventure than of books."

"Does the boy live with you?" asked Warner, dropping his bantering tone,
and looking about his searchingly.

"Yes, he is still with me."

"I don't see him."

"Because he has gone to Deer Creek on business."

When Melville saw the rapid glance of satisfaction interchanged by the
two visitors he realized that he had made an imprudent admission. He
suspected that their design was to rob him, and he had voluntarily
assured them that he was alone, and that they could proceed without
interruption.

"Sorry not to see him," said Warner. "I'd like to renew our pleasant
acquaintance."

Melville was about to reply that Herbert would be back directly, when it
occurred to him that this would be a fresh piece of imprudence. It would
doubtless lead them to proceed at once to the object of their visit,
while if he could only keep them till his boy companion did actually
return, they would at least be two to two. Even then they would be by no
means equally matched, but something might occur to help them.

"I suppose Herbert will return by evening," he replied. "You can see him
if you remain till then."

Another expression of satisfaction appeared upon the faces of his two
visitors, but for this he was prepared.

"Sorry we can't stay till then," said Warner, "but business of
importance will limit our stay. Eh, Brown?"

"I don't see the use of delaying at all!" growled Brown, who was not
as partial as his companion to the feline amusement of playing with his
intended victim. With him, on the contrary, it was a word, and a blow,
and sometimes the blow came first.

"Come to business!" continued Brown, impatiently, addressing his
associate.

"That is my purpose, friend Brown."

"Mr. Melville, it is not solely the pleasure of seeing you that has led
my friend and myself to call this afternoon."

Melville nodded.

"So I supposed," he said.

"There is a little unfinished business between us, as you will remember.
I owe you a return for the manner in which you saw fit to throw
suspicion upon me some time since, when we were traveling together."

"I shall be very glad to have you convince me that I did you an
injustice," said Melville. "I was led to believe that you and your
friend now present were leagued together to rob us of our money and
valuables. If it was not so--"

"You were not very far from right, Mr. Melville. Still it was not polite
to express your suspicions so rudely. Besides, you were instrumental in
defeating our plan."

"I can't express any regret for that, Col. Warner, or Jerry Lane, as I
suppose that is your real name."

"I am Jerry Lane!" said Warner, proudly. "I may as well confess it,
since it is well that you should know with whom you have to deal. When I
say that I am Jerry Lane, you will understand that I mean business."

"I do," answered Melville, quietly.

"You know me by reputation?" said the outlaw, with a curious pride in
his unenviable notoriety.

"I do."

"What do men say of me?"

"That you are at the head of a gang of reckless assassins and
outlaws, and that you have been implicated in scores of robberies and
atrocities."

This was not so satisfactory.

"Young man," said Lane--to drop his false name--"I advise you to be
careful how you talk. It may be the worse for you. Now, to come to
business, how much money have you in the house?"

"Why do you ask, and by what right?"

"We propose to take it. Now answer my question."

"Gentlemen, you will be very poorly paid for the trouble you have taken
in visiting me. I have very little money."

"Of course, you say so. We want an answer."

"As well as I can remember I have between forty and fifty dollars in my
pocketbook."

Brown uttered an oath under his breath, and Lane looked uneasy.

"That's a lie!" said Brown, speaking first. "We were told you had five
thousand dollars here."

"Your informant was badly mistaken, then. I am not very wise, perhaps,
in worldly matters, but I certainly am not such a fool as to keep so
large a sum of money in a lonely cabin like this."

"Perhaps not so much as that," returned Lane. "I don't pretend to say
how much you have. That is for you to tell us."

George Melville drew from his pocket a wallet, and passed it to the
outlaw.

"Count the money for yourself, if you wish," he said. "You can verify my
statement."

Lane opened the wallet with avidity, and drew out the contents. It was
apparent at the first glance that the sum it contained was small. It was
counted, however, and proved to amount to forty-seven dollars and a few
silver coins.

The two robbers looked at each other in dismay. Was it possible that
this was all? If so, they would certainly be very poorly paid for their
trouble.

"Do you expect us to believe, Mr. Melville," said Jerry Lane, sternly,
"that this is all the money you have?"

"In this cabin--yes."

"We are not so easily fooled. It is probably all you carry about with
you; but you have more concealed somewhere about the premises. It will
be best for you to produce at once, unless you are ready to pass in your
checks."

"That means," said Melville, growing pale in spite of himself, for he
knew from report the desperate character of his guests, "that means, I
suppose, that you will kill me unless I satisfy your rapacity."

"It does," said Lane, curtly. "Now for your answer!"

"Gentlemen, I cannot accomplish impossibilities. It is as I say. The
money in your hands is all that I have by me."

"Do you mean to deny that you are rich?" asked Lane.

"No, I do not deny it. That is not the point in question. You ask me to
produce all the money I have with me. I have done so."

"Do you believe this, Brown?" asked the captain, turning to his
subordinate.

"No, I don't."

"It is strictly true."

"Then," said Brown, "you deserve to die for having no more money for
us."

"True," chimed in Lane. "Once more, will you produce your secret hoard?"

"I have none."

"Then you must be dealt with in the usual way. Brown, have you a rope?"

"Yes."

"Is there a convenient tree near by."

"We'll find one."

The two seized Melville, and, despite his resistance, dragged him
