
Hester's great gift was song, but even her speaking voice was refined,
pathetic, and with some uncommon notes in it, which always exercised a
certain influence over those who listened to her. She told of Bet and
Will, of their love and their despair; and the sad tale certainly lost
nothing by her manner of telling it. Sister Mary no longer sat still;
she rose to her feet, clasping and unclasping her white hands, her lips
opening, as if she must arrest the speaker's words--as if she must pour
forth some of the pent-up feeling which the story had aroused.

"Then you believe," she said at last, "you firmly believe, that the
man, the sailor with the blue eyes, whose face haunts me still, is
innocent?--that he never stole my purse--that he is lying in prison now
under a false charge? Oh, how glad I am! It seemed to shake my very
faith to have to believe that a man with a face like that was really
guilty."

"He is innocent, sister. Will Scarlett told a true story. Dent gave him
the notes because he wanted to get rid of them, and because he wanted
to win Bet for himself. Isaac Dent is the thief, sister; my cousin Will
is innocent."

"But if you knew this, Hester Wright--if you were certain on this
point," answered Miss Vallence, "why did you not come to the
police-court the other day, and clear the sailor? Oh, I think it was
cruel of you to stay away."

"What's _my_ word, lady? I know it, but I can't prove it. The facts are
all agin' Will--he's in the House of Detention now, and he says he's
safe to get two year."

"Two years' imprisonment, when another man did the deed!"

"Yes, sister--he says he's quite sure."

"But this is dreadful! I will speak to my father--you must tell your
story to my father."

"That'ull do no good, lady. Facts go agin' Will, and there's only one
way of clearing him."

"Oh, is there a way? How glad I am! You are a brave girl, Hester. Tell
me at once about the way."

"I can't tell you much, Miss Vallence, but I ha' come here to-day--I
ha' come to say--yes, to say that we can't never clear Will, and that a
plan I have got in my head can't be carried through without you."

"Without me? Yes; I will certainly help--tell me what I can do."

"I can't lady--not yet-the time ain't ripe yet; but ef you'll trust a
lass like me, and give a promise, then I can carry out my plan. And ef
it succeeds Will will be cleared, and Bet won't be tied for life to a
villain; and a bad man--perhaps two bad men--'ull meet what they
deserve. Oh," continued Hester, "I never said as I believed in God--I
never went in for being a good 'un in any sense; but I think I do
believe in Him now--I think I do. Trust, and He will bring it to pass.
Lady," here Hester resumed her usual manner, "I ha' come to ask you to
give me a promise in the dark."

"That is a difficult thing to give," replied Miss Vallence, slowly. "I
am most desirous of helping you--I may say further, that I certainly
_will_ help you to the best of my ability; but a promise in the dark
seems scarcely right--why do you ask it of me?"

"Because you can help me in no other way, Miss Vallence. It's just a
question of trusting a lass you ha' never seen afore. No harm shall
happen to you--not a hair of your head shall be touched, but you must
go blindly with me,--in the dark--that's it; there's no other way."

"You're a strange creature," said Miss Vallence. "You move me, you
excite me. In spite of myself, I cannot help believing in you. I may be
wrong, but for once I will be guided by the queer influence you have
over me--by the something within which compels me to trust you. Hester
Wright, I will promise to do what you want."

Hester's earnest dark eyes filled with tears.

"You ha' taken a load off me," she said. "There is a good God--for He
made you. The lad has a chance now, and Bet has a chance; and perhaps
the little 'un may get well arter all. Oh! every thing may come right
arter all, and it 'ull be owing to you, just because you weren't
afeard, and trusted a lass you had never seen. Miss Vallence, it won't
be to-night, nor to-morrow night--but the night arter--some time the
night arter--I'll come here, and then I'll ask you to go with me. You
needn't be afeard; no one in all Liverpool will be safer nor you; but
you'll be coming with me in the dark. A brave lady! Eh! I used to think
as ladies had no real sperrit, but I'll never think so no more!"

"I'll be ready for you, Hester," said Sister Mary, in her gravest
voice. "The night after next--at what hour will you call for me,
Hester?"

"Sister, I may not come at all, and I can't name the hour--it may be
any time atween eight o'clock and midnight. I may fail--only I don't
think so."

"You will not fail," said Miss Vallence. "I will be ready."

They clasped each other's hands and parted.




CHAPTER XXIX.


If ever a girl ought to feel happy it should be on the eve of her
wedding-day. To a great many, however, this turning-point in life, this
step into a new and unknown world, is fraught with terror and distress.
Wedding bells do not always mean happiness.

Bet Granger was sitting alone in Jenny's attic. She was to be married
before the registrar to-morrow to Isaac Dent. He had made all
arrangements, and had come over from Liverpool that day to see his
promised bride. He had spent half an hour with Bet--had told her when
and where to meet him the next morning, and then had gone back to his
old haunts, a victorious and satisfied man.

When he left her, Bet had gone up to the attic, and had sat there ever
since without moving or speaking. Her hands were clasped loosely in her
lap, and her dull and heavy eyes were fixed on the fire. Jenny, finding
her poor company, had gone out, and Bet was quite alone. She was to be
a bride to-morrow,--Isaac Dent's bride. Her heart beat slowly and
calmly; there was nothing more now to hope for; she would keep her
promise, and she would try to endure the life which stretched before
her. After all, the mate of a sailor had some advantages,--she could
often be parted from her lord; he could go away on long voyages,--he
could be, he would be, he must be, months away from home; and during
that time the very winds that blew, the very breezes that fanned her
cheeks, would help to divide them--would help to show her how many
miles stretched between her and him.

Yes; the thought of the coming separation, of the certain and
inevitable separation, cheered Bet, and made her feel that her lot was
endurable.

She was to be a bride to-morrow! How strange! She felt accustomed now
to the idea of being almost a bride. It was only a few weeks back that
she sat in another attic waiting for the dawn of another wedding-day,
and the embrace of another bridegroom. She had not been happy
then,--she had been full of fear and apprehension; but the heart now so
queer, and dull and heavy, had beat fast, and the eyes had been bright
with intense excitement, and in her restless dread and earnest longing
she had paced the floor of Mother Bunch's attic until the very dawn.
Then she had been unhappy, but she had been alive. Now, what had come
over her? Had the spirit of the real Bet Granger gone away with Will
over the dancing sea? Had it refused to be parted from her true lover,
and was Isaac Dent only marrying a dead woman?

During the fortnight that Bet had spent at Warrington she had searched
high and low for her father and the boys. Of course, she had searched
in vain. It was quite possible for a clever man like Dent to furnish
her with endless clues which all led to nothing. His object was to give
her a reason for remaining in Warrington--his object was to keep her at
any hazard out of Liverpool. He knew that in Liverpool the knowledge of
his treachery towards Will could not long be concealed from her. She
would meet Hester Wright--she would meet one friend or another who
would certainly tell her that the lad for whom she had sold herself was
still in prison.

After they were married--oh! then it mattered nothing at all. Then his
triumph would be all the greater when the bad man showed her that,
although she was his absolutely, she had done nothing for Will by her
deed of self-sacrifice.

Jenny had been a good friend to Bet during the last fortnight. She knew
Dent, but did not admire him; and it was an unceasing puzzle to her how
any promise could bind Bet to such a man.

"You'll be his forever," she said. "Well, I wouldn't have him--not for
no price. I wouldn't be his wife, not if you was to pay me for it. And
the other lad, he'll come back from sea, and he won't like to see you
Isaac's wife. It's a wrong promise you ha' made, Bet Granger; and you
needn't go for to tell me nothing else. If I was you, I wouldn't keep
it. Don't 'ee, now, Bet--don't 'ee. Think of the other poor sailor
feller--how he'll look at yer when he comes back from sea!"

At first, when Jenny spoke like this, Bet had shut her up with a few
sharp words, but of late she had taken no notice; her face every day
had grown duller, and her words further apart. Her whole attitude was
so dull and lifeless that Jenny gave up teasing her; and finding that,
from being an entertaining companion, she was now one of the dullest,
left her a good deal to herself.

Bet sat on in the attic, and presently the fire went out, and only the
moonlight lit up her little dreary room. Bet closed her eyes, and fell
into a heavy doze; she slept for about ten minutes, and, whether that
sleep had refreshed her, and lifted a cloud from her brain, no one can
say, but she awoke in quite a different mood: the apathy and
indifference of the last few days had left her; she was once more
keenly alive, keenly suffering and rebellious.

The events of the two last months--all the story which had come to her
since her mother's death-kept flitting like a series of pictures before
her vivid imagination. She saw Will's face with a tender light in the
eyes; she felt his breath on her cheek, and her hand seemed again to be
clasped in his. Once more she heard Hester and Will singing together--

    "I had a message to send her--
      To be whom my soul loved best,
    But I had my task to finish,
      And she had gone home to rest."

Bet saw once more the little room in Sparrow Street, and the smile, the
look so full of satisfaction, on her dead mother's face.

"Oh, mother, mother!" she sobbed.

She fell on her knees, and the tears streamed through the fingers which
covered her face. "Oh mother! life ha' gone hard--bitter, bitter
hard--for poor Bet. I ha' broke my word to you--and the lads, I dunno
where they are. Oh, I'm good for nought--I'm good for nought--I wish I
were lying dead beside my mother!"

She sobbed and sobbed; and her tears, while they seemed to rend her
heart, brough a certain sense of lightness and relief.

"Mother, you was a good woman-you believed in religion and all that. I
didn't. I were allers a hard 'un--allers, and allers; but I'd give the
world,--mother, mother, hear me, hear me, ef you can, up in heaven with
God!--I'd give all the wide world to be _good_, GOOD, to-night!"

Again Bet seemed to hear Will and Hester singing to her--

    "And I know that at last my message
      Has passed through the golden gate,
    And my heart is no longer restless,
      And I am content to wait."

She rose to her feet. Her tears were over, her great grief was
lightened, but now a curious and inexplicable desire took possession of
her. She would not fail Isaac Dent. If she had broken every other
promise she would at least keep this one. She would marry him tomorrow,
and perhaps her mother's God would help her to be a good wife to him.
But she would--she must--go to Liverpool tonight. She had money enough
in her pocket to take her there; she looked at the coins, going close
to the window to see them the better in the moonlight, and saw that she
had sufficient to purchase a single third-class fare. How was she to
get back to Warrington in the morning? How was she to meet Dent at the
registrar's office? She did not know; she felt also that she did not
care. Already her marriage with Dent seemed to be removed into a dim
and intangible future. She would marry him,--oh, yes--but when and how
she did not know, she did not care. She could scarcely bring her
thoughts to bear on the great and terrible subject which an hour ago
had filled her whole horizon. Liverpool, the great city, was drawing
her, as though it was the voice of Will himself. She rose, brushed out
her hair, plaited it, and wound it in a great coronet round her
beautiful head, washed her face and hands, wrapped her mother's shawl
tidily round her, and ran downstairs.

At the door she met Jenny.

"Good-bye, dear," she said in a gentle tone. And she stooped and kissed
the little round-faced girl.

"Why, Bet, are you mad?" said Jenny. "Where are you going? How spry you
look! And your eyes are so bright! Oh, Bet, Bet! have you come to your
senses? Are you going to break your promise to Dent?"

"It is not that," said Bet. "I'll be here tomorrow morn. I won't fail
Isaac. I'll see you again to-morrow morning, Jenny, but I must go to
Liverpool to-night. My heart draws me--I must go. Good-bye,
Jenny--good-bye, dear."

Jenny looked after the tall, stately figure.

"Well, this _is_ a rum go," she muttered. "And ef she don't hurry
she'll be late. The last train goes at eight o'clock--she'll lose it ef
she don't run."

But Bet did not lose the train.




CHAPTER XXX.


Isaac Dent did indeed feel himself a triumphant man. If such a nature
as his could possibly know anything of love, he had something which he
called by that name for the handsome girl whom he had deceived, and
whose happiness he had wrecked. His powers of loving, however, might
have been described as uncertain, dubious, and absolutely unworthy of
so high and sacred a name. But there was no doubt at all with regard to
his powers of revenge, or as to his cunning and double dealing.

It was the night before his wedding; and the prize--the choice, rich,
great prize of the bravest and most beautiful girl in the city--was
almost his. Will was safe in prison; Bet was safe at Warrington. One
week of happiness with her, and then he would secure for himself a good
berth on board a prosperous ship, and sail away, the luckiest fellow in
the land.

If Dent had a conscience at all, it was a very dull one, and it
certainly gave him no trouble some qualms that night. He still
possessed seven or eight pounds of the stolen money, and he intended to
have a right good time with Bet--to spend his ill-gotten wealth freely,
and to enjoy himself in a thorough manner for once in his life. He had
been to Warrington and made all final arrangements; and now, about nine
o'clock in the evening, he left his lodgings to fulfill an appointment
he had made with Granger, who was to meet him and was to have a good
time with him at the Star and Garter.

Dent's lodgings were close to the docks; and to go from there to
Granger's place in Sparrow Street he generally walked up a very narrow
and very disreputable street. He could have gone around, going along
Castle Street and down by Lime Street; but the other way was a great
short cut: and to meet low people, to hear the voices of tipsy men and
loud-voiced women gave him no manner of annoyance. At the time of this
story there were some courts in Liverpool which at night-time were
absolutely in the dark. Not a single ray of gaslight illuminated them.
The doers of evil liked such places; and the courts at nightfall were
often full, and sounds the reverse of edifying were apt to proceed from
them.

David Street, the short cut which Dent was about to take to keep his
rendezvous with Granger, possessed several such courts. It was not far
from the Irish quarter, where Mother Bunch held undoubted sway. David
Street was not quite so much dreaded as Paradise Bow; but, on account
of these same dark courts, few respectable people would care to walk
there after nightfall. Dent, however, could scarcely be reckoned
amongst this class, and he stepped quickly now through the narrow
street with its flickering gaslight reflecting a sombre glow on the
puddles at his feet, and on the faces of the ragged children and men
and women who jostled past him. The only bright places were the
public-houses, where the hungriest and most despairing paused to look
in and long for the brightness and warmth inside. Those who had pence
in their pockets generally entered through the swinging doors; those
who had not, looked in with growing envy and increasing despair on
their faces.

Dent was by no means a sober person, and more than one public-house in
