you for four dollars a week."

Herbert closed the day in good spirits. He thought he saw his way clear
to supporting himself in the city. Before he went to bed he wrote a
cheerful letter to his mother and deposited it in a post office box at
the corner.




CHAPTER XXXIII

HERBERT AS A NEWSBOY


The next morning, by advice of his roommate, Herbert got up early, and
made his way downtown and obtained a supply of morning papers.

The first day was not a success, chiefly on account of his inexperience.
He was "stuck" on nearly half his papers, and the profits were less than
nothing. But Herbert was quick to learn. The second day, though he still
had some papers left, he cleared twenty-five cents. The third day
he netted seventy-five. He felt now that he had passed the period of
experiment, and that he would at any rate, be able to pay his board. Of
course, he hoped for something better, and indeed felt confident of it.

Three weeks later, about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, as he stood in
front of the Astor House, with his last paper in his hand, he heard his
name called:

"Hello, Carter; are you here?"

He did not need to turn around to recognize James Leech.

"Good-morning, James," he said, politely.

"So you're a newsboy," said James.

"Yes; any way to make a living."

"Do you make much?" inquired his old foe, curiously.

"I haven't made enough to retire upon yet; but I can manage to pay my
board."

"How much do you pay for your board?"

Herbert hesitated about gratifying his curiosity, but finally did so.

"Four dollars," repeated James, scornfully. "It can't be much of a
boarding house."

"An Italian count boards there," said Herbert, knowing James' respect
for rank.

"You don't say so!" returned James, rather impressed. "Did he ever speak
to you?"

"He spoke to me this morning."

"What did he say?"

"'Will you pass ze butter?'"

"Do you save up any money?" inquired James.

Herbert penetrated his motive in asking the question, and did not mean
to give too definite information. But James was bent on learning all he
could.

"How much do you make a day?" he asked.

"Sometimes more, sometimes less, just as it happens."

"I can't tell anything from that."

"Why do you want to know?" asked Herbert, pointedly.

"Curiosity, I suppose."

"So I thought. If it was from interest in me, I would tell you; but I
don't care to gratify your curiosity."

"You don't expect me to feel any interest in a common newsboy, do you?"

"No; I don't. I know you too well for that."

"I don't see what object you have in refusing to answer my questions."

"If you are thinking of going into the business, yourself, I'll tell
you."

"I a newsboy? I sell papers in the street? You must be crazy!" returned
James, haughtily.

"I suppose you feel above it," said Herbert, smiling.

"To be sure I do. Haven't I a right to?"

"Oh, you must settle that question for yourself. Papers, sir?"

The gentleman addressed purchased the last remaining paper, and Herbert
was free till afternoon.

"How do you like the city?" asked James.

"Very much. I should like to have my mother here; then I would be
contented."

"We may come to live here," said James. "Of course, we shall live in a
brownstone front, uptown."

"I live in a brick house," said Herbert, smiling.

"Fashionable people live in brownstone fronts."

"I may be rich some time."

"Then you'll have to go into some other business. But there isn't much
hope for you. You'll be a poor man."

"You seem very confident of it."

"You've got no chance, you know. But I must be going."

"Who do you think I met this morning, father?" asked James, later in the
day.

"I don't know."

"The Carter boy."

"Where did you meet him?"

"He was selling papers in front of the Astor House."

"He won't get rich very fast in that business. What did he have to say
for himself?"

"He wouldn't tell me how much money he was making. He pays four dollars
a week for board."

"He probably finds it hard to pay that. It isn't likely he lays up
anything. He would do better to stay in Wrayburn."

"Then you think he can't send any money to his mother?"

"No; he will find it hard to pay his own expenses."

"Then she won't be able to pay the interest on the mortgage?"

"I don't see how she can."

"And you will seize the house?"

"I fully intend to do so."

"Good! That'll bring down Carter's pride. He's as cheeky as ever."

"He hasn't much to be proud of."

"That don't seem to make any difference with him. He talks as if he were
my equal."

"That don't make him so."

"When are you going to move to the city, father?"

"I don't know," said the squire, shortly.

"I've got tired of Wrayburn."

"You'll have to stay there till my business will allow me to move."

The fact was, Squire Leech had just had an unsatisfactory interview with
Mr. Andrew Temple. Under the advice of that gentleman he had invested a
very considerable sum of money in some mining shares, in the assurance
that he would be able in a very short time to sell at a large profit.
But from the time he bought, they began to drop. He asked an explanation
of Mr. Temple.

"My dear sir," said the financier, "there's no being sure of the market.
So many trivial circumstances affect it, that the wisest of us cannot
absolutely predict anything. We can only calculate probabilities."

"You told me there was no doubt about the stock rising," grumbled the
squire.

"Nor is there any, if you only have patience to wait Rome was not built
in a day, you know."

"It seems to me there is a good deal of uncertainty and risk in these
stock operations," objected the squire, very sensibly.

"Not under discreet guidance; if you only have pluck and patience, you
are morally sure of a fortune in the end. Fortunes are made every day.
Why, there's old Jenkins, a grocer on Sixth Avenue--you've heard of his
luck, haven't you?"

"No."

"Made fifty thousand dollars in six months from an original investment
of ten thousand. At first, things went against him, but he was bound to
see the thing through, and he did, and he's forty thousand better off
for it."

"What did he invest in?" asked the squire, eagerly.

Mr. Temple told him, but I regret to say that the whole thing was a
fiction, intended to encourage his dupe. He succeeded in influencing
the squire to put another large sum into his hands, and sent him away
hopeful. To raise this sum Squire Leech was obliged to sell or mortgage
most of his real estate to parties whom Mr. Temple found for him. The
prices realized were less than his valuation of the property; but Temple
told him this was not so important, as he was sure to double his money
in twelve months by investments in Wall Street.

So Squire Leech gave himself up to dreams of sudden wealth. He
subscribed for two financial papers, and spent many hours in studying
their columns. He was soon able to talk glibly of stocks and bonds,
and the Wrayburn people thought he was on the high road to becoming a
millionaire.

"Depend upon it, the squire's a long-headed man," said old Tom Cooper,
in the village tavern. "It wouldn't surprise me a mite if he died worth
a million."




CHAPTER XXXIV

HERBERT'S LEGACY


The weeks slipped rapidly away. Herbert succeeded in maintaining himself
at his new business, and never failed to have ready the four dollars
which he had agreed to pay for board. It was lucky he did, for he soon
found that there would be no chance of borrowing from his roommate.
Cornelius was always hard up. As he only paid a dollar more board than
Herbert, the latter wondered what he did with his twenty dollars a
week. But the fact was, Mr. Dixon at present received but half that sum,
though pride induced him to represent otherwise. And what, I ask, are
ten dollars a week to a young man of fashionable tastes? No wonder he
was always short of funds. How could it be otherwise?

Of course it was satisfactory to Herbert to feel that he was paying
his way. But still he had a source of anxiety. He felt that he
ought--indeed, it was absolutely necessary--to contribute to his
mother's support. Moreover, the dreaded day on which the semi-annual
interest came due was now close at hand. So far as he could judge, his
mother would have nothing to meet it. It seemed inevitable that she
should submit to the squire's demand, and sacrifice the house. It was a
sad thing to think of, yet there was this consolation: the three or four
hundred dollars cash which the squire would pay would tide over the next
year or two, until Herbert was older and could earn more.

But, after all, was it certain that he would earn more? Could he sell
more papers two years hence than now? That was hardly likely. If he
wanted to advance his income, it must be in some other business. Yet,
to a boy situated as he was, there was little chance of getting any
employment that would make as good immediate returns as selling papers.

So, thinking over these things, our hero was much perplexed, and could
see no way out of the difficulty. He had never read "David Copperfield,"
and had not accustomed himself to expecting something to turn up. He
was sensible enough, indeed, to know that it is idle to wait for
such chances. Yet, when one does his duty faithfully, things will
occasionally turn up, and this was precisely what happened to Herbert.

He was standing at his accustomed post one day, when a pleasant-looking
gentleman of fifty, or perhaps a little more, accosted him, inquiring
for a particular morning paper.

"I haven't got it, sir; but I will get you one," said Herbert.

"Will you be long?"

"No, sir; I know where I can get one at once."

"Very well, then, I will wait here till you return."

Herbert was as good as his word. As the gentleman paid him, he asked,
pleasantly: "How is business, my young friend?"

"Pretty good, sir."

"Can you make money enough to support yourself?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then I suppose you are contented?"

"I should be, sir, if I had only myself to look after."

"You haven't a wife and family, I presume," said the gentleman, smiling.

Herbert laughed.

"I hope not yet, sir," he answered. "But I have a mother whom I ought to
assist."

"And you cannot?"

"I have not been able to yet. It takes all I can earn to pay my own
expenses."

"Does your mother live in the city?"

"No, sir; in the town of Wrayburn, fifty or sixty miles from here."

"Wrayburn?" repeated the gentleman, in surprise.

"Yes, sir; it is a small village. I dare say you never heard of it."

"But I have heard of it. My son passed a few weeks there during the last
summer."

It was Herbert's turn to be surprised. He examined the gentleman's face
attentively, and it dawned upon him who he was.

"Are you Mr. Cameron?" he asked.

"How is it that you know me?" inquired the other.

"My name is Herbert Carter. I was employed to read to your son. Have you
heard from him?"

"We are expecting a letter daily, but the distance is considerable, and
we may have to wait for some time yet. So you are Herbert Carter?"

"Yes, sir."

"My son was very much interested in you. He has spoken often of you."

"He was very kind to me."

"Your father was an inventor."

"That was not his business, but he devoted his leisure to invention."

"My son placed in my hands, for examination, a model of his, just before
he went away."

"Have you examined it? What do you think of it, sir?" asked Herbert,
eagerly.

"I only recently returned from Europe, and have not thoroughly examined
it. So far as I have done so, I am inclined to think favorably of it."

Herbert's heart bounded with hope.

"Do you think we can get anything for it?" he asked.

"I think you can. Indeed, if further examination bears out my first
favorable impressions, I will myself make you an offer for it."

"I should be so glad, for mother's sake!" exclaimed Herbert.

"My young friend," said Mr. Cameron, "I like your feeling toward your
mother. I sincerely hope I may be able to make you a satisfactory
offer. By the way, how are you situated? Can you leave the city this
afternoon?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then come home with me. You shall be my guest for a week. During that
time we will examine and decide about the model."

"Thank you, sir; you are very kind," said Herbert, hesitating.

"What makes you hesitate?"

"I am afraid I don't look fit to visit a gentleman's family."

"Oh, never mind that," said Mr. Cameron, heartily. "We are plain people,
and don't value fine dress."

"Will there be time for me to go home first?"

"Yes; you can meet me two hours hence at the St. Nicholas Hotel. I
occupy Room 121. On second thoughts, you may as well wait for me in the
reading room."

"All right, sir."

Herbert hurried home, arrayed himself in clean clothes, put up a small
bundle of necessary articles, and in an hour and a half was at the hotel
awaiting Mr. Cameron. He left a note for Cornelius Dixon, explaining
that he was called out of the city for a few days, but would write soon.
He did not enter into details, for he was not at all certain that things
would turn out as he hoped.

Mr. Cameron lived in a substantial country house, with a fine garden
attached. Nothing was wanting of comfort in his hospitable home, but
he avoided show and ostentation. To Herbert was assigned a large,
well-furnished chamber, the best he had ever occupied, and he was
made to feel at home. The next day he accompanied Mr. Cameron to the
manufactory, which he found to be a scene of busy industry, employing
three hundred hands.

