Mrs. Halm and her daughter gladly followed her, but Cornelli said:
"Oh, Papa, can I run over to Martha? I'll be back very soon."

Dino also begged to go, for he longed to see old Martha again. As the
permission had readily been given, the two children started off. They
had meant to run down the path, but Cornelli could not go fast. The
meadow was so full of daisies, buttercups and especially of blue
forget-me-nots, her favorite flowers, that she felt as if she had to
gather them all, and Dino had to remind her that their time was short
and that the flowers would still be there to-morrow.

Martha had heard that Cornelli and her guests were expected that day,
so she had several times glanced towards the garden to see if she could
discover trace of her or of Dino. Now both came flying up the steps,
and Martha ran out to meet them. Oh, yes, here was Dino, Dino whom she
knew so well, and Cornelli, too--Martha looked at the child and tried
to say something. Instead of that, however, bright tears started to
her eyes, and she was unable to speak.

"Oh, Martha, how I have looked forward to coming home and coming to
you right away!" Cornelli exclaimed. "Are you glad, too, Martha? Oh,
I am so happy!"

"I too, I too, Cornelli," Martha assured her. "What memories you bring
back to me, child, for you have grown just like your mother. Oh, how
different you are now from what you were. God has blessed your life
in town. It seems like a miracle. Oh, how I have prayed for this!"

After these words she shook Dino's hand, looking at him rather sadly,
for her great joy at seeing him again was dimmed by his delicate
appearance.

"Oh, Dino, how pale and thin you look," she said. "Last year you were
so much stouter."

"That is why I came again to Iller-Stream," Dino replied cheerfully.
"You must rejoice with us now, Mrs. Martha, for Cornelli and I are
tremendously pleased to be here again. It is just as lovely here as
it was last year, and now we can come to see you every day, for this
seems like home."

Martha was so moved that she could not speak. Here was Cornelli, looking
as fresh and bright as ever; all the unspeakably sad expression had
vanished from her face, together with the awful disfigurement of those
days. The old woman was deeply stirred by the happy look in the little
girl's eyes. Her young mother had looked at her just that way. And
here was Dino, too, full of his old attachment, and speaking such kind
words to her. She could hardly believe this great happiness.

"We have to go, now, Martha," Cornelli said, "but we'll come every day
the way we used to; you know that, Martha. I'll run over every single
day."

"And I, too," cried Dino. When the happy little couple were running
away, Martha looked after them from her little stairway. Her eyes were
moist, yet followed the two till they were lost from sight.

Even then she still stood there with folded hands.

"Oh, good God," she said quietly, "my heart is full of thankfulness.
Thou hast blessed everything that was hard for the child, and hast
turned everything to good."

When the children entered the house, Cornelli said: "Just go in, Dino,
I'll soon follow you."

Then she turned and went into the kitchen.

"Oh, I was hoping all the time that our Cornelli could still find her
way to the kitchen," said Esther with satisfaction. "Come and let me
have a real look at you, Cornelli!"

Esther placed herself squarely in front of the child and said: "You
have grown a lot last year, Cornelli. And your hair is so neatly combed
and brushed! One certainly can enjoy looking at our Cornelli, now."

Cornelli blushed a little, for she had to remember the way she had
looked when she had gone away. She knew how it had been and how she
had shut her heart against the help Esther had often offered her.

"Oh, Esther, I have to tell you something. Where is Trina, the maid,
who has come with them?"

"I told her to go behind the house to look at the vegetable garden,"
said Esther. "She stood in my way all the time. I am afraid she is not
very quick."

"No, she isn't; I know that. But Esther, I want to tell you something
about her. Please be good to her!" Cornelli begged. "You see, Trina
is block-headed and awkward, but she can't help it. You don't know how
that is, but I know. And if you are very good to her, she won't mind
as much being that way. Won't you do me that favor, Esther?"

Full of surprise, Esther looked after the child, who was running towards
the dining room.

"How does she ever think of such things," Esther murmured to herself.
"One might think Cornelli had to begin at the bottom herself, instead
of being the Director's daughter who can have whatever she wants."

Esther kept on shaking her head for quite a while, but she was anxious
to show Cornelli that she was the only daughter of the house and could
command her. She was very proud of Cornelli's position and eager to
prove to her young mistress that she was only too happy to follow her
wishes.

When the first merry meal was over, the children were allowed to run
out to the garden. They already knew what they were going to see there,
because Dino had described it to them with great enthusiasm. He had
told them about the flower garden with its wealth of color, the
trellises, covered with red peaches, the heavily laden pear and apple
trees. Now they could see all those wonders for themselves, including
the stable with the splendid cows and the proud and shining horses.
So the five children ran away with great eagerness.

The Director and Mrs. Halm remained in the dining room, drinking their
coffee in each other's company.

"Please, Mr. Hellmut," she said, as soon as the door had closed behind
the children, "please let me thank you for your great kindness. I want
to tell you how grateful I am."

"What do you mean? Why do you want to thank me, Mrs. Halm?" the Director
interrupted her. "Please let me speak first! It is I who want to thank
you. I shall never be able to repay you for what you have done. What
wonders you have accomplished for my child! How you have been able to
change and develop Cornelli! How well she looks now! I have to gaze
at her again and again, for I can hardly believe that it is the same
child. How can I thank you enough? How did you ever do it? And what
patience, care and trouble you must have taken with her. I am afraid
that it has required endless thought on your part to bring her back
like this."

"Oh, no, Mr. Hellmut, that was not the way at all," said Mrs. Halm.
"Cornelli has cost me neither patience, care, nor trouble. If by a
little love I have been able to draw out the good kernel of her nature
and bring it to happy development, then that is all I have done.
Cornelli has never made my task hard for me. We have all become so
fond of her that we had to think with sorrow of the time when she would
leave us. I shall never forget what happy hours Dino had with Cornelli
during his illness and how she constantly entertained my sociable
little Mux with her constant merriment and kindness. Yes, Mr. Hellmut,
I shall never forget what she has done, and I can assure you that you
have a lovely little daughter."

The Director jumped up in his excitement and strode to and fro in the
room. What different enthusiasm from that of a year ago!

"You do not know what you are saying, Mrs. Halm," he said, standing
still before her. "You are relieving me of most dreadful anxiety. I
have suffered perfect tortures, because I was blaming myself for having
neglected my Cornelia's child. I thought it was too late and that
Cornelli had grown hopelessly stubborn. Now you have come and brought
me back my child so that she even resembles her mother in her eyes and
her whole expression and appearance. My wife was friendly and gay, and
now you tell me that this is Cornelli's disposition, too."

"I have to tell you something else, Mr. Hellmut," Mrs. Halm continued.
"I am perfectly sure that a child's first impressions are very
important. It is natural that Cornelli missed her mother's guidance,
but she was not by any means a neglected child when she came to me.
From what she and Dino have told me I am perfectly sure that Martha
gave Cornelli the best one can possibly give a child on spiritual
education. I esteem old Martha very highly, for she must love and
understand children as few people do."

"My wife used to say the same thing, and that is why I had such
confidence in Martha. Unfortunately a time came later on when I feared
that she was wrong, and I did not realize what she meant to Cornelli.
You have reminded me of my great debt--"

At this moment such loud laughter and rejoicing sounded from below
that both stepped to the open window.

Mux was screaming loudly, and seemed quite beside himself. "Mama,
Mama," he cried out, "just look at a living goat boy and a real goat!
Come down and see me!"

Mux was sitting on the seat of a lovely wicker carriage, with two reins
in one hand and a whip in the other, while a young and slender goat
was pulling him. Agnes and Cornelli were running beside the carriage
as protectors, while Dino held the goat lightly by the reins to keep
her from running off. All the children were screaming with delight at
the wonderful ride.

Matthew was standing beside the bushes to watch this trial trip, for
he thought that his help might be needed. He had built the carriage
for Cornelli and had already several times harnessed the goat so as
to teach her how to behave when Cornelli returned. When Matthew had
first shown the little conveyance to the children, Cornelli had said
right away that Mux had to take the first ride in order to realize the
scene he loved so much in his picture book.

Mux simply screamed to his mother in wild joy. To see the wonderful
spectacle from near by, she came down to the garden.

The Director also left the house, but he went another way. Not long
afterwards he went up Martha's little stairway to the porch where the
old woman sat on her stool mending.

"Oh, Mr. Hellmut!" she called out in her surprise. Opening the door
she led her visitor into her room, for the porch was very narrow.

Mr. Hellmut entered.

"Martha," he said in a business-like tone, "I have spoiled your business
by taking your boarder away from you forever. That requires a
compensation, and so I have just bought your little cottage from the
farmer over there, besides the little piece of ground in front of it.
Now you will have more room for your carnations, and if you manage
well, you can surely have some pleasant days from the rent which you
save. Are you satisfied?"

"Oh, Mr. Hellmut! Is this little house really my own, now, and will
I really have a garden besides? Oh, Mr. Hellmut!"

But her benefactor would not let her say any more. After heartily
shaking her hand, he hurried away.

The large raspberries were peeping out between the green leaves, and
the golden plums were dropping from the heavily laden branches. From
morning till night on these beautiful summer days Mux fairly swam in
uninterrupted bliss. Before he had even opened his eyes in the morning,
he would call out to his mother in his sleep: "Oh, mother, are we in
Iller-Stream still? Are we still here?" Then the hours of the day
began, each more lovely than the last, and Mux could not tell which
was the best.

As the boy spent most of the day in the stable, the hayloft, and the
barn, his mother had been obliged to make him a special stable costume.
The little boy loved to watch the milking of the cows, and he never
tired of admiring the horses and the goat.

Matthew had become his best friend. The gardener constantly thought
out pleasant surprises for Mux, who showed a decided taste for farming.
If Matthew had to do some important work where Mux was in his way, he
always devised a plan to keep the boy amused elsewhere: "Go down there
to the raspberry hedge, Mux!" he would say. "The berries are finest
and biggest there, because the sun has cooked them through. Go to the
plum tree afterwards and wait for me!"

Mux would obey promptly, wandering over to the plum tree from the
raspberry bushes, which he had lightened considerably. He then would
sit thoughtfully under the plum tree, waiting till Matthew returned.
The gardener then shook the tree so mightily that a flood of golden
plums came rolling down over Mux, who could freely enjoy the wealth
about him.

If Matthew could not be found and Cornelli and Dino were busy with
their own plans and did not need him, Mux knew another friend who
always gave him a good reception, that friend was Esther. He loved to
find her in the vegetable garden, which was also full of surprises for
him. It was like a marvel to the little boy that the green peas hung
here in abundance, whereas they were only served at home on feast days.
He became quite scared when Esther picked a basketful. But when he
warned her, saying, "Don't take them all, for then we won't have any
more," she only laughed and said: "They always grow again; in a week
there will be plenty more."

If Mux looked a little timidly at the large cabbage heads, Esther said
to him: "Don't be afraid of them, Mux. If I cook cabbage, everybody
else likes it so much that you won't have to eat it at all, and you
can take the potatoes which I serve with it."

Mux often accompanied Esther to the kitchen, where he soon picked up
a lot of useful knowledge. There was no pastry the exact recipe of
which as well as how it tasted Mux could not tell. In this manner he
lived through heavenly days.

They were no less heavenly for the other children. Dino and Cornelli
had started the large undertaking of laying out Martha's garden after
their own plan. They were so busy inventing things and carrying them
out that they could hardly ever be found.

Agnes struggled with Dino for first place in Cornelli's affection, but
Dino was always the victor. Cornelli never forgot that he had been her
first friend, who had held fast to their friendship. For this she
remained faithful to him.

It was a consolation to Agnes that she could play on the lovely piano
whenever she wanted to and that Cornelli was always home in the
evenings, when she could sing with her. Mr. Hellmut would sit in his
arm-chair while the two girls sang one song after another, and he could
never hear enough. Beaming with joy, he would say to Mrs. Halm from
time to time: "The child has her mother's voice, except that her
mother's voice was still fuller and softer."

Mrs. Halm's face would beam, too, as she would say: "Just have a little
patience, Director. You are sure some day to hear Cornelli's voice
when there will be nothing more to desire in it. Her teacher's highest
wish is to train her voice." For answer the father nodded and lay back
in his chair smiling contentedly.

Nika, too, was completely changed. No shadows dimmed her eyes, for she
could wander about all day with her paint box from one lovely spot to
another, up to the beech wood or to the hill where the big oak tree
stood. There she could sit on a bench and look down, over the house
and garden, and far below into the wide, green valley. Nika was very
happy to be able to spend all her time in painting, without ever being
disturbed or called away by unwished-for duties.

