clean and her goods were temptingly spread out she had plenty of
customers.

The couple had one boy called Jem. A handsome, pleasant-faced boy of
twelve, and tall for his age. He used to sit by his mother in the market
and would carry home what people bought from her, for which they often
gave him a pretty flower, or a slice of cake, or even some small coin.

One day Jem and his mother sat as usual in the Market Place with plenty
of nice herbs and vegetables spread out on the board, and in some
smaller baskets early pears, apples, and apricots. Jem cried his wares
at the top of his voice:

'This way, gentlemen! See these lovely cabbages and these fresh herbs!
Early apples, ladies; early pears and apricots, and all cheap. Come,
buy, buy!'

As he cried an old woman came across the Market Place. She looked very
torn and ragged, and had a small sharp face, all wrinkled, with red
eyes, and a thin hooked nose which nearly met her chin. She leant on
a tall stick and limped and shuffled and stumbled along as if she were
going to fall on her nose at any moment.

In this fashion she came along till she got to the stall where Jem and
his mother were, and there she stopped.

'Are you Hannah the herb seller?' she asked in a croaky voice as her
head shook to and fro.

'Yes, I am,' was the answer. 'Can I serve you?'

'We'll see; we'll see! Let me look at those herbs. I wonder if you've
got what I want,' said the old woman as she thrust a pair of hideous
brown hands into the herb basket, and began turning over all the neatly
packed herbs with her skinny fingers, often holding them up to her nose
and sniffing at them.

The cobbler's wife felt much disgusted at seeing her wares treated like
this, but she dared not speak. When the old hag had turned over the
whole basket she muttered, 'Bad stuff, bad stuff; much better fifty
years ago--all bad.'

This made Jem very angry

'You are a very rude old woman,' he cried out. 'First you mess all our
nice herbs about with your horrid brown fingers and sniff at them with
your long nose till no one else will care to buy them, and then you say
it's all bad stuff, though the duke's cook himself buys all his herbs
from us.'

The old woman looked sharply at the saucy boy, laughed unpleasantly, and
said:

'So you don't like my long nose, sonny? Well, you shall have one
yourself, right down to your chin.'

As she spoke she shuffled towards the hamper of cabbages, took up one
after another, squeezed them hard, and threw them back, muttering again,
'Bad stuff, bad stuff.'

'Don't waggle your head in that horrid way,' begged Jem anxiously. 'Your
neck is as thin as a cabbage-stalk, and it might easily break and your
head fall into the basket, and then who would buy anything?'

'Don't you like thin necks?' laughed the old woman. 'Then you sha'n't
have any, but a head stuck close between your shoulders so that it may
be quite sure not to fall off.'

'Don't talk such nonsense to the child,' said the mother at last.

'If you wish to buy, please make haste, as you are keeping other
customers away.'

'Very well, I will do as you ask,' said the old woman, with an angry
look. 'I will buy these six cabbages, but, as you see, I can only walk
with my stick and can carry nothing. Let your boy carry them home for me
and I'll pay him for his trouble.'

The little fellow didn't like this, and began to cry, for he was afraid
of the old woman, but his mother ordered him to go, for she thought
it wrong not to help such a weakly old creature; so, still crying, he
gathered the cabbages into a basket and followed the old woman across
the Market Place.

It took her more than half an hour to get to a distant part of the
little town, but at last she stopped in front of a small tumble-down
house. She drew a rusty old hook from her pocket and stuck it into a
little hole in the door, which suddenly flew open. How surprised Jem
was when they went in! The house was splendidly furnished, the walls and
ceiling of marble, the furniture of ebony inlaid with gold and precious
stones, the floor of such smooth slippery glass that the little fellow
tumbled down more than once.

The old woman took out a silver whistle and blew it till the sound rang
through the house. Immediately a lot of guinea pigs came running down
the stairs, but Jem thought it rather odd that they all walked on their
hind legs, wore nutshells for shoes, and men's clothes, whilst even
their hats were put on in the newest fashion.

'Where are my slippers, lazy crew?' cried the old woman, and hit about
with her stick. 'How long am I to stand waiting here?'

They rushed upstairs again and returned with a pair of cocoa nuts lined
with leather, which she put on her feet. Now all limping and shuffling
was at an end. She threw away her stick and walked briskly across the
glass floor, drawing little Jem after her. At last she paused in a room
which looked almost like a kitchen, it was so full of pots and pans, but
the tables were of mahogany and the sofas and chairs covered with the
richest stuffs.

'Sit down,' said the old woman pleasantly, and she pushed Jem into
a corner of a sofa and put a table close in front of him. 'Sit down,
you've had a long walk and a heavy load to carry, and I must give you
something for your trouble. Wait a bit, and I'll give you some nice
soup, which you'll remember as long as you live.'

So saying, she whistled again. First came in guinea pigs in men's
clothing. They had tied on large kitchen aprons, and in their belts were
stuck carving knives and sauce ladles and such things. After them hopped
in a number of squirrels. They too walked on their hind legs, wore full
Turkish trousers, and little green velvet caps on their heads. They
seemed to be the scullions, for they clambered up the walls and brought
down pots and pans, eggs, flour, butter, and herbs, which they carried
to the stove. Here the old woman was bustling about, and Jem could see
that she was cooking something very special for him. At last the broth
began to bubble and boil, and she drew off the saucepan and poured its
contents into a silver bowl, which she set before Jem.

'There, my boy,' said she, 'eat this soup and then you'll have
everything which pleased you so much about me. And you shall be a clever
cook too, but the real herb--no, the REAL herb you'll never find. Why
had your mother not got it in her basket?'

The child could not think what she was talking about, but he quite
understood the soup, which tasted most delicious. His mother had often
given him nice things, but nothing had ever seemed so good as this. The
smell of the herbs and spices rose from the bowl, and the soup tasted
both sweet and sharp at the same time, and was very strong. As he was
finishing it the guinea pigs lit some Arabian incense, which gradually
filled the room with clouds of blue vapour. They grew thicker and
thicker and the scent nearly overpowered the boy. He reminded himself
that he must get back to his mother, but whenever he tried to rouse
himself to go he sank back again drowsily, and at last he fell sound
asleep in the corner of the sofa.

Strange dreams came to him. He thought the old woman took off all his
clothes and wrapped him up in a squirrel skin, and that he went about
with the other squirrels and guinea pigs, who were all very pleasant and
well mannered, and waited on the old woman.

First he learned to clean her cocoa-nut shoes with oil and to rub them
up. Then he learnt to catch the little sun moths and rub them through
the finest sieves, and the flour from them he made into soft bread for
the toothless old woman.

In this way he passed from one kind of service to another, spending a
year in each, till in the fourth year he was promoted to the kitchen.
Here he worked his way up from under-scullion to head-pastrycook, and
reached the greatest perfection. He could make all the most difficult
dishes, and two hundred different kinds of patties, soup flavoured
with every sort of herb--he had learnt it all, and learnt it well and
quickly.

When he had lived seven years with the old woman she ordered him one
day, as she was going out, to kill and pluck a chicken, stuff it with
herbs, and have it very nicely roasted by the time she got back. He did
this quite according to rule. He wrung the chicken's neck, plunged it
into boiling water, carefully plucked out all the feathers, and rubbed
the skin nice and smooth. Then he went to fetch the herbs to stuff it
with. In the store-room he noticed a half-opened cupboard which he did
not remember having seen before. He peeped in and saw a lot of baskets
from which came a strong and pleasant smell. He opened one and found a
very uncommon herb in it. The stems and leaves were a bluish green, and
above them was a little flower of a deep bright red, edged with yellow.
He gazed at the flower, smelt it, and found it gave the same strong
strange perfume which came from the soup the old woman had made him. But
the smell was so sharp that he began to sneeze again and again, and at
last--he woke up!

There he lay on the old woman's sofa and stared about him in surprise.
'Well, what odd dreams one does have to be sure!' he said to himself.
'Why, I could have sworn I had been a squirrel, a companion of guinea
pigs and such creatures, and had become a great cook, too. How mother
will laugh when I tell her! But won't she scold me, though, for sleeping
away here in a strange house, instead of helping her at market!'

He jumped up and prepared to go: all his limbs still seemed quite stiff
with his long sleep, especially his neck, for he could not move his head
easily, and he laughed at his own stupidity at being still so drowsy
that he kept knocking his nose against the wall or cupboards. The
squirrels and guinea pigs ran whimpering after him, as though they would
like to go too, and he begged them to come when he reached the door, but
they all turned and ran quickly back into the house again.

The part of the town was out of the way, and Jem did not know the many
narrow streets in it and was puzzled by their windings and by the crowd
of people, who seemed excited about some show. From what he heard, he
fancied they were going to see a dwarf, for he heard them call out:
'Just look at the ugly dwarf!' 'What a long nose he has, and see how his
head is stuck in between his shoulders, and only look at his ugly brown
hands!' If he had not been in such a hurry to get back to his mother, he
would have gone too, for he loved shows with giants and dwarfs and the
like.

He was quite puzzled when he reached the market-place. There sat his
mother, with a good deal of fruit still in her baskets, so he felt he
could not have slept so very long, but it struck him that she was sad,
for she did not call to the passers-by, but sat with her head resting on
her hand, and as he came nearer he thought she looked paler than usual.

He hesitated what to do, but at last he slipped behind her, laid a hand
on her arm, and said: 'Mammy, what's the matter? Are you angry with me?'

She turned round quickly and jumped up with a cry of horror.

'What do you want, you hideous dwarf?' she cried; 'get away; I can't
bear such tricks.'

'But, mother dear, what's the matter with you?' repeated Jem, quite
frightened. 'You can't be well. Why do you want to drive your son away?'

'I have said already, get away,' replied Hannah, quite angrily. 'You
won't get anything out of me by your games, you monstrosity.'

'Oh dear, oh dear! she must be wandering in her mind,' murmured the lad
to himself. 'How can I manage to get her home? Dearest mother, do look
at me close. Can't you see I am your own son Jem?'

'Well, did you ever hear such impudence?' asked Hannah, turning to a
neighbour. 'Just see that frightful dwarf--would you believe that he
wants me to think he is my son Jem?'

Then all the market women came round and talked all together and scolded
as hard as they could, and said what a shame it was to make game of Mrs.
Hannah, who had never got over the loss of her beautiful boy, who had
been stolen from her seven years ago, and they threatened to fall upon
Jem and scratch him well if he did not go away at once.

Poor Jem did not know what to make of it all. He was sure he had gone
to market with his mother only that morning, had helped to set out the
stall, had gone to the old woman's house, where he had some soup and a
little nap, and now, when he came back, they were all talking of seven
years. And they called him a horrid dwarf! Why, what had happened to
him? When he found that his mother would really have nothing to do
with him he turned away with tears in his eyes, and went sadly down the
street towards his father's stall.

'Now I'll see whether he will know me,' thought he. 'I'll stand by the
door and talk to him.'

When he got to the stall he stood in the doorway and looked in. The
cobbler was so busy at work that he did not see him for some time, but,
happening to look up, he caught sight of his visitor, and letting shoes,
thread, and everything fall to the ground, he cried with horror: 'Good
heavens! what is that?'

'Good evening, master,' said the boy, as he stepped in. 'How do you do?'

'Very ill, little sir, replied the father, to Jem's surprise, for he did
not seem to know him. 'Business does not go well. I am all alone, and am
getting old, and a workman is costly.'

'But haven't you a son who could learn your trade by degrees?' asked
Jem.

'I had one: he was called Jem, and would have been a tall sturdy lad
of twenty by this time, and able to help me well. Why, when he was only
twelve he was quite sharp and quick, and had learnt many little things,
and a good-looking boy too, and pleasant, so that customers were taken
by him. Well, well! so goes the world!'

'But where is your son?' asked Jem, with a trembling voice.

'Heaven only knows!' replied the man; 'seven years ago he was stolen
from the market-place, and we have heard no more of him.'

'SEVEN YEARS AGO!' cried Jem, with horror.

'Yes, indeed, seven years ago, though it seems but yesterday that my
wife came back howling and crying, and saying the child had not come
back all day. I always thought and said that something of the kind would
happen. Jem was a beautiful boy, and everyone made much of him, and
my wife was so proud of him, and liked him to carry the vegetables and
things to grand folks' houses, where he was petted and made much of. But
I used to say, "Take care--the town is large, there are plenty of bad
people in it--keep a sharp eye on Jem." And so it happened; for one day
an old woman came and bought a lot of things--more than she could carry;
so my wife, being a kindly soul, lent her the boy, and--we have never
seen him since.'

'And that was seven years ago, you say?'

'Yes, seven years: we had him cried--we went from house to house. Many
knew the pretty boy, and were fond of him, but it was all in vain. No
one seemed to know the old woman who bought the vegetables either; only
one old woman, who is ninety years old, said it might have been the
fairy Herbaline, who came into the town once in every fifty years to buy
things.'

As his father spoke, things grew clearer to Jem's mind, and he saw now
that he had not been dreaming, but had really served the old woman seven
years in the shape of a squirrel. As he thought it over rage filled his
heart. Seven years of his youth had been stolen from him, and what had
he got in return? To learn to rub up cocoa nuts, and to polish glass
floors, and to be taught cooking by guinea pigs! He stood there
thinking, till at last his father asked him:

'Is there anything I can do for you, young gentleman? Shall I make you a
pair of slippers, or perhaps' with a smile--'a case for your nose?'

'What have you to do with my nose?' asked Jem. 'And why should I want a
case for it?'

'Well, everyone to his taste,' replied the cobbler; 'but I must say if I
had such a nose I would have a nice red leather cover made for it. Here
is a nice piece; and think what a protection it would be to you. As it
is, you must be constantly knocking up against things.'

The lad was dumb with fright. He felt his nose. It was thick, and quite
two hands long. So, then, the old woman had changed his shape, and that
was why his own mother did not know him, and called him a horrid dwarf!

'Master,' said he, 'have you got a glass that I could see myself in?'

'Young gentleman,' was the answer, 'your appearance is hardly one to
be vain of, and there is no need to waste your time looking in a glass.
Besides, I have none here, and if you must have one you had better
ask Urban the barber, who lives over the way, to lend you his. Good
morning.'

So saying, he gently pushed Jem into the street, shut the door, and went
back to his work.

Jem stepped across to the barber, whom he had known in old days.

'Good morning, Urban,' said he; 'may I look at myself in your glass for
a moment?'

'With pleasure,' said the barber, laughing, and all the people in his
shop fell to laughing also. 'You are a pretty youth, with your swan-like
neck and white hands and small nose. No wonder you are rather vain; but
look as long as you like at yourself.'

So spoke the barber, and a titter ran round the room. Meantime Jem had
stepped up to the mirror, and stood gazing sadly at his reflection.
Tears came to his eyes.

'No wonder you did not know your child again, dear mother,' thought he;
'he wasn't like this when you were so proud of his looks.'

His eyes had grown quite small, like pigs' eyes, his nose was huge and
hung down over his mouth and chin, his throat seemed to have disappeared
altogether, and his head was fixed stiffly between his shoulders. He was
no taller than he had been seven years ago, when he was not much more
than twelve years old, but he made up in breadth, and his back and
chest had grown into lumps like two great sacks. His legs were small and
spindly, but his arms were as large as those of a well-grown man, with
large brown hands, and long skinny fingers.

Then he remembered the morning when he had first seen the old woman, and
her threats to him, and without saying a word he left the barber's shop.

He determined to go again to his mother, and found her still in the
market-place. He begged her to listen quietly to him, and he reminded
her of the day when he went away with the old woman, and of many things
in his childhood, and told her how the fairy had bewitched him, and he
had served her seven years. Hannah did not know what to think--the story
was so strange; and it seemed impossible to think her pretty boy and
this hideous dwarf were the same. At last she decided to go and talk to
her husband about it. She gathered up her baskets, told Jem to follow
her, and went straight to the cobbler's stall.

'Look here,' said she, 'this creature says he is our lost son. He has
been telling me how he was stolen seven years ago, and bewitched by a
fairy.'

'Indeed!' interrupted the cobbler angrily. 'Did he tell you this? Wait a
minute, you rascal! Why I told him all about it myself only an hour ago,
and then he goes off to humbug you. So you were bewitched, my son were
you? Wait a bit, and I'll bewitch you!'

So saying, he caught up a bundle of straps, and hit out at Jem so hard
that he ran off crying.
