Buenos Ayres, ready to be picked.

The culture of tobacco requires considerable care. The ground is
first prepared with great care, and is well and thoroughly manured;
but this was not required in the present case, as the rich virgin
soil needed no artificial aid. It is then dug in beds something
like asparagus beds, about two feet wide, with a deep trench
between each. The seeds are raised in a seed-bed, and when nine or
ten inches high they are taken up and carefully transplanted into
the beds, two rows being placed in each, and the plants being a
foot apart.

There are various methods of cultivation, but this was the one
adopted by Mr. Hardy. The plants grew rapidly, the ground between
them being occasionally hoed, and kept free from weeds. When they
were four feet high the tops were nipped off, and any leaves which
showed signs of disease were removed. Each stem had from eight to
ten leaves. When the leaves began to turn rather yellow, Mr. Hardy
announced that the time for cutting had arrived, and one morning
all hands were mustered to the work. It consisted merely in cutting
the stems at a level with the earth, and laying the plants down
gently upon the ground. By breakfast-time the two acres were
cleared. They were left all day to dry in the sun, and a little
before sunset they were taken up, and carried up to one of the
store-sheds, which had been cleared and prepared for the purpose.
Here they were placed in a heap on the ground, covered over with
raw hides and mats, and left for three days to heat. After this
they were uncovered, and hung up on laths from the roof, close to
each other, and yet sufficiently far apart to allow the air to
circulate between them. Here they remained until they were quite
dry, and were then taken down, a damp covering being chosen for the
operation, as otherwise the dry leaves would have crumbled to dust.
They were again laid in a heap, and covered up to allow them to
heat once more, This second heating required some days to
accomplish, and this operation required great attention, as the
tobacco would have been worthless if the plants had heated too
much.

In ten days the operation was complete. The leaves were then
stripped off, the upper leaves were placed by themselves, as also
the middle and the lower leaves; the higher ones being of the
finest quality. They were then tied in bundles of twelve leaves
each, and were packed in layers in barrels, a great pressure being
applied with a weighted lever, to press them down into an almost
solid mass. In all they filled three barrels, the smallest of
which, containing sixty pounds of the finest tobacco, Mr. Hardy
kept for his own use and that of his friends; the rest he sold at
Buenos Ayres at a profitable rate. The venture, like that of the
cotton, had proved a success, but the trouble and care required had
been very great, and Mr. Hardy determined in future to plant only
sufficient for his own use and that of the men employed upon the
estate.

The next experiment which was perfected was that with the
sugar-cane. In this, far more than in the others, Mrs. Hardy and
the girls took a lively interest. Sugar had been one of the few
articles of consumption which had cost money, and it had been used
in considerable quantities for converting the fruit into fine
puddings and preserves. It was not contemplated to make sugar for
sale, but only for the supply of the house: two acres, therefore,
was the extent of the plantation. Mr. Hardy procured the cuttings
from a friend who had a small sugar plantation near Buenos Ayres.

The cultivation of sugar is simple. The land having been got in
perfect order, deep furrows were plowed at a distance of five feet
apart. In these the cuttings, which are pieces of the upper part of
the cane, containing two or three knots, were laid at a distance of
three feet apart. The plow was then taken along by the side of the
furrow, so as to fill it up again and cover the cuttings. In sugar
plantations the rows of canes are close together, but Mr. Hardy had
chosen this distance, as it enabled his horse-hoe to work between
them, and thus keep the ground turned up and free from weeds,
without the expense of hard labor. In a short time the shoots
appeared above the soil. In four months they had gained the height
of fourteen feet, and their glossy stems showed that they were
ready to cut.

"Now, Clara," Mr. Hardy said, "this is your manufacture, you know,
and we are only to work under your superintendence. The canes are
ready to cut: how do you intend to crush the juice out? because
that is really an important question."

The young Hardys looked aghast at each other, for in the pressure
of other matters the question of apparatus for the sugar
manufacture had been quite forgotten.

"Have you really no idea how to do it, Frank?"

"No, really I have not, my dear. We have certainly no wood on the
place which would make the rollers; besides, it would be rather a
difficult business."

Mrs. Hardy thought for a minute, and then said, "I should think
that the mangle would do it."

There was a general exclamation of "Capital, mamma!" and then a
burst of laughter at the idea of making sugar with a mangle. The
mangle in question was part of a patent washing apparatus which Mr.
Hardy had brought with him from England, and consisted of two
strong iron rollers, kept together by strong springs, and turning
with a handle.

"I do think that the mangle would do, Clara," Mr. Hardy said, "and
we are all much obliged to you for the idea. I had thought of the
great washing copper for boiling the sugar, but the mangle
altogether escaped me. We will begin to-morrow. Please get all the
tubs scrubbed out and scalded, and put out in the sun to dry."

"How long will it take, papa?"

"Some days, Ethel; we must only cut the canes as fast as the boiler
can boil the juice down."

The next day the work began. The canes were cut at a level with the
ground, the tops were taken off, and the canes cut into lengths of
three feet. They were then packed on a bullock cart and taken up to
the house. They were next passed through the mangle, which
succeeded admirably, the juice flowing out in streams into the tub
placed below to receive it. When all the canes had been passed
through the mangle, the screws were tightened to increase the
pressure, and they were again passed through; by which time,
although the juice was not so thoroughly extracted as it would have
been by a more powerful machine, the quantity that remained was not
important. As the tub was filled the contents were taken to the
great copper, under which a fire was then lighted. The crushing of
the canes was continued until the copper was nearly full, when Mr.
Hardy ordered the cutting of the canes to be discontinued for the
day. The fire under the copper was fed with the crushed canes,
which burned very freely. Mr. Hardy now added a small quantity of
lime and some sheep's blood, which last ingredient caused many
exclamations of horror from Mrs. Hardy and the young ones. The
blood, however, Mr. Hardy informed them, was necessary to clarify
the sugar, as the albumen contained in the blood would rise to the
surface, bringing the impurities with it. The fire was continued
until the thermometer showed that the syrup was within a few
degrees of boiling, and the surface was covered with a thick,
dark-colored scum. The fire was then removed, and the liquor
allowed to cool, the family now going about other work, as so large
a quantity of liquor would not be really cold until the next day.

The following morning the tap at the bottom of the boiler was
turned, and the syrup came out bright and clear--about the color of
sherry wine. The scum descended unbroken on the surface of the
liquor; and when the copper was nearly empty the tap was closed,
and the scum and what little liquor remained was taken out. The
bright syrup was now again poured into the boiler, the fire
re-lighted, and the syrup was kept boiling, to evaporate the water
and condense the syrup down to the point at which it would
crystallize. It required many hours' boiling to effect this, any
scum which rose to the surface being carefully taken off with a
skimmer. At last it was found that the syrup on the skimmer began
to crystallize, and Mr. Hardy pronounced it to be fit to draw off
into the large washing tubs to crystallize. A fresh batch of canes
was now crushed, and so the process was repeated until all the
canes were cut. It took a fortnight altogether, but only five days
of this were actually occupied in cutting and crushing the canes.
As the sugar crystallized it was taken out-a dark, pulpy-looking
mass, at which the young Hardys looked very doubtfully-and was
placed in a large sugar hogshead, which had been procured for the
purpose. In the bottom of this eight large holes were bored, and
these were stopped up with pieces of plantain stalk. Through the
porous substance of these stalks the molasses or treacle slowly
drained off. As the wet sugar was placed in the cask, layers of
slices of plantain stems were laid upon it, as the spongy substance
draws the dark coloring matter out from the sugar. The plantain
grows freely in South America, and Mr. Hardy had planted a number
of this graceful tree near his house; but these had not been
advanced enough to cut, and he had therefore procured a sufficient
quantity from a friend at Rosario. It was three months before the
drainage of the molasses quite ceased; and the Hardys were greatly
pleased, on emptying the hogshead and removing the plantain stems,
to find that their sugar was dry, and of a very fairly light color.
The sugar-canes did not require planting again, as they will grow
for many years from the same roots; and although the canes from old
stools, as they are called, produce less sugar than those of the
first year's planting, the juice is clearer, and requires far less
trouble to prepare and refine. Before another year came round the
boys made a pair of wooden rollers of eighteen inches in diameter.
These were covered with strips of hoop iron, nailed lengthways upon
them at short intervals from each other, thereby obtaining a better
grip upon the canes, and preventing the wood from being bruised and
grooved. These rollers were worked by a horse mill, which Mr. Hardy
had ordered from England. It was made for five horses, and did a
great deal of useful work, grinding the Indian corn into fine flour
for home consumption and for sale to neighboring settlers, and into
coarse meal, and pulping the pumpkins and roots for the pigs and
other animals.

Mr. Hardy also tried many other experiments, as the climate is
suited to almost every kind of plant and vegetable. Among them was
the cultivation of ginger, of the vanilla bean, of flax, hemp, and
coffee. In all of them he obtained more or less success; but the
difficulty of obtaining labor, and the necessity of devoting more
and more attention to the increasing flocks, herds, and irrigated
land, prevented him from carrying them out on a large scale.
However, they served the purpose for which he principally undertook
them--of giving objects of interest and amusement to his children.




CHAPTER XII.

A STEADY HAND.


It was now more than eighteen months since the Hardys had been
fairly established at Mount Pleasant. A stranger who had passed
along at the time the house was first finished would certainly fail
to recognize it now. Then it was a bare, uninviting structure,
looking, as has been said, like a small dissenting chapel built on
the top of a gentle rise, without tree or shelter of any kind. Now
it appeared to rise from a mass of bright green foliage, so rapidly
had the trees grown, especially the bananas and other tropical
shrubs planted upon each side of the house. At the foot of the
slope were some sixty or seventy acres of cultivated ground, while
to the right were three or four large and strong wire enclosures,
in which the milch cows, the cattle, the sheep, and the pigs were
severally driven at night.

Everything was prospering beyond Mr. Hardy's most sanguine
expectations. More and more land was monthly being broken up and
irrigated. Large profits had been realized by buying lean cattle
during the dry season, fattening them upon alfalfa, and sending
them down to Rosario for sale. The pigs had multiplied
astonishingly; and the profits from the dairy were increasing
daily, as more cows were constantly added. The produce of Mount
Pleasant was so valued at both Rosario and Buenos Ayres that the
demand, at most remunerative prices, far exceeded the supply.

Additions had been made to the number of peons, and the farm
presented quite an animated appearance.

The two years which had elapsed since the Hardys left England had
effected a considerable change in their appearance. Charley was now
eighteen--a squarely-built, sturdy young fellow. From his life of
exposure in the open air he looked older than he was. He had a
strong idea that he was now becoming a man; and Ethel had one day
detected him examining his cheeks very closely in the glass, to see
if there were any signs of whiskers. It was a debated question in
his own mind whether a beard would or would not be becoming to him.
Hubert was nearly seventeen: he was taller and slighter than his
brother, but was younger both in appearance and manners. He had all
the restlessness of a boy, and lacked somewhat of Charley's steady
perseverance.

The elder brother was essentially of a practical disposition. He
took a lively interest in the affairs of the farm, and gave his
whole mind to it. If he went out shooting he did so to get game for
the table. He enjoyed the sport, and entered heartily into it, but
he did so in a business sort of way.

Hubert was a far more imaginative boy. He stuck to the work of the
farm as conscientiously as his brother did, but his attention was
by no means of the same concentrated kind. A new butterfly, an
uncommon insect, would be irresistible to him; and not
unfrequently, when he went out with his gun to procure some game
which Mr. Hardy had wanted upon the arrival of some unexpected
visitor, he would come back in a high state of triumph with some
curious little bird, which he had shot after a long chase, the
requirements of the household being altogether forgotten.

Maud was fifteen. Her constant out-of-door exercise had made her as
nimble and active as a young fawn. She loved to be out and about,
and her two hours of lessons with her mamma in the afternoon were a
grievous penance to her.

Ethel wanted three months of fourteen, and looked under twelve. She
was quite the home-bird of the family, and liked nothing better
than taking her work and sitting by the hour, quietly talking to
her mother.

The time was now again approaching when the Indian forays were to
be expected. It was still a month earlier than the attack of the
year before, and Mr. Hardy, with the increased number of his men,
had not the least fear of any successful assault upon Mount
Pleasant; but he resolved, when the time came, to take every
possible precaution against attacks upon the animals. He ordered
that the iron gates of the enclosures should be padlocked at night,
and that some of the native dogs should be chained there as
sentinels. He looked forward with some little anxiety to the Indian
moon, as it is called, because, when he had ridden out with Lopez
and two of their Canterbury friends to the scene of the encounter a
few days after it had taken place, they found that the Indians had
fled so precipitately upon the loss of their horses that they had
not even buried the bodies of their friends, and that, short as the
time had been, the foxes had left nothing but a few bones remaining
of these. From the moccasins, however, and from other relics of the
Indians strewn about, Lopez had pronounced at once that two tribes
had been engaged in the fray: the one, inhabitants of the pampas--a
people which, although ready to murder any solitary whites, seldom
attack a prepared foe; and the other, of Indians from the west, of
a far more warlike and courageous character. The former tribe,
Lopez affirmed--and the natives of the country agreed with
him--would not of themselves have been likely to attempt a fresh
attack upon antagonists who had proved themselves so formidable,
but the latter would be almost certain to make some desperate
attempt to wipe off the disgrace of their defeat. Under these
circumstances, although perfectly confident of their power to beat
off any attack, it was resolved that every precaution should be
taken when the time approached.

Late one afternoon, however, Mr. Fitzgerald had gone out for a ride
with Mr. Hardy. Charley had gone down to the dam with his gun on
his shoulder, and Hubert had ridden to a pool in the river at some
distance off, where he had the day before observed a wild duck,
which he believed to be a new sort. The cattle and flocks had just
been driven in by Lopez and two mounted peons at an earlier hour
than usual, as Mr. Hardy had that morning given orders that the
animals were all to be in their enclosures before dusk. The
laborers in the fields below were still at work plowing. Ethel was
in the sitting-room working with Mrs. Hardy, while Maud was in the
garden picking some fruit for tea.

Presently the occupants of the parlor were startled by a sharp cry
from Maud, and in another instant she flew into the room, rushed at
a bound to the fireplace, snatched down her light rifle from its
hooks over the mantel, and crying, "Quick, Ethel, your rifle!" was
gone again in an instant.

Mrs. Hardy and Ethel sprang to their feet, too surprised for the
moment to do anything, and then Mrs. Hardy repeated Maud's words,
"Quick, Ethel, your rifle!"

Ethel seized it, and with her mother ran to the door. Then they saw
