But though the little Norman girl of seven nodded a friendly greeting
to pretty brown-eyed Maurice as he passed, and though the making of
lace on bobbins must be a delightful employment, Cecile felt there
could be no tidings of Lovedy for her there; and after partaking of a
little hot soup in the smallest cafe they could come across, the little
pilgrims found themselves outside Caen and in the desolate and wintry
country, when it was still early in the day.

Early it was, not being yet quite two o'clock; but it might have been
three or four hours later to judge by the light. The snow, it is true,
had for the present ceased to fall, but the blackness of the sky was so
great that the ground appeared light by comparison. A wind, which
sounded more like a wailing cry than any wind the children had ever
heard, seemed to fill the atmosphere.

It was not a noisy wind, and it came in gusts, dying away, and then
repeating itself. But for this wailing wind there was absolutely not a
sound, for every bird, every living creature, except the three children
and the dog, appeared to have vanished from the face of the earth.
Maurice, not caring about the weather, indifferent to these signal
flags of danger, was cross, for he wanted to talk to the little
lacemaker, and to learn how to manage her bobbins.

Cecile was wondering how soon they should reach a very small village,
and find a night's shelter in a tiny inn. Joe, better appreciating the
true danger, was full of anxious forebodings and also self-reproach,
for allowing himself to be guided by a child so young and ignorant as
Cecile. Still it never occurred to him to turn back.

After all, it was given to Toby to suggest, though, alas! when too
late, the only sensible line of action. For some time, indeed ever
since they left Caen, the dog had walked on a little ahead of his
party, with his tail drooping, his whole attitude one of utter
despondency.

Once or twice he had looked back reproachfully at Cecile; once or twice
he had relieved his feelings with a short bark of utter discomfort. The
state of the atmosphere was hateful to Toby. The leaden sky, charged
with he knew not what, almost drove him mad. At last he could bear it
no longer. There was death for him and his, in that terrible, sighing
wind. He stood still, got on his hind legs, and, looking up at the
lowering sky, gave vent to several long and unearthly howls, then
darting at Cecile, he caught her dress between his teeth, and turned
her sharp round in the direction of Caen.

If ever a dog said plainly, "Go back at once, and save our lives," Toby
did then.

"Toby is right," said Joe in a tone of relief; "something awful is
going to fall from that sky, Cecile; we must go back to Caen at once."

"Yes, we must go back," said Cecile, for even to her rather slow mind
came the knowledge that a moment had arrived when a promise must yield
to a circumstance.

They had left Caen about a mile behind them. Turning back, it seemed
close and welcome, almost at their feet. Maurice, still thinking of his
little lacemaker, laughed with glee when Joe caught him in his arms.

"Take hold of my coat-tails, Cecile," he said; "we must run, we may get
back in time."

Alas! alas! Toby's warning had come too late. Suddenly the wind
ceased--there was a hush--an instant's stillness, so intense that the
children, as they alone moved forward, felt their feet weighted with
lead. Then from the black sky came a light that was almost dazzling. It
was not lightning, it was the letting out from its vast bosom of a
mighty torrent of snow. Thickly, thicker, thicker--faster, faster--in
great soft flakes it fell; and, behold! in an instant, all Caen was
blotted out. Trees vanished, landmarks disappeared, and the children
could see nothing before them or behind them but this white wall, which
seemed to press them in and hem them round.




CHAPTER VI.

IN THE SNOW.


So sudden was the snowstorm when it came, so complete the blinding
sense of the loss of all external objects, that the children stood
stunned, not fearing, because they utterly failed to realize. Maurice,
it is true, hid his pretty head in Joe's breast, and Cecile clung a
little tighter to her young companion. Toby, however, again seemed the
only creature who had any wits about him. Now it would be impossible to
get back to Caen. There was, as far as the little party of pilgrims
were concerned, no Caen to return to, and yet they must not stand
there, for either the violence of the storm would throw them on their
faces, or the intense cold would freeze them to death. Onward must
still be their motto. But where? These, perhaps, were Toby's thoughts,
for certainly no one else thought at all. He set his keen wits to work.
Suddenly he remembered something. The moment the memory came to him, he
was an alert and active dog; in fact, he was once more in the post he
loved. He was the leader of the expedition. Again he seized Cecile's
thin and ragged frock; again he pulled her violently.

"No, no, Toby," she said in a muffled and sad tone; "there's no use
now, dear Toby."

"Foller him, foiler him; he has more sense than we jest now," said Joe,
rousing himself from his reverie.

Toby threw to the tall boy the first grateful look which had issued
from his brown eyes. Again he pulled Cecile, and the children, obeying
him, found themselves descending the path a little, and then the next
moment they were in comparative peace and comfort. Wise Toby had led
them to the sheltered side of an old wall. Here the snow did not beat,
and though eventually it would drift in this direction, yet here for
the next few hours the children might at least breathe and find
standing room.

"Bravo, Toby!" said Joe, in a tone of rapture; "we none of us seen this
old wall; why, it may save our lives. Now, if only the snow don't last
too long, and if only we can keep awake, we may do even yet."

"Why mayn't we go to sleep?" asked Cecile; "not that I am sleepy at two
o'clock in the day."

"Why mayn't we go to sleep?" echoed Joe. "Now, Missie, dear, I'm a
werry hignorant boy, but I knows this much, I knows this much as true
as gospel, and them as sleeps in the snow never, never wakes no more.
We must none of us drop asleep, we must do hevery think but sleep--you
and me, and Maurice and Toby. We must stay werry wide awake, and 'twill
be hard, for they do say, as the cruel thing is, the snow does make you
so desperate sleepy."

"Do you mean, Joe Barnes," asked Cecile, fixing her earnest little face
on the tall boy, "that if we little children went to sleep now, that
we'd die? Is that what you mean by never waking again?"

Joe nodded. "Yes, Missie, dear, that's about what I does mean," he said.

"To die, and never wake again," repeated Cecile, "then I'd see the
Guide. Oh, Joe! I'd _see_ Him, the lovely, lovely Jesus who I love so
very much."

"Oh! don't think on it, Miss Cecile; you has got to stay awake--you has
no call to think on no such thing, Missie."

Joe spoke with real and serious alarm. It seemed to him that Cecile in
her earnest desire to see this Guide might lie down and court the sleep
which would, alas! come so easily.

He was therefore surprised when she said to him in a quiet and
reproachful tone, "Do you think I would lie down and go to sleep and
die, Jography? I should like to die, but I must not die just yet. I'm a
very, very anxious little girl, and I have a great, great deal to do;
it would not be right for me even to think of dying yet. Not until I
have found Lovedy, and given Lovedy the purse of gold, and told Lovedy
all about her mother, then after that I should like to die."

"That's right, Missie; we won't think on no dying to-night. Now let's
do all we can to keep awake; let's walk up and down this little
sheltered bit under the wall; let's teach Toby to dance a bit; let's
jump about a bit."

If there was one thing in all the world poor Toby hated more than
another, it was these same dancing lessons. The fact was the poor dog
was too old to learn, and would never be much good as a dancing dog.

Already he so much dreaded this new accomplishment which was being
forced upon him, that at the very word dancing he would try and hide,
and always at least tuck his tail between his legs.

But now, what had transformed him? He heard what was intended
distinctly, but instead of shrinking away, he came forward at once, and
going close to Maurice's side, sat up with considerable skill, and then
bending forward took the little boy's hat off his head, and held it
between his teeth.

Toby had an object. He wanted to draw the attention of the others to
Maurice. And, in truth, he had not a moment to lose, for what they
dreaded had almost come to little Maurice--already the little child was
nearly asleep.

"This will never do," said Joe with energy. He took Maurice up roughly,
and shook him, and then drawing his attention to Toby, succeeded in
rousing him a little.

The next two hours were devoted by Cecile and Joe to Maurice, whom they
tickled, shouted to, played with, and when everything else failed, Joe
would even hold him up by his legs in the air.

Maurice did not quite go to sleep, but the cold was so intense that the
poor little fellow cried with pain.

At the end of about two hours the snow ceased. The dark clouds rolled
away from the sky, which shone down deep blue, peaceful, and
star-bespangled on the children. The wind, also, had gone down, and the
night was calm, though most bitterly cold.

It had, however, been a very terrible snowstorm, and the snow, quite
dazzling white, lay already more than a foot deep on the ground.

"Why, Cecile," said Joe, "I can see Caen again."

"Do you think we could walk back to Caen now, Joe?"

"I don't know. I'll jest try a little bit first. I wish we could. You
keep Maurice awake, Cecile, and I'll be back in a minute."

Cecile took her little brother in her arms, and Joe disappeared round
the corner of the old wall.

"Stay with the children, Toby," he said to the dog, and Toby stayed.

"Cecile," said Maurice, nestling up close to his sister, "'tisn't half
so cold now."

He spoke in a tone of great content and comfort, but his sweet baby
voice sounded thin and weak.

"Oh, yes! Maurice, darling, it's much colder. I'm in dreadful pain from
the cold."

"I was, Cecile, but 'tis gone. I'm not cold at all; I'm ever so
comfortable. You'll be like me when the pain goes."

"Maurice, I think we had better keep walking up and down."

"No, no, Cecile, I won't walk no more. I'm so tired, and I'm so
comfortable. Cecile, do they sing away in the South?"

"I don't know, darling. I suppose they do."

"Well, I know they sing in heaven. Mammie Moseley said so. Cecile, I'd
much rather go to heaven than to the South. Would not you?"

"Yes, I think so. Maurice, you must not go to sleep."

"I'm not going to sleep. Cecile, will you sing that pretty song about
glory? Mrs. Moseley used to sing it."

"That one about '_thousands of children_?'" said Cecile.

"Yes--singing, 'Glory, glory, glory.'"

Cecile began. She sang a line or two, then she stopped. Maurice had
fallen a little away from her. His mouth was partly open, his pretty
eyes were closed fast and tight. Cecile called him, she shook him, she
even cried over him, but all to no effect, he was fast asleep.

Yes, Maurice was asleep, and Cecile was holding him in her arms.

Joe was away? and Toby?--Cecile was not very sure where Toby was.

She and her little brother were alone, half buried in the snow. What a
dreadful position! What a terrible danger!

Cecile kept repeating to herself, "Maurice is asleep, Maurice will
never wake again. If I sleep I shall never wake again."

But the strange thing was that, realizing the danger, Cecile did not
care. She was not anxious about Joe. She had no disposition to call to
Toby. Even the purse of gold and the sacred promise became affairs of
little moment. Everything grew dim to her--everything indifferent. She
was only conscious of a sense of intense relief, only sure that the
dreadful, dreadful pain from the cold in her legs was leaving her--that
she, too, no longer felt the cold of the night. Jesus the Guide seemed
very, very near, and she fancied that she heard "thousands of children"
singing, "Glory, glory, glory."

Then she remembered no more.




CHAPTER IV.

TOBY AGAIN TO THE RESCUE.


Meanwhile Joe was struggling in a snowdrift. Not ten paces away he had
suddenly sunk down up to his waist. Notwithstanding his rough hard
life, his want of food, his many and countless privations, he was a
strong lad. Life was fresh and full within him. He would not, he could
not let it go cheaply. He struggled and tried hard to gain a firmer
footing, but although his struggles certainly kept him alive, they were
hitherto unavailing. Suddenly he heard a cry, and was conscious that
something heavy was springing in the air. This something was Toby, who,
in agony at the condition of Cecile and Maurice, had gone in search of
Joe. He now leaped on to the lad's shoulder, thus by no means assisting
his efforts to free himself.

"Hi, Toby lad! off! off!" he shouted; "back to the firm ground, good
dog."

Toby obeyed, and in so doing Joe managed to catch him by the tail. It
was certainly but slight assistance, but in some wonderful way it
proved itself enough. Joe got out of the drift, and was able to return
with the dog to the friendly shelter of the old wall. There, indeed, a
pang of terror and dismay seized him. Both children, locked tightly in
each other's arms, were sound asleep.

Asleep! Did it only mean sleep? That deathly pallor, that breathing
which came slower and slower from the pretty parted lips! Already the
little hands and feet were cold as death. Joe wondered if even now
could succor come, would it be in time? He turned to the one living
creature besides himself in this scene of desolation.

"Toby," he said, "is there any house near? Toby, if we cannot soon get
help for Cecile and Maurice, they will die. Think, Toby--think, good
dog."

Toby looked hard at Joe Barnes. Then he instantly sat down on his hind
legs. Talk of dogs not having thoughts--Toby was considering hard just
then. He felt a swelling sense of gratitude and even love for Joe for
consulting him. He would put his dog's brain to good use now. Already
he had thought of the friendly shelter of the old broken wall. Now he
let his memory carry him back a trifle farther. What else had those
sharp eyes of his taken in besides the old wall? Why, surely, surely,
just down in the hollow, not many yards away, a little smoke. Did not
smoke mean a fire? Did not a fire mean a house? Did not a house mean
warmth and food and comfort? Toby was on his feet in a moment, his tail
wagging fast. He looked at Joe and ran on, the boy following carefully.
Very soon Joe too saw, not only a thin column of smoke, but a thick
volume, caused by a large wood fire, curling up amidst the whiteness of
the snow. The moment his eyes rested on the welcome sight, he sent Toby
back. "Go and lie on the children, Toby. Keep them as warm as you can,
good dog, dear dog." And Toby obeyed.


