He found the bedclothes tossed about, and most of them on the floor,
while the princess's garments were scattered all over the room, which
was in the greatest confusion.  It was only too evident that the
goblins had been there, and Curdie had no longer any doubt that she had
been carried off at the very first of the inroad. With a pang of
despair he saw how wrong they had been in not securing the king and
queen and prince; but he determined to find and rescue the princess as
she had found and rescued him, or meet the worst fate to which the
goblins could doom him.



CHAPTER 28

Curdie's Guide

Just as the consolation of this resolve dawned upon his mind and he was
turning away for the cellar to follow the goblins into their hole,
something touched his hand.  It was the slightest touch, and when he
looked he could see nothing.  Feeling and peering about in the grey of
the dawn, his fingers came upon a tight thread.  He looked again, and
narrowly, but still could see nothing.  It flashed upon him that this
must be the princess's thread.  Without saying a word, for he knew no
one would believe him any more than he had believed the princess, he
followed the thread with his finger, contrived to give Lootie the slip,
and was soon out of the house and on the mountainside--surprised that,
if the thread were indeed the grandmother's messenger, it should have
led the princess, as he supposed it must, into the mountain, where she
would be certain to meet the goblins rushing back enraged from their
defeat.  But he hurried on in the hope of overtaking her first.  When
he arrived, however, at the place where the path turned off for the
mine, he found that the thread did not turn with it, but went straight
up the mountain.  Could it be that the thread was leading him home to
his mother's cottage?  Could the princess be there?  He bounded up the
mountain like one of its own goats, and before the sun was up the
thread had brought him indeed to his mother's door.  There it vanished
from his fingers, and he could not find it, search as he might.

The door was on the latch, and he entered.  There sat his mother by the
fire, and in her arms lay the princess, fast asleep.

'Hush, Curdie!' said his mother.  'Do not wake her.  I'm so glad you're
come!  I thought the cobs must have got you again!'

With a heart full of delight, Curdie sat down at a corner of the
hearth, on a stool opposite his mother's chair, and gazed at the
princess, who slept as peacefully as if she had been in her own bed.
All at once she opened her eyes and fixed them on him.

'Oh, Curdie! you're come!' she said quietly.  'I thought you would!'

Curdie rose and stood before her with downcast eyes.

'Irene,' he said, 'I am very sorry I did not believe you.'

'Oh, never mind, Curdie!' answered the princess.  'You couldn't, you
know.  You do believe me now, don't you?'

'I can't help it now.  I ought to have helped it before.'

'Why can't you help it now?'

'Because, just as I was going into the mountain to look for you, I got
hold of your thread, and it brought me here.'

'Then you've come from my house, have you?'

'Yes, I have.'

'I didn't know you were there.'

'I've been there two or three days, I believe.'

'And I never knew it!  Then perhaps you can tell me why my grandmother
has brought me here?  I can't think.  Something woke me--I didn't know
what, but I was frightened, and I felt for the thread, and there it
was!  I was more frightened still when it brought me out on the
mountain, for I thought it was going to take me into it again, and I
like the outside of it best.  I supposed you were in trouble again, and
I had to get you out.  But it brought me here instead; and, oh, Curdie!
your mother has been so kind to me--just like my own grandmother!'

Here Curdie's mother gave the princess a hug, and the princess turned
and gave her a sweet smile, and held up her mouth to kiss her.

'Then you didn't see the cobs?'asked Curdie.

'No; I haven't been into the mountain, I told you, Curdie.'

'But the cobs have been into your house--all over it--and into your
bedroom, making such a row!'

'What did they want there?  It was very rude of them.'

'They wanted you--to carry you off into the mountain with them, for a
wife to their prince Harelip.'

'Oh, how dreadful' cried the princess, shuddering.

'But you needn't be afraid, you know.  Your grandmother takes care of
you.'

'Ah! you do believe in my grandmother, then?  I'm so glad!  She made me
think you would some day.'

All at once Curdie remembered his dream, and was silent, thinking.

'But how did you come to be in my house, and me not know it?' asked the
princess.

Then Curdie had to explain everything--how he had watched for her sake,
how he had been wounded and shut up by the soldiers, how he heard the
noises and could not rise, and how the beautiful old lady had come to
him, and all that followed.

'Poor Curdie! to lie there hurt and ill, and me never to know it!'
exclaimed the princess, stroking his rough hand.  'I would have come
and nursed you, if they had told me.'

'I didn't see you were lame,' said his mother.

'Am I, mother?  Oh--yes--I suppose I ought to be! I declare I've never
thought of it since I got up to go down amongst the cobs!'

'Let me see the wound,' said his mother.

He pulled down his stocking--when behold, except a great scar, his leg
was perfectly sound!

Curdie and his mother gazed in each other's eyes, full of wonder, but
Irene called out:

'I thought so, Curdie!  I was sure it wasn't a dream.  I was sure my
grandmother had been to see you.  Don't you smell the roses?  It was my
grandmother healed your leg, and sent you to help me.'

'No, Princess Irene,' said Curdie; 'I wasn't good enough to be allowed
to help you: I didn't believe you.  Your grandmother took care of you
without me.'

'She sent you to help my people, anyhow.  I wish my king-papa would
come.  I do want so to tell him how good you have been!'

'But,' said the mother, 'we are forgetting how frightened your people
must be.  You must take the princess home at once, Curdie--or at least
go and tell them where she is.'

'Yes, mother.  Only I'm dreadfully hungry.  Do let me have some
breakfast first.  They ought to have listened to me, and then they
wouldn't have been taken by surprise as they were.'

'That is true, Curdie; but it is not for you to blame them much. You
remember?'

'Yes, mother, I do.  Only I must really have something to eat.'

'You shall, my boy--as fast as I can get it,' said his mother, rising
and setting the princess on her chair.

But before his breakfast was ready, Curdie jumped up so suddenly as to
startle both his companions.

'Mother, mother!' he cried, 'I was forgetting.  You must take the
princess home yourself.  I must go and wake my father.'

Without a word of explanation, he rushed to the place where his father
was sleeping.  Having thoroughly roused him with what he told him he
darted out of the cottage.



CHAPTER 29

Masonwork

He had all at once remembered the resolution of the goblins to carry
out their second plan upon the failure of the first.  No doubt they
were already busy, and the mine was therefore in the greatest danger of
being flooded and rendered useless--not to speak of the lives of the
miners.

When he reached the mouth of the mine, after rousing all the miners
within reach, he found his father and a good many more just entering.
They all hurried to the gang by which he had found a way into the
goblin country.  There the foresight of Peter had already collected a
great many blocks of stone, with cement, ready for building up the weak
place--well enough known to the goblins. Although there was not room
for more than two to be actually building at once, they managed, by
setting all the rest to work in preparing the cement and passing the
stones, to finish in the course of the day a huge buttress filling the
whole gang, and supported everywhere by the live rock.  Before the hour
when they usually dropped work, they were satisfied the mine was secure.

They had heard goblin hammers and pickaxes busy all the time, and at
length fancied they heard sounds of water they had never heard before.
But that was otherwise accounted for when they left the mine, for they
stepped out into a tremendous storm which was raging all over the
mountain.  The thunder was bellowing, and the lightning lancing out of
a huge black cloud which lay above it and hung down  its edges of thick
mist over its sides.  The lightning was breaking out of the mountain,
too, and flashing up into the cloud.  From the state of the brooks, now
swollen into raging torrents, it was evident that the storm had been
storming all day.

The wind was blowing as if it would blow him off the mountain, but,
anxious about his mother and the princess, Curdie darted up through the
thick of the tempest.  Even if they had not set out before the storm
came on, he did not judge them safe, for in such a storm even their
poor little house was in danger.  Indeed he soon found that but for a
huge rock against which it was built, and which protected it both from
the blasts and the waters, it must have been swept if it was not blown
away; for the two torrents into which this rock parted the rush of
water behind it united again in front of the cottage--two roaring and
dangerous streams, which his mother and the princess could not possibly
have passed.  It was with great difficulty that he forced his way
through one of them, and up to the door.

The moment his hand fell on the latch, through all the uproar of winds
and Waters came the joyous cry of the princess:

'There's Curdie!  Curdie!  Curdie!'

She was sitting wrapped in blankets on the bed, his mother trying for
the hundredth time to light the fire which had been drowned by the rain
that came down the chimney.  The clay floor was one mass of mud, and
the whole place looked wretched.  But the faces of the mother and the
princess shone as if their troubles only made them the merrier.  Curdie
burst out laughing at the sight of them.

'I never had such fun!' said the princess, her eyes twinkling and her
pretty teeth shining.  'How nice it must be to live in a cottage on the
mountain!'

'It all depends on what kind your inside house is,' said the mother.

'I know what you mean,' said Irene.  'That's the kind of thing my
grandmother says.'

By the time Peter returned the storm was nearly over, but the streams
were so fierce and so swollen that it was not only out of the question
for the princess to go down the mountain, but most dangerous for Peter
even or Curdie to make the attempt in the gathering darkness.

'They will be dreadfully frightened about you,' said Peter to the
princess, 'but we cannot help it.  We must wait till the morning.'

With Curdie's help, the fire was lighted at last, and the mother set
about making their supper; and after supper they all told the princess
stories till she grew sleepy.  Then Curdie's mother laid her in
Curdie's bed, which was in a tiny little garret-room.  As soon as she
was in bed, through a little window low down in the roof she caught
sight of her grandmother's lamp shining far away beneath, and she gazed
at the beautiful silvery globe until she fell asleep.



CHAPTER 30

The King and the Kiss

The next morning the sun rose so bright that Irene said the rain had
washed his face and let the light out clean.  The torrents were still
roaring down the side of the mountain, but they were so much smaller as
not to be dangerous in the daylight.  After an early breakfast, Peter
went to his work and Curdie and his mother set out to take the princess
home.  They had difficulty in getting her dry across the streams, and
Curdie had again and again to carry her, but at last they got safe on
the broader part of the road, and walked gently down towards the king's
house.  And what should they see as they turned the last corner but the
last of the king's troop riding through the gate!

'Oh, Curdie!' cried Irene, clapping her hands right joyfully,'my
king-papa is come.'

The moment Curdie heard that, he caught her up in his arms, and set off
at full speed, crying:

'Come on, mother dear!  The king may break his heart before he knows
that she is safe.'

Irene clung round his neck and he ran with her like a deer.  When he
entered the gate into the court, there sat the king on his horse, with
all the people of the house about him, weeping and hanging their heads.
The king was not weeping, but his face was white as a dead man's, and
he looked as if the life had gone out of him.  The men-at-arms he had
brought with him sat with horror-stricken faces, but eyes flashing with
rage, waiting only for the word of the king to do something--they did
not know what, and nobody knew what.

The day before, the men-at-arms belonging to the house, as soon as they
were satisfied the princess had been carried away, rushed after the
goblins into the hole, but found that they had already so skilfully
blockaded the narrowest part, not many feet below the cellar, that
without miners and their tools they could do nothing. Not one of them
knew where the mouth of the mine lay, and some of those who had set out
to find it had been overtaken by the storm and had not even yet
returned.  Poor Sir Walter was especially filled with shame, and almost
hoped the king would order his head to be cut off, for to think of that
sweet little face down amongst the goblins was unendurable.

When Curdie ran in at the gate with the princess in his arms, they were
all so absorbed in their own misery and awed by the king's presence and
grief, that no one observed his arrival.  He went straight up to the
king, where he sat on his horse.

'Papa! papa!' the princess cried, stretching out her arms to him; 'here
I am!'

The king started.  The colour rushed to his face.  He gave an
inarticulate cry.  Curdie held up the princess, and the king bent down
and took her from his arms.  As he clasped her to his bosom, the big
tears went dropping down his cheeks and his beard.  And such a shout
arose from all the bystanders that the startled horses pranced and
capered, and the armour rang and clattered, and the rocks of the
mountain echoed back the noises.  The princess greeted them all as she
nestled in her father's bosom, and the king did not set her down until
she had told them all the story.  But she had more to tell about Curdie
than about herself, and what she did tell about herself none of them
