
"If they continue to guard us like this, Bertie, I really don't see a
shadow of a chance of getting away. We calculated on there being one,
or perhaps two sentries at the door, and thought we could have cut a
hole through that adobe wall at the back and crept out through it; but
as there is a guard at each corner, I don't see a chance of it. The
fellows are evidently afraid of their captain, and each keeps to his
corner, and sits there and smokes and drones out songs, but they never
move till they are relieved. Of course we must make the attempt if we
see no other way of escaping. But I have still great hope that Dias
will somehow or other try to get us out, though how he can do it I
don't know."

They observed that the sentries were not changed in any military way.
Five minutes before sunset the four men who were to relieve those on
guard came sauntering up. The former guard ordered the captives into
the hut and bolted the door, and then after a short chat with the
others went off, the new sentries having already taken their posts at
the corners of the hut. On the fifth evening after their capture they
saw approaching a peasant woman sitting on a mule. A man was walking
beside her. Behind the woman was a small barrel, and two packs and two
small wine-skins hung on each side.

"Harry," Bertie exclaimed, "I believe that is Dias and Maria!"

"It is," Harry said. "Thank God they have found us! Twenty to one they
will get us out. What have they got with them, I wonder?"

They stopped in the road opposite the house, which was the end one in
the village.

"You are not to come nearer," one of the sentries shouted.

"I am sure I don't want to come nearer," the woman said pertly. "You
don't think you are so handsome that I want to get a better sight of
your face?"

"What have you got there?" the man asked. "We shall be coming off duty
in ten minutes."

"Well, we have got a little of everything," she said. "As pretty sashes
as there are in the country, beautiful silk neckerchiefs, silver
brooches for your sweethearts, and for those who purchase freely a
glass of the best pisco spirit."

"Well, wait, and I dare say we shall lay out a dollar or two."

A minute or two later four other men sauntered up, and began to talk to
Maria, who slipped off her mule. The guards, fearful that the best
bargains would be sold before they could get forward, hurried the
prisoners into the hut and bolted the door. The brothers heard a great
deal of talking and arguing, and ten minutes later the sentries came up
to their usual post.

"I would not mind betting odds," Bertie said with delight, "that Dias
has drugged that spirit."

"I expect so, Bertie. He would be sure that they could not resist it,
for it is the best spirit there is in Peru."

For a time the sentries talked, saying that the pedlars' goods were
cheap and the spirit as good as any they had ever tasted. "We had great
difficulty in getting her to sell us a second glass each; and she was
right, for she had not much of it, and it must help her rarely to sell
her goods. The husband seemed a surly sort of chap. I wonder such a
pretty little woman would marry such a fellow."

"I suppose he was well-to-do and she was poor," another said; "such is
generally the case when you see a marriage like that. I dare say he
makes a good thing of it; the goods are as cheap, though, as they would
be in Lima."

Gradually the talking ceased, and within an hour there was perfect
quiet outside the hut. Half an hour later they heard footsteps coming
quietly up to the door. They held their breath; but instead of, as they
expected, hearing the bolt drawn, they heard the new-comers going round
the hut, pausing a minute at each corner. Then they again stopped at
the door; the two bolts were shot back, and the door opened.

"Come, senors," Dias said; "it is quite safe. We have put them all to
sleep. Here are their muskets and pistols. You had better take them, in
case we are pursued, which is not likely. At any rate, should one of
them wake the want of a gun will mean delay in raising the alarm.

"Don't speak, senors; it is as well to keep quiet till we are fairly
off." He shut the door and rebolted it, and then led the way down into
the road.

Not a word was spoken till they had gone a hundred yards, and then
Harry said: "You have done us another good turn, Dias; we did not see
any possible way of getting out; but we both agreed that if you could
find us you would."

"Of course, senors, you could not suppose that Maria and I would go
quietly off."

"How did you manage to get away, Dias?"

"It was easy enough. After what we had heard of these brigands I made
up my mind that I would not unsaddle the mules, nor take the packs off
the two loaded ones. The burdens were not heavy, for we have little but
our bedding and the tents left, and I thought they might as well stay
where they were, and in the morning we could shift them on to the
others. I told Jose to watch about half the night; but I was standing
talking to him, and smoking my last cigarette, when he said suddenly,
'I can hear a noise at the other end of the village.'

"The evening was still, and I could also hear the sound of many
footsteps, so I ran and pulled down the bar at the back of the yard,
called Maria, and told her and Jose to take the mules straight down to
the lake, and then to follow the bank. Then I ran to warn you; but
before I got half-way I heard shouts and firing, and knew that I was
too late, so I ran back to the lake, where I overtook the mules, and we
mounted and went off at a trot. When I got a quarter of a mile away I
told the others to go on to Junin, which we knew was twenty miles away,
and put up there till I joined them. Then I ran back to the village,
and, keeping myself well behind a house, watched them getting ready to
start, and saw you. There was nothing to do but to follow you. I did
so, and observed where they had shut you up, and I waited about for
some hours, so as to see how you were guarded.

"I saw their captain go into your hut twice. When he came out the
second time he had a paper in his hand. He went to the house he has
taken possession of, and I kept a good watch over that. Presently two
lieutenants came out, talking together. They entered another house, and
ten minutes afterwards issued out again, dressed in ordinary clothes,
such as a muleteer or a cultivator fairly well off would wear, and
returned to the captain's house, and stayed there for a good half-hour
before they came out again. Two horses had been brought round to the
door. The captain came out with them, and was evidently giving them
some last instructions. Then they rode off, saying good-bye to some of
the men as they passed through the village.

"Knowing the ways of these bandits, I had no doubt the paper I saw
their captain bring out of the hut where you were was a letter he had
compelled you to write to request a large sum of money to be sent in
exchange for you; and as I felt certain that we should rescue you
somehow, I thought it was a pity that this letter should go down, so I
started at once to follow them. They had not got more than a quarter of
an hour's start of me, and by the line they had taken I saw that they
intended to go to Junin. I did not think it likely that they would
enter the place, because they would be sure to meet some of Quinda's
men there; but would probably sleep at some small village near it, and
then make a circuit to strike the road beyond the town.

"Fortunately I had some money in my pocket, and at the first farm I
came to I bought a mule. You see, senor, I had not lain down the night
before, and had done a fair day's work before I started to follow your
captors. I had walked twenty miles with them, and had been busy all the
morning. I knew it could not be much less than thirty miles to Junin,
and that if I could not find them there I should have to push on after
them again the next morning, so I gave the farmer what he asked for his
mule, and started at once on it barebacked. It turned out to be a good
animal, and I rode hard, for I wanted to get down to Junin before the
two men. I reckoned I should do that, because, as they were going a
very long journey, they would not want to press their horses, and
besides would prefer that it should be dark before they stopped for the
night.

"When I got to Junin I found Maria and Jose, who had put up the mules
at the only inn there. I set Maria to watch on the road leading into
the town, and went out with Jose to a little village a mile back, where
I made sure the fellows would stop. I was not long in finding out that
they had arrived about half an hour after I had ridden through, and had
put up at the priest's. That was good enough for me. We went back to
the town. I had some supper, which I can tell you I wanted badly, for I
had been afraid of going into the brigand's village to buy anything,
as, being a stranger, I might have been asked questions, so I had had
nothing since the night before. I had found that there was a road from
the place where they had stopped, by which they could ride along by the
lake without going into the town; so Jose and I ambushed there an hour
before daylight, thinking that they would be off early. We were right;
for in a quarter of an hour they came along. Day was just breaking, so
we could make out their figures easily enough, and as they were not
five yards away as they passed, we were not likely to miss them. Well,
I found the paper you had written in the coat-pocket of one of them,
together with two hundred dollars, no doubt for the expenses of his
journey. We hid the two bodies under a heap of stones."

"Then you killed them, Dias?" Harry said, in a tone of surprise.

"Of course! what else would one do with them? They were brigands, and
they had attacked a peaceable village and killed several people. Even
if I had not wanted to get your paper it would have been a very
meritorious action."

"Oh, I am not blaming you, Dias, at all! There was no other way of
getting the paper, and it may be regarded as an act of necessity. And
what did you do with their horses?"

"Jose went on with them, and I returned to the town again and started
with Maria and the mules. We journeyed to a village half-way to Oroya.
Of course we overtook Jose a mile or two after we had left Junin. There
we put up at a quiet place and talked over the situation. We knew that
there was no particular hurry, for we read your letter, and knew that
no harm would come to you for a long time. It would be a month at least
before they would expect the men back with the money. There was another
letter, addressed to Don Mariano Carratala, whom I know to be a busy
politician in Lima. The money was to be paid to him; at least he was to
receive it from the two men immediately they left the British consul's
house, and he was to hold it for Valdez, which is the name of the
brigand."

"I thought he would not trust the men to bring up a sum like that."

"It would be enough to tempt the most incorruptible Peruvian, and
certainly the men he sent down would have taken good care never to come
to this part of the country again if they had got the money into their
possession. I don't think either it would have been safe in the hands
of Carratala, if he did not know that sooner or later he would get a
knife between his shoulders if he kept it. Next morning Maria and I
started back, bringing with us four mules, the fastest we had. We rode
on two and led the others. I knew some people at Junin, for I have
often passed through the town when I have been bringing down silver
from Cerro, and one managed to get for us that little barrel of pisco.
I was sure that no soldier would refuse a glass; but it was almost a
sin to give such liquor to the dogs. Then we bought peasants' clothes,
and a parcel of goods such as travelling hawkers carry.

"You know how we succeeded. Of course we had drugged the pisco heavily,
and knew that two glasses would send any man off to sleep in half an
hour. As soon as it was dark, Maria went on with the mule. We shall
find her half a mile from here at a deserted hut where we left the
other three mules."

"Well, Dias, you have assuredly saved our lives. Guarded as we were,
there was not the slightest chance of our getting away by ourselves;
and as the British consul certainly could not have raised the sum they
demanded, we should have had our throats cut when the messengers
returned empty-handed. Valdez is not the man to go back from his word
in that respect."

"It is a pity you have lost your arms, senor."

"Yes, we have certainly lost our double-barrelled guns, but our rifles
and pistols are hidden in the straw of the bed in the room where we
slept. We had just time to hide them before the brigands burst into the
room."

"Then we can recover them, senor. Of course I intended to ride straight
to Junin, but it won't make very much difference. We will ride to the
village, get the rifles and pistols, and then follow the road by the
lake. It is now only nine o'clock; we can be there by one easily, and
reach Junin by morning. It will be perfectly safe to rest there. I
suppose your guards will be relieved about twelve o'clock?"

"Yes, that was the time we heard them changed."

"They will most likely discover that you have gone then. When they find
the four guards sound asleep, they are sure to unbolt the door and see
if you are there, then of course they will give the alarm at once. But
I hardly think they will even attempt to pursue. They are infantry, and
none of them are mounted but the officers, which means that at present
only Valdez himself has a horse. They would know that you had been
assisted, and that probably horses were waiting for you somewhere.
There is the hut, senors."

Maria ran out as they came up.

"The saints be praised," she exclaimed, "that you are with us again,
senors!"

"The saints are no doubt to be praised," Harry said, "but we feel at
present a good deal more indebted to Dias and yourself than to them. We
are indeed grateful to you both, and you managed it splendidly. My
brother and I felt so confident that you would do something to get us
out, that we were not in the least surprised when we recognized you and
Diaz got up as travelling hawkers."

"You did not tell them that we were with you?"

"No. Fortunately they asked no questions at all, and took us for
Englishmen travelling by ourselves. They may have thought of it
afterwards, but in the hurry of carrying off their booty they
apparently gave the matter no attention. If they had done so they would
probably have sent a party out in pursuit of the mules. Even if they
had not done so, they would have been sure to look with some suspicion
at two hawkers arriving at such an out-of-the-way village at such a
time."

"Well, we had better be moving at once," Dias said. "We are going down
to the village where they were captured, Maria. They hid their rifles
and pistols there when they found the place was in the hands of the
brigands."

Three minutes later they started. There was a full moon, so they were
able to ride fast, and it was just midnight when they arrived at the
village. When they knocked at the house where their rifles had been
left, the proprietor looked out from the upper window in great dismay,
fearing that the brigands might have returned. However, as soon as he
recognized the party he came down and opened the door. The arms were
found where they had been hidden, and in five minutes they were again
on their way, and arrived at Junin at five o'clock. It was necessary to
wait here twenty-four hours to rest the animals. The next morning they
started as soon as it was light, and picked up Jose and the convoy. The
brothers mounted the two horses, and Dias and Maria rode on one mule,
and led three behind them. Jose rode another and led four. The horses
and the mule Dias had bought were sold at Oroya, and after purchasing
enough provisions for the rest of their journey they started for Lima,
having concluded that it would be better, now that they were on the
main track, to follow it instead of striking across the hills.




CHAPTER XIII

LETTERS FROM HOME


There was some little discussion over the amount of supplies that it
would be necessary to purchase.

"Travelling quietly, the journey will not occupy over fourteen days,"
Harry said. "Do not get anything more than is absolutely necessary. It
is evident that the whole country is in a disturbed state, and it is as
well to have nothing to lose. We can buy nearly everything we want in
the way of meat and flour at villages we pass through. Therefore, if we
have enough tea, coffee, and sugar there will be really no occasion to
buy anything more. We have still two or three bottles of spirits left,
and you can buy pulque everywhere. There is a proverb two or three
thousand years old, 'The empty traveller can sing before the robber'.
We are reduced to that condition, except for our tents, bedding, and
blankets, and they have done good service and would not cost much to
replace. There remain, then, only the animals. They would certainly be
a serious loss to us."

"Brigands would not want to take them. They would not be of the least
use to them in the mountains. I would not say the same of parties of
disbanded soldiers making their way down to Lima or Callao, who might
prefer riding to travelling all that distance."

"The brigands might take our rifles and pistols, Dias."

"Yes, they would be sure to do that, senor. But we have had more than
our share of bad luck already, what with the brigands in the Cerro
pass, and these rascals we have just had to do with. I will enquire
when the last silver convoy went down. If one has gone during the past
five or six days, we could overtake it soon, for we can do two days'
journey to its one. If no convoy has gone forward later, and there is
one starting shortly, it might be worth our while to wait for it, for
by all accounts the road down to Lima is infested by discharged
soldiers, and ruffians of all kinds from Callao and Lima."

"Have the convoys an escort?"

"Yes, senors. The silver mines have always a considerable force in
their pay. They used to have troops from the division stationed here,
but what with the constant revolutions, and the fact that more than
once the escort, instead of protecting the convoys, mutinied and seized
them, they found it better to raise a force themselves. They do not
take Creoles, preferring pure-bred Indians, who are just as brave as
the Creoles, if not braver, and can be relied upon to be faithful to
their trust. The consequence is that, in spite of the disturbed state
of the country, it is a long time now since one of their escorts has
been attacked, especially as the robbers would find great difficulty in
disposing of the silver, as each ingot is marked with the name of the
mine it comes from.

"They might, of course, melt it up again; but even then there would be
a difficulty, as the law is very strict as to the sale of silver, and a
certificate has to be obtained from the local authorities in every
case, stating where it was obtained. This is hard upon the natives, for
many of the little mines are worked among the mountains, and the
rascals, to whom all official positions are given in reward for
services done to the party which happens to be in power for the time,
take good care to fleece the Indians heavily before they will give them
the necessary documents. Nothing can be done here, senors, without
greasing the palms of two or three people, and the grease has to be
pretty heavily laid on."

Dias went out and made enquiries. "There will be no convoy for another
fortnight. One went down ten days ago."

"I certainly shall not wait another fortnight, Dias. As to an escort,
less than a dozen men would be useless, and as they would be a
fortnight at least going down, and as much returning, even if you could
get twelve men who could be relied upon, it would be a very expensive
job. We might as well risk losing our baggage, and even our guns. The
great thing will be to reduce the weight as much as possible. Four
cotton beds take up a lot of space, and I think in any case I should
have bought new ones at Lima; at any rate they can go. The blankets and
ponchos we could, of course, carry behind us. So that practically there
are only the two tents, cooking utensils, and the stores, which will
not weigh many pounds, to carry, and with our clothes the whole will
make a ridiculously small load even for one mule. We had better get rid
of the pickaxes and shovels, they would fetch pretty nearly as much
here as we should give for new ones at Lima.

"Thus, then, with Donna Maria riding one of the mules, there would be
our five selves and three led mules, of which only one would be laden.
That would offer no great temptation to plunderers; and as we shall all
have guns across our shoulders, they would see that it would not be
worth while to interfere on the very slight chance that the one laden
mule might be carrying anything valuable."

"I agree with you, senor. Our appearance would be that of a party of
travellers who have been exploring the old ruins, or, as has been done
before, endeavouring to ascertain whether the rivers on the east are
navigable down to the Amazon. Besides, the bulk of the people here do
not forget what they owe to Englishmen, and the fact that you are of
that nation would in itself secure good treatment for you among all
except desperate men."

Accordingly they started the next morning. Maria rode, in Amazon
fashion, on a mule between her husband and Harry. Bertie followed with
Jose, to whose saddle the three baggage mules were attached in single
file. They were undisturbed on their journey. Three or four times they
were hailed by men on the rocks above as they went through difficult
points of the pass. The reply of Dias, that the two gentlemen with him
were Englishmen who had been exploring the ruins and doing a little
shooting among the hills, generally satisfied them. One or two,
however, who enquired what the mule was carrying, were invited by him
to come down and see, though at the same time they were informed that
the load contained nothing but blankets and cooking vessels, and enough
provisions to last them on the way.

When, within two days' journey from Lima, a party of rough men came
down into the road, Dias rode forward to meet them and repeated his
usual story. "You can examine the mule if you like," he said, "but I
warn you not to interfere with us; the English senors are not men to be
meddled with. They are armed with rifles, and each carries a brace of
double-barrelled pistols. They are dead shots, too, and you may reckon
that it will cost you over a dozen lives were you to interfere with
them. Moreover, the other muleteer and myself could give a fair account
of ourselves. Rather than have trouble, however, two of you can come
forward and see that my statement as to what the mule carries is
correct. Its burden would not fetch fifty dollars at Lima."

Two of the men came forward and examined the mule's burden, and felt
the saddles of the others to see that nothing was concealed there. When
they rejoined their party one who appeared to be their leader came
forward.

"Senors," he said, "I regret that we have stopped you; but we are poor
men, and are obliged to take to the road to live. Perhaps your honours
would not mind giving us ten dollars to buy food at the next village."

[Illustration: THEY SAW APPROACHING A PEASANT WOMAN SITTING ON A MULE.]

