That day was a bad one for the defenders of Gubbins' garrison, for no
less than twelve shells penetrated the house, and five of the occupants
were killed or wounded. The shells came from a newly erected battery a
hundred and fifty yards to the north. Among the killed was one of Mrs.
Righton's children; and the boys first learned the news when, on rising
from a fruitless attempt to sleep, they went to get a little fresh air
outside. Edith and Nelly Hargreaves came out from the door, with jugs,
on their way to fetch water.

The Warreners at once offered to fetch it for them, and as they spoke
they saw that the girls' faces were both swollen with crying.

"Is anything the matter, Miss Hargreaves?" Ned asked.

"Have you not heard," Edith said, "how poor little Rupert has been
killed by a shell? The ayah was badly hurt, and we all had close
escapes; the shells from that battery are terrible."

Expressing their sorrow at the news, the boys took the jugs, and
crossing the yard to the well, filled and brought them back.

"I wish we could do something to silence that battery," said Dick; "it
will knock the house about our ears, and we shall be having the women
and children killed every day."

"Let's go and have a look at it from the roof," replied Ned.

The roof was, like those of most of the houses in the Residency, flat,
and intended for the inmates to sit and enjoy the evening breeze. The
parapet was very low, but this had been raised by a line of sandbags,
and behind them five or six of the defenders were lying, firing through
the openings between the bags, in answer to the storm of musketry which
the enemy were keeping up on the post.

Stooping low to avoid the bullets which were singing overhead, the
Warreners moved across the terrace, and lying down, peered out through
the holes which had been left for musketry. Gubbins' house stood on one
of the highest points of the ground inclosed in the defenses, and from
it they could obtain a view of nearly the whole circle of the enemy's
batteries. They were indeed higher than the roofs of most of the houses
held by the enemy, but one of these, distant only some fifty yards from
the Sikh Square, dominated the whole line of the British defenses on
that side, and an occasional crack of a rifle from its roof showed that
the advantage was duly appreciated.

"What do they call that house?" Ned asked one of the officers on the
terrace.

"That is Johannes' house," he answered. "It was a terrible mistake that
we did not destroy it before the siege began; it is an awful thorn in
our side. There is a black scoundrel, a negro, in the service of the
king of Oude, who has his post there; he is a magnificent shot, and he
has killed a great number of ours. It is almost certain death to show a
head within the line of his fire."

"I wonder we have not made a sortie, and set fire to the place," said
Ned.

"The scoundrels are so numerous that we could only hope to succeed with
considerable loss, and we are so weak already that we can't afford it.
So the chief sets his face against sorties, but I expect that we shall
be driven to it one of these days. That new battery is terribly
troublesome also. There, do you see, it lies just over that brow, so
that the shot from our battery cannot touch it, while it can pound away
at our house, and indeed at all the houses along this line."

"I should have thought," Dick said, "that a rush at night might carry
it, and spike the guns."

"No; we should be certain to make some sort of noise, however quiet we
were. There are six guns, all loaded at nightfall to the muzzle with
grape; we know that, for once they fancied they heard us coming, and
they fired such a storm of grape that we should have been all swept
away; besides which, there are a large number of the fellows sleeping
round; and although sometimes the battery ceases firing for some hours,
the musketry goes on more or less during the night."

The Warreners lay wistfully watching the battery, whose shots
frequently struck the house, and two or three times knocked down a
portion of the sandbag parapet--the damage being at once repaired with
bags lying in readiness, but always under a storm of musketry, which
opened in the hopes of hitting the men engaged upon the work; these
were, however, accustomed to it, and built up the sandbags without
showing a limb to the enemy's shot.

"There were two children killed by that last shot," an officer said,
coming up from below and joining them; "it made its way through the
earth and broke in through a blocked-up window."

"We must silence that battery, Ned, whatever comes of it," Dick said in
his brother's ear.

"I agree with you, Dick; but how is it to be done? have you got an
idea?"

"Well, my idea is this," the midshipman said. "I think you and I might
choose a dark night, as it will be to-night. Take the bearings of the
battery exactly; then when they stop firing, and we think the gunners
are asleep, crawl out and make for the guns. When we get there we can
make our way among them, keeping on the ground so that the sentry
cannot see us against the sky; and then with a sponge full of water we
can give a squeeze on each of the touchholes, so there would be no
chance of their going off till the charges were drawn. Then we could
make our way back and tell Gubbins the guns are disabled, and he can
take out a party, carry them with a rush, and spike them permanently."

"Capital, Dick; I'm with you, old boy."

"Now let us take the exact bearings of the place. There was a lane, you
see, before the houses were pulled down, running along from beyond that
corner nearly to the guns. When we get out we must steer for that,
because it is comparatively clear from rubbish, and we ain't so likely
to knock a stone over and make a row. We must choose some time when
they are pounding away somewhere else, and then we shan't be heard even
if we do make a little noise. We will ask Mrs. Hargreaves for a couple
of pieces of sponge; we need not tell her what we want them for."

"And you think to-night, Dick?"

"Well, to-night is just as likely to succeed as any other night, and
the sooner the thing is done the better. Johnson commands the guard
from twelve to four, and he is an easy-going fellow, and will let us
slip out, while some of the others wouldn't."




CHAPTER XV.

SPIKING THE GUNS.


As soon as night fell a little procession with three little forms on
trays covered with white cloths, and two of larger size, started from
Gubbins' house to the churchyard. Mr. and Mrs. Hargreaves, and Mrs.
Righton and her husband, with two other women, followed. That morning
all the five, now to be laid in the earth, were strong and well; but
death had been busy. In such a climate as that, and in so crowded a
dwelling, no delay could take place between death and burial, and the
victims of each day were buried at nightfall. There was no time to make
coffins, no men to spare for the work; and as each fell, so were they
committed to the earth.

A little distance from Gubbins' house the procession joined a larger
one with the day's victims from the other parts of the garrison--a
total of twenty-four, young and old. At the head of the procession
walked the Rev. Mr. Polehampton, one of the chaplains, who was
distinguished for the bravery and self-devotion with which he labored
among the sick and wounded. The service on which they were now engaged
was in itself dangerous, for the churchyard was very exposed to the
enemy's fire, and--for they were throughout the siege remarkably
well-informed of what was taking place within the Residency--every
evening they opened a heavy fire in the direction of the spot where
they knew a portion of the garrison would be engaged in this sad
avocation. Quietly and steadily the little procession moved along,
though bullets whistled and shells hissed around them. Each stretcher
with an adult body was carried by four soldiers, while some of the
little ones' bodies were carried by their mothers as if alive. Mrs.
Hargreaves and her daughter carried between them the tray on which the
body of little Rupert Righton lay. Arrived at the churchyard, a long
shallow trench, six feet wide, had been prepared, and in this, side by
side, the dead were tenderly placed. Then Mr. Polehampton spoke a few
words of prayer and comfort, and the mourners turned away, happily
without one of them having been struck by the bullets which sang
around, while some of the soldiers speedily filled in the grave.

While the sad procession had been absent, the boys had gone to Mrs.
Hargreaves' room. The curtain was drawn, and they could hear the girls
sobbing inside.

"Please, Miss Hargreaves, can I speak to you for a moment?" Ned said.
"I would not intrude, but it is something particular."

Edith Hargreaves came to the door.

"Please," Ned went on, "will you give us two good-sized pieces of
sponge? We don't know any one else to ask, and--but you must not say a
word to any one--my brother and myself mean to go out to-night to
silence that battery which is doing such damage."

"Silence that battery!" Edith exclaimed in surprise. "Oh, if you could
do that; but how is it possible?"

"Oh, you dear boy," Nelly, who had come to the door, exclaimed
impetuously, "if you could but do that, every one would love you. We
shall all be killed if that terrible battery goes on. But how are you
going to do it?"

"I don't say we are going to do it," Ned said, smiling at the girl's
excitement, "but we are going to try to-night. We'll tell you all about
it in the morning when it is done; that is," he said seriously, "if we
come back to tell it. But you must not ask any questions now, and
please give us the pieces of sponge." Edith disappeared for a moment,
and came back with two large pieces of sponge.

"We will not ask, as you say we must not," she said quietly, "but I
know you are going to run some frightful danger. I may tell mamma and
Carrie when they come back that much, may I not? and we will all keep
awake and pray for you tonight--God bless you both!" And with a warm
clasp of the hands the girls went back into their room again.

"I tell you what, Ned," the midshipman said emphatically, when they
went out into the air, "if I live through this war I'll marry Nelly
Hargreaves; that is," he added, "if she'll have me, and will wait a
bit. She is a brick, and no mistake. I never felt really in love
before; not regularly, you know."

At any other time Ned would have laughed; but with Edith's farewell
words in his ear he was little disposed for mirth, and he merely put
his hand on Dick's shoulder and said:

"There will be time to talk about that in the future, Dick. There's the
battery opening in earnest. There! Mr. Gubbins is calling for all hands
on the roof with their rifles to try and silence it. Come along."

For an hour the fire on both sides was incessant. The six guns of the
battery concentrated their fire upon Gubbins' house, while from the
walls and houses on either side of it the fire of the musketry flashed
unceasingly, sending a hail of shot to keep down the reply from the
roof.

On their side the garrison on the terrace disregarded the musketry
fire, but, crowded behind the sandbags, kept up a steady and
concentrated fire at the flashes of the cannon; while from the battery
below, the gunners, unable to touch the enemy's battery, discharged
grape at the houses tenanted by the enemy's infantry. The Sepoys,
carefully instructed in our service, had constructed shields of rope to
each gun to protect the gunners, but those at the best could cover but
one or two men, and the fire from the parapet inflicted such heavy
losses upon the gunners that after a time their fire dropped, and an
hour from the commencement of the cannonade all was still again on both
sides. The Sepoy guns were silenced.

It was now ten o'clock, and the Warreners went and lay down quietly for
a couple of hours. Then they heard the guard changed, and after waiting
a quarter of an hour they went out to the battery, having first filled
their sponges with water. There they joined Mr. Johnson.

"Can't sleep, boys?" he asked; "those flies are enough to drive one
mad. You will get accustomed to them after a bit."

"It is not exactly that, sir," Ned said, "but we wanted to speak to
you. Dick and I have made up our minds to silence that battery. We have
got sponges full of water, and we mean to go out and drown the priming.
Then when we come back and tell Mr. Gubbins, I dare say he will take
out a party, make a rush, and spike them."

"Why, you must be mad to think of such a thing!" Mr. Johnson said in
astonishment.

"I think it is easy enough, sir," Ned replied; "at any rate, we mean to
try."

"I can't let you go without leave," Mr. Johnson said.

"No, sir, and so we are not going to tell you we are going," Ned
laughed. "What we want to ask you is to tell your men not to fire if
they hear a noise close by in the next few minutes, and after that to
listen for a whistle like this. If they hear that they are not to fire
at any one approaching from the outside. Good-by, sir."

And without waiting for Mr. Johnson to make up his mind whether or not
his duty compelled him to arrest them, to prevent them from carrying
out the mad scheme of which Ned had spoken, the Warreners glided off
into the darkness.

They had obtained a couple of native daggers, and took no other arms.
They did not take off their boots, but wound round them numerous strips
of blanket, so that they would tread noiselessly, and yet if obliged to
run for it would avoid the risk of cutting their feet and disabling
themselves in their flight. Then, making sure that by this time Mr.
Johnson would have given orders to his men not to fire if they heard a
noise close at hand, they went noiselessly to the breastwork which ran
from the battery to the house, climbed over it, and dropped into the
trench beyond.

Standing on the battery close beside them, they saw against the sky the
figure of Mr. Johnson.

"Good-by, sir," Ned said softly; "we will be back in half an hour if we
have luck."

Then they picked their way carefully over the rough ground till they
reached the lane, and then walked boldly but noiselessly forward, for
they knew that for a little way there was no risk of meeting an enemy,
and that in the darkness they were perfectly invisible to any native
posted near the guns. After fifty yards' walking, they dropped on their
hands and knees. Although the guns had been absolutely silent since
their fire ceased at ten o'clock, a dropping musketry fire from the
houses and walls on either side had, as usual, continued. This
indicated to the boys pretty accurately the position of the guns.
Crawling forward foot by foot, they reached the little ridge which
sheltered the guns from the battery in Gubbins' garden.

The guns themselves they could not see, for behind them was a house,
and, except against the sky line, nothing was visible. They themselves
were, as they knew, in a line between Gubbins' house and any one who
might be standing at the guns, so that they would not show against the
sky. They could hear talking among the houses on either side of the
guns, and could see the light of fires, showing that while some of
their enemies were keeping up a dropping fire, others were passing the
night, as is often the native custom, round the fires, smoking and
cooking. There was a faint talk going on ahead, too, beyond the guns;
but the enemy had had too severe a lesson of the accuracy of the
English rifle-fire to dare to light a fire there.

Having taken in the scene, the boys moved forward, inch by inch.
Presently Ned put his hand on something which, for a moment, made him
start back; an instant's thought, however, reassured him; it was a man,
but the hardness of the touch told that it was not a living one.
Crawling past it, the lads found other bodies lying thickly, and then
they touched a wheel. They had arrived at the guns, and the bodies were
those of the men shot down a few hours before in the act of loading.

Behind the guns a number of artillerymen were, as the boys could hear,
sitting and talking; but the guns themselves stood alone and unguarded.
A clasp of the hand, and the boys parted, one going, as previously
arranged, each way. Ned rose very quietly by the side of the gun,
keeping his head, however, below its level, and running his hand along
it until it came to the breech. The touch-hole was covered by a wad of
cloth to keep the powder dry from the heavy dew. This he removed, put
up his hand again with the wet sponge, gave a squeeze, and then
cautiously replaced the covering.

Dick did the same with the gun on the right, and so each crept along
from gun to gun, until the six guns were disabled. Then they crawled
back and joined each other.

A clasp of the hands in congratulation, and then they were starting to
return, when they heard a dull tramp, and the head of a dark column
came along just ahead of them. The boys shrank back under the guns, and
lay flat among the bodies of the dead. The column halted at the guns,
and a voice asked:

"Is the colonel here?"

"Here am I," said a voice from behind the guns, and a native officer
came forward.

[Illustration: THE WARRENERS DROWNING THE PRIMING OF THE SEPOY GUNS.]

"We are going to make an attack from the house of Johannes. We shall be
strong, and shall sweep the Kaffirs before us. It is the order of the
general that you open with your guns here, to distract their attention."

"Will it please you to represent to the general that we have fought
this evening, and that half my gunners are killed. The fire of the sons
of Sheitan is too strong for us. Your excellency will see the ground is
covered with our dead. Bring fire," he ordered, and at the word one of
the soldiers lighted a torch made of straw, soaked in oil, which threw
a lurid flame over the ground. "See, excellency, how we have suffered."

"Are they all dead?" asked the officer, stepping nearer.

The boys held their breath, when there was a sharp cracking of
musketry, the man with the torch fell prostrate, and several cries
arose from the column. The watchers on the roof of Gubbins' house had
been quick to discern their enemy.

"Move on, march!" the officer exclaimed hastily, "double. Yes, I see,
it is hot here; but when we have attacked, and their attention is
distracted, you may do something."

So saying, he went off at a run with his regiment.

The boys lost no time in creeping out again, and making the best of
their way back; once fairly over the crest, they rose to their feet and
ran down toward the intrenchment. As they neared this Ned whistled
twice. The whistle was answered, and in a minute hands were stretched
down to help them to scramble over the earthwork.

"All right," Ned said to Mr. Johnson; "the guns are useless, and weakly
guarded. There are lots of infantry on both sides, but some of them
will be drawn off, for they are going to make an attack from Johannes'
house. Where is Mr. Gubbins?"

"He has just made his rounds," Mr. Johnson said; "I will take you to
him."

Mr. Gubbins was astonished when he heard from the boys that they had
been out, and rendered the guns temporarily useless. "You were wrong to
act without orders," he said, "but I can't scold you for such a gallant
action. We must act on it at once. I would send for a reinforcement,
but we must not lose a moment. If the attack from Johannes' house
