
The Magician sat on a throne, a sparkling crown on his head; his eyes
blazed like a green fire, and instead of hands he had claws. As soon as
Prince Milan entered he flung himself on his knees. The Magician stamped
loudly with his feet, glared frightfully out of his green eyes, and
cursed so loudly that the whole underworld shook. But the Prince,
mindful of the counsel he had been given, wasn't the least afraid, and
approached the throne still on his knees. At last the Magician laughed
aloud and said, 'You rogue, you have been well advised to make me laugh;
I won't be your enemy any more. Welcome to the underworld! All the same,
for your delay in coming here, we must demand three services from you.
For to-day you may go, but to-morrow I shall have something more to say
to you.'

Then two servants led Prince Milan to a beautiful apartment, and he lay
down fearlessly on the soft bed that had been prepared for him, and was
soon fast asleep.

Early the next morning the Magician sent for him, and said, 'Let's see
now what you've learnt. In the first place you must build me a palace
to-night, the roof of purest gold, the walls of marble, and the
windows of crystal; all round you must lay out a beautiful garden, with
fish-ponds and artistic waterfalls. If you do all this, I will reward
you richly; but if you don't, you shall lose your head.'

'Oh, you wicked monster!' thought Prince Milan, 'you might as well have
put me to death at once.' Sadly he returned to his room, and with bent
head sat brooding over his cruel fate till evening. When it grew dark, a
little bee flew by, and knocking at the window, it said, 'Open, and let
me in.'

Milan opened the window quickly, and as soon as the bee had entered, it
changed into the beautiful Hyacinthia.

'Good evening, Prince Milan. Why are you so sad?'

'How can I help being sad? Your father threatens me with death, and I
see myself already without a head.'

'And what have you made up your mind to do?'

'There's nothing to be done, and after all I suppose one can only die
once.'

'Now, don't be so foolish, my dear Prince; but keep up your spirits, for
there is no need to despair. Go to bed, and when you wake up to-morrow
morning the palace will be finished. Then you must go all round it,
giving a tap here and there on the walls to look as if you had just
finished it.'

And so it all turned out just as she had said. As soon as it was
daylight Prince Milan stepped out of his room, and found a palace which
was quite a work of art down to the very smallest detail. The Magician
himself was not a little astonished at its beauty, and could hardly
believe his eyes.

'Well, you certainly are a splendid workman,' he said to the Prince.
'I see you are very clever with your hands, now I must see if you are
equally accomplished with your head. I have thirty daughters in my
house, all beautiful princesses. To-morrow I will place the whole thirty
in a row. You must walk past them three times, and the third time you
must show me which is my youngest daughter Hyacinthia. If you don't
guess rightly, you shall lose your head.'

'This time you've made a mistake,' thought Prince Milan, and going to
his room he sat down at the window. Just fancy my not recognising the
beautiful Hyacinthia! Why, that is the easiest thing in the world.'

'Not so easy as you think,' cried the little bee, who was flying past.
'If I weren't to help you, you'd never guess. We are thirty sisters so
exactly alike that our own father can hardly distinguish us apart.'

'Then what am I to do?' asked Prince Milan.

'Listen,' answered Hyacinthia. 'You will recognise me by a tiny fly I
shall have on my left cheek, but be careful for you might easily make a
mistake.'

The next day the Magician again commanded Prince Milan to be led before
him. His daughters were all arranged in a straight row in front of him,
dressed exactly alike, and with their eyes bent on the ground.

'Now, you genius,' said the Magician, 'look at these beauties three
times, and then tell us which is the Princess Hyacinthia.'

Prince Milan went past them and looked at them closely. But they were
all so precisely alike that they looked like one face reflected in
thirty mirrors, and the fly was nowhere to be seen; the second time
he passed them he still saw nothing; but the third time he perceived a
little fly stealing down one cheek, causing it to blush a faint pink.
Then the Prince seized the girl's hand and cried out, 'This is the
Princess Hyacinthia!'

'You're right again,' said the Magician in amazement; 'but I've still
another task for you to do. Before this candle, which I shall light,
burns to the socket, you must have made me a pair of boots reaching to
my knees. If they aren't finished in that time, off comes your head.'

The Prince returned to his room in despair; then the Princess Hyacinthia
came to him once more changed into the likeness of a bee, and asked him,
'Why so sad, Prince Milan?'

'How can I help being sad? Your father has set me this time an
impossible task. Before a candle which he has lit burns to the socket,
I am to make a pair of boots. But what does a prince know of shoemaking?
If I can't do it, I lose my head.'

'And what do you mean to do?' asked Hyacinthia.

'Well, what is there to be done? What he demands I can't and won't do,
so he must just make an end of me.'

'Not so, dearest. I love you dearly, and you shall marry me, and I'll
either save your life or die with you. We must fly now as quickly as we
can, for there is no other way of escape.'

With these words she breathed on the window, and her breath froze on the
pane. Then she led Milan out of the room with her, shut the door, and
threw the key away. Hand in hand, they hurried to the spot where they
had descended into the lower world, and at last reached the banks of the
lake. Prince Milan's charger was still grazing on the grass which grew
near the water. The horse no sooner recognized his master, than it
neighed loudly with joy, and springing towards him, it stood as if
rooted to the ground, while Prince Milan and Hyacinthia jumped on its
back. Then it sped onwards like an arrow from a bow.

In the meantime the Magician was waiting impatiently for the Prince.
Enraged by the delay, he sent his servants to fetch him, for the
appointed time was past.

The servants came to the door, and finding it locked, they knocked; but
the frozen breath on the window replied in Prince Milan's voice, 'I am
coming directly.' With this answer they returned to the Magician. But
when the Prince still did not appear, after a time he sent his servants
a second time to bring him. The frozen breath always gave the same
answer, but the Prince never came. At last the Magician lost all
patience, and commanded the door to be burst open. But when his servants
did so, they found the room empty, and the frozen breath laughed
aloud. Out of his mind with rage, the Magician ordered the Prince to be
pursued.

Then a wild chase began. 'I hear horses' hoofs behind us,' said
Hyacinthia to the Prince. Milan sprang from the saddle, put his ear to
the ground and listened. 'Yes,' he answered, 'they are pursuing us, and
are quite close.' 'Then no time must be lost,' said Hyacinthia, and
she immediately turned herself into a river, Prince Milan into an iron
bridge, and the charger into a blackbird. Behind the bridge the road
branched off into three ways.

The Magician's servants hurried after the fresh tracks, but when they
came to the bridge, they stood, not knowing which road to take, as the
footprints stopped suddenly, and there were three paths for them to
choose from. In fear and trembling they returned to tell the Magician
what had happened. He flew into a dreadful rage when he saw them, and
screamed out, 'Oh, you fools! the river and bridge were they! Go back
and bring them to me at once, or it will be the worse for you.'

Then the pursuit began afresh. 'I hear horses' hoofs,' sighed
Hyacinthia. The Prince dismounted and put his ear to the ground. 'They
are hurrying after us, and are already quite near.' In a moment the
Princess Hyacinthia had changed herself, the Prince, and his charger
into a thick wood where a thousand paths and roads crossed each other.
Their pursuers entered the forest, but searched in vain for Prince Milan
and his bride. At last they found themselves back at the same spot they
had started from, and in despair they returned once more with empty
hands to the Magician.

'Then I'll go after the wretches myself,' he shouted. 'Bring a horse at
once; they shan't escape me.'

Once more the beautiful Hyacinthia murmured, 'I hear horses' hoofs quite
near.' And the Prince answered, 'They are pursuing us hotly and are
quite close.'

'We are lost now, for that is my father himself. But at the first church
we come to his power ceases; he may chase us no further. Hand me your
cross.'

Prince Milan loosened from his neck the little gold cross his mother had
given him, and as soon as Hyacinthia grasped it, she had changed herself
into a church, Milan into a monk, and the horse into a belfry. They had
hardly done this when the magician and his servants rode up.

'Did you see no one pass by on horseback, reverend father?' he asked the
monk.

'Prince Milan and Princess Hyacinthia have just gone on this minute;
they stopped for a few minutes in the church to say their prayers, and
bade me light this wax candle for you, and give you their love.'

'I'd like to wring their necks,' said the magician, and made all haste
home, where he had every one of his servants beaten to within an inch of
their lives.

Prince Milan rode on slowly with his bride without fearing any further
pursuit. The sun was just setting, and its last rays lit up a large city
they were approaching. Prince Milan was suddenly seized with an ardent
desire to enter the town.

'Oh my beloved,' implored Hyacinthia, 'please don't go; for I am
frightened and fear some evil.'

'What are you afraid of?' asked the Prince. 'We'll only go and look at
what's to be seen in the town for about an hour, and then we'll continue
our journey to my father's kingdom.'

'The town is easy to get into, but more difficult to get out of,' sighed
Hyacinthia. 'But let it be as you wish. Go, and I will await you here,
but I will first change myself into a white milestone; only I pray you
be very careful. The King and Queen of the town will come out to meet
you, leading a little child with them. Whatever you do, don't kiss the
child, or you will forget me and all that has happened to us. I will
wait for you here for three days.'

The Prince hurried to the town, but Hyacinthia remained behind disguised
as a white milestone on the road. The first day passed, and then the
second, and at last the third also, but Prince Milan did not return,
for he had not taken Hyacinthia's advice. The King and Queen came out to
meet him as she had said, leading with them a lovely fair-haired little
girl, whose eyes shone like two clear stars. The child at once caressed
the Prince, who, carried away by its beauty, bent down and kissed it on
the cheek. From that moment his memory became a blank, and he forgot all
about the beautiful Hyacinthia.

When the Prince did not return, poor Hyacinthia wept bitterly and
changing herself from a milestone into a little blue field flower, she
said, 'I will grow here on the wayside till some passer-by tramples me
under foot.' And one of her tears remained as a dewdrop and sparkled on
the little blue flower.

Now it happened shortly after this that an old man passed by, and seeing
the flower, he was delighted with its beauty. He pulled it up carefully
by the roots and carried it home. Here he planted it in a pot, and
watered and tended the little plant carefully. And now the most
extraordinary thing happened, for from this moment everything in the old
man's house was changed. When he awoke in the morning he always found
his room tidied and put into such beautiful order that not a speck of
dust was to be found anywhere. When he came home at midday, he found a
table laid out with the most dainty food, and he had only to sit down
and enjoy himself to his heart's content. At first he was so surprised
he didn't know what to think, but after a time he grew a little
uncomfortable, and went to an old witch to ask for advice.

The witch said, 'Get up before the cock crows, and watch carefully till
you see something move, and then throw this cloth quickly over it, and
you'll see what will happen.'

All night the old man never closed an eye. When the first ray of light
entered the room, he noticed that the little blue flower began to
tremble, and at last it rose out of the pot and flew about the room,
put everything in order, swept away the dust, and lit the fire. In great
haste the old man sprang from his bed, and covered the flower with
the cloth the old witch had given him, and in a moment the beautiful
Princess Hyacinthia stood before him.

'What have you done?' she cried. 'Why have you called me back to life?
For I have no desire to live since my bridegroom, the beautiful Prince
Milan, has deserted me.'

'Prince Milan is just going to be married,' replied the old man.
'Everything is being got ready for the feast, and all the invited guests
are flocking to the palace from all sides.'

The beautiful Hyacinthia cried bitterly when she heard this; then she
dried her tears, and went into the town dressed as a peasant woman. She
went straight to the King's kitchen, where the white-aproned cooks were
running about in great confusion. The Princess went up to the head cook,
and said, 'Dear cook, please listen to my request, and let me make a
wedding-cake for Prince Milan.'

The busy cook was just going to refuse her demand and order her out of
the kitchen, but the words died on his lips when he turned and beheld
the beautiful Hyacinthia, and he answered politely, 'You have just come
in the nick of time, fair maiden. Bake your cake, and I myself will lay
it before Prince Milan.'

The cake was soon made. The invited guests were already thronging round
the table, when the head cook entered the room, bearing a beautiful
wedding cake on a silver dish, and laid it before Prince Milan. The
guests were all lost in admiration, for the cake was quite a work of
art. Prince Milan at once proceeded to cut it open, when to his surprise
two white doves sprang out of it, and one of them said to the other: 'My
dear mate, do not fly away and leave me, and forget me as Prince Milan
forgot his beloved Hyacinthia.'

Milan sighed deeply when he heard what the little dove said. Then he
jumped up suddenly from the table and ran to the door, where he found
the beautiful Hyacinthia waiting for him. Outside stood his faithful
charger, pawing the ground. Without pausing for a moment, Milan and
Hyacinthia mounted him and galloped as fast as they could into the
country of King Kojata. The King and Queen received them with such
joy and gladness as had never been heard of before, and they all lived
happily for the rest of their lives.





PRINCE FICKLE AND FAIR HELENA (From the German)



There was once upon a time a beautiful girl called Helena. Her own
mother had died when she was quite a child, and her stepmother was as
cruel and unkind to her as she could be. Helena did all she could to
gain her love, and performed the heavy work given her to do cheerfully
and well; but her stepmother's heart wasn't in the least touched, and
the more the poor girl did the more she asked her to do.

One day she gave Helena twelve pounds of mixed feathers and bade her
separate them all before evening, threatening her with heavy punishment
if she failed to do so.

The poor child sat down to her task with her eyes so full of tears that
she could hardly see to begin. And when she had made one little heap of
feathers, she sighed so deeply that they all blew apart again. And so it
went on, and the poor girl grew more and more miserable. She bowed her
head in her hands and cried, 'Is there no one under heaven who will take
pity on me?'

Suddenly a soft voice replied, 'Be comforted, my child: I have come to
help you.'

Terrified to death, Helena looked up and saw a Fairy standing in front
of her, who asked in the kindest way possible, 'Why are you crying, my
dear?'

Helena, who for long had heard no friendly voice, confided her sad tale
of woe to the Fairy, and told her what the new task she had been given
to do was, and how she despaired of ever accomplishing it.

'Don't worry yourself about it any more,' said the kind Fairy; 'lie
down and go to sleep, and I'll see that your work is done all right.'
So Helena lay down, and when she awoke all the feathers were sorted
into little bundles; but when she turned to thank the good Fairy she had
vanished.

In the evening her stepmother returned and was much amazed to find
Helena sitting quietly with her work all finished before her.

She praised her diligence, but at the same time racked her brain as to
what harder task she could set her to do.

The next day she told Helena to empty a pond near the house with a spoon
which was full of holes. Helena set to work at once, but she very soon
found that what her stepmother had told her to do was an impossibility.
Full of despair and misery, she was in the act of throwing the spoon
away, when suddenly the kind Fairy stood before her again, and asked her
why she was so unhappy?

When Helena told her of her stepmother's new demand she said, 'Trust
to me and I will do your task for you. Lie down and have a sleep in the
meantime.'

Helena was comforted and lay down, and before you would have believed
it possible the Fairy roused her gently and told her the pond was empty.
Full of joy and gratitude, Helena hurried to her stepmother, hoping
that now at last her heart would be softened towards her. But the wicked
woman was furious at the frustration of her own evil designs, and only
thought of what harder thing she could set the girl to do.

Next morning she ordered her to build before evening a beautiful castle,
and to furnish it all from garret to basement. Helena sat down on the
rocks which had been pointed out to her as the site of the castle,
feeling very depressed, but at the same time with the lurking hope that
the kind Fairy would come once more to her aid.

And so it turned out. The Fairy appeared, promised to build the castle,
and told Helena to lie down and go to sleep in the meantime. At the
word of the Fairy the rocks and stones rose and built themselves into
a beautiful castle, and before sunset it was all furnished inside, and
left nothing to be desired. You may think how grateful Helena was when
she awoke and found her task all finished.

But her stepmother was anything but pleased, and went through the whole
castle from top to bottom, to see if she couldn't find some fault for
which she could punish Helena. At last she went down into one of the
cellars, but it was so dark that she fell down the steep stairs and was
killed on the spot.

So Helena was now mistress of the beautiful castle, and lived there in
peace and happiness. And soon the noise of her beauty spread abroad, and
many wooers came to try and gain her hand.

Among them came one Prince Fickle by name, who very quickly won the love
of fair Helena. One day, as they were sitting happily together under a
lime-tree in front of the castle, Prince Fickle broke the sad news to
Helena that he must return to his parents to get their consent to his
marriage. He promised faithfully to come back to her as soon as he could
and begged her to await his return under the lime-tree where they had
spent so many happy hours.

Helena kissed him tenderly at parting on his left cheek, and begged him
not to let anyone else kiss him there while they were parted, and she
promised to sit and wait for him under the lime-tree, for she never
doubted that the Prince would be faithful to her and would return as
quickly as he could.

And so she sat for three days and three nights under the tree without
moving. But when her lover never returned, she grew very unhappy, and
determined to set out to look for him. She took as many of her jewels
as she could carry, and three of her most beautiful dresses, one
embroidered with stars, one with moons, and the third with suns, all of
pure gold. Far and wide she wandered through the world, but nowhere did
she find any trace of her bridegroom. At last she gave up the search in
despair. She could not bear to return to her own castle where she
had been so happy with her lover, but determined rather to endure
her loneliness and desolation in a strange land. She took a place as
herd-girl with a peasant, and buried her jewels and beautiful dresses in
a safe and hidden spot.

Every day she drove the cattle to pasture, and all the time she thought
of nothing but her faithless bridegroom. She was very devoted to a
certain little calf in the herd, and made a great pet of it, feeding it
out of her own hands. She taught it to kneel before her, and then she
whispered in its ear:

