
'You'll never see anything else if you do,' said Cyril. 'Oh, JIMMY!'
appealed Anthea. 'I'll NEVER bring you out again!'

'You'll never have the chance if you don't go soon,' said the Psammead.

'I WILL see the end of the dream,' said the learned gentleman
obstinately.

The hills around were black with people fleeing from the villages to the
mountains. And even as they fled thin smoke broke from the great white
peak, and then a faint flash of flame. Then the volcano began to throw
up its mysterious fiery inside parts. The earth trembled; ashes and
sulphur showered down; a rain of fine pumice-stone fell like snow on all
the dry land. The elephants from the forest rushed up towards the peaks;
great lizards thirty yards long broke from the mountain pools and
rushed down towards the sea. The snows melted and rushed down, first in
avalanches, then in roaring torrents. Great rocks cast up by the volcano
fell splashing in the sea miles away.

'Oh, this is horrible!' cried Anthea. 'Come home, come home!'

'The end of the dream,' gasped the learned gentleman.

'Hold up the Amulet,' cried the Psammead suddenly. The place where they
stood was now crowded with men and women, and the children were strained
tight against the parapet. The turret rocked and swayed; the wave had
reached the golden wall.

Jane held up the Amulet.

'Now,' cried the Psammead, 'say the word!'

And as Jane said it the Psammead leaped from its bag and bit the hand of
the learned gentleman.

At the same moment the boys pushed him through the arch and all followed
him.

He turned to look back, and through the arch he saw nothing but a waste
of waters, with above it the peak of the terrible mountain with fire
raging from it.


He staggered back to his chair.

'What a ghastly dream!' he gasped. 'Oh, you're here, my--er--dears. Can
I do anything for you?'

'You've hurt your hand,' said Anthea gently; 'let me bind it up.'

The hand was indeed bleeding rather badly.

The Psammead had crept back to its bag. All the children were very
white.


'Never again,' said the Psammead later on, 'will I go into the Past with
a grown-up person! I will say for you four, you do do as you're told.'

'We didn't even find the Amulet,' said Anthea later still.

'Of course you didn't; it wasn't there. Only the stone it was made of
was there. It fell on to a ship miles away that managed to escape and
got to Egypt. _I_ could have told you that.'

'I wish you had,' said Anthea, and her voice was still rather shaky.
'Why didn't you?'

'You never asked me,' said the Psammead very sulkily. 'I'm not the sort
of chap to go shoving my oar in where it's not wanted.'

'Mr Ji-jimmy's friend will have something worth having to put in his
article now,' said Cyril very much later indeed.

'Not he,' said Robert sleepily. 'The learned Ji-jimmy will think it's a
dream, and it's ten to one he never tells the other chap a word about it
at all.'

Robert was quite right on both points. The learned gentleman did. And he
never did.



CHAPTER 10. THE LITTLE BLACK GIRL AND JULIUS CAESAR

A great city swept away by the sea, a beautiful country devastated by
an active volcano--these are not the sort of things you see every day of
the week. And when you do see them, no matter how many other wonders
you may have seen in your time, such sights are rather apt to take your
breath away. Atlantis had certainly this effect on the breaths of Cyril,
Robert, Anthea, and Jane.

They remained in a breathless state for some days. The learned gentleman
seemed as breathless as anyone; he spent a good deal of what little
breath he had in telling Anthea about a wonderful dream he had. 'You
would hardly believe,' he said, 'that anyone COULD have such a detailed
vision.'

But Anthea could believe it, she said, quite easily.

He had ceased to talk about thought-transference. He had now seen too
many wonders to believe that.

In consequence of their breathless condition none of the children
suggested any new excursions through the Amulet. Robert voiced the mood
of the others when he said that they were 'fed up' with Amulet for a
bit. They undoubtedly were.

As for the Psammead, it went to sand and stayed there, worn out by
the terror of the flood and the violent exercise it had had to take in
obedience to the inconsiderate wishes of the learned gentleman and the
Babylonian queen.

The children let it sleep. The danger of taking it about among strange
people who might at any moment utter undesirable wishes was becoming
more and more plain.

And there are pleasant things to be done in London without any aid from
Amulets or Psammeads. You can, for instance visit the Tower of London,
the Houses of Parliament, the National Gallery, the Zoological Gardens,
the various Parks, the Museums at South Kensington, Madame Tussaud's
Exhibition of Waxworks, or the Botanical Gardens at Kew. You can go to
Kew by river steamer--and this is the way that the children would have
gone if they had gone at all. Only they never did, because it was when
they were discussing the arrangements for the journey, and what they
should take with them to eat and how much of it, and what the whole
thing would cost, that the adventure of the Little Black Girl began to
happen.

The children were sitting on a seat in St James's Park. They had been
watching the pelican repulsing with careful dignity the advances of the
seagulls who are always so anxious to play games with it. The pelican
thinks, very properly, that it hasn't the figure for games, so it spends
most of its time pretending that that is not the reason why it won't
play.

The breathlessness caused by Atlantis was wearing off a little. Cyril,
who always wanted to understand all about everything, was turning things
over in his mind.

'I'm not; I'm only thinking,' he answered when Robert asked him what he
was so grumpy about. 'I'll tell you when I've thought it all out.'

'If it's about the Amulet I don't want to hear it,' said Jane.

'Nobody asked you to,' retorted Cyril mildly, 'and I haven't finished my
inside thinking about it yet. Let's go to Kew in the meantime.'

'I'd rather go in a steamer,' said Robert; and the girls laughed.

'That's right,' said Cyril, 'BE funny. I would.'

'Well, he was, rather,' said Anthea.

'I wouldn't think, Squirrel, if it hurts you so,' said Robert kindly.

'Oh, shut up,' said Cyril, 'or else talk about Kew.'

'I want to see the palms there,' said Anthea hastily, 'to see if they're
anything like the ones on the island where we united the Cook and the
Burglar by the Reverend Half-Curate.'

All disagreeableness was swept away in a pleasant tide of recollections,
and 'Do you remember...?' they said. 'Have you forgotten...?'

'My hat!' remarked Cyril pensively, as the flood of reminiscence ebbed a
little; 'we have had some times.'

'We have that,' said Robert.

'Don't let's have any more,' said Jane anxiously.

'That's what I was thinking about,' Cyril replied; and just then they
heard the Little Black Girl sniff. She was quite close to them.

She was not really a little black girl. She was shabby and not very
clean, and she had been crying so much that you could hardly see,
through the narrow chink between her swollen lids, how very blue her
eyes were. It was her dress that was black, and it was too big and too
long for her, and she wore a speckled black-ribboned sailor hat that
would have fitted a much bigger head than her little flaxen one. And she
stood looking at the children and sniffing.

'Oh, dear!' said Anthea, jumping up. 'Whatever is the matter?'

She put her hand on the little girl's arm. It was rudely shaken off.

'You leave me be,' said the little girl. 'I ain't doing nothing to you.'

'But what is it?' Anthea asked. 'Has someone been hurting you?'

'What's that to you?' said the little girl fiercely. 'YOU'RE all right.'

'Come away,' said Robert, pulling at Anthea's sleeve. 'She's a nasty,
rude little kid.'

'Oh, no,' said Anthea. 'She's only dreadfully unhappy. What is it?' she
asked again.

'Oh, YOU'RE all right,' the child repeated; 'YOU ain't agoin' to the
Union.'

'Can't we take you home?' said Anthea; and Jane added, 'Where does your
mother live?'

'She don't live nowheres--she's dead--so now!' said the little girl
fiercely, in tones of miserable triumph. Then she opened her swollen
eyes widely, stamped her foot in fury, and ran away. She ran no further
than to the next bench, flung herself down there and began to cry
without even trying not to.

Anthea, quite at once, went to the little girl and put her arms as tight
as she could round the hunched-up black figure.

'Oh, don't cry so, dear, don't, don't!' she whispered under the brim of
the large sailor hat, now very crooked indeed. 'Tell Anthea all about
it; Anthea'll help you. There, there, dear, don't cry.'

The others stood at a distance. One or two passers-by stared curiously.

The child was now only crying part of the time; the rest of the time she
seemed to be talking to Anthea.

Presently Anthea beckoned Cyril.

'It's horrible!' she said in a furious whisper, 'her father was a
carpenter and he was a steady man, and never touched a drop except on a
Saturday, and he came up to London for work, and there wasn't any, and
then he died; and her name is Imogen, and she's nine come next
November. And now her mother's dead, and she's to stay tonight with
Mrs Shrobsall--that's a landlady that's been kind--and tomorrow the
Relieving Officer is coming for her, and she's going into the Union;
that means the Workhouse. It's too terrible. What can we do?'

'Let's ask the learned gentleman,' said Jane brightly.

And as no one else could think of anything better the whole party walked
back to Fitzroy Street as fast as it could, the little girl holding
tight to Anthea's hand and now not crying any more, only sniffing
gently.

The learned gentleman looked up from his writing with the smile that had
grown much easier to him than it used to be. They were quite at home
in his room now; it really seemed to welcome them. Even the mummy-case
appeared to smile as if in its distant superior ancient Egyptian way it
were rather pleased to see them than not.

Anthea sat on the stairs with Imogen, who was nine come next November,
while the others went in and explained the difficulty.

The learned gentleman listened with grave attention.

'It really does seem rather rough luck,' Cyril concluded, 'because I've
often heard about rich people who wanted children most awfully--though I
know _I_ never should--but they do. There must be somebody who'd be glad
to have her.'

'Gipsies are awfully fond of children,' Robert hopefully said. 'They're
always stealing them. Perhaps they'd have her.'

'She's quite a nice little girl really,' Jane added; 'she was only
rude at first because we looked jolly and happy, and she wasn't. You
understand that, don't you?'

'Yes,' said he, absently fingering a little blue image from Egypt. 'I
understand that very well. As you say, there must be some home where she
would be welcome.' He scowled thoughtfully at the little blue image.

Anthea outside thought the explanation was taking a very long time.

She was so busy trying to cheer and comfort the little black girl that
she never noticed the Psammead who, roused from sleep by her voice, had
shaken itself free of sand, and was coming crookedly up the stairs. It
was close to her before she saw it. She picked it up and settled it in
her lap.

'What is it?' asked the black child. 'Is it a cat or a organ-monkey, or
what?'

And then Anthea heard the learned gentleman say--

'Yes, I wish we could find a home where they would be glad to have her,'
and instantly she felt the Psammead begin to blow itself out as it sat
on her lap.

She jumped up lifting the Psammead in her skirt, and holding Imogen by
the hand, rushed into the learned gentleman's room.

'At least let's keep together,' she cried. 'All hold hands--quick!'

The circle was like that formed for the Mulberry Bush or Ring-o'-Roses.
And Anthea was only able to take part in it by holding in her teeth
the hem of her frock which, thus supported, formed a bag to hold the
Psammead.

'Is it a game?' asked the learned gentleman feebly. No one answered.

There was a moment of suspense; then came that curious upside-down,
inside-out sensation which one almost always feels when transported
from one place to another by magic. Also there was that dizzy dimness of
sight which comes on these occasions.

The mist cleared, the upside-down, inside-out sensation subsided,
and there stood the six in a ring, as before, only their twelve feet,
instead of standing on the carpet of the learned gentleman's room, stood
on green grass. Above them, instead of the dusky ceiling of the Fitzroy
Street floor, was a pale blue sky. And where the walls had been and the
painted mummy-case, were tall dark green trees, oaks and ashes, and in
