
"There's a man come with a box of soap, Miss Katy, and here's the bill.
He says it's resated."

It took Katy a little time to find her purse, and then she wanted
her pencil and account book, and Elsie had to move from her seat at
the table.

"Oh dear!" she said, "I wish people wouldn't keep coming and
interrupting us. Who'll be the next, I wonder?"

She was not left to wonder long. Almost as she spoke, there was another
knock at the door.

"Come in!" said Katy, rather wearily. The door opened.

"Shall I?" said a voice. There was a rustle of skirts, a clatter of
boot-heels, and Imogen Clark swept into the room. Katy could not think
who it was, at first. She had not seen Imogen for almost two years.

"I found the front door open," explained Imogen, in her high-pitched
voice, "and as nobody seemed to hear when I rang the bell, I ventured to
come right up stairs. I hope I'm not interrupting anything private?"

"Not at all," said Katy, politely. "Elsie, dear, move up that low chair,
please. Do sit down, Imogen! I'm sorry nobody answered your ring, but
the servants are cleaning house to-day, and I suppose they didn't hear."

So Imogen sat down and began to rattle on in her usual manner, while
Elsie, from behind Katy's chair, took a wide-awake survey of her dress.
It was of cheap material, but very gorgeously made and trimmed, with
flounces and puffs, and Imogen wore a jet necklace and long black
ear-rings, which jingled and clicked when she waved her head about. She
still had the little round curls stuck on to her cheeks, and Elsie
wondered anew what kept them in their places.

By and by the object of Imogen's visit came out. She had called to say
good-by. The Clark family were all going back to Jacksonville to live.

"Did you ever see the Brigand again?" asked Clover, who had never
forgotten that eventful tale told in the parlor.

"Yes," replied Imogen, "several times. And I get letters from him quite
often. He writes _beau_tiful letters. I wish I had one with me, so that
I could read you a little bit. You would enjoy it, I know. Let me
see--perhaps I have." And she put her hand into her pocket. Sure enough
there _was_ a letter. Clover couldn't help suspecting that Imogen knew
it all the time.

The Brigand seemed to write a bold, black hand, and his note-paper and
envelope was just like anybody else's. But perhaps his band had
surprised a pedlar with a box of stationery.

"Let me see," said Imogen, running her eye down the page. "'Adored
Imogen'--that wouldn't interest you--hm, hm, hm--ah, here's something!
'I took dinner at the Rock House on Christmas. It was lonesome without
you. I had roast turkey, roast goose, roast beef, mince pie, plum
pudding, and nuts and raisins. A pretty good dinner, was it not? But
nothing tastes first-rate when friends are away.'"

Katy and Clover stared, as well they might. Such language from a
Brigand!

"John Billings has bought a new horse," continued Imogen; "hm, hm,
hm--him. I don't think there is anything else you'd care about. Oh, yes!
just here, at the end, is some poetry:

  "'Come, little dove, with azure wing,
  And brood upon my breast,'

"That's sweet, ain't it?"

"Hasn't he reformed?" said Clover; "he writes as if he had."

"Reformed!" cried Imogen, with a toss of the jingling ear-rings. "He was
always just as good as he could be!"

There was nothing to be said in reply to this. Katy felt her lips
twitch, and for fear she should be rude, and laugh out, she began to
talk as fast as she could about something else. All the time she found
herself taking measure of Imogen, and thinking--"Did I ever really like
her? How queer! Oh, what a wise man Papa is!"

Imogen stayed half an hour. Then she took her leave.

"She never asked how you were!" cried Elsie, indignantly; "I noticed,
and she didn't--not once."

"Oh well--I suppose she forgot. We were talking about her, not about
me," replied Katy.

The little group settled down again to their work. This time half an
hour went by without any more interruptions. Then the door bell rang,
and Bridget, with a disturbed face, came up stairs.

"Miss Katy," she said, "it's old Mrs. Worrett, and I reckon's she's
come to spend the day, for she's brought her bag. What ever shall I
tell her?"

Katy looked dismayed. "Oh dear!" she said, "how unlucky. What can we
do?"

Mrs. Worrett was an old friend of Aunt Izzie's, who lived in the
country, about six miles from Burnet, and was in the habit of coming to
Dr. Carr's for lunch, on days when shopping or other business brought
her into town. This did not occur often; and, as it happened, Katy had
never had to entertain her before.

"Tell her ye're busy, and can't see her," suggested Bridget; "there's no
dinner nor nothing, you know."

The Katy of two years ago would probably have jumped at this idea. But
the Katy of to-day was more considerate.

"N-o," she said; "I don't like to do that. We must just make the best of
it, Bridget. Run down, Clover, dear, that's a good girl! and tell Mrs.
Worrett that the dining-room is all in confusion, but that we're going
to have lunch here, and, after she's rested, I should be glad to have
her come up. And, oh, Clovy! give her a fan the first thing. She'll be
_so_ hot. Bridget, you can bring up the luncheon just the same, only
take out some canned peaches, by way of a dessert, and make Mrs. Worrett
a cup of tea. She drinks tea always, I believe.

"I can't bear to send the poor old lady away when she has come so far,"
she explained to Elsie, after the others were gone. "Pull the
rocking-chair a little this way, Elsie. And oh! push all those little
chairs back against the wall. Mrs. Worrett broke down in one the last
time she was here--don't you recollect?"

It took some time to cool Mrs. Worrett off, so nearly twenty minutes
passed before a heavy, creaking step on the stairs announced that the
guest was on her way up. Elsie began to giggle. Mrs. Worrett always made
her giggle. Katy had just time to give her a warning glance before the
door opened.

Mrs. Worrett was the most enormously fat person ever seen. Nobody dared
to guess how much she weighed, but she looked as if it might be a
thousand pounds. Her face was extremely red. In the coldest weather she
appeared hot, and on a mild day she seemed absolutely ready to melt. Her
bonnet-strings were flying loose as she came in, and she fanned herself
all the way across the room, which shook as she walked.

"Well, my dear," she said, as she plumped herself into the
rocking-chair, "and how do you do?"

"Very well, thank you," replied Katy, thinking that she never saw Mrs.
Worrett look half so fat before, and wondering how she _was_ to
entertain her.

"And how's your Pa?" inquired Mrs. Worrett. Katy answered politely, and
then asked after Mrs. Worrett's own health.

"Well, I'm so's to be round," was the reply, which had the effect of
sending Elsie off into a fit of convulsive laughter behind Katy's chair.

"I had business at the bank," continued the visitor, "and I thought
while I was about it I'd step up to Miss Petingill's and see if I
couldn't get her to come and let out my black silk. It was made quite a
piece back, and I seem to have fleshed up since then, for I can't make
the hooks and eyes meet at all. But when I got there, she was out, so
I'd my walk for nothing. Do you know where she's sewing now?"

"No," said Katy, feeling her chair shake, and keeping her own
countenance with difficulty, "she was here for three days last week to
make Johnnie a school-dress. But I haven't heard anything about her
since. Elsie, don't you want to run down stairs and ask Bridget to
bring a--a--a glass of iced water for Mrs. Worrett? She looks warm
after her walk."

Elsie, dreadfully ashamed, made a bolt from the room, and hid herself in
the hall closet to have her laugh out. She came back after a while, with
a perfectly straight face. Luncheon was brought up. Mrs. Worrett made a
good meal, and seemed to enjoy everything. She was so comfortable that
she never stirred till four o'clock! Oh, how long that afternoon did
seem to the poor girls, sitting there and trying to think of something
to say to their vast visitor!

At last Mrs. Worrett got out of her chair, and prepared to depart.

"Well," she said, tying her bonnet-strings, "I've had a good rest, and
feel all the better for it. Ain't some of you young folks coming out to
see me one of these days? I'd like to have you, first-rate, if you will.
'Tain't every girl would know how to take care of a fat old woman, and
make her feel to home, as you have me, Katy. I wish your aunt could see
you all as you are now. She'd be right pleased; I know that."

Somehow, this sentence rang pleasantly in Katy's ears.

"Ah! don't laugh at her," she said later in the evening, when the
children, after their tea in the clean, fresh-smelling dining-room, were
come up to sit with her, and Cecy, in her pretty pink lawn and white
shawl, had dropped in to spend an hour or two; "she's a real kind old
woman, and I don't like to have you. It isn't her fault that she's fat.
And Aunt Izzie was fond of her, you know. It is doing something for her
when we can show a little attention to one of her friends. I was sorry
when she came, but now it's over, I'm glad."

"It feels so nice when it stops aching," quoted Elsie, mischievously,
while Cecy whispered to Clover.

"Isn't Katy sweet?"

"Isn't she!" replied Clover. "I wish I was half so good. Sometimes I
think I shall really be sorry if she ever gets well. She's such a dear
old darling to us all, sitting there in her chair, that it wouldn't seem
so nice to have her anywhere else. But then, I know it's horrid in me.
And I don't believe she'd be different, or grow slam-bang and horrid,
like some of the girls, even if she were well."

"Of course she wouldn't!" replied Cecy.




CHAPTER XIII

AT LAST


It was about six weeks after this, that one day, Clover and Elsie were
busy down stairs, they were startled by the sound of Katy's bell ringing
in a sudden and agitated manner. Both ran up two steps at a time, to see
what was wanted.

Katy sat in her chair, looking very much flushed and excited.

"Oh, girls!" she exclaimed, "what do you think? I stood up!"

"What?" cried Clover and Elsie.

"I really did! I stood up on my feet! by myself!"

The others were too much astonished to speak, so Katy went on
explaining.

"It was all at once, you see. Suddenly, I had the feeling that if I
tried I could, and almost before I thought, I _did_ try, and there I
was, up and out of the chair. Only I kept hold of the arm all the time!
I don't know how I got back, I was so frightened. Oh, girls!"--and Katy
buried her face in her hands.

"Do you think I shall ever be able to do it again?" she asked, looking
up with wet eyes.

"Why, of course you will!" said Clover; while Elsie danced about, crying
out anxiously: "Be careful! Do be careful!"

Katy tried, but the spring was gone. She could not move out of the chair
at all. She began to wonder if she had dreamed the whole thing.

But next day, when Clover happened to be in the room, she heard a sudden
exclamation, and turning, there stood Katy, absolutely on her feet.

"Papa! papa!" shrieked Clover, rushing down stairs. "Dorry, John,
Elsie--come! Come and see!"

Papa was out, but all the rest crowded up at once. This time Katy found
no trouble in "doing it again." It seemed as if her will had been
asleep; and now that it had waked up, the limbs recognized its orders
and obeyed them.

When Papa came in, he was as much excited as any of the children. He
walked round and round the chair, questioning Katy and making her stand
up and sit down.

"Am I really going to get well?" she asked, almost in a whisper.

"Yes, my love, I think you are," replied Dr. Carr, seizing Phil and
giving him a toss into the air. None of the children had ever before
seen Papa behave so like a boy. But pretty soon, noticing Katy's burning
cheeks and excited eyes, he calmed himself, sent the others all away,
and sat down to soothe and quiet her with gentle words.

"I think it is coming, my darling," he said, "but it will take time, and
you must have a great deal of patience. After being such a good child
all the years, I am sure you won't fail now. Remember, any imprudence
will put you back. You must be content to gain a very little at a time.
There is no royal road to walking any more than there is to learning.
Every baby finds that out."

"Oh, Papa!" said Katy, "it's no matter if it takes a year--if only I get
well at last."

How happy she was that night--too happy to sleep. Papa noticed the dark
circles under her eyes in the morning, and shook his head.

"You must be careful," he told her, "or you'll be laid up again. A
course of fever would put you back for years."

Katy knew Papa was right, and she was careful, though it was by no
means easy to be so with that new life tingling in every limb. Her
progress was slow, as Dr. Carr had predicted. At first she only stood
on her feet a few seconds, then a minute, then five minutes, holding
tightly all the while by the chair. Next she ventured to let go the
chair, and stand alone. After that she began to walk a step at a time,
pushing a chair before her, as children do when they are learning the
use of their feet. Clover and Elsie hovered about her as she moved,
like anxious mammas. It was droll, and a little pitiful, to see tall
Katy with her feeble, unsteady progress, and the active figures of the
little sisters following her protectingly. But Katy did not consider it
either droll or pitiful; to her it was simply delightful--the most
delightful thing possible. No baby of a year old was ever prouder of
his first steps than she.
