"That's always a safe prediction to make," said Adam Colfax, smiling. "I
never saw five other human beings with such a capacity for getting out
of danger."

"We were all at Wyoming, and we all still live."

The face of the New Englander darkened.

"Wyoming!" he exclaimed. "I cannot hear of it without every vein growing
hot within me."

"We saw things done there," said Henry gravely, "the telling of which few
men can bear to hear."

"I know! I know!" exclaimed Adam Colfax. "The news of it has spread
everywhere!"

"What we want," said Henry, "is revenge. It is a case in which we must
strike back, and strike hard. If this thing goes on, not a white
life will be safe on the whole border from the St. Lawrence to the
Mississippi."

"It is true," said Adam Colfax, "and we would send an army now against
the Iroquois and their allies, but, Henry, my lad, our fortunes are at
their lowest there in the East, where the big armies are fighting. That
is the reason why nobody has been sent to protect our rear guard, which
has suffered so terribly. You may be sure, too, that the Iroquois will
strike in this region again as often and as hard as they can. I make
more than half a guess that you and your comrades are here because you
know this."

He looked shrewdly at the boy.

"Yes," said Henry, "that is so. Somehow we were drawn into it, but being
here we are glad to stay. Timmendiquas, the great chief who fought us
so fiercely on the Ohio, is with the Iroquois, with a detachment of his
Wyandots, and while he, as I know, frowns on the Wyoming massacre, he
means to help Thayendanegea to the end."

Adam Colfax looked graver than ever.

"That is bad," he said. "Timmendiquas is a mighty warrior and leader,
but there is also another way of looking at it. His presence here will
relieve somewhat the pressure on Kentucky. I ought to tell you, Henry,
that we got through safely with our supplies to the Continental army,
and they could not possibly have been more welcome. They arrived just in
time."

The others came forth presently and were greeted with the same warmth by
Adam Colfax.

"It is shore mighty good for the eyes to see you, Mr. Colfax," said
Shif'less Sol, "an' it's a good sign. Our people won when you were on
the Mississippi an' the Ohio'--an' now that you're here, they're goin'
to win again."

"I think we are going to win here and everywhere," said Adam Colfax,
"but it is not because there is any omen in my presence. It is because
our people will not give up, and because our quarrel is just."

The stanch New Englander left on the following day for points farther
east, planning and carrying out some new scheme to aid the patriot
cause, and the five, on the day after that, received a message written
on a piece of paper which was found fastened to a tree on the outskirts
of the settlement. It was addressed to "Henry Ware and Those with Him,"
and it read:


     "You need not think because you escaped us at Wyoming and on
     the Susquehanna that you will ever get back to Kentucky.
     There is amighty league now on the whole border between the
     Indians and the soldiers of the king.  You have seen at
     Wyoming what we can do, and you will see at other places and
     on a greater scale what we will do.

     "I find my own position perfect.  It is true that
     Timmendiquas does not like me, but he is not king here.  I
     am the friend of the great Brant; and Hiokatoo, Sangerachte,
     Hahiron, and the other chiefs esteem me.  I am thick with
     Colonel John Butler, the victor of Wyoming; his son, the
     valiant and worthy Walter Butler; Sir John Johnson, Colonel
     Guy Johnson, Colonel Daniel Claus, and many other eminent
     men and brave soldiers.

     "I write these words, Henry Ware, both to you and your
     comrades, to tell you that our cause will prevail over
     yours.  I do not doubt that when you read this you will try
     to escape to Kentucky, but when we have destroyed everything
     along the eastern border, as we have at Wyoming, we shall
     come to Kentucky, and not a rebel face will be left there.

     "I am sending this to tell you that there is no hole in
     which you can hide where we cannot reach you.  With my
     respects, BRAXTON WYATT."

Henry regarded the letter with contempt.

"A renegade catches something of the Indian nature," he said, "and
always likes to threaten and boast."

But Shif'less Sol was highly indignant.

"Sometimes I think," he said, "that the invention o' writin' wuz a
mistake. You kin send a man a letter an' call him names an' talk mighty
big when he's a hundred miles away, but when you've got to stan' up
to him face to face an' say it, wa'al, you change your tune an' sing a
pow'ful sight milder. You ain't gen'ally any roarin' lion then."

"I think I'll keep this letter," said Henry, "an' we five will give an
answer to it later on."

He tapped the muzzle of his rifle, and every one of the four gravely
tapped the muzzle of his own rifle after him. It was a significant
action. Nothing more was needed.

The next morning they bade farewell to the grateful Mary Newton and
her children, and with fresh supplies of food and ammunition, chiefly
ammunition, left the fort, plunging once more into the deep forest. It
was their intention to do as much damage as they could to the Iroquois,
until some great force, capable of dealing with the whole Six Nations,
was assembled. Meanwhile, five redoubtable and determined borderers
could achieve something.

It was about the first of August, and they were in the midst of the
great heats. But it was a period favoring Indian activity, which was now
at its highest pitch. Since Wyoming, loaded with scalps, flushed with
victory, and aided by the king's men, they felt equal to anything.
Only the strongest of the border settlements could hold them back. The
colonists here were so much reduced, and so little help could be
sent them from the East, that the Iroquois were able to divide into
innumerable small parties and rake the country as with a fine tooth
comb. They never missed a lone farmhouse, and rarely was any fugitive
in the woods able to evade them. And they were constantly fed from the
North with arms, ammunition, rewards for scalps, bounties, and great
promises.

But toward the close of August the Iroquois began to hear of a silent
and invisible foe, an evil spirit that struck them, and that struck
hard. There were battles of small forces in which sometimes not a single
Iroquois escaped. Captives were retaken in a half-dozen instances, and
the warriors who escaped reported that their assailants were of uncommon
size and power. They had all the cunning of the Indian and more, and
they carried rifles that slew at a range double that of those served to
them at the British posts. It was a certainty that they were guided by
the evil spirit, because every attempt to capture them failed miserably.
No one could find where they slept, unless it was those who never came
back again.

The Iroquois raged, and so did the Butlers and the Johnsons and Braxton
Wyatt. This was a flaw in their triumph, and the British and Tories saw,
also, that it was beginning to affect the superstitions of their red
allies. Braxton Wyatt made a shrewd guess as to the identity of the
raiders, but he kept quiet. It is likely, also, that Timmendiquas knew,
but be, too, said nothing. So the influence of the raiders grew. While
their acts were great, superstition exaggerated them and their powers
manifold. And it is true that their deeds were extraordinary. They were
heard of on the Susquehanna, then on the Delaware and its branches, on
the Chemung and the Chenango, as far south as Lackawaxen Creek, and as
far north as Oneida Lake. It is likely that nobody ever accomplished
more for a defense than did those five in the waning months of the
summer. Late in September the most significant of all these events
occurred. A party of eight Tories, who had borne a terrible part in
the Wyoming affair, was attacked on the shores of Otsego Lake with such
deadly fierceness that only two escaped alive to the camp of Sir John
Johnson. Brant sent out six war parties, composed of not less than
twenty warriors apiece, to seek revenge, but they found nothing.

Henry and his comrades had found a remarkable camp at the edge of one of
the beautiful small lakes in which the region abounds. The cliff at that
point was high, but a creek entered into it through a ravine. At the
entrance of the creek into the river they found a deep alcove, or,
rather, cave in the rock. It ran so far back that it afforded ample
shelter from the rain, and that was all they wanted. It was about
halfway between the top and bottom of the cliff, and was difficult of
approach both from below and above. Unless completely surprised-a very
unlikely thing with them-the five could hold it against any force as
long as their provisions lasted. They also built a boat large enough for
five, which they hid among the bushes at the lake's edge. They were thus
provided with a possible means of escape across the water in case of the
last emergency.

Jim and Paul, who, as usual, filled the role of housekeepers, took great
delight in fitting up this forest home, which the fittingly called "The
Alcove." The floor of solid stone was almost smooth, and with the aid of
other heavy stones they broke off all projections, until one could walk
over it in the dark in perfect comfort. They hung the walls with
skins of deer which they killed in the adjacent woods, and these walls
furnished many nooks and crannies for the storing of necessities. They
also, with much hard effort, brought many loads of firewood, which Long
Jim was to use for his cooking. He built his little fireplace of stones
so near the mouth of "The Alcove" that the smoke would pass out and be
lost in the thick forest all about. If the wind happened to be blowing
toward the inside of the cave, the smoke, of course, would come in on
them all, but Jim would not be cooking then.

Nor did their operations cease until they had supplied "The Alcove"
plentifully with food, chiefly jerked deer meat, although there was no
way in which they could store water, and for that they had to take
their chances. But their success, the product of skill and everlasting
caution, was really remarkable. Three times they were trapped within a
few miles of "The Alcove," but the pursuers invariably went astray on
the hard, rocky ground, and the pursued would also take the precaution
to swim down the creek before climbing up to "The Alcove." Nobody could
follow a trail in the face of such difficulties.

It was Henry and Shif'less Sol who were followed the second time, but
they easily shook off their pursuers as the twilight was coming, half
waded, half swam down the creek, and climbed up to "The Alcove," where
the others were waiting for them with cooked food and clear cold water.
When they had eaten and were refreshed, Shif'less Sol sat at the mouth
of "The Alcove," where a pleasant breeze entered, despite the foliage
that hid the entrance. The shiftless one was in an especially happy
mood.

"It's a pow'ful comf'table feelin'," he said, "to set up in a nice safe
place like this, an' feel that the woods is full o' ragin' heathen,
seekin' to devour you, and wonderin' whar you've gone to. Thar's a heap
in knowin' how to pick your home. I've thought more than once 'bout that
old town, Troy, that Paul tells us 'bout, an' I've 'bout made up my mind
that it wuzn't destroyed 'cause Helen eat too many golden apples, but
'cause old King Prime, or whoever built the place, put it down in a
plain. That wuz shore a pow'ful foolish thing. Now, ef he'd built it on
a mountain, with a steep fall-off on every side, thar wouldn't hev been
enough Greeks in all the earth to take it, considerin' the miserable
weepins they used in them times. Why, Hector could hev set tight on the
walls, laughin' at 'em, 'stead o' goin' out in the plain an' gittin'
killed by A-killus, fur which I've always been sorry."

"It's 'cause people nowadays have more sense than they did in them
ancient times that Paul tells about," said Long Jim. "Now, thar wuz
'Lyssus, ten or twelve years gittin' home from Troy. Allus runnin'
his ship on the rocks, hoppin' into trouble with four-legged giants,
one-eyed women, an' sech like. Why didn't he walk home through the
woods, killin' game on the way, an' hevin' the best time he ever knowed?
Then thar wuz the keerlessness of A-killus' ma, dippin' him in that
river so no arrow could enter him, but holdin' him by the heel an'
keepin' it out o' the water, which caused his death the very first time
Paris shot it off with his little bow an' arrer. Why didn't she hev
sense enough to let the heel go under, too. She could hev dragged it out
in two seconds an' no harm done 'ceptin', perhaps, a little more yellin'
on the part of A-killus."

"I've always thought Paul hez got mixed 'bout that Paris story," said
Tom Ross. "I used to think Paris was the name uv a town, not a man, an'
I'm beginnin' to think so ag'in, sence I've been in the East, 'cause I
know now that's whar the French come from."

"But Paris was the name of a man," persisted Paul. "Maybe the French
named their capital after the Paris of the Trojan wars."

"Then they showed mighty poor jedgment," said Shif'less Sol. "Ef I'd
named my capital after any them old fellers, I'd have called it Hector."

"You can have danger enough when you're on the tops of hills," said
Henry, who was sitting near the mouth of the cave. "Come here, you
fellows, and see what's passing down the lake."

They looked out, and in the moonlight saw six large war canoes being
rowed slowly down the lake, which, though narrow, was quite long. Each
canoe held about a dozen warriors, and Henry believed that one of them
contained two white faces, evidently those of Braxton Wyatt and Walter
Butler.

"Like ez not they've been lookin' fur us," said Tom Ross.

"Quite likely," said Henry, "and at the same time they may be engaged in
some general movement. See, they will pass within fifty feet of the base
of the cliff."

The five lay on the cave floor, looking through the vines and foliage,
and they felt quite sure that they were in absolute security. The six
long war canoes moved slowly. The moonlight came out more brightly, and
flooded all the bronze faces of the Iroquois. Henry now saw that he was
not mistaken, and that Braxton Wyatt and Walter Butler were really in
the first boat. From the cover of the cliff he could have picked off
either with a rifle bullet, and the temptation was powerful. But he
knew that it would lead to an immediate siege, from which they might not
escape, and which at least would check their activities and plans for a
long time. Similar impulses flitted through the minds of the other four,
but all kept still, although fingers flitted noiselessly along rifle
stocks until they touched triggers.

The Iroquois war fleet moved slowly on, the two renegades never dreaming
of the danger that had threatened them. An unusually bright ray of
moonshine fell full upon Braxton Wyatt's face as he paused, and Henry's
finger played with the trigger of his rifle. It was hard, very hard, to
let such an opportunity go by, but it must be done.

The fleet moved steadily down the lake, the canoes keeping close
together. They turned into mere dots upon the water, became smaller and
smaller still, until they vanished in the darkness.

"I'm thinkin'," said Shif'less Sol, "that thar's some kind uv a movement
on foot. While they may hev been lookin' fur us, it ain't likely that
they'd send sixty warriors or so fur sech a purpose. I heard something
three or four days ago from a hunter about an attack upon the Iroquois
town of Oghwaga."

"It's most likely true," said Henry, "and it seems to me that it's our
business to join that expedition. What do you fellows think?"

"Just as you do," they replied with unanimity.

"Then we leave this place and start in the morning," said Henry.




CHAPTER XVI. THE FIRST BLOW


Summer was now waning, the foliage was taking on its autumn hues, and
Indian war parties still surged over the hills and mountains, but the
five avoided them all. On one or two occasions they would have been
willing to stop and fight, but they had bigger work on hand. They had
received from others confirmation of the report that Long Jim had heard
from the hunters, and they were quite sure that a strong force was
advancing to strike the first blow in revenge for Wyoming. Curiously
enough, this body was commanded by a fourth Butler, Colonel William
Butler, and according to report it was large and its leaders capable.

When the avenging force lay at the Johnstown settlement on the Delaware,
it was joined by the five. They were introduced to the colonel by the
celebrated scout and hunter, Tini Murphy, whom they had met several
times in the woods, and they were received warmly.

"I've heard of you," said Colonel Butler with much warmth, "both from
hunters and scouts, and also from Adam Colfax. Two of you were to have
been tomahawked by Queen Esther at Wyoming."

Henry indicated the two.

"What you saw at Wyoming is not likely to decrease your zeal against the
Indians and their white allies," continued Colonel Butler.

"Anyone who was there," said Henry, "would feel all his life, the desire
to punish those who did it."

"I think so, too, from all that I have heard," continued Colonel Butler.
"It is the business of you young men to keep ahead of our column and
warn us of what lies before us. I believe you have volunteered for that
duty."

The five looked over Colonel Butler's little army, which numbered only
two hundred and fifty men, but they were all strong and brave, and it
was the best force that could yet be sent to the harassed border.
It might, after all, strike a blow for Wyoming if it marched into no
ambush, and Henry and his comrades were resolved to guard it from that
greatest of all dangers.

When the little column moved from the Johnstown settlement, the five
were far ahead, passing through the woods, up the Susquehanna, toward
the Indian villages that lay on its banks, though a great distance above
Wyoming. The chief of these was Oghwaga, and, knowing that it was the
destination of the little army, they were resolved to visit it, or at
least come so near it that they could see what manner of place it was.

"If it's a big village," said Colonel Butler, "it will be too strong
to attack, but it may be that most of the warriors are absent on
expeditions."

They had obtained before starting very careful descriptions of the
approaches to the village, and toward the close of an October evening
they knew that they were near Oghwaga, the great base of the Iroquois
supplies. They considered it very risky and unwise to approach in the
daytime, and accordingly they lay in the woods until the dark should
come.

The appearance of the wilderness had changed greatly in the three
months since Wyoming. All the green was now gone, and it was tinted
red and yellow and brown. The skies were a mellow blue, and there was a
slight haze over the forest, but the air had the wonderful crispness and
freshness of the American autumn. It inspired every one of the five with
fresh zeal and energy, because they believed the first blow was about to
be struck.

About ten o'clock at night they approached Oghwaga, and the reports
of its importance were confirmed. They had not before seen an Indian
village with so many signs of permanence. They passed two or three
orchards of apple and peach trees, and they saw other indications of
cultivation like that of the white farmer.

"It ain't a bad-lookin' town," said Long Jim Hart. "But it'll look
wuss," said Shif'less Sol, "onless they've laid an ambush somewhar.
I don't like to see houses an' sech like go up in fire an' smoke, but
after what wuz done at Wyomin' an' all through that valley, burnin' is a
light thing."

