"And then, as you've had a certain amount of military duty, although
'tis not excessive, you've had little chance to see this most
important town of ours. Can you not join this company of mine at my
house for supper, and then we'll all go together to the play? I'll
obtain your seat for you."

"With great pleasure, sir," replied Grosvenor. "'Twill be easy for me
to secure the needed leave, and I'll be at your house with
promptness."

He departed presently for his quarters, and the three men also went
away together on an errand of business, leaving Robert and Tayoga to
go whithersoever they pleased and it pleased them to wander along the
shores of the port. Young Lennox was impressed more than ever by the
great quantity of shipping, and the extreme activity of the town. The
war with France, so far from interfering with this activity, had but
increased it.

Privateering was a great pursuit of the day, all nations deeming it
legal and worthy in war, and bold and enterprising merchants like
Mr. Hardy never failed to take advantage of it. The weekly news sheets
that Willet had bought contained lists of vessels captured already,
and Robert's hasty glances showed him that at least sixty or seventy
had been taken by the privateers out of New York. Most of the prizes
had been in the West India trade, although some had been captured far
away near the coast of Africa, and nearly all had been loaded richly.

They saw several of the privateers in port, armed powerfully, and as
they were usually built for speed, Robert admired their graceful
lines. He felt anew the difference between military Quebec and
commercial New York. Quebec was prepared to send forth forces for
destruction, but, here, life-giving commerce flowed in and flowed out
again through arteries continually increasing in number and
power. Once again came to him the thought that the merchant more than
the soldier was the builder of a great nation. The impression made
upon him was all the more vivid because New York, even in the middle
of the eighteenth century, when it was in its infancy, surprised even
travelers from Europe with its manifold activities and intense energy.

After a day, long but of extraordinary interest, they returned to the
house of Mr. Hardy, where Grosvenor joined them in half an hour, and
then, after another abundant supper, they all went to the play.




CHAPTER XI

THE PLAY


They were all arrayed in their very best clothes, even Master Jonathan
having powdered his hair, and tied it in an uncommonly neat queue,
while his buckled shoes, stockings and small clothes, though of
somewhat ancient fashion, were of fine quality. Mr. Hardy gazed at him
admiringly.

"Jonathan," he said, "you are usually somewhat sour of visage, but
upon occasion you can ruffle it with the best macaroni of them all."

Master Jonathan pursed his lips, and smiled with satisfaction. All of
them, in truth, presented a most gallant appearance, but by far the
most noticeable figure was that of Tayoga. Indians often appeared in
New York, but such Indians as the young Onondaga were rare
anywhere. He rose half a head above the ordinary man, and he wore the
costume of a chief of the mighty League of the Hondenosaunee, the
feathers in his lofty headdress blowing back defiantly with the
wind. He attracted universal, and at the same time respectful,
attention.

They were preceded by a stout link boy who bore aloft a blazing torch,
and as they walked toward the building in Nassau Street, owned by Rip
Van Dam, in which the play was to be given, they overtook others who
were upon the same errand. A carriage drawn by two large white horses
conveyed Governor de Lancey and his wife, and another very much like
it bore his brother-in-law, the conspicuous John Watts, and
Mrs. Watts. All of them saw Mr. Hardy and his party and bowed to them
with great politeness. Robert already understood enough of the world
to know that it denoted much importance on the part of the merchant.

"A man of influence in our community," said Master Benjamin, speaking
of Mr. Watts. "An uncommonly clear mind and much firmness and
decision. He will leave a great name in New York."

As he spoke they overtook a tall youth about twenty-three years old,
walking alone, and dressed in the very latest fashion out of
England. Mr. Hardy hailed him with great satisfaction and asked him to
join them.

"Master Edward Charteris,[A] who is soon to become a member of the
Royal Americans," he said to the others. "He is a native of this town
and belongs to one of our best families here. When he does become a
Royal American he will probably have the finest uniform in his
regiment, because Edward sets the styles in raiment for young men of
his age here."

[Footnote A: The story of Edward Charteris, and his adventures at
Ticonderoga and Quebec are told in the author's novel, "A Soldier of
Manhattan."]

Charteris smiled. It was evident that he and the older man were on the
most friendly footing. But he held himself with dignity and had pride,
qualities which Robert liked in him. His manner was most excellent
too, when Mr. Hardy introduced all of his party in turn, and he
readily joined them, speaking of his pleasure in doing so.

"I shall be able to exchange my seat and obtain one with you," he
said. "We shall be early, but I am glad of it. Mr. Hallam and his fine
company have been performing in Philadelphia, and as we now welcome
them back to New York, nearly all the notable people of our city will
be present. Unless Mr. Hardy wishes to do so, it will give me pleasure
to point them out to you."

"No, no!" exclaimed Master Benjamin. "The task is yours, Edward, my
lad. You can put more savor and unction into it than I can."

"Then let it be understood that I'm the guide and expounder," laughed
Charteris.

"He has a great pride in his city, and it won't suffer from his
telling," said Master Benjamin.

They were now in Nassau Street near the improvised theater, and many
other link boys, holding aloft their torches, were preceding their
masters and mistresses. Heavy coaches were rolling up, and men and
women in gorgeous costumes were emerging from them. The display of
wealth was amazing for a town in the New World, but Mr. Hardy and his
company quickly went inside and obtained their seats, from which they
watched the fashion of New York enter. Charteris knew them all, and
to many of them he was related.

The number of De Lanceys was surprising and there was also a profusion
of Livingstons, the two families between them seeming to dominate the
city, although they lived in bitter rivalry, as Charteris whispered to
Robert. There were also Wattses and Morrises and Crugers and Waltons
and Van Rensselaers, Van Cortlandts and Kennedys and Barclays and
Nicolls and Alexanders, and numerous others that endured for
generations in New York. The diverse origin of these names, English,
Scotch, Dutch and Huguenot French, showed even at such an early date
the cosmopolitan nature of New York that it was destined to maintain.

Robert was intensely interested. Charteris' fund of information was
wonderful, and he flavored it with a salt of his own. He not only knew
the people, but he knew all about them, their personal idiosyncrasies,
their rivalries and jealousies. Robert soon gathered that New York was
not only a seething city commercially, but socially as well. Family
was of extreme importance, and the great landed proprietors who had
received extensive grants along the Hudson in the earlier days from
the Dutch Government, still had and exercised feudal rights, and were
as full of pride and haughtiness as ducal families in Europe. Class
distinctions were preserved to the utmost possible extent, and, while
the original basis of the town had been Dutch, the fashion was now
distinctly English. London set the style for everything.

When they were all seated, the display of fine dress and jewels was
extraordinary, just as the wealth and splendor shown in some of the
New York houses had already attracted the astonished attention of many
of the British officers, to whom the finest places in their own
country were familiar.

And while Robert was looking so eagerly, the party to which he
belonged did not pass unnoticed by any means. Master Benjamin Hardy
was well known. He was bold and successful and he was a man of great
substance. He had qualities that commanded respect in colonial New
York, and people were not averse to being seen receiving his friendly
nod. And those who surrounded him and who were evidently his guests
were worthy of notice too. There was Edward Charteris, as well born as
any in the hall, and a pattern in manners and dress for the young men
of New York, and there was the tall youth with the tanned face, and
the wonderful, vivid eyes, who must surely, by his appearance, be the
representative of some noble family, there was the young Indian chief,
uncommon in height and with the dignity and majesty of the forest, an
Indian whose like had never been seen in New York before, and there
was the gigantic Willet, whose massive head and calm face were so
redolent of strength. Beyond all question it was a most unusual and
striking company that Master Benjamin Hardy had brought with him, and
old and young whispered together as they looked at them, especially at
Robert and Tayoga.

Mr. Hardy was conscious of the stir he had made, and he liked it, not
for himself alone, but also for another. He glanced at Robert and saw
how finely and clearly his features were cut, how clear was the blue
of his eyes and the great width between them, and he drew a long
breath of satisfaction.

"'Tis a good youth. Nature, lineage and Willet have done well," he
said to himself.

More of the fashion of New York came in and then a group of British
officers, several of whom nodded to Grosvenor.

"The tall man with the gray hair at the temples is my colonel,
Brandon," he said. "Very strict, but just to his men, and we like
him. He spent some years in the service of the East India Company, in
one of the hottest parts of the peninsula. That's why he's so brown,
and it made his blood thin, too. He can't endure cold. The officer
with him is one of our majors, Apthorpe. He has had less experience
than the colonel, but thinks he knows more. His opinion of the French
is very poor. Believes we ought to brush 'em aside with ease."

"I hope you don't think that way, Grosvenor," said Robert. "We in this
country know that the French is one of the most valiant races the
world has produced."

"And so do most thinking Englishmen. The only victories we boast much
about are those we have won over the French, which shows that we
consider them foes worthy of anybody's steel. But the play is going to
begin, I believe. The hall is well filled now, and I'm not trying to
make an appeal to your local pride, Lennox, when I tell you 'tis an
audience that will compare well with one at Drury Lane or Covent
Garden for splendor, and for variety 'twill excel it."

Robert was pleased secretly. Although more identified with Albany than
New York, he considered himself nevertheless one of the people who
belonged to the city at the mouth of the Hudson, and he felt already
its coming greatness.

"We call ourselves Englishmen," he said modestly, "and we hope to
achieve as much as the older Englishmen, our brethren across the
seas."

"Have you seen many plays, Lennox?"

"But few, and none by great actors like Mr. Hallam and Mrs. Douglas. I
suppose, Grosvenor, you've seen so many that they're no novelty to
you."

"I can scarcely lay claim to being such a man about town as that. I
have seen plays, of course, and some by the great Master Will, and I
do confess that the mock life I behold beyond the footlights often
thrills me more than the real life I see this side of them. Once, I
witnessed this play 'Richard III,' which we are now about to see, and
it stirred me so I could scarce contain myself, though some do say
that our Shakespeare has made the hunchback king blacker than he
really was."

Presently a little bell rang, the curtain rolled up, and Robert passed
into an enchanted land. To vivid and imaginative youth the great style
and action of Shakespeare make an irresistible appeal. Robert had
never seen one of the mighty bard's plays before, and now he was in
another world of romance and tragedy, suffused with poetry and he was
held completely by the spell. Shakespeare may have blackened the
character of the hunchback, but Robert believed him absolutely. To
him Richard was exactly what the play made him.

Although the stage was but a temporary one, built in the hall of Rip
Van Dam, it was large, the seating capacity was great and Hallam and
his wife were among the best actors of their day, destined to a long
career as stars in the colonies, and also afterward, when they ceased
to be colonies. They and an able support soon took the whole audience
captive, and all, fashionable and unfashionable alike, hung with
breathless attention upon the play. Robert forgot absolutely
everything around him, Willet was carried back to days of his youth,
and Master Benjamin Hardy, who at heart was a lover of adventure and
romance, responded to the great speeches the author has written for
his characters. Tayoga did not stir, his face of bronze was unmoved,
but now and then his dark eyes gleamed.

In reality the influence of the tragedy upon Tayoga was as great as it
was upon Robert. The Onondaga had an unusual mind and being sent at an
early age to school at Albany he had learned that the difference
between white man and red was due chiefly to environment. Their hopes
and fears, their rivalries and ambitions were, in truth, about the
same. He had seen in some chief a soul much like that of humpbacked
Richard, but, as he looked and listened, he also had a certain feeling
of superiority. As he saw it, the great League, the Hodenosaunee, was
governed better than England when York and Lancaster were tearing it
to pieces. The fifty old sachems in the vale of Onondaga would decide
more wisely and more justly than the English nobles. Tayoga, in that
moment, was prouder than ever that he was born a member of the Clan of
the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, and doubtless his patron saint,
Tododaho, in his home on the great, shining star, agreed with him.

The first act closed amid great applause, several recalls of smiling
and bowing actors followed, and then, during the wait, came a great
buzz of talk. Robert shook himself and returned to the world.

"What do you like best about it, Lennox?" asked Grosvenor.

"The poetry. The things the people say. Things I've thought often
myself, but which I haven't been able to put in a way that makes them
strike upon you like a lightning flash."

"I think that describes Master Will. In truth, you've given me a
description for my own feelings. Once more I repeat to you, Lennox,
that 'tis a fine audience. I see here much British and Dutch wealth,
and people whose lives have been a continuous drama."

"Truly it's so," said Robert, and, as his examining eye swept the
crowd, he almost rose in his seat with astonishment, with difficulty
suppressing a cry. Then he charged himself with being a fool. It could
not be so! The thing was incredible! The man might look like him, but
surely he would not be so reckless as to come to such a place.

Then he looked again, and he could no longer doubt. The stranger sat
near the door and his dress was much like that of a prosperous
seafaring man of the Dutch race. But Robert knew the blue eyes, lofty
and questing like those of the eagle, and he was sure that the reddish
beard had grown on a face other than the one it now adorned. It was
St. Luc, whom he knew to be romantic, adventurous, and ready for any
risk.

Robert moved his body forward a little, in order that it might be
directly between Tayoga and the Frenchman, it being his first impulse
to shelter St. Luc from the next person who was likely to recognize
him. But the Onondaga was not looking in that direction. The young
English officer, moved by his intense interest, had engaged him in
conversation continually, surprised that Tayoga should know so much
about the white race and history.

Robert looked so long at St. Luc, and with such a fixed and powerful
gaze, that at last the chevalier turned and their eyes met. Robert's
said:

"Why are you here? Your life is in danger every moment. If caught you
will be executed as a spy."

"I'm not afraid," replied the eyes of St. Luc. "You alone have seen me
as I am."

"But others will see you."

"I think not."

"How do you know that I will not proclaim at once who you are?"

"You will not because you do not wish to see me hanged or shot."

Then the eyes of St. Luc left Robert and wandered ever the audience,
which was now deeply engrossed in talk, although the Livingstons and
the De Lanceys kept zealously away from one another, and the families
who were closely allied with them by blood, politics or business also,
stayed near their chiefs. Robert began to fancy that he might have
been mistaken, it was not really St. Luc, he had allowed an imaginary
resemblance to impose upon him, but reflection told him that it was no
error. He would have known the intense gaze of those burning blue eyes
anywhere. He was still careful to keep his own body between Tayoga and
the Frenchman.

The curtain rose and once more Robert fell under the great writer's
spell. Vivid action and poetic speech claimed him anew, and for the
moment he forgot St. Luc. When the second act was finished, and while
the applause was still filling the hall, he cast a fearful glance
toward the place where he had seen the chevalier. Then, in truth, he
rubbed his eyes. No St. Luc was there. The chair in which he had sat
was not empty, but was occupied by a stolid, stout Dutchman, who
seemed not to have moved for hours.

It had been a vision, a figment of the fancy, after all! But it was
merely an attempt of the will to persuade himself that it was so. He
could not doubt that he had seen St. Luc, who, probably listening to
some counsel of providence, had left the hall. Robert felt an immense
relief, and now he was able to assume his best manner when Mr. Hardy
began to present him and Tayoga to many of the notables. He met the
governor, Mr. Watts, and more De Lanceys, Wilsons and Crugers than he
could remember, and he received invitations to great houses, and made
engagements which he intended to keep, if it were humanly
possible. Willet and Hardy exchanged glances when they noticed how
easily he adapted himself to the great world of his day. He responded
here as he had responded in Quebec, although Quebec and New York, each
a center in its own way, were totally unlike.

The play went on, and Robert was still absorbed in the majestic
lines. At the next intermission there was much movement in the
audience. People walked about, old acquaintances spoke and strangers
were introduced to one another. Robert looked sharply for St. Luc, but
there was no trace of him. Presently Mr. Hardy was introducing him to
a heavy man, dressed very richly, and obviously full of pride.

"Mynheer Van Zoon," he said, "this is young Robert Lennox. He has been
for years in the care of David Willet, whom you have met in other and
different times. Robert, Mynheer Van Zoon is one of our greatest
merchants, and one of my most active rivals."

Robert was about to extend his hand, but noticing that Mynheer Van
Zoon did not offer his he withheld his own. The merchant's face, in
