Hong-Mo said, "What are you doing?  Why do you children stay out here,
when I have given you a good house to live in?"

The Secretary told her all about the trouble with the King.

Hong-Mo said, "Now you must be friendly to each other.  Come with me,
and I will bring you and your King together.  We must have peace here."

When the Chickens came to where the King was he walked about, and
scraped his wings on the ground, and sharpened his spurs.  His people
had come to make peace, and they bowed their heads and looked happy
when they saw their King.  But he still walked about alone and would
not bow.

He said, "I am a King--always a King.  Do you know that?  You bow your
heads and think that pleases me.  But what do I care?  I should not
care if there was never another Chicken in the world but myself.  I am
King."

And he hopped up on a tree and sang some war songs.  But suddenly an
eagle who heard him, flew down and caught him in his talons and carried
him away.  And the Chickens never saw their proud, quarrelsome King
again.

EE-SZE (Meaning): No position in life is so high that it gives the
right to be proud and quarrelsome.



The Hen and the Chinese Mountain Turtle

Four hundred and fifty years ago in Lze-Cheung Province, Western China,
there lived an old farmer named Ah-Po.

The young farmers all said Ah-Po knew everything.  If they wanted to
know when it would rain, they asked Ah-Po, and when he said: "It will
not rain to-morrow," or, "You will need your bamboo-hat this time
to-morrow," it was as he said.  He knew all about the things of nature
and how to make the earth yield best her fruits and seeds, and some
said he was a prophet.

One day Ah-Po caught a fine Mountain Turtle.  It was so large that it
took both of Ah-Po's sons to carry it home.  They tied its legs
together and hung it on a strong stick, and each son put an end of the
stick on his shoulder.

Ah-Po said, "We will not kill the Turtle.  He is too old to eat, and I
think we will keep him and watch the rings grow around his legs each
year."  So they gave him a corner in the barnyard and fed him rice and
water.

Ah-Po had many Chickens, and for three months the Turtle and Chickens
lived in peace with each other.  But one day all the young Chickens
came together and laughed at the Turtle.  Then they said to him, "Why
do you live here so long?  Why do you not go back to your own place?
This small barnyard corner is not so good as your cave in the
wilderness.  You have only a little sand and grass to live on here.
The servant feeds you, but she never gives you any wilderness fruits.
You are very large, and you take up too much room.  We need all the
room there is here.  You foolish old thing, do you think our fathers
and mothers want you?  No.  There is not one of our people who likes
you.  Besides, you are not clean.  You make too much dirt.  The servant
girl gave you this water to drink, and your water bowl is even now
upside down.  You scatter rice on our floor.  Too many flies come here
to see you, and we do not like flies."

The Turtle waited until they had all finished scolding.  Then he said,
"Do you think I came here myself?  Who put me here, do you know?  Do
you suppose I like to be in jail?  You need not be jealous.  I never
ate any rice that belonged to you or your family.  I am not living in
your house.  What are you complaining about?  If our master should take
your whole family and sell it, he would only get one piece of silver.
Who and what are you to talk so much?  Wait and see; some day I may
have the honoured place."

Some of the Chickens went home and told their mother, "We had an
argument with the Turtle to-day and he had the last word.  To-morrow we
want you to go with us and show him that a Chicken can argue as well as
a Turtle."

The next day all the Chickens of the barnyard went to see the Turtle.
And the old Hen said, "My children came here to play yesterday, and you
scolded them and drove them away.  You said all my family was not worth
one piece of silver.  You think you are worth many pieces of gold, I
suppose.  No one likes you.  Your own master would not eat you.  And
the market people would never buy a thing so old and tough as you are.
But I suppose you will have to stay here in our yard a thousand years
or so, until you die.  Then they will carry you to the wilderness and
throw you into the Nobody-Knows Lake."

Then the Turtle answered and said, "I am a Mountain Turtle.  I come
from a wise family, and it is not easy for even man to catch me.
Educated men, doctors, know that I am useful for sickness, but if all
the people knew the many ways they could use me, I think there would
soon be no more turtles in the world.  Many Chinese know that my skin
is good for skin disease, and my forefeet are good for the
devil-sickness in children, as they drive the devil away; and then my
shells are good for sore throat, and my stomach is good for
stomach-ache, and my bones are good for tooth-ache.  Do you remember
that not long ago our master brought three turtle eggs to feed your
children?  I heard him say: 'Those little Chickens caught cold in that
damp place, and so I must give them some turtle eggs.'  I saw your
children eat those three eggs, and in two or three days they were well.

"So you see the Turtle is a useful creature in the world, even to
Chickens.  Why do you not leave me in peace?  As I must stay here
against my will, it is not right that your children should trouble me.
Sometimes they take all my rice and I go hungry, for our master will
not allow me to go outside of this fence to hunt food for myself.  I
never come to your house and bother you, but your children will not
even let me live in peace in the little corner our master gave me.  If
I had a few of my own people here with me, as you have, I think you
would not trouble me.  But I have only myself, while you are many.

"Yesterday your children scolded me and disturbed my peace.  To-day you
come again; and to-morrow and many to-morrows will see generations and
still more unhatched generations of Chickens coming here to scold me, I
fear; for the length of life of a cackling hen is as a day to me--a
Mountain Turtle.  I know the heaven is large, I know the earth is large
and made for all creatures alike.  But you think the heavens and the
earth were both made for you and your Chickens only.  If you could
drive me away to-day you would try to-morrow to drive the dog away, and
in time you would think the master himself ought not to have enough of
your earth and air to live in.  This barnyard is large enough for
birds, chickens, ducks, geese, and pigs.  It makes our master happy to
have us all here."

The Chickens went away ashamed.  Talking to each other about it, they
said: "The Turtle is right.  It is foolish to want everything.  We
barnyard creatures must live at peace with each other until we die.
The barnyard is not ours; we use it only a little while."

EE-SZE (Meaning): The Creator made the world for all to use, and, while
using it, the strong should not try to drive out the weak.



The Proud Fox and the Crab

One day a Fox said to a Crab: "Crawling thing, did you ever run in all
your life?"

"Yes," said the Crab, "I run very often from the mud to the grass and
back to the river."

"Oh, shame!" said the Fox, "that is no distance to run.  How many feet
and legs have you?  I have only four.  Why, if I had as many feet as
you have, I would run at least six times as fast as you do.  Did you
know that you are really a very slow, stupid creature?  Though I have
only four feet I run ten times as far as you do.  I never heard of any
one with so many feet as you have, running so slowly."

The Crab said: "Would you like to run a race with a stupid creature
like me?  I will try to run as fast as you.  I know I am small, so
suppose we go to the scales and see how much heavier you are.  As you
are ten times larger than I, of course you will have to run ten times
faster.

"Another reason why you can run so fast is because you have such a fine
tail and hold it so high.  If you would allow me to put it down, I do
not think you would run any faster than I."

"Oh, very well," said the Fox, contemptuously, "do as you like, and
still the race will be so easy for me that I will not even need to try.
Your many legs and your stupid head do not go very well together.  Now,
if I had my sense and all of your legs, no creature in the forest could
outrun me.  As it is, there are none that can outwit me.  I am known as
the sharp-witted.  Even man says, 'Qui-kwat-wui-lai' (sly as a fox).
So do what you will, stupid one."

"If you will let me tie your beautiful tail down so it will stay," said
the Crab, "I am sure I can win the race."

"Oh, no, you cannot," said the Fox.  "But I will prove to even your
stupid, slow brain that it will make no difference.  Now, how do you
wish that I should hold my tail?"

Said the Crab: "If you will allow me to hang something on your tail to
hold it down, I am sure you cannot run faster than I."

"Do as you like," said the Fox.

"Allow me to come nearer," said the Crab, "and when I have it fastened
to your tail, I will say 'Ready!'  Then you are to start."

So the Crab crawled behind and caught the Fox's tail with his pincers
and said, "Ready!" The Fox ran and ran until he was tired.  And when he
stopped, there was the Crab beside him.

"Where are you now?" said the Crab.  "I thought you were to run ten
times faster than I.  You are not even ahead of me with all your
boasting."

The Fox, panting for breath, hung his head in shame and went away where
he might never see the crab again.

EE-SZE (Meaning): A big, proud, boastful mouth, is a worse thing for a
man than it is for a fox.



The Mule and the Lion

One night the Lion was very hungry, but as the creatures of the
wilderness knew and feared him even from afar, he could not find food.
So he went to visit the young Mule that lived near the farmer's house,
and when he saw him he smiled blandly and asked, "What do you eat, fair
Lii, to make you so sleek and fat?  What makes your hair so smooth and
beautiful?  I think your master gives you tender fresh grass and fat
young pig to eat."

The Mule answered, "No, I am fat because I am gentle.  My hair is
beautiful because I do not fight with other creatures.  But why do you
come here, Sii?  Are you hungry?  I believe you are seeking for food."

The Lion said, "Oh, no, I am not hungry.  I only walk around to get the
cool, fresh air.  And then the night is very beautiful.  The moon hangs
up in the clear sky with the stars and makes a soft light, and so I
came to visit you.  Would you not like to take a walk with me?  I will
take you to visit my friend, the Pig.  I never go to his house alone; I
always take a friend with me."

The Mule asked, "Shall we go to any other place?"

"Yes," answered the Lion, "I think we will go to visit another friend
of mine who lives not far away."

Then the Mule asked his mother, "Will you allow me to go with Sii to
see his friend?"

"Who is his friend?" asked the mother.

"The farmer's Pig." said the Mule.

"I think it is no harm if you go only there," said the mother Mule.
"But you must not go anywhere else with Sii.  The hunter is looking for
him, I hear, and you must be careful.  Do not trust him fully, for I
fear he will tempt you to go to some other place or into some wrong
thing.  If I allow you to go, you must come home before midnight.  The
moon will not be gone then and you can see to find your way."

So the Lion and the Mule went to visit the Pig, who lived in a house in
the farmer's yard.  But as soon as the Pig saw the Lion, he called out
in a loud voice to his mother.

The Lion said, "He is afraid of me.  I will hide and you may go in
first."

When the Pig saw that the Mule was alone, he thought the Lion had gone.
He opened his door wide and was very friendly to the Mule, saying,
"Come in."

But the Lion jumped from his hiding place and caught the Pig as he came
to the door.  The Pig called to his mother in great fear, and the Mule
begged the Lion, saying, "Let the poor little creature go free."

But the Lion said, "No, indeed; I have many Pigs at my house.  It is
better for him to go with me."

Then the Lion carried the Pig, while the Mule followed.  Soon they came
to where a fine looking dog lay on some hay behind a net.  The Lion did
not seem to see the net, for he dropped the Pig and tried to catch the
Dog, who cried loudly for mercy.

But the Lion said to the foolish Mule, "See how rude the Dog is to us.
We came to visit him and he makes a loud noise and tries to call the
hunter so that he will drive us away.  I have never been so insulted.
Come here, Lii-Tsze, at once and help me!"

The Mule went to the Lion and the net fell and caught them both.  At
sunrise the Hunter came and found the Mule and the Lion in his net.
The Mule begged earnestly and said, "Hunter, you know me and you know
my mother.  We are your friends and we do no wrong.  Set me free, oh,
hunter, set me free!"

The Hunter said, "No, I will not set you free.  You may be good, but
you are in bad company and must take what it brings.  I will take you
and the Lion both to the market place and sell you for silver.  That is
my right.  I am a hunter.  If you get in my net, that is your business.
If I catch you, that is my business."

EE-SZE (Meaning): Bad company is a dangerous thing for man or beast.



The Lion and the Mosquitoes

One day Ah-Fou's father said to him, "Come here, my boy, and I will
tell you a story.  Do you remember the great lion we saw one day, which
Ah-Kay caught?  You know a strong rope held him, and he roared and
tried to free himself until he died.  Then when Ah-Kay took him from
the net, he looked at the rope and the bamboo carefully, and found five
of the great ropes broken.

"How strong is the lion?  Twenty children like you could not break one
strand of that great rope.  But the lion broke five complete ropes.  He
is the strongest of all animals.  He catches many creatures for his
food, but once he lost a battle with one of the least of the wilderness
creatures.  Do you know what it was?"

"A bird could fight and then fly away.  Was it a bird?"

"No, my son."

"A man is stronger than a lion."

"No; do you not remember the woodcutter who could put down five strong
men?  One night a wilderness lion caught and killed him."

"Then what was the smallest of all creatures of the wilderness that
battled with a lion?"

The father said, "I will tell you the story: Once in the summer time
the Lion was very thirsty.  But the sun had taken all the water near
the Lion's home and he went to many places seeking for it.  In time he
found an old well, but the water was not fresh.  As the Lion was very
thirsty, he said, 'I must drink, even though the water is stale.'

"But when he reached down into the old well, he found that it was the
home of all the Mosquitoes of the wilderness.

"The Mosquitoes said to the Lion, 'Go away, we do not want you.  This
is our home and we are happy.  We do not wish the lion, the fox, or the
bear to come here.  You are not our friend.  Why do you come?"

"The Lion roared and said, 'Weak and foolish things!  I am the Lion.
It is you that should go away, for I have come to drink.  This is my
wilderness, and I am king.   Do you know, weak things, that when I come
out from my place and send forth my voice, all the creatures of the
wilderness shake like leaves and bow their heads to me?  What are you
that you should have a place you call your home and tell me that I may
or I may not?'

"Then the Mosquitoes answered, 'You are only one.  You speak as if you
were many.  Our people had this old well for a home before your roar
was heard in the wilderness.  And many generations of us have been born
here.  This home is ours, and we are they that say who shall come or
go.  And yet you come and tell us to go out of our own door.  If you do
not leave us, we will call our people, and you shall know trouble.'

"But the Lion held his head high with pride and anger and said, 'What
are you, oh, small of the small?  I will kill every one of your useless
people.  When I drink, I will open my mouth only a little wider, and
you shall be swallowed like the water.  And to-morrow I shall forget
that I drank to-day.'

"'Boastful one,' said the Mosquitoes, 'we do not believe that you have
