REQUIREMENTS FOR THE THIRD DEGREE.
1. To be able to start a fire with a fire drill, the fuel and material
   used to be found in the woods.
2. To be able to tell the correct time by the sun at least twice a day.
3. To be able to swim 200 yards.
4. To be able to row a boat one mile in ten minutes.
5. To measure the correct height of a tree without climbing it.
6. To be able to tie and untie eight different standard knots.
7. To catch a two-pound fish.
8. To be able to know and name fifteen different trees in the woods.
9. To be able to perform on a stunt night acceptably.
10. To be able to know and name 25 different birds as seen around the camp.
11. To lead in the Evening Devotions at least twice.
12. To run 100 yards in 13 seconds.

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FOURTH DEGREE,
1. To catch a three-pound fish.
2. To be able to run 100 yards in 11 seconds.
3. To be able to run 100 yards in 12 seconds.
4. To conduct Evening Devotions.
5. To teach one boy how to swim (test one hundred feet).
6. To influence one boy into the Christian life.
7. To know and to name 25 different trees as found in the woods.
8. To be able to make twelve standard knots in a rope.
9. To conquer one bad habits while at camp.
10. To accomplish at least one definite piece of service as prescribed
    by the camp.
11. To become a member of the camp council.
12. To be able to jump 16 feet in the running broad Jump.

The tests in Camps Durrell and Becket are based upon Baden-Powell's book,
"Scouting for Boys," and have proven very successful. They are as follows:

 HONOR EMBLEMS AND A WARDS  285

HONOR PLAN
DISCIPLINE.
1. Doing camp duty promptly, efficiently and cheerfully. (5 points)
2. Participating promptly in preparing tents, baggage and beds for
   Inspection. (4 points.)
3. Loyalty to captain in all games. (5 points.)

OBSERVATION.
1. Observe the ways of birds, animals and people and jot down a sketch
   of them in a notebook.
(3 points.)
2. Take a walk and upon return to the camp write upon the following
   six subjects.
(a) Nature of by-ways of paths.
(b) Different kinds of trees you noticed.
(c) People you met.
(d) Peculiar smells of plants.
(e) Kind of fences you saw.
(f) Sounds you heard. (3 points.)
3. Observe sanitary and hygienic disorder and correct the same.
   (5 points.)
4. After the reading aloud of a story write an account of it. (3 points.)

WOODCRAFT.
1. Observe the tracks of birds and animals and distinguish them.
   (2 points.)
2. Identify fifteen birds, or fifteen trees, or fifteen flowers, or
    fifteen minerals. (2 points.)
3. Tie a square knot, a weaver's knot, a slip knot, a flemish coop, a
   bowline, a half, timber clove, boom hitches, stevedore and wall end
   knots, blackwall and catspaw turn and hitch hook hitches. (2 points.)
4. Make a "star" fire and cook a meal upon it for the boys of your tent.
   (3 points.)
5. Find the south at any time of day by the sun with the aid of a watch.
   (1 point.)
6. Estimate the distance across water. (1 point.)
7. Judge the time of day by the sun. (1 point.)
8. Read the signs of the weather by the sun, wind and clouds. (2 points.)
9. Make something useful for the camp. (5 points.)

HEALTH.
1. Promptness, erect carriage and earnestness in setting up drill.
   (3 points.)
2. Gain made in physical development during the time in camp. (2 points.)
3. Essay upon the camp-fire talks on "Personal Hygiene." (3 points.)
4. Care of tent, clothing and baggage, in dry and wet weather. (3 points.)
5. Cleanliness of person. (3 points).
6. Proper eating at meals. (5 points.)
7. Win first place in the athletic or aquatic events. (2 points.)

CHIVALRY. (Among the laws of the Knights was this: "Chivalry requireth
that youth should be trained to perform the most laborious and humble
offices with cheerfulness and grace: and to do good unto others.")
1. Do a good turn to somebody every day. (3 points.)
2. Control tongue and temper. (5 points.)
3. Participate in some entertainment. (2 points.)
4. Secure the approval of the leaders. (2 points.)
5. Promptness in attending Chapel services. (2 points.)

SAVING LIFE.
1. Be able to swim fifty yards and return without stopping. (1 point.)
2. Pass the examinations in Life Saving and First Aid Work by written
   and demonstration work. (5 points.)
3. Row from wharf to a given point and back in a given time. (1 point.)

PATRIOTISM.
1. Respect for the United States flag at raising and colors. (5 points.)
2. Memorize "America" and "Star Spangled Banner," (1 point.)
3. Write an essay explaining the plan of governing your own town and city.
   (2 points.)
4. Write in your own words what you think citizenship means. (2 points.)
5. Describe upon paper some historic spot or building near your home
   and its connection with the making of America. (1 point.)

NOTE.--Each boy must win 90 points out of a possible 100 to secure the
honor emblem. Leaders will be appointed to take charge of the different
tests, to whom the boys will report when they qualify in the tests and
receive their points. The final decision in the giving of the honor emblem
is made at a full meeting of the Camp Council.

The honor emblem consists of a white "swastika" [1] cross with garnet felt
D for Durrell and B for Becket. Boys who fail to secure the emblem in one
season are credited with points which hold good the next season. The Honor
Pennant is awarded only to those who render special service to the camp.

[Illustration: Honor Camp Leader]

The camp emblem is a garnet solid triangle with the initial of the camp in
white felt upon it. A white bar placed above the triangle represents the
attendance, one bar is given for each year. The Senior leader's emblem is
a white felt disc with a garnet felt triangle, and the Junior leader's
emblem, a garnet felt disc with a white felt triangle.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: The swastika is an ancient religious symbol, a
Greek cross with the ends of the arms bent at right angles. It was adopted
by the Nazi party under Adolf Hitler in 1935. This book was written 22
years earlier.]

Campers will find enough suggestions in these outlines to develop systems
of their own which will help in the all-round development of the boy.

Camp Kineo Cup

Some camps prefer the awarding of what may be called "proficiency cups."
At Camp Kineo a silver cup is awarded to the boy in each division who is
the best all-round fellow, considering manly qualities, loyalty to camp,
deportment, behavior under all conditions, skill in athletics, aquatics,
tennis, baseball, and all other sports, self-control, temperament,
popularity with boys and good standing with councilors. The judges are the
Director and Camp Council, whose decision counts for 60 per cent toward
the final award, the boys not competing deciding the other 40 per cent
toward the final award.

Hall of Fame

At Camp Wildmere there is a "Hall of Fame." Votes are taken for the most
respected leader and the most respected boy, the most popular leader and
boy; the boy who has done the most for the camp and the boys; the most
courteous boy, neatest boy, best-built boy, brightest boy, favorite in
games; neatest in tent; best all-round camper; boy who talks least about
himself; the one with the best table manners; the quietest boy, most
generous boy, handsomest boy, best-natured boy and the camp humorist.

[Illustration: Striking the Colors]



CHAPTER XXIII--PACKING UP

THE LAST NIGHT
PACKING UP
INSTRUCTIONS TO LEADERS
THE LAST WORD

Farewell, wild hearth where many logs have burned;
 Among your stones the fireweed may grow.
The brant[1] are flown, the maple-leaves have turned,
 The goldenrod is brown--and we must go.
-Arthur Guiterman.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: brant: Dark wild goose of the Arctic having
a black neck and head.]

The Last Night

The last night in a boys' camp should be the best of all the nights. It is
usually a night of reminiscence. Around the camp fire or log fire in the
"Lodge," all the campers gather and rehearse the good times of the days
that have passed all too quickly--those days of close intimacy of tent
life, where boys of different tastes, temperaments and dispositions were
thrown together, where life's great lessons of give and take were learned
and where character was put to the test! Friendships have been formed
which will last through life. The same group of fellows will never come
together again. The director, perhaps as no other person, realizes the
importance of making this night one of permanent impression, and his
"good-by" talk to the fellows will reiterate the "why" of camping and
emphasize the taking home of the spirit of good which has prevailed and
the making it count for the best things in home, school, factory and
church life of those boys who enjoyed the benefits of the camp.

All the favorite songs of the camp are sung, the leaders make "speeches,"
and the boys have an opportunity of telling what camp life has done for
them. As the fire dies down the bugler off in the distance plays "God Be
With You Till We Meet Again"; silence--and then "taps."

Packing Up

There is just as much need of system and care in breaking camp and packing
up, as in opening camp. Chas. R. Scott at Camp Wawayanda issues to each
leader the following letter of instructions, which may be of help to those
in charge of large camps.

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION TO LEADERS

DEAR FRIEND--Will you kindly help me break camp by carrying out the
following instructions:

1. Have all your boys return all books to the librarian not later than
Thursday morning, and tools to the shop by the same time.

2. Encourage your helpers to loosen the side walls of tent early Friday
morning, if clear, and fasten guy ropes so that canvas will dry if damp.

3. Take out all the pegs which fasten the side walls, clean off dirt and
place in boxes at boat house.

4. Take down the board in your tent, take out all nails; straighten them
and place in proper boxes in shop. Then take board to the boat house.
Leave the rope over the ridge pole untied.

5. Take out all nails and screws in the upright poles of your tent and
bunks, and place in boxes in shop.

6. Empty the oil and clean lantern and return to the boat house. Take
bunks to the lodge and let us know the condition of each.

7. See that all paper and old things in and around the tent are picked up
and placed on the fire for that purpose.

8. After Bible study we will take down all tents. We should like you to
delegate one fellow to each upright pole, one to each of the four corner
guy ropes, and then follow instructions as the bugle blows.

9. Take all rope on the trees to headquarters.

10. Kindly answer the following questions regarding your tent:
    a. Are all the poles properly marked with tent number?
    b. Does tent leak? If so, where?
    c. Is the ridge pole in good condition?
    d. Does front and rear of tent close securely?
    e.  Does it need new fasteners for tying up?

Anything else you have noticed during the time you have been in the tent;
please make a memorandum of same on back of this sheet.

11. Return camp keys, if you have them, to headquarters before leaving.

We would be pleased to have you write on the back of this sheet any
suggestions you have for the improvement of camp for next season. Thanking
you personally for your help and trusting to have your cooperation and
that of your boys until the close of camp, I remain, Sincerely yours,

Last Words

The day before camp breaks, each boy should pack his trunk or box neatly,
leaving at the top the things needed to make the homeward journey, with
room for his blankets. If the packing is left until the last day,
confusion will result and temper be sorely tried.

Permanent buildings should be securely safeguarded against the severity of
the winter and the breaking in of thieves. All kitchen utensils should be
thoroughly cleaned and dried. If they are put away moist rust will eat
holes. Give the stove a good coat of old grease and cover with burlap or
old canvas. Hang the tents in bags where the squirrels and rats cannot get
at them. When camp is closed it should be in such condition that it would
require but a few hours to reopen and make ready for the next outing.


Index.

Advance Party.
Aeroplanes.
Agriculture.
Aquatic Sports.
Archery.
Athletic Events and Awards.
Athletic Grouping.

Bacon.
Bandages.
Bank.
Barometer, Homemade.
Barometers, Plant.
Baseball League.
Baseball, Water.
Basket Ball, Water.
Beds.
Bible Study.
Bites and Stings.
Blanket Roll.
Bleeding.
Boats and Boat Building.
Books, Rainy Day.
Bow and Arrows.
Box Furniture.
Box Trunk.
Broken Bone.
Bruises and Burns.
Buildings.

Camp, Plan of.
Cleaning.
Location of.
Camp Fire.
Camping, Arguments for.
Canoe Tag.
Chapel.
Character Building.
Check List.
Chills.
Choking.
Circle Jumping.
Clothing.
Clouds.
Cocoa.
Coffee.
Colds.
Commissary Blank.
Cooks.
Council.
Cramps.
Cups, Drinking.
Cuts.

Departments.
Digestion, Time of.
Director.
Dirt.
Discipline.
Dish Washing.
Dislocation.
Drains.
Dramas, Outdoor.
Drowning, Rescue from.

Eggs.
Egg Test.
Earache.
Evening Program.
Eyes.
Fainting.
Fee.

Field Glasses.
Fireplace.
First Aid.
Fish (Receipts).
Fish, Study of.
Flag Raising and Striking.
Food Charts.
Food, How to Buy.
Forestry.
Frog's Legs.
Funnel.

Games and Stunts, Indoor.
Games, Outdoor.
Games, Their Purpose.
Garbage.
German Bowling.
Grace at Meals.
Green Rag Society.
Griddle Cakes.
Grocery List.

Hall of Fame.
Hammocks.
Hands.
Hand Wrestling.
Handy Devices.
Hanger.
Headache.
Health Board.
Health Charts.
Health Maxims.
Health Talks.
Herbarium.
Hiccough.
Honor Awards.
Honor Cup.
Honor Flag.
Honor Plan.
Hospital Tent.
"How Men Found the Great Spirit".

Indian and White Man.
Ink, Onion.
Inspection.
Internal Organs.

Jumping Standards.

Kites.

Lamps.
Lantern Talks.

Leaders or Counsellor.
 Blanks for.
 Letter to.
 Opportunities of.
 Pay of.
 Suggestions to.

Lean-to.
Library.
Life Saving.

Map Reading.
Matches, Lighting.
Measuring Device.
Medical Stores.
Mending Pots.
Menu (for hike).
Menus.
Moccasins.
Moral.
Morning Hymn.
Mottoes.
Music.

Nature Study.
Nature Study Equipment.
Nature Study Walks.
Nature Talks.
Nose.
Novel Bonfire.

Old Clothes Race.
Order of Day.
Organization Chart.

Packing Up.
Packs.
Pain and Pain Chart.
