driver was up to his neck in the snow, but the fireman was not visible.

Acton availed himself of the overturned engine, which was making
unearthly noises, and reached out a hand for the driver. The latter
clutched it, and scrambled out.

"Where's your mate?"

"Tom jumped the other way, sir."

Acton swung the lamp round, sending its broad sheet of light into the
driving snow. For a moment he could see nothing but the dazzling white
floor, but next instant perceived the fireman, whose head rested against
the horizontal wheel of the overturned engine.

"This man is hurt," he said, when he saw a crimson stain on the snow.
"Take the lamp, guard."

Acton clambered over the short tender, seized the man by the shoulder,
and, with an immense effort of strength, pulled him partly up. The man
gave no signs of life.

"Bear a hand, driver, will you? He's too much for me alone."

The driver hastily scrambled beside Acton, and in a minute or so they
had the insensible man between them.

"He hurt himself as he jumped," said Acton, looking with concern at a
gaping cut over the man's eye. "Anyhow, our first business is to bring
him round."

It was a weary business lifting the unconscious fireman into an empty
compartment, and still more weary work to bring him round, but at last
this was done. Acton tore up his handkerchief, and with melted snow
washed clean the ugly cut on his forehead, and then left the fireman in
charge of his mate.

"We'll have to roost here, sir, all night. There's no getting out of
this cutting, nohow. Thank you, sir; I'll see to Tom."

Acton and the guard made their way back to the rear of the train, where
the Amorians were awaiting their schoolfellow with impatience and
anxiety.

"The engine is off the rails and the stoker is damaged above a bit,"
said Acton, seriously, "and we're fixtures here until the company comes
and digs us out. There's only one thing to do: we must make ourselves as
comfy as possible for the night. I must see that lady, though, before we
do anything for ourselves. Back in a moment."

Acton sallied out once more and devoted a good ten minutes to explaining
matters to the very horrified and nervous lady and her tearful little
twelve-year-old girl.

"I'll bring you some cushions, and I'll steal Dick Worcester's pillow
for the little girl," he explained cheerfully. "You have one rug, I see.
We can spare you a couple more. No danger at all, really, But isn't it
really horrid? We have not a morsel of food to offer you, but I dare say
you can, if you don't worry over it, put up with a makeshift bed--only
for one night, I'm sure."

Acton relieved Dick Worcester--who plumed himself on his pillow--of
that article, and one of Senior's rugs.

On his return he confronted the dubious looks of his chums with his
invincible cheerfulness.

"Now, you fellows! we're to sleep here. Two on a seat is the order, and
one on the floor, that's me. Dicky, darling, please don't roll off your
perch. We've plenty of rugs and overcoats: enough to stock Nansen, Grim,
so we shan't all wake up frozen to death."

Gus Todd smiled dutifully at this bull.

The guard came with a modest request.

"Can you roost with us? Oh! certainly. Bag another cushion for the
floor, and then you're all right. More, the merrier; and let the
ventilation go hang. If Mr. Worcester doesn't fall on you, guard, I dare
say you'll live to tell the tale."

The Amorians, who trusted to Acton as they would have trusted to no one
else on earth, entered into the fun of the thing, and the last joke of
the night was a solemn warning to Grim from Dick Worcester to avoid
snoring, as he valued his life.

"We can manage like this for one night, anyhow," whispered Acton to the
guard, "for we really keep each other warm. We'll get out of this
to-morrow."

The guard did not reply to this for fully a minute. He whispered back,
"Listen to the wind, sir. The storm isn't half over yet. I've got my
doubts about to-morrow. We're snowed up for more'n a day."




II

OVER THE FELLS


When day dawned, and the snowed-up travellers began to look around them,
they found that, though the snow was not descending nearly as heavily as
on the night before, the wind was still strong and the weather bitterly
cold.

On the windward side of the train the snow had drifted almost up to the
window panes, but on the leeward there was considerably less. Looking up
and down the line, they could see their train surrounded by its dazzling
environment, and the drifts were so high that they had filled the low
cutting stretching towards Lowbay level to its top.

The train was an island in a sea of snow.

The Amorians, stiff and cramped with their narrow quarters of the night,
dropped off into the snow on the sheltered side and explored as far as
the overturned engine, now stark and cold, with wonder and awe.

"Why, we're like rats in a trap!" exclaimed Gus Todd.

"We'll have a council of war now," said Acton, as he saw the driver and
his mate floundering towards them, "and then we can see what's to be
done--if anything can be done."

It seemed the result of the council was to be the decision that there
was nothing to be done. To go back to Lowbay, or forward to Lansdale,
was plainly impossible, and neither guard nor driver thought they could
be ploughed out under two days at the earliest. "And yet," concluded
Acton, "we can't starve and freeze for two days. Look here, guard, isn't
there a fell farm somewhere hereabouts? I begin to fancy----"

"There's one over the hills yonder, three or four miles away. Might as
well be three hundred, for they'll never dream of our being snowed up
here."

"Well, but can't we go to them, if you know the way?"

"That's just what I don't know, with all this snow about. The farm is
behind that hill somewhere; but I could no more take you there than fly.
Besides, who could wade up to their necks in snow for half a mile, let
alone three?"

"But the snow won't be so deep on the fells as in these cuttings."

"That's true, I suppose. But get into a drift on the fell--and, Lord,
that would be easy enough--you're done. And there's becks deep enough to
drown a man, and you'll never see them till you're up to your chin in
their icy waters. I wouldn't chance it for anything. We mun wait here
till we're dug out, sir, and that's all about it."

"Where is that farm, guard? Behind which shoulder of the fell?"

"Look here, Acton," began Dick Worcester, apprehensively, "I'm hanged if
we're going to let you go groping about for any blessed farm in this
storm. We'll eat the coals in the tender first!"

"Thanks, Dick. Which shoulder, guard?"

The man explained as fully and elaborately as if he might as well talk
as think. The shoulder of the fell was noted by Acton exactly and
carefully, even to borrowing a compass pendant off Todd's historic
watch--chain.

"It lies exactly N.N.E., and one could find one's way in the dark if
that were all."

"But it isn't, Acton," said Grim, anxiously, "not by a long chalk. Oh,
Acton, don't go!"

"I'm going to turn over the idea, Grim. But, anyhow, I don't stir out of
this cutting until the snow's out of the sky."

Acton and the guard talked long and seriously, whilst the Amorians put
into practical working Senior's idea of a fire beside the van. There
were coals galore.

Half an hour afterwards the snow ceased. "Now," said Acton, quietly, "I
know exactly where that farm is. I'm going to go now and have a try for
it. I'll move the farm people, if I reach 'em, double quick back again
with food, for they're used to these fells, and then we can all go back
to the farm together. The fact is," said Acton, hurriedly, as he saw a
chorus of dissent about to break out, "we _must_ get out of this very
soon. There's the lady and the child--and even more than that, there is
the fireman, who is downright ill. We cannot wait till we're dug out;
that is absolutely certain. I'm not going to run any danger, and if I
find I'm likely to, I'm coming back. I fancy, really," he added,
laughing, "that the most difficult part of the business will be to get
out of this cutting."

The fellows all knew Acton; they knew that when he said things in a
certain tone there was no good arguing. That was why Grim, with a white
face, hurriedly left stoking the blazing fire and retired in dismay to
the guard's van, and why Gus Todd, in an access of angry impatience,
shied the magazine he had been turning over into the middle of the
flames.

Jack Senior said, "This is just like you, Acton. You _will_ fight more
than your share of bargees, but this time I'm going to go one and one
with you. If you like to risk being drowned in those beastly moorland
streams, or to fall into some thirty-feet drift, I'm going to go too.
That is final. _Kismet_, etc.!"

Acton looked narrowly at Senior. "All right, Jack. Get your coat on;
but, honour bright, I'd rather go alone."

"Couldn't do it, old man," said Senior, whilst Worcester nodded
approvingly. "What would Phil Bourne say, if he heard we'd let you melt
away into---- I'm going too."

The passage out of the cutting was not so difficult as Acton had
bargained for; but Worcester and Todd did wonders with the fireman's
shovels and made a lane through the drifts. On the firm ground of the
fell the two found that, though the snow was deep enough in all
conscience, it was not to be compared with the drifts on the line. The
wind now, as they started off, was whipping away the loose top layers of
snow in cold white clouds, which stung the face and ears with their icy
sharpness; but, with caps well down and coats buttoned up to the ears,
the two trudged on. The snow had ceased, but it was plain, by the dark
and lowering sky, that this might only be temporary, and Acton kept up
as smart a pace as he could, heading right for the shoulder of the fell,
a couple of miles away, behind which he might, if he were lucky, see
that moorland farm. The hill ran down into a valley, towards which the
two Amorians hurried, Acton keeping his ears well open for the faintest
murmur of water.

"There's a beck somewhere down here, Jack, but we'll not see it until
we're almost into it. So look out!"

"All serene! I'm on the _qui vive!_" Hardly were the words out of
Senior's mouth than he stumbled headlong forward, the ground opening at
his feet, and a narrow ribbon of cold grey water, silently sliding under
its shrunken banks, caught Acton's eye. Senior had plumped cleanly into
this. Luckily, it was not very deep, and he scrambled out to the other
side drenched to the skin, and showing clearly enough, where he had
broken through the snow on both sides, that all the care in the world
would not prevent them repeating the experience. The snow overhung a
yard. Acton had stopped dead when he saw Senior disappear, but in a
moment he had sprung clear, and was helping his friend up the bank. The
snow slipped silently into the stream as he jumped.

"That's number one," said Senior, "and only half an hour from the train!
Any more hereabouts?"

"I fancy so, but we may have better luck next time."

"Hope so. Set the pace, old man, please. It's b-b-beastly c-c-cold."

Acton was thoroughly upset by this mishap, and he headed up the opposite
slope of the hill with a face that showed how the incident had shaken
him. Senior's teeth chattered, and he looked blue with cold. The two
plodded on, Acton insisting on Senior keeping behind. Acton again had
the unenviable pleasure of seeing some more of those icy waters, and
their slow and deadly stealing under the snow seemed to him sinister and
fatal as he pulled himself up on the brink. The care necessary, the
cold, cutting wind, and the knee-deep snow, made their progress terribly
slow, and Acton began to notice that Senior, despite his anxiety for a
sharp pace, was already terribly fagged.

The distance widened between the two, and once, when Acton turned round
and found his friend nearly thirty yards behind, his heart almost
stopped beating.

"This will never do! Heaven help us if he cracks up!" He waited for the
weary Senior, and then said gently, "Pace too hot, old fellow?"

"Rather. So sorry, but you seem to run almost."

"Run!" smiled Acton, bitterly. "Why, we're not doing a mile an hour.
Put your heart into it, Jack, and for Heaven's sake don't let me get too
much in front!"

"All serene!" said Senior, gamely.

To Acton's intense alarm, the snow had recommenced, and the wind swept
it down the fells full into their faces. Acton was afraid that he might
make a mistake if the snow became so heavy as to blot out the landscape,
and, knowing that to do so might have terrible consequences, he
nervously forced the pace.

Senior responded gamely.

"Keep well behind, old man. You'll dodge the snow better. Can you do a
wee sprint? We're not far from the top of the ridge, and then we've only
to work down the hill and bear to the left, and there we are."

"Only!" said Senior, wearily. "How far?"

"A bare mile. Step it out for all you're worth."

By this time it was obvious that the storm had recommenced in all its
fury, and Acton, in an ecstasy of horror and anxiety lest he should turn
the shoulder of the hill too late to see anything of the farm, almost
ran forward. He had thrust out his head, and his eyes anxiously peered
forward. They were now almost on the top of the shoulder of the fell.
Acton turned round with eagerness.

"Five minutes more and we're---- He's gone!"

Senior, indeed, was not in sight. With a groan of despair, Acton ran
back down the slope.

"Jack! Jack! Jack!" he howled above the wind, "Where are you?"

There was no reply

"He's lost!"

Further down the slope ran Acton, shouting into the storm. He heard
nothing; not a sound. Then, and his heart almost burst with joy, his eye
caught sight of a moving, staggering figure, drifting aimlessly across
his path. Senior, half his senses beaten out of him by cold, wet, the
wind, and lack of food, looked at the screaming Acton with
uncomprehending eyes, and was aimlessly shaking off his grasp to lounge
easily to death.

"He _has_ cracked up," said Acton, in despair, and he gripped the
half-senseless youth with frenzied strength.

"This is the way you're to go--with me!" he yelled.

Half-dragging, half-coaxing, uttering strange promises, to which Senior
smiled stupidly, Acton regained those few but terrible yards to the top
of the ridge. Then his heart almost died within him: there was nothing
to be seen, as, half-blinded by the snow, he tried to peer down the
valley.

"Nothing!"

Senior, bereft of his companion's arm, had sunk down happily upon the
snow and looked at Acton, stupidly trying to make head or tail out of
the situation. His face was darkly flushed; his lips were swollen; and
his eyes were heavy with sleep.

Roused from his momentary despair by these terrible signs, Acton seized
his friend by the throat of his overcoat, and jerked him to his feet. He
shook him savagely until some sign of intelligence glimmered in the
sleepy eyes.

"Jack! Jack! Keep awake! We'll win out yet if you do."

"All right, old man: my head buzzes awf'ly, Where are we? What are you
doing?"

"We're going down the hill. Don't leave go of me whatever you do, and
oh, keep awake."

"Serene," said Senior, closing his eyes again peacefully.

With a sob of horror and despair, Acton lurched down the hill, dragging
his companion with him. He kept repeating, as though it were a formula:
"Down the slope and bear to the left" again and again.

What the next half-hour held of misery, horror, and utter despair, Acton
cannot, even now, recall without a shudder. They stumbled and staggered
downwards like drunken men. The snow blinded him, and the dragging
weight of Senior on his arm was an aching agony, from which, above all
things, he must not free himself.

Then, as the very climax to hopeless despair, Senior rolled heavily
forward and lay prone, as helpless as a log, his face buried in the
snow! His cap had fallen off, and Acton watched the black curls
whitening in the storm.

How long he remained there, crouched before the motionless body, he does
not know; only that he tried many times to shake the dying youth from
the terrible torpor in vain. Senior breathed heavily, and that was all.

All hope had died in Acton's breast. He threw himself forward beside
his friend, and sobbed, with his face in the snow.

A sound reached Acton's ears which brought him to his feet with a bound.
He placed his hand to his ear, and sent his very soul to the effort to
fix the sound again, above the roar of the wind. It was the deep, but
not distant, low of cattle.

A third time did the low boom through the storm.

Almost frantic with a living hope, Acton turned to Senior. He raised the
unconscious youth, and, by a mighty effort, got him upon his shoulders,
and then staggered off in the direction of the sound. He has a faint
recollection that he rolled over into the snow twice, that he waded
across a river, with the water up to his arm-pits, and always that there
was a weight on his neck that almost throttled him.... He felt that he
was going mad. Then at last--it seemed many hours--a building, wreathed
in white, seemed to spring up out of the storm. Delirious with joy,
Acton staggered towards it with his burden. Some figures moved towards
him, and Acton shouted for help as he pitched forward for the last time
into the snow. He dimly remembers strong hands raising him up and
helping him through a farmyard, which seemed somehow to tremble with the
low of cattle, and then he was in a chair, and a fire in front of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour or two afterwards, Acton was seated before a table, and, in the
intervals of gulping down hot coffee and swallowing food, told his
tale. The peasant farmer and his wife listened open-eyed with
astonishment. The farmer, from sheer amazement, dropped into the
broadest Westmoreland dialect.

"How far did thoo carry t'other yan?"

