about ten feet long and six feet broad. John saw as it approached that
the aviator sat before the motor and screw, but that the elevating and
steering rudders were placed in front of him. There were three men
besides the aviator in the machine.

"A biplane," said John.

"Yes," said Weber, "I recognize the type of the machine. It's originally
a French model."

"But in this case, undoubtedly a German imitation. They've seen our
flag, because I can make out one of the men with glasses to his eyes.
They hover about as if in uncertainty. No wonder they can't make up
their minds, because there's the tricolor floating from the top of that
tall tree, and not a thing in the world to explain why it's in such a
place. A man with a rifle is about to take a shot at it. Bang! There it
goes! But I can't see that the bullet has damaged our flag. Look, how it
whips about and snaps defiance! Now, all the men except the aviator
himself have out glasses and are studying the phenomenon of our signal.
They come above the tree, and I think they're going to make a swoop
around the grove near the ground. Lie close, Weber! As I found out once
before, a thick forest is the best defense against aeroplanes. They
can't get through the screen of boughs."

They heard a whirring and drumming, and the biplane not more than fifty
feet above the earth made several circles about the little wood. John
saw the men in it very clearly. He could even discern the German cast of
countenance where all except the one at the wheel that controlled the
two rudders had thrown back their hoods and taken off their glasses.
The three carried rifles which they held ready for use, in case they
detected an enemy.

Whirling around like a vast primeval bird of prey the biplane began to
rise, as if disappointed of a victim, and winding upward was soon above
the trees. Then John heard the rapid crackle of rifles.

"Shooting at our flag again!" he exclaimed.

But the whizz of a bullet that buried itself in the earth near him told
him better.

"It isn't possible that they've seen us!" he exclaimed.

"No," said Weber, "they're merely peppering the woods and vines in the
hope that they'll hit a concealed enemy, if such there should be."

"That being the case," said John, "I'm going to make my body as small as
possible, and push myself into the ground if I can."

He lay very close, but the rifle fire quickly passed to other portions
of the wood, and then died away entirely. John straightened himself out
and saw the biplane becoming smaller, as it flew off in the direction
whence it had come.

"I hope you'll come to no good," he said, shaking his fist at the
disappearing plane. "You've scared me half to death with your shots, and
I hope that both your rudders will get out of gear and stay out of gear!
I hope that the wheel controlling them will be smashed up! I hope that
the top plane will crash into the bottom one! I hope that a French shell
will shoot your tail off! And I hope that you'll tumble to the earth and
lie there, nothing but a heap of rotting wood and rusty old metal!"

"Well done, Mr. Scott!" said Weber. "That was quite a curse, but I think
it will take something more solid to disable the biplane."

"I think so too, but I've relieved my feelings, and after a man has done
so he can work a lot better. What are we to look for now, Weber? We
don't seem to have success in attracting anything but Germans. If Lannes
is coming at all, as you think he will, he'll get a pretty late ticket
of admission to our reserved section of the air."

"You must remember that the sky above us is a pretty large place, and at
any rate we're a drawing power. We're always pulling something out of
the ether."

"And our biggest catch is coming now! Look, Weber, look I If that isn't
one of Herr Zeppelin's railroad trains of the air then I'll eat it when
it gets here!"

"You're right, Mr. Scott. There the monster comes. It can't be anything
but a Zeppelin! They must have one of their big sheds not far east of
us."

"We'll hear its rattling soon. Like the others it will surely see our
flag and make for it. But if they take a notion to shoot up the wood, as
the men on that biplane did, we'd better hunt holes. A Zeppelin can
carry a lot of soldiers."

The Zeppelin was not moving fast. It had none of the quick graceful
movements of the aeroplanes, but came on slowly like some huge monster
of the air, looking about for prey. It turned southeast for a moment or
two, then some one on board saw the flag and coming back it lumbered
toward the tree.

"Ugly things," said John. "Lannes and I blew up one once, and I wish I
had the same chance against that fellow up there. But they're in the
same puzzled state that the other fellows were. Men on both platforms
are examining the flag through glasses, and the flag doesn't give a rap
for them. It's standing out in the wind, now, straight and stiff. It
seems to know that old Noah's ark can't make it out."

The huge Zeppelin drew its length along the grove, coming as close to
the trees as it dared, then passed above, and after some circling
lumbered away to the south.

"Good-bye, old Mr. Curiosity," exclaimed John. "You weren't invited
here, and I don't care whether you ever come again. Besides, you're
nothing but a big bluff, anyway. There's our flag, still standing
straight out in the wind, so you can see every stripe on it, and yet you
haven't, despite your visit, the remotest idea why it was put there!"

Weber smiled.

"They've all gone away as ignorant as they were when they came," he
said, "but we must be due for a French visitor or two. After so long a
run of Germans we should have Frenchmen soon."

"I begin to believe with you that Lannes will arrive some time or other.
He flies fast and far and in time he must see our signal."

"I've never doubted it. Meanwhile I think I'll take a little luncheon,
and I'd advise you to do the same. We haven't had such a bad time here,
saving those random rifle shots from the biplane."

"Not at all. It's like watching a play, and you certainly have a clear
field for observation, when you look up at the heavens. The stage is
always in full view."

John was feeling uncommonly good. Their concealment while they watched
the scouts and messengers from the skies coming to see the meaning of
the flag had been easy and restful. Much of his long and painful tension
had relaxed. The hum of distant artillery was in his ears as ever, like
a moaning of the wind, but he was growing so used to it that he would
now have noticed its absence rather than its presence. So he ate his
share of bread and sausage with a good appetite, meanwhile keeping a
watchful eye upon the heavens which burned in the same brilliant blue.

It was now about noon. The rain the night before had given fresh tints
to the green of grass and foliage. The whole earth, indifferent to the
puny millions that struggled on its vast bosom, seemed refreshed and
revitalized. A modest little bird in brown plumage perched on a bough
near them, and, indifferent too, to war, poured forth a brilliant volume
of song.

"Happy little fellow," John said. "Nothing to do but eat and sleep and
sing."

"Unless he's snapped up by some bigger bird," said Weber, "but having
been an hour without callers we're now about to have a new one. And as
this comes from the west it's likely to be French."

John felt excitement, and stood up. Yes, there was the machine coming
out of the blue haze in the west, soaring beautifully and fast. It was
very high, but his eye, trained now, saw that it was descending
gradually. He felt an intense hope that it was Lannes, but he soon knew
that it was not lie. The approaching machine could not possibly be the
_Arrow_.

"It's a Bleriot monoplane," said Weber. "I can tell the type almost as
far as I can see it. It's much like a gigantic bird, with powerful
parchment wings mounted upon a strong body. The wings as you see now
present a concave surface to the earth. They always do that. The flyer
sits between the two wings and has in front of him the lever with which
he controls the whole affair."

"You seem to know a good deal about flying machines, Weber."

"Oh, yes, I've observed them a lot. I've always been curious about them
and I've attended the great flying meets at Rheims, but personally I'm a
coward about heights. I study the types of these wonderful machines, but
I don't go up in 'em. That's a little fellow coming now and he's seen
the flag."

"There's only one man in the plane, but as he's undoubtedly French what
do you think we ought to do? He can't carry us away with him in the
machine, it's too small. Do you think we should signal him to come to
the ground and have a talk?"

"Perhaps we'd better let him pass, Mr. Scott. We have no real
information to give. He might suspect that we are Germans and a lot of
time would be lost maneuvering. Suppose we remain in hiding, and say
nothing until Lannes himself appears."

"You still feel sure that he will come?"

"It's a conviction."

"Same way with me, and I agree with you that we'd better let our friend
in the Bleriot go by. He's descending fast now. The plane certainly does
look like a bird. Reminds me somewhat of a German Taube, though this
machine is much smaller."

"The pilot will take only a look or two at the flag. Then, if we don't
hail him, he'll sail swiftly back to the west."

"For good reasons too. The air here is chiefly in the German sphere of
influence, and if I were in his place I'd take to my heels too at a
single glance."

"That's what he's doing now. He's flying past the flag just as one of
the Germans did. He leans over to take a look at it, can't make out what
it means, glances back apprehensively toward the German quarter of the
heavens, and now he's sliding like a streak through the blue for French
air."

"So near and yet so far! A friend in the air just over our heads, and we
had to let him go. Well, he couldn't have done us any good."

"No, he couldn't, and he's gone back so fast that he's out of sight
already, but another and different inhabitant of the air is coming out
of the south. See, the shape off there, Mr. Scott. Wait until it comes
nearer, and I think I can tell you what it is. Now it's made out the
flag and is steering for it."

"What class of plane is it, Weber? Can you tell that yet?"

"Yes. It's an Esnault-Pelterie, an invention of a young Frenchman. It's
a monoplane with flexible, warped wings. It's made of steel tubes,
welded together, and it has two wheels, one behind the other for contact
with the ground."

"I noticed something queer in its appearance. It's the wheels. I don't
call this machine any great beauty, but it seems to cut the air well. I
suppose we'd better treat it as we did the Bleriot--let it go as it
came, none the worse and none the wiser?"

"I think so. But we have no other choice! That flyer is a suspicious
fellow and he isn't taking any chances. He's come fairly close to the
flag, and now he's sheering off at an angle."

"I don't blame him. He probably has something more important to do than
to unravel the meaning of a flag in a tree top."

"Nor I either. But whatever comes we'll wait for Lannes, always for
Lannes. The heavens here, Mr. Scott, are peopled with strange birds, but
of all the lot there is one particular bird for which we are looking."

"Right again. My eyes have grown a little weary of watching the skies.
For a long stare, blue isn't as soft and easy a sight as green, and I
think I'll look at the grass and leaves for a little while."

"Then while you rest I'll keep an outlook and when I'm tired you can
relieve me."

"Good enough."

John lay down in the grass and rested his body while he eased his worn
eyes. Weber commented now and then on the new birds in the heavens,
aeroplanes of all kinds, but they kept their distance.

"The air over us is not held now by either French or Germans," said
Weber, "and I imagine that only the more daring make incursions into it.
Perhaps, too, they are kept busy elsewhere, because, as my ears
distinctly tell me, the battle is increasing in volume."

"I noticed the swelling fire when I lay down here," said John. "It seems
a strange thing, but for a while I had forgotten all about the battle."

Presently Weber took his eyes from the heavens, moved about and looked
uneasy.

"If I'm not mistaken," he said, "I caught a glimpse of steel down the
river. I think it was a lance head glittering in the sun, and Uhlans may
be near."

"How far away do you think it was."

"A half-mile or more. I must take a look in that direction. I'm a good
scout, Mr. Scott, and I'll see what's up. Watch here will you, until I
come back? It may be some time."

"All right, but don't get yourself captured, Weber. I'd be mighty
lonesome without you."

"Don't fear for me. Of course, as I told you, I'll be gone for some
time, and if I may suggest, Mr. Scott, I wouldn't move from among the
vines."

"Catch me doing it! I'll say here in my green bower and as my eyes are
back in form I'll watch the heavens."

"Good-bye, then, for a while."

Weber slipped away. His tread was so light that he vanished, as if he
had melted into air.

"That man would certainly have made a good scout in our old Indian
days," thought John, and with the thought came the conviction that Weber
was too clever to let himself be caught. Then he turned his attention
back to the heavens.

They were now well on into the afternoon, and the sun was at the zenith.
A haze of gold shimmered against the vast blue vault. A wind perfumed
with grass and green leaves, brought also the ceaseless roar of the
guns, and now and then the bitter taste of burned gunpowder. The faint
trembling of the earth, or rather of the air just above it, went on, and
John, turning about in his little bower, surveyed the heavens from all
quarters.

He saw shapes, faint, dark and floating on every horizon, but none of
them came near until a full half-hour had elapsed. Then one shot out of
the west, sailed toward the northeast, but curving suddenly, came back
in the direction of the tree. As the shape grew larger and more defined
John's heart began to throb. He had seen many aeroplanes that day, and
most of them had been swift and graceful, but none was as swift and
graceful as the one that was now coming.

It was a machine, beautiful in shape, and as lithe and fast as the
darting swallow. There could be none other like it in the heavens, and
his heart throbbed harder. Intuition, perhaps, was back of knowledge and
he never for a moment doubted that it was he for whom they had looked so
long.

The aeroplane seemed fairly to shoot out of space. First its outlines
became visible, and then the man at the rudder. He came straight toward
the tree, dropped low and circled about it, while John rushed from the
vines and cried as loud as he could:

"Lannes! Lannes, it's me! John Scott! I've been waiting for you!"

The _Arrow_ dropped further, barely touched the earth, and Lannes,
leaning over, shouted to John in tones, tense and sharp with command:

"Give the plane a shove with all your might, and jump in. For God's sake
don't linger, man! Jump!"

The impulse communicated by Lannes was so powerful that before he knew
what he was doing John pushed the _Arrow_ violently and sprang into the
extra seat, just as it was leaving the earth.

Lannes gave the rudder a strong twist and the aeroplane shot up like a
