"A panther!" whispered Paul.

Henry nodded. It was, in fact, a large specimen of the panther or southern
cougar, and Henry whispered again:

"See what he is after!"

A small colt from the herd had wandered dangerously near to the forest and
the bough on which the cougar lay, watching him with the yellow, famished
eyes of the great, hungry cat.

"Shoot him, Henry! Shoot him!" whispered Paul. "You can reach him with a
bullet from here. Don't let him kill the poor, little colt!"

"I'd do it if it were needed," replied Henry, "but I don't think it will
be. See, Paul, the Prairie King suspects!"

The great white stallion raised his head a little higher. It may be that
he caught a glimpse of the tawny form and yellow, hungry eyes amid the
foliage of the bough, or it may be that a sudden flaw in the wind brought
to his nostrils the pungent odor of the big cat. He reared and stamped,
the startled colt turned away, and the cougar, afraid that he was about to
lose his chance, sprang.

A yellow compact mass, bristling with sharp, white teeth and long, hooked
claws shot through the air, but the distance was too great. The colt had
turned just in time, and the cougar fell short. He gathered himself
instantly for another spring, but quick as he was, he was not quick
enough.

The boys heard a fierce neigh, and the great stallion, wild with rage,
launched himself upon the cougar. Agile and powerful though the great cat
was, the sharp hoofs trampled him down. Taken at a disadvantage, just at
the moment when his first spring had spent itself, he was no match for the
protector of the herd. No bone could resist the impact of those heavy
terrible hoofs. No skull was thick enough to save. The cougar squealed,
clawed, and bit wildly, but in an incredibly quick space he was trampled
to death and lay quite still. The boys believed that every bone in him
must have been broken.

The herd had run some distance away in fright at the cougar's leap, but
while the swift combat lasted it stood looking on. Now the stallion, after
a last look at the slain robber, turned and walked away in triumph to the
herd that he had protected so well. It seemed to the glorified fancy of
the boys that he held his head higher than ever, and that his great mane
and tail flowed away in new ripples. He stalked proudly at the head of the
herd down to the other side of the prairie, where they went placidly on
with their grazing.

"That is certainly one thing that turned out right," said Paul in a
gratified tone.

"The hoofs of a powerful and enraged wild stallion are a terrible thing,"
said Henry. "Even a deer, which is far smaller, can kill a man with its
hoofs. But if you'll look again, Paul, you'll see that a new danger
threatens our king of horses."

Paul followed Henry's gaze, and he distinctly saw two or three human
figures at the edge of the wood. These figures were hidden from the horses
by a swell of the prairies, and, as in the case of the cougar, the wind
blew their odor away. "Indians?" asked Paul.

"I can't tell at this distance," replied Henry, "but it's more likely that
they belong to the party of Alvarez, and perhaps they know that wild
horses frequent this prairie and others hereabouts. See what they are
doing!"

Paul saw well enough, One man carrying on his arm a coll of rope, the
lariat of Mexico, lay down in the long grass which completely hid him, but
both Henry and Paul knew that he was creeping forward inch by inch toward
the beautiful stallion that was grazing not ten yards from the woods.

"When he comes close enough, if he can do so before the horse takes the
alarm," said Henry, "he will throw the rope and catch the horse by the
neck in the running noose at the end."

"But the horse will take alarm," said Paul hopefully.

"I don't know," said Henry. "He may think in his horse mind that one enemy
in one day is as much as he has need to dread."

It seemed that Henry was right. Exultant in his victory over the cougar,
the Prairie King had relaxed his vigilance. More often now his head was
down, cropping the grass like the rest of the herd. Henry and Paul
believed that they could see the grass rippling as the new and more
cunning enemy crept forward. But it was only agile fancy--they were too
far away.

"What ever happens it's bound to happen soon," said Henry.

Even as he spoke the man in the grass sprang to his feet, threw forth his
right arm, and the rope shot out like a snake uncoiling itself as it
sprang. Both Paul and Henry felt a pang when they saw the loop enclose the
neck of the noble horse, while the man himself and his comrades uttered
loud shouts of exultation.

"He has caught him!" exclaimed Paul sadly.

"Yes," said Henry, "and I'm sorry, but it was a wonderful feat of skill
and patience!"

The frightened herd ran away, and the white stallion reared and struggled,
his great eyes red and distended with rage and astonishment. Two men ran
forward and seized the rope which their comrade had thrown so skillfully.
Then the three pulled hard.

But the quarry was too magnificent. They had miscalculated the white
stallion's strength. Caught by the neck, he dragged, nevertheless, all
three over the prairie, and then, suddenly making a mighty lunge, tore the
rope from their grasp, leaving them thrown headlong to the earth. Away he
went, the long rope flying out behind him like a streamer.

Doubtless some failure of the noose to draw tightly around his neck had
saved the horse, and this was proved when the rope catching in a bush
slipped off over his head as he struggled again. Then the stallion, by
chance, or because his horse's mind inclined him to it, uttered a long,
shrill neigh of triumph, kicked his heels high in the air, and galloped
away, his flowing tail streaming out behind him, a banner of triumph.

"He's won again," said Henry in a tone of gladness. "I told you that horse
wasn't made ever to be ridden."

"But he has to struggle continually for life and freedom," said Paul.

"Just the same as we do," rejoined Henry. "See those fellows are picking
themselves up; but they've been slow about it."

"I don't blame them. I fancy they suffered some pretty severe bruises when
the horse jerked them down. Paul, I think I can make out two white faces
in that party, which almost certainly means that they are the men of
Alvarez. And it says to us that we ought to hurry."

"But not without our deer, I hope," said Paul. They gave one last look at
the far edge of the prairie, where they could still dimly see the white
stallion, now keeping well away from the woods.

"I don't think anything will get him," said Henry, "and I hope not. Just
as we do, he loves to be free."

They, too, re-entered the woods and were fortunate enough to find a deer
quickly. Henry was willing to risk the chance of the shot being heard by
their enemies and his bullet brought it down. Then they cut up the body
and took it back to the boat, where they told all that had occurred. The
others agreed that if Alvarez and his men were in the vicinity they ought
to leave at once, and, transferring the drying clothes from the bank to
the boat, they entered the Mississippi once more and set sail down its
stream.




CHAPTER XIV

NEW ORLEANS


They sailed and rowed steadily on for several days. Once or twice they saw
canoes or boats containing white men, who regarded them curiously, but
none approached. They inferred that they were now very near New Orleans,
and all the five were alert with anticipation. Besides the accomplishment
of their great task, they were about to visit a metropolis, a seat of
government, a city of eight or ten thousand people, commanding the road to
the heart of the North American continent, swarming with many races, and
destined, as all the world then believed, to be the largest place in
either America. It is no wonder that the bosoms of the five throbbed with
curiosity, and that they looked forward to strange and varied sights.

"Now, Jim," said Shif'less Sol in a warning tone to Long Jim, "I've got
advice to give you. I wuz in a big town once. I told you about that time I
went to Baltimore when I wuz a little boy, an' so I'm fit to tell you how
to behave. New Or-lee-yuns ain't like the woods, Jim. Don't you be too
handy with your gun. Ef you see a man follerin' along behind you ez ef he
wuz trailin' you, don't you up an' take a shot at him. Like ez not he's
about his business, only it happens to be in the same direction that
you're goin'. An', Jim, don't you go to gittin' dizzy, through seein' so
many people about. Mebbe you don't think thar will be sech a crowd, but
you'll believe it when you see it."

"Sol Hyde," rejoined Long Jim indignantly, "I'm sorry New Or-lee-yuns
ain't right at the sea, 'cause the sea is salt, so I've heard, an' then ef
I wuz to dip you in it three or four times it would do you a pow'ful lot
uv good. Salt is shorely mighty helpful in the curin' up uv fresh things."

"There goes another of those canoes," said Paul, "but I can't tell whether
it's a white man or an Indian in it."

"It's a white man," said Henry, "but I fancy it's a West Indian Frenchman
or Spaniard. I've heard that some of them are as dark as Indians."

"Time to think 'bout tyin' up for the dark," said Tom Ross. "We might go
on all night, but we need to save our strength fur to-morrow. What do you
say to that little cove over thar on the west bank, Henry?"

"Looks as if it would be the right place," replied Henry, "and it is
certainly time to stop. The sun seems to go down faster here than it does
In Kentucky."

The twilight was spreading swiftly over the arch from west to east as they
entered the cove and tied "The Galleon" to a live oak. Paul leaped
joyfully ashore, glad to stretch his limbs again. The others quickly
followed, and they set about gathering wood to build a fire. They were out
of the Indian country now and they had no need to be cautious.

Paul bestirred himself looking for brushwood. Presently he found at the
edge of the water a dead bough which was long enough to be broken into
several sticks of convenient length. He picked it up, and for the purpose
of breaking it brought it down heavily on a large brown log lying in the
mud near the water.

To Paul's amazement and horror, the big brown log got into action at
either end. One end, in the shape of a tail, whipped around at him, barely
missing him, and the other end, splitting itself horizontally in half,
revealed huge jaws lined with terrible teeth. Paul sprang back with a cry,
and Henry, who was near, rifle in hand, fired a ball into the monster's
brain. The big brown log, that was no log, turned partially over and died.

"An alligator," said Henry, "I've heard of them, but this is the first
that I've ever seen."

"I've heard of them, too," said Paul, "but I never thought I'd walk almost
into the mouth of one without knowing it."

Shif'less Sol had his grievance, too. "Now that's another o' the ways o'
this here southern country!" he exclaimed in a pained tone, "A big,
hungry, wild animal, tryin' to pass itself off ez, an old dead log. Up in
Kentucky, a good honest bear, or even a sneakin' panther, would be
ashamed to look you in the face after tryin' to play sech a low-down
trick on a man."

"It is certainly a hideous brute," said Paul.

"I'm thinkin' that we'd better build our fire big," said Long Jim. "I
don't want to wake up in the mornin' an' find myself devoured by an
alligator, jest when I wuz about to reach the great town uv New
Or-lee-yuns."

But they were not molested that night by either man or animal, and the
next day, watchful and surcharged with interest, they approached New
Orleans, which was bulking so large to them. The river looped out into a
crescent and narrowed greatly. As they came to the city, the Mississippi
did not seem to them to be more than a third of a mile wide, but they knew
that it was extremely deep.

But there, snugly within the crescent, lay New Orleans, a town enclosed
within palisaded fortifications that faced the levee for about a thousand
yards, and that ran back perhaps half as far. The levee was lined with
vessels. Already New Orleans was famous for shipping, and they saw the
flags of many nations. Schooners there were and brigs and brigantines, and
barks and barkentines, and other craft from Europe and the West Indies and
South America. Near the shore was a great, high ship, from which the red
and yellow flag of Spain fluttered in more than one place, while the
muzzles of cannon protruded from her wooden sides.

"That's an armed galleon," said Paul.

"She's a big ship an' she's got lots o' men on her," said Shif'less Sol,
"but I wouldn't trade our gall-yun fur her."

"No, our boat suits us best," said Henry.

They saw about them on the river many small craft like their own, ships,
boats, canoes, barges, dug-outs, and other kinds, manned by white men, red
men, yellow men, and brown men. They heard strange cries in foreign
tongues, and now and then the sound of a trumpet blown at one of the forts
in the palisaded wall. Officers in brilliant uniforms appeared on the
levee.

The eyes of Long Jim Hart opened wider and wider.

"It shorely is a big town," he said. "Sol, I'd been thinkin' that you an'
Paul wuz tellin' a good deal that ain't, but I reckon it's the truth. The
world has a lot more people than I thought it had. I'm pow'ful glad I
came."

They turned "The Galleon" toward the levee, and an officer in a boat
pulled by four uniformed oarsmen hailed them in Spanish, which none of
them understood.

"Must be a harbor master or something of that kind," said Henry.

They brought "The Galleon" to a stop, and the other boat came alongside.
The officer in the bow was a Catalan, richly dressed, and small, but with
a thin, alert face. He looked at the five with as much curiosity as they
looked at him. Secretly he admired their splendid shoulders and chests,
and their obvious strength. He was acute enough, too, to guess whence
they came. Lieutenant Diego Bernal had not been two years in New Orleans
for nothing.

"You come from Kaintock?" he said in fair and not unfriendly English.

"Yes," replied Henry, "we are all the way from Kentucky, and we have an
important message for the Governor General, Bernardo Galvez. Can you tell
us how to reach him?"

Lieutenant Diego Bernal glanced at "The Galleon," which was obviously of
Spanish build, but he was a shrewd officer who would make his way in the
world and he knew that many strange things passed inspection in this great
Franco-Spanish metropolis of New Orleans.

"His Excellency, the Governor General," he replied, "is now at his house
at the corner of Toulouse street and Rue de la Levee, but it is too late
for you to see him to-day. To-morrow morning you may secure audience with
him if you have the important message that you say."

The five disregarded the ironical tone in his voice. They were good enough
judges of character to surmise that Lieutenant Diego Bernal, whose name
and career were unknown to them, did not care a particle how they had come
into possession of the boat which was so obviously of Spanish build. There
was no advantage to him in asking too many questions, and he calmly waved
them to a landing.

They pulled in and tied their boat to the levee, while men and women,
white, yellow, brown, and black, and all the colors between, stood about
and looked at the giants from Kaintock, where people were reported to be
of such extraordinary size and ferocity, and where they certainly were, as
their own eyes could tell them, of uncommon height and strength, even boys
such as they saw Henry and Paul to be.

While the five were engaged in this task, _rabbais_, or peddling
merchants, some Provencals and some Catalans came to sell them goods,
which they carried in coffin-shaped vehicles pushed before them. They had
wares, mostly small articles from Spain and France and the West Indies.
Colored women carrying immense cans of milk or coffee on their heads
passed by or lingered in hope of a sale. Others were calling for sale
_callas_ and cakes _tous chauds_ in monotonous, drawling voices.
Negresses, also, were trying to sell _belles chandelles_, which were dirty
candles made from green myrtle wax, the chief light then sold in the city.

The five understood the gestures of this rabble, although not their words,
and waved them away, not caring to buy anything.

"Keep cool, Jim! keep cool!" said Shif'less Sol. "Don't shoot. They don't
want to kill you; they jest want to rob you."

"Depends on what they want to rob me uv," replied Long Jim with a grin. "I
never had more'n ten shillin's at one time in my life, an' I've got a
purty strong grip on my rifle an' the clothes that I hev on."

"I think we'd better go ashore an' do a little scoutin'," said Tom Ross.
"It's always well to know the groun' on which you're goin' to act."

"No doubt of it, Tom," said Henry, "and we'll all go together."

They had a little money of English coinage which was taken readily in
cosmopolitan New Orleans, and with two shillings they hired a levee
watchman, whom they judged they could trust, to look after "The Galleon."
Then, rifle on shoulder, they entered the fortified city by the gate
called _Chemin des Tchoupitoulas_. Spain, officially at least, was the
friend of the colonies and the enemy of England, and the sentinels at the
gate readily passed them after a few questions.

Here they asked again for the Governor General, Bernardo Galvez, and the
statement of Lieutenant Diego Bernal that he could not be seen was
