
"We can lock them up in the kitchen. If they make trouble, I have a
revolver," whispered Shuffles.

"A revolver! I won't have anything to do with it if you are going to use
pistols," said the alarmed confederate.

"It's only to look at; there will be no occasion to use it," answered
Shuffles, soothingly.

"There will be twelve men, besides the stewards, locked up in the main
cabin."

"That's so."

"How long do you suppose it would take them to break down the bulkhead
between the cabin and the steerage, or to climb up through the
skylight?"

"If they attempt anything of that kind, we can show them the revolver;
that will quiet them."

"You might frighten the parson in that way; but do you suppose men like
Mr. Lowington, Mr. Fluxion, and Peaks, who have been in the navy so
long, will be afraid of a pistol?"

"They won't want to be shot, if they have been in the navy all their
lives."

"Then you mean to shoot them?"

"They will think we do, and it will be all the same."

"I don't know about this business. I'm afraid the pistol might go off,
and hurt somebody."

"I suppose you could raise objections all night," added Shuffles,
contemptuously. "I'm not going to have any man tyrannize over me,
Wilton. I suppose if Lowington wants to pull every fellow's teeth out,
you won't object."

"I'm as much opposed to his tyranny as you are, and I will do anything
that is reasonable; but I want to know whether the water is hot or cold
before I put my fingers into it. What's the use of blundering into an
enterprise, and making a failure of it?"

"I have no idea of making a failure of it. Did you ever know me to make
a failure of anything that I attempted?"

"Yes, I have."

"What?"

"You failed to get elected captain when we first came aboard of the
ship."

"That was only because we had just come on board? the fellows didn't
know me, and I didn't know them. We are better acquainted now, and I am
just as sure of success as though we had already won it," added
Shuffles, confidently. "I don't believe in making failures."

"I don't believe there is more than one chance in ten for you to
succeed," continued the sceptic.

"There isn't more than one chance in ten for us to fail. You are a bird
of evil omen. You have no faith in anything; and if you are going to
croak like this, I don't want you in the Chain," added Shuffles,
petulantly.

"I'm in for it, already; and when I can see my way clearly, I shall be
as strong as you are."

"Then don't croak any more. We must go to work while the fever is on the
fellows, and make up----"

"In the maintop, ahoy!" shouted the master, from the waist.

"On deck!" replied Shuffles.

"Lay down from aloft!"

"Yes, sir."

The conspirators descended, after Shuffles had admonished his shaky
companion to be discreet.

"What are you doing in the top so long?" demanded Foster, the first
master, as the truants reached the sheer-pole.

"Watching the sea, sir," replied Shuffles. "It looks fine from the top."

"When you have done what you are sent aloft for, it is your duty to come
down and report it," added the officer.

Shuffles made no reply, as he probably would have done if he had not had
a heavy operation on his hands, which prevented him from indulging in
any side quarrels.

Except the wheelmen and the lookout, the watch on deck was divided into
little groups, who were quartered in the most comfortable places they
could find, telling stones, or discussing the exciting topic of the day.

"Shuffles, some of our fellows want to see you and Wilton," said Adler,
as the first master went below, to inspect the steerage, at two bells.

"What's up?" demanded the conspirator.

"Don't say anything," added the messenger, as he led the way to the
steerage skylight, under the lee of which Sanborn and Grimme had stowed
themselves away, out of the reach of the stream that was flowing along
the water-ways, and of the spray which was dashing over the weather
bows.

The party from aloft, with the messenger, increased the group to five,
which was the total number of "our fellows" that could be mustered in
the first part of the port watch.

"What's up?" demanded Shuffles, when he had seated himself by the
skylight.

"We intend to pipe to mischief, to-night, Shuffles and we want some help
from you," said Sanborn, in reply.

"We have been robbed of our money, and we are going to have
satisfaction, somehow or other," added Grimme, in explanation. "We are
not going to stand this sort of thing. We must teach Lowington and the
professors that they can't put our noses to the grindstone."

"Exactly so!" exclaimed Shuffles. "And you intend to put them there
yourselves. In other words, you mean to get into some scrape, and be
punished for it, as I was."

"No, we don't. We are going to work man-of-war style. Old Peaks told us
how to do it, when we were on watch last night," replied Grimme.

"Peaks?"

"Yes, he spun us a yarn about man-of-war life, and told us how the men
serve out the officers when they don't behave themselves."

"Peaks told you this--did he?" demanded Shuffles.

"Of course he didn't mean to have us do anything of the kind."

"Well, how did he tell you to serve out the officers?"

"Make them uncomfortable; keep them in a hornet's nest all the time."

"How? How?" asked Shuffles, impatiently.

"Why, if the unpopular officer went forward, a belaying pin was sure to
drop on his head or his feet; a tar can or a paint pot would be upset on
his back; or, if he went below, a cannon ball was liable to roll out of
a shot case upon him. Of course no one ever knew the author of this
mischief."

"Do you propose to play off any of these tricks on Lowington?" demanded
Shuffles.

"We have got a rod in pickle for him," replied Grimme, chuckling.

"What is it?"

"We intend to give him a dose of kerosene oil, to begin with," laughed
Sanborn.

"One of the stewards left his oil can on the fore scuttle ladder, after
the hatch was put on to keep the spray out, and I took possession of
it," added Grimme, hardly able to keep his mirth within the limits of
prudence.

"What are you going to do with it?" asked Shuffles.

"We are going to give Lowington the contents of the can, and then throw
it overboard."

"Indeed! Who is the fellow that has boldness enough to do this thing?"

"I have; and I have volunteered to do the job," answered Grimme, with a
degree of assurance which astonished even Shuffles.

"You dare not do it!"

"I dare, and I will, if the fellows will stand by me. Lowington is
sitting at the table in the professors' cabin, right under the skylight,
reading. One section of the skylight is open, and you can see him, as
plain as day. It's as dark as a pocket on deck, and the officers can't
see you twenty feet off. All I have to do is to pop the oil through the
opening, and get out of the way."

"What then?"

"Why, he will come on deck, and try to find out who did it; but he
can't."

"Perhaps he can."

"No, he can't; only half a dozen of the fellows will know anything about
it, and of course they won't let on."

"Suppose he don't find out. What good will this trick do?"

"The second part of the port watch must follow up the game. Lowington
will come on deck at eight bells, and Monroe, in the starboard watch,
will give him another dose."

"What will that be?"

"Slush the first step of the ladder at the after companion-way, and let
him tumble down stairs," chuckled Grimme.

"Then Lynch will give him some more," said Adler.

"Well, you may break his neck when he tumbles down the ladder. I'll have
nothing to do with any of those tricks," added Shuffles, decidedly. "If
you want to pipe to mischief, I'm with you, but in no such way as that.
Those are little, mean, dirty tricks."

"But they will keep him in hot water all the time, and he will get sick
of being a tyrant over the fellows in less than a week. There are twenty
things we might do to annoy him, which would help to bring him to his
senses. For instance, when the steward carries the coffee into the
professors' cabin, one fellow might engage his attention, while another
drops a lump of salt, a handful of pepper, or a piece of tobacco into
the urn."

"I don't want to hear any more of such low-lived tricks," interposed the
magnificent conspirator. "If you want to pipe to mischief, let us do it
like men."

"What would you do? Fifty of the fellows, at least, will go into
anything to punish Lowington for his tyranny."

"Join the Chain, then," said Shuffles, in a whisper, and with a suitable
parade of mystery.

"The what?"

"The Chain."

The object of the League was duly explained; and before the second part
of the port watch came on deck, three new members had been "toggled."
Greatly to the satisfaction of Shuffles, and to the astonishment of
Wilton, they did not hesitate at the penalty of the obligation, and
seemed to be entirely willing to "fall overboard accidentally" if they
failed to make strong and faithful "links in the Chain."




CHAPTER XIV.

ALL HANDS, REEF TOPSAILS!


Augustus Pelham, the fourth lieutenant of the Young America, was almost
the only malcontent among the officers; the only one who persistently
declined to be reconciled to the new regulation. Others objected to it;
others criticised it, and even regarded the act as tyrannical; but the
good offices of Paul Kendall, who argued the question with them, as he
did with Shuffles, had in a measure conciliated them, and they were at
least disposed to submit gracefully to the order. But Pelham was not of
this number He was above the average age, and, like the chief
conspirator on board, expecting to leave the ship at the end of the
first year, had not exerted himself to the extent of his ability. He had
been first lieutenant and had now fallen to fourth. He was older than
the captain, and it galled him to be subject to one younger than
himself.

He was dissatisfied with his rank, and this had a tendency to make him a
grumbler. It needed only an appearance of tyranny or injustice to array
him in spirit against the authorities of the ship. Shuffles knew his
state of mind, and was prepared to take advantage of it, hoping through
him to gain other discontented spirits in the cabin.

When the first part of the port watch was relieved, the "Chain"
consisted of five links, and the conspirators were well satisfied with
the present success of the enterprise. Each of the new members of the
League was commissioned to obtain a recruit, whose name was given to
him, and he was required to report upon the case, to Shuffles, before
eight bells in the afternoon watch. As a measure of precaution, it was
required that no meetings should be held; that not more than three
members should assemble for business at any one time. The utmost care
and circumspection were urged, and it was agreed that not a word should
be said in the steerage, where it was possible for any of the professors
to overhear it.

The second part of the port watch, with Pelham as officer of the deck,
went on duty at ten o'clock. The wind had been freshening for the last
two hours, and it was now necessary to reduce sail. The royals were
first taken in, and then the top-gallant sails.

"We can't lay this course, sir," said Burchmore, the quartermaster, who
was conning the helm. "The wind is hauling to the eastward."

"Make the course east by north then," replied Pelham, without taking the
trouble to consult the captain or Mr. Fluxion, both of whom were on
deck.

"The wind is north-north-east, sir," reported the quartermaster, a short
time afterwards.

"Keep her east then."

At six bells the wind was north-east, and coming heavier and heavier
every moment. The ship was headed east-south-east, and it was evident
that she still had on more sail than she could easily carry.

"What's the course, Mr. Pelham?" asked Captain Gordon.

"East-south-east, sir," replied Pelham.

"The course given out was east-north-east."

"I have changed it three times within the last hour," answered the
fourth lieutenant, in rather surly tones.

"By whose order?" demanded the captain.

"By no one's order, sir."

"You know the regulation for the officer of the deck. He is not
permitted to alter the course of the ship, unless to avoid some sudden
danger, without informing the captain."

"I had to alter the course, or have the topsails thrown aback," replied
Pelham.

"Very likely it was proper to alter the course; but it was also proper
to inform me, especially when I was on deck."

"Very well, Captain Gordon. I will not alter the course again without
your order," added the fourth lieutenant, stiffly.

"The regulation is not mine, Mr. Pelham," continued the captain,
sternly.

As the wind increased, sail was reduced to topsails and courses, jib and
spanker; but at seven bells even these were found to be too much for
her.

"Captain Gordon, it is coming heavier," said Mr. Fluxion. "I think it
will be necessary to reef."

"I was thinking of that, sir. The wind is north-east, and blowing a
gale."

"You had better call all hands, and do it at once."

"Mr. Pelham, you will call all hands to reef topsails!"

"All hands, sir?"

"Certainly, Mr. Pelham; that was my order," replied the captain, more
sharply than usual, for there was something in the manner of the officer
of the deck which he did not like, and he found it necessary to maintain
the dignity of his position.

Pelham touched his cap; he felt the weight of authority upon him heavier
than ever before. Until recently he had always performed his duty
cheerfully, and was considered a first-rate officer. Since the new
regulation had been put in force, and he had been compelled to deliver
up ten sovereigns in his possession he had been rather disagreeable. In
the cabin he had used some language reflecting upon the principal, and
he was now regarded as a malcontent by the captain, and by those who
still sustained the discipline of the ship.

"Morrison," called he, as he went forward to the waist.

"Here, sir," replied the boatswain, who belonged in this quarter watch;
and there was a boatswain's mate in each of the others.
