cost the family thirty thousand pounds, which we can ill afford to
lose. It was unlucky that she came to luncheon the very day that
Edward and I had settled to dress up as Early Britons, in blue woad,
and dine off earth-nuts in the shrubbery. As we slipped out at the
side door, the yellow chariot drove up to the front. We had doormats
on, as well as powder-blue, but the old lady was terribly shocked, and
drove straight away, and did not return. Nurse says she is my father's
godmother, and has thirty thousand pounds, which she would have
bequeathed to us if we had not offended her. I take the blame
entirely, because I always made the others play as I pleased.

We used to play at all kinds of things--concerts, circuses,
theatricals, and sometimes conjuring. Uncle Patrick had not been to
see us for a long time, when one day we heard that he was coming, and
I made up my mind at once that I would have a perfectly new
entertainment for him.

We like having entertainments for Uncle Patrick, because he is such a
very good audience. He laughs, and cries, and claps, and thumps with
his crutch, and if things go badly, he amuses the rest.

Ever since I can remember anything, I remember an old print, called
"The Happy Family," over our nursery fire-place, and how I used to
wonder at that immovable cat, with sparrows on her back, sitting
between an owl and a magpie. And it was when I saw Edward sitting with
Benjamin the cat, and two sparrows he had brought up by hand,
struggling and laughing because Cocky would push itself, crest first,
under his waistcoat, and come out at the top to kiss him--that an idea
struck me; and I resolved to have a Happy Family for Uncle Patrick,
and to act Showman myself.

Edward can do anything with beasts. He was absolutely necessary as
confederate, but it was possible Lettice might want to show off with
Cocky, and I did not want a girl on the stage, so I said very little
to her. But I told Edward to have in the yard-dog, and practise him in
being happy with the rest of the family pets. Fred, the farm-boy,
promised to look out for an owl. Benjamin, the cat, could have got
mice enough; but he would have eaten them before Edward had had time
to teach him better, so I set a trap. I knew a village-boy with a
magpie, ready tamed.

Bernard, the yard-dog, is a lumbering old fellow, with no tricks. We
have tried. We took him out once, into a snow-drift, with a lantern
round his neck, but he rescued nothing, and lost the lantern--and then
he lost himself, for it was dark.

But he is very handsome and good, and I knew, if I put him in the
middle, he would let anything sit upon him. He would not feel it, or
mind if he did. He takes no notice of Cocky.

Benjamin never quarrels with Cocky, but he dare not forget that Cocky
is there. And Cocky sometimes looks at Benjamin's yellow eyes as if it
were thinking how very easily they would come out. But they are quite
sufficiently happy together for a Happy Family.

The mice gave more trouble than all the rest, so I settled that
Lettice should wind up the mechanical mouse, and run that on as the
curtain rose.




CHAPTER III.

     "Memor esto majorum."

OLD MOTTO.

    "     .     .     .     .

    All my fears are laid aside,
    If I but remember only
    Such as these have lived and died!"

LONGFELLOW.


Do you wish to avoid vexations? Then never have a Happy Family! Mine
were countless.

Fred could not get me an owl. Lettice _did_ want to show off with
Cocky. I had my own way, but she looked sulky and spiteful. I got Tom
Smith's magpie; but I had to have him, too. However, my costume as
Showman was gorgeous, and Edward kept our Happy Family well together.
We arranged that Tom should put Mag on at the left wing, and then run
round behind, and call Mag softly from the right. Then she would hop
across the stage to him, and show off well. Lettice was to let mother
know when the spectators might take their places, and to tell the
gardener when to raise the curtain.

I really think one magpie must be "a sign of sorrow," as nurse says;
but what made Bernard take it into his beautiful foolish head to give
trouble I cannot imagine. He wouldn't lie down, and when he did, it
was with a _grump_ of protest that seemed to forbode failure. However,
he let Cocky scold him and pull his hair, which was a safety-valve for
Cocky. Benjamin dozed with dignity. He knew Cocky wasn't watching for
his yellow eyes.

I don't think Lettice meant mischief when she summoned the spectators,
for time was up. But her warning the curtain to rise when it did was
simple malice and revenge.

I never can forget the catastrophe, but I do not clearly remember how
Tom Smith and I _began_ to quarrel. He was excessively impudent, and
seemed to think we couldn't have had a Happy Family without him and
his chattering senseless magpie.

When I told him to remember he was speaking to a gentleman, he grinned
at me.

"A gentleman? Nay, my sakes! Ye're not civil enough by half. More like
a new policeman, if ye weren't such a Guy Fawkes in that finery."

"Be off," said I, "and take your bird with you."

"What if I won't go?"

"I'll make you!"

"Ye darsen't touch me."

"Daren't I?"

"Ye darsen't."

"I dare."

"Try."

"_Are_ you going?"

"Noa."

I only pushed him. He struck first. He's bigger than me, but he's a
bigger coward, and I'd got him down in the middle of the stage, and
had given him something to bawl about, before I became conscious that
the curtain was up. I only realised it then, because civil, stupid
Fred, arrived at the left wing, panting and gasping--

"Measter Bayard! Here's a young wood-owl for ye."

As he spoke, it escaped him, fluff and feathers flying in the effort,
and squawking, plunging, and fluttering, made wildly for the darkest
corner of the stage, just as Lettice ran on the mechanical mouse in
front.

Bernard rose, and shook off everything, and Cocky went into screaming
hysterics; above which I now heard the thud of Uncle Patrick's crutch,
and the peals upon peals of laughter with which our audience greeted
my long-planned spectacle of a Happy Family!

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Irish uncle is not always nice. He teases and mocks, and has an
uncertain temper. But one goes to him in trouble. I went next morning
to pour out my woes, and defend myself, and complain of the others.

I spoke seriously about Lettice. It is not pleasant for a fellow to
have a sister who grows up peculiar, as I believe Lettice will. Only
the Sunday before, I told her she would be just the sort of woman men
hate, and she said she didn't care; and I said she ought to, for women
were made for men, and the Bible says so; and she said grandmamma said
that every soul was made for GOD and its own final good. She
was in a high-falutin mood, and said she wished she had been
christened Joan instead of Lettice, and that I would be a true Bayard;
and that we could ride about the world together, dressed in armour,
and fighting for the right. And she would say all through the list of
her favourite heroines, and asked me if I minded _their_ being
peculiar, and I said of course not, why should you mind what women do
who don't belong to you? So she said she could not see that; and I
said that was because girls can't see reason; and so we quarrelled,
and I gave her a regular lecture, which I repeated to Uncle Patrick.

He listened quite quietly till my mother came in, and got fidgetty,
and told me not to argue with my uncle. Then he said--

"Ah! let the boy talk, Geraldine, and let me hear what he has to say
for himself. There's a sublime audacity about his notions, I tell ye.
Upon me conscience, I believe he thinks his grandmother was created
for his particular convenience."

That's how he mocks, and I suppose he meant my Irish grandmother. He
thinks there's nobody like her in the wide world, and my father says
she is the handsomest and wittiest old lady in the British Isles. But
I did not mind. I said,

"Well, Uncle Patrick, you're a man, and I believe you agree with me,
though you mock me."

"Agree with ye?" He started up, and pegged about the room. "Faith! if
the life we live is like the globe we inhabit--if it revolves on its
own axis, _and you're that axis_--there's not a flaw in your
philosophy; but IF--Now perish my impetuosity! I've frightened your
dear mother away. May I ask, by the bye, if _she_ has the good fortune
to please ye, since the Maker of all souls made her, for all eternity,
with the particular object of mothering you in this brief patch of
time?"

He had stopped under the portrait--my godfather's portrait. All his
Irish rhodomontade went straight out of my head, and I ran to him.

"Uncle, you know I adore her! But there's one thing she won't do, and,
oh, I wish you would! It's years since she told me never to ask, and
I've been on honour, and I've never even asked nurse; but I don't
think it's wrong to ask you. Who is that man behind you, who looks
such a wonderfully fine fellow? My Godfather Bayard."

I had experienced a shock the night before, but nothing to the shock
of seeing Uncle Patrick's face then, and hearing him sob out his
words, instead of their flowing like a stream.

"Is it possible? Ye don't know? She can't speak of him yet? Poor
Geraldine!"

He controlled himself, and turned to the picture, leaning on his
crutch. I stood by him and gazed too, and I do not think, to save my
life, I could have helped asking--

"Who is he?"

"Your uncle. Our only brother. Oh, Bayard, Bayard!"

"Is he dead?"

He nodded, speechless; but somehow I could not forbear.

"What did he die of?"

"Of unselfishness. He died--for others."

"Then he _was_ a hero? That's what he looks like. I am glad he is my
godfather. Dear Uncle Pat, do tell me all about it."

"Not now--hereafter. Nephew, any man--with the heart of man and not
of a mouse--is more likely than not to behave well at a pinch; but no
man who is habitually selfish can be _sure_ that he will, when the
choice comes sharp between his own life and the lives of others. The
impulse of a supreme moment only focusses the habits and customs of a
man's soul. The supreme moment may never come, but habits and customs
mould us from the cradle to the grave. His were early disciplined by
our dear mother, and he bettered her teaching. Strong for the weak,
wise for the foolish--tender for the hard--gracious for the
surly--good for the evil. Oh, my brother, without fear and without
reproach! Speak across the grave, and tell your sister's son that vice
and cowardice become alike impossible to a man who has never--cradled
in selfishness, and made callous by custom--learned to pamper himself
at the expense of others!"

I waited a little before I asked--

"Were you with him when he died?"

"I was."

"Poor Uncle Patrick! What _did_ you do?"

He pegged away to the sofa, and threw himself on it.

"Played the fool. Broke an arm and a thigh, and damaged my spine,
and--_lived_. Here rest the mortal remains."

And for the next ten minutes, he mocked himself, as he only can.

       *       *       *       *       *

One does not like to be outdone by an uncle, even by such an uncle;
but it is not very easy to learn to live like Godfather Bayard.

Sometimes I wish my grandmother had not brought up her sons to such a
very high pitch, and sometimes I wish my mother had let that unlucky
name become extinct in the family, or that I might adopt my nickname.
One could live up to _Backyard_ easily enough. It seems to suit being
grumpy and tyrannical, and seeing no further than one's own nose, so
well.

But I do try to learn unselfishness; though I sometimes think it would
be quite as easy for the owl to learn to respect the independence of a
mouse, or a cat to be forbearing with a sparrow!

I certainly get on better with the others than I used to do; and I
have some hopes that even my father's godmother is not finally
estranged through my fault.

Uncle Patrick went to call on her whilst he was with us. She is very
fond of "that amusing Irishman with the crutch," as she calls him; and
my father says he'll swear Uncle Patrick entertained her mightily
with my unlucky entertainment, and that she was as pleased as Punch
that her cockatoo was in the thick of it.

I am afraid it is too true; and the idea made me so hot, that if I had
known she was really coming to call on us again, I should certainly
have kept out of the way. But when Uncle Patrick said, "If the yellow
chariot rolls this way again, Bayard, ye need not be pursuing these
archaeological revivals of yours in a too early English costume," I
thought it was only his chaff. But she did come.

I was pegging out the new gardens for the little ones. We were all
there, and when she turned her eye over us (just like a cockatoo), and
said, in a company voice--

     "What a happy little family!"

I could hardly keep my countenance, and I heard Edward choking in
Benjamin's fur, where he had hidden his face.

But Lettice never moved a muscle. She clasped her hands, and put her
head on one side, and said--in _her_ company voice--"But you know
brother Bayard _is_ so good to us now, and _that_ is why we are such A
HAPPY FAMILY."

       *       *       *       *       *


_The present Series of Mrs. Ewing's Works is the only authorized,
complete, and uniform Edition published._

_It will consist of 18 volumes, Small Crown 8vo, at 2s. 6d. per vol.,
issued, as far as possible, in chronological order, and these will
appear at the rate of two volumes every two months, so that the Series
will be completed within 18 months. The device of the cover was
specially designed by a Friend of Mrs. Ewing._

_The following is a list of the books included in the Series--_


1. MELCHIOR'S DREAM, AND OTHER TALES.

2. MRS. OVERTHEWAY'S REMEMBRANCES.

3. OLD-FASHIONED FAIRY-TALES.

4. A FLAT-IRON FOR A FARTHING.

5. THE BROWNIES, AND OTHER TALES.

6. SIX TO SIXTEEN.

7. LOB-LIE-BY-THE-FIRE, AND OTHER TALES.

8. JAN OF THE WINDMILL.

9. VERSES FOR CHILDREN, AND SONGS.

10. THE PEACE EGG--A CHRISTMAS MUMMING PLAY--HINTS FOR PRIVATE
THEATRICALS, &c.

11. A GREAT EMERGENCY, AND OTHER TALES.

12. BROTHERS OF PITY, AND OTHER TALES OF BEASTS AND MEN.

13. WE AND THE WORLD, Part I

14. WE AND THE WORLD, Part II.

15. JACKANAPES--DADDY DARWIN'S DOVECOTE--THE STORY OF A SHORT LIFE.

16. MARY'S MEADOW, AND OTHER TALES OF FIELDS AND FLOWERS.

17. MISCELLANEA, including The Mystery of the Bloody Hand--Wonder
