what she left out, not what she put into the long letters she sent
from India that cut Madam Liberality to the heart.

Darling's husband read all her letters, and he did not like the home
ones to be too tender--as if Darling's mother and sister pitied her.
And he read Darling's letters before they went away by the mail.

From this it came about that the sisters' letters were very
commonplace on the surface. And though Madam Liberality cried when
Darling wrote, "Have swallows built in the summer-house this year?
Have you put my old doll's chest of drawers back in its place since
the room was papered? What colour is the paper?"--the Major only said
that stuff like that was hardly worth the postage to England. And when
Madam Liberality wrote, "The clump of daffodils in your old bed was
enormous this spring. I have not touched it since you left. I made
Mother's birthday wreath out of the flowers in your bed and mine.
Jemima broke the slop-basin of the green and white tea-set to-day. It
was the last piece left. I am trying to forgive her,"--the Major made
no harsher remark than, "A storm in a slop-basin! Your sister is not a
brilliant letter-writer, certainly."

The source of another heart-ache for Madam Liberality was poor Tom. He
was as liberal and hospitable as ever in his own way. He invited his
friends to stay with his mother, and when they and Tom had gone, Madam
Liberality and her mother lived without meat to get the housekeeping
book straight again. Their great difficulty in the matter was the
uncertain nature of Tom's requirements. And when he did write for
money he always wrote in such urgent need that there was no refusing
him if by the art of "doing without" his wants could be supplied.

But Tom had a kindly heart; he sent his sister a gold locket, and
wrote on the box, "For the best and most generous of sisters."

Madam Liberality liked praise, and she dearly liked praise from Tom;
but on this occasion it failed to soothe her. She said curtly, "I
suppose it's not paid for. If we can't afford much, we can afford to
live at our own expense, and not on the knavery or the forbearance of
tradesmen." With which she threw the locket into a box of odds and
ends, and turned the key with some temper.

Years passed, and Madam Liberality was alone. Her mother was dead, and
Tom--poor Tom!--had been found drowned. Darling was still in India,
and the two living boys were in the colonies, farming.

It seemed to be an aggravation of the calamity of Tom's death that he
died, as he had lived, in debt. But, as regards Madam Liberality, it
was not an unmixed evil. It is one of our bitterest pangs when we
survive those we love that with death the opportunity has passed for
being kind to them, though we love them more than ever. By what
earthly effort could Madam Liberality's mother now be pleased, whom so
little had pleased heretofore?

But for poor Tom it was still possible to plan, to economize, to be
liberal--and by these means to pay his debts, and save the fair name
of which he had been as reckless as of everything else which he
possessed.

Madam Liberality had had many a hard struggle to get Tom a birthday
present, but she had never pinched and planned and saved on his behalf
as she did now. There is a limit, however, to the strictest economies.
It would have taken a longer time to finish her labour of love but
for "the other boys." They were good, kind fellows, and having had to
earn daily bread where larks do not fall ready cooked into the mouth,
they knew more of the realities of life than poor Tom had ever
learned. They were prosperous now, and often sent a few pounds to
Madam Liberality "to buy a present with."

"And none of your old 'Liberality' tricks, mind!" George wrote on one
occasion. "Fit yourself thoroughly out in the latest fashions, and do
us credit!"

But it all went to Tom's tailor.

She felt hardly justified in diverting George's money from his
purpose; but she had never told the boys of Tom's debts. There was
something of her old love of doing things without help in this, and
more of her special love for Tom.

It was not from the boys alone that help came to her. Madam
Liberality's godmother died, and left her fifty pounds. In one lump
she had now got enough to finish her work.

The acknowledgments of these last payments came on Tom's birthday.
More and more courteous had grown the tradesmen's letters, and Madam
Liberality felt a foolish pleasure in seeing how respectfully they all
spoke now of "Your lamented brother, Madam!"

The jeweller's bill was the last; and when Madam Liberality tied up
the bundle, she got out Tom's locket and put a bit of his hair into
it, and tied it round her throat, sobbing as she did so, "Oh, Tom, if
you _could_ have lived and been happy in a small way! Your debts are
paid now, my poor boy. I wonder if you know. Oh, Tom, Tom!"

It was her greatest triumph--to have saved Tom's fair name in the
place where he had lived so foolishly and died so sadly.

But the triumphs of childhood cast fewer shadows. There was no one now
to say, "Three cheers for Madam Liberality!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a very cold winter, but Madam Liberality and Jemima, the
maid-of-all-work, were warmer than they had been for several previous
winters, because they kept better fires. Time heals our sorrows in
spite of us, and Madam Liberality was a very cheerful little body now,
and as busy as ever about her Christmas-boxes. Those for her nephews
and nieces were already despatched. "The boys" were married; Madam
Liberality was godmother to several children she had never seen; but
the Benjamin of his aunt's heart was Darling's only child--Tom--though
she had not seen even him.

Madam Liberality was still in the thick of her plans, which were
chiefly to benefit the old people and the well-behaved children of the
village. All the Christmas-boxes were to be "surprises," and Jemima
was in every secret but the one which most concerned her.

Madam Liberality had even some plans for her own benefit. George had
talked of coming home in the summer, and she began to think of saving
up for a new carpet for the drawing-room. Then the last time she went
to the town she saw some curtains of a most artistic pattern, and
particularly cheap. So much good taste for so little money was rare in
provincial shops. By and by she might do without something which would
balance the cost of the curtains. And she had another ambition--to
provide Jemima with black dresses and white muslin aprons for
afternoon wear in addition to her wages, that the outward aspect of
that good soul might be more in accordance than hitherto with her
intrinsic excellence.

She was pondering this when Jemima burst in in her cooking apron,
followed up the passage by the steam of Christmas cakes, and carrying
a letter.

"It's a big one, Miss," said she. "Perhaps it's a Christmas-box,
Miss." And beaming with geniality and kitchen warmth, Jemima returned
to her labours.

Madam Liberality made up her mind about the dresses and aprons; then
she opened her letter.

It announced the death of her cousin, her godmother's husband. It
announced also that, in spite of the closest search for a will, which
he was supposed to have made, this could not be found.

Possibly he had destroyed it, intending to make another. As it was he
had died intestate, and succession not being limited to heirs male,
and Madam Liberality being the eldest child of his nearest
relative--the old childish feeling of its being a dream came over her.

She pinched herself, however, to no purpose. There lay the letter, and
after a second reading Madam Liberality picked up the thread of the
narrative and arrived at the result--she had inherited fifteen
thousand a year.

The first rational idea which came to her was that there was no
difficulty now about getting the curtains; and the second was that
their chief merit was a merit no more. What is the good of a thing
being cheap when one has fifteen thousand a year?

Madam Liberality poked the fire extravagantly, and sat down to think.

The curtains naturally led her to household questions, and those to
that invaluable person, Jemima. That Jemima's wages should be doubled,
trebled, quadrupled, was a thing of course. What post she was to fill
in the new circumstances was another matter. Remembering Podmore, and
recalling the fatigue of dressing herself after her pretty numerous
illnesses. Madam Liberality felt that a lady's-maid would be a comfort
to be most thankful for. But she could not fancy Jemima in that
capacity, or as a housekeeper, or even as head housemaid or cook. She
had lived for years with Jemima herself, but she could not fit her
into a suitable place in the servants' hall.

However, with fifteen thousand a year, Madam Liberality could buy, if
needful, a field, and build a house, and put Jemima into it with a
servant to wait upon her. The really important question was about her
new domestics. Sixteen servants are a heavy responsibility.

Madam Liberality had very high ideas of the parental duties involved in
being the head of a household. She had suffered--more than Jemima--over
Jemima's lack of scruple as to telling lies for good purposes. Now a
footman is a young man who has, no doubt, his own peculiar temptations.
What check could Madam Liberality keep upon him? Possibly she might--under
the strong pressure of moral responsibility--give good general advice to
the footman; but the idea of the butler troubled her.

When one has lived alone in a little house for many years one gets
timid. She put a case to herself. Say that she knew the butler to be
in the habit of stealing the wine, and suspected the gardener of
making a good income by the best of the wall fruit, would she have the
moral courage to be as firm with these important personages as if she
had caught one of the school-children picking and stealing in the
orchard? And if not, would not family prayers be a mockery?

Madam Liberality sighed. Poor dear Tom! He had had his faults
certainly; but how well he would have managed a butler!

This touched the weak point of her good fortune to the core. It had
come too late to heap luxuries about dear "Mother"; too late to open
careers for the boys; too late to give mad frolics and girlish
gaieties to light hearts, such as she and Darling had once had. Ah, if
they could have enjoyed it together years ago!

There remained, however, Madam Liberality's old consolation: one can
be happy in the happiness of others. There were nephews and nieces to
be provided for, and a world so full of poor and struggling folk that
fifteen thousand a year would only go a little way. It was, perhaps,
useful that there had been so many articles lately in the papers about
begging letters, and impostors, and, the evil effects of the
indiscriminate charity of elderly ladies; but the remembrance of them
made Madam Liberality's head ache, and troubled her dreams that
night.

It was well that the next day was Sunday. Face to face with those
greater interests common to the rich and the poor, the living and the
dead, Madam Liberality grew calmer under her new cares and prospects.
It did not need that brief pause by her mother's grave to remind her
how little money can do for us: and the sight of other people
wholesomely recalled how much it can effect. Near the church porch she
was passed by the wife of a retired chandler, who dressed in very fine
silks, and who was accustomed to eye Madam Liberality's old clothes as
she bowed to her more obviously than is consistent with good breeding.
The little lady nodded very kindly in return. With fifteen thousand a
year one can afford to be _quite_ at ease in an old shawl.

The next day was Christmas Eve. Madam Liberality caught herself
thinking that if the legacy had been smaller--say fifty pounds a
year--she would at once have treated herself to certain little
embellishments of the old house, for which she had long been
ambitious. But it would be absurd to buy two or three yards of rosebud
chintz, and tire herself by making covers to two very old
sofa-cushions, when the point to be decided was in which of three
grandly furnished mansions she would first take up her abode. She
ordered a liberal supper, however, which confirmed Jemima in her
secret opinion that the big letter had brought good news.

When, therefore, another letter of similar appearance arrived, Jemima
snatched up the waiter and burst breathlessly in upon Madam
Liberality, leaving the door open-behind her, though it was bitterly
cold and the snow fell fast.

And when Madam Liberality opened this letter she learned that her
cousin's will had been found, and that (as seems to be natural) he had
left his money where it would be associated with more money and kept
well together. His heir was a cousin also, but in the next degree--an
old bachelor, who was already wealthy; and he had left Madam
Liberality five pounds to buy a mourning ring.

It had been said that Madam Liberality was used to disappointment, but
some minutes passed before she quite realized the downfall of her
latest visions. Then the old sofa-cushions resumed their importance,
and she flattened the fire into a more economical shape, and set
vigorously to work to decorate the house with the Christmas
evergreens. She had just finished and gone up-stairs to wash her hands
when the church clock struck three.

It was an old house, and the window of the bedroom went down to the
floor, and had a deep window-seat. Madam Liberality sat down in it and
looked out. She expected some linsey-woolsey by the carrier, to make
Christmas petticoats, and she was glad to see the hooded waggon
ploughing its way through the snow. The goose-pond was firmly frozen,
and everything looked as it had looked years ago, except that the
carrier's young son went before the waggon and a young dog went before
him. They passed slowly out of sight, but Madam Liberality sat on. She
gazed dreamily at the old church, and the trees, and the pond, and
thought of the past; of her mother, and of poor Tom, and of Darling,
and she thought till she fancied that she heard Darling's voice in the
passage below. She got up to go down to Jemima, but as she did so she
heard a footstep on the stairs, and it was not Jemima's tread. It was
too light for the step of any man or woman.

Then the door opened, and on the threshold of Madam Liberality's room
stood a little boy dressed in black, with his little hat pushed back
from the loveliest of baby faces set in long flaxen hair. The
carnation colour of his cheeks was deepened by the frost, and his
bright eyes were brighter from mingled daring and doubt and curiosity,
as he looked leisurely round the room and said in a slow,
high-pitched, and very distinct tone,

"Where are you, Aunt Liberality?"

But, lovely as he was, Madam Liberality ran past him, for another
figure was in the doorway now, also in black, and, with a widow's cap;
and Madam Liberality and Darling fell sobbing into each other's arms.

"This is better than fifteen thousand a year," said Madam Liberality.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not necessary to say much more. The Major had been killed by a
fall from horseback, and Darling came back to live at her old home.
She had a little pension, and the sisters were not parted again.

It would be idle to dwell on Madam Liberality's devotion to her
nephew, or the princely manner in which he accepted her services. That
his pleasure was the object of a new series of plans, and presents,
and surprises, will be readily understood. The curtains were bought,
but the new carpet had to be deferred in consequence of an extravagant
outlay on mechanical toys. When the working of these brought a deeper
tint into his cheeks, and a brighter light into his eyes, Madam
Liberality was quite happy; and when he broke them one after another,
his infatuated aunt believed this to be a precocious development of
manly energies.

The longest lived, if not the favourite, toys with him were the old
set of scallop-shells, with which he never wearied of making feasts,
to which Madam Liberality was never weary of being invited. He had
more plums than had ever sweetened her childhood, and when they sat
together on two footstools by the sofa, and Tom announced the contents
of the dishes in his shrillest voice and lifted the covers, Madam
Liberality would say in a tone of apology,

"It's very odd, Darling, and I'm sure at my time of life it's
disgraceful, but I cannot feel old!"

We could hardly take leave of Madam Liberality in pleasanter
circumstances. Why should we ask whether, for the rest of her life,
she was rich or poor, when we may feel so certain that she was
contented? No doubt she had many another hope and disappointment to
keep life from stagnating.

As a matter of fact she outlived the bachelor cousin, and if he died
intestate she must have been rich after all. Perhaps she was. Perhaps
she never suffered again from insufficient food or warmth. Perhaps the
illnesses of her later years were alleviated by skill and comforts
such as hitherto she had never known. Perhaps Darling and she enjoyed
a sort of second spring in their old age, and went every year to the
Continent, and grew wonderful flowers in the greenhouse, and sent Tom
to Eton, and provided for their nephews and nieces, and built churches
to their mother's memory, and never had to withhold the liberal hand
from helping because it was empty; and so passed by a time of wealth
to the hour of death.

Or perhaps the cousin took good care to bequeath his money where there
was more money for it to stick to. And Madam Liberality pinched out
her little presents as heretofore, and kept herself warm with a hot
bottle when she could not afford a fire, and was too thankful to have
Darling with her when she was ill to want anything else. And perhaps
Darling and she prepared Tom for school, and (like many another
widow's son) he did them credit. And perhaps they were quite happy
with a few common pot-plants in the sunny window, and kept their
mother's memory green by flowers about her grave, and so passed by a
life of small cares and small pleasures to where

     "Divided households re-unite."

Of one thing we may be quite certain. Rich or poor, she was always

MADAM LIBERALITY.




_Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London, & Bungay_.

_The present Series of Mrs. Ewing's Works is the only authorized,
complete, and uniform Edition published_.

_It will consist of 18 volumes, Small Crown 8vo, at 2s. 6d. per vol.,
issued, as far as possible, in chronological order, and these will
appear at the rate of two volumes every two months, so that the Series
will be completed within 18 months. The device of the cover was
specially designed by a Friend of Mrs. Ewing_.

_The following is a list of the books included in the Series_--


1. MELCHIOR'S DREAM, AND OTHER TALES.

2. MRS. OVERTHEWAY'S REMEMBRANCES.

3. OLD-FASHIONED FAIRY TALES.

4. A FLAT IRON FOR A FARTHING.

5. THE BROWNIES, AND OTHER TALES.

6. SIX TO SIXTEEN.

7. LOB LIE-BY-THE-FIRE, AND OTHER TALES.

8. JAN OF THE WINDMILL.

9. VERSES FOR CHILDREN, AND SONGS.

10. THE PEACE EGG--A CHRISTMAS MUMMING
