always trotting, tries to slip between the ranks, which close up to
prevent her escape. Trotting-horse must trot, not run. If she runs when
making her escape she must go back into the ring and try once more to
break away. When she succeeds fairly in getting through the ranks the
player in front of whom she slips becomes "It" and takes the place of
trotting-horse.


=Wood Tennis=

Wood tennis is of the woods, woodsy. Green pine-cones take the place of
balls; hands, of rackets; and branches, of tennis-net. Lay out a regular
tennis-court by scraping the lines in the earth, or outlining the
boundaries with sticks or other convenient materials. Build a net of
branches by sticking the ends in the ground, and collect a number of
smooth, green cones for balls.

Wood tennis must, of necessity, differ somewhat from the regulation
game. Since pine-cones will not bounce and there are no rackets for
striking them, they must be tossed across the net, caught in the hands,
and quickly tossed back. In other respects the rules of the established
game may be used entire or simplified if desired.

[Illustration: WHEN DARKNESS CLOSES IN]


=Around the Camp-Fire=

When darkness creeps through the woods, closing in closer and closer;
when it blots out, one by one, the familiar landmarks and isolates the
little camp in a sea of night, with the mutual wish for nearer
companionship, we gather around the camp-fire, the one light in all the
great darkness. We are grateful for its warmth, as the evenings are
chill, and its cheery blaze and crackle bring a feeling of hominess
and comfort welcome to every one. If there are men in the party they
light their pipes and then begin the stories of past experiences on the
trail, which are of the keenest interest to all campers. These stories,
told while one gazes dreamily into the glowing coals of the fire or
looks beyond the light into the mysterious blackness of the forest, have
a charm that is wanting under different surroundings. The stories are
not confined to the men, for in these days when girls and women are also
on the trail, they too can relate things worth the telling.


=Songs=

Then come the songs. If there is some one in the party who can lead in
singing, she can use a familiar air with a rousing chorus as a frame
upon which to hang impromptu verses, made up of personalities and local
hits. This is always fun and you are surprised how quickly doggerel
rhymes suggest themselves when your turn comes to furnish a verse to the
song.

The leader begins something like this, using, perhaps, the air and
refrain of an old chantey or college song.

                  _Leader_
           "I spotted a beaver,
            But he wasn't very nye."

                  _Chorus_
           "Don't you rock so hard!"

               _Second Soloist_
           "His fur was all ragged
            And he had but one eye."

                  _Chorus_
           "Don't you rock so hard.
          Oh! You rock and I rock, and
            Don't you rock so hard!
          Everybody rocks when I rock, and
            Don't you rock so hard."

                  _Third Soloist_
           "You may laugh at the beaver,
            But he's always up to time."

                  _Chorus_
           "Don't you rock so hard!"

              _Fourth Soloist_
           "Oh, do drop the beaver,
            And start a new rhyme."

              _Chorus as before_

A song like this may go on indefinitely or until the rhyming powers of
the party are exhausted.


=Bird-Call Match=

In a camp where the members are all familiar with the calls of the
various wild birds, a bird-call match makes a charming game when the
party is gathered around the camp-fire. The leader begins by whistling
or singing the call of a wild bird; if it can be put into words so much
the better. For instance, we will take the first few notes of the
wood-thrush, which F. Schuyler Mathews has put into notes and words as
follows:

[Illustration: Music: Come to me, I am here.

Wood-thrush.]

Or the yellow-throated vireo, which he gives in this way:

[Illustration: Music: See me! I'm here, Where are you?

Yellow vireo.]

If the leader is correct the next player gives the call of another bird.
When a player gives a bird call which is known to be incorrect--that is,
absolutely wrong--and some one else can supply the proper rendering, the
first player is dropped from the game just as a person is dropped out of
a spelling-match when she misspells a word. If there is no one who can
give the call correctly, she retains her place. This is excellent
training in woodcraft as well as a fascinating game. Your ears will be
quickened to hear and to identify the bird calls by playing it; and
storing bird notes in your memory for use in the next bird-call match
will become a habit.


=Vary the Game=

You can vary this game by giving the calls of wild animals and the
characteristic noises they make when frightened or angry.

Living even for a short time in the wild will develop unsuspected
faculties and qualities in your make-up, and to perfect yourself in
knowledge of the woods and its inhabitants will seem of the utmost
importance. While learning the cries of birds and animals in sport, you
will wish to retain them in earnest, and to enter the wilderness
equipped with some knowledge of its languages, will open vistas to you
that the more ignorant cannot penetrate.


=Lighting the Fire Without a Match=

A fire-lighting contest is the best of camp sports, for it requires
practise and skill, and to excel in it is to acquire distinction among
all outdoor people. There are girls in the Girl Pioneers Organization
who are as proficient in lighting a fire without matches as any of the
Boy Scouts who make much of the feat.


=Bow-and-Drill Method=

The bow-and-drill method is the most popular among girls and boys alike,
and for this, as for all other ways of lighting a fire, you must have
the proper appliances and will probably have to make them yourself.

Unlike the bow used for archery, the fire-bow is not to be bent by the
bow-string but must have a permanent curve. Choose a piece of sapling
about eighteen or twenty inches long which curves evenly; cut a notch
around it at each end and at the notched places attach a string of
rawhide of the kind used as shoe-strings in hunting-shoes. Tie the
bow-string to the bow in the manner shown in Fig. 75, and allow it to
hang loosely. It must _not_ be taut as for archery.

[Illustration: MAKE THE BOW-STRING SLACK

77

75

76

Fire without matches.]


To the bow must be added the twirling-stick and fireboard (Fig. 76).
Make these of spruce. The twirling-stick, spindle, or fire-drill should
be a little over half an inch in diameter and sixteen inches long. Its
sides may be rounded or bevelled in six or seven flat spaces like a
lead-pencil, as shown in Fig. 76. Cut the top end to a blunt point and
sharpen the bottom end as you would a lead-pencil, leaving the lead
blunt. To hold the spindle you must have something to protect your hand.
A piece of soapstone or a piece of very hard wood will answer. This is
called the socket-block. In the wood or stone make a hole for a socket
that will hold the top end of the spindle (Fig. 76).

The flat piece of spruce for your fireboard should be about two feet
long and a little less than one inch thick. Cut a number of triangular
notches in one edge of the board as in Fig. 76. Make the outer end of
each notch about half an inch wide, and at the inner end make a small,
cup-like hole large enough to hold the lower end of the twirling-stick.
This is called the fire pit. The reason you are to have so many notches
is because when one hole becomes too much enlarged by the drilling of
the twirling-stick, or is bored all the way through, it is discarded and
there must be others ready and prepared for immediate use.


=Tinder=

All is now ready for creating a spark, but that spark cannot live alone,
it must have something it can ignite before there will be a flame. What
is wanted is tinder, and tinder can be made of various materials, all of
which must be _absolutely dry_. Here is one receipt for making tinder
given by Daniel C. Beard: "The tinder is composed of baked and blackened
cotton and linen rags. The best way to prepare these rags is to bake
them until they are dry as dust, then place them on the hearth and touch
a match to them. As soon as they burst into flame, smother the flame
with a folded newspaper, then carefully put your punk (baked and charred
rags) into a tin tobacco box or some other receptacle where it will keep
dry and be ready for use."

This can be prepared at home. In the woods gather some of the dry inner
bark of the cedar, the fine, stringy edges of white or yellow birch, and
dry grasses, and dry them thoroughly at the camp-fire.

Mr. Beard also says: "You can prepare tinder from dry, inflammable woods
or barks by grinding or pounding them between two flat stones. If you
grind up some charcoal (taken from your camp-fire) very fine to mix with
it, this will make it all the more inflammable. A good, safe method to
get a flame from your fine tinder is to wrap up a small amount of it in
the shredded bark of birch or cedar, so that you may hold it in your
hand until it ignites from the embers produced by the saw."

With all your material at hand for starting a fire, make one turn around
the spindle, with the bow-string, as in Fig. 76. Place the point of the
lower end of the spindle in the small hole or "fire pit" at the inside
end of a notch in the fireboard, fit the socket-block on the top end of
the spindle (Fig. 76), and hold it in place with one hand, as shown in
Fig. 77. Grasp one end of the bow with the other hand and saw it back
and forth. This will whirl the spindle rapidly and cause the friction
which makes the heat that produces the spark. When it begins to smoke,
fan it with your hand and light your tinder from the sparks.


=Without the Bow=

Fig. 78 shows a method which is the same as Fig. 77, the only difference
being that the bow is dispensed with, the hands alone being used for
twirling the spindle. While simpler, it is very difficult to put
sufficient force and speed into the work to produce fire, and it is a
very tiresome process. Another way is shown in Fig. 79. It will take two
girls to work in this fashion. The spindle is whirled by pulling the
leather shoe-string back and forth. One girl holds the spindle and
steadies the fireboard while the other does the twirling.

[Illustration: THE RUBBING STICK

80

THE PLOW

78 79

81

SLIT BAMBOO

SAW

Fire without the bow.]


=The Plough=

It is more difficult to produce fire by the plough method than with the
bow, but it can be done. The appliances are simple enough. All you need
is a fireboard in which a groove or gutter has been cut, and a
rubbing-stick to push up and down the gutter (Fig. 80).

Other woods than spruce are used with success for fire-drills and
fireboards, but all must be dry. These are soft maple, cedar, balsam,
tamarack, cottonwood root, and _white_, not pitch, pine.


=Bamboo Fire-Saw=

Part of an old bamboo fishing-rod will supply material for the fire-saw.
Cut off a piece of bamboo about fifteen inches long, split it, and
sharpen the edge of one piece to a knife-like thinness. Lay the other
half down with the curved surface up and cut a slit in it through which
the sharp edge of the saw can be passed. One or two girls can work this.
When there are two, one girl holds the slit bamboo down firmly, while
the other does the sawing (Fig. 81).

Put a little wad of tinder on a dry leaf and arrange it where the
powdered sawdust will fall on it. When the powder becomes sufficiently
hot there will be sparks and these, falling into the tinder, can be
fanned into a flame by waving your hand over it. You will not see the
spark but when smoke arises you will know that it is there. Fan gently,
else you will blow the fire out, and keep on fanning until your flame is
started.




CHAPTER XIV

HAPPY AND SANE SUNDAY IN CAMP


It is a good idea to carefully plan for your Sundays in camp, have every
hour mapped out and never allow the time to drag. Make special effort
and determine that the day shall be the very happiest day of each week,
a day in which every one of the campers will be especially interested
and will look forward to with genuine pleasure.

Sit down quietly and think it all out. You will want the day to differ
from week-days; you will want it filled with the real life, not
half-life, the life only of the physical and mental, but the true,
entire life for each camper; you will want to emphasize this higher,
inner life, which is the spiritual.

To this end, when you arise in the morning, form the resolution that the
day shall be a peaceful, enjoyable one for all the girls. When you take
your morning plunge resolve that not only will you be physically clean,
but you will also be both mentally and spiritually clean; then all
through the day keep in mind that you _can_ rule your thoughts and that
you _will_, for power to do this will be given to you from the source of
all power. Allow not one thought to remain which is not kind, friendly,
cheerful, and peaceful. Should other thoughts intrude be firm and severe
with them, have no mercy on them, talk to those thoughts as you would to
robbers and thieves, tell them to go, _go_, GO, BEGONE, that you have
nothing in common with them and you _command_ them to _go_; then
immediately busy yourself with active work, building the fire, cooking,
tidying up the camp, etc.

Have your Sunday breakfast especially nice, with a few flowers, vines,
leaves, or grasses on the table for a Sunday centrepiece, and keep the
conversation on wholesome, happy topics.

After breakfast is over and the camp in order, with all the campers go
for a short walk to some attractive spot either by the water or inland,
and when the place is reached, having previously selected certain songs
containing cheerful, religious elements, ask the entire camp to join in
the singing. If one of the girls can sing a solo, let her do so, or it
may be that two can sing a duet; then sit quietly while one of the group
reads something helpful, interesting, and beautiful, which will be
verses from the Bible probably, but may be one of Emerson's essays, or
extracts from other thoughtful and helpful writers.

Close the simple exercises with another hymn and return to camp.

In addition to the camp dinner prepare some one dish as a pleasant
surprise for the other girls. When dinner is over, the dishes washed,
and camp again in order, the girls should have one hour of quiet, to
read, write letters, sketch, or lie down and rest. Each camper should
respect the demands of the hour for quiet and rest and _not talk_, but
leave her companions to their own thoughts and occupations. If you
should see your special friend seated off by herself, do not disturb her
during the rest hour; it is each girl's right to remain unmolested at
that time.

When the hour is up, the campers can each pack her portion of the
evening meal, and in a moment's time be ready to hit the trail, or take
the canoe for a paddle to the place previously selected where supper is
to be enjoyed, and if the trip be on land, all may play the observation
game while on the way.


=Observation Game=

The leader counts 3 to the credit of the girl who first sees a squirrel,
2 for the girl who sees the second one, and 1 for every succeeding
squirrel discovered by any member of the party. A bird counts 6, if
identified 12. A wood-mouse counts 4, when identified 8. A deer 20,
beaver 12, muskrat 8, chipmunk 10, porcupine 14, eagle 30, mink 16,
rabbit 1. The player holding the highest record when reaching the supper
grounds is victor. Keep your records tacked up in your shelter to
compare with those you will make on the following Sunday.

In this game every time a player stumbles on the trail 5 is taken from
her credit; if she falls, she loses 10.

It is a rule of the game that the winner be congratulated by each camper
in turn, that she be crowned with a wreath of leaves, grasses, or vines
and sit at the head of the table. Keep this game for your Sunday
afternoons and play others during the week.

In the evening, as the campers sit quietly around the camp-fire, if the
camp director will talk to the girls gently and seriously for a little
while on some phase of their real life, the talk will be welcome and
appreciated; then just before retiring all should stand while singing
the good-night song.

It is hardly possible to present Sunday plans for each variety of camp
