"Right you are, O She-who-must-be-obeyed!"

"Your humble servants, Ma'am!"

Their Captain's suggestion of an evening cricket practice was welcomed
by the team, and approved by Miss Bishop. It was delightfully cool at
seven o'clock; the girls, instead of being languid and half-hearted,
were energetic and enthusiastic, and their play became a different
matter altogether. Winona, who had been decidedly down about the
prospects of the match, began to feel more confidence. Betty's bowling
was improving daily, and Irene, who had been given to blind swiping, was
gaining discretion. If they would continue to make progress at the same
rate, Seaton would have a chance.

"It would be too bad if we lost the last match of the season!" fluttered
Winona. "While I'm your captain I want to break the record."

"All right, old girl! It shall be a kind of Charge of the Light Brigade.
'Theirs but to do or die!' It will probably be a broiling hot day, but
we'll play till we drop!" Betty assured her.

"Only have the Ambulance Corps ready with fans and stretchers to revive
us and bear us from the field!" added Irene, giggling.

"I'll see there's lemonade for you!"

Though to Winona, as Games Captain, "Seaton _v._ Binworth" seemed the
one event worth living for, there were plenty of other interests going
on in the school. Linda Fletcher, the head girl, was arranging a program
for the Parents' Afternoon, the efficient performance of which was, in
her eyes, of infinitely greater public importance than the cricket
match. She also required numerous rehearsals, and the conflicting claims
on the girls' time became so confusing that after one or two struggles
between rival "whips," who contended hotly for possession, the chiefs
were obliged to strike a bargain, Winona releasing two members of the
team in order that they might act, and filling up their places from her
reserve, while Linda undertook to leave the rest of the eleven out of
her calculations. After this there was peace, and Violet Agnew and
Averil Walmer, who had been secretly burning to distinguish themselves
in the dramatic line in preference to athletics, could meet Winona with
clear consciences.

Among other items of the program, Linda had fixed upon a French Pastoral
Play, which was to be acted in the garden among the trees and lilac
bushes. The girls were really supposed to get up the whole of the
little entertainment by themselves, but Mademoiselle was kind in this
instance, and helped to coach them. The scene was to be a Fete
Champetre, and the costumes were to be copied from some of Watteau's
pictures. There were tremendous consultations over them. A dressmaking
Bee was held every afternoon from four to five o'clock in the small
lecture-room, Miss Bishop generously lending her sewing machine for the
purpose. Here a band of willing workers sat and stitched and chattered
and laughed and ate chocolates, while pretty garments grew rapidly under
their fingers. The dresses were only made of cheap materials, and were
hastily put together, but they had a very good effect, for the colors
were gay, and the style, with its panniers and lace frills was charming.
The girls would hardly have managed the cutting out quite unaided, had
not Miss Lever offered her assistance. "Dollikins" had large experience
in the preparation of school theatricals, and possessed many invaluable
paper patterns, so she was given a royal welcome, and installed at the
table with the biggest and sharpest pair of scissors at her disposal.

On the afternoon fixed for the entertainment quite a goodly audience
assembled to watch and applaud. Mothers were in the majority, with a
fair number of aunts and elder sisters, and just a sprinkling of
fathers. Forms had been carried into the garden and arranged as an
amateur theater, a flat piece of lawn with a background of bushes
serving as stage. The program was to be representative of the whole
school, so the first part was devoted to the performances of the
Juniors. Twelve small damsels selected from Forms I. and II. gave a
classic dance. They were dressed in Greek costume with sandals, and wore
chaplets of roses round their hair. They had been carefully trained by
Miss Barbour, the drill mistress, and went through their parts with a
joyousness reminiscent of the Golden Age. The Morris Dance which
followed, rendered by members of Forms III. and IV., though hardly so
graceful, was sprightly and in good time, the fantastic dresses with
their bells and ribbons suiting most of their wearers. It was felt that
the Juniors had distinguished themselves, and "Dollikins," who with Miss
Barbour had worked hard on their behalf, felt almost justified in
bragging of their achievements.

Meantime the Seniors had been making ready, and presently from behind
the bushes tripped forth a charming group of Louis XV. courtiers,
pattering the prettiest of French remarks. Dorrie Pollack as Monsieur le
Duc de Tourville was a model of gallantry in a feathered hat and stiff
ringlets (the result of an agonizing night passed in tight knobby curl
papers!), while Linda, as Madame la Comtesse, quite outdid herself in
the depth of her curtseys, and the distinguished grace with which she
extended her hand for her cavalier to kiss. Nora Wilson tripped over her
sword in her excitement, and Violet Agnew forgot her part, and had to be
prompted by Mademoiselle, who stood with the book behind a bush; but
these were only minor accidents, and on the whole the scene passed off
with flying colors, and greatly impressed the parents and aunts with
the high stage of proficiency in the French language attained by the
pupils of Seaton High School.

Linda was so elated by the success of the afternoon that she sat up long
after she ought to have been in bed that night, writing an account of
the proceedings for the School Magazine. The manuscript, couched in
antique language, was headed:

        "YE SEATON CHRONICLE.

        "Then whereas ye damsels at ye schule had laboured well and
        diligently during many days at ye tasks set them by their
        reverend elders, it seemed good to those that did govern to
        appoint unto them a day to make merry and rejoice. Therefore did
        they choose out certain among them, and arraying them in goodly
        fashion, did charge them to dance, to instruments of music
        before ye face of ye whole assembly of ye damsels, and likewise
        of some of their kindred, ye which were gathered together. Then
        did ye maids with no small skill tread ye dance, clad in fair
        garments with gauds and ornaments of silver upon them, at ye
        sight of which their kindred did raise cries of joy, and did
        further make great ado with clapping of ye hands. And when ye
        little maidens had duly presented their dances before ye
        company, then did ye elder damosels give a goodly masque, being
        decked forth in brave trappings, and speaking cunningly in ye
        tongue of ye fair lande of France, wherein all who heard them
        might well understand. And ye kindred and alle they that were
        gathered together for to look upon them did in kindness and with
        glad hearts commend them, and did of their charity vouchsafe to
        say that ye like had not aforetime been witnessed at ye schule,
        whereat ye maidens rejoiced greatly, as evenso it seemed unto
        them a reward for their diligent labour."

"We shall leave an account of our doings behind us," said Linda to some
of her friends in the Sixth, "for the copies of the School Magazine are
to be bound, and kept in the library for ever and a day. Future
generations of girls will at least see our names and our Form photo, if
they don't know anything else about us."

Winona was living for one event, the match with Binworth. This was not
to take place on the playing grounds of either school, but on a very
superior cricket ground hired for the occasion from a local club.
Winona, as Secretary for Seaton, had made fullest arrangements,
including the presence in the pavilion of a cheery little woman from a
neighboring restaurant, who undertook the purveying of lemonade, ginger
pop, cakes, and any fruit which might be obtainable for the occasion.

Tickets of admission to the ground were issued and distributed
throughout the school, public opinion deeming attendance almost
compulsory. The team were inspected and criticized beforehand almost as
the Roman gladiators used to be reviewed by their patrons. Winona was on
the whole proud of her eleven. Though not up to the lofty standard at
which she had aimed, she felt that they realized a very respectable
degree of merit.

The ground lay a few miles out of the city, and was reached as a rule by
tramcar, but as the ordinary service would be utterly unable to cope
with the large numbers who proposed going, special omnibuses and brakes
had been put on for the occasion to accommodate the school, which turned
out almost in full force to witness the show. Binworth also contributed
its quota of spectators, so the stands of the cricket ground were
rapidly filled.

Winona had a short preliminary talk with Dora Evans, who commanded the
rival team, and as soon as the clock in the pavilion pointed to 2.30 the
Captains stood out to toss.

"Heads!" cried Winona. "It's tails! Your choice!"

"We'll bat, then," decreed Dora.

Winona placed her field at once, and Dora, after a whispered word or two
to her team, selected her first bats. One was a business-like looking
girl who hummed a tune as she came, with ostentatious carelessness; the
other, stout and dark, blinked her eyes nervously. It was manifestly
impossible to judge their capacities beforehand. Betty Carlisle was to
take the first over. She had a high overhand action, and sent the ball
down the pitch at a good pace. Lottie Moir, the dark-haired damsel who
faced the bowling, was cautious. She played the first ball respectfully
back to the bowler. The next, being of good length, she played quietly
to long-off for one. She was evidently not out to take risks, and the
rest of the over she did not attempt to score. Her partner, Meg Perkins,
was a fairly brilliant, but more reckless player. The first ball she
received came down at a good pace, but well on the off-side of the
wicket. A well-timed cut sent it flying to the short boundary for two.
Perhaps the success turned her head a little. The next ball pitched well
to the leg-side; she made a mighty stroke at it, not allowing for the
break, and missed it altogether. Next moment she was walking ruefully
back to the pavilion.

Phyllis Knight, the next bat, was evidently regarded by the Binworth
team as a champion. She was tall, and decidedly athletic looking. Winona
nodded to Irene Swinburne, celebrated for her twisters, and Irene went
on to bowl. Phyllis had a long reach, which she employed successfully in
driving the first ball she received right along the ground into "the
country" for three. Seaton began to look rather glum. The next ball she
stone-walled. Irene was growing desperate. Phyllis was waiting with her
bat slightly raised. "Now if only I can drop the ball just under that
bat, out she goes!" said Irene to herself, and sent the swiftest she
knew how. Phyllis made a slash at it, evidently thinking it a half
volley, but alas! her bails flew, and the Seaton contingent were roaring
"Well bowled!"

None of the rest of the Binworth team approached to Phyllis' standard,
though they played with caution, and their score mounted up steadily. At
the end of their innings sixty was up on the board.

The Binworth Captain now arranged her field, and Winona sent in Bessie
Kirk and Irene Swinburne to face the bowling of Meg Perkins at one end,
and Phyllis Knight at the other. At first things did not go over well
for Seaton. Bessie Kirk fell a victim to Meg's crafty slows. She played
too soon at a short-pitched ball, and spooned a catch to mid-on. Irene
at first scored merrily, but growing foolhardy was clean bowled by
Phyllis Knight, to her huge discomfiture. Betty Carlisle and Maggie
Allesley met with better luck, and the score began to creep up. The
Seaton girls breathed more freely. Audrey Redfern and Lizzie Morris came
up next. Lizzie broke her duck in the first over, and gaining confidence
began to get her eye in, and with Audrey stone-walling with dogged
persistence at the other end, and now and then making a single, the
score reached fifty-three. There were only ten minutes left. Winona
began to grow desperate. She came forth herself now, with a look of
determination on her face. Dora Evans at once rolled the ball to Lottie
Moir. Winona took her block composedly. Lottie might with advantage have
been put on before. Her style, though by no means swift, was most
awkward to play. Winona in the first over did not attempt to score. She
wished to take the measure of her opponent. In the next over her partner
made a single, which brought Winona to the opposite wicket. The first
ball came well on the off-side, and she sent it flying to the boundary
for four. Fifty-eight was now up on the board, and there were only five
minutes left! Perhaps Lottie Moir was tired, or waxed a little careless.
The next ball she sent down was an easy full pitch. Winona waited till
just the right moment, and then, with a fine swing of her bat, sent the
ball clean over the boundary for six. The match was won, and Seaton, in
the ecstasy of victory, was cheering itself hoarse.

"I never thought we'd do it!" murmured Winona to Betty, as they drank
ginger pop together in the pavilion.

"I reckoned our Captain wouldn't fail us!" chuckled Betty delightedly.
"Linda must compose an epic on it for the School Magazine. It beats
Marathon, in my opinion!"

"Well, I'm glad my last match at the old 'High' has been a success,
anyway!"

"Seaton _versus_ Binworth" had taken place on Wednesday, and the school
had scarcely finished exulting over its triumph before another matter
claimed its attention.

On Thursday morning the results of the examination arrived. Miss Bishop
summoned the whole school into the lecture hall to hear the news. She
was looking flushed and excited. She waited a few moments as if to give
extra effect to her words, then announced:

"I have just received the results of the Entrance Examinations from
Dunningham University. Out of twelve candidates who were entered from
this school, ten have satisfied the examiners. Their names stand as
follows in order of merit:

                              FIRST CLASS.

                              Garnet Emerson.

                              SECOND CLASS.

                              Linda Fletcher.
                              Agatha James.
                              Helena Maitland.
                              Freda Long.

                              THIRD CLASS.

                              Mary Payne.
                              Hilda Langley.
                              Winona Woodward.
                              Dorrie Pollack.
                              Estelle Harrison."

Winona heaved an immense sigh of mingled amazement and relief. She had
passed! Actually passed! She--Winona Woodward, whose form record had
never soared above the most modest average. It was an unprecedented and
altogether delightful finale to her school career. For the moment she
could hardly believe that it was true. But Miss Bishop had not finished
her speech; she held up her hand to stop the burst of clapping, and
continued:

"As you are aware, the Governors of the School offered a three years'
scholarship, tenable at Dunningham University, to whichever of the
candidates should head the list, being not lower than second class.
Garnet Emerson, who has secured a First Class, is therefore, at the
desire of the Governors, awarded the scholarship. Now if you like to
clap for her, you may do so!"

That Garnet, her dear Garnet, should have won the coveted scholarship,
put the coping-stone on Winona's glee. She squeezed her friend's hand
afterwards in an ecstasy of congratulation. Garnet said little, so
little that her enthusiastic chum was almost disappointed. Winona,
judging by her own feelings, expected her to be at delirium point.
Beatrice Howell and Olave Parry, the two candidates who had failed,
were receiving condolences with chastened resignation, the rest were in
various stages of jubilee.

That evening, about six o'clock, a small packet was left at Abbey Close,
directed to Miss Winona Woodward. She opened it eagerly. It held a small
jewelers' box containing a beautiful little ring, and was accompanied by
a letter from Garnet.

        "DEAR WIN" (so the letter ran),--"You must have thought
        me slack this morning when you were congratulating me, but the
        fact was I was utterly overwhelmed. I'd hoped and hoped to win
        the scholarship, and then put the idea away, and when I knew my
        good fortune I just felt stunned. It's all owing to you, for if
        you hadn't helped me I could never, never even have passed. I
        don't know how to thank you. Words are quite inadequate. But
        will you believe that I shall never forget your kindness all the
        rest of my life, and will you accept this little ring and wear
        it for my sake? It is a garnet, and belonged to my grandmother,
        after whom I was named. I value it greatly, but I would far
        rather know you have it than keep it myself.

                    "Always your most grateful friend,

                                 "GARNET EMERSON."


There was a further surprise for Winona that evening. When supper was
over, and she and Miss Beach were taking their usual twilight stroll
round the garden, Aunt Harriet, who had been silent for a few minutes,
suddenly spoke.

"I wish to say something to you, Winona. I'm very gratified indeed to
hear that you have passed your college examinations. It has given me a
better opinion of your capacity and perseverance than I possessed
before. This result, combined with your conduct in coaching your friend
through all these weeks, has decided me in a project that I was debating
in my mind. I am going to send you either to a Physical Training College
to qualify as a Games Mistress, or to a Horticultural College to prepare
for a National Rural Economy diploma. Whichever career you decide to
choose, I am resolved that you shall have the best training available."

"Oh, Aunt Harriet! Thank you! Thank you! I don't deserve it!" faltered
Winona.

The end of the term had come at length. The next day was Winona's very
last at Seaton High School. She was loth to leave, for the two years she
had passed there had been the happiest and the fullest in her life. But
though the past had pleasant memories, the future also held out fair
hopes to her. As she entered Miss Bishop's study to say good-by, the
head-mistress looked up kindly.

"I shall miss you, Winona. I have just been turning over your school
record. It's not perhaps brilliant, but it has been persevering, and I
am sure you've done your best. I am particularly pleased that you have
passed your examination. As Games Captain you have been a decided asset
to the school. I think I may safely say that you have justified the
decision of the Governors in allowing you to hold the County
Scholarship. Your aunt tells me that you are to go in either for
Physical Training or Horticulture. Don't decide in a hurry. Get to know
as much as you can about both, and think the matter over. Remember if
ever you want a friend to come to me. Good-by!"

Outside in the playground the Juniors were hanging about rather shyly
and awkwardly. As Winona came from the dressing-room, Daisy James, much
nudged by the others, advanced and thrust a little parcel into her hand.

"It's a present from us Juniors," she said hurriedly. "Please take it!
It's not much--only a birthday book--but we've all written our names in
it, so that you mayn't forget us. You've been so awfully good all the
year in coaching us at hockey and cricket. I don't know what we're going
to do without you when you've gone! Now, girls, are you ready? One, two,
three!"

And the ring of Juniors standing round shouted in one unanimous chorus:
"Three cheers for our Games Captain! Hip-hip-hooray!"




                           _SAVE THE WRAPPER!_


        _If_ you have enjoyed reading about the adventures of the new
        friends you have made in this book and would like to read more
        clean, wholesome stories of their entertaining experiences, turn
        to the book jacket--on the inside of it, a comprehensive list of
        Burt's fine series of carefully selected books for young people
        has been placed for your convenience.

        _Orders for these books, placed with your bookstore or sent to
        the Publishers, will receive prompt attention._

[Illustration]

Princess
Polly Series

By AMY BROOKS

Author of "Dorothy Dainty" series, Etc.
  Stories of Sweet-Tempered, Sunny,
    Lovable Little "Princess Polly."
      For girls 12 to 16 years.
      Each Volume Illustrated.

Cloth Bound

_With Individual Jackets in Colors._

PRICE, 75 CENTS EACH
POSTAGE 10c EXTRA


PRINCESS POLLY
PRINCESS POLLY'S PLAYMATES
PRINCESS POLLY AT SCHOOL
PRINCESS POLLY BY THE SEA
PRINCESS POLLY'S GAY WINTER
PRINCESS POLLY AT PLAY
PRINCESS POLLY AT CLIFFMORE

For sale by all booksellers, or sent on receipt of price by the Publishers

A. L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 E. 23d St., NEW YORK

[Illustration]

The Camp Fire
Girls Series

By HILDEGARD G. FREY


A Series of Outdoor Stories for
Girls 12 to 16 Years.

