      To their haven under the hill;
    But O for the touch of a vanish'd hand,
      And the sound of a voice that is still!

    Break, break, break,
      At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
    But the tender grace of a day that is dead
      Will never come back to me.

TENNYSON




Try to frequent the company of your betters. In books and life, that is
the most wholesome society; learn to admire rightly; the great pleasure
of life is that. Note what great men admired: they admired great things;
narrow spirits admire basely and worship meanly.

THACKERAY




THE BED OF PROCRUSTES


A very tall and strong man, dressed in rich garments, came down to meet
Theseus. On his arms were golden bracelets, and round his neck a collar
of jewels; and he came forward, bowing courteously, and held out both
his hands, and spoke:

"Welcome, fair youth, to these mountains; happy am I to have met you!
For what greater pleasure to a good man than to entertain strangers? But
I see that you are weary. Come up to my castle, and rest yourself
awhile."

"I give you thanks," said Theseus; "but I am in haste to go up the
valley."

"Alas! you have wandered far from the right way, and you cannot reach
your journey's end to-night, for there are many miles of mountain
between you and it, and steep passes, and cliffs dangerous after
nightfall. It is well for you that I met you, for my whole joy is to
find strangers, and to feast them at my castle, and hear tales from them
of foreign lands. Come up with me, and eat the best of venison, and
drink the rich red wine, and sleep upon my famous bed, of which all
travellers say that they never saw the like. For whatsoever the
stature of my guest, however tall or short, that bed fits him to a hair,
and he sleeps on it as he never slept before." And he laid hold on
Theseus' hands, and would not let him go.

[Illustration: NIAGARA FALLS]

Theseus wished to go forwards: but he was ashamed to seem churlish to so
hospitable a man; and he was curious to see that wondrous bed; and
beside, he was hungry and weary: yet he shrank from the man, he knew not
why; for, though his voice was gentle, it was dry and husky like a
toad's; and though his eyes were gentle, they were dull and cold like
stones. But he consented, and went with the man up a glen which led from
the road, under the dark shadow of the cliffs.

And as they went up, the glen grew narrower, and the cliffs higher and
darker, and beneath them a torrent roared, half seen between bare
limestone crags. And around them was neither tree nor bush, while the
snow-blasts swept down the glen, cutting and chilling, till a horror
fell on Theseus as he looked round at that doleful place. And he said at
last: "Your castle stands, it seems, in a dreary region."

"Yes; but once within it, hospitality makes all things cheerful. But who
are these?" and he looked back, and Theseus also; and far below, along
the road which they had left, came a string of laden asses, and
merchants walking by them, watching their ware.

"Ah, poor souls!" said the stranger. "Well for them that I looked back
and saw them! And well for me, too, for I shall have the more guests at
my feast. Wait awhile till I go down and call them, and we will eat and
drink together the livelong night. Happy am I, to whom Heaven sends so
many guests at once!"

And he ran back down the hill, waving his hand and shouting to the
merchants, while Theseus went slowly up the steep pass.

But as he went up he met an aged man, who had been gathering driftwood
in the torrent-bed. He had laid down his faggot in the road, and was
trying to lift it again to his shoulder. And when he saw Theseus, he
called to him and said:

"O fair youth, help me up with my burden, for my limbs are stiff and
weak with years."

Then Theseus lifted the burden on his back. And the old man blessed him,
and then looked earnestly upon him, and said:

"Who are you, fair youth, and wherefore travel you this doleful road?"

"Who I am my parents know; but I travel this doleful road because I have
been invited by a hospitable man, who promises to feast me and to make
me sleep upon I know not what wondrous bed."

Then the old man clapped his hands together and cried:

"Know, fair youth, that you are going to torment and to death, for he
who met you (I will requite your kindness by another) is a robber and a
murderer of men. Whatsoever stranger he meets he entices him hither to
death; and as for this bed of which he speaks, truly it fits all comers,
yet none ever rose alive off it save me."

"Why?" asked Theseus, astonished.

"Because, if a man be too tall for it, he lops his limbs till they be
short enough, and if he be too short, he stretches his limbs till they
be long enough; but me only he spared, seven weary years agone; for I
alone of all fitted his bed exactly, so he spared me, and made me his
slave. And once I was a wealthy merchant, and dwelt in a great city; but
now I hew wood and draw water for him, the torment of all mortal men."

Then Theseus said nothing; but he ground his teeth together.

"Escape, then," said the old man, "for he will have no pity on thy
youth. But yesterday he brought up hither a young man and a maiden, and
fitted them upon his bed; and the young man's hands and feet he cut off,
but the maiden's limbs he stretched until she died, and so both perished
miserably--but I am tired of weeping over the slain. And therefore he is
called Procrustes, the stretcher. Flee from him: yet whither will you
flee? The cliffs are steep, and who can climb them? and there is no
other road."

But Theseus laid his hand upon the old man's mouth, and said: "There is
no need to flee;" and he turned to go down the pass.

"Do not tell him that I have warned you, or he will kill me by some evil
death;" and the old man screamed after him down the glen; but Theseus
strode on in his wrath.

And he said to himself: "This is an ill-ruled land; when shall I have
done ridding it of monsters?" And, as he spoke, Procrustes came up the
hill, and all the merchants with him, smiling and talking gaily. And
when he saw Theseus, he cried: "Ah, fair young guest, have I kept you
too long waiting?"

But Theseus answered: "The man who stretches his guests upon a bed and
hews off their hands and feet, what shall be done to him, when right is
done throughout the land?"

Then Procrustes' countenance changed, and his cheeks grew as green as a
lizard, and he felt for his sword in haste; but Theseus leaped on him,
and cried:

"Is this true, my host, or is it false?" and he clasped Procrustes round
waist and elbow, so that he could not draw his sword.

"Is this true, my host, or is it false!" But Procrustes answered never a
word.

Then Theseus flung him from him, and lifted up his dreadful club; and
before Procrustes could strike him, he had struck and felled him to the
ground.

And once again he struck him; and his evil soul fled forth, squeaking
like a bat into the darkness of a cave.

Then Theseus stripped him of his gold ornaments, and went up to his
house, and found there great wealth and treasure, which he had stolen
from the passers-by. And he called the people of the country, whom
Procrustes had spoiled a long time, and divided the spoil among them,
and went down the mountains, and away.

KINGSLEY: "The Heroes."
(Adapted)




"BOB WHITE"


    I see you, on the zigzag rails,
      You cheery little fellow!
    While purple leaves are whirling down,
      And scarlet, brown, and yellow.
    I hear you when the air is full
      Of snow-down of the thistle;
    All in your speckled jacket trim,
      "Bob White! Bob White!" you whistle.

    Tall amber sheaves, in rustling rows,
      Are nodding there to greet you;
    I know that you are out for play--
      How I should like to meet you!
    Though blithe of voice, so shy you are,
      In this delightful weather;
    What splendid playmates, you and I,
      "Bob White," would make together!

    There, you are gone! but far away
      I hear your whistle falling.
    Ah! maybe it is hide-and-seek,
      And that's why you are calling.
    Along those hazy uplands wide
      We'd be such merry rangers;
    What! silent now, and hidden too!
      "Bob White," don't let's be strangers.

    Perhaps you teach your brood the game,
      In yonder rainbowed thicket,
    While winds are playing with the leaves,
      And softly creeks the cricket.
    "Bob White! Bob White!"--again I hear
      That blithely whistled chorus;
    Why should we not companions be?
      One Father watches o'er us!

GEORGE COOPER




RADISSON AND THE INDIANS


The tribe being assembled and having spread out their customary gifts,
consisting of beaver tails, smoked moose tongues and pemmican, one of
the leading braves arose and said:

"Men who pretend to give us life, do you wish us to die! You know what
beaver is worth and the trouble we have to take it. You call yourselves
our brothers, and yet will not give us what those give who make no such
profession. Accept our gifts, and let us barter, or we will visit you
no more. We have but to travel a hundred leagues and we will encounter
the English, whose offers we have heard."

On the conclusion of this harangue, silence reigned for some moments.
All eyes were turned on the two white traders. Feeling that now or never
was the time to exhibit firmness, Radisson, without rising to his feet,
addressed the whole assemblage in haughty accents.

"Whom dost thou wish I should answer? I have heard a dog bark; when a
man shall speak, he will see I know how to defend my conduct and my
terms. We love our brothers and we deserve their love in return. For
have we not saved them all from the treachery of the English?"

Uttering these words fearlessly, he leaped to his feet and drew a long
hunting-knife from his belt. Seizing by the scalp-lock the chief of the
tribe, who had already adopted him as his son, he asked: "Who art thou?"
To which the chief responded, as was customary: "Thy father."

"Then," cried Radisson, "if that is so, and thou art my father, speak
for me. Thou art the master of my goods; but as for that dog who has
spoken, what is he doing in this company? Let him go to his brothers,
the English, at the head of the Bay. Or he need not travel so far. He
may, if he chooses, see them starving and helpless on yonder island;
answering to my words of command.

"I know how to speak to my Indian father," continued Radisson, "of the
perils of the woods, of the abandonment of his squaws and children, of
the risks of hunger and the peril of death by foes. All these you avoid
by trading with us here. But although I am mightily angry, I will take
pity on this wretch and let him still live. Go," addressing the brave
with his weapon outstretched, "take this as my gift to you, and depart.
When you meet your brothers, the English, tell them my name, and add
that we are soon coming to treat them and their factory yonder as we
have treated this one."

The speaker knew enough of the Indian character, especially in affairs
of trade, to be aware that a point once yielded them is never recovered.
And it is but just to say that the terms he then made of three axes for
a beaver were thereafter adopted, and that his firmness saved the
Company many a cargo of these implements. His harangue produced an
immediate impression upon all save the humiliated brave, who declared
that, if the Assiniboines came hither to barter, he would lie in ambush
and kill them.

The French trader's reply to this was, to the Indian mind, a terrible
one.

"I will myself travel into thy country," said he, "and eat sagamite in
thy grandmother's skull."

While the brave and his small circle of friends were livid with fear and
anger, Radisson ordered three fathoms of tobacco to be distributed;
observing, contemptuously, to the hostile minority that, as for them,
they might go and smoke women's tobacco in the country of the lynxes.
The barter began and, when at nightfall the Indians departed, not a skin
was left amongst them.

BECKLES WILLSON: "The Great Company."




THE BROOK


    I come from haunts of coot and hern,
      I make a sudden sally,
    And sparkle out among the fern,
      To bicker down a valley.

    By thirty hills I hurry down,
      Or slip between the ridges,
    By twenty thorps, a little town,
      And half a hundred bridges.

    Till last by Philip's farm I flow
      To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and men may go,
      But I go on for ever.

    I chatter over stony ways,
      In little sharps and trebles,
    I bubble into eddying bays,
      I babble on the pebbles.

    With many a curve my banks I fret
      By many a field and fallow,
    And many a fairy foreland set
      With willow-weed and mallow.

    I chatter, chatter, as I flow
      To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and men may go,
      But I go on for ever.

    I wind about, and in and out,
      With here a blossom sailing,
