second to take possession of that steamer," said Christy, holding on at
the rail in front of him. "Put fifteen men well armed into each boat,
and send the second engineer with them. Hurry them off, or they may burn
the vessel."

The two boats were soon in the water, though the first lieutenant
wondered that he had not been sent on this important service. The two
officers hurried their crews, and the boats flew on their mission. The
commander felt that it was necessary to keep an eye on the fort, for its
energetic officer was not at all inclined to be idle at the present
exciting time. The Bronx had hardly stopped her screw before the
soldiers were to be seen on the barbette; but the shell with which
the midship gun had been charged sent them all to the casemates in an
instant.

"What is the matter, Captain Passford?" asked the first lieutenant,
as he halted on the deck. "You are as pale as a ghost."

"A ball went through my arm; but it is all right," replied Christy with
a ghastly smile.

He refused to go below, or to permit Dr. Connelly to come to him until
he had attended to the poor fellows who had been wounded on deck.

At the end of a couple of hours, the flames arose from the two bay
steamers which had been alongside the Sphinx, for the second lieutenant
had been ordered to burn them. The smoke was pouring out of the two
smoke-stacks of the steamer. Several boats filled with men pulled to the
shore, landing the crews of the three vessels. In less than another hour
the Sphinx was under way, and soon came alongside the Bronx.

As only one of the broadsides of the gunboat was available in the action
with the fort, the starboard battery was transferred to the captured
vessel. Men enough to handle them were put on board, and Mr. Camden was
put in command of her. It was late in the afternoon when all this work
had been done, and then the Bronx led the way through the Pass, her
mission fully accomplished.

As soon as the steamer was abreast of the fort, the broadside guns
poured the shrapnel into the embrasures and loopholes, though nothing
could be known of the effect of the firing. The muskets were as active
as before. Christy was on the bridge still, for the doctor had dressed
his wound, and he had taken some refreshment.

This time it was discovered that the vigorous commander of the garrison
had dug out some rifle-pits on the top of his works, and his men were
doing effective work with their muskets. Three men had been wounded on
the deck of the Bronx, the third lieutenant being one of them. Christy
shouted to Mr. Flint, ordering him to send the men below, and cease
the use of the broadside guns, for the garrison were on the barbette,
sheltered by their earth-works, where the guns could not reach them,
so high was their position.

With the aid of his speaking trumpet he gave the same order to Mr.
Camden on board of the Sphinx; but he had hardly uttered the command
before his left leg gave way under him, and he sunk to the floor of the
bridge. A ball had struck him in the thigh, and he could feel the blood
flowing down his limb. He grasped the rail of the bridge, and drew
himself up. There he stood like a statue, supporting himself with his
well arm, till the Bronx had passed out of musket-shot range.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the first lieutenant, as he came out from his
shelter. "You are wounded again!"

"I must give up now, I fear," replied Christy feebly; and then he
fainted.

  [Illustration: Christy Receives a Second Wound.--Page 358.]

He was carried to his stateroom by his officers, and the doctor examined
his last wound. He was restored to consciousness, but he looked like
death itself beneath the ruddy brown of his weather-beaten face.

"You will take the command now, Mr. Flint," said he when he saw the
executive officer watching him with the most intense interest. "What do
you think of it, Dr. Connelly?" he asked, turning to the surgeon.

"Severe, but not dangerous," answered the doctor. "The ball did not
touch the bone, but it ploughed deep through the flesh. You were
fortunate in having plenty of meat on your bones."

Dave was the most assiduous of nurses, and had no little skill in
attending to the wants of the sick. The young commander was made
comfortable in a few hours, and Mr. Flint came below to see him at
the end of an hour when he had performed his most pressing duties. He
reported that Mr. Pennant's wound was slight, and did not disable him.
Eight seamen in all had been wounded, and one of them was likely to die
of his injury.

"But we have done our work well, Captain Passford, and I don't believe
that one-half the garrison of that fort are fit for duty at this
moment," added the first lieutenant.

"But that was a splendid fellow who commanded there," continued Christy
with admiration. "If his guns had not been taken away from him, and his
force reduced to a handful of men, we should have had to wait for the
Sphinx to come out of the bay; and it might have been three weeks or a
month before she concluded to do so."

"We have damaged the enemy enough to make it pay, and the steamer and
her cargo will put at least seventy-five thousand dollars into the
pockets of our side in the conflict."

"And by taking the bull by the horns, instead of waiting till the
captain of the Sphinx concluded to take his chances of being captured
in getting to sea, we have made the Bronx available for duty at once in
another quarter, where she can do better work than in chewing her cable
off the bar of Barataria," said the wounded commander, thus satisfying
his conscience that he had done his duty.

The venerable colored man, who had given so much assistance and
information to the third lieutenant on shore, had no desire to leave his
home, and he was landed in the darkness of the evening at a considerable
distance from the fort. Christy had rewarded him handsomely for the
service he had rendered. The men in the first and second cutters had
taken all the cotton in the small steamers, and put it on board of the
Sphinx before they set them on fire. The four guns in the hold had been
hoisted out to make room for the bales, and the vessel had been put in
condition for her voyage.

Early in the evening, the two steamers were standing out into the Gulf
headed to the south-east. In the middle of the afternoon of the next
day, Mr. Flint reported to the flag-officer off Pensacola Bay. The
wounded captain was as comfortable as a young man could be with two
bullet-holes in his limbs. It was the first time he had been wounded so
as to disable him; but he felt that he had faithfully done his duty to
his country, and he was as cheerful as a man in his condition could be.
Dr. Connelly reported that he would not be fit for service again for six
or eight weeks.

Mr. Pennant, the third lieutenant, on account of his wound, which was
not severe enough to render him unfit for ordinary duty, was appointed
prize-master of the Sphinx, with orders to report at New York for
condemnation. A furlough was given to Christy, with a stateroom on board
of the captured steamer. She was fitted out so that she could defend
herself, or even capture any vessel of the enemy within her reach, and
not too strong for her. She was not as fast as the Bronx, but she had
logged over twelve knots on the passage from Barataria Bay, and was
therefore likely to be added to the force of the navy.

Ensign Flint was appointed to the command of the Bronx by the
flag-officer, who had called upon Captain Passford in his stateroom.
Christy had not failed to commend his executive officer in the highest
terms. The commodore suggested that Christy could not be very kindly
disposed towards Captain Battleton of the Vernon, on account of his
decision against him in the matter of his identity.

"On the contrary, I do not see how he could have done otherwise,
commodore, and I have expressed to him my friendly feeling," replied
Christy. "I think he is a devoted and faithful officer, sir."

  [Illustration: Dave Receives his Appointment as Steward.--Page 364.]

"He desires employment on more active duty than the command of a
store-ship, and I am instructed to give him such a position if I have
one at my disposal," added the flag-officer.

"I certainly hope you will do so, sir, if possible."

"I propose to appoint him executive officer of the Bronx."

"I am sure Mr. Flint could not have a better man."

In due time this appointment was made, and Captain Flint, on the
recommendation of Christy, was entirely satisfied to receive him as
his first lieutenant.

"One thing more, Captain Passford," continued the flag-officer; "the
ship's steward of the Mercidita has been very sick for three weeks, and
has applied for a sick-leave. I shall be obliged to transfer Mr. Nawood
of the Bronx to his place."

"I can mention just the right person to take Mr. Nawood's place," said
Christy eagerly.

"You seem to have a man ready for every vacant position. Who is he?"
asked the commodore with a pleasant smile.

"His name is David Davis; but he is not a relative of the president of
the Southern Confederacy, for he is a mulatto. He has rendered very
important service on several occasions, and there is not a truer or
braver man on board of the Bronx, or any other ship of the squadron,"
replied Christy with enthusiasm.

The commodore shook his head, but he looked very good-natured. Christy
narrated the part Dave had taken in the capture of Captain Flanger in
the cabin, and in recovering possession of the Bronx when it was shown
that the officers were rebels. Mr. Flint was sent for. He was quite as
earnest in his plea for the steward as the commander had been, and the
written appointment of Mr. David Davis was in Christy's hands when the
flag-officer took his leave of the wounded commander.

"Dave," said the wounded lieutenant, the next time the steward came into
the room, "no more 'massa,' no more 'moggywompus,' no more 'done do it.'
You know better than to use such expressions, and you are no longer a
'nigger;' you are the ship's steward of the Bronx."

"What's that, Captain Passford?" demanded Dave, opening his eyes like a
pair of saucers.

Christy handed him the appointment just made, and the steward danced
about like a madman. He had expected nothing for his meritorious
service, and he found himself in a position of trust and responsibility.
He expressed his gratitude in the most earnest language, and without
using a single objectionable phrase, for his education was better than
his habit in the use of speech.

Ensign McLinn, who had served on board of the little steamer, but had
recently been on sick leave, was appointed second lieutenant of the
Bronx, while Mr. Camden, outranked by the other officers, remained as
third lieutenant. Christy and Mr. Pennant were transferred to the
Sphinx, with a prize crew; and that same evening the Bronx sailed under
her new commander, with sealed orders, to the eastward.

The Sphinx sailed the next day for New York, and made a tolerably quick
passage. Of course Christy was received with open arms by the family at
Bonnydale, and with a profusion of blushes by Bertha Pembroke, who
happened to be there on a visit. His father and mother looked with
no little anxiety at the pale face of their son, though he was still
cheerful and happy. He had lost a portion of his flesh, and his uniform
hung rather loosely upon him.

He was too feeble from the effects of his wounds, for that in the thigh
had proved to be more severe than the surgeons had indicated, to tell
the exciting story of the escapade of Corny Passford; but when he did
relate it, three weeks later, it thrilled the listeners for three whole
evenings.

"You took the bull by the horns at an opportune moment, my son," said
Captain Passford, Senior. "If you had not done so you would have been in
a rebel prison at this moment. As it is, poor Corny has got back to Fort
Lafayette, with Galvinne and our man-servant, whom I never should have
suspected of being a Confederate officer."

"I don't think I care to go to the Gulf again as the commander of a
vessel," added Christy, who had not changed his mind on this subject.

"Why not, my son?"

"I don't like the responsibility, in the first place, and the
inactivity, in the second. When I am forty or fifty years old, I shall
like a command better. Others seem to look upon me now as a boy, capable
of any sort of quixotism, however prudent I may be, and point at me as
one who has been made a commander of a steamer by influence at court.
There is a vacancy at the present time on board of the Bellevite, for
the second lieutenant will be compelled to resign on account of his
health."

This matter was fully discussed during the next two months; and at the
end of that time the young lieutenant was again in condition for duty.
Both Mr. Camden and Mr. Pennant obtained the appointment of ensign on
the strength of his reports. Christy was as earnest as ever in his
desire to Stand by the Union; he was ordered to the Bellevite as second
lieutenant, and, after three months' absence, went to the Gulf again,
where we shall find him once more, both on sea and shore, Fighting for
the Right.




Lee and Shepard's

  STAR JUVENILES

    With New and Attractive Dies.

MESSRS. LEE AND SHEPARD announce a new edition of this fine line of
  12mo Juveniles, consisting of books by KELLOGG, KINGSTON, BALLANTYNE,
  HEADLEY, and others. Printed on a fine quality of paper, fully
  illustrated, and bound in polished buckram cloth, at $1.00 per volume.
  Liberal discount for quantities.


By ELIJAH KELLOGG.

  Lion Ben of Elm Island.
  Charlie Bell; The Waif of Elm Island.
  The Ark of Elm Island.
  The Boy Farmers of Elm Island.
  The Young Shipbuilders of Elm Island.
  The Hardscrabble of Elm Island.
  Sowed by the Wind; or, The Poor Boy's Fortune.
  Wolf Run; or, The Boys of the Wilderness.
  Brought to the Front; or, The Young Defenders.
  The Mission of Black Rifle; or, On the Trail.
  Forest Glen; or, The Mohawk's Friendship.
  Burning the Hatchet; or, The Young Brave of the Delawares.
  A Strong Arm and a Mother's Blessing.
  The Unseen Hand; or, James Renfew and his Boy Helpers.
  The Live Oak Boys; or, The Adventures of Richard Constable
      Afloat and Ashore.
  Arthur Brown, the Young Captain.
  The Young Deliverers of Pleasant Cove.
  The Cruise of the Casco.
  The Child of the Island Glen.
  John Godsoe's Legacy.
  The Fisher Boys of Pleasant Cove.
  A Stout Heart; or, The Student from Over the Sea.
  A Spark of Genius; or, The College Life of James Trafton.
  The Sophomores of Radcliffe; or, James Trafton and his
      Boston Friends.
  The Whispering Pine; or, The Graduates of Radcliffe.
  The Turning of the Tide; or, Radcliffe Rich and his Patients.
  Winning his Spurs; or, Henry Morton's First Trial.


By P. C. HEADLEY.

  Fight it out on this Line; The Life and Deeds of Gen. U. S.
      Grant.
  Facing the Enemy; The Life of Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman.
  Fighting Phil; The Life of Lieut.-Gen. Philip Henry Sheridan.
  Old Salamander; The Life of Admiral David Glascoe Farragut.
  The Miner Boy and his Monitor; The Career of John Ericsson,
      Engineer.
  Old Stars; The Life of Major-Gen. Ormsby McKnight Mitchel.


By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE.

  Heroes and Martyrs of Invention.
  Vasco da Gama; His Voyages and Adventures.
  Pizarro; His Adventures and Conquests.
  Magellan; or, The First Voyage Round the World.
  Marco Polo; His Travels and Adventures.
  Raleigh; His Voyages and Adventures.
  Drake; The Sea King of Devon.


By CAPT. CHARLES W. HALL.

  Adrift in the Ice Fields.


By DR. ISAAC I. HAYES.

  Cast Away in the Cold; An Old Man's Story of a Young Man's
      Adventures.


By W. H. G. KINGSTON.

  The Adventures of Dick Onslow among the Redskins.
  Ernest Bracebridge; or, School Boy Days.


By JAMES D. McCABE JR.

  Planting the Wilderness; or, The Pioneer Boys.


By DR. C. H. PEARSON.

  The Cabin on the Prairie.
  The Young Pioneers of the Northwest.


By JAMES DE MILLE.

  The Lily and the Cross; A Tale of Acadia.


By F. G. ARMSTRONG.

  The Young Middy; or, The Perilous Adventures of a Boy Officer.


By R. M. BALLANTYNE.

  The Life Boat; A Tale of Our Coast Heroes.


  _Sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of price._

    LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON


_J. T. Trowbridge's Books._


THE TIDE-MILL STORIES

Six Volumes. Handsomely Illustrated. Per Vol., $1.25.

  THE TINKHAM BROTHERS' TIDE-MILL
  PHIL AND HIS FRIENDS
  THE SATIN-WOOD BOX
  THE LITTLE MASTER
  HIS ONE FAULT
  PETER BUDSTONE

  "The more stories Mr. Trowbridge can write, the better for the boys
  of this generation. Flooded as our country is with literature of a
  dime-novel order, we have need of just such safe and interesting
  books as 'The Little Master,' 'Phil and His Friends,' 'Bound in
  Honor,' etc., to put into the hands of our growing boys."--_Living
    Church_.

  "Mr. Trowbridge's humor, his fidelity to nature and story-telling
  power, lose nothing with years, and he stands at the head of those
  who are furnishing a literature for the young, clean and sweet in
  tone, and always of interest and value."--_The Continent_.


SILVER MEDAL STORIES

Six Volumes. Handsomely Illustrated. Per Vol., $1.25.

  THE SILVER MEDAL
  HIS OWN MASTER
  BOUND IN HONOR
  THE POCKET-RIFLE
  THE JOLLY ROVER
  YOUNG JOE AND OTHER BOYS

  "If every boy could read these stories, or have them read to him,
  there would be fewer rogues in the world. Straightforward, honest
  stories, without cant, without moralizing, full of genuine fun and
  hard common sense, they are just the tales that are needed to make
  a young fellow fall in love with simple integrity and fair dealing.
  They are noble contributions to juvenile literature."--_Woman's
  Journal_.

  "Mr. Trowbridge has a good perception of character, which he draws
  with skill; he has abundance of invention, which he never abuses;
  and he has, what so many American writers have not, an easy, graceful
  style, which can be humorous, or pathetic, or poetic."--_R. H.
  Stoddard in N.Y. Mail_.


START IN LIFE STORIES

Four Volumes. Handsomely Illustrated. Per Vol., $1.00.
