great-grandmother was supporting him, and soothing him with gentle
words in French. I could see now how helpless he was. For a bit he
seemed still puzzled and confused; but he clung to her and kissed her
hand, and suffered himself to be led indoors. Then I followed them,
through the window, into the room where the candles were not yet lighted
for economy's sake--the glare of the red sunset bars making everything
dark to me--with a strange sense of gloom.

It would be hard to imagine a stronger contrast than that between my
life in my new home and my life in my home upon the moors. At the
Arkwrights' we lived so essentially with the times. Our politics, on the
whole, were liberal; our theology inclined to be broad; our ideas on
social subjects were reformatory, progressive, experimental. Scientific
subjects were a speciality of the household; and, living in a
manufacturing district, mere neighbourhood kept us with the great
current of mercantile interests. We argued each other into a general
unfixity of opinions; and, full of youthful dreams of golden ages, were
willing to believe this young world--where not yet we, but only our
words could fly--to be but upon the threshold of true civilization.
Above all, life seemed so short, our hands were so full, so over-full of
work, the daylight was not long enough for us, and we grudged meals and
sleep.

How different it was under the shadow of this old Vine! I am very
thankful, now, that I had grace, under the sense of "wasted time," which
was at first so irritating, to hold by my supreme child-duty towards my
aged parents against the mere modern fuss of "work," against what John
Wesley called the "lust of finishing" any labour, and to serve them in
their way rather than in my own. But the change was very great. How we
"pottered" through the days!--with what needless formalities, what
slowness, what indecision! How fatiguing is enforced idleness! How
lengthy were the evening meals, where we sat, trifling with the
vine-leaves under a single dish of fruit, till the gloaming deepened
into gloom!

At fifteen one is very susceptible of impressions; very impatient of
what one is not used to. The very four-post bed in which I slept
oppressed me, and the cracked basin held together for years by the
circular hole in the old-fashioned washstand. The execution-picture only
made me laugh now.

Then, as to the meals. No doubt a great many people eat and drink too
much, as we are beginning to discover. Whether we at the Vicarage did, I
cannot say; but the change to the unsubstantial fare on which very old
people like the Vandaleurs keep the flickering light of life aglow was
very great; and yet in this slow, vegetating existence my appetite soon
died away. The country was flat and damp too; and by and by neuralgia
kept me awake at night, as regularly as the ghost of my
great-grandfather had done in years gone by. But it is strange how
quickly unmarked time slips on. Day after day, week after week ran by,
till a lassitude crept over me in which I felt amazed at former
ambitions, and a certain facility of sympathy, which has been in many
respects an evil, and in many a good to me, seemed to mould me to the
interests of the fading household. And so I lived the life of my
great-grandparents, which was as if science made no strides, and men no
struggles; as if nothing were to be done with the days, but to wear
through them in all patient goodness, loyal to a long-fallen dynasty,
regretful of some ancient virtues and courtesies, tender towards past
beauties and passions, and patient of succeeding sunsets, till this aged
world should crumble to its close.

My great-grandfather came to know me again, though his mind was in a
disordered, dreary condition; from old age, Elspeth said, but it often
recalled what I had heard of the state of his mother's intellect before
her death. The dear little old lady's intellects were quite bright, and,
happily, not only entire, but cultivated. I do not know how people who
think babies and servants are a woman's only legitimate interests would
like to live with women who have either never met with, or long
outlived them. I know how my dear granny's educated mind and sense of
humour helped us over a dozen little domestic difficulties, and broke
the neck of fidgets that seemed almost inevitable at her great age and
in that confined sphere of interests.

I certainly faded in our twilight existence, as if there were some truth
in the strange old theory that very aged people can withdraw vital force
from young companions and live upon it. But every day and hour of my
stay made me love and reverence my great-grandmother more and more, and
be more and more glad that I had come to know her, and perhaps be of
some little service to her.

Indeed, it was my great-grandfather's condition that kept us so much
among the shadows. The old lady had a delightful youthfulness of spirit,
and took an almost wistful pleasure in hearing about our life at the
Arkwrights', as if some ambitious Scotch blood in her would fain have
kept better pace with the currents of the busy world. But when my
grandfather joined us, we had to change the subject. Modern ideas jarred
upon him. And it was seldom that he was not with us. The tender love
between the old couple was very touching.

"It must seem strange to you, my dear, to think of such long lives so
little broken by events," said my great-grandmother. "But your dear
grandfather and I have never been apart for a day since our happy
marriage."

I do not think they were apart for an hour whilst I was with them. He
followed her about the house, if she left him for many minutes, crying,
"Victoire! Victoire!" chiefly from love, but I was sometimes spiteful
enough to think also because he could not amuse himself.

"The master's calling for you again," said Elspeth, with some
impatience, one day when grandmamma was teaching me a bit of dainty
cookery in the kitchen.

"Oh, fly, petite!" she cried to me; "and say that his Majesty has
summoned the Duchess."

Much bewildered, I ran out, and met my great-grandfather on the terrace,
crying, "Victoire! Victoire!" in fretful tones.

"His Majesty has summoned the Duchess, sir," said I, dropping a slight
curtsy, as I generally did on disturbing the old gentleman.

To my astonishment, this seemed quite to content him. He drew in his
elbows, and spread the palms of his hands with a very polite bow,
saying, "Bien, bien;" and after murmuring something else in French,
which I did not catch, but which I fancy was an acknowledgment of the
prior claims of royalty, he folded his hands behind his back and
wandered away down the terrace, as I rushed off to my confectionery
again.

I found that this use of the old fable, which had calmed my
great-grandfather in past days, was no new idea. It was, in fact, a
graceful fiction which deceived nobody, and had been devised by my
great-grandmother out of deference to her husband's prejudices. In the
long years when they were very poor, their poverty was made, not only
tolerable but graceful, by Mrs. Vandaleur's untiring energy, but (though
he wouldn't, or perhaps couldn't, find any occupation by which to add to
their income) the sight of his Victoire, who should have been a duchess,
doing any menial work so distracted him, that my grandmother had to
devise some method to secure herself from his observation when she
washed certain bits of priceless lace which redeemed her old dresses
from commonness, or cooked some delicacy for Mons. le Duc's dinner, or
mended his honourable clothes. Thus Jeanette's old fable came into use;
first in jest, and then as an adopted form for getting rid of my
great-grandfather when he was in the way. It must have astonished a
practical woman like my great-grandmother to find how completely it
satisfied him. But there must have been a time when his helplessness and
impracticability tried her in many ways, before she fairly came to
realize that he never could be changed, and her love fell in with his
humours. On this point he was humoured completely, and never inquired on
what business his deceased Majesty of France required the attendance of
the Duchess that should have been!

To do him justice, if he was a helpless he was a very tender husband.

"He has never said a rude or unkind word to me since we were boy and
girl together," said the little old lady, with tears in her eyes. And
indeed, courtesy implies self-discipline; and even now the old man's
politeness checked his petulance over and over again. He never gave up
the habit of gathering flowers for my grandmother, and such exquisite
contrasts of colour I never saw combined by any other hand. Another
accomplishment of his was also connected with his love of plants.

"It's little enough a man can do about a house the best of times," said
Elspeth, "and the master's just as feckless as a bairn. But he makes a
fine sallet."

I shudder almost as I write the words. How little we thought that my
poor grandfather's one useful gift would have so fatal an ending!

But I must put it down in order. It was the end of many things. Of my
life at The Vine among them, and very nearly of my life in this world
altogether. My great-grandfather made delicious salads. I have heard him
say that he preferred our English habit of mixing ingredients to the
French one of dressing one vegetable by itself; but he said we did not
carry it far enough, we neglected so many useful herbs. And so his
salads were compounded not only of lettuce and cress, and so forth, but
of dandelion, sorrel, and half-a-dozen other field or garden plants.
Sometimes one flavour preponderated, sometimes another, and the sauce
was always good.

Now it is all over it seems to me that I must have been very stupid not
to have paid more attention to the strange flavour in the salad that
day. But I was thinking chiefly of the old lady, who was not very well
(Elspeth had an idea that she had had a very slight "stroke," but how
this was we cannot know now), whilst my grandfather was almost flightily
cheerful. I tasted the salad, and did not eat it, but I was the less
inclined to complain of it as they seemed perfectly satisfied.

Then my grandmother was taken ill. At first we thought it a development
of what we had noticed. Then Mr. Vandaleur became ill also, and we sent
Adolphe in haste for the doctor. At last we found out the truth. The
salad was full of young leaves of monk's-hood. Under what delusion my
poor grandfather had gathered them we never knew. Elspeth and I were
busy with the old lady, and he had made the salad without help from any
one.

From the first the doctor gave us little hope, and they sank rapidly.
Their priest, for whom Adolphe made a second expedition, did not arrive
in time; they were in separate rooms, and Elspeth and I flitted from one
to the other in sad attendance. The dear little old lady sank fast, and
died in the evening.

Then the doctor impressed on us the necessity of keeping her death from
my great-grandfather's knowledge.

"But supposing he asks?" said I.

"Say any soothing thing your ready wit may suggest, my dear young lady.
But the truth, in his present condition, would be a fatal shock."

It haunted me. "Supposing he asks." And late in the evening he did ask!
I was alone with him, and he called me.

"Marguerite, dear child, thou wilt tell me the truth. Why does my wife,
my Victoire, thy grandmother, not come to me?"

Pondering what lie I could tell him, and how, an irresistible impulse
seized me. I bent over him and said:

"Dear sir, the King has summoned the Duchess."

Does the mind regain power as the body fails? My great-grandfather
turned his head, and, as his blue eyes met mine, I could not persuade
myself that he was deceived.

"The will of his Majesty be done," he said faintly but firmly.

The next few moments seemed like years. Had I done wrong? Had it done
him harm? Above all, what did he mean? Were his words part of one last
graceful dream of the dynasty of the white lilies, or was his loyal
submission made now to a Majesty not of France, not even of this world?
It was an intense relief to me when he spoke again.

"Marguerite!"

I knelt by the bedside, and he laid his hand upon my head. An exquisite
smile shone on his face.

"Good child; pauvre petite! His Majesty will call me also, before long.
Is it not so? And then thou shalt rest."

His fine face clouded again with a wandering, troubled look, and his
fingers fumbled the bed-clothes. I saw that he had lost his crucifix in
moving his hand to my head. I gave it him, and he clasped his hands over
it once more, and carrying it to his lips with a smile, closed his eyes
like some good child going to sleep.

And Thou, O King of kings, didst summon him, as the dark faded into
dawn!




CHAPTER XXIX.

HOME AGAIN--HOME NEWS--THE VERY END.


Now it is past it seems like a dream, my life at The Vine, with its sad
end, if indeed that can be justly called a sad end which took away
together, and with little pain, those dear souls whose married life had
not known the parting of a day, and who in death were not (even by a
day) divided.

And so I went back to the moors. I was weak and ill when I started, but
every breath of air on my northward journey seemed to bring me strength.

There are no events in that porter's life, I am convinced. He looked
just the same, and took me and my boxes quite coolly, though I felt
inclined to shake hands with him in my delight. I did cry for very joy
as we toiled up the old sandy hill, and the great moors welcomed me
back. Then came the church, then the Vicarage, with the union-jack out
of my window, and the villagers were at their doors--and I was at home.
Oh, how the dear boys tore me to pieces!

There was no very special news, it seemed. Clement had been very good in
taking my class at school, and had established a cricket club. Jack had
positively found a new fungus, which would probably be named after him.
"Boy's luck," as we all said! Captain Abercrombie had been staying with
an old uncle at a place close by, only about twelve miles off. And he
was constantly driving over. "So very good-natured to the boys," Mr.
Arkwright said. And there was to be a school-children's tea on my
birthday.

My birthday has come and gone, and I am sixteen now. Dear old Eleanor
and I have gone back to our old ways. She had left my side of our room
untouched. It was in talking of our recent parting, and all that has
come and gone in our lives, that the fancy came upon us of writing our
biographies this winter.

And here, in the dear old kitchen, round which the wild wind howls like
music, with the dear boys dreaming at our feet, we bring them to an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

This dusty relic of an old fad had been lying by for more than a year,
when I found it to-day, in emptying a box to send some books in to
Oxford, to Jack.

Eleanor should have had it, for we are parted, after all; but her
husband has more interest in hers, so we each keep our own.

She is married, to George Abercrombie, and I mean to paste the bit out
of the newspaper account of their wedding on to the end of this, as a
sort of last chapter. It would be as long as all the rest put together
if I were to write down all the ups and downs, and ins and outs, that
went before the marriage, and I suppose these things are always very
much alike.

I like him very much, and I am going to stay with them. The wedding was
very pretty. Jack threw shoes to such an extent, that when I went to
change my white ones I couldn't find a complete pair to put on. He says
he meant to pick them up again, but Prince, our new puppy, thought they
were thrown for him, and he never brought them back. Dear boy!

The old uncle helps George, who I believe is his heir, but at present he
sticks to the regiment. It seems so funny that Eleanor should now be
living there, and I here. In her letter to-day she says: "Fancy,
Margery, my having quarrelled with Mrs. Minchin and not known it! She
called on me to-day and solemnly forgave me, whereby I learned that she
had been 'cutting' me for six weeks. When she said, 'No doubt you
thought it very strange, Mrs. Abercrombie, that I never called on your
mother whilst she was with you,' I was obliged to get over it the best
way I could, for I dare not tell her I had never noticed it. I think my
offence was something about calls, and I must be more particular. But
George and I have been sketching at every spare moment this lovely
weather. Oh, Margery dear, I do often feel so thankful to my mother for
having given us plenty of rational interests. I could really imagine
even _our_ quarrelling or getting tired of each other, if we had nothing
but ourselves in common. As it is, you can't tell, till you have a
husband of your own, what a double delight there is in everything we do
together. As to social ups and downs, and not having much money or many
fine dresses, a 'collection' alone makes one almost too indifferent. Do
you remember Mother's saying long ago, that intellectual pleasures have
this in common with the consolations of religion, that they are such as
the world can neither give nor take away?"

THE END.


_Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London & Bungay._




_The present Series of Mrs. Ewing's Works is the only authorized,
complete, and uniform Edition published._

_It will consist of 18 volumes, Small Crown 8vo, at 2s. 6d. per vol.,
issued, as far as possible, in chronological order, and these will
appear at the rate of two volumes every two months, so that the Series
will be completed within 18 months. The device of the cover was
specially designed by a Friend of Mrs. Ewing._

_The following is a list of the books included in the Series--_

   1. MELCHIOR'S DREAM, AND OTHER TALES.

   2. MRS. OVERTHEWAY'S REMEMBRANCES.

   3. OLD-FASHIONED FAIRY-TALES.

   4. A FLAT IRON FOR A FARTHING.

   5. THE BROWNIES, AND OTHER TALES.

   6. SIX TO SIXTEEN.

   7. LOB-LIE-BY-THE-FIRE, AND OTHER TALES.

   8. JAN OF THE WINDMILL.

   9. VERSES FOR CHILDREN, AND SONGS.

  10. THE PEACE EGG--A CHRISTMAS MUMMING PLAY--HINTS FOR PRIVATE
     THEATRICALS, &c.

  11. A GREAT EMERGENCY, AND OTHER TALES.

  12. BROTHERS OF PITY, AND OTHER TALES OF BEASTS AND MEN.

  13. WE AND THE WORLD, Part I.

  14. WE AND THE WORLD, Part II.

  15. JACKANAPES--DADDY DARWIN'S DOVE-COTE--THE STORY OF A SHORT LIFE.

  16. MARY'S MEADOW, AND OTHER TALES OF FIELDS AND FLOWERS.

  17. MISCELLANEA, including The Mystery of the Bloody Hand--Wonder
      Stories--Tales of the Khoja, and other translations.
