The other villain nodded, winked, and leered.

"I'll bet you a horn of brandy," said the first, "that the chap has
either a pocket-book or a snug little hoard of small change, stowed away
amongst his shirts. And if not there, we shall find it in his
pantaloons' pocket."

"But how if he wakes?" said the other.

His companion thrust aside his waistcoat, pointed to the handle of a
dirk, and nodded.

"So be it!" muttered the second villain.

They approached the unconscious David, and, while one pointed the dagger
towards his heart, the other began to search the bundle beneath his
head. Their two faces, grim, wrinkled, and ghastly with guilt and fear,
bent over their victim, looking horribly enough to be mistaken for
fiends, should he suddenly awake. Nay, had the villains glanced aside
into the spring, even they would hardly have known themselves, as
reflected there. But David Swan had never worn a more tranquil aspect,
even when asleep on his mother's breast.

"I must take away the bundle," whispered one.

"If he stirs, I'll strike," muttered the other.

But, at this moment, a dog, scenting along the ground, came in beneath
the maple-trees, and gazed alternately at each of these wicked men, and
then at the quiet sleeper. He then lapped out of the fountain.

"Pshaw!" said one villain. "We can do nothing now. The dog's master must
be close behind."

"Let's take a drink, and be off," said the other.

The man with the dagger thrust back the weapon into his bosom, and drew
forth a pocket-pistol, but not of that kind which kills by a single
discharge. It was a flask of liquor, with a block-tin tumbler screwed
upon the mouth. Each drank a comfortable dram, and left the spot, with
so many jests, and such laughter at their unaccomplished wickedness,
that they might be said to have gone on their way rejoicing. In a few
hours they had forgotten the whole affair, nor once imagined that the
recording angel had written down the crime of murder against their
souls, in letters as durable as eternity. As for David Swan, he still
slept quietly, neither conscious of the shadow of death when it hung
over him, nor of the glow of renewed life when that shadow was
withdrawn.

He slept, but no longer so quietly as at first. An hour's repose had
snatched from his elastic frame the weariness with which many hours of
toil had burthened it. Now he stirred--now moved his lips, without a
sound--now talked in an inward tone to the noonday spectres of his
dream. But a noise of wheels came rattling louder and louder along the
road, until it dashed through the dispersing mist of David's
slumber--and there was the stage-coach. He started up, with all his
ideas about him.

"Hallo, driver! Take a passenger?" shouted he.

"Room on top!" answered the driver.

Up mounted David, and bowled away merrily towards Boston, without so
much as a parting glance at that fountain of dreamlike vicissitude. He
knew not that a phantom of Wealth had thrown a golden hue upon its
waters, nor that one of Love had sighed softly to their murmur, nor that
one of Death had threatened to crimson them with his blood--all, in the
brief hour since he lay down to sleep. Sleeping or waking, we hear not
the airy footsteps of the strange things that almost happen. Does it not
argue a superintending Providence, that, while viewless and unexpected
events thrust themselves continually athwart our path, there should
still be regularity enough in mortal life, to render foresight even
partially available?




LIV. MY KATE.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.--1809-1861.


    She was not as pretty as women I know,
    And yet all your best made of sunshine and snow
    Drop to shade, melt to nought in the long-trodden ways,
    While she's still remember'd on warm and cold days--
              My Kate.

    Her air had a meaning, her movements a grace;
    You turn'd from the fairest to gaze on her face:
    And when you had once seen her forehead and mouth,
    You saw as distinctly her soul and her truth--
              My Kate.

    Such a blue inner light from her eyelids outbroke,
    You look'd at her silence and fancied she spoke:
    When she did, so peculiar yet soft was the tone,
    Though the loudest spoke also, you heard her alone--
              My Kate.

    I doubt if she said to you much that could act
    As a thought or suggestion: she did not attract
    In the sense of the brilliant or wise: I infer
    'Twas her thinking of others, made you think of her--
              My Kate.

    She never found fault with you, never implied
    Your wrong by her right; and yet men at her side
    Grew nobler, girls purer, as through the whole town
    The children were gladder that pull'd at her gown--
              My Kate.

    None knelt at her feet confess'd lovers in thrall;
    They knelt more to God than they used,--that was all;
    If you praised her as charming, some ask'd what you meant,
    But the charm of her presence was felt when she went--
              My Kate.

    The weak and the gentle, the ribald and rude,
    She took as she found them, and did them all good:
    It always was so with her: see what you have!
    She has made the grass greener even here ... with her grave--
              My Kate.

    My dear one!--when thou wast alive with the rest,
    I held thee the sweetest and lov'd thee the best:
    And now thou art dead, shall I not take thy part
    As thy smiles used to do for thyself, my sweet Heart--
              My Kate?




LV. A DEAD ROSE.

MRS. BROWNING.


        O Rose, who dares to name thee?
    No longer roseate now, nor soft nor sweet,
    But pale and hard and dry as stubble wheat,--
      Kept seven years in a drawer, thy titles shame thee.

        The breeze that used to blow thee
    Between the hedgerow thorns, and take away
    An odor up the lane to last all day,--
      If breathing now, unsweeten'd would forego thee.

        The sun that used to smite thee,
    And mix his glory in thy gorgeous urn
    Till beam appear'd to bloom, and flower to burn,--
      If shining now, with not a hue would light thee.

        The dew that used to wet thee,
    And, white first, grow incarnadined because
    It lay upon thee where the crimson was,--
      If dropping now, would darken where it met thee.

        The fly that 'lit upon thee
    To stretch the tendrils of its tiny feet
    Along thy leafs pure edges after heat,--
      If 'lighting now, would coldly overrun thee.

        The bee that once did suck thee,
    And build thy perfumed ambers up his hive,
    And swoon in thee for joy, till scarce alive,--
      If passing now, would blindly overlook thee.

        The heart doth recognize thee,
    Alone, alone! the heart doth smell thee sweet,
    Doth view thee fair, doth judge thee most complete,
      Perceiving all those changes that disguise thee.

        Yes, and the heart doth owe thee
    More love, dead rose, than to any roses bold
    Which Julia wears at dances, smiling cold:--
      Lie still upon this heart which breaks below thee!




LVI. TO THE EVENING WIND.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.--1794-1878.


    Spirit that breathest through my lattice, thou
      That cool'st the twilight of the sultry day,
    Gratefully flows thy freshness round my brow;
      Thou hast been out upon the deep at play,
    Riding all day the wild blue waves till now,
      Roughening their crests, and scattering high their spray,
    And swelling the white sail. I welcome thee
    To the scorch'd land, thou wanderer of the sea.

    Nor I alone;--a thousand bosoms round
      Inhale thee in the fulness of delight;
    And languid forms rise up, and pulses bound
      Livelier at coming of the wind of night;
    And languishing to hear thy grateful sound,
      Lies the vast inland stretch'd beyond the sight.
    Go forth into the gathering shade; go forth,
    God's blessing breathed upon the fainting earth!

    Go, rock the little wood-bird in his nest,
      Curl the still waters, bright with stars, and rouse
    The wide old wood from his majestic rest,
      Summoning from the innumerable boughs
    The strange deep harmonies that haunt his breast;
      Pleasant shall be thy way where meekly bows
    The shutting flower, and darkling waters pass,
    And where the o'er-shadowing branches sweep the grass.

    The faint old man shall lean his silver head
      To feel thee; thou shalt kiss the child asleep,
    And dry the moisten'd curls that overspread
      His temples, while his breathing grows more deep;
    And they who stand about the sick man's bed
      Shall joy to listen to thy distant sweep,
    And softly part his curtains to allow
    Thy visit, grateful to his burning brow.

    Go,--but the circle of eternal change,
      Which is the life of nature, shall restore,
    With sounds and scents from all thy mighty range,
      Thee to thy birthplace of the deep once more;
    Sweet odors in the sea-air, sweet and strange,
      Shall tell the homesick mariner of the shore;
    And, listening to thy murmur, he shall dream
    He hears the rustling leaf and running stream.




LVII.--DEATH OF THE PROTECTOR.[M]

THOMAS CARLYLE.--1795-1881.

_From_ OLIVER CROMWELL'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES.


And so we have now nothing more;--and Oliver has nothing more. His
Speakings, and also his Actings, all his manifold Strugglings, more or
less victorious, to utter the great God's-Message that was in him,--have
here what we call ended. This Summer of 1658, likewise victorious after
struggle, is his last in our World of Time. Thenceforth he enters the
Eternities; and rests upon his arms _there_.

Oliver's look was yet strong; and young for his years, which were
Fifty-nine last April. The "Three-score and ten years," the Psalmist's
limit, which probably was often in Oliver's thoughts and in those of
others there, might have been anticipated for him: Ten Years more of
Life;--which, we may compute, would have given another History to all
the Centuries of England. But it was not to be so, it was to be
otherwise. Oliver's health, as we might observe, was but uncertain in
late times; often "indisposed" the spring before last. His course of
life had not been favorable to health! "A burden too heavy for man!" as
he himself, with a sigh, would sometimes say. Incessant toil;
inconceivable labor, of head and heart and hand; toil, peril, and sorrow
manifold, continued for near Twenty years now, had done their part:
those robust life-energies, it afterwards appeared, had been gradually
eaten out. Like a Tower strong to the eye, but with its foundations
undermined; which has not long to stand; the fall of which, on any
shock, may be sudden.--

The Manzinis and Ducs de Crequi, with their splendors, and
congratulations about Dunkirk, interesting to the street-populations and
general public, had not yet withdrawn, when at Hampton Court there had
begun a private scene, of much deeper and quite opposite interest there.
The Lady Claypole, Oliver's favorite Daughter, a favorite of all the
world, had fallen sick we know not when; lay sick now,--to death, as it
proved. Her disease was of a nature, the painfullest and most harassing
to mind and sense, it is understood, that falls to the lot of a human
creature. Hampton Court we can fancy once more, in those July days, a
house of sorrow; pale Death knocking there, as at the door of the
meanest hut. "She had great sufferings, great exercises of spirit."
Yes:--and in the depths of the old Centuries, we see a pale anxious
Mother, anxious Husband, anxious weeping Sisters, a poor young Frances
weeping anew in her weeds. "For the last fourteen days" his Highness had
been by her bedside at Hampton Court, unable to attend to any public
business whatever. Be still, my Child; trust thou yet in God: in the
waves of the Dark River, there too is He a God of help!--On the 6th day
of August she lay dead; at rest forever. My young, my beautiful, my
brave! She is taken from me; I am left bereaved of her. The Lord giveth,
and the Lord taketh away; blessed be the Name of the Lord!--...

In the same dark days, occurred George Fox's third and last interview
with Oliver.--.... George dates nothing; and his facts everywhere lie
round him like the leather-parings of his old shop: but we judge it may
have been about the time when the Manzinis and the Ducs de Crequi were
parading in their gilt coaches, That George and two Friends "going out
of Town," on a summer day, "two of Hacker's men" had met them,--taken
them, brought them to the Mews. "Prisoners there awhile:"--but the
Lord's power was over Hacker's men; they had to let us go. Whereupon:

"The same day, taking boat I went down" (_up_) "to Kingston, and from
thence to Hampton Court, to speak with the Protector about the
Sufferings of Friends. I met him riding into Hampton-Court Park; and
before I came to him, as he rode at the head of his Lifeguard, I saw and
felt a waft" (_whiff_) "of death go forth against him."----Or in favor
of him, George? His life, if thou knew it, has not been a merry thing
for this man, now or heretofore! I fancy he has been looking, this long
while, to give it up, whenever the Commander-in-Chief required. To quit
his laborious sentry-post; honorably lay-up his arms, and be gone to his
rest:--all Eternity to rest in, O George! Was thy own life merry, for
example, in the hollow of the tree; clad permanently in leather? And
does kingly purple, and governing refractory worlds instead of stitching
coarse shoes, make it merrier? The waft of death is not against _him_, I
think,--perhaps against thee, and me, and others, O George, when the
Nell-Gwynn Defender and Two Centuries of all-victorious Cant have come
in upon us! My unfortunate George----"a waft of death go forth against
him; and when I came to him, he looked like a dead man. After I had laid
the Sufferings of Friends before him, and had warned him according as I
was moved to speak to him, he bade me come to his house. So I returned
to Kingston; and, the next day, went up to Hampton Court to speak
farther with him. But when I came, Harvey, who was one that waited on
him, told me the Doctors were not willing that I should speak with him.
So I passed away, and never saw him more."

Friday the 20th of August 1658, this was probably the day on which
George Fox saw Oliver riding into Hampton Park with his Guards, for the
last time. That Friday, as we find, his Highness seemed much better: but
on the morrow a sad change had taken place; feverish symptoms, for which
the Doctors rigorously prescribed quiet. Saturday to Tuesday the
symptoms continued ever worsening: a kind of tertian ague, "bastard
tertian" as the old Doctors name it; for which it was ordered that his
Highness should return to Whitehall, as to a more favorable air in that
complaint. On Tuesday accordingly he quitted Hampton Court;--never to
see it more.

"His time was come," says Harvey; "and neither prayers nor tears could
prevail with God to lengthen out his life and continue him longer to us.
Prayers abundantly and incessantly poured out on his behalf, both
publicly and privately, as was observed, in a more than ordinary way.
Besides many a secret sigh,--secret and unheard by men, yet like the cry
of Moses, more loud, and strongly laying hold on God, than many spoken
supplications. All which,--the hearts of God's People being thus
mightily stirred up,--did seem to beget confidence in some, and hopes in
all; yea some thoughts in himself, that God would restore him."

"Prayers public and private:" they are worth imagining to ourselves.
Meetings of Preachers, Chaplains, and Godly Persons; "Owen, Goodwin,
Sterry, with a company of others, in an adjoining room"; in Whitehall,
and elsewhere over religious London and England, fervent outpourings of
many a loyal heart. For there were hearts to whom the nobleness of this
man was known; and his worth to the Puritan Cause was evident.
Prayers,--strange enough to us; in a dialect fallen obsolete, forgotten
now. Authentic wrestlings of ancient Human Souls,--who were alive then,
with their affections, awestruck pieties; with their Human Wishes, risen
to be _transcendent_, hoping to prevail with the Inexorable. All
swallowed now in the depths of dark Time; which is full of such, since
the beginning!--Truly it is a great scene of World-History, this in old
Whitehall: Oliver Cromwell drawing nigh to his end. The exit of Oliver
Cromwell and of English Puritanism; a great Light, one of our few
authentic Solar Luminaries, going down now amid the clouds of Death.
Like the setting of a great victorious Summer Sun; its course now
finished. "_So stirbt ein Held_," says Schiller, "So dies a Hero! Sight
worthy to be worshipped!"--He died, this Hero Oliver, in Resignation to
God; as the Brave have all done. "We could not be more desirous he
should abide," says the pious Harvey, "than he was content and willing
to be gone." The struggle lasted, amid hope and fear, for ten days....

On Monday August 30th, there roared and howled all day a mighty storm of
wind.... It was on this stormy Monday, while rocking winds, heard in the
sickroom and everywhere, were piping aloud, that Thurloe and an Official
person entered to enquire, Who, in case of the worst, was to be his
Highness's Successor? The Successor is named in a sealed Paper already
drawn-up, above a year ago, at Hampton Court; now lying in such and such
a place. The Paper was sent for, searched for; it could never be found.
Richard's is the name understood to have been written in that Paper: not
a good name; but in fact one does not know. In ten years' time, had ten
years more been granted, Richard might have become a fitter man; might
have been cancelled, if palpably unfit. Or perhaps it was Fleetwood's
name,--and the Paper, by certain parties, was stolen? None knows. On the
Thursday night following, "and not till then," his Highness is
understood to have formally named "Richard",--or perhaps it might only
be some heavy-laden "Yes, yes!" spoken, out of the thick death-slumbers,
in answer to Thurloe's _question_ "Richard?" The thing is a little
uncertain. It was, once more, a matter of much moment;--giving color
probably to all the subsequent Centuries of England, this answer!--...

Thursday night the Writer of our old Pamphlet [Harvey] was himself in
attendance on his Highness; and has preserved a trait or two; with which
let us hasten to conclude. Tomorrow is September Third, always kept as a
Thanksgiving day, since the Victories of Dunbar and Worcester. The
wearied one, "that very night before the Lord took him to his
everlasting rest," was heard thus, with oppressed voice, speaking:

"'Truly God is good; indeed He is; He will not'----Then his speech
failed him, but as I apprehended, it was, 'He will not leave me.' This
saying, 'God is good,' he frequently used all along; and would speak it
with much cheerfulness, and fervor of spirit, in the midst of his
pains.--Again he said: 'I would be willing to live to be farther
serviceable to God and His People: but my work is done. Yet God will be
with His People.'

"He was very restless most part of the night, speaking often to himself.
And there being something to drink offered him, he was desired To take
the same, and endeavor to sleep.--Unto which he answered: 'It is not my
design to drink or sleep; but my design is, to make what haste I can to
be gone.'--

"Afterwards, towards morning, he used divers holy expressions, implying
much inward consolation and peace; among the rest he spake some
exceeding self-debasing words, _annihilating_ and judging himself. And
truly it was observed, that a public spirit to God's Cause did breathe
in him,--as in his lifetime, so now to his very last."

When the morrow's sun rose, Oliver was speechless; between three and
four in the afternoon, he lay dead. Friday 3rd September 1658. "The
consternation and astonishment of all people," writes Fauconberg, "are
inexpressible; their hearts seem as if sunk within them. My poor
Wife,--I know not what on earth to do with her. When seemingly quieted,
she bursts out again into a passion that tears her very heart in
pieces."--Husht, poor weeping Mary! Here is a Life-battle right nobly
done. Seest thou not,

    "The storm is changed into a calm,
    At His command and will;
    So that the waves which raged before
    Now quiet are and still!

    "Then are _they_ glad,--because at rest
    And quiet now they be:
    So to the haven He them brings
    Which they desired to see."

"Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord;" blessed are the valiant
that have lived in the Lord. "Amen, saith the Spirit,"--Amen. "They do
rest from their labors, and their works follow them."

"Their works follow them." As, I think, this Oliver Cromwell's works
have done and are still doing! We have had our "Revolutions of
Eighty-eight," officially called "glorious"; and other Revolutions not
yet called glorious; and somewhat has been gained for poor Mankind.
Men's ears are not now slit-off by rash Officiality; Officiality will,
for long henceforth, be more cautious about men's ears. The tyrannous
Star-chambers, branding-irons, chimerical Kings and Surplices at
All-hallowtide, they are gone, or with immense velocity going. Oliver's
works do follow him!--The works of a man, bury them under what
guano-mountains and obscene owl-droppings you will, do not perish,
cannot perish. What of Heroism, what of Eternal Light was in a Man and
his Life, is with very great exactness added to the Eternities; remains
forever a new divine portion of the Sum of Things; and no owl's voice,
this way or that, in the least avails in the matter.--But we have to
end here.

Oliver is gone; and with him England's Puritanism, laboriously built
together by this man, and made a thing far-shining, miraculous to its
own Century, and memorable to all the Centuries, soon goes. Puritanism,
without its King, is _kingless_, anarchic; falls into dislocation,
self-collision; staggers, plunges into ever deeper anarchy; King,
Defender of the Puritan Faith there can now none be found;--and nothing
is left but to recall the old disowned Defender with the remnants of his
Four Surplices, and Two Centuries of _Hypocrisis_ (or Play-acting _not_
so-called), and put-up with all that, the best we may. The Genius of
England no longer soars Sunward, world-defiant, like an Eagle through
the storms, "mewing her mighty youth," as John Milton saw her do: the
Genius of England, much liker a greedy Ostrich intent on provender and a
whole skin mainly, stands with its _other_ extremity Sunward; with its
Ostrich-head stuck into the readiest bush, of old Church-tippets,
King-cloaks, or what other "sheltering Fallacy" there may be, and _so_
awaits the issue. The issue has been slow; but it is now seen to have
been inevitable. No Ostrich, intent on gross terrene provender, and
sticking its head into Fallacies, but will be awakened one day,--in a
terrible _a-posteriori_ manner, if not otherwise!----Awake before it
come to that; gods and men bid us awake! The Voices of our Fathers, with
thousand-fold stern monition to one and all, bid us awake.

FOOTNOTES:

[M] The author's use of capital letters and punctuation marks has
been retained.




LVIII. EACH AND ALL.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.--1803-1882.


    Little thinks, in the field, yon red-cloak'd clown
    Of thee from the hill-top looking down;
    The heifer that lows in the upland farm,
    Far-heard, lows not thine ear to charm;
    The sexton, tolling his bell at noon,
    Deems not that great Napoleon
    Stops his horse, and lists with delight,
    While his files sweep round yon Alpine height;
    Nor knowest thou what argument
    Thy life to thy neighbor's creed has lent.
    All are needed by each one--
    Nothing is fair or good alone.

    I thought the sparrow's note from heaven,
    Singing at dawn on the alder bough;
    I brought him home in his nest, at even,
    He sings the song, but it pleases not now;
    For I did not bring home the river and sky;
    He sang to my ear--they sang to my eye.

    The delicate shells lay on the shore;
    The bubbles of the latest wave
    Fresh pearls to their enamel gave,
    And the bellowing of the savage sea
    Greeted their safe escape to me.
    I wiped away the weeds and foam--
    I fetch'd my sea-born treasures home;
    But the poor unsightly, noisome things
    Had left their beauty on the shore,
    With the sun and the sand, and the wild uproar.

    The lover watch'd his graceful maid,
    As 'mid the virgin train she stray'd;
    Nor knew her beauty's best attire
    Was woven still by the snow-white choir.
    At last she came to his hermitage,
    Like the bird from the woodlands to the cage;
    The gay enchantment was undone--
    A gentle wife, but fairy none.

    Then I said, "I covet truth;
    Beauty is unripe childhoods cheat--
    I leave it behind with the games of youth."
    As I spoke, beneath my feet
    The ground-pine curled its pretty wreath,
    Running over the club-moss burrs;
    I inhaled the violet's breath;
    Around me stood the oaks and firs;
    Pine-cones and acorns lay on the ground;
    Over me soar'd the eternal sky,
    Full of light and of deity;
    Again I saw, again I heard,
    The rolling river, the morning bird;
    Beauty through my senses stole--
    I yielded myself to the perfect whole.




LIX. WATERLOO.

CHARLES JAMES LEVER.--1806-1872.

_From_ CHARLES O'MALLEY.


"This is the officer that I spoke of," said an aid-de-camp, as he rode
up to where I was standing, bare-headed and without a sword. "He has
just made his escape from the French lines, and will be able to give
your lordship some information."

The handsome features and gorgeous costume of Lord Uxbridge were known
