was Henry Norman, who, when he had seen his horse and lunched, entered
the room unperceived by Louis or Mrs. Paget, and passed noiselessly
along to the furthest window, where he sat, with a book, hid by the
curtains from a careless glance. A few words caught his ear as he
was finding out his place; and, whether the matter of the first page
required deep consideration and digestion or not, we cannot pretend
to determine, not knowing the nature of the chosen volume, but it is
certain that that leaf was not turned over that afternoon, and the
eyes that professed to convey its meaning to the mind of the reader
not unfrequently wandered on the hills in the distant prospect, or,
on being recalled, on the nearer objects of Mrs. Paget's sofa--the
skein of silk and the pair of hands, which were the only portions
visible to him of the loquacious little visitor. That he was listening
with interest of an equivocal nature might be gathered from the
frequent, impatient knitting of the brow, biting of the lips, and
sudden laying down of the book altogether; but there he sat till Louis,
having flown off from Hamilton to the general school failings, had
finished relating the history of Frank Digby's memorable Saturday
night's exploit, and concluded by an emphatic delivery of his upright
sentiments on the heinousness of practical jokes. He paused a minute
to take breath, after a Philippic that elicited a small dose of
flattery from Mrs. Paget, and, with a face flushed with satisfaction
and excitement, stooped to pick up a fallen pair of scissors, when
Mrs. Norman, laying down her work looked again at him and uttered a
sound indicative of an intention of speaking. This time Louis was
fully aware of an expression in her countenance far from satisfactory,
but she had not time to express her sentiments, for at this moment
Reginald was announced, and a general move took place. Henry Norman
came forward and welcomed him, and then took him and Louis out on
the Crescent till dinner-time. Here they were joined by some of
Norman's acquaintances, whom he introduced to his visitors. Louis
thought uncomfortably, for a few minutes, of Mrs. Norman's look of
disapprobation; but he persuaded himself that there was nothing meant
by it, and soon became very lively. There was something he did not like
about Norman, who, though perfectly well-bred and attentive, showed a
degree of indifference and disregard to any thing he said or did, that
did not altogether suit Louis' present state of mind. If Louis addressed
him, he listened very politely, but with a slight, sarcastic smile, and
either returned a very short and cool reply, or, if the remark did not
require one, an inclination of the head, and turned immediately to one
of his other companions. Reginald did not much fancy him; but, upon the
whole, they managed to pass the time very pleasantly till they were
summoned to dinner.

Several persons came in in the evening, and Louis was called upon by
Mrs. Paget to sing, "_Where the bee sucks_." This led to other
songs, and Louis attracted the notice of a musical gentleman, who was
much pleased with him, and who gave him a general invitation to his
house. Louis was in the midst of his thanks when Reginald summoned him
to go home, and, in spite of Mrs. Paget's remonstrances and offers of
her carriage, carried his point.

"Well, Louis, how did you get on?" said Reginald, as they were walking
home; "I think you must have been dreadfully bored with holding skeins
and talking fine for Mrs. Paget's edification for two hours at least,
to say nothing of all the stuffing you have had this evening."

"Oh! I have been very happy," said Louis. "Do you know Mr. Fraser has
invited me to his musical parties?"

"I wish you joy, I am sure. What a nice woman Mrs. Norman seems!"

"Yes," said Louis, doubtfully.

"_Yes_--that sounds very much like _no_," said Reginald.

"I did not mean it." Louis recalled her manner lately towards him,
and mentally went over the conversation of the day.

"Well, what's the matter?" asked Reginald.

"I am afraid I have been very foolish; I talk so foolishly sometimes,
Reginald--I said so many foolish things this afternoon. I don't think
Mrs. Norman likes me."

"Rubbish! stuff and nonsense! Just like you, Louis, always imagining
somebody's displeased with you--I won't hear a word more; I have no
patience with you."

"Then you don't think she seemed vexed with me?"

"Not I; and if she were, what's the odds? What difference need she make
in your happiness? What a wretched creature you'll make of yourself,
Louis, if you think so much of the opinion of every one--a person, too,
you may never see again."

Louis was relieved, and talked on other matters with his brother till
they reached home. He was a little annoyed to hear that Hamilton had
expressed considerable vexation at his going with Mrs. Norman before
afternoon school, and this, combined with the excitement and vanity
under which he labored, disturbed considerably the tranquillity of
his slumbers, and prevented his earnestly seeking that aid he so much
needed.




CHAPTER XVIII.

  "A talebearer revealeth secrets; but he that is of a faithful
   spirit concealeth the matter."--Prov. xi. 13.

  "He that covereth a transgression seeketh love, but he that
   repeateth a matter separateth very friends."--Prov. xvii. 9.

  "When pride cometh, then cometh shame."--Prov. xi. 2.

  "A haughty spirit goeth before a fall."--Prov. xvi. 18.


Perhaps those who have read the first part of the story of Louis
Mortimer will remember that I there endeavored to explain the nature
of the Christian's warfare, and that I stated that there were sad
periods when the Christian, too confident in his own strength, perhaps
too much inclined to exult in his victories as evincing some latent
power in _himself_, becomes less watchful, and gradually falls back
in his glorious course. It is certain, that if we do not advance
we go back, and oh, how sad it is that redeemed sinners, called by
so holy a name as that of Christian, should, in any degree, forget
to whom they owe all their might to do well, as well as their final
salvation, that they should relax, in the least, their prayers, their
efforts in the strength of the Holy Spirit to press forward towards
the mark of the prize of their high calling. It is not that all those
who thus sadly backslide are allowed to fall into open sin. Many, by
the great mercy of their Lord, are preserved from thus dishonoring
His holy name and cause; but alas! too often is there a falling off
in devotion, in singleness of heart, in perseverance, in watchfulness
against besetting sins, when the prayers are fewer and colder, the
praises fainter, and the Christian, after languishing for a time
in this divided state, hardly making an effort to return, becomes
conscious, to his alarm, how far he has wandered, and feels with
our sweet poet, in the bitterness of his spirit,


    "Where is the blessedness I knew,
       When first I saw the Lord?
     Where is the soul-refreshing view
       Of Jesus and His word?

    "The peaceful hours I once enjoyed
       How sweet their memory still!
     But they have left an _aching void_
       _The world can never fill_."

For the next fortnight the singing class was indefatigable, and owing
to the cultivated taste of Louis and Reginald, and the superior musical
education of one or two others, among whom Mr. Witworth and Frank were
not the least in importance, the members at length considered themselves
competent to exhibit before an audience.

Accordingly, after Dr. Wilkinson had been favored with a specimen
of their skill, his permission was obtained to invite such of their
friends as they chose.

Tickets of admission, which had been prepared before-hand, were then
sent out in various directions, accompanied by notes of invitation.
As soon as Mrs. Paget's arrived at its destination, a most kind answer
was dispatched to Louis as president, adding a request to be allowed
to provide refreshment for the performers; and, as her proposal was
hailed with three cheers, and gracefully accepted by Louis, on the
morning of the eventful day came grapes, peaches, biscuits, and wine,
which were very elegantly set out in the class-room by the committee.

The concert passed off as propitiously as could be wished. Hamilton,
who, from utter want of ear, was totally incapacitated for singing,
acted the part of steward with Trevannion, Meredith, and one or two
others, with great decorum, and actually stood near Mrs. Paget during
part of the performance, listening quietly to Louis' praises with such
evident interest, that a few words of commendation he uttered quite
won the lady's heart, though she had certainly been prejudiced against
him before. It was remarked by some, that the doctor did not seem much
pleased with Louis' manners on this occasion; for, when Mrs. Paget,
between the parts, began to praise Louis' extraordinary musical
talents (as she was pleased to call them), and to relate how much
he pleased the company at her house, Dr. Wilkinson coolly replied,
that he considered he had been well taught, but doubted his having
more than an average good taste and general ability; and as his eye
turned upon Louis, who was moving rather affectedly and conceitedly
from rank to rank on his way to the refreshment-room, his forehead
wrinkled ominously, and his lips became more tightly compressed. He
was observed to watch Louis for a minute, and then turn suddenly away
as if disgusted.

The madrigal concert took place about the end of the quarter, and on the
following Saturday afternoon, the monotony of Ashfield House was varied
by the arrival of a new scholar, in the person of Mr. Henry Norman, who
was placed as a parlor boarder with the doctor.

When Hamilton and Louis returned from the playground together,
they discovered this young gentleman sitting on the table, carefully
balancing the doctor's chair with one of his feet, deeply immersed
in the contents of a new book with only partially cut leaves, left
by accident on the table. His back was turned towards them, and he
was so engrossed in the twofold occupation of reading and keeping the
heavy chair from falling, that he did not notice their entrance, and
Louis, not recognizing his figure at first, nor knowing that he was
expected, left the business of welcoming the stranger to his senior.

"Our new school-fellow, Louis, I suppose," said Hamilton, in a low tone,
as he scrutinized the lengthy figure before him. "I know that fellow,
Louis--he is a friend of yours."

Before Louis had time to answer, the low murmur had disturbed
Norman; and, looking up without altering his position in the least,
he acknowledged his acquaintance with Louis by a nod, and a careless
"How do you do?"

Louis advanced directly with a warm welcome and out-stretched hand
that was met by two fingers of Norman's left hand, tendered in a
manner so offensive to Hamilton that he debated whether he should
turn the intruder out of window, or walk himself out of the door;
and concluded by drawing back in disdainful anger.

Louis was not so ready to take offence, though he was sensitive
enough to feel a little hurt; and, turning round to his friend,
introduced Norman to him.

Norman took a steady quick glance at Hamilton, and, though his lips
were full of propriety, there was something like a sarcastic smile
in his eyes.

"You are not altogether a stranger to me, Mr. Hamilton, though,
I imagine, I am to you," he said, as he allowed the chair to regain
its legs, and got off the table, throwing the book on another,
several yards distant.

"I must confess you have the advantage of me," said Hamilton,
coldly. "I was not aware that I had the honor of being known
to you."

"I assure you, then, that you had that honor.--Dear me!" he
added, as he threw himself into the doctor's chair, stretching
out his legs to their utmost length: "absurd of me to sit on that
table, when I might have initiated myself so admirably into the
art of reading made easy. Comfortable chair this of Fudge's--I beg
his pardon, Dr. Wilkinson's. I am so accustomed to that elegant
_nom du guerre_ that I occasionally forget myself. The old
gentleman knows how to make himself comfortable; I suppose that
book belongs to him. I took the liberty of cutting a few leaves."

"Which will be a peculiar satisfaction to him, doubtless," said
Hamilton; "and perhaps you may have the pleasure of hearing so
from his own lips."

"_Verbum sat_," replied Norman. "It is a peculiar gratification,
Mr. Hamilton, to discover that your natural good sense is overcoming
your usual disinclination to notice those things which are not
_comme il faut_ in your school-fellows, thereby depriving them of the
aid of your countenance and example in their little endeavors; and
I feel peculiar satisfaction in thus early becoming the recipient of
the good services bestowed by the blunt sincerity and kindliness
of your nature."

Hamilton crimsoned and stared; but there was nothing insolent in the
tone; it was inexplicable. That something was meant he could not doubt;
and presently, perceiving that Louis was uncomfortable and embarrassed,
he said haughtily,

"I really am at a loss to understand you, sir; but your manner towards
your friend and mine is particularly unpleasant. What you may have
been used to I cannot pretend to know; but, whatever it be, you will
be kind enough to remember that here we are accustomed to the society
of gentlemen, and to treat each other as such."

"My dear Mr. Hamilton," said Norman, blandly, slightly moving as if to
arrest Hamilton's progress towards the door, "you entirely misunderstand
me. Master Mortimer and I now understand each other better. Indeed, I am
laid under a weighty obligation to Master Louis for my acquaintance with
your royal self and various members of your court; and could not possibly
have any intention of quarrelling with so kind a benefactor. As for you,
I have made up my mind to know and like you. Shake hands, will you?"

Hamilton hesitatingly touched the proffered hand, and looking at his
watch at the same moment, wondered to Louis why tea was not ready.

"There's the bell!" exclaimed Louis; and seizing Hamilton's arm,
he hurried off, leaving Norman to follow at his leisure, as neither
Hamilton nor himself felt at all inclined to be ceremonious.

Louis felt a little afraid of Norman, though he did not exactly
know why.

Norman did not follow them immediately; and Hamilton had nearly
emptied his first cup of tea when he came in, in company with
Trevannion and Frank Digby, the latter of whom had a marvellous
facility for making acquaintances on the shortest notice. They
sat down at the end of one of the three long tables, and continued
laughing and talking the whole of the tea-time, after which Norman
went to his own tea with the doctor.

"So, Louis, Norman's come!" exclaimed Reginald, pouncing upon his
brother just as he reached the school-room door.

"Is he a friend of yours?" asked Trevannion.

"He is, and he is not. Make that riddle out at your leisure,"
replied Reginald, gayly.

"Oh, that settles the matter!" said Trevannion.

"What matter?" asked Louis.

A look of the most withering description was the only answer
Louis received; it was enough, however, to deter him from
repeating his question.

Happily, Reginald did not see it.

"How do you like our new-comer, Trevannion?" asked Hamilton,
linking his arm in his friend's, preparatory to a short, after-tea
turn in the playground. "There is something very peculiar about
him--insolent, I think."

"He's a nice fellow, in my opinion," said Trevannion.

"A very knowing chap," said Salisbury. "Has he been here before?"

"No," said Frank Digby; "but somebody's been kind enough to give
the full particulars, history, and lives, peccadilloes, _et cetera_,
_et cetera_, _et cetera_, of the gentlemen, generally, and individually,
at Ashfield Academy. Why, Hamilton, he called Trevannion and Salisbury
by their names, without any introduction, and is as much up to every
thing here as yourself, I believe."

"I don't much fancy him," said Hamilton; "and strongly suspect he won't
add much to our comfort."

"He doesn't like your pet, I suppose, then," said Trevannion,
marking the slight color that rose in Hamilton's face. "He told
me of your strange rencontre in the class-room; he has taken a
fancy, I am sure, to you."

Hamilton did not look particularly delighted, and changed the subject
to one on which he and Trevannion conversed most amicably till past
their usual time for re-entering the study.

Norman did not come among them that evening till prayer-time; and,
to his great satisfaction, Louis saw very little of him for the next
day or two.

One day, during the first week of Norman's initiation, at the close
of the morning school, a party similar in size and kind to that which
had the honor of greeting Louis on his arrival the preceding half-year,
was assembled on the raised end of the school-room. Frank and Salisbury
were both of them seated on the top of a desk; the former, generally
silent, relieved himself by sundry twists and contortions, smacking of
the lips, sighs, and turnings of the eyes, varied by a few occasional
thumps administered to Salisbury, who sat by him, apparently unconscious
of the bellicose attitude of his neighbor, listening attentively, with
a mixed expression of concern and anger on his honest countenance, to
Norman, who, on this occasion, was the principal speaker. Louis was
in the room, at his desk, hunting for a top; but too intent upon his
search, and too far off to hear more of the topics that engrossed so
much attention, than a few words that conveyed no impression to him,
being simply, "Ferrers--my aunt--clever--hypocritical."

Just as he had given up all hope of finding his top, Hamilton came up
to him. "Louis," said he, "if Trevannion goes out with me, I shall have
time to hear your Herodotus before afternoon school, directly after
dinner, mind."

"I shan't forget;--oh, Hamilton, you haven't such a thing as another
top, have you? Reginald's broken two of mine, and I can't find my other."

"I do happen to have taken care of yours for you, you careless boy.
Here is my desk-key, you will find it there; you can give me the key
after dinner."

With many thanks, Louis proceeded to Hamilton's desk, and Hamilton went
up to Trevannion, who was one of the party at the upper end of the room.
Louis was now so near the speakers, as to be unavoidably within hearing
of all that passed; and, astonished by the first few words, he proceeded
no further in his errand than putting the key into the lock.

"Are you inclined for a walk, Trevannion?" asked Hamilton, as he
reached him.

Trevannion was leaning against the doctor's desk, in a more perturbed
state than his calm self usually exhibited. As Hamilton spoke, he turned
round, stared, and drew himself proudly up, replying, in a tone of great
bitterness, "Thank you, Mr. Hamilton, but perhaps if you _will_ take the
trouble, you may find some one better suited to you than myself."

"What is the matter?" said Hamilton.

"Some of your friends appear to have better memories than yourself,"
replied Trevannion, folding his arms, and assuming an indifferent air;
"you will, perhaps, not find mine quite so capricious; I am much obliged
for all favors bestowed, Mr. Hamilton. Perhaps you considered me too
lazy to look out for another friend; I am active enough, I assure you,
to provide myself with one, and to release you from the irksome ties
your indolence has imposed upon you."
