York, and, of course, we've all got to go, too, which is the worst of
it, and mother and I are just awfully put out."

"What's the good of his going," asked Rectus. "Can't he get a lawyer to
attend to it all?"

"Oh, you couldn't keep him here now," said Corny. "He's just wild to be
off. The man who sued him is a horrid person, and father says that if he
don't go right back, the next thing he'll hear will be that old Colbert
will be trying to get a foot instead of four inches."

"Old Colbert!" ejaculated Rectus, "I guess that must be my father."

If I had been Rectus, I don't think I should have been so quick to guess
anything of that kind about my father; but perhaps he had heard things
like that before. He took it as coolly as he generally took everything.

Corny was as red as a beet.

"Your father!" she exclaimed. "I don't believe it. I'll go this very
minute and see."

Rectus was right. The stingy hankerer after what Corny called four
inches of dirt was his father. Mr. Chipperton came up to us and talked
about the matter, and it was all as plain as daylight. When he found
that Mr. Colbert was the father of Rectus, Mr. Chipperton was very much
surprised, and he called no more names, although I am sure he had been
giving old Colbert a pretty disagreeable sort of a record. But he sat
down by Rectus, and talked to him as if the boy were his own father
instead of himself, and proved to him, by every law of property in
English, Latin, or Sanscrit, that the four inches of ground were
legally, lawfully, and without any manner of doubt, his own, and that it
would have been utterly and absolutely impossible for him to have built
his house one inch outside of his own land. I whispered to Rectus that
the house might have swelled, but he didn't get a chance to put in the
suggestion.

Rectus had to agree to all Mr. Chipperton said--or, at least, he
couldn't differ with him,--for he didn't know anything on earth about
the matter, and I guess he was glad enough when he got through. I'm sure
I was. Rectus didn't say anything except that he was very sorry that the
Chipperton family had to go home, and then he walked off to his room.

In about half an hour, when I went upstairs, I found Rectus had just
finished a letter to his father.

"I guess that'll make it all right," he said, and he handed me the
letter to read. It was a strictly business letter. No nonsense about the
folks at home. He said that was the kind of business letter his father
liked. It ran like this:

          DEAR FATHER: Mr. Chipperton has told me about your
          suing him. If he really has set his house over on
          four inches of your lot, I wish you would let it
          stand there. I don't care much for him, but he has
          a nice wife and a pleasant girl, and if you go on
          suing him the whole lot of them will leave here
          to-morrow, and they're about the only people I
          know, except Gordon. If you want to, you can take
          a foot off any one of my three lots, and that
          ought to make it all right.

                     Your affectionate son, SAMUEL COLBERT.

"Have you three lots?" I asked, a good deal surprised, for I didn't know
that Rectus was a property-owner.

"Yes," said he; "my grandmother left them to me."

"Are they right next to your father's lot, which Chipperton cut into?"

"No, they're nowhere near it," said Rectus.

I burst out laughing.

"That letter wont do any good," I said.

"You'll see," said Rectus, and he went off to mail it.

I don't know what kind of a business man Mr. Chipperton was, but when
Rectus told him that he had written a letter to his father which would
make the thing all right, he was perfectly satisfied; and the next day
we all went out in a sail-boat to the coral-reef, and had a splendid
time, and the "Tigress" went off without any Chippertons. I think Mr.
Chipperton put the whole thing down as the result of his lecture to
Rectus up in the silk-cotton tree.




CHAPTER XV.

A STRANGE THING HAPPENS TO ME.


For several days after our hot chase after Priscilla, we saw nothing of
this ex-emissary. Indeed, we began to be afraid that something had
happened to her. She was such a regular attendant at the
hotel-door-market, that people were talking about missing her black face
and her chattering tongue. But she turned up one morning as gay and
skippy as ever, and we saw her leaning against the side of one of the
door-ways of the court in her favorite easy attitude, with her head on
one side and one foot crossed over the other, which made her look like a
bronze figure such as they put under kerosene lamps. In one hand she had
her big straw hat, and in the other a bunch of rose-buds. The moment she
saw Corny she stepped up to her.

"Wont you buy some rose-buds, missy?" she said. "De puttiest rose-buds I
ever brought you yit."

Corny looked at her with a withering glare, but Priscilla didn't wither
a bit. She was a poor hand at withering.

"Please buy 'em, missy. I kep' 'em fur you. I been a-keepin' 'em all de
mornin'."

"I don't see how you dare ask me to buy your flowers!" exclaimed Corny.
"Go away! I never want to see you again. After all you did----"

"Please, missy, buy jist this one bunch. These is the puttiest red-rose
buds in dis whole town. De red roses nearly all gone."

"Nearly all gone," said I. "What do you mean by telling such a fib?"--I
was going to say "lie," which was nearer the truth (if that isn't a
bull); but there were several ladies about, and Priscilla herself was a
girl. "You know that there are red roses here all the year."

"Please, boss," said Priscilla, rolling her eyes at me like an innocent
calf, "wont you buy dese roses fur missy? They's the puttiest roses I
ever brought her yit."

"I guess you've got a calcareous conscience, haven't you?" said Rectus.

Priscilla looked at him, for a moment, as if she thought that he might
want to buy something of that kind, but as she hadn't it to sell, she
tried her flowers on him.

"Please, boss, wont you buy dese roses fur----"

"No," said Rectus, "I wont."

And we all turned and walked away. It was no use to blow her up. She
wouldn't have minded it. But she lost three customers.

I said before that I was the only one in our party who liked fishing,
and for that reason I didn't go often, for I don't care about taking
trips of that kind by myself. But one day Mr. Burgan and the other
yellow-legs told me that they were going to fish in Lake Killarney, a
lovely little lake in the interior of the island, about five miles from
the town, and that if I liked I might go along. I did like, and I went.

I should have been better pleased if they had gone there in a carriage;
but this wouldn't have suited these two fellows, who had rigged
themselves up in their buck-skin boots, and had all the tramping and
fishing rigs that they used in the Adirondacks and other sporting places
where they told me they had been. It was a long and a warm walk, and
trying to find a good place for fishing, after we got to the lake, made
the work harder yet. We didn't find any good place, and the few fish we
caught didn't pay for the trouble of going there; but we walked all over
a big pineapple plantation and had a splendid view from the highest hill
on the whole island.

It was pretty late in the afternoon when we reached home, and I made up
my mind that the next time I went so far to fish, in a semi-tropical
country, I'd go with a party who wore suits that would do for riding.

Rectus and Corny and Mrs. Chipperton were up in the silk-cotton tree
when I got home, and I went there and sat down. Mrs. Chipperton lent me
her fan.

Corny and Rectus were looking over the "permission paper" which the
English governor had given us.

"I guess this isn't any more use, now," said Corny, "as we've done all
we can for kings and queens, but Rectus says that if you agree I can
have it for my autograph book. I never had a governor's signature."

"Certainly, you can have it," I said. "And he's a different governor
from the common run. None of your State governors, but a real British
governor, like those old fellows they set over us in our colony-days."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Chipperton, smiling. "You must be able to remember a
long way back."

"Well, you needn't make fun of this governor," said Corny, "for he's a
real nice man. We met him to-day, riding in the funniest carriage you
ever saw in your life. It's like a big baby-carriage for twins, only
it's pulled by a horse, and has a man in livery to drive it. The top's
straw, and you get in in the middle, and sit both ways."

"Either way, my dear," said Mrs. Chipperton.

"Yes, either way," continued Corny. "Did you ever see a carriage like
that?"

"I surely never did," said I.

"Well, he was in it, and some ladies, and they stopped and asked Rectus
and I how we got along with our queen, and when I told them all about
it, you ought to have heard them laugh, and the governor, he said, that
Poqua-dilla shouldn't suffer after we went away, even if he had to get
all his pepper-pods from her. Now, wasn't that good?"

I admitted that it was, but I thought to myself that a good supper and a
bed would be better, for I was awfully tired and hungry. But I didn't
say this.

I slept as sound as a rock that night, and it was pretty broad daylight
when I woke up. I don't believe that I would have wakened then, but I
wanted to turn over and couldn't, and that is enough to make any fellow
wake up.

When I opened my eyes, I found myself in the worst fix I had ever been
in in my life. I couldn't move my arms or my legs, for my arms were tied
fast to my body, at the elbows and wrists, and my feet and my knees were
tied together. I was lying flat on my back, but I could turn my head
over to where Rectus' bed stood--it was a small one like mine--and he
wasn't there. I sung out:

"Rectus!" and gave a big heave, which made the bed rattle. I was scared.

In a second, Rectus was standing by me. He had been sitting by the
window. He was all dressed.

"Don't shout that way again," he said, in a low voice, "or I'll have to
tie this handkerchief over your mouth," and he showed me a clean linen
handkerchief all folded up, ready. "I wont put it so that it will stop
your breathing," he said, as coolly as if this sort of thing was nothing
unusual. "I'll leave your nose free."

"Let me up, you little rascal!" I cried. "Did you do this?"

At that he deliberately laid the handkerchief over my mouth and fastened
it around my head. He was careful to leave my nose all right, but I was
so mad that I could scarcely breathe. I knew by the way he acted that he
had tied me, and I had never had such a trick played on me before. But
it was no use to be mad. I couldn't do anything, though I tugged and
twisted my very best. He had had a good chance to tie me up well, for I
had slept so soundly. I was regularly bandaged.

He stood by me for a few minutes, watching to see if I needed any more
fixing, but when he made up his mind that I was done up securely, he
brought a chair and sat down by the side of the bed and began to talk to
me. I never saw anything like the audacity of the boy.

"You needn't think it was mean to tie you, when you were so tired and
sleepy, for I intended to do it this morning, any way, for you always
sleep sound enough in the mornings to let a fellow tie you up as much as
he pleases. And I suppose you'll say it was mean to tie you, any way,
but you know well enough that it's no use for me to argue with you, for
you wouldn't listen. But now you've got to listen, and I wont let you up
till you promise never to call me Rectus again."

"The little rascal!" I thought to myself. I might have made some noise
in spite of the handkerchief, but I thought it better not, for I didn't
know what else he might pile on my mouth.

"It isn't my name, and I'm tired of it," he continued. "I didn't mind it
at school, and I didn't mind it when we first started out together, but
I've had enough of it now, and I've made up my mind that I'll make you
promise never to call me by that name again."

I vowed to myself that I would call him Rectus until his hair was gray.
I'd write letters to him wherever he lived, and direct them: "Rectus
Colbert."

[Illustration: "I WOULDN'T LIKE IT MYSELF."]

"There wasn't any other way to do it, and so I did it this way," he
said. "I'm sorry, really, to have to tie you up so, because I wouldn't
like it myself, and I wouldn't have put that handkerchief over your
mouth if you had agreed to keep quiet, but I don't want anybody coming
in here until you've promised."

"Promise!" I thought; "I'll never promise you that while the world rolls
round."

"I know you can't say anything with that handkerchief over your mouth;
but you don't have to speak. Your toes are loose. When you're ready to
promise never to call me Rectus again, just wag your big toe, either
one."

I stiffened my toes, as if my feet were cast in brass. Rectus moved his
chair a little around, so that he could keep an eye on my toes. Then he
looked at his watch, and said:

"It's seven o'clock now, and that's an hour from breakfast time. I don't
want to keep you there any longer than I can help. You'd better wag your
toe now, and be done with it. It's no use to wait."

"Wag?" I thought to myself. "Never!"

"I know what you're thinking," he went on. "You think that if you lie
there long enough, you'll be all right, for when the chambermaid comes
to do up the room, I must let her in, or else I'll have to say you're
sick, and then the Chippertons will come up."

That was exactly what I was thinking.

"But that wont do you any good," said he, "I've thought of all that."
