


CHAPTER XX

WHEN THE VIOLETS BLOOM AGAIN

Now there was not a man in the room who had not heard of the order to
return the Eagles to Paris, where they were to be broken up and melted
down, not a man in the army for that matter.  Nor was there a man who
had not heard some account of the resistance of other regiments to the
order, which had been nevertheless enforced wherever possible, although
in cases not a few Eagles had been hidden or disappeared mysteriously
and had not been given up.  There was scarcely a man in the
regiment--unless some royalist officer or new recruit--who had not been
glad that their own Eagle had been lost honorably in battle and buried,
as they believed, in the river.  It was more fitting that it should
meet that end than be turned back to Paris to be broken up, melted down
and cast into metal for ignoble use--and any other use would be ignoble
in the estimation of the regiment.

"I would rather throw it into the Isere," growled old Grenier, "than
send it back."

"And I, and I, and I," came from different voices.

"Perhaps," said Lestoype, speaking slowly and with deep meaning, for he
realized that his words were in the highest degree treasonable, "if we
can preserve it by some means we may see it once again at the head of
the regiment when----" he stopped.  The silence was positively ghastly.
He looked about him.  The men thrilled to his glance.  "----'when the
violets bloom again,'" he said, using the mystic poetic phrase which
had become so widely current.

"God speed the day!" burst out some deep voiced veteran.

"Amen, amen!"

"_Vive l'Empereur_!"

"Let us save the Eagle!"

The whole room was in tumult of nervous cries.

"_Vive le brave Marteau_!" finally said Drehon when he could get a
hearing.  "He has given us back our honor, our life."

The emotions of the moment were too much.  Reckless of what might
happen, the room instantly rang with loud acclaim in response to this
appeal.  The soldiers sprang to their feet, moved by irresistible
emotion.  Swords were drawn again.

The officers and men clustered around Lestoype and Marteau.  The Eagle
was lifted high, blades were upheaved threateningly again.  Dangers
were forgotten.  Intoxicated with enthusiasm they gave free course to
their emotions.

"_Vive l'Empereur_!" resounded through the hall, not whispered but
shouted, not shouted but roared!

In their mad frenzy of excitement they did not, any of them, notice
that the door into the hall had been thrown open and that a young
officer of the regiment stood there, his face pale with amazement, his
mouth open, staring.  He could not take in the whole purport of the
scene but he saw the Eagle, he heard the cries, the word "_Vive_" came
to him out of the tumult, coupled with the name of Marteau and the
Emperor.

"Gentlemen!" he finally shouted, raising his voice to its highest pitch
and as the sound penetrated to the tumultuous mass the noise died away
almost as suddenly as it had arisen.

Men faced about and stared toward the entrance.  There stood young St.
Laurent, one of the royalist officers, newly appointed to the regiment,
who had been made aide to the Governor and commander.

"Major Lestoype," said the youth with great firmness, having recovered
his presence of mind and realizing instantly the full purport and
menace of the situation, "an order from the Governor requests your
presence at once.  I was sent to deliver it.  The soldiers at the door
strove vainly to stop me but I forced my way past them.  I am an
unwelcome guest, I perceive, being a loyal servant of the King, but I
am here.  What is the meaning of this gathering, the worship of this
discarded emblem, these treasonable cries?"

"Am I, a veteran of the army of Italy, to be catechised and questioned
by a boy?" growled Lestoype in mingled rage and astonishment.

"You forget yourself, monsieur.  I regret to fail in any military duty
or in respect to my seniors, but in this I represent the Marquis
d'Aumenier, the Governor, aye, even the King, my master.  Whence came
this Eagle?"

There was a dead silence.

"I brought it, monsieur, to my old comrades, to my old regiment,"
coolly said Marteau, stepping forward.

"Traitor!" exclaimed St. Laurent, confronting him boldly.

"Not so, for I have taken no oath to King Louis."

"Ah, you still wear the insignia of the Corsican, I see," continued the
young aide, looking more closely.  "But how about these gentlemen?"

Again the question was met by silence.

"Messieurs," said St. Laurent, "you are old soldiers of the former
Emperor.  I see.  I understand.  You love him as I and mine the King.
It is as much as my life is worth, as much as my honor, to condone it.
Yet I would not be a tale-bearer, but this cannot pass unless----"

"Shall I cut him down where he stands, _Mon Commandant_?" growled the
old port-aigle, presenting his weapon.

"And add murder to treason!" exclaimed St. Laurent, his face flushing a
little but not giving back an inch before the threatening approach of
the veteran.

There was good stuff in him, evidently, and even those who foresaw
terrible consequences to themselves in his unexpected presence could
not but admire him.  They were even proud that he was a Frenchman, even
though he served the King they hated.

"By no means," said Lestoype, motioning the color-bearer back.  "You
shall go as freely as you came."

"And if you do as I suggest I shall go and forget all I have seen,
messieurs."

"Impossible!"

"Upon my honor I shall do it but on one condition."

"Ah! and that is?"

"That you give me the Eagle."

"Give you the Eagle!" exclaimed old Captain Grenier.

"The Eagle for which our brave comrades died," said Drehon.

"The Eagle which has been carried in triumph in every capital in
Europe!" added Suraif.

The whole room was filled with cries again.

"Never!  Never!"

The whole mass surged forward, including Marteau.

"Was it to give it up to any servant of King Louis that I brought it
back?" the latter shouted threateningly.

"Gentlemen," said the young aide so soon as he could make himself heard
in the tumult, "the choice is yours, not mine.  I am a soldier of the
King, aide-de-camp to the Governor of this place, an officer under the
Marquis d'Aumenier.  You have your ideas of duty, I have mine.  I have
already stretched my conscience to the limit in offering to be silent
about this under any conditions.  I am doing wrong in concealing it but
I do not wish to doom so many brave men to disgrace, to death.  You,
monsieur"--he pointed toward Marteau--"refused a commission in this
regiment.  You wear the insignia of Bonaparte.  You have no place here.
Withdraw.  Your arrival has disturbed the orderly course of events.
These gentlemen were doing their duty contentedly----"

"No, by God, never," roared out a veteran.  "Contentedly!  We will
never be content until----"

"Until what, monsieur?"

"Until the violets bloom again," came the answer, accompanied by a
burst of sardonic laughter.

"Your interest in the flowers of spring does not concern me,
gentlemen," returned the young aide, affecting not to understand, and
perhaps he did not.  "If you will give me the Eagle----"

"And what will you do with it if we should do so?"

"I will be silent as to this."

"And how will you explain your possession of it?"

"I will say that I got it from Monsieur Marteau, who has gone."

"And what will you do with it?"

"That shall be as the Marquis d'Aumenier directs."

"And he?"

"I think he will undoubtedly obey the orders of the Minister of War and
send it to Paris to be broken up."

"Gentlemen," said Major Lestoype, endeavoring to quiet and repress the
growls of antagonism that arose on every hand, "you hear the
proposition of Monsieur St. Laurent.  Seeing his duty as he does, I am
forced to admit," continued the veteran with great magnanimity, "that
it does credit to his heart.  What shall we do?"

"Purchase our freedom, purchase our rank, purchase our lives by giving
up our Eagle!" said old Captain Grenier.  "Never!"

"I vote NO to that proposition," said Drehon.

"And I, and I, and I," acclaimed the soldiers.

"You hear, Monsieur St. Laurent?" said the Major.  "These gentlemen
have signified their will unmistakably."

"I hear," said the young aide.  "Major Lestoype, forgive me if I have
failed in respect or soldierly deference to my superior officer, but I,
too, have my duty to perform.  I warn you all that when I pass from
this room I shall go directly to the Marquis d'Aumenier and report what
I have seen."

"When he passes," cried some of the soldiers of lower rank ominously,
emphasizing the adverb and rudely thrusting themselves between St.
Laurent and the door.

"Pardon me, gentlemen," said the young aide quite coolly.  "It seems
that I spoke unadvisedly in one particular."

"You retract?" said a voice.

"Never.  I should have said 'if I pass.'"

Swords were still out, hands were clenched, arms were raised.

"Say the word and he dies where he stands," cried one.

"Gentlemen," said Lestoype sternly, "back, all of you.  Free passage
for Monsieur St. Laurent.  Back, I say.  Let him go unharmed, as he
came."

"My orders were to request your presence before the Governor of the
town immediately," said the aide.

"I attend him at once, young gentleman," returned the old soldier,
seizing his cloak and covering his head with his chapeau.  "Gentlemen,"
he added, turning to the rest, "I leave the Eagle in your hands.
Before he departs let me say that Monsieur St. Laurent has borne
himself like a brave man, a gallant officer, and a true gentleman.
Monsieur, you will not take amiss this heartfelt tribute from so old a
soldier as I."

"I thank you, sir, and you, gentlemen," said the young aide, surveying
the men, their sudden temper abated, now looking at him with
admiration, some of them with hands raised in salute.  "The duty you
have imposed upon me by your choice is the most painful I shall ever be
called upon to perform."

"This way, Monsieur St. Laurent," said old Lestoype, stepping through
the door with his head high, beckoning the young aide to follow him.

The door had scarcely closed behind the two when the wild confusion
broke out again.

"What shall be done now?" cried Captain Grenier, the senior officer
present, as soon as he could be heard.

"Messieurs," said Marteau, striving to gain the attention of all, "let
me speak a moment.  I have a plan.  Be silent, I beg of you."

"We will hear Marteau."

"What have you to suggest?"

"Speak!"

"Be quick."

"This.  I will take the Eagle, I, who brought it."

"You will throw it into the Isere?"

"No.  I know this town like a book.  The regiment was once stationed
here for a few months.  I had time on my hands.  I explored many of the
ancient buildings.  I will----  But ask me nothing.  Trust the Eagle to
me.  I have periled my life for it as have you all.  Trust it to me.
It shall come to no dishonor in my hands.  Say to the Governor that I
came here, that I brought the Eagle, that I was asked to surrender it,
that I refused, that I took it away, that you know not where I
concealed it, nor whither I am gone.  Let Monsieur St. Laurent make his
report.  You can simply tell the truth.  Nothing will be done."

"It is well thought on," said Captain Grenier.

"The danger is to you," said another.

"What of that?  I have looked danger in the face often since I have
been in the army, like all the rest of you."

"I like not to shift the responsibility upon this young man," said the
old port-aigle dubiously.  "He is saving our lives at the risk of his
own if they should find him--which is likely."

"Messieurs," said Marteau quickly, "I am not preserving your lives for
yourselves."

"Why, then?" asked an officer.

"That you may be ready," said the young man, throwing his cloak about
his shoulders, seizing the Eagle with his hands, "when the violets
bloom again."

As they stared at him he saluted, turned on his heel, opened the door
and went out.




CHAPTER XXI

LIKE A THIEF IN THE NIGHT

The reception was over.  The last guest had departed.  The house had
been closed.  Sir Gervaise Yeovil and his son and the Countess Laure
had bidden the old Marquis good night and retired to their several
apartments.  There were wakeful hours ahead for the Governor, who
repaired to his cabinet and got to work.  The tidings which had been
brought him by the young Baron St. Laurent were sufficiently grave and
perturbing to render sleep impossible, even if he had nothing to do.
In great astonishment the Marquis had questioned Major Lestoype closely
and from him had received a frank and accurate version of the whole
affair.  The Major would have died rather than betray a comrade, but in
this instance the betrayal had already been effected and there was
nothing whatever to be gained, from Marteau's point of view or from
anybody's point of view, by an attempt at concealment.

The old Marquis had acted with dazzling promptitude.  His personal
escort had consisted of a troop of loyalist cavalry from the King's
household guard and it had not yet returned to Paris.  He could depend
absolutely upon these men.  They had none of them been soldiers of the
grand armies of the Emperor.  They had been recruited in loyal and
long-suffering Vendee.  He placed them under the command of St.
Laurent, of whose conduct he highly approved, being in ignorance of the
offer of secrecy made by that young soldier, Lestoype being too fine a
man to attempt to better his case by bringing the Lieutenant into
disgrace.  This detachment had searched the Major's quarters
thoroughly.  They had found them, of course, deserted.

Captain Grenier, being forthwith summoned to headquarters, had stated
truthfully that Marteau had taken the Eagle and gone and thereafter the
assembly had dispersed.  He declared upon his word of honor that he had
no knowledge where he had gone or what he had done with the Eagle.  The
Marquis had a complete description of Marteau drawn up and sent to
every gate in the walled town.  The guard was ordered to permit nobody
and nothing to pass without the severest scrutiny and the closest
search or inspection.  The Governor made preparations for public
proclamation on the morrow, offering a large reward for the fugitive's
apprehension dead or alive, and also an additional reward for
