anything that's possible to man.  But you'll have to look sharp, for if
Edwin comes home an' diskivers what's doin', it's all up with the fortin
an' Betty.'

"Well, to make a long story short, your mother went to the lawyer's, an'
had her will made, leavin' a good lump of a sum to your brother, but the
most of the fortin to you.  By the advice o' Truefoot Tickle, and
Badger, she made it so that you shouldn't touch the money till you come
to be twenty-one, `for,' says she, `there's no sayin' what bad men will
be runnin' after the poor thing an deceivin' her for the sake of her
money before she is of an age to look after herself.'  `Yes,' thought I,
`an' there's no sayin' what bad men'll be runnin' after the poor thing
an' deceivin' of her for the sake of her money _after_ she's of an age
to look after herself,' but I didn't say that out, for your mother was
excited enough and over-anxious about things, I could see that.

"Well, when the will was made out all right, she took it out of her
chest one night an' read it all over to me.  I could see it was
shipshape, though I couldn't read a word of its crabbed letters myself.

"`Now Mrs Buxley,' says I, `where are you goin' to keep that
dockiment?'

"`In my chest,' says she.

"`Won't be safe there,' says I, for I knowed her forgivin' and confidin'
natur' too well, an' that she'd never be able to keep it from your
brother; but, before I could say more, there was a tremendous knockin'
wi' a stick at the front door.  Your poor mother turned pale--she know'd
the sound too well.  `That's Edwin,' she says, jumpin' up an runnin' to
open the door, forgetting all about the will, so I quietly folded it up
an' shoved it in my pocket.

"When Edwin was comin' up stairs I know'd he was very drunk and savage
by the way he was goin' on, an' when he came into the room an' saw me he
gave a yell of rage.  `Didn't I tell you never to show your face here
again?' says he.  `Just so,' says I, `but not bein' subjec' to your
orders, d'ye see, I _am_ here again.'

"Wi' that he swore a terrible oath an' rushed at me, but he tripped over
a footstool and fell flat on the floor.  Before he could recover himself
I made myself scarce an' went home.

"Next mornin', when I'd just finished breakfast a thunderin' rap came to
the door.  I know'd it well enough.  `Now look out for squalls,' said I
to myself, as I went an' opened it.  Edwin jumped in, banged the door
to, an' locked it.

"`You've no occasion to do that' says I, `for I don't expect no
friends--not even bobbies.'

"`You double-faced villain!' says he; `you've bin robbin' my mother!'

"`Come, come,' says I, `civility, you know, between pals.  What have I
done to your mother?'

"`You needn't try to deceive me, Paul,' says he, tryin' to keep his
temper down.  `Mother's bin took bad, wi' over-excitement, the doctor
says, an' she's told me all about the fortin an' the will, an' where
Betty is down at Brighton.'

"`My Betty at Brighton!' says I--pretendin' great surprise, for I had a
darter at that time whom I had called after your mother, for that was
her name too--but she's dead, poor thing!--she was dyin' in hospital at
the very time we was speakin', though I didn't know at the time that her
end was so near--`my Betty at Brighton!' says I.  `Why, she's in
hospital.  Bin there for some weeks.'

"`I don't mean _your_ brat, but my sister,' says Edwin, quite fierce.
`Where have you put her?  What's the name of the school?  What have you
done wi' the will?'

"`You'd better ax your mother,' says I.  `It's likely that she knows the
partiklers better nor me.'

"He lost patience altogether at this, an' sprang at me like a tiger.
But I was ready for him.  We had a regular set-to then an' there.  By
good luck there was no weapons of any kind in the room, not even a table
knife, for I'd had to pawn a'most everything to pay my rent, and the
clasp-knife I'd eat my breakfast with was in my pocket.  But we was both
handy with our fists.  We kep' at it for about half an hour.  Smashed
all the furniture, an' would have smashed the winders too, but there was
only one, an' it was a skylight.  In the middle of it the door was burst
open, an' in rushed half a dozen bobbies, who put a stop to it at once.

"`We're only havin' a friendly bout wi' the gloves,' says I, smilin'
quite sweet.

"`I don't see no gloves,' says the man as held me.

"`That's true,' says I, lookin' at my hands.  `They must have dropped
off an' rolled up the chimbly.'

"`Hallo!  Edwin Buxley!' said the sargeant, lookin' earnestly at your
brother; `why you've bin wanted for some time.  Here, Joe! the
bracelets.'

"In half a minute he was marched off.  `I'll have your blood, Paul, for
this,' he said bitterly, looking back as he went out.

"As _I_ wasn't `wanted' just then, I went straight off to see your
mother, to find out how much she had told to Edwin, for, from what he
had said, I feared she must have told all.  I was anxious, also, to see
if she'd bin really ill.  When I got to the house I met a nurse who said
she was dyin', an' would hardly let me in, till I got her persuaded I
was an intimate friend.  On reachin' the bedroom I saw by the looks o'
two women who were standin' there that it was serious.  And so it was,
for there lay your poor mother, as pale as death; her eyes closed and
her lips white; but there was a sweet, contented smile on her face, and
her thin hands clasped her well-worn Bible to her breast."

Paul Bevan stopped, for the poor girl had burst into tears.  For a time
he was silent and laid his heavy hand gently on her shoulder.

"I did not ventur' to speak to her," he continued, "an' indeed it would
have been of no use, for she was past hearin'.  A few minutes later and
her gentle spirit went up to God.

"I had no time now to waste, for I knew that your brother would give
information that might be bad for me, so I asked the nurse to write
down, while I repeated it, the lawyer's address.

"`Now,' says I, `go there an' tell 'em what's took place.  It'll be the
better for yourself if you do.'  An' then I went straight off to
Brighton."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

"Well, you must know," said Paul Bevan, continuing his discourse to the
Rose of Oregon, "when I got to Brighton I went to the school, told 'em
that your mother was just dead, and brought you straight away.  I wasn't
an hour too soon, for, as I expected, your brother had given
information, an' the p'lice were on my heels in a jiffy, but I was too
sharp for 'em.  I went into hidin' in London; an' you've no notion,
Betty, what a rare place London is to hide in!  A needle what takes to
wanderin' in a haystack ain't safer than a feller is in London, if he
only knows how to go about the business.

"I lay there nigh three months, durin' which time my own poor child
Betty continued hoverin' 'tween life an death.  At last, one night when
I was at the hospital sittin' beside her, she suddenly raised her sweet
face, an fixin' her big eyes on me, said--

"`Father, I'm goin' home.  Shall I tell mother that you're comin'?'

"`What d'ye mean, my darlin'?' says I, while an awful thump came to my
heart, for I saw a great change come over her.

"`I'll be there soon, father,' she said, as her dear voice began to
fail; `have you no message for mother?'

"I was so crushed that I couldn't speak, so she went on--

"`You'll come--won't you, father? an' we'll be so glad to welcome you to
heaven.  An' so will Jesus.  Remember, He is the only door, father, no
name but that of Jesus--' She stopped all of a sudden, and I saw that
she had gone home.

"After that" continued Paul, hurrying on as if the memory of the event
was too much for him, "havin' nothin' to keep me in England, I came off
here to the gold-fields with you, an' brought the will with me,
intendin', when you came of age, to tell you all about it, an' see
justice done both to you an' to your brother, but--"

"Fath--Paul," said Betty, checking herself, "that brown parcel you gave
me long ago with such earnest directions to keep it safe, and only to
open it if you were killed, is--"

"That's the will, my dear."

"And Edwin--does he think that I am your real daughter Betty?"

"No doubt he does, for he never heard of her bein' dead, and he never
saw you since you was quite a little thing, an' there's a great change
on you since then--a wonderful change."

"Yes, fath--Oh! it is so hard to lose my father," said Betty, almost
breaking down, and letting her hands fall listlessly into her lap.

"But why lose him, Betty?  I did it all for the best," said Paul, gently
taking hold of one of the poor girl's hands.

She made a slight motion to withdraw it, but checked herself and let it
rest in the man's rough but kindly grasp, while tears silently coursed
down her rounded cheeks.  Presently she looked up and said--

"How did Edwin find out where you had gone to?"

"That's more than I can tell, Betty, unless it was through Truefoot,
Tickle, and Badger.  I wrote to them after gettin' here, tellin' them to
look well after the property, and it would be claimed in good time, an'
I raither fear that the postmark on the letter must have let the cat out
o' the bag.  Anyhow, not long after that Edwin found me out an' you know
how he has persecuted me, though you little thought he was your own
brother when you were beggin' of me not to kill him--no more did you
guess that I was as little anxious to kill him as you were, though I did
pretend I'd have to do it now an' then in self-defence.  Sometimes,
indeed, he riled me up to sitch an extent that there wasn't much
pretence about it; but thank God! my hand has been held back."

"Yes, thank God for that; and now I must go to him," said Betty, rising
hastily and hurrying back to the Indian village.

In a darkened tent, on a soft couch of deerskins, the dying form of
Buxley, alias Stalker, lay extended.  In the fierceness of his self-will
he had neglected his wounds until too late to save his life.  A look of
stern resolution sat on his countenance--probably he had resolved to
"die game," as hardened criminals express it.  His determination, on
whatever ground based, was evidently not shaken by the arguments of a
man who sat by his couch.  It was Tom Brixton.

"What's the use o' preachin' to me, young fellow?" said the
robber-chief, testily.  "I dare say you are pretty nigh as great a
scoundrel as I am."

"Perhaps a greater," returned Tom.  "I have no wish to enter into
comparisons, but I'm quite prepared to admit that I am as bad."

"Well, then, you've as much need as I have to seek salvation for
yourself."

"Indeed I have, and it is because I have sought it and obtained it,"
said Tom, earnestly, "that I am anxious to point out the way to you.
I've come through much the same experiences, no doubt, as you have.  I
have been a scouter of my mother's teachings, a thief, and, in heart if
not in act, a murderer.  No one could be more urgently in need of
salvation _from sin_ than I, and I used to think that I was so bad that
my case was hopeless, until God opened my eyes to see that Jesus came to
save His people _from their sins_.  That is what you need, is it not?"

"Ay, but it is too late," said Stalker, bitterly.

"The crucified thief did not find it too late," returned Tom, "and it
was the eleventh hour with him."

Stalker made no reply, but the stern, hard expression of his face did
not change one iota until he heard a female voice outside asking if he
were asleep.  Then the features relaxed; the frown passed like a summer
cloud before the sun, and, with half-open lips and a look of glad,
almost childish expectancy, he gazed at the curtain-door of the tent.

"Mother's voice!" he murmured, apparently in utter forgetfulness of Tom
Brixton's presence.

Next moment the curtain was raised, and Betty, entering quickly,
advanced to the side of the couch.  Tom rose, as if about to leave.

"Don't go, Mr Brixton," said the girl, "I wish you to hear us."

"My brother!" she continued, turning to the invalid, and grasping his
hand, for the first time, as she sat down beside him.

"If you were not so young I'd swear you were my mother," exclaimed
Stalker, with a slight look of surprise at the changed manner of his
nurse.  "Ha!  I wish that I were indeed your brother."

"But you _are_ my brother, Edwin Buxley," cried the girl with intense
earnestness, "my dear and only brother, whom God will save through Jesus
Christ?"

"What do you mean, Betty?" asked Stalker, with an anxious and puzzled
look.

"I mean that I am _not_ Betty Bevan.  Paul Bevan has told me so--told me
that I am Betty Buxley, and your sister!"

The dying man's chest heaved with labouring breath, for his wasted
strength was scarcely sufficient to bear this shock of surprise.

"I would not believe it," he said, with some difficulty, "even though
Paul Bevan were to swear to it, were it not for the wonderful likeness
both in look and tone."  He pressed her hand fervently, and added, "Yes,
dear Betty.  I _do_ believe that you are my very sister."

Tom Brixton, from an instinctive feeling of delicacy, left the tent,
while the Rose of Oregon related to her brother the story of her life
with Paul Bevan, and then followed it up with the story of God's love to
man in Jesus Christ.

Tom hurried to Bevan's tent to have the unexpected and surprising news
confirmed, and Paul told him a good deal, but was very careful to make
no allusion to Betty's "fortin."

"Now, Mister Brixton," said Paul, somewhat sternly, when he had
finished, "there must be no more shilly-shallyin' wi' Betty's feelin's.
You're fond o' _her_, an' she's fond o' _you_.  In them circumstances a
man is bound to wed--all the more that the poor thing has lost her
nat'ral protector, so to speak, for I'm afraid she'll no longer look
upon me as a father."

There was a touch of pathos in Paul's tone as he concluded, which
checked the rising indignation in Brixton's breast.

"But you forget, Paul, that Gashford and his men are here, and will
probably endeavour to lay hold of me.  I can scarce look on myself as
other than an outlaw."

"Pooh! lay hold of you!" exclaimed Paul, with contempt; "d'ye think
Gashford or any one else will dare to touch you with Mahoghany Drake an'
Mister Fred an' Flinders an' me, and Unaco with all his Injins at your
back?  Besides, let me tell you that Gashford seems a changed man.  I've
had a talk wi' him about you, an' he said he was done persecutin' of
you--that you had made restitootion when you left all the goold on the
river's bank for him to pick up, and that as nobody else in partikler
wanted to hang you, you'd nothin' to fear."

"Well, that does change the aspect of affairs," said Tom, "and it may be
that you are right in your advice about Betty.  I have twice tried to
get away from her and have failed.  Perhaps it may be right now to do as
you suggest, though after all the time seems not very suitable; but, as
you truly observe, she has lost her natural protector, for of course you
cannot be a father to her any longer.  Yes, I'll go and see Fred about
it."

Tom had considerable qualms of conscience as to the propriety of the
step he meditated, and tried to argue with himself as he went in search
of his friend.

"You see," he soliloquised aloud, "her brother is dying; and then,
though I am not a whit more worthy of her than I was, the case is
nevertheless altered, for she has no father now.  Then by marrying her I
shall have a right to protect her--and she stands greatly in need of a
protector in this wild country at this time, poor thing! and some one to
work for her, seeing that she has no means whatever!"

"Troth, an' that's just what she does need, sor!" said Paddy Flinders,
stepping out of the bush at the moment.  "Excuse me, sor, but I cudn't
help hearin' ye, for ye was spakin' out loud.  But I agree with ye
intirely; an', if I may make so bowld, I'm glad to find ye in that state
o' mind.  Did ye hear the news, sor?  They've found goold at the hid o'
the valley here."

"Indeed," said Tom, with a lack of interest that quite disgusted his
volatile friend.

"Yes, indade," said he.  "Why, sor, they've found it in big nuggets in
some places, an' Muster Gashford is off wid a party not half an hour
past.  I'm goin' mesilf, only I thought I'd see first if ye wouldn't
jine me; but ye don't seem to care for goold no more nor if it was
copper; an that's quare, too, whin it was the very objec' that brought
ye here."

"Ah, Flinders, I have gained more than my object in coming.  I _have_
found gold--most fine gold, too, that I won't have to leave behind me
when it pleases God to call me home.  But never fear, I'll join you.  I
owe you and other friends a debt, and I must dig to pay that.  Then, if
I succeed in the little scheme which you overheard me planning, I shall
need some gold to keep the pot boiling!"

"Good luck to ye, sor! so ye will.  But plaze don't mintion the little
debt you say you owe me an' the other boys.  Ye don't owe us nothin' o'
the sort.  But who comes here?  Muster Fred it is--the very man I want
to see."

"Yes, and I want to see him too, Paddy, so let me speak first, for a
brief space, in private, and you can have him as long as you like
afterwards."

Fred Westly's opinion on the point which his friend put before him
entirely coincided with that of Paul Bevan.

"I'm not surprised to learn that Paul is not her father," he said.  "It
was always a puzzle to me how she came to be so lady-like and refined in
her feelings, with such a rough, though kindly, father.  But I can
easily understand it now that I hear who and what her mother was."

But the principal person concerned in Tom Brixton's little scheme held
an adverse opinion to his friends Paul and Fred and Flinders.  Betty
would by no means listen to Tom's proposals until, one day, her brother
said that he would like to see her married to Tom Brixton before he
died.  Then the obdurate Rose of Oregon gave in!

"But how is it to be managed without a clergyman?" asked Fred Westly one
evening over the camp fire when supper was being prepared.

"Ay, how indeed?" said Tom, with a perplexed look.

"Oh, bother the clergy!" cried the irreverent Flinders.

"That's just what I'd do if there was one here," responded Tom; "I'd
bother him till he married us."

"I say, what did Adam and Eve an' those sort o' people do?" asked Tolly
Trevor, with the sudden animation resulting from the budding of a new
idea; "there was no clergy in their day, I suppose?"

"True for ye, boy," remarked Flinders, as he lifted a large pot of soup
off the fire.

"I know and care not, Tolly, what those sort o' people did," said Tom;
"and as Betty and I are not Adam and Eve, and the nineteenth century is
not the first, we need not inquire."

"I'll tell 'ee what," said Mahoghany Drake, "it's just comed into my
mind that there's a missionary goes up once a year to an outlyin' post
o' the fur-traders, an' this is about the very time.  What say ye to
make an excursion there to get spliced, it's only about two hundred
miles off?  We could soon ride there an' back, for the country's all
pretty flattish after passin' the Sawback range."

"The very thing!" cried Tom; "only--perhaps Betty might object to go,
her brother being so ill."

"Not she," said Fred; "since the poor man found in her a sister as well
as a nurse he seems to have got a new lease of life.  I don't, indeed,
think it possible that he can recover, but he may yet live a good while;
and the mere fact that she has gone to get married will do him good."

So it was finally arranged that they should all go, and, before three
days had passed, they went, with a strong band of their Indian allies.
They found the missionary as had been expected.  The knot was tied, and
Tom Brixton brought back the Rose of Oregon as a blooming bride to the
Sawback range.

From that date onward Tom toiled at the goldfields as if he had been a
galley-slave, and scraped together every speck and nugget of gold he
could find, and hoarded it up as if he had been a very miser, and,
strange to say, Betty did not discourage him.

One day he entered his tent with a large canvas bag in his hand quite
full.

"It's all here at last," he said, holding it up.  "I've had it weighed,
and I'm going to square up."

"Go, dear Tom, and God speed you," said the Rose, giving him a kiss that
could not have been purchased by all the gold in Oregon.

Tom went off, and soon returned with the empty bag.

"It was hard work, Betty, to get them to take it, but they agreed when I
threatened to heave it all into the lake if they didn't!  Then--I
ventured," said Tom, looking down with something like a blush--"it does
seem presumptuous in me, but I couldn't help it--I preached to them!  I
told them of my having been twice bought; of the gold that never
perishes; and of the debt I owe, which I could never repay, like theirs,
