
But of all the wide-spread and far-reaching turmoil; the wreck and
rescue, the rending and relieving of hearts, the desperate daring, and
dread disasters of that night we shall say nothing at all, save in
regard to that which occurred on and in the neighbourhood of the Goodwin
Sands.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A NIGHT OF WRECK AND DISASTER--THE GULL "COMES TO GRIEF."

When the storm began to brew that night, George Welton, the mate of the
floating light, walked the deck of his boiled-lobster-like vessel, and
examined the sky and sea with that critical expression peculiar to
seafaring men, which conveys to landsmen the reassuring impression that
they know exactly what is coming, precisely what ought to be done, and
certainly what will be the result of whatever happens!

After some minutes spent in profound meditation, during which Mr Welton
frowned inquiringly at the dark driving clouds above him, he said,
"It'll be pretty stiff."

This remark was made to himself, or to the clouds, but, happening to be
overheard by Jerry MacGowl, who was at his elbow, it was answered by
that excellent man.

"True for ye; it'll blow great guns before midnight.  The sands is
showin' their teeth already."

The latter part of this remark had reference to brilliant white lines
and dots on the seaward horizon, which indicated breakers on the Goodwin
sands.

"Luk at that now," said Jerry, pointing to one of those huge clumsy
vessels that are so frequently met with at sea, even in the present day,
as to lead one to imagine that some of the shipbuilders in the time of
Noah must have come alive again and gone to work at their old trade on
the old plans and drawings.  "Luk at that, now.  Did iver ye see sitch a
tub--straight up and down the side, and as big at the bow as the stern."

"She's not clipper built," answered the mate; "they make that sort o'
ship by the mile and sell her by the fathom,--cuttin' off from the piece
just what is required.  It don't take long to plaster up the ends and
stick a mast or two into 'em."

"It's in luck she is to git into the Downs before the gale breaks, and
it's to be hoped she has good ground-tackle," said Jerry.

The mate hoped so too in a careless way, and, remarking that he would go
and see that all was made snug, went forward.

At that moment there came up the fore-hatch a yell, as if from the
throat of a North American savage.  It terminated in the couplet,
tunefully sung--

  "Oh my! oh my!
  O mammy, don't you let the baby cry!"

Jack Shales, following his voice, immediately after came on deck.

"Have 'ee got that work-box done?" asked Jerry as his mate joined him.

"Not quite done yet, boy, but I'll get it finished after the lights are
up.  Duty first, pleasure afterwards, you know."

"Come now, Jack, confess that you're makin' it for a pretty girl."

"Well, so I am, but it ain't for my own pretty girl.  It's for that
sweet little Nora Jones, who came lately to live in Ramsgate.  You see I
know she's goin' to be spliced to Jim Welton, and as Jim is a good sort
of fellow, I want to make this little gift to his future bride."

The gift referred to was a well-made work-box, such as the men of the
floating light were at that time, and doubtless still are, in the habit
of constructing in leisure hours.  It was beautifully inlaid with wood
of various kinds and colours, and possessed a mark peculiarly
characteristic of floating-light boxes and desks, namely, two flags
inlaid on the lid--one of these being the Union Jack.  Most of the men
on board displayed much skill and taste in the making of those boxes and
desks, although they were all self-taught, and wrought with very simple
tools in a not very commodious workshop.

"A great change from yesterday in the look o' things, Jerry," observed
Shales, surveying the Downs, where, despite the stiff and ever
increasing breeze amounting almost to a gale, numerous little
pilot-boats were seen dancing on the waves, showing a mere shred of
canvas, and looking out for a job.  "Yesterday was all sunshine and
calm, with pleasure-boats round us, and visitors heaving noospapers
aboard.  To-day it's all gloom, with gales brewin' and pilots bobbin'
about like Mother Cary's chickens."

"That's true, Jack," replied Jerry, whose poetic soul was fired by the
thought:--

  "`Timpest an' turmoil to-day,
  With lots a' salt-wather an' sorrow.
  Blue little waves on the say,
  An' sunny contintment to-morrow.'

"That's how it is, Jack, me boy, all the world over--even in owld
Ireland hersilf; an' sure if there's pace to be found on earth it's
there it's to be diskivered."

"Right, Jerry, peace is _to be_ discovered there, but I'm afraid it's in
a very distant future as yet," said Jack with a laugh.

"All in good time," retorted Jerry.

"Up lights!" called the mate down the hatchway.

"Ay, ay, sir," came in chorus from below.

Desks and boxes were thrust aside, the winch was manned, and the weighty
lantern mounted slowly to its nocturnal watch-tower.

Its red eye flashed upon a dark scene.  The gloom of approaching night
was deepened by the inky clouds that obscured the sky.  Thick fog banks
came sweeping past at intervals; a cold north-easterly gale conveyed a
wintry feeling to the air.  Small thick rain fell in abundance, and
everything attested the appropriateness of Jerry MacGowl's observation,
that it was "dirty weather intirely."

The floating light was made snug--in other words, prepared for action--
by having a good many more fathoms of her chain veered out, in order
that she might strain less and swing more freely.  Loose articles were
secured or stowed away.  Hatches were battened down, and many other
little nautical arrangements made which it would require a seaman to
understand as well as to describe in detail.

As the evening advanced the gale increased in violence tenfold, and
darkness settled down like an impenetrable pall over land and sea.  The
roar of breakers on the Goodwin Sands became so loud that it was
sometimes heard on board the Gull-light above the howling of the
tempest.  The sea rose so much and ran so violently among the
conflicting currents caused by wind, tide, and sand-banks, that the Gull
plunged, swooped, and tore at her cable so that the holding of it might
have appeared to a landsman little short of miraculous.  Hissing and
seething at the opposition she offered, the larger waves burst over her
bows, and swept the deck from stem to stern; but her ample scuppers
discharged it quickly, and up she rose again, dripping from the flood,
to face and fight and foil each succeeding billow.

High on the mast, swaying wildly to and fro, yet always hanging
perpendicular by reason of a simple mechanism, the lantern threw out its
bright beams, involving the vessel and the foam-clad boiling sea in a
circle of light which ended in darkness profound, forming, as it were, a
bright but ghostly chamber shut in with walls of ebony, and revealing,
in all its appalling reality, the fury of the sea.  What horrors lay
concealed in the darkness beyond no one could certainly know; but the
watch on board the Gull could form from past experience a pretty good
conception of them, as they cowered under the lee of the bulwarks and
looked anxiously out to windward.

Anxiously!  Ay, there was cause for anxiety that night.  The risk of
parting from their cable was something, though not very great; but the
risk of being run down by passing or driving ships during intervals of
fog was much greater, and the necessity of looking out for signals of
distress was urgent.

It was a night of warfare, and the battle had begun early.  Mr Welton's
record of the earlier part of that day in the log ran thus:--

"At 4 a.m. calm, with misty rain; at 8, wind south-east, light breeze.
At noon, west-south-west, fresh breeze and rain.  At 4 p.m., wind
south-west, fresh gale and heavy rain.  A large fleet anchored in the
Downs.  A schooner was seen to anchor in a bad place about this time.
At 7, wind still increasing.  The watch observed several vessels part
from their 7 anchors and proceed to Margate Roads.  At 7:30 the wind
flew into the nor'-nor'-west, and blew a hurricane."

These were the first mutterings of the fight that had begun.

It was now about a quarter to eight p.m. Jerry and his friend Shales
were cowering behind the bulwark on the starboard bow, gazing to
windward, but scarce able to keep their eyes open owing to wind and
spray.  Suddenly a large object was seen looming into the circle of
light.

"Stand by!" roared Jerry and Jack, with startling vigour, as the one
leaped towards the tiller, the other to the companion-hatch; "a vessel
bearing down on our hawse!"

The mate and men rushed on deck in time to see a large ship pass close
to the bow of the Gull.  Jack had cast loose the tiller, because,
although in ordinary circumstances the helm of a light-vessel is of no
use, this was one of the few occasions in which it could be of service.
The rush of the tide past a ship at anchor confers upon it at all times,
except during "slack water" (i.e., when the tide is on the turn), the
power of steering, so that she can be made to sheer swiftly to port or
starboard, as may be required.  But for this power, floating lights
would undoubtedly be run into more frequently than they are.

The danger being over, the helm was again made fast amidships, but as
several vessels were soon after seen sweeping past--two or three of them
burning tar-barrels and "flare-lights" for assistance, it became evident
that there would be little or no rest for any one on board that night.
The mate put on his oiled coat, trousers, boots, and sou'wester, and
remained on deck.

Between eight and nine o'clock a schooner was seen approaching.  She
came out of surrounding darkness like a dim phantom, and was apparently
making the attempt to go to windward of the floating light.  She failed,
and in a moment was bearing down with terrible speed right upon them.

"Starboard your helm!" shouted the mate, at the same moment springing to
the tiller of his own vessel.

The steersman of the driving vessel fortunately heard and obeyed the
order, and she passed--but shaved the bow of the Gull so closely that
one of the men declared he could easily have jumped aboard of her.

Again, at nine o'clock, there was a stir on board the floating light,
for another vessel was seen driving towards her.  This one was a brig.
The foremast was gone, and the remains of a tar-barrel were still
burning on her deck, but as none of the crew could be seen, it was
conjectured that some other ship must have run foul of her, and they had
escaped on board of it.  All hands were again called, the tiller was
cast loose, a wide sheer given to the Gull, and the brig went past them
at about the distance of a ship-length.  She went slowly by, owing, it
was afterwards ascertained, to the fact that she had ninety fathoms of
cable trailing from her bows.  She was laden with coal, and when the
Deal boatmen picked her up next day, they found the leg of a man on her
deck, terribly mutilated, as if it had got jambed somehow, and been
wrenched off!  But no one ever appeared to tell the fate of that
vessel's crew.

Shortly before ten, two tar-barrels were observed burning in a
north-easterly direction.  These proved to be the signals of distress
from a ship and a barque, which were dragging their anchors.  They
gradually drove down on the north part of the sands; the barque struck
on a part named the Goodwin Knoll, the ship went on the North sandhead.

Now the time for action had come.  The Goodwin light-vessel, being
nearest to the wrecks, fired a signal-gun and sent up a rocket.

"There goes the _Goodwin_!" cried the mate; "load the starboard gun,
Jack."

He ran down himself for a rocket as he spoke, and Jerry ran to the cabin
for the red-hot poker, which had been heating for some time past in
readiness for such an event.

"A gun and a flare to the south-east'ard, sir, close to us," shouted
Shales, who had just finished loading, as the mate returned with the
rocket and fixed it in position.

"Where away, Jack?" asked the mate hastily, for it now became his duty
to send the rocket in the direction of the new signals, so as to point
out the position of the wreck to the lifeboat-men on shore.

"Due south-east, sir; there they go again," said Jack, "not so close as
I thought.  South sandhead vessel signalling now, sir."

There was no further need for questions.  The flash of the gun was
distinctly seen, though the sound was not heard, owing to the howling of
the hurricane, and the bright flare of a second tar-barrel told its own
tale, while a gun and rocket from the floating light at the South
sandhead showed that the vessel in distress had been observed by her.

"Fire!" cried the mate.

Jerry applied the poker to the gun, and the scene which we have
described in a former chapter was re-enacted;--the blinding flash, the
roar, and the curved line of light across the black sky; but there was
no occasion that night to repeat the signals.  Everywhere along the
coast the salvors of life and property were on the alert--many of them
already in action, out battling in midnight darkness with the raging
sea.  The signal was at once replied to from Ramsgate.

Truly it was a dreadful night; one of those tremendous hurricanes which
visit our shores three or four times it may be in a century, seeming to
shake the world to its foundations, and to proclaim with unwonted
significance the dread power of Him who created and curbs the forces of
nature.

But the human beings who were involved in the perils of that night had
scant leisure, and little inclination, perchance, to contemplate its
sublimity.  The crew of the Gull light were surrounded by signals of
disaster and distress.  In whichever direction they turned their eyes
burning tar-barrels and other flaring lights were seen, telling their
dismal tale of human beings in urgent need of assistance or in dire
extremity.

Little more than an hour before midnight another craft was observed
driving down on the hawse of the Gull.  There was greater danger now,
because it happened to be near the turn of the tide, or "slack water,"
so that the rudder could not be used to advantage.  All hands were once
more turned out, and as the vessel drew near Mr Welton hailed her, but
got no reply.

"Let go the rudder-pendants!" cried the mate as he shipped the tiller.

The order was promptly obeyed, and the helm shoved hard a-port, but
there was no responsive sheer.  The sea was at the time currentless.
Another moment and the vessel, which was a large deserted brig, struck
the floating light on the port-bow, and her fore shrouds caught the
fluke of the spare anchor which projected from the side.

"An axe, Jerry; look alive!"

Jerry required no spur; he bounded forward, caught up an axe, and leaped
with it into the chains of the vessel, which had already smashed part of
the Gull's bulwarks and wrenched the iron band off the cat-head.

"Cut away everything," cried the mate, who observed that the decks of
the brig were full of water, and feared that she might be in a sinking
condition.

The other men of the Gull were busy with boat-hooks, oars, and fenders,
straining every nerve to get clear of this unwelcome visitor, while
Jerry dealt the shrouds a few telling blows which quickly cut them
through, but, in sweeping past, the main-topsail yard-arm of the brig
went crashing into the lantern.  Instantly the lamps were extinguished,
and the bright beams of the floating light were gone!  The brig then
dropt astern and was soon lost to view.

This was a disaster of the most serious nature--involving as it did the
absence of a light, on the faithful glow of which the fate of hundreds
of vessels might depend.  Fortunately, however, the extreme fury of the
gale had begun to abate; it was therefore probable that all the vessels
which had not already been wrecked had found ports of shelter, or would
now be able to hold on to their anchors and weather the storm.

But floating-lights are not left without resource in a catastrophe such
as this.  In the book of Regulations for the Service it is ordered that,
in circumstances of this kind, two red lights are to be shown, one at
the end of the davit forward, the other on a stanchion beside the ensign
staff aft, and likewise a red flare light is to be shown every quarter
of an hour.  Accordingly, while some of the men lit and fixed up the red
lanterns, Jerry MacGowl was told off to the duty of showing the red
flares, or, as he himself expressed it, "settin' off a succession o'
fireworks, which wos mightily purty, no doubt, an' would have bin highly
entertainin' if it had been foin weather, and a time of rejoycin'!"

Meanwhile the lantern was lowered, and it was found that the only damage
done had been the shattering of one of its large panes of glass.  The
lamps, although blown out, had not been injured.  The men therefore set
vigorously to work to put in a spare pane, and get the light once more
into working order.

