Happily these remarks did not reach Ernest's ears.  Gratifying as they
must have been, they would have proved somewhat dangerous, even to a
mind so well balanced as his was.  He knew that he had achieved a
success, but he was well aware that, after all, it was not a very great
one, and that he had many more far far greater to achieve before the
victory would be won.

I must not forget one of the amusements which generally terminated the
winter half of the year.  It was a grand race on stilts.  There was a
wide extent of flat meadow land in the neighbourhood, intersected with
narrow ditches full of water.  This was the ground selected for the
sport.  It was something like the Landes in the south of France.
Monsieur Malin had introduced the amusement.

Boys when they first came to the school, who had not been accustomed to
walk on stilts, were surprised at the height of those used, and the
rapidity with which the older fellows walked along on them.  Many of
them were ten feet high.  The resting-place for the feet was a piece of
wood flat on the upper surface, with a strap to it which could be
fastened round the feet or not.  The upper ends of the poles were held
by the hands, with the shoulders pressing against them.  By this mode a
boy could leap off his stilts without risk.  Some are used which do not
reach above the knee, round which the end is secured by a strap, but a
fall with these may prove a very serious matter, and the Doctor would
not allow them to be used.

It was good fun on stilt day to see the greater part of the school
mounted up high above the ground, and striding away at a rapid rate over
the fields; to hear the shouts and shrieks of laughter, especially if
any unfortunate wight put the end of his stilt into a ditch deeper than
he expected, and, unable to draw it out again, dropped on his nose.
Monsieur Malin generally led the party, and no one cheered and laughed
more than he did.  This year it was arranged that a steeple-chase should
take place; so it was called; but in reality it was not a steeple which
formed the goal, but a low object--a white gate, which could only be
seen from an elevation; therefore the boys with the highest stilts were
the best able to keep it in sight.

Fancy upwards of eighty boys collected on a fine clear frosty afternoon,
mounted up five or six feet off the ground, some even more, stalking
away as fast as they could go over the fields, shouting, and laughing,
and hallooing to each other.

As usual, Ernest was one of the most active.  He and Buttar took the
lead, but they were closely followed by Tom Bouldon, who was very great
upon stilts.  The exercise suited his temperament.  He had been at the
school ever since Monsieur Malin introduced them, and so he was
well-practised in their use.  He thus had an advantage Ernest did not
possess.  He went steadily on across hedges and ditches, and across
ploughed fields, and moist meadows and marshes, till he overtook Buttar,
and then he came up with Ernest, who was beginning to fag, and then he
went ahead, and finally got in at the winning-post half a field's length
before anybody else.

Two days after that the school broke up, and the boys, in high spirits
at the anticipation of the amusements they were to enjoy, started off in
all directions to their respective homes.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS.  SKATING AND OTHER WINTER AMUSEMENTS.

Ernest liked his school very much, but he had good reason to love his
home still more, for such a home as his--or rather its inhabitants,
which constituted it his home--was well worthy of all the affection of
his warm affectionate heart.  His father and mother were so wise and
sensible and kind, so just and so indulgent.  The expression of their
countenances and their general personal appearance at once showed that
they were above the ordinary run of people; yet, noble as they looked,
none but the base and evil-disposed were afraid of them.  It was a
pleasure to see the smiling faces and the affectionate looks with which
they were received as they walked about the village, where they and
their ancestors for several generations had lived before them.  Often
and often they might be seen simply, and, if the weather was bad,
roughly, dressed; going from cottage to cottage, with a basket of
medicines, or provisions and clothing, for those poor neighbours who
were, they well knew, utterly unable to obtain them for themselves.
Their daughters followed their example.  No more sweet, amiable, and yet
refined, girls were to be found in the country.  Their brothers declared
that no such girls existed in the world; and yet, though they could do
all sorts of things, and ride, and fish, and even play cricket with them
on a pinch, they were not in the slightest degree proud or conceited.
They could sing and play, and when they went to balls, which was not
very often, no young ladies appeared to greater advantage, or were more
lively or graceful.  They were admired, and yet fully respected, by all
who knew them.

I have described what Ernest was.  His brothers were his equals in most
respects.  His eldest brother was a very fine young man, and had taken
high honours at Cambridge.  He was an excellent specimen of an English
gentleman of the nineteenth century.  Free from all affectation and
pedantry, still his whole nature seemed to revolt from anything slangish
or low.  No oaths, nor anything which would be considered one, nor any
cant expressions, ever escaped his lips.  Yet he was full of life and
spirits, the soul of every society in which he moved.  He had numerous
friends, and so mild and quiet was his disposition that he seldom or
never made enemies; or rather, I may say, if he made an enemy, he
quickly got rid of his enmity.  All his brothers looked up to him, and
loved him heartily.

"My brother John says so and so," or "My brother John did so and so,"
was a constant phrase of theirs, and it was always something good he had
said or done.  He was at home, and so were indeed all Ernest's brothers.
One was in the navy--Frank.  What a light-hearted and merry fellow he
was.  He had seen some hard service, had been highly spoken of in a
dispatch, and had a medal on his breast.  He was a gallant, true-hearted
sailor, and was as much liked by his companions afloat as his brothers
were by theirs on shore.

Such were the inhabitants of Oaklands.  The house itself was a fine old
substantially-built edifice, with thick walls, standing on a gentle
elevation, and overlooking a wide extent of country.  The grounds which
surrounded it were large, and contained woods, and shady walks, and
fishponds, or rather lakes, and ornamental flower gardens, and rich
velvety lawns, and kitchen gardens.

A short time before the holidays, Mr Bracebridge had written to his
son, desiring to have the addresses of several of them.  What was his
reason for doing this, his father did not tell him.

The holidays began.  What a happy Christmas-day the whole family spent
together!  It was spent as Christmas-day should be spent--in
affectionate family intercourse, and not in a wild gaiety which is
calculated to drive away all thought and recollection of the great and
glorious event it is intended to celebrate on that day.  How happy
everybody was both upstairs and downstairs; what long yarns Frank spun
of his adventures in many lands, and his hair-breadth escapes; how he
made them laugh at some of his stories, and cry, if their hair did not
stand on end, at others, so exciting or so full of horror did they
appear.  I should like to repeat some of them, but I have not time to do
so now.  Of course everybody was wishing for a frost, that they might
have skating.

"Oh, how delightful it will be!" exclaimed the midshipman.  "I have not
put on a pair of skates for the last five years.  I have seen ice enough
and to spare in the shape of icebergs, and floes, and fields of ice, but
that is not the sort of ice suitable for skating.  A big, thundering
iceberg is a wonderful thing; we nearly got run down by one, or rather
we nearly ran into one, if the truth must be said, when I was in the
`Stag,' only, of course, we always lay the blame on anything but
ourselves; so in this case we blamed the iceberg for getting in our way,
as if it had not just as much right to be there as we had, and as if it
had not been our business to get out of its way.  We were going round
Cape Horn, and the master thought fit to make a considerable offing, and
to keep away to the southward.  It was my watch on deck.  We had a fair
wind on our starboard quarter.  Jim Holdfast, whom I took out with me,
and who promises to turn out a prime sailor, was forward.  It was a
pitchy dark night.  We could barely make out our hands held out before
us, and as to seeing across the deck, that was impossible.  We had three
reefs in our topsails, and though it was not blowing very hard--that is
to say, a man might open his mouth without fear of having his teeth
blown down his throat--we were running at the rate of nearly eight knots
an hour through the water.  By the way the stern of the ship lifted, and
then by the feeling that she was gliding away downward into the depths
of some watery valley, we knew that huge mountainous seas were rolling
up astern of us.  I frequently looked astern to try and make them out,
but I could only hear their loud surge or slush (I must coin a word), as
they broke close to our taffrail.  Now and then, by keeping my eye on
the sky, a vast ominous darkness came up between me and it, and that I
knew from experience was a giant billow, big enough, if it once broke
over us, to swallow up us, or a ship ten times as large.  My watch was
nearly out.  I was thinking that I should not be sorry to get below, and
go fast asleep.  Now, `you gentlefolks of England, who stay at home at
ease,' will, I dare say, fancy that no one could go to sleep under such
circumstances; but for us sailors it would never do if we allowed a gale
of wind or any such trifle to keep us awake when it was not our watch on
deck.  The officer of the watch had just ordered eight bells to be
struck, that is to say, it was the end of the first watch, or twelve
o'clock at night, when a voice from forward shrieked out--for it was not
an ordinary hail, but a cry which showed that life or death depended on
the words being heard.

"`Iceberg ahead!  Port the helm!--port--port--luff--luff!  Ease away the
weather braces--haul taut the lee braces!'

"I recognised the voice as that of Jim Holdfast.  I do not think the
second-lieutenant, who had the watch, was aware who was speaking, but he
was a sensible fellow, and instead of being angry, as some officers
would have been at finding anybody venturing to give an order instead of
themselves, he repeated it, and discovering that it was obeyed, hurried
forward to ascertain more clearly if possible the state of things.  I
looked out to leeward.  There rising, as it were, out of the ocean was
an indistinct mass of luminous matter (I can call it by no other name),
out of which proceeded a cold chilling air, piercing to our very marrow.
High, high above us it seemed to tower.  The seas roared against its
base.  Not a man on deck but held his breath, for no one knew what was
next to happen.  We were terribly near to it.  The sea, as it dashed up
the sides of the icy rock--for there was no doubt it was an iceberg--
came toppling back in showers of foam, and deluging our decks.  As the
ship heeled over to the breeze, her mainyard, I verily believe, grazed
the iceberg.  Had she been a few feet nearer to it, perhaps, I may say,
a few inches, I do not believe that the gallant little sloop or any one
on board would ever again have been heard of.  The watch below had been
called, and they came tumbling up in a great hurry, not knowing what was
the matter.  I could tell by the exclamations of a few near me that they
wished themselves anywhere but where they were.  The dear little ship
flew on, and in another minute the iceberg was left astern.  Then a
cheer from all hands arose, and I believe many returned sincere, though
silent, thanks to Him who had so mercifully preserved us.  We hauled our
wind and stood to the northward, for we had no fancy to encounter
another of those big ice mountains in that dark night, not but what we
knew that even then we might still run against one.  You see, our sailor
philosophy is to do our very best, and then not to trouble our heads
more than we can help as to what are to be the consequences.  When the
excitement had calmed down, inquiries were made as to who had seen the
iceberg, and so promptly given the order to `port the helm,' through
which the ship had undoubtedly been saved.  Jim Holdfast, when he heard
the inquiries made, was in a great fright, thinking that he was going to
be punished, or well rowed at all events; and he never would have
confessed that he had ventured to give the order, had not I gone to him
and insisted on his coming forward, and saying how he had seen the
iceberg, and had known that, unless what he had ordered was done, the
ship would be lost.  The next day the sea went down, and we were able
before night to haul up permanently on our course for Valparaiso, the
capital of Chili.  Well, after breakfast I got Jim to come aft with me
to the captain, who, with most of the officers, was on the quarter-deck.

"`I've found the culprit, sir,' said I.  `Here's the man who first
discovered the iceberg, though he had never seen one before, and--'

"`And gave the order which saved the ship, and all our lives,' said the
captain, interrupting me, and smiling pleasantly.  `Holdfast, my man,
you did a most seaman-like thing.  I shall at once give you a higher
rating, for you have shown yourself thoroughly deserving of it.'

"I never saw a fellow so thoroughly astonished.  He pulled away a lock
of his hair, till I thought he would haul it out by the roots, for he,
of course, held his hat in his hand; and he scraped away with his foot,
and said that he didn't think he had done anything out of the common
way, and it was only his duty, and that sort of thing; but there was
nothing like affectation in what he said.  Still more astonished was he
when the captain continued--

"`You shall come to my clerk every day, and perhaps he will give you
some instruction which may be useful to you.  If you go on as you have
begun, I may hope some day to see you on the quarter-deck.'

"The captain said a good deal more to the same effect.  As I was saying,
Jim was astonished.  He said very little in return, but only pulled away
harder than ever at his hair.  Though before that time I should not have
supposed that he had a spark of ambition in his soul, I after this
observed a marked change in his demeanour and character.  I suspect his
eye was never off the quarter-deck.  When not on duty, he was always
reading and writing, and talking on nautical subjects.  He was neater,
and cleaner, and more active than before; at the same time that he was
just as respectful as ever to all above him.  He came home with us, and
as soon as the ship was paid off, he went of his own accord to a
nautical school to learn navigation, to enable him to do which he had
saved up every farthing of his pay.  Now, I say that Jim has set an
example which many young gentlemen would do well to follow.  If our
captain gets a ship soon, he will take him with him; and when he hears
how he has been employing his time on shore, I am very certain that he
will keep his eye on him, and advance him if he can."

Everybody present had listened with intense interest to Frank's account
of his ship's narrow escape from destruction, and this of course
encouraged him to continue his narrations on subsequent evenings; but as
my readers are not his brothers and sisters, and father and mother, who
might possibly be somewhat prejudiced in his favour, I will not repeat
them.

The young men and boys were all looking out eagerly for a frost; and
every night they went out, one after the other, to ascertain whether the
smell of the air gave indications of one having set in.  Who does not
know that peculiar clear, fresh feeling, so invigorating and
exhilarating, which the air has when a frost has begun?  Night after
night, however, passed, and still the frost did not commence; but as the
atmosphere grew colder and colder, everybody believed that their hopes
would not long be delayed.  Skates, which had long lain dormant in
tool-chests and cupboards, were got out and polished.  Skating shoes or
boots were greased, and straps were repaired.  At last Ernest, in high
glee, rushed in among the family circle assembled around the
drawing-room fire one evening, and declared that a right honest frost
had, without the slightest doubt, set in, and that in two days he felt
sure the ice would bear.  The anticipation of the pleasure they all so
much enjoyed put them into great spirits; and if either of the younger
ones had been asked what he considered the greatest misfortune that
could happen to the world, he would very likely have replied, a thaw.
When, however, they had exhausted the subject, or at all events the
patience of their hearers, their eldest sister proposed that those who
were not engaged in any manual employment should read or tell a tale.
The proposal was cordially welcomed.  Frank gave for his share of the
evening's amusements a further account of his adventures; then a tale
was read; and at last Charles, Ernest's second brother, who had lately
returned from Germany, undertook to give a terrible ghost story which he
had heard in that country, and which, as he said, had the advantage of
being entirely true, though he was not disposed to quarrel with those
who would not believe it.

"Is it an ancient or modern story, Charles?" asked Ernest; "I have no
fancy for modern ghost stories.  They all end in so ridiculous a way
that one feels vexed at having taken the trouble of reading them."

"Oh, this is a true antique tale," said Charles; "but you shall hear it.
Is everybody ready to attend?  Well, then.  Once upon a time--"

"No! no! no!  Don't begin a story in that old-fashioned, obsolete way,"
exclaimed Ernest.  "I never can fancy that a story is worth hearing when
it begins with `Once upon a time.'"

"Heave ahead! and let us hear what it is about," cried Frank.  "Leave
out the `Once upon a time.'  We are all ready.  Just plunge at once into
the story--don't give us a long-winded prelude, that is all."

"Very well, then; I will leave out the objectionable expression, and
will begin at once by telling you all about the hero and his exploits up
to the time my story commences.  So once more.  Listen--listen now!
Here goes:--

"Kurd von Stein was a gallant and adventurous knight; he cared not how
far he wandered, nor what danger lay in his path.  He had travelled to
all lands, and in all climates, defending ladies from insult, and the
defenceless from oppression.  His love of adventure led him through wood
and wild, over mountains and across seas; but it was in the night that
he loved best to ride forth, when the soft moon shone on the silvery
lake and quiet forest; when the stars gazed calmly on the earth, as if
seeking to penetrate its future, and mourning over its past; when the
hoot of the owl and the cry of the beast of prey were the only sounds to
be heard, besides the tread of his own charger, when he left the forest
glade for the more beaten track.
