"Ay, this very night," said Jack, as we hurried back to the spot where
our goods had been left.

As we went along in silence I noticed that Peterkin sighed once or twice
very heavily, and I asked him if he was quite well.

"Well?  Ay, well enough in body, Ralph, but ill at ease in mind.  How
can it be otherwise when we are thus suddenly and unexpectedly about to
take leave of our dear friends the gorillas?  I declare my heart is fit
to break."

"I sympathise with you, Peterkin," said I, "for I have not yet made
nearly as many notes in regard to these monster-monkeys as I could have
wished.  However, I am thankful for what I have got, and perhaps we may
come back here again one of these days."

"What bloodthirsty fellows!" cried Jack, laughing.  "If you talk so, I
fear that Mak and I shall have to cut your acquaintance; for, you see,
he and I have got a _little_ feeling left."

"Well, it's natural, I fancy," observed Peterkin, "that gorillas should
feel for their kindred.  However, I console myself with the thought that
the country farther south is much better filled with other game,
although the great puggy is not there.  And then we shall come among
lions again, which we can never find, I believe, in the gorilla country.
I wonder if the gorilla has really driven them out of this part of
Africa."

"Some think it probable," observed I, "but we cannot make sure of that
point."

"Well, we can at all events make sure of this point," cried Peterkin, as
we came in sight of our encampment, "that lions are thick enough in the
country whither we are bound; so let's have a good supper, and hurrah
for the south!  It's a bright prospect before us.  A fair lady to be
saved; possibly a fight with the niggers, and lion, elephant,
rhinoceros, alligator, hippopotamus, and buffalo shooting by way of
relaxation in the intervals of the war!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING--WE FLY, AND I MAKE A NARROW ESCAPE FROM AN
APPALLING FATE.

During many days after the incidents narrated in the last chapter did
Jack, and Peterkin, and Makarooroo, and I, push across the continent
through bush and brake, over hill and dale, morass and plain, at our
utmost possible speed.  We did not, during the whole course of our
journey, overtake the Portuguese slave-dealer; but we thought little of
that, for it was not very probable that we should hit upon exactly the
same route, and we entertained sanguine hopes that the energy and speed
with which we kept steadily and undeviatingly on our way would enable us
to reach the village of Mbango before the slave-dealer and his party.

When I look back upon that time now, and reflect calmly on the dangers
we encountered and the hardships we endured, I confess that I am filled
with amazement.  I might easily fill several volumes such as this with
anecdotes of our encounters with wild animals, and other adventures; but
however interesting these might be in themselves, I must not forget that
some of the main incidents of our sojourn in Africa have yet to be
related, and that there is a limit to the patience of even youthful
readers.

Our power of enduring fatigue and sustained active exertion, with
comparatively short intervals of nightly repose, was much greater than I
could have believed to be possible.  I have no doubt that anxiety to
save Okandaga from the terrible fate that hung over her enabled us to
bear up under fatigues which would at other times have overcome us.  I
know not well how it was that I kept up with my strong and agile
comrades.  Oftentimes I felt ready to drop down as I walked, yet somehow
I never thought of falling behind, but went doggedly on, and at nights
found myself little worse in condition than they.  Peterkin, although
small, was tough and springy, and his spirits seemed rather to rise than
otherwise as his strength abated.  As for Jack, I never saw any one like
him.  He seemed like a lion roaming in his strength over his native
deserts.  So hardened had we all become during the course of our travels
that we found ourselves not only equal to Makarooroo in pedestrian
powers, but superior; for when occasion required we could almost knock
him up, but I am free to admit that we never succeeded in doing this
thoroughly.  In short, we were all as nearly as possible equal to each
other, with the exception of Jack, who seemed in every way invulnerable.

During this long and hurried but intensely interesting and delightful
journey we came upon, at different times, almost every species of
animal, plant, and tree peculiar to the African continent.  Oftentimes
we passed by droves and herds of elephants, deer, buffalo, giraffes,
antelopes, and zebras; we saw rhinoceroses, alligators, leopards, lions,
apes of several kinds, and smaller monkeys innumerable.  We also saw
great numbers of birds--some curious on account of their habits and
form, others beautiful and bright as the rainbow.

Yet although, as I have said, this journey was very delightful, our
feelings were at different times exceedingly varied, and not
unfrequently pained; for while we saw around us much that was beautiful,
innocent, and lovely, we also witnessed the conflicts of many wild
creatures, and sometimes came across evidences of the savage and cruel
dispositions of the human beings by whom the country was peopled.  We
always, however, carefully avoided native villages, being anxious not to
be interrupted on our forced march.  Neither did we turn aside to hunt,
although we were much tempted so to do, but contented ourselves with
killing such animals as we required for our daily subsistence; and of
these we shot as many as we required without having to turn aside from
our straight course.

Thus we went on day after day, and slept under the shade of the trees or
under the wide canopy of heaven night after night, until we arrived one
day at a beautiful valley, bordered by a plain, and traversed by a
river, where Peterkin met with a sad accident, and our onward progress
was for a short period arrested.

It happened thus:--The region through which we chanced to be passing was
peopled by so many natives that we had the utmost difficulty in avoiding
them, and more than once were compelled to halt during the daytime in
some sequestered dell, and resume our journey during the night.

One day--it was, if I remember rightly, about two o'clock in the
afternoon--we came suddenly in sight of a native village on the banks of
the river whose course we were at that time following, and made a wide
detour in order to avoid it.  We had passed it several miles, and were
gradually bending into our course again, when we came unexpectedly upon
a band of natives who had been out hunting and were returning to their
village with the spoils of the chase on their shoulders.  Both parties
at once came to an abrupt halt, and we stood for several minutes looking
at each other--the natives in speechless amazement, while we conversed
in whispers, uncertain what to do.

We knew that if we made friendly advances we should no doubt be
welcomed, but then we should certainly be compelled to go back with them
to their village and spend at least a day or two with them, as we could
not hope to give them a satisfactory reason for our going on at once.
We also knew that to go on in spite of them would produce a quarrel,
and, of course, a fight, which, as it would certainly result in
bloodshed, was by all means to be avoided for we could not bear to think
that a mere caprice of ours in visiting Africa should be the means of
causing the death of a single human being, if we could prevent it.

"What _is_ to be done?" said Peterkin, looking at Jack in despair.

"I don't know," replied Jack.  "It's very awkward.  It will never do to
go all the way back to the village with these stupid fellows, and we
cannot tell them our real reason for going on; for, in the first place,
they would perhaps not believe us, or, in the second place, they might
offer to join us."

"Fight," said Makarooroo in a low tone, grinding his teeth together and
clutching his rifle.

I felt deep sympathy with the poor fellow, for I knew well that in
disposition he was naturally the reverse of quarrelsome, and that his
present state of mind was the consequence of anxiety for the deliverance
of his faithful bride.

"No, no," replied Jack quickly; "we shall not fight."

"Suppose we bolt!" whispered Peterkin, brightening up as the idea
occurred to him--"regularly run away!"

We seized at the idea instantly.  We were all of us hard of muscle and
strong of wind now, and we knew that we could outstrip the savages.

"We'll do it!" said Jack hastily.  "Let us scatter, too, so as to
perplex them at the outset."

"Capital!  Then here goes.  I'm off," cried Peterkin.

"Stay!" said Jack.

"Why?" demanded Peterkin.

"Because we must appoint a place of rendezvous if we would hope to meet
again."

"True; I forgot that."

"D'you all see yonder blue mountain-peak?"

"Let us meet there.  If we miss each other at the base, let us proceed
to the summit and wait.  Away!"

As Jack uttered the last word we all turned right about and fled like
the wind.  The savages instantly set up a hideous yell, and darted after
us; but we made for the thick woods, and scattering in all directions,
as had been previously arranged, speedily threw them off the scent, and
finally made our escape.

For the first time since landing on the continent of Africa, I now found
myself totally alone in the wild forest.  After separating from my
companions, I ran at my utmost speed in the direction of a dense jungle,
where I purposed taking shelter until the natives should pass by, and
then come out and pursue my way leisurely.  But I was prevented from
adopting this course in consequence of two very fleet negroes
discovering my intention, and, by taking a short cut, frustrating it.  I
was compelled, therefore, to keep in the more open part of the forest,
and trust simply to speed and endurance for escape.

I should think that I ran nearly two miles at full speed, and kept well
ahead of my pursuers.  Indeed, I had distanced them considerably; but
feeling that I could not hold out long at such a killing pace, I pulled
up a little, and allowed them to gain on me slightly.  I was just about
to resume my full speed, and, if possible, throw them at once far
behind, when my foot was caught by a thorny shrub, and I fell headlong
to the ground.  I was completely stunned for a moment or two, and lay
quite motionless.  But my consciousness suddenly returned, accompanied
by a feeling of imminent danger, which caused me to spring up and renew
my headlong career.  Glancing over my shoulder, I saw that the two
natives had gained so much on me that had I lain a few seconds longer I
must inevitably have been captured.

I exerted myself now beyond my powers.  My head, too, from the shock I
had received, became confused, and I scarce knew whither I was going.
Presently a loud, dull roar, as if of distant thunder, struck upon my
ear, and I beheld what appeared to me to be a vast white plain covered
with mist before.  Next moment I found myself on the brink of a
precipice of a hundred feet deep, over which, a little to my left, a
large river fell, and thundered down into a dark abyss, whence issued
those clouds of spray which I had taken for a white plain in the
confusion of my brain and vision.

I made a desperate effort to check myself, but it was too late.  My
heels broke off the earthy edge of the cliff, and I obtained just one
awful glance of the horrid turmoil directly below me as I fell over with
a mass of debris.  I uttered an involuntary shriek of agony, and flung
my arms wildly out.  My hand clutched the branch of an overhanging bush.
This, slight though it was, was the means, under God, of saving my
life.  The branch broke off, but it checked my fall, and at the same
time swung me into the centre of a tree which projected out from the
cliff almost horizontally.  Through this tree I went crashing with
fearful violence, until I was arrested by my chest striking against a
stout branch.  This I clutched with the tenacity of despair, and
wriggling myself, as it were, along it, wound my arms and legs round it,
and held on for some time with the utmost fervour of muscular energy.

My position now was beyond conception horrible.  I shut my eyes and
prayed earnestly for help.  Presently I opened them, and in the position
in which I then lay, the first thing I saw was the boiling water of the
fall more than a hundred feet below me.  My agony was such that large
drops of perspiration broke out all over my forehead.  It was many
minutes before I could summon up courage to turn my head so as to look
upward, for I had a vague feeling that if I were to move the branch on
which I lay would break off.  When I did so, I observed that the
branches over my head completely screened the sky from me, so that I
knew I had escaped one danger; for the natives, believing, no doubt,
that I had fallen down into the river, would at once give up their
hopeless pursuit.  The branch on which I lay was so slender that it
swayed about with every motion that I made, and the longer I remained
there the more nervous did I become.

At last I bethought me that unless I made a manful effort I should
certainly perish, so I looked about me until I became accustomed to the
giddy position.  Then I perceived that, by creeping along the branch
until I gained the trunk of the tree, I could descend by means of it to
the face of the precipice from which it projected, and thus gain a
narrow ledge of rock that overhung the abyss.  In any other
circumstances I would as soon have ventured to cross the Falls of
Niagara on a tight-rope; but I had no other alternative, so I crept
along the branch slowly and nervously, clinging to it, at the same time,
with terrible tenacity.  At last I gained the trunk of the tree and
breathed more freely, for it was much steadier than the branch.

The trunk projected, as I have said, almost horizontally from the
precipice, so I had to draw myself carefully along it, not daring to get
on my hands and knees, and finally reached the ledge above referred to.
Compared with my former position, this was a place of temporary safety,
for it was three feet wide, and having a good head, I had no fear of
falling over.  But on looking up my heart sank within me, for the bare
cliff offered no foothold whatever.  I do not believe that a monkey
could have climbed it.  To descend the precipice was equally impossible,
for it was like a wall.  My only hope, therefore, lay in the ledge on
which I stood, and which, I observed, ran along to the right and turned
round a projecting rock that hid the remainder of it from view.

Hasting along it, I found, to my inexpressible relief, that it
communicated with the top of the precipice.  The ascent was difficult
and dangerous; but at last I succeeded in passing the most serious part,
and soon gained the summit of the cliff in safety, where I immediately
fell on my knees and returned thanks for my deliverance.

I had passed nearly an hour in the trying adventure which I have just
related, and feeling that my companions would naturally begin soon to be
anxious about me, I started for our rendezvous, which I reached in
little more than an hour and a half.  Here I found Jack seated alone
beside a stream of water, from which he occasionally lifted a little in
the hollow of his hand and drank greedily.

"Ah, Ralph, my boy!" he exclaimed joyfully as I came up, "I'm glad
you've come.  I had begun to fear that you must have been captured.  Ay,
drink, lad!  You seem warm enough, though I scarcely think you can be
much more so than I am.  What a run we have had, to be sure!  But, what,
Ralph--your clothes are much torn, and your face and hands are
scratched.  Why, you must have got among thorns.  Not badly hurt, I
trust?"

"Oh no; nothing to speak of.  I have, however, had a narrow escape.  But
before I speak of that, what of Peterkin?"

"I don't know," replied Jack, with an anxious expression; "and to say
truth, I begin to feel uneasy about him, for he ought to have been here
almost as soon as myself."

"How so?  Did you, then, run together?"

"Latterly we did.  At first we separated, and I knew not what had become
either of him or you.  The fact is, I had enough to do to look out for
myself, for a dozen of rascally niggers kept close upon my heels and
tried my powers of running somewhat; so I took to the thick wood and
made a detour, to throw them off the scent.  All at once I heard a
smashing of the bushes right in front of me, and before I knew what I
was about, Peterkin bounced through the underwood and almost plunged
into my arms.  We both gave an involuntary yell of alarm.

"`There's two of 'em right on my heels,' said he in a gasp, as he dashed
off again.  `Come along with me, Jack.'

"I followed as fast as I could, and we crossed an open plain together,
when I looked over my shoulder, and saw that all the other fellows had
given up the chase except the two mentioned by Peterkin.  These kept on
after us, and somehow or other we got separated again, just after
re-entering the wood on the other side of the plain.  Of course I ran
on, expecting to see my companion every minute.  Finally I came to the
rendezvous, and here I found that the savages had given up all hope of
overtaking me, for I could see nothing of them."

"How long ago is that?"  I inquired quickly.

"About an hour."

"Then poor Peterkin must have been caught," said I, in a voice of
despair.

"No, that is not likely," replied Jack; "for I climbed a high tree and
saw the savages recrossing the plain alone.  I think it probable he may
have lost his way, and is afraid to climb trees or to fire off his gun
to signal us, for fear of being heard or seen by the niggers.  I have
sent Mak, who came here soon after I did, to search for him."

"It may be as you say, Jack, but we must go at once to look for him."

"With all my heart, Ralph.  I only waited until you had sufficiently
rested."

"The body cannot rest when the mind is ill at ease.  Come, let us start
at once.  I shall tell you of my little adventure as we go along."

We soon reached the edge of the plain where Jack had been separated from
his companion, and here we proceeded to make a careful search.  Being
