around him, he cleared an opening, and, dashing past his foes with a
wild yell, bounded off through the shrubbery.  The guerilleros followed,
screaming with rage; and we could hear an occasional shot, as they
continued the pursuit into the distant woods.  Dubrosc was carried back
into the rancho, apparently lifeless.

We were still wondering how our comrade had untied himself, when one of
the guerilleros, lifting a piece of the thong, exclaimed:

"_Carajo! ha cortado el briboncito_!"  (The little rascal has cut it!)
and the man darted into the shrubbery in search of little Jack.  It was
with us a moment of fearful suspense.  We expected to see poor Jack
sacrificed instantly.  We watched the man with intense emotion, as he
ran to and fro.

At length he threw up his arms with a gesture of surprise, calling out
at the same time:

"_Por todos santos! se fue_!"  (By all the saints! he's gone!)

"Hurrah!" cried Chane; "holies!--such a gossoon as that boy!"

Several of the guerilleros dived into the thicket; but their search was
in vain.

We were now separated, so that we could no longer converse, and were
more strictly watched, two sentries standing over each of us.  We spent
about an hour in this way.  Straggling parties at intervals came back
from the pursuit, and we could gather, from what we overheard, that
neither Lincoln nor Jack had yet been retaken.

We could hear talking in the rear of the rancho, and we felt that our
fate was being determined upon.  It was plain Dubrosc was not in command
of the party.  Had he been so, we should never have been carried beyond
the olive-grove.  It appeared we were to be hung elsewhere.

At length a movement was visible that betokened departure.  Our horses
were taken away, and saddled mules were led out in front of the rancho.
Upon these we were set, and strapped tightly to the saddles.  A serape
was passed over each of us, and we were blinded by tapojos.  A bugle
then sounded the "forward".  We could hear a confusion of noises, the
prancing of many hoofs, and the next moment we felt ourselves moving
along at a hurried pace through the woods.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

A BLIND RIDE.

We rode all night.  The mule-blinds, although preventing us from seeing
a single object, proved to be an advantage.  They saved our eyes and
faces from the thorny claws of the acacia and mezquite.  Without hands
to fend them off, these would have torn us badly, as we could feel them,
from time to time, penetrating even the hard leather of the tapojos.
Our thongs chafed us, and we suffered great pain from the monotonous
motion.  Our road lay through thick woods.  This we could perceive from
the constant rustle of the leaves and the crackling of branches, as the
cavalcade passed on.

Towards morning our route led over hills, steep and difficult, we could
tell from the attitudes of our animals.  We had passed the level plains,
and were entering among the "foothills" of the Mexican mountains.  There
was no passing or repassing of one another.  From this I concluded that
we were journeying along a narrow road, and in single file.

Raoul was directly in front of me, and we could converse at times.

"Where do you think they are taking us, Raoul?"  I inquired, speaking in
French.

"To Cenobio's hacienda.  I hope so, at least!"

"Why do you hope so?"

"Because we shall stand some chance for our lives.  Cenobio is a noble
fellow."

"You know him, then?"

"Yes, Captain; I have helped him a little in the contraband trade."

"A smuggler, is he?"

"Why, in this country it is hardly fair to call it by so harsh a name,
as the Government itself dips out of the same dish.  Smuggling here, as
in most other countries, should be looked upon rather as the offspring
of necessity and maladministration than as a vice in itself.  Cenobio is
a _contrabandisto_, and upon a large scale."

"And you are a political philosopher, Raoul!"

"Bah!  Captain; it would be bad if I could not defend my own calling,"
replied my comrade, with a laugh.

"You think, then, that we are in the hands of Cenobio's men."

"I am sure of it, Captain.  _Sacre_! had it been Jarauta's band, we
would have been in heaven--that is, our souls--and our bodies would now
be embellishing some of the trees upon Don Cosme's plantation.  Heaven
protect us from Jarauta!  The robber-priest gives but short shrift to
any of his enemies; but if he could lay his hands on your humble
servant, you would see hanging done in double-quick time."

"Why think you we are with Cenobio's guerilla?"

"I know Yanez, whom we saw at the rancho.  He is one of Cenobio's
officers, and the leader of this party, which is only a detachment.  I
am rather surprised that _he_ has brought us away, considering that
Dubrosc is with him; there must have been some influence in our favour
which I cannot understand."

I was struck by the remark, and began to reflect upon it in silence.
The voice of the Frenchman again fell upon my ear.

"I cannot be mistaken.  No--this hill--it runs down to the San Juan
River."

Again, after a short interval, as we felt ourselves fording a stream,
Raoul said:

"Yes, the San Juan--I know the stony bottom--just the depth, too, at
this season."

Our mules plunged through the swift current, flinging the spray over our
heads.  We could feel the water up to the saddle-flaps, cold as ice; and
yet we were journeying in the hot tropic.  But we were fording a stream
fed by the snows of Orizava.

"Now I am certain of the road," continued Raoul, after we had crossed.
"I know this bank well.  The mule slides.  Look out, Captain."

"For what?"  I asked, with some anxiety.

The Frenchman laughed as he replied:

"I believe I am taking leave of my senses.  I called to you to look out,
as if you had the power to help yourself in case the accident should
occur."

"What accidents?"  I inquired, with a nervous sense of some impending
danger.

"Falling over: we are on a precipice that is reckoned dangerous on
account of the clay; if your mule should stumble here, the first thing
you would strike would be the branches of some trees five hundred feet
below, or thereabout."

"Good heaven!"  I ejaculated; "is it so?"

"Never fear, Captain; there is not much danger.  These mules appear to
be sure-footed; and certainly," he added, with a laugh, "their loads are
well packed and tied."

I was in no condition just then to relish a joke, and my companion's
humour was completely thrown away upon me.  The thought of my mule
missing his foot and tumbling over a precipice, while I was stuck to him
like a centaur, was anything else than pleasant.  I had heard of such
accidents, and the knowledge did not make the reflection any easier.  I
could not help muttering to myself:

"Why, in the name of mischief, did the fellow tell me this till we had
passed it?"

I crouched closer to the saddle, allowing my limbs to follow every
motion of the animal, lest some counteracting shock might disturb our
joint equilibrium.  I could hear the torrent, as it roared and hissed
far below, appearing directly under us; and the "sough" grew fainter and
fainter as we ascended.

On we went, climbing up--up--up; our strong mules straining against the
precipitous path.  It was daybreak.  There was a faint glimmer of light
under our tapojos.  At length we could perceive a brighter beam.  We
felt a sudden glow of heat over our bodies; the air seemed lighter; our
mules walked on a horizontal path.  We were on the ridge, and warmed by
the beams of the rising sun.

"Thank heaven we have passed it!"

I could not help feeling thus: and yet perhaps we were riding to an
ignominious death!



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

A DRINK A LA CHEVAL.

The guerilleros now halted and dismounted.  We were left in our saddles.
Our mules were picketed upon long lazos, and commenced browsing.  They
carried us under the thorny branches of the wild locust.  The maguey,
with its bill-shaped claws, had torn our uniform overalls to shreds.
Our limbs were lacerated, and the cactus had lodged its poisoned
prickles in our knees.  But these were nothing to the pain of being
compelled to keep our saddles, or rather saddle-trees--for we were upon
the naked wood.  Our hips ached intensely, and our limbs smarted under
the chafing thong.

There was a crackling of fires around us.  Our captors were cooking
their breakfasts, and chattering gaily over their chocolate.  Neither
food nor drink was offered to us, although we were both thirsty and
hungry.  We were kept in this place for about an hour.

"They have joined another party here," said Raoul, "with pack-mules."

"How know you?"  I inquired.

"I can tell by the shouts of the arrieros.  Listen!--they are making
ready to start."

There was a mingling of voices--exclamations addressed to their animals
by the arrieros, such as:

"_Mula! anda! vaya! levantate! carrai! mula--mulita!--anda!--st!--st_!"

In the midst of this din I fancied that I heard the voice of a woman.

"Can it be--?"

The thought was too painful.

A bugle at length sounded, and we felt ourselves again moving onward.

Our road appeared to run along the naked ridge.  There were no trees,
and the heat became intense.  Our serapes, that had served us during the
night, should have been dispensed with now, had we been consulted in
relation to the matter.  I did not know, until some time after, why
these blankets had been given to us, as they had been hitherto very
useful in the cold.  It was not from any anxiety in regard to our
comfort, as I learned afterwards.

We began to suffer from thirst, and Raoul asked one of the guerilleros
for water.

"_Carajo_!" answered the man, "it's no use: you'll be choked by and by
with something else than thirst."

The brutal jest called forth a peal of laughter from his comrades.

About noon we commenced descending a long hill.  I could hear the sound
of water ahead.

"Where are we, Raoul?"  I inquired faintly.

"Going down to a stream--a branch of the Antigua."

"We are coming to another precipice?"  I asked, with some uneasiness, as
the roar of the torrent began to be heard more under our feet, and I
snuffed the cold air from below.

"There is one, Captain.  There is a good road, though, and well paved."

"Paved! why, the country around is wild--is it not?"

"True; but the road was paved by the priests."

"By the priests!"  I exclaimed with some astonishment.

"Yes, Captain; there's a convent in the valley, near the crossing; that
is, there _was_ one.  It is now a ruin."

We crept slowly down, our mules at times seeming to walk on their heads.
The hissing of the torrent grew gradually louder, until our ears were
filled with its hoarse rushing.

I heard Raoul below me shouting some words in a warning voice, when
suddenly he seemed borne away, as if he had been tumbled over the
precipice.

I expected to feel myself next moment launched after him into empty
space, when my mule, uttering a loud whinny, sprang forward and
downward.

Down--down! the next leap into eternity!  No--she keeps her feet! she
gallops along a level path!  I am safe!

I was swung about until the thongs seemed to cut through my limbs; and
with a heavy plunge I felt myself carried thigh-deep into water.

Here the animal suddenly halted.

As soon as I could gain breath I shouted at the top of my voice for the
Frenchman.

"Here, Captain!" he answered, close by my side, but, as I fancied, with
a strange, gurgling voice.

"Are you hurt, Raoul?"  I inquired.

"Hurt?  No, Captain."

"What was it, then?"

"Oh!  I wished to warn you, but I was too late.  I might have known they
would stampede, as the poor brutes have been no better treated than
ourselves.  Hear how they draw it up!"

"I am choking!"  I exclaimed, listening to the water as it filtered
through the teeth of my mule.

"Do as I do, Captain," said Raoul, speaking as if from the bottom of a
well.

"How?"  I asked.

"Bend down, and let the water run into your mouth."

This accounted for Raoul's voice sounding so strangely.

"They may not give us a drop," continued he.  "It is our only chance."

"I have not even that," I replied, after having vainly endeavoured to
reach the surface with my face.

"Why?" asked my comrade.

"I cannot reach it."

"How deep are you?"

"To the saddle-flaps."

"Ride this way, Captain.  It's deeper here."

"How can I?  My mule is her own master, as far as I am concerned."

"_Parbleu_!" said the Frenchman.  "I did not think of that."

But, whether to oblige me, or moved by a desire to cool her flanks, the
animal plunged forward into a deeper part of the stream.

After straining myself to the utmost, I was enabled to "duck" my head.
In this painful position I contrived to get a couple of swallows; but I
should think I took in quite as much at my nose and ears.

Clayley and Chane followed our example, the Irishman swearing loudly
that it was a "burnin' shame to make a dacent Christyin dhrink like a
horse in winkers."

Our guards now commenced driving our mules out of the water.  As we were
climbing the bank, someone touched me lightly upon the arm; and at the
same instant a voice whispered in my ear, "Courage, Captain!"

I started--it was the voice of a female.  I was about to reply, when a
soft, small hand was thrust under the tapojo, and pushed something
between my lips.  The hand was immediately withdrawn, and I heard the
voice urging a horse onward.

The clatter of hoofs, as of a horse passing me in a gallop, convinced me
that this mysterious agent was gone, and I remained silent.

"Who can it be Jack?  No.  Jack has a soft voice--a small hand; but how
could he be here, and with his hands free?  No--no--no!  Who then?  It
was certainly the voice of a woman--the hand, too.  What other should
have made this demonstration?  I know no other--it must--it must have
been--."

I continued my analysis of probabilities, always arriving at the same
result.  It was both pleasant and painful: pleasant to believe _she_ was
thus, like an angel, watching over me--painful to think that she might
be in the power of my fiendish enemy.

But is she so?  Lincoln's blow may have ended him.  We have heard
nothing of him since.  Would to heaven--!

It was an impious wish, but I could not control it.

"What have I got between my lips?  A slip of paper!  Why was it placed
there, and not in my bosom or my button-hole?  Ha! there is more
providence in the manner of the act than at first thought appears.  How
could I have taken it from either the one or the other, bound as I am?
Moreover it may contain what would destroy the writer, if known to--.
Cunning thought--for one so young and innocent, too--but love--."

I pressed the paper against the tapojo, covering it with my lips, so as
to conceal it in case the blind should be removed.

"Halted again?"

"It is the ruin, Captain--the old convent of Santa Bernardina."

"But why do they halt here?"

"Likely to noon and breakfast--that on the ridge was only their
_desayuna_.  The Mexicans of the _tierra caliente_ never travel during
mid-day.  They will doubtless rest here until the cool of the evening."

"I trust they will extend the same favour to us," said Clayley: "God
knows we stand in need of rest.  I'd give them three months' pay for an
hour upon the treadmill, only to stretch my limbs."

"They will take us down, I think--not on our account, but to ease the
mules.  Poor brutes! they are no parties to this transaction."

