evening asking the very same thing of me!"

"What!"  I exclaimed, "was it Jack Smith?"

"I don't know his name, but he'd a pair of black eyes that would
astonish you."

"That's him, that's him!"  I cried.  "And he wanted to pay for the
boots?"

"He did pay for them.  I shall make my fortune out of that pair of
boots," added she, laughing.

This, then, explained his wearing the boots that morning.  How quick I
had been to suspect him of far different conduct!

"You'd better keep your money for the next time he steals something,"
observed Mrs Trotter, rather enjoying my astonishment; "he's likely to
be a costly young treat to you at this rate.  I hope the next party he
robs will be as lazy about her rights as me."

I dropped my uncle's half-sovereign back into my purse, with the rather
sad conviction that after all I was not the only honest and righteous
person in the world.

The next morning, on my arrival at Hawk Street rather before the time (I
had taken to being early at the office, partly to avoid arriving there
at the same time as Smith, and partly to have the company of young
Larkins, of postage-stamp celebrity, in my walk from Beadle Square), I
found Doubleday already there in a state of great perturbation.

"What do you think," he cried, almost before I entered the office--"what
do you think they've done?  I knew that young puppy's coming was no good
to us!  Here have I been here twelve years next Michaelmas, and he not a
year, and blest if I haven't got to hand over the petty cash to my lord,
because old Merrett wants the dear child to get used to a sense of
responsibility in the business!  Sense of rot, I call it!"

It certainly did seem hard lines.  Doubleday, as long as I had been at
Hawk Street, had always been the custodian of all loose cash paid into
the office, which he carefully guarded and accounted for, handing it
over regularly week by week to be paid into the bank.

It is never pleasant when a fellow has held an office of trust to have
it coolly taken from him and handed to another.  In this case no one
would suspect it meant any lack of confidence; for Doubleday, even his
enemies admitted, was as honest as the Bank of England; but it meant
elevating another at his expense, which did not seem exactly fair.

"If the darling's such a big pot in the office," growled Doubleday,
"they'd better make him head clerk at once, and let me run his errands
for him."

"Never mind," said I, "it'll be so much less work for you."

"Yes, and a pretty mess the accounts will get into, to make up for it."

Hawkesbury entered at this moment, smiling most beautifully.

"How punctual you two are!" said he.

"Need to be punctual," growled Doubleday, "when I've got to hand you
over the petty cash."

"Oh!" said Hawkesbury; "the petty cash?  My uncle was saying something
about my keeping it.  I think it's a pity he couldn't let it stay where
it was; you're so much more used to it than I am.  Besides, I've plenty
of work to do without it."

"I suppose I shall get some of your work to do for you," said
Doubleday--"that is, if I'm competent!"

Hawkesbury laughed softly, as if it were a joke, and Doubleday relapsed
into surly silence.

It was still some minutes before the other clerks were due.  Hawkesbury
used the interval in conversing amiably with me in a whisper.

"I'm afraid Doubleday's put out," said he.  "You know, he's a very good
sort of fellow; but, between you and me, don't you think he's a trifle
too unsteady?"

What could I say?  I certainly could not call Doubleday steady, as a
rule, and yet I disliked to have to assent to Hawkesbury's question.
"He's very steady in business," I said.

"Yes; but at other times I'm afraid he's not," said Hawkesbury.  "Not
that I'm blaming him.  But of course, when a fellow's extravagant, and
all that, it _is_ a temptation, isn't it?"

"Do you mean a temptation to be dishonest?"

"Well, it's rather a strong way of putting it.  I don't suppose for a
moment Doubleday is not perfectly trustworthy; no more does my uncle."

"I should think not," said I, rather warmly.

"Of course not," said he, sweetly; "but you know, Batchelor, prevention
is better than cure, and it seems the kindest thing, doesn't it, to put
temptation quite out of a fellow's reach when one can?"

"But," observed I, "it seems to me you are taking it out of Doubleday's
reach and putting it into your own."

For an instant a shade of vexation crossed his face, but directly
afterwards he laughed again in his usual amused manner.

"You forget," said he, "I live at home, and haven't the chance of
following Doubleday's example, even if I wished to.  In fact, I'm a
domestic character."

He seemed to forget that he had frequently accepted Doubleday's
hospitality and joined in the festivities of the "usual lot."

"I thought you lived at your uncle's?" said I.

"Oh, no!  My father's rectory is in Lambeth.  But we're just going to
move into the City.  I don't enjoy the prospect, I can assure you!  But
I say, how are you and your friend Smith getting on now?"

He was always asking me about my friend Smith.

"The same as usual," said I.

"That's a pity!  He really seems very unreasonable, considering he has
so little to be proud of."

"It's I that have got little to be proud of," replied I.

"Really, Batchelor, you are quite wrong there.  I think it's very
generous the way you have always stuck to him--with certainly not much
encouragement."

"Well," said I, "I shall have another attempt to make it up with him."

Hawkesbury mused a bit, and then said, smilingly, "Of course, it's a
very fine thing of you; but do you know, Batchelor, I'm not sure that
you are wise in appearing to be in such a hurry?"

"What do you mean?"  I said.

"I mean, I shall be as glad as any one to see you two friends again: but
if you seem too eager about it, I fancy you would only be demeaning
yourself, and giving him a fresh chance of repulsing you.  My advice as
a friend is, wait a bit.  As long as he sees you unhappy about it he
will have a crow over you.  Let him see you aren't so greatly afflicted,
and then, take my word for it, he'll come a good deal more than half way
to meet you."

There seemed to be something in this specious advice.  I might, after
all, be defeating my own ends by seeming too anxious to make it up with
Jack Smith, and so making a reconciliation more difficult in the end.  I
felt inclined, at any rate, to give it a trial.

But the weeks that followed were wretched weeks.  I heard daily and
regularly from Billy all the news I could gather of my friend, but
before Smith himself I endeavoured to appear cheerful and easy in mind.
It was a poor show.  How could I seem cheerful when every day I was
feeling my loss more and more?

My only friends at this time were Hawkesbury and Billy and young
Larkins.  The former continued to encourage me to persevere in my
behaviour before Smith, predicting that it would be sure, sooner or
later, to make our reconciliation certain.  But at present it did not
look much like it.  If I appeared cheerful and easy-minded, so did
Smith.  The signs of relenting which I looked for were certainly not to
be discovered, and, so far from meeting me half way, the more
unconcerned about him I seemed, the more unconcerned he seemed about me.

"Of course he'll be like that at first," said Hawkesbury, when I
confided my disappointment one day to him, "but it won't last long.
He's not so many friends in the world that he can afford to throw you
over."

And so I waited week after week.  I saw him daily, but our eyes scarcely
ever met.  Only when I glanced at him furtively I thought him looking
paler and thinner even than usual, and longed still more intensely to
call him my friend and know why it was.

"Most likely he's fretting," said Hawkesbury, "and will soon give in.
It's a wonder to me how he's held out so long."

"Unless he speaks to me soon, I'll risk everything and speak to him."

"I can quite understand your anxiety," said my counsellor, "but I really
wouldn't be too impatient."

I tried to find out from Billy the reason of Jack's altered looks.

"Yaas," said he, in response to my inquiry whether he had heard if my
friend was ill--"yaas, he do look dicky.  `Governor,' says I, `what's
up?'  I says.  `Up,' says he, `what do you mean by it?' says he.  `Go
on,' says I, `as if you didn't know you was queer!'  `I ain't queer,'
says he.  `Oh, no, ain't you,' says I; `what do you want to look so
green about the mazard for, then?' says I.  `Oh, that's nothing,' says
he; `reading late at night, that's what that is,' says he.  `Turn it
up,' says I.  `So I will,' says he, `when my Sam's over,' says he.
Bless you, governor, I'd like to give that there Sam a topper, so I
would."

So, then, he was reading for an examination!  This paleness, after all,
did not come from fretting on my account, but because he had found an
occupation which drove me from his thoughts evening after evening!

I felt more hopeless of recovering my friend than ever.

"Do you go to the ragged school still?"  I asked.

"Yaas, a Fridays.  I say, governor, look here."

He dipped his finger into his blacking-pot, and, after cleaning the
flagstone on which he knelt with his old hat, proceeded laboriously and
slowly to trace an S upon it.

"There," he cried, when the feat was accomplished, "what do you think of
that?  That's a ess for Mr Smith, and a proper bloke he is.  He do
teach you to-rights, so I let you know, he do."

"What else does he teach you besides your letters?"

"Oh, about a bloke called Cain as give 'is pal a topper, and--"

He stopped abruptly, as he noticed the smile I could not restrain, and
then added, in his offended tone, "I ain't a-goin' to tell you.  'Tain't
no concern of yourn."

I knew Billy well enough by this time to be sure it was no use, after
once offending him, trying to cajole him back into a good-humour, so I
left him.

So the wretched weeks passed on, and I almost wished myself back at
Stonebridge House.  There at least I had some society and some friends.
Now, during those lonely evenings at Mrs Nash's I had positively no
one--except young Larkins.

That cheery youth was a standing rebuke to me.  He had come up to town a
year ago, a fresh, innocent boy; and a fresh, innocent boy he remained
still.  He kept his diary regularly, and wrote home like clock-work, and
chirruped over his postage-stamp album, and laughed over his storybooks
in a way which it did one's heart good to see.  And yet it made my heart
sore.  Why should he be so happy and I not?  He wasn't, so I believe, a
cleverer boy than I was.  Certainly he wasn't getting on better than I
was, for I had now had my third rise in salary, and he still only got
what he started with.  And he possessed no more friends at Beadle Square
than I did.  Why ever should he always be so jolly?

I knew, though I was loth to admit it.  His conscience was as easy as
his spirits.  There was no one he had ever wronged, and a great many to
whom he had done kind actions.  When any one suggested to him to do what
he considered wrong, it was the easiest thing in the world for him to
refuse flatly, and say boldly why.  If everybody else went one way, and
he thought it not the right way, it cost him not an effort to turn and
go his own way, even if he went it alone.  Fellows didn't like him.
They called him a prig--a sanctimonious young puppy.  What cared he?  If
to do what was right manfully in the face of wrong, to persevere in the
right in the face of drawbacks, constituted a prig, then Larkins was a
prig of the first water, and he didn't care what fellows thought of him,
but chirruped away over his postage-stamp album as before, and read his
books, as happy as a king.

It was in this boy's society that during those wretched weeks I found a
painful consolation.  He was constantly reminding me of what I was not;
but for all that I felt he was a better companion than the heroes with
whom I used to associate, and with whom I still occasionally consorted.
He knew nothing of my trouble, and thought I was the crossest-grained,
slowest growler in existence.  But since I chose his company, and seemed
glad to have him beside me, he was delighted.

"I say," said he suddenly one evening, as we were engaged in
experimenting with a small steam-engine he had lately become the proud
possessor of, "I saw your old friend Smith to-day!"

"Where?"  I asked.

"Why, down Drury Lane.  I heard of a new Russian stamp that was to be
had cheap in a shop there, and while I was in buying it he came in."

"Was he buying stamps too?"

"No; he lives in a room over the shop.  Not a nice hole, I should fancy.
Didn't you know he was there?"

"No," I said.

"Oh, you should go and see the place.  He'd much better come back here,
tell him.  But I thought you saw one another every day?" he added, in
his simple way.

"Did he say anything to you?"  I asked, avoiding the question.

"Yes.  I asked him how he was getting on, and he said very well; and I
asked him what he thought of the Russian stamp; and he said if I liked
he could get me a better specimen at his office.  Isn't he a brick? and
he's promised me a jolly Turkish one, too, that I haven't got."

"Was that all?"  I asked.  "I mean all he said?"

"Yes--oh, and I asked if he'd got any message for you, and he said no.
Look, there--it's going!  I say, isn't it a stunning little engine?  I
mean to make it work a little pump I've got in the greenhouse at home.
It's just big enough."

Any message for me?  No!  Was it worth trying for any longer?  I
thought, as once more I crept solitary and disappointed to bed.

But the answer was nearer than I thought for.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

HOW I TOOK PART IN A NOT VERY SUCCESSFUL HOLIDAY PARTY.

Several weeks elapsed, and I was beginning to doubt whether Hawkesbury's
advice, after all, was good, when a general holiday occurred to break
the monotony of my life both at Hawk Street and Beadle Square.

I had for some time meditated, if I had the funds, taking advantage of
my next holiday to run down to my uncle's.  Not that I expected any
particular welcome from him, but I longed to see the old familiar haunts
of my childhood after my long imprisonment in London; and, even if there
were no more congenial friend than Cad Prog to hail me, it would at
least be a change from this dreary city, with its noise and bustle, and
disappointed hopes and lost friendships.

But my intention in this direction was upset by a double reason.  One
was that I had no money.  Indeed, my debts had got so far ahead of my
means that it was clear a crisis in my financial affairs must soon come.
The other reason was an invitation to join in a grand day's excursion
by road to Windsor.

It came from Hawkesbury.

"Are you doing anything particular on Monday?" he asked me, a day or two
before the holiday.

"No; I half thought of going home, but I can't afford that, so I may go
to the British Museum."

"Not a very cheerful place to spend a holiday," laughed Hawkesbury.
"What do you say to coming a quiet drive with me?"

Had the invitation come from Crow or Daly, or even Doubleday, I should
have regarded it shyly.  But Hawkesbury was a steady fellow, I thought,
and not likely to lead one into mischief.

"I should like it awfully!"  I said, "only--that is--I don't think I can
afford it."

"Oh!" said he, smiling affably, "you shan't be at any expense at all.
It's my affair, and I should like to take you with me."

Of course my gratitude was as profuse as it was sincere.

"My idea was," continued Hawkesbury, "to get a dogcart for the day and
go somewhere in the direction of Windsor, taking our own provender with
us, and having a jolly healthy day in the open air."

Nothing could be more delightful or more in accordance with my own
wishes.

"Will it be just you and I?"  I asked.

"Well, these traps generally hold four.  I thought perhaps Whipcord
would come for one; he's a good driver, you know, and a steady enough
fellow when he's by himself.  And there's a friend of mine called Masham
I mean to ask as well."

I would have preferred it if the expedition had been confined to
Hawkesbury and myself, but I had no right to be discontented with the
arrangements which had been made, and spent the next few days in eager
anticipation.

I wondered what Jack Smith meant to do on his holiday; most likely he
would be reading hard for his "Sam," as Billy called it.  It seemed
shabby of me to go off on a spree and leave him to drudge; but, as
Hawkesbury said when I referred to the matter, it would just show him
what he missed by holding aloof, and make him all the more ready to try
to get back my friendship.

Doubleday, when I told him of my plan for the day, snuffed up at it in
no very pleasant way.  But then he had always been jealous of Hawkesbury
since giving up the petty-cash to his charge.

"All I can say is," said he, "_I'd_ think twice about going with that
party, and I'm not so very particular.  I suppose you never met Mr
Masham, did you?"

"No," said I.

"Ah!" he replied, laughing, "you'll find him a very nice boy; just a
little too strait-laced for me, but he'll suit you."

I could not make out whether this was in jest or earnest; in any case, I
put it down to the petty-cash, and thought it a pity Doubleday should be
so put out by a trifle.

"What are you going to do?"  I asked him.

"Oh!  I'm going to do my best to be cheerful in a mild way," said he,
"down the river.  It's a good job Hawkesbury's booked you, my boy, for I
meant to ask you to join us, and that would have done you out of your
quiet day with Petty-Cash and his friends, which would be a pity."

The Monday came at last, and opened perfectly.  My spirits rose as I
looked out and saw the blue cloudless sky overhead, and thought of the
trees, and birds, and flowers, and country air I was so soon to be
among.

I was to meet my party at the Horseshoe stables in the City, and thither
I repaired in good time, in my smartest get-up, and with a shilling
plum-cake under my arm, which I had made up my mind to take as my
contribution to the commissariat of the expedition.  I passed Style
Street on my way, and came in for hilarious greeting from Billy.

"Hi! shine 'e boots, governor?  My eye, there's a nob!  Shine 'e all
over, governor.  Ain't you got 'em on, though?  What's up, mister?"

"See you again soon, Billy," said I, bustling on.  I was angry with him
for the way he laughed, and for the description of me I knew quite well
he would presently give to Jack Smith.

Early as I was at the rendezvous, Hawkesbury was before me, and with him
his friend Masham.  The latter was a queer-looking fellow of about
thirty.  He was pale and dark round the eyes, like a person who hadn't
slept for a week.  His lips were large and red, and the lower part of
his face a good deal too big for the upper.  Altogether Mr Masham was
neither a very healthy nor a very prepossessing-looking specimen; but
Hawkesbury had told me he was clever and very amusing, so I supposed I
oughtn't to judge by appearances.

"Punctual as usual," said Hawkesbury, as I approached.  "Phil, this is
my friend Batchelor I was telling you of."

I wished secretly I knew exactly what he had been telling him of me.

"Oh," said Masham, eyeing me all over, as he lit a cigar, and then held
out his cigar-case to me.  "What do you smoke, Batchelor?"

"I don't smoke, thank you," said I.

"Have you given it up, then?" said Hawkesbury.  "You used to smoke at
Doubleday's parties."

"Ah!  I thought he looked like a chap that smoked," said Masham, holding
out his case again.  "Don't be modest, Batchelor.  We're all friends
here."

I didn't like the style of this Masham.  Indeed, I was a trifle afraid
of him already, and half repented coming.

"I gave up smoking some weeks ago," said I, determined not to give in if
I could help.  "I found I couldn't afford it."

"The very reason you should take a cigar now when you've a chance of
getting one for nothing," replied Masham, digging me pleasantly in the
ribs.

"Thanks, I'd rather not, if you'll excuse me," I replied again.

"Can't excuse you, my dear fellow.  We're all bound to be sociable to-
day.  At least, so I fancy."

"Come, Batchelor," said Hawkesbury.  "We may as well humour him.  I'd
advise you to take a cigar.  I'll take one, too, to keep you company,
though I hate them.  They always make me feel sick."

So saying, he took a cigar and lit it.  I felt bound to do the same, not
only to relieve myself of Masham's importunity, but to avoid disturbing
the harmony of our party at the very beginning of the day.

At this moment Whipcord arrived on the scene, as stylish as ever, with
his hat all on one side of his head and his straw all on one side of his
mouth.

"What cheer, my venerable chums?" he cried, as he approached.  "Ah!
Masham.  You turned up again!  I thought we'd lost--"

"That'll do," said Masham, with a significant jerk of his head towards
me.  "Have a weed?"

"Thanks, we'll see about that later on.  I'm off my smoke just now.  Ah!
young Batchelor, you there?  Brought your boxing-gloves with you, I
hope?  Hot fellow with the gloves is Batchelor, Phil.  Well, where's
your trap, Hawkesbury?"

"There it is coming out."

Whipcord eyed it professionally and critically.  He liked the dogcart,
but didn't think much of the horse.

"Do all right for a water-cart, I dare say," observed he, "or cat's
meat.  But I don't see how we're to get to Windsor and back with such a
rheumatic old screw."

"You're out there, mister," said the ostler, who was harnessing the
animal.  "You'll find he ain't such a screw as you think.  You'll need
to keep a steady hand on him all the way, pertikler on the road home, or
he'll screw you a way you don't fancy."

Whipcord laughed.

"I'll do my best," he said.  "He does look a sort of beast to be nervous
of, certainly."

The ostler grinned cynically, and we meanwhile mounted to our seats,
Hawkesbury and Whipcord being in front, and I, much to my disgust, being
placed beside Masham on the back seat.

Despite Whipcord's desponding prophecies, our charger stepped out at a
pretty fair pace, and in due time we began to shake off the dust of
London from our wheels and meet the first traces of country.

For a considerable time my companion absorbed himself in his cigar--much
to my satisfaction--and I, for fear of appearing anxious for
conversation, betook myself to mine.

At length, however, after about half an hour thus occupied, Masham broke
the silence.

"Know Hawkesbury well?" he asked.

"Pretty well," I answered; "we were at school together first, and now
we're in the same office."

"Nice boy at school?"

"Yes; I think so."

"Not quite sure, eh?"

"I always got on well with him."

"Yes, you would.  Sort of a nest for bad eggs, that school, wasn't it?"

"Yes--that is, a good many of the boys were a bad sort," said I, not
very comfortable to be undergoing this cross-examination.

"I understand.  You weren't, of course, eh?" said he, digging me in the
ribs with his knuckles.

His manner was most offensive.  I felt strongly inclined to resent it,
and yet somehow I felt that to be civil to him would be the less of two
evils.

"Hawkesbury doing well at the office, eh?"

"Certainly!" said I.  "Why not?"

"See no reason at all.  Worthy chap, Hawkesbury.  Nice boy at home;
great comfort to the old people."

"Really," said I, "you know him much better than I do."

"Ah! should get to know Hawkesbury all you can.  Moral chap--like you
and me, eh?" and here followed another dig in the ribs.

This was getting intolerable.  However, at this point Whipcord pulled up
at a wayside inn, much to my relief.  Anything was better than Masham's
conversation.

We halted a quarter of an hour, to give our horse time to get breath, as
Whipcord explained, but, as it really seemed, to allow that gentleman
and Masham to refresh themselves also.

When we started again my companion began almost immediately to resume
the conversation, but this time it was of a less personal nature, though
disagreeable enough.

For he made no secret at all that he was a youth of depraved tastes and
habits, and insisted on addressing me as though I resembled him in these
respects.  He gave me what he doubtless intended to be a highly
entertaining and spicy account of many of his escapades and exploits in
town and country, appealing to me every few sentences as to what I
should have said or done or thought in similar circumstances.

And when he had exhausted his stories of himself he told me stories of
his friends, some of which were disgusting, some horrifying, and some
