the stationmaster to send.

"It's such a comfort you know!" said Hilda. "I wish I'd learnt
ambulance."

It seemed an interminable age to poor Miss Roberts and the girls
before a railway porter and two labourers who had been working on the
line, arrived with a stretcher, which fortunately was kept in the
inspector's office at Riggness. It was a tedious slow journey along
the shore, and up to the station. The patient was nearly worn out by
the time they placed her in the waiting-room, and was thankful to have
the cup of tea which the stationmaster's wife brought her. A doctor
arrived from Stedburgh half an hour afterwards, armed with proper
splints and bandages, and he carefully examined and reset the broken
limb.

"I must thoroughly congratulate the young lady who contributed first
aid," he said. "She managed most skilfully. This would have been a
serious thing but for her prompt measures. If the bone had been jolted
about before it was put in splints, the consequences might have been
permanent lameness or even loss of life. I wish it were obligatory for
everybody to study ambulance."

The doctor took Miss Roberts back to her home in Stedburgh in his own
car, and the girls followed by the next train, all equally anxious to
get away from Riggness. They were much distressed about their teacher;
the excursion had been a fiasco, and the whole party felt limp and out
of spirits, like sheep without a shepherd.

"I'm thankful to get the whole crew packed off safe," said the
stationmaster to his wife. "My word! It was a nasty accident to
happen, down there on the shore. Good thing one of those lassies had a
head on her shoulders!"

"An ordinary enough looking girl, too," remarked his wife. "I wouldn't
have guessed she'd be the one to come forward. But there, one never
can tell!"

"There must be more in her than shows on the outside," agreed the
stationmaster.




CHAPTER XVII

A Pressing Account


When Gwen took her place at her desk on the following Monday morning,
she was aware of a subtle difference in the general attitude towards
her. She had earned the respect of the Form, and though nobody gushed,
she felt she was no longer regarded as an interloper and upstart.
Especially was this noticeable in the case of the nicer girls, several
of whom spoke to her in quite a pleasant manner, and included her in a
discussion about the tennis tournament. To Gwen, who had so long been
left out in the cold, it was a most welcome change; she had never
expected popularity, but she had always hoped that in time she might
be able to conquer the prejudice that existed against her. It was a
new thing to be asked to lend her dictionary to Hilda Browne, to
compare chemistry papers with Iris Watson, or to play a game of tennis
with Elspeth Frazer, Edith Arnold, and Charlotte Perry. The ban which
had hitherto excluded her from the better set in the Form seemed to
have been suddenly removed, the girls were looking at her from a new
standpoint, and were ready to allow that after all she was different
from what they had previously supposed.

Naturally Miss Roberts's accident and consequent absence from her
post made a great upset in the school: classes had to be rearranged,
and lessons delegated to other teachers. It was particularly awkward,
because the Fifth Form was working for the Senior Oxford, and though
only a few girls were actually to take the examination, the
preparation was the same for everybody.

"I call it too bad," said Betty Brierley, an acknowledged slacker, "to
make the whole Form grind--grind--grind--like this, all on behalf of
about four candidates. They ought to have a special class to
themselves."

"There's method in the madness, though," said Joan Masters. "Miss
Roscoe isn't going to tell till the very last who's to go in for it,
so nobody knows if she mayn't be destined as a victim for the
sacrifice, and her name already entered."

"Oh! Not me!"

"Don't alarm yourself. But there are one or two others who, I expect,
are on the secret list. It depends entirely on our weekly reports."

"Then I'm safe, for mine are always bad. I wouldn't go in for a public
exam, for the whole world, the school ones are quite enough for me,
and too much, as a rule. Who's likely, do you think?"

"I'm not quite sure. Elspeth Frazer, for one, and--yes, I shouldn't be
so very much astonished if Miss Roscoe's chosen Gwen Gascoyne."

"Gwen--yes. She's been bucking up no end lately in maths."

"And in Latin too. However, it's not our business. But I think
there'll be some surprises."

Gwen, whether or not with the idea of the Senior Oxford in her head,
had certainly been working hard. She had not only caught up, but even
overstepped most of the Form, and her reports kept a steady average of
improvement. Miss Roscoe, who was generally scanty in the matter of
praise, said little, but there was an air of encouragement about her
which urged Gwen to her best efforts.

"I made up my mind I'd let them all see I could do the work as well as
anybody, though I am the youngest," she said to herself. "They don't
sneer at me now."

Her translation from the Lower School was beginning to feel quite an
old remembrance. Her thoughts went back sometimes to that first day in
the Fifth, the day when Netta had taken her into Miss Roscoe's private
sitting-room, and she had broken the box of china. That was a
recollection which always stung, and which she would thrust away
uneasily into the lumber-room of her mind. So far she had heard
nothing more from Parker's, but the consciousness of the debt was
there, and she knew that sooner or later she would be called upon to
face the difficulty.

Nor was she mistaken. One Saturday morning, when she was taking a
little vigorous exercise with the lawn mower before breakfast, she saw
the postman coming in at the gate, and obeying a sudden impulse, ran
to receive the letters, instead of allowing him to deliver them as
usual at the door. There were four circulars for Father, a postcard
for Beatrice, and one thin business envelope addressed to "Miss Gwen
Gascoyne, c/o Miss Goodwin, The Thorns, Manor Road, Stedburgh," and
re-directed in Netta's handwriting to "Skelwick Parsonage, North
Ditton". Full of apprehension Gwen turned it over, and saw the name
"J. Parker & Sons" printed on the flap. So it had come at last!
Without even opening it she knew perfectly well what must be inside.
She wondered they had waited so long before sending in the account
again. What a mercy she had intercepted the postman that morning and
taken the letters herself! If Beatrice had got hold of this it would
have been impossible to conceal the matter any longer. Why had Netta
sent the letter on by post instead of giving it to her at school?
Surely it was a piece of spite on her part. Gwen turned quite hot as
she thought of what Beatrice would have said. She hastily put the
postcard and circulars on the breakfast-table, and ran down the garden
to a retired place in the orchard, where she could open her ill-fated
envelope in privacy.

Yes, it was just what she anticipated--a bill for ten shillings, and a
polite but urgent request that the amount should be paid without
further delay. She crushed it angrily in her hand, then stuffed it
into her pocket and stood thinking. What was she to do? What could she
do? All sorts of desperate schemes came running through her mind, and
she gave each its due consideration.

"If I were a girl in a magazine story," she thought, "I suppose I'd
disguise myself as a pierrette and go and sing on the promenade at
Stedburgh. I dare say I'd get heaps of pennies. But--oh! I wonder if
girls ever really do such things out of books? Father'd rather I owed
pounds than went singing for pennies. He stopped the Sunday School
children going round on Christmas Eve, but then they went into the
public-houses, and of course I shouldn't. No, I couldn't risk it, and
besides, I'd be too shy to sing, and somebody would be sure to find
out. Shall I ask Dick to lend me half a sovereign? He would in a
minute. No! I've not sunk to sponging on my boy friends, at any rate.
I'd rather do a day's charing than that. A good idea! Why shouldn't I
turn charwoman? If Beatrice would let me clean out the schools every
Saturday, instead of Mrs. Cass, and pay me the money, I'd work off the
bill in time. I wonder if I dare suggest it?"

The breakfast bell ringing loudly and clamorously at that moment put
an end to Gwen's meditations, and she went indoors, but she was much
preoccupied during the meal, so that she never noticed how Giles was
peppering her piece of bread and butter till she incautiously took a
bite and choked.

"You hateful boy! You're always up to some monkey tricks!" she
exclaimed indignantly.

    "'For she can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when she pleases!'"

jeered Giles, adroitly dodging the smack she designed for him.

And the rest of the family laughed--yes, laughed, in a most heartless
and inconsiderate manner.

"Your wits were wool-gathering, Gwen!" said Winnie, quoting a local
proverb. "Stumps did it so deliberately and openly that anybody could
have caught him who wasn't absolutely dreaming. We were all watching
to see if you'd notice."

"The absent-minded beggar!" piped Basil.

"I think you're all very horrid and unkind!" complained the victim,
still sneezing.

"Don't be grumpy, Gwen!"

"You must learn to take a joke, childie!" said Father, pushing back
his chair and going away to his study.

Father so generally stood up for her that Gwen felt aggrieved. She had
always flattered herself upon her capacity for accepting "ragging"
with equanimity, but this, she considered, was beyond a joke.

"It might have got into my eyes and blinded me," she declared with
plaintive dignity, and leaving the peppery remains on her plate,
stalked off to the garden. She had certainly been too busy thinking
during breakfast to notice her plate. It had struck her that if she
really wished Beatrice to allow her to do charwoman's work at the
school, she must give some proof of her capacity in that direction.

"Mrs. Cass never begins till one o'clock," she thought. "I'll go down
this morning and get it all done before she comes, and then I can show
Beatrice."

It seemed the only possible way of earning money open to her, so
stealing one of Nellie's coarse aprons and a tin of soft soap from the
kitchen, she hurried off to the school. She knew where Mrs. Cass kept
the bucket and scrubbing-brush which she used for her cleaning
operations; they were in a cupboard at the end of the passage. Being
Saturday, the place was, of course, empty, and no one would disturb
her. She had brought the Parsonage key to unlock the door, and after
filling her bucket at the pump in the yard, she put on the apron,
tucked up her sleeves, and set to work. And it was work! Gwen had
never in her life before tried to scrub a floor, and though her arms
were sturdy and strong at wielding a tennis-racket or the lawn mower,
they soon began to ache at the unwonted exercise which she had set
herself. The room seemed most enormously large, and she was sure it
was abnormally dirty. The school children's boots must have been caked
with mud. She began to have a wholesome respect for Mrs. Cass. She
grew stiff and cramped with kneeling, and was obliged to stand up
occasionally and take a rest.

"There are the two classrooms to do yet," she thought ruefully, "to
say nothing of the passage. I'm getting rather fed up with scrubbing."

But she was only half through, so she set grimly to her self-imposed
task again. She had very nearly finished the big room when the door
softly opened, and who should appear but Beatrice! At the sight of
Gwen and her occupation she nearly dropped the books she was carrying.

"Gwen! what's the meaning of this? You do look an object!" she
exclaimed.

Gwen jumped up hastily, well aware that she thoroughly merited any
aspersions on her appearance. Both her dress and the apron were soaked
with water, her face had accumulated some of the dirt, her hair ribbon
had fallen off, and her hair was dangling in her eyes. A more untidy
young person could not have been found in the whole village. She
flung back her hair with a wet, grimy hand, and finding her pocket
handkerchief, tried to wipe her face.

"What freak is this, Gwen? Whatever will you do next?" continued
Beatrice.

"I didn't expect you here till I'd finished," answered Gwen, sitting
down exhaustedly on a form.

"You know I often come to practise the hymns, now Winnie takes the
mission-room at Basingwold. That doesn't explain why you're washing
the floor."

"I wanted you to see that I could do it. I thought perhaps you'd let
me scrub every week, and pay me instead of Mrs. Cass," said Gwen,
blurting out her scheme in the baldest outline.

Beatrice took another comprehensive glance at her sister's
disreputable figure, then sat down hilariously.

"You needn't laugh so--I mean it seriously," protested Gwen. "I want
the money."

"Oh! oh! You look so funny!" screamed Beatrice; then, suddenly
sobering down, she changed her tone. "I couldn't help laughing," she
continued, "but it was a good thing it was only I who came in and
caught you in this dirty mess. What prompted you to be so silly?"

"I've told you already."

"Gwen, don't be idiotic! How could you scrub the school every week.
Besides, we couldn't take the work away from Mrs. Cass. She'd be most
indignant She needs the money badly, poor body, with that large family
to keep."

This was an utterly new aspect of the case that had not before
occurred to Gwen.

"I want money too," she groaned.

"So do I, and so does Dad, and so do we all, but we can't get it,"
replied Beatrice rather tartly. "We have to make up our minds to go
without. You're no worse off than the rest of us."

Gwen paused. A half impulse was stirring within her to tell her sister
her difficulties. If only Beatrice looked a little more sympathetic!

"How do you know I'm no worse off?" she began.

"I've no patience with you, Gwen! You're always thinking about
yourself! You've done a silly, mad prank to-day, and I don't know what
Mrs. Cass will say when she arrives. Really, at your age you ought to
know better and remember your dignity. You're not a child now, though
I'm sure you behave like one. Go and put that bucket and
scrubbing-brush away, and wash your face before you walk home. I shall
have to explain to Mrs. Cass, or she'll think I've been giving her
work to another charwoman. It would be enough to make her leave the
church! She's fearfully touchy. I wonder when you'll learn sense."

Very crestfallen, Gwen turned away. No, it was quite impossible to
confide in Beatrice. Beatrice never understood, never even seemed to
want to understand. In her superior, elder-sisterly position she
