it not more than twenty-four hours' old?"

"Guilty!" exclaimed Lewis, with a sigh.

"I condemn you, then," said Lawrence, with a smile, "to a continuation
of this lecture, and, be assured, the punishment is much lighter than
you deserve.  Listen:--There are three unavoidable dangers in Alpine
climbing--"

"Please don't be long on each head," pleaded Lewis, throwing himself
back in his bed, while his friend placed the point of each finger of his
right hand on a corresponding point of the left, and crossed his legs.

"I won't.  I shall be brief--brief as your life is likely to be if you
don't attend to me.  The three dangers are, as I have said, unavoidable;
but two of them may be guarded against; the other cannot.  First, there
is danger from _falling rocks_.  This danger may be styled positive.  It
hangs over the head like the sword of Damocles.  There is no avoiding it
except by not climbing at all, for boulders and ice-blocks are perched
here, and there, and everywhere, and no one can tell the moment when
they shall fall.  Secondly, there is danger from crevasses--the danger
of tumbling into one when crossing a bridge of snow, and the danger of
breaking through a crust of snow which conceals one.  This may be called
a negative danger.  It is reduced to almost nothing if you are tied to
your comrade by a rope, and if the leader sounds with his staff as he
walks along; but it changes from a negative to a positive danger to the
man who is so mad as to go out _alone_.  Thirdly, there is danger from
new snow on steep slopes, which is positive if you step on it when
recently fallen, and when the slope is very steep; but is negative when
you allow sufficient time for it to harden.  While, however, it is
certain that many deaths occur from these three dangers being neglected,
it is equally true that the largest number of accidents which occur in
the Alps arise chiefly from momentary indiscretions, from false steps,
the result of carelessness or self-confidence, and from men attempting
to do what is beyond their powers.  Men who are too old for such
fatigue, and men who, though young, are not sufficiently strong, usually
come to grief.  I close my lecture with a quotation from the writings of
a celebrated mountaineer--`In all cases the man rather than the mountain
is at fault.'"

"There is truth in what you say," observed Lewis, rising, with a yawn.

"Nay, but," returned his friend, seriously, "your mother, who is made
very anxious by your reckless expeditions, begged me to impress these
truths on you.  Will you promise me, like a good fellow, to consider
them?"

"I promise," said Lewis, becoming serious in his turn, and taking his
friend's hand; "but you must not expect sudden perfection to be
exemplified in me.--Come, let's go have a talk with Le Croix about his
projected expedition after the chamois."

Up in the mountains now,--above some of the clouds undoubtedly, almost
'mong the stars, as Gillie put it,--Lewis wanders in company with
Baptist Le Croix, half-forgetful of his promise to Lawrence.  Below them
lies a world of hills and valleys; above towers a fairy-land of ice,
cliff, and cloud.  No human habitation is near.  The only indications of
man's existence are so faint, and so far off in the plains below, that
houses are barely visible, and villages look like toys.  A sea of cloud
floats beneath them, and it is only through gaps in this sea that the
terrestrial world is seen.  Piercing through it are the more prominent
of the Alpine peaks--the dark tremendous obelisk of the Matterhorn
towering in one direction, the not less tremendous and far grander head
of Mont Blanc looming in another.  The sun shines brightly over all,
piercing and rendering semi-transparent some of the clouds, gilding the
edges and deepening the shadows of others.

"Do you see anything, Le Croix?" asked Lewis, as he reclined on a narrow
ledge of rock recovering breath after a fatiguing climb, while his
comrade peered intently through a telescope into the recesses of a dark
mountain gorge that lay a little below them.

For some moments the hunter made no reply.  Presently he closed the
glass, and, with an air of satisfaction, said, "Chamois!"

"Where?" asked Lewis, rising eagerly and taking the glass.

Le Croix carefully pointed out the spot but no effort on the part of the
inexperienced youth could bring anything resembling the light and
graceful form of a chamois into the field of vision.

"Never mind, Le Croix," he said, quickly returning the glass and picking
up his rifle; "come along, let's have at them."

"Softly," returned the hunter; "we must get well to leeward of them
before we can venture to approach."

"Lead where you will; you'll find me a quiet and unquestioning
follower."

The hunter at once turned, and, descending the mountain by a precipice
which was so steep that they had in some places to drop from ledge to
ledge, at last gained a position where the light air, that floated but
scarce moved the clouds, came direct from the spot where the chamois
lay.  He then turned and made straight towards them.  As they advanced
the ground became more rugged and precipitous, so that their progress
was unavoidably slow, and rendered more so by the necessity that lay on
them of approaching their game without noise.

When they had reached a spot where a sheer precipice appeared to render
further progress impossible, the hunter stopped and said in a low tone,
"Look, they are too far off; a bullet could not reach them."

Lewis craned his neck over the cliff, and saw the chamois grazing
quietly on a small patch of green that lay among brown rocks below.

"What's to be done?" he asked anxiously.  "Couldn't we try a long shot?"

"Useless.  Your eyes are inexperienced.  The distance is greater than
you think."

"What, then, shall we do?"

Le Croix did not answer.  He appeared to be revolving some plan in his
mind.  Turning at last to his companion, he said--

"I counsel that you remain here.  It is a place near to which they must
pass if driven by some one from below.  I will descend."

"But how descend?" asked Lewis.  "I see no path by which even a goat
could get down."

"Leave that to me," replied the hunter.  "Keep perfectly still till you
see them within range.  Have your rifle ready; do not fire in haste;
there will be time for a slow and sure aim.  Most bad hunters owe their
ill-luck to haste."

With this advice Le Croix crept quietly round a projecting rock, and,
dropping apparently over the precipice, disappeared.

Solitude is suggestive.  As long as his companion was with him, Lewis
felt careless and easy in mind, but now that he was left alone in one of
the wildest and grandest scenes he had yet beheld, he became solemnised,
and could not help feeling, that without his guide he would be very
helpless in such a place.  Being alone in the mountains was not indeed
new to him.  As we have already said, he had acquired the character of
being much too reckless in wandering about by himself; but there was a
vast difference between going alone over ground which he had traversed
several times with guides in the immediate neighbourhood of Chamouni,
and being left in a region to which he had been conducted by paths so
intricate, tortuous, and difficult, that the mere effort to trace back
in memory even the last few miles of the route confused him.

There was a mysterious stillness, too, about everything around him; and
the fogs, which floated in heavy masses above and below, gave a
character of changeful wildness to the scenery.

"What a place to get lost in and benighted!" he thought.  Then his mind,
with that curious capacity for sudden flight, which is one of the chief
characteristics of thought, leaped down the precipices, up which he had
toiled so slowly, sped away over hill and dale, and landed him in
Chamouni at the feet of Nita Horetzki.  Once there, he had no desire to
move.  He kept looking steadily in her pretty face, speculated as to the
nature of the charm that rendered it so sweet, wondered what was the
cause of the lines of care that at times rippled her smooth white brow,
longed to become the sharer of her grief, and her comforter, and
pondered the improbability of his ever being in a position to call her
Nita--darling Nita--sweetest Nita--exquisite Nita!  He was still engaged
in creating adjectives at Chamouni when he was brought suddenly back to
the Alpine heights by the sound of a shot.  It was repeated in a hundred
echoes by the surrounding cliffs, as he seized his rifle and gazed over
the precipice.

A puff of smoke, hanging like a cloudlet, guided his eyes.  Not far in
front of it he saw the fawn-like form of a chamois stretched in death
upon the ground, while two others were seen bounding with amazing
precision and elasticity over the rocks towards him.

He turned at once to an opening among the rocks at his right, for, even
to his unpractised eye, it was obviously impossible that anything
without wings could approach him in front or at his left.

Coolness and promptitude were characteristics of the youth; so that he
sat crouching with the rifle, resting in the palm of his left hand, over
one knee, as motionless as if he had been chiselled from the rock
against which he leaned; but his natural coolness of deportment could
not prevent, though it concealed, a throbbing of anxiety lest the game
should pass out of reach, or behind rocks, which would prevent his
seeing it.  For an instant he half-rose, intending to rush to some more
commanding elevation, but remembering the parting advice of Le Croix, he
sank down again and remained steady.

Scarcely had he done so when the clatter of bounding hoofs was heard.
He knew well that the open space, across which he now felt sure the
chamois must pass, was only broad enough to afford the briefest possible
time for an aim.  He raised the rifle more than half-way to the
shoulder.  Another instant and a chamois appeared like an arrow shooting
athwart the hill-side before him.  He fired, and missed!  The bullet,
however, which had been destined for the heart of the first animal, was
caught in the brain of that which followed.  It sprang high into the
air, and, rolling over several times, lay stretched at full length on
the rocks.

We need not pause to describe the rejoicing of the young sportsman over
his first chamois, or to detail Lecroix's complimentary observations
thereon.

Having deposited their game in a place of safety, the hunter suggested
that, as there was no chance of their seeing any more in that locality,
it would be well to devote the remainder of the day to exploring the
higher slopes of a neighbouring glacier, for, familiar as he was with
all the grander features of the region, there were some of the minuter
details, he said, with which he was unacquainted.

Lewis was a little surprised at the proposal, but, being quite satisfied
with his success, and not unwilling to join in anything that smacked of
exploration, he readily assented; and, ere long, the two aspiring
spirits were high above the spot where the chamois had fallen, and
struggling with the difficulties of couloir and crevasse.

Before quitting the lower ground, they had deposited their game and
rifles in a cave well known to Le Croix, in which they intended to pass
the night, and they now advanced armed only with their long-handled
Alpine hatchets, without which implements it is impossible to travel
over glaciers.

Being both of them strong in wind and limb, they did not pause often to
rest, though Lewis occasionally called a momentary halt to enjoy the
magnificent prospect.  During one of these pauses a dark object was seen
moving over the ice far below them.

Le Croix pointed to it, and said that it approached them.

"What is it--a crow?" asked Lewis.

"More like a man; but it is neither," returned the hunter, adjusting his
telescope; "yes, it is, as I fancied, a chamois."

"Then it cannot have seen us," said Lewis, "else it would not approach."

"Nay, it approaches because it has seen us.  It mistakes us for
relatives.  Let us sit down to deceive it a little."

They crouched beside a piece of ice, and the chamois advanced, until its
pretty form became recognisable by the naked eye.  Its motions, however,
were irregular.  It was evidently timid.  Sometimes it came on at full
gallop, then paused to look, and uttered a loud piping sound, advancing
a few paces with caution, and pausing to gaze again.  Le Croix replied
with an imitative whistle to its call.  It immediately bounded forward
with pleasure, but soon again hesitated, and stopped.  At last it seemed
to become aware of its mistake, for, turning at a tangent, it scoured
away over the ice like wind swooping down from the mountain-summits,
bounded over the crevasses like an india-rubber ball, and was quickly
out of sight.

While gazing with profound interest at this graceful creature, the
explorers were not at first aware that a dark mass of inky cloud was
rapidly bearing down on them, and that one of those wild storms which
sweep frequently over the high Alps seemed to be gathering.

"We must make haste, if we would gain the shelter of our cave," said Le
Croix, rising.

As he spoke, a low rumbling sound was heard behind them.  They turned
just in time to see a small avalanche of rocks hopping down the cliffs
towards them.  It was so far off, and looked such an innocent rolling of
pebbles, that Lewis regarded it as an insignificant phenomenon.  His
companion formed a better estimate of its character, but being at least
five hundred yards to one side of the couloir or snow-slope, down which
it rushed, he judged that they were safe.  He was mistaken.  Some of the
largest stones flew past quite near them, several striking the glacier
as they passed, and sending clouds of ice-dust over them, and one, as
large as a hogshead, bounding, with awful force, straight over their
heads.

They turned instantly to hasten from so dangerous a spot, but were
arrested by another and much louder rumbling sound.

"Quick, fly, Monsieur!" exclaimed Le Croix, setting his young companion
the example.

Truly there was cause for haste.  A sub-glacial lake among the heights
above had burst its icy barriers, and, down the same couloir from which
the smaller avalanche had sprung, a very ocean of boulders, mud, ice,
and _debris_ came crashing and roaring with a noise like the loudest
thunder, with this difference, that there was no intermission of the
roar for full quarter of an hour; only, at frequent intervals, a series
of pre-eminent peals were heard, when boulders, from six to ten feet in
diameter, met with obstacles, and dashed them aside, or broke themselves
into atoms.

Our hunters fled for their lives, and barely gained the shelter of a
giant boulder, when the skirts of the hideous torrent roared past leaped
over an ice-cliff, and was swallowed up by the insatiable crevasses of
the glacier below.  For several minutes after they had reached, and
stood panting in, a position of safety, they listened to the thunderous
roar of Alpine artillery, until it died slowly away--as if unwillingly--
in the light pattering of pebbles.

Gratitude to the Almighty for deliverance from a great danger was the
strongest feeling in the heart of the chamois-hunter.  Profound
astonishment and joy at having witnessed such an amazing sight,
quickened the pulse of Lewis.

"That was a narrow escape, Le Croix?"

"It was.  I never see such a sight without a shudder, because I lost a
brother in such an avalanche.  It was on the slopes of the Jungfrau.  He
was literally broken to fragments by it."

Lewis expressed sympathy, and his feelings were somewhat solemnised by
the graphic recital of the details of the sad incident with which the
hunter entertained him, as they descended the mountain rapidly.

In order to escape an impending storm, which was evidently brewing in
the clouds above, Lewis suggested that they should diverge from the
route by which they had ascended, and attempt a short cut by a steeper
part of the mountains.

Le Croix looked round and pondered.  "I don't like diverging into
unknown parts when in a hurry, and with the day far spent," he said.
"One never knows when a sheer precipice will shut up the way in places
like this."

The youth, however, was confident, and the man of experience was too
amiable and yielding.  There was also urgent reason for haste.  It was
therefore decided that the steeper slopes should be attempted.

They began with a glissade.  A very steep snow-slope happened to be
close at hand.  It stretched uninterruptedly down several hundred feet
to one of the terraces, into which the precipitous mountainside at that
place was cut.

"Will you try?" asked Le Croix, looking doubtfully at his companion.

"Of course I will," replied Lewis, shortly.  "Where you choose to go I
will follow."

"Have you ever done such work before?"

"Yes, often, though never on quite so steep or long a slope."

Le Croix was apparently satisfied.  He sat down on the summit of the
slope, fixed the spiked end of his axe in the snow, resting heavily on
the handle, in order to check his descent, and hitched himself forward.

"Keep steady and don't roll over," he cried, as he shot away.  The snow
rose and trailed like a white tail behind him.  His speed increased
almost to that of an avalanche, and in a few seconds he was at the
bottom.

Lewis seated himself in precisely the same manner, but overbalanced
himself when halfway down, swung round, lost self-command, let slip his
axe, and finally went head over heels, with legs and arms flying wildly.

Le Croix, half-expecting something of the kind, was prepared.  He had
re-ascended the slope a short way, and received the human avalanche on
his right shoulder, was knocked down violently as a matter of course,
and the two went spinning in a heap together to the bottom.

"Not hurt, I hope?" cried Lewis, jumping up and looking at his comrade
with some anxiety.

"No, Monsieur," replied Le Croix, quietly, as he shook the snow from his
garments--"And you?"

"Oh!  I'm all right.  That was a splendid beginning.  We shall get down
to our cave in no time at this rate."

