
"Oui," replied La Roche, seating himself at the grindstone. "(Ah! pas si
vite, a leet more slow, Bryan.)  Oui, him make it all ready; only want
de ring-bolts."

"Thin it won't want thim long.  Ye can take thim over to the shop when
ye go across.  There they are on the binch."

Bryan continued to turn the handle of the stone for some time in
silence.

"D'ye know, Losh," he resumed, "whin Mister Frank is goin' to the
fishery?"

"He go demain, I b'lieve, and Mademoiselle Edith go too."

"None o' the min goin'?" inquired the blacksmith.

"Non.  Monsieur Frank just go for to try if dere be any fish to be cotch
by de hook; and I t'ink he go more for to give Edith one drive dan dat."

"Very likely, Losh.  The poor purty little crature.  She's very fond o'
sledgin' and walkin' in snow-shoes.  'Tis well for her, bekase there's a
want o' companions for her here intirely."

"Ah! mercy, dat is superb, magnifique!" said the Frenchman, feeling the
edge of the axe with his thumb.  "It sharp 'nuff to shave de hair off
your ogly face, Bryan."

"Thin be off wid ye, an' don't kape me longer from my work.  An' shut
the door quick behind ye; there's cowld enough in the place already."

So saying, Bryan resumed his hammer, and La Roche, following the
snow-track across the yard, recommenced his labour of chopping firewood.

Next day, Frank and Edith made preparations for the excursion alluded to
in the foregoing conversation.

The object for which this excursion was undertaken was twofold--first,
to ascertain if there were any fish in a large lake about ten miles
distant from the fort; and, secondly, to give little Edith a drive for
the good of her health.  Not that her health was bad, but several weeks
of bad weather had confined her much to the house, and her mother
thought the change would be beneficial and agreeable; and tenderly did
that mother's heart yearn over her little child, for she felt that,
although she was all to Edith that a mother could be, nature had
implanted in her daughter's mind a longing desire for the companionship
of little ones of her own age, which could not be satisfied by any
substitute--not even that of a tender mother, who sought, by all the
means in her power, to become a child again for Edith's sake.

Immediately after breakfast that day Frank took Edith by the hand, and
led her round by the back of the fort, towards the kennel where the dogs
were kept, intending to release Chimo, who was to have the honour of
hauling the sledge of his young mistress.  In passing the spring, Edith
paused, as she had often done before during the winter, to gaze with
wonder on the transformation that had taken place in the appearance of
the once green and fertile spot.  Not only was it covered with deep
snow, but over the spring there was formed a singular dome of ice.  This
dome was a subject of continual astonishment to every one at Ungava.  It
had commenced to rise soon after the first hard frosts had sealed up the
little fountain from the open air.  As time passed by, the covering
became thick ice, and was bulged gradually up above the surrounding
waste, until it reached an elevation of not much less than twelve or
thirteen feet.  Inside of this the spring bubbled up as of yore.

"What think you, Edith?" said Frank, as a sudden thought occurred to
him; "shall I cut a doorway into that crystal house, and see if the
spirit of the spring dwells there?"

Edith clapped her hands with delight at the idea, and urged her
companion to begin at once.  Then, checking him as he was about to
commence the work with his hatchet, she said earnestly--

"Do spirits really dwell in the springs, Frank?"

"Why, Eda, we must send to England for a lot of fairy tales to teach you
what I mean.  I do but jest when I speak of spirits living there.  But
many books, have been written about pretended spirits and fairies, which
tell us of their wonderful adventures, and what they said and did long
ago.  I shall tell you some of these stories one of these days.  But I
daresay there are no spirits in this spring."

"Faix, an' it would be a rale misfortune if there was, sir," remarked
Bryan, who came up at this moment, and touched his cap; "for it would be
only sperits and wather, which wouldn't kape in this cowld climate.
I've finished the ring-bolts for the sled, sir, an' came to see when ye
would have them fixed."

"Put them in your pocket, Bryan, for a few minutes, and lend a hand here
to cut a hole through this dome."

As Frank spoke, he drew a small axe from his belt, and began to lay
about him so vigorously that the icy splinters flew in all directions
like a shower of broken crystal.  Bryan seconded his efforts, and in
less than half an hour a block of solid ice, about four feet high and
two broad, was cut out and detached from the side of the dome.

"That'll do, Bryan," said Frank, when their work was nearly completed;
"I'll finish it myself now.  Go to the carpenter's house, and Francois
will show you what to do with the sled."

As Bryan walked away, Frank dealt the mass of ice a blow that split it
into several pieces, which he quickly removed, revealing to the
astonished and eager gaze of his young companion a cavern of a most
beautiful light blue colour.  Taking Edith by the hand, he led her into
this icy cave.  Its walls were quite luminous and delicately blue,
except in places where the green moss and earth around the spring had
been torn from the ground and lifted up along with the dome.  Icicles
hung in various places from the roof, and the floor was hard and dry,
except in the centre, where the spring bubbled up through it, and cut a
channel across towards one side of the icy wall, where it disappeared
under the snow.

"Oh, what a beautiful palace!" cried Edith, with delight, after she had
gazed around her for a few minutes in silent wonder and admiration.  "I
shall come and live here, Frank.  Oh! do come, and let us get chairs and
a small table, and make it our sitting-room.  We can come every day when
the sun shines and read, or you can tell me the tales about spirits and
fairies you spoke of!"

"A good idea, Eda; but I fear we would need a stove to keep us warm.  It
strikes me it will make a capital ice-house in spring to keep our fresh
meat in.  It will last long after the snow is melted."

"Then we shall make a palace of it in winter and a meat-store in
spring," cried Edith, laughing, as she walked round this
newly-discovered house, examining its blue walls and peeping into the
cold black spring.  Meanwhile Frank examined it with a view to the
utilitarian purpose, and, after both of them had gone round it several
times, they continued on their way towards the dog-kennel.

The sledge which Francois had constructed for Edith was made after the
model of those used by the Esquimaux.  There were two stout runners, or
skates, made of wood, for sliding over the snow.  These were slightly
turned up, or rather _rounded_ up, in front, and attached to each other
by means of cross bars and thin planks of wood; all of which were
fastened, not by nails (for iron-work snaps like glass in such a cold
climate as that of Ungava), but by thongs of undressed sealskin, which,
although they held the fabric very loosely together in appearance, were,
nevertheless, remarkably strong, and served their purpose very well.
Two short upright bars behind served as a back to lean against.  But the
most curious part of the machine was the substance with which the
runners were shod, in order to preserve them.  This was a preparation of
mud and water, which was plastered smoothly on in a soft condition, and
then allowed to freeze.  This it did in a few minutes after being
exposed to the open air, and thus became a smooth, hard sheathing, which
was much more durable and less liable to break than iron, or indeed any
other sheathing that could be devised.  This substance is, of course,
easily repaired, and is always used by the Esquimaux in winter.

Esquimau sledges being heavy, and meant for carrying a number of people,
require large teams of dogs.  But Edith's sledge--or sled, as the men
called it--was little.  Moreover, Edith herself was little and light,
therefore Chimo was deemed sufficiently powerful to draw it.  So
thoroughly correct were they in this supposition, that when Edith was
seated in her sledge for a trial trip, and Chimo harnessed, he ran away
with her and gave Frank a chase of half a mile over the river ere he
condescended to stop in his wild career.

But the intended excursion was suddenly interrupted and postponed, by an
event which we shall relate in the next chapter.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

BURIED ALIVE--BUT NOT KILLED--THE GIANT IN THE SNOW-STORM.

The event which prevented the excursion referred to in the last chapter
was neither more nor less than a snowstorm.  "Was that all?" say you,
reader?  Nay, that was not all.  Independently of the fact that it was a
snowstorm the like of which you have never seen, unless you have
travelled in northern climes, it was a snow-storm that produced results.
Of these, more hereafter.

The storm began with a sigh--a mysterious sigh, that swept over the
mountains of Ungava with a soft, mournful wail, and died slowly away in
the distant glen of the Caniapuscaw, as if the spirit of the north wind
grieved to think of the withering desolation it was about to launch upon
the land.

The gathering clouds that preceded and accompanied this sigh induced
Frank Morton to countermand his orders for the intended journey.  In
order to console Edith for the disappointment, he went with her into the
hall, and, drawing a low stool towards the blazing stove, placed a
draught-board upon it.  Then he placed another and a lower stool beside
the first, on which he seated Edith.  Spreading a deerskin robe upon the
ground, he stretched himself thereon at full length, and began to
arrange the men.

The hall, which was formerly such a comfortless apartment, was now
invested with that degree of comfort which always gathers, more or less,
round a place that is continually occupied.  The ceiling was composed of
a carpet of deerskin stretched tightly upon the beams.  The walls were
hung all round with the thick heavy coats and robes of leather and fur
belonging to the inmates, and without which they never ventured abroad.
The iron stove in the centre of the apartment, with its pipe to conduct
away the smoke, and its radiant fire of logs, emitted a cheerful glow in
its immediate vicinity; which glow, however, was not intense enough to
melt the thick ice, or rather hoar-frost, an inch deep, with which the
two windows were encrusted, to the almost total exclusion of the view
and the serious diminution of the light.  The door was padded all round
its edges with fur, which tended to check the bitter wind that often
blew against it, and tempered the slight draught that did force its way
through.  Altogether the hall at Fort Chimo was curious and
comfortable--rather shaggy in its general appearance, but sound and
trustworthy at bottom.

A small rough table, the work of Frank Morton, stood close to the stove;
and beside it was seated Mrs Stanley, with a soft yellow deerskin
before her, which she was carefully transforming into a hunting coat for
her husband.  On another and a larger table was spread the tea equipage.
Those who would understand this aright must for _tea_ read _supper_.
Among fur-traders the two are combined.  Candles--dips made at the
fort--had been brought some time ago by La Roche, who entered the hall
by a back door which communicated with a passage leading to the kitchen
behind.

"What can have become of papa, I wonder?"  Mrs Stanley designated her
husband by this epithet, in consequence of her desire to keep up the
fiction of her being Edith's little sister or playfellow.

Frank looked up from the board.  "I know not," said he.  "I left him
giving some orders to the men.  We have been getting things made snug
about the fort, for we expect a pretty stiff breeze to-night.--Take
care, Eda; your crown's in danger."

"Oh! so it is," cried Edith, snatching back her piece, and looking with
intense earnestness at the board.

Frank might have observed, had he not been too deeply engaged with his
game, that the expected stiff breeze had already come, and was whistling
round the fort with considerable vigour.

"You'll beat me, Eda, if you play so boldly," said Frank, with a smile.
"There, give me another crown."

"And me too," said Edith, pushing up her piece.  As she spoke, the door
burst open, and Stanley sprang into the room.

"Whew! what a night!" he cried, shutting the door with a forcible bang,
in order to keep out the snow-drift that sought to enter along with him.

Two moves would have made Frank the conqueror, but the gust of wind
upset the board, and scattered the men upon the floor.

Stanley looked like a man of white marble, but the removal of his cap,
coat, and leggings produced a speedy and entire metamorphosis.

"Ho!  La Roche!"

"Oui, monsieur."

"Here, take my coat and shake the snow off it, and let's have supper as
speedily as may be.  The draughts without, Frank, are a little too
powerful for the draughts within, I fear.--What, wife, making another
coat?  One would think you had vowed to show your affection for me by
the number of coats you made.  How many have you perpetrated since we
were married?"

"Never mind; go and put on one now, and come to supper while it is hot."

"I'm glad it is hot," cried Stanley from his bedroom.  "One needs
unusual heat within to make up for the cold without.  The thermometer is
thirty below."

While the party in the hall were enjoying their evening meal, the men
were similarly employed beside the stove in their own habitation.  There
was not much difference in the two apartments, save that the confusion
in that of the men was much greater, in consequence of the miscellaneous
mass of capotes, caps, belts, discarded moccasins, axes, guns, and
seal-spears, with which they saw fit to garnish the walls.  The fumes of
tobacco were also more dense, and the conversation more uproarious.

"'Tis a howlin' night," observed Massan, as a gust of more than usual
violence shook the door on its hinges.

"Me t'ink de snow-drift am as t'ick in de sky as on de ground," said
Oolibuck, drawing a live coal from the fire and lighting his pipe
therewith.

"Hould on, boys!" cried Bryan, seizing his chair with both hands, half
in jest and half in earnest, as another blast shook the building to its
foundation.

The two Indians sat like statues of bronze, smoking their calumets in
silence, while Gaspard and Prince rose and went to the window.  But the
frozen moisture on the panes effectually prevented their seeing out.

It was indeed an awful night--such a night as had not, until now,
visited the precincts of Fort Chimo.  Viewed from the rocky platform on
the hill, the raging of the storm was absolutely sublime.  The wind came
sometimes in short, angry gusts, sometimes in prolonged roars, through
the narrows, sweeping up clouds of snow so dense that it seemed as
though the entire mass had been uplifted from the earth, hurling it
upwards and downwards and in circling eddies, past the ravines, and
round the fort, and launching it with a fierce yell into the valley of
the Caniapuscaw.  The sky was not altogether covered with clouds, and
the broken masses, as they rolled along, permitted a stray moonbeam to
dart down upon the turmoil beneath, and render darkness visible.
Sometimes the wind lulled for a second or two, as if to breathe; then it
burst forth again, splitting through the mountain gorges with a shriek
of intensity; the columns of snow sprang in thousands from every hollow,
cliff and glen, mingled in wild confusion, swayed, now hither, now
thither, in mad uncertainty, and then, caught by the steady gale, pelted
on, like the charging troops of ice-land, and swept across the frozen
plain.

Could human beings face so wild a storm as this?  Ay, they could--at
least they could dare to try!

There was one traveller out upon the hills on that tremendous night.
The giant was in the midst of it; but weak as the bulrush were the
mighty limbs of Maximus before the rushing gale.  Several days previous
to this the Esquimau had been sent down to his brethren at False River,
to procure some seal-meat for the dogs, and to ascertain the condition
of the natives and their success in fishing.  On arriving, he found that
they had been so far successful, that starvation (their too frequent
guest) had not yet visited their dwellings of snow.  But Maximus found
the old woman who had formerly saved his life very ill, and apparently
about to die.  Having learned from experience the efficacy of Stanley's
medicines, he resolved to procure some for the old woman, whom he had
tenderly watched over and hunted for ever since the eventful day of the
attack.  His dogs were exhausted, and could not return.  But the bold
Esquimau was in the prime of life, and animated by the fire of vigorous
youth.  The storm was beginning to mutter in the distance.  What then?--
Had he not faced the blasts of the frozen regions many a time before?--
Without saying a word, he threw a junk of seal-flesh into his wallet,
and, striding back upon his track at the mountain's base, he disappeared
in the driving snow.

Before reaching the fort, however, the full fury of the storm had burst
upon him.  It cast him headlong into the snow; but he rose and staggered
on.  Again it burst forth, and again he fell before it like a stately
pine.  Rising to his knees, Maximus draw the hood of his hairy garment
close round his head and face, and tried to peer through the driving
snow; but he could not see until a slight lull came; then he observed a
hummock of ice at a short distance, and, rising, made towards it.  The
lulls were short-lived, however.  The storm threw him down again;
instantly he was drifted over with snow; another blast came, lifted the
drift into the air, and left the Esquimau exposed to all its fury.  But
Maximus was not conquered.  He rose again, panting, it is true, but
sturdy as ever, and ready to take advantage of the next lull.  It came
soon; and he saw a rock, or, it might be, the base of a cliff close at
hand.  With a quick run he reached it; and, going down on his knees,
began with his gloved hands to scrape a hollow in the snow.  Having made
a hole big enough to contain his body, he lay down in it, and, pulling
the superincumbent snow down upon him, was almost buried in the ruin.
Scarcely had he drawn the hood of his coat well over his face, when
another burst of the storm dashed a column of curling drift upon the
rock, and the place where he lay was covered up; not a wrinkle in the
drift remained to mark the spot where he was buried!

All that night the storm roared among mountains with bitter fury; but
next day the wind was subdued, and the sun shone brightly on the grey
rocks and on the white wreaths of snow.  It shone in all the lustre of
an unclouded winter sky.  Not only did the sun smile upon the scene, but
two mock suns or parhelia, almost as bright as himself, shone on either
side of him.  Yet no ray of light illuminated the dwellings of the
fur-traders.  All was darkness there, until Stanley rose from his couch
and lighted a candle, for the purpose of examining his watch.

"Hallo!  Frank, Frank!" he cried, entering the hall, while he hastily
threw on his garments; "turn out, man; there's something wrong here.
'Tis past noon, and dark as midnight.  Bring your watch; perhaps I'm
wrong."

Frank yawned vociferously, and sprang from his bed.  In two seconds more
he made his appearance in his trousers and shirt.

"Past twelve, no doubt of--yea-o-ow!  That accounts for my waking three
times and going off again; but--"

"Hey! what have we here?" cried Stanley, as he opened the front door,
and disclosed to view a solid wall of snow.

"Snowed up; dear me! eh! that's odd," said Frank, beginning to
comprehend the state of matters.

Snowed up they were, undoubtedly; so thoroughly snowed up that there was
not a ray of daylight within their dwelling.  Had Frank been above the
snow, instead of below it, he would have seen that the whole fort was so
completely buried that nothing was visible above the surface except the
chimneys and the flagstaff.  After the first few moments of surprise had
passed, it occurred to Stanley that they might ascend to the regions
above by the chimney, which was wide enough, he thought, to admit a man;
but on looking up, he found that it also was full of drifted snow.
This, however, could have been easily removed; but there was a bar of
iron stretching across, and built into the clay walls, which rendered
escape by that passage impossible.

"There's nothing for it, Frank, but to dig ourselves out, so the sooner
