These birds had grown so tame, as to take food freely out of the hand of
anyone who offered it to them; and with like freedom, to take it where
it was not offered, but found within reach of their long prehensile
beaks.  Often had they pilfered provisions to which they were anything
but welcome; and, among other acts of their rapacity, there was one of
which Fritz had been an interested spectator, and for which he was not
likely ever to forgive them.  That was, their robbing him of a dainty
piece of meat, which one of the cooks had presented to Fritz himself;
and upon which he had been going to make his dinner.  One of the birds
had the audacity to seize the meat in its mandibles, jerk it out of the
dog's very teeth, and swallow it, before the latter had time to offer
either interruption or remonstrance.

The consequence was, that, from that time, Fritz had conceived a most
rancorous antipathy towards all birds of the genus _Ciconia_--and the
species _Argala_ in particular; and this it was that impelled him, on
first perceiving the adjutant--for being by the hut on their arrival he
had not seen them before,--to rush open-mouthed towards them, and seize
the tail of one of them between his teeth.

It is not necessary to add that the bird, thus indecorously assailed,
took to instant flight, followed by its more fortunate though not less
frightened mate--leaving Fritz in a temper to treat Marabout feathers as
they had never been treated before--even when by the hands of some
scorned and jealous vixen they may have been torn from the turban of
some hated rival!



CHAPTER FIFTY NINE.

CAPTURING THE STORKS.

Our adventurers witnessed the uprising of the birds with looks that
betokened disappointment and displeasure; and Fritz was in danger of
getting severely castigated.  He merited chastisement; and would have
received it on the instant--for Caspar already stood over him with an
upraised rod--when an exclamation from Karl caused the young hunter to
hold his hand, and saved Fritz from the "hiding" with which he was being
threatened.

It was not for this that Karl had called out.  The exclamation that
escaped him was of a different import--so peculiarly intoned as at once
to draw Caspar's attention from the culprit, and fix it on his brother.

Karl was standing with eyes upraised and gazing fixedly upon the
retreating stork--that one with whose tail Fritz had taken such an
unwarrantable liberty.

It was not the ragged Marabout feathers, hanging half plucked from the
posterior of the stork, upon which Karl was gazing; but its long legs,
that, as the bird rose in its hurried flight, hung, slantingly downward,
extending far beyond the tip of its tail.  Not exactly these either was
it that had called forth that strange cry; but something attached to
them--or one of them at least--which, as it came under the shining rays
of the sun, gleamed in the eyes of Karl with a metallic lustre.

It had a yellowish sheen--like gold or burnished brass--but the
scintillation of the sun's rays, as they glanced from its surface,
hindered the spectators from making out its shape, or being able to say
exactly what it was.

It was only Caspar and Ossaroo who were thus perplexed.  Karl knew that
glittering meteor, that for a moment had flashed before his eyes like a
beam of hope--now slowly but surely departing from him, and plunging him
back into the old misery.

"Oh! brother!" he exclaimed, as the stork flew upward, "what a
misfortune has happened!"

"Misfortune! what mean you, Karl?"

"Ah! you know not how near we were to a chance of being delivered.
Alas! alas! it is going to escape us!"

"The birds have escaped us, you mean?" inquired Caspar.  "What of that?
I don't believe they could have carried up the rope anyhow; and what
good would it be to catch them?  They're not eatable; and we don't want
their feathers valuable as they may be."

"No, no!" hurriedly rejoined Karl; "it is not that--not that."

"What then, brother?" inquired Caspar, somewhat astonished at the
incoherent speeches of the plant-hunter.  "What are you thinking of?"

"Look yonder!" said Karl, now for the first time pointing up to the
soaring storks.  "You see something that shines?"

"Ha! on the leg of one of the birds?  Yes; I do see something--like a
piece of yellow metal--what can it be?"

"I know what it is!" rejoined Karl, in a regretful tone; "right well do
I know.  Ah! if we could only have caught that bird, there would have
been a hope for us.  It's no use grieving after it now.  It's gone--
alas! it's gone; and you, Fritz, have this day done a thing that will
cause us all regret--perhaps for the rest of our lives."

"I don't comprehend you, brother!" said Caspar; "but if it's the escape
of the storks that's to be so much regretted, perhaps it will never take
place.  They don't appear to be in such a hurry to leave us--
notwithstanding the inhospitable reception Fritz has given them.  See!
they are circling about, as if they intended to come down again.  And
see also Ossaroo--he's holding out a lure for them.  I warrant the old
shikaree will succeed in coaxing them back.  He knows their habits
perfectly."

"Merciful Father!" exclaimed Karl, as he looked first at the flying
storks and then at Ossaroo; "be it permitted that he succeed!  You,
Caspar, lay hold upon Fritz, and give Ossaroo every chance!  For your
life don't let the dog get away from you; for your life--for the lives
of all of us!"

Caspar, though still under surprise at the excited bearing of his
brother, did not allow that to hinder him from obeying his command, and
rushing upon Fritz, he caught hold of the dog.  Then placing the hound
between his legs, he held him with both hands and knees as tightly as if
Fritz had been screwed in a vice.

The eyes of all--the dog included--were now turned upon Ossaroo.  Caspar
contemplated his movements with an undefined interest; while Karl
watched them with feelings of the keenest anxiety.

The cunning shikaree had not come to the spot unprepared.  Having
anticipated some difficulty in getting hold of the storks, he had
providentially provided a lure, which, in the event of their proving
shy, might attract them within reach of his _ringall_.  This lure was a
large fish--which he had taken out of the larder before leaving the hut,
and which he was now holding out--as conspicuously as possible, to
attract their attention.  He had gone some distance apart from the
others, and especially from Fritz, whom he had scolded away from his
side; and, having stationed himself on a slight eminence near the edge
of the lake, he was using all his wiles to coax back the birds that had
been so unwittingly compelled to take wing.

It was evident to Ossaroo--as well as to the others--that the flight of
the storks had been against their will; and that they had reluctantly
ascended into the air.  They were no doubt wearied, and wanted rest.

Whether this desire would have brought them to the earth again, Ossaroo
did not stay to determine.  As soon as by their actions he became
convinced that they saw the fish held out in his hand, he flung the
tempting morsel to some distance from him, and then stood awaiting the
result.

It proved a success--and almost instantaneously.

There was nothing in the appearance or attitude of Ossaroo to excite the
suspicion of the adjutants.  His dark skin and Hindoo costume were both
well-known to them; and though now observed in an odd, out-of-the-way
corner of the world, that was no reason for regarding him as an enemy.

Fritz was alone the object of their fear, but Fritz was a good way off,
and there appeared no longer any reason for dreading him.

Reasoning thus--and perhaps with empty stomachs to guide them to a
conclusion--the sight of the fish--lying unguarded upon the grass--put
an end to their fears; and, without further hesitation, both dropped
down beside it.

Both at the same instant clutched at the coveted prize--each
endeavouring to be the first in securing it.

As one of the birds had got hold of the fish by the head and the other
by its tail, a struggle now arose as to which should be the first to
swallow its body.  Each soon passed a portion of it down its capacious
throat, until its mandibles met in the middle, and cracked against each
other.

As neither would yield to the other, so neither would consent to
disgorge, and let go; and for some seconds this curious contention was
kept up.

How long it might have continued was not left to the determination of
the parties themselves; but to Ossaroo, who, while they were thus
occupied, rushed upon the spot; and, flinging wide his arms, enfolded
both the birds in an embrace, from which they vainly struggled to get
free.

With the assistance of Karl and Caspar--who had in the meantime tied
Fritz to a tree--the huge creatures were soon overpowered, and pinioned
beyond the possibility of escaping.



CHAPTER SIXTY.

A LABELLED LEG.

"It is! it is!" cried Karl, stooping suddenly down, and grasping the
shank of one of the birds.

"What?" inquired Caspar.

"Look, brother!  See what is there, round the stork's leg!  Do you not
remember having seen that bit of jewellery before?"

"A brass ring!  Oh yes!" replied Caspar; "now I do remember.  In the
Botanic Gardens there was an adjutant with a ring round its ankle; a
brass ring, too--just like this one.  How very odd!"

"Like!" echoed Karl.  "Not only like, but the very _same_!  Stoop down,
and examine it more closely.  You see those letters?"

"_R.B.G., Calcutta_," slowly pronounced Caspar, as he read the
inscription graven upon the ring. "`_R.B.G_.'  What do these initials
stand for, I wonder?"

"It is not difficult to tell that," knowingly answered Karl.  "_Royal
Botanical Garden_!  What else could it be?"

"Nothing else.  For certain, these two birds must be the same we used to
see there, and with which we so often amused ourselves!"

"The same," asserted Karl.  "No doubt of it."

"And Fritz must have recognised them too--when he made that unprovoked
attack upon them!  You remember how he used to quarrel with them?"

"I do.  He must not be permitted to assail them any more.  I have a use
for them."

"A use?"

"Ah, a most important one; so important that these birds, ugly and
unamiable as they are, must be cared for, as if they were the prettiest
and most prized of pets.  We must provide them with food and water; we
must tend them by day, and watch over them by night--as though they were
some sacred fire, which it was our duty to keep constantly burning."

"All that, indeed!"

"Verily, brother!  The possession of these storks is not only
important--it is essential to our safety.  If they should die in our
hands, or escape out of them--even if one of them should die or get
away--we are lost.  Our last hope lies in them.  I am sure it is our
last."

"But what hope have you found in them?" interrogated Caspar--puzzled to
make out the meaning of his brother's words, and not without wonder at
their apparent wildness.

"Hope?  Every hope.  Ay, something more than hope: for in this singular
incident I cannot fail to recognise the finger of a merciful God.
Surely He hath at length taken compassion upon us!  Surely it is He who
has sent these birds!  They are messengers from Heaven!"

Caspar remained silent, gazing earnestly in the eyes of his brother,
that were now sparkling with mingled gratitude and joy.  But although
Caspar could perceive this expression, he was utterly unable to
interpret it.

Ossaroo was alike puzzled by the strange looks and speeches of the Sahib
Karl; but the Hindoo gave less heed to them--his attention being almost
wholly taken up by the adjutants, which he fondled in turns--talking to
them and embracing them, as if they had been his brothers!

As soon as the cord had been looped round their ankles, and there was no
longer any danger of their getting away, Ossaroo cut up the fish into
slices convenient for their gullets; and proceeded to feed them with as
much fondness as he could have shown to a brace of human beings, who had
arrived from a long journey in a state of starvation.

The storks exhibited no signs of shyness--not the slightest.  It was not
in their nature to do so.  They gobbled up the morsels flung before
them, with as much avidity and unconcern, as if they were being fed by
the side of the great tank in the Garden at Calcutta.

The sight of Fritz alone had a disturbing influence upon them; but, by
the command of Karl, the dog was kept out of view, until they had
finished the meal with which Ossaroo had provided them.

Caspar, still in a cloud, once more interrogated the plant-hunter as to
his purpose.

"Ho, brother!" answered Karl, "you are not wont to be so dull of
comprehension.  Can you not guess why I am so joyed by the presence of
these birds?"

"Indeed I cannot--unless--"

"Unless what?"

"You expect them to carry a rope up the cliff."

"Carry a rope up the cliff!  Nothing of the sort.  Yes; perhaps it is
something of the sort.  But since you have made such a poor guess, I
shall keep you in suspense a little longer."

"O, brother!--"

"Nay, I shall not tell you.  It is news worth guessing at; and you and
Ossaroo must make it out between you."

The two hunters, thus challenged, were about entering upon a series of
conjectures, when they were interrupted by Karl.

"Come!" said he, "there is no time now.  You can exercise your ingenuity
after we have got home to the hut.  We must make sure of the storks,
before anything else be attended to.  This cord is too slight.  They may
file it in two with their bills, and get free.  The very strongest rope
we have got will not be more than sufficient.  Come, Ossaroo, you take
one.  Lift it up in your arms.  I shall carry the other myself; while
you, Caspar, see to Fritz.  Lead the dog in a leash.  From this time
forward he must be kept tied up--lest any misfortune should happen to
spoil the best plan that has yet offered for our deliverance."

So saying, Karl flung his arms around one of the adjutants.  Ossaroo at
the same instant embraced the other; and, despite the roaring that
proceeded from their throats, and the clattering made by their
mandibles, the huge birds were borne home to the hut.

On arriving there, they were carried inside, and fastened with strong
ropes--carefully attached to their legs, and tied to the heavy beams
forming the rafters of the roof.  The door was to be kept shut upon them
at all times when the eyes of the captors were not watching them: for
Karl, knowing the importance of having such guests, was determined to
make sure of his "game."



CHAPTER SIXTY ONE.

MAIL-CARRIERS ON WINGS.

It was only after they had gone back for their baskets of beans, and
once more returned to the hut, that Caspar and Ossaroo found time to
indulge in their conjectures.  Then both of them set to work in
earnest--seated upon the great stones outside the door, where often
before they had conjured up schemes for their deliverance.  Neither
communicated his thoughts to the other; each silently followed the
thread of his own reflections--as if there was a rivalry between them,
as to who should be the first to proclaim the design already conceived
by Karl.

Karl was standing close by, apparently as reflective as either of his
companions.  But his thoughts were only occupied in bringing to
perfection the plan, which to them was still undiscovered.

The storks had been brought out of the hut, and tied to a heavy log that
lay near.  This had been done, partly to accustom them to the sight of
the place, and partly that they might be once more fed--the single fish
they had swallowed between them not being deemed sufficient to satisfy
their hunger.

Caspar's eyes wandered to that one that had the ring upon its leg; and
then to the ring itself--_R.B.G., Calcutta_.

The inscription at length proved suggestive to Caspar, as the ring
itself, on first seeing it, had to his brother.  On that bit of brass
there was information.  It had been conveyed all the way from Calcutta
by the bird that bore the shining circlet upon its shank.  By the same
means why might not information be carried back?  Why--

"I have it!  I have it!" shouted Caspar, without waiting to pursue the
thread of conjecture that had occurred to him.  "Yes, dear Karl, I know
your scheme--I know it; and by Jupiter Olympus, it's a capital one!"

"So you have guessed it at last," rejoined Karl, rather sarcastically.
"Well, it is high time, I think!  The sight of that brass ring, with its
engraved letters, should have led you to it long ago.  But come! let us
hear what you have got to say, and judge whether you have guessed
correctly."

"Oh, certainly!" assented Caspar, taking up the tone of jocular badinage
in which his brother had been addressing him.  "You intend making a
change in the character--or rather the calling--of these lately arrived
guests of ours."  Caspar pointed to the storks.  "That is your
intention, is it not?"

"Well?"

"They are now soldiers--_officers_, as their title imports--adjutants!"

"Well?"

"They will have no reason to thank you for your kind intentions.  The
appointment you are about to bestow on them can scarce be called a
promotion.  I don't know how it may be with birds, but I do know that
there are not many men ambitious of exchanging from the military to the
civil service."

"What appointment, Caspar?"

"If I'm not mistaken, you mean to make _mail-carriers_ of
them--_postmen_, if you prefer the phrase."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Karl, in a tone expressive of gratification at the
clever manner in which Caspar had declared himself.  "Right, brother!
you've guessed my scheme to the very _letter_.  That is exactly what I
intend doing."

"By de wheeles ob Juggannaut coachee," cried the shikaree, who had been
listening, and understood the figurative dialogue; "dat be da goodee
plan.  Dese stork go back Calcutt--surely dey go back.  Dey carry letter
to Feringhee Sahibs--Sahibs dey know we here in prison--dey come d'liva
we vey dey affer get de letter--ha! ha! ha!"  Then _delivering_ himself
of a series of shrill ejaculations, the Hindoo sprang up from the stone
upon which he had been sitting, and danced around the hut, as if he had
suddenly taken leave of his senses!

However imperfectly spoken, the words of Ossaroo had disclosed the whole
plan, as conceived by the plant-hunter himself.

It had vaguely defined itself in Karl's mind, on first seeing the storks
above him in the air; but when the lustre of metal flashed before his
eyes, and he perceived that yellow band encircling the shank of the
bird, the scheme became more definite and plausible.

When at length the storks were taken captive, and Karl deciphered the
inscription--by which they were identified as old acquaintances of the
R.B.G.--he no longer doubted that Providence was in the plot; and that
these winged messengers had been sent, as it were, from Heaven itself,
to deliver him and his companions from that prison in which they had so
long been pining.



CHAPTER SIXTY TWO.

CONCLUSION.

The deliverance came at length; though it was not immediate.  Several
months more, of that lonely and monotonous life, were our adventurers
called upon to endure.

They had to wait for the return of the rainy season; when the rivers
that traverse the great plains of Hindostan became brimful of flood--
bearing upon their turbid bosoms that luxuriance, not of life, but of
death, which attracts the crane and the stork once more to seek
