
"Go out!" he said, imperiously, "or I'll make you."

"I won't then," said Micky, defiantly.

"We'll see about that."

Gilbert seized him by the shoulders; but Micky was accustomed to
fighting, and made a vigorous resistance. In the midst of the fracas Mr.
Rockwell came up.

"What does this mean?" he demanded, in a quiet but authoritative tone.

"This young rascal has attempted to force his way in," said the
book-keeper, desisting, and with a flushed face.

"I asked to see you," said Micky, "and he said I shouldn't."

"I told him to come," said Mr. Rockwell. "You may come into the
counting-room, Michael. Mr. Gilbert, I should like your presence also."

In surprise, not unmingled with foreboding, Mr. Gilbert followed his
employer and Micky Maguire into the counting-room.

"Mr. Gilbert," commenced Mr. Rockwell, "are you acquainted with this
boy?"

"He blacked my boots on one occasion," said the book-keeper; "I know no
more of him except that he is a young vagabond and a thief."

"Who hired me to steal?" retorted Micky.

"I don't think you would need any hiring," said Gilbert, with a sneer.

Micky was about to retort in no choice terms, but Mr. Rockwell signed to
him to be silent.

"This boy has made a charge against you, Mr. Gilbert," he said, "which
you ought to be made aware of."

"He is capable of any falsehood," said the book-keeper; but he began to
be nervous.

"I thought your acquaintance with him was very slight."

"So it is; but it is easy to judge from his looks what he is."

"That is not always a safe guide. But to the charge. He asserts that you
hired him to fix the charge of theft upon Richard, on account of your
dislike to him."

"So he did, and all he give me was a dollar," said Micky, aggrieved.
"That was mean."

"Do you believe this story?" asked Gilbert, turning to Mr. Rockwell.

"I know that you dislike Richard, Mr. Gilbert."

"So I do. He's artful and bad; but you'll find him out some day."

"I don't think you do him justice. Artful is the very last word I should
apply to him."

"You may be deceived."

"If I am, I shall never put confidence in any boy again. But you haven't
answered the charge, Mr. Gilbert."

"It isn't worth answering," said the book-keeper, scornfully.

"Still, I would be glad to have you give an answer one way or the
other," persisted Mr. Rockwell.

"Then it's a lie, of course."

"It's true," said Micky.

"I hope you consider my word as of more value than this vagabond's,"
said Gilbert, contemptuously.

"Why were you so anxious to prevent his entering, Mr. Gilbert?"

"I didn't see what business he could possibly have here."

"Michael, will you give an account of all that has taken place between
Mr. Gilbert and yourself? I do not yet feel satisfied."

"Mr. Rockwell," said Gilbert, in a passion, "I do not choose to submit
to the insulting investigation you propose. My month is out next
Thursday; I beg leave to resign my situation."

"Your resignation is accepted," said Mr. Rockwell, quietly.

"If it is convenient to you, I should like to leave at once," said the
book-keeper, livid with passion.

"As you please," said his employer. "Your salary shall be paid up to the
end of the month."

To this Gilbert offered no opposition. The balance of his salary was
paid him, and he left the warehouse in a very unpleasant frame of mind,
much to the gratification of Micky Maguire, who felt that his vengeance
was complete.

"Now, Michael," said Mr. Rockwell, "I must see what I can do for you. Do
you wish to give up your present business?"

"Yes," said Micky, "I don't like it."

"I can give you a situation as errand-boy in my own employ," said Mr.
Rockwell. "My head clerk will explain your duties."

"What wages will I get?" asked Micky, anxiously.

"For the present you shall have a dollar a day, or six dollars a week. I
will besides give you a new suit of clothes. Will that suit you?"

"Yes," said Micky, feeling as if he had unexpectedly become heir to a
fortune. "When will I begin?"

"To-morrow if you like. Come here this afternoon at three, and I will
send Richard with you to a clothing-house."

Just then Dick, who had been to the post-office, entered, and Mr.
Rockwell in a few words informed him of the changes that had taken
place.

"I believe you and Michael haven't been very good friends," he added;
"but I trust you will get over that."

Dick promptly offered his hand to his old enemy.

"I am glad you are coming here, Micky," he said "I'll do all I can to
help you on, and if we are not good friends it won't be my fault."

"Do you mean that, Dick?" said Micky, almost incredulous.

"Yes, I do."

"I've acted mean by you more'n once."

"If you have, it's all over now," said Dick. "There's no use in
remembering it."

"You're a good fellow, Dick," said Micky, "an' I ought to have known it
before."

Dick was gratified by this testimony from one who for years had been his
active opponent, and he determined to help Micky to turn over the new
leaf which was to bear a very different record from the old one.

When Micky had gone out, Mr. Rockwell said, "Well, Richard, I have lost
my book-keeper."

"Yes, sir," said Dick.

"And I can't say I am sorry. I will do Mr. Gilbert the justice to say
that he understood his business; but he was personally disagreeable, and
I never liked him. Now I suppose I must look out for a successor."

"Yes, sir, I suppose so."

"I know a very competent book-keeper, who is intending to go into
business for himself at the expiration of six months. Until that time I
can secure his services. Now, I have a plan in view which I think you
will approve. You shall at once commence the study of book-keeping in a
commercial school in the evening, and during the day I will direct Mr.
Haley to employ you as his assistant. I think in that way you will be
able to succeed him at the end of his term."

Dick was completely taken by surprise. The thought that he, so recently
plying the trade of a boot-black in the public streets, could rise in
six months to the responsible post of a book-keeper in a large wholesale
house, seemed almost incredible.

"I should like nothing better," he said, his eyes sparkling with
delight, "if you really think I could discharge the duties
satisfactorily."

"I think you could. I believe you have the ability, and of your fidelity
I feel assured."

"Thank you, sir; you are very kind to me," said Dick, gratefully.

"I have reason to be," said Mr. Rockwell, taking his hand. "Under God it
is to your courage that I owe the life of my dear boy. I shall never
forget it. One thing more. I intend Michael to undertake most of your
present duties, such as going to the post-office, etc. Do you think he
will answer?"

"I think so," said Dick. "He has been a rough customer, but then he has
never had a chance. I believe in giving everybody a chance."

"So do I," said Mr. Rockwell. "Michael shall have his chance. Let us
hope he will improve it."

There are many boys, and men too, who, like Micky Maguire, have never
had a fair chance in life. Let us remember that, when we judge them, and
not be too hasty to condemn. Let us consider also whether it is not in
our power to give some one the chance that may redeem him.

That afternoon Micky Maguire was provided with a new suit of clothes, of
which he felt very proud. The next morning, on his way to the
post-office, he fell in with his old confederate, Limpy Jim, who
regarded him with a glance of the most bewildering surprise.

"It aint you, Micky,--is it?" he asked, cautiously, surveying his old
comrade's neat appearance. "When did you come back from the Island?"

"Shut up about the Island, Jim," said Micky. "Do I look as if I had been
there?"

"You look nobby," said Jim. "Where's your brush?"

"I've give up the blackin' business," said Micky.

"You have? What are you going to do? Sell papers?"

"No," said Micky, consequentially. "I'm in business on Pearl Street."

"Why," said Limpy Jim, surprised, "that's where that upstart Ragged Dick
works."

"He aint an upstart, an' he aint ragged," said Micky. "He's a friend of
mine, an' if you insult him, I'll lam' ye."

"O my eyes!" ejaculated Jim, opening the organs of vision to a very wide
extent; "that's the biggest joke I ever heerd of."

"You'll hear of a bigger one pretty quick," said Micky, rolling up his
sleeves, and squaring off scientifically.

Limpy Jim, who had a respect for Micky's prowess, incontinently fled,
surveying Micky from a safe distance, with a look in which surprise
seemed to mingle with incredulity.

It may seem strange, but, from that time forth, Dick had no firmer
friend than Micky Maguire, who, I am glad to say, though occasionally
wayward, improved vastly, and became a useful employe of the
establishment which he had entered. Of course both in ability and
education, though in the last he gained considerably, he was quite
inferior to Dick; but he was advanced as he grew older to the position
of porter, where his strength stood him in good stead. His pay increased
also, and through Dick's influence he was saved from vicious habits, and
converted from a vagabond to a useful member of society.

And now, almost with regret, I find myself closing up the record of
Dick's chequered career. The past with its trials is over; the future
expands before him, a bright vista of merited success. But it remains
for me to justify the title of my story, and show how Dick acquired
"Fame and Fortune." I can only hint briefly at the steps that led to
them.

In six months, at the age of seventeen, Dick succeeded to Mr. Gilbert's
place with a salary, to commence with, of one thousand dollars. To this
an annual increase was made, making his income at twenty-one, fourteen
hundred dollars. Just about that time he had an opportunity to sell his
up-town lots, to a gentleman who had taken a great fancy to them, for
five times the amount he paid, or five thousand dollars. His savings
from his salary amounted to about two thousand dollars more.

Meanwhile Mr. Rockwell's partner, Mr. Cooper, from ill health felt
obliged to withdraw from business, and Richard, to his unbounded
astonishment and gratification, was admitted to the post of junior
partner, embarking the capital he had already accumulated, and receiving
a corresponding share of the profits. These were so large that Richard
was able to increase his interest yearly by investing his additional
savings, and three years later he felt justified in offering his hand to
Ida Greyson, whose partiality to Dick had never wavered. He was no
longer Ragged Dick now, but Mr. Richard Hunter, junior partner in the
large firm of Rockwell & Hunter. Mr. Greyson felt that even in a worldly
way Dick was a good match for his daughter; but he knew and valued still
more his good heart and conscientious fidelity to duty, and excellent
principles, and cheerfully gave his consent. Last week I read Dick's
marriage in the papers, and rejoiced in his new hopes of happiness.

So Dick has achieved FAME and FORTUNE,--the fame of an honorable and
enterprising man of business, and a fortune which promises to be very
large. But I am glad to say that Dick has not been spoiled by prosperity.
He never forgets his humble beginnings, and tries to show his sense of
God's goodness by extending a helping hand to the poor and needy boys,
whose trials and privations he understands well from his own past
experience. I propose in my next story to give an account of one of
these boys, and shall take the opportunity to give further information
in regard to some of the characters introduced in this volume. This
story, the third in the Ragged Dick series; will be entitled

MARK, THE MATCH BOY;
OR,
RICHARD HUNTER'S WARD.




       *       *       *       *       *

HORATIO ALGER'S Successful Juvenile Books.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ragged Dick Books.

I. RAGGED DICK; or, Street Life in New York. II. FAME AND FORTUNE; or,
The Progress of Richard Hunter. III. MARK, THE MATCH BOY. IV. ROUGH AND
READY; or, Life Among New York Newsboys. V. BEN THE LUGGAGE BOY; or,
Among the Wharves. VI. RUFUS AND ROSE; or, The Fortunes of Rough and
Ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tattered Tom Books.

A Continuation of the Ragged Dick Series.


FIRST SERIES, in Four Volumes

I. TATTERED TOM; or, The Story of a Street Arab. II. PAUL, THE PEDDLER;
or, The Adventures of a Young Street Merchant. III. PHIL, THE FIDDLER;
or, The Young Street Musician. IV. SLOW AND SURE; or, From the Sidewalk
to the Shop.


SECOND SERIES.

I. JULIUS; or, The Street Boy out West.

       *       *       *       *       *

Luck and Pluck Books.


FIRST SERIES, in Four Volumes

I. LUCK AND PLUCK; or, John Oakley's Inheritance. II. SINK OR SWIM; or,
Harry Raymond's Resolve. III. STRONG AND STEADY; or, Paddle your own
Canoe. IV. STRIVE AND SUCCEED; or, The Progress of Walter Conrad.


SECOND SERIES.

I. TRY AND TRUST; or, The Story of a Bound Boy. II. BOUND TO RISE; or,
How Harry Walton rose in the World. III. RISEN FROM THE RANKS; or, Harry
Walton's Success.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bold and Brave Books.

_To be completed in Four Volumes._

I. BOLD AND BRAVE; or, The Fortunes of a Factory Boy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Campaign Books.

I. FRANK'S CAMPAIGN. II. PAUL PRESCOTT'S CHARGE. III. CHARLIE CODMAN'S
CRUISE.



