"We shall have the place all to ourselves!" exclaimed Mr. Ackerman.
"There will be no spectators to watch me renew my youth, thank
goodness!"

Quickly the skates were strapped on and the young people shot out into
the sunshine and began to circle about. More cautiously Mr. Tolman and
his guest followed.

"I wouldn't go into the quarry," shouted Mr. Tolman, "for I doubt if it
has been cold enough yet to freeze the ice very solidly there. There are
liable to be air holes where the river makes in."

"Oh, we fellows have skated in the quarry millions of times, Dad,"
Stephen protested. "It is perfectly safe."

"There is no way of telling whether it is or not," was the response, "so
suppose for to-day we keep away from it."

"But--"

"Oh, don't argue, Stevie," called Doris. "If Dad doesn't want us to go
there that's enough, isn't it?"

"But half the fun is making that turn around the rocks," grumbled
Stephen, in a lower tone. "I don't see why Dad is such a fraid-cat. I
know this pond better than he does and--"

"If your father says not to skate there that ought to go with you," cut
in Dick. "He doesn't want you to--see? Whether it is safe or not has
nothing to do with it."

"But it's so silly!" went on Stephen. "Why--"

"Oh, cut it out! Can it!" ejaculated the East Side lad. "Your dad says
_No_ and he's the boss."

The ungracious retort Steve offered was lost amid the babel of laughter
that followed, and the skaters darted away up the pond. Indeed, one
could not long have cherished ill humor amid such radiant surroundings.
There was too much sunshine, too much sparkle in the clear air; too much
jollity and happiness. Almost before he realized it Stephen's irritation
had vanished and he was speeding across the glassy surface of the ice as
gay as the gayest of the company.

He never could explain afterward just how it happened that he found
himself around the bend of the quarry and sweeping with the wind toward
its farther end. He had not actually formulated the intention of
slipping away from the others and invading this forbidden spot.
Nevertheless, there he was alone in the tiny cove with no one in sight.
What followed was all over in a moment,--the breaking ice and the
plunge into the frigid water. The next he knew he was fighting with all
his strength to prevent himself from being drawn beneath the jagged,
crumbling edge of the hole. To clamber out was impossible, for every
time he tried the thin ice would break afresh under his hands and
submerge him again in the bitter cold of the moving stream. Over and
over he tried to pull himself to safety but without success. Then
suddenly he felt himself becoming numb and helpless. His teeth chattered
and he could no longer retain his hold on the frail support that was
keeping his head above water. He was slipping back into the river. _He
was not going to be able to get out!_

With a piercing scream he made one last desperate lunge forward, and
again the ice that held him broke and the water dashed over his ears and
mouth.

When he next opened his eyes it was to find himself in his own bed with
a confusion of faces bending over him.

"There!" he heard some one say in a very small, far-away voice. "He is
coming to himself now, thank God! It was chiefly cold and fright. He is
safe now, Tolman. Don't you worry! You'd better go and get off some of
your wet clothing, or you will catch your death."

Mr. Ackerman was speaking.

"Yes, Henry, do go!" pleaded his wife.

[Illustration: He was fighting to prevent himself from being drawn
beneath the jagged, crumbling edge of the hole. Page 244.]

As Stephen looked about him in the vague, groping uncertainty of
returning consciousness his glance fell upon his father who stood beside
his pillow, shivering nervously. He put out his hand and touched the
dripping coat sleeve.

"What--" began he weakly.

Then with a rush it all came back to him and everything was clear. He
had been drowning and his father had plunged into the water to save him!

A sob rose in his throat and he caught the elder man's hand between both
of his.

"Oh, Dad," he exclaimed, "I've been so rotten to you--so mean--so
cowardly. I'm ashamed to--"

"Don't talk about it now, son. I know."

"You know what I did?"

"Yes."

"But--" the boy paused bewildered.

"Don't talk any more about it now, Stevie," pleaded his mother.

"But I've got to know," said the lad. "Can't you see that--"

"Let me talk with him alone a moment," suggested Mr. Tolman in an
undertone. "He is all upset and he won't calm down until he has this
thing off his mind. Leave me here with him a little while. I'll promise
that he does not tire himself."

The doctor, Mr. Ackerman and Mrs. Tolman moved across the room toward
the window.

"You asked how I knew, son," began his father with extreme gentleness.
"I didn't really know. I just put two and two together. There was the
scratched machine and the gasoline gone--both of which facts puzzled me
not a little. But the proof that clinched it all and made me certain of
what had happened came to me this morning when Havens brought me an old
red sweater and some school papers of Bud Taylor's that the men who were
overhauling the car found under the seat. In an instant the whole thing
was solved."

"You knew before we went skating then?"

"Yes."

"And--and--you jumped into the water after me just the same."

Mr. Tolman's voice trembled:

"You are my son and I love you no matter what you may do."

"Oh, Dad, I'm so sorry!" sobbed the boy. "I wanted to tell you--I meant
to. It was just that I was too much of a coward. I was so ashamed of
what I had done that I hadn't the nerve. After it was over it all seemed
so wrong. I knew you would be angry--"

"Rather say _sorry_, son."

"Well, sorry. And now that you have been so white to me I'm more ashamed
still."

"There, there, my boy, we will say no more about it," his father
declared. "You and your conscience have probably had a pretty bitter
battle and I judge you have not been altogether happy since your
adventure. People who do wrong never are. It is no fun to carry your
fault to bed with you and find it waiting when you wake up in the
morning."

"You bet it isn't!" replied the lad, with fervor. "But can't I do
something now to make good, Dad?"

Mr. Tolman checked an impulsive protest and after a moment responded
gravely:

"We will see. Perhaps you would like to earn something toward doing over
the car."

"Yes! Yes! I would!"

"Well, all that can be arranged later. We--"

"Henry," broke in Mrs. Tolman, "you must go this instant and get into
some dry clothes. You are chilled through. The doctor says Stephen is
going to be none the worse for his ducking and that he can come down
stairs to dinner after he has rested a little longer. So our
Thanksgiving party is not to be spoiled, after all. In fact, I believe
we shall have more to give thanks for than we expected," concluded she,
making an unsteady attempt to speak lightly.

"I think so, too," echoed her husband.

"And so do I!" added Stephen softly, as he exchanged an affectionate
smile with his father.




CHAPTER XIX

THE END OF THE HOUSE PARTY


As they were persons of strong constitution and in good athletic
training neither Mr. Tolman nor Steve were any the worse for the narrow
escape of the morning, and although a trifle spent with excitement both
were able to take their places at the dinner table so that no cloud
rested on the festivity of the day.

Certainly such a dinner never was,--or if there ever had been one like
it in history at least Dick Martin had never had the luck to sit down to
it. The soup steaming and hot, the celery white and crisp, the sweet
potatoes browned in the oven and gleaming beneath their glaze of sugar,
the cranberry sauce vivid as a bowl of rubies; to say nothing of squash,
and parsnips and onions! And as for the turkey,--why, it was the size of
an ostrich! With what resignation it lay upon its back, with what an
abject spirit of surrender,--as if it realized that resistance was
futile and that it must docilely offer itself up to make perfect the
feast. And the pudding, the golden-tinted pies with their delicate
crust, the nuts; the pyramid of fruit, riotous in color; the candies of
every imaginable hue and flavor! Was it a wonder that Dick, who had
never before beheld a real New England home Thanksgiving, regarded the
novelty with eyes as large as saucers and ate until there was not room
for another mouthful?

"Gee!" he gasped in a whisper to Stephen, as he sank weakly back into
his chair when the coffee made its appearance. "This sure is some
dinner."

The others who chanced to overhear the observation laughed.

"Had enough, sonny?" inquired Mr. Tolman.

"_Enough!_"

There was more laughter.

"I suppose were it not for the trains and the ships we should not be
having such a meal as this to-day," remarked Mrs. Tolman.

"You are right," was Mr. Ackerman's reply. "Let me see! Fruit from
Florida, California and probably from Italy; flour from the Middle West;
coffee from South America; sugar probably from Cuba; turkey from Rhode
Island, no doubt; and vegetables from scattered New England farms. Add
to this cigarettes from Egypt and Turkey and you have covered quite a
portion of the globe."

"It is a pity we do not consider our indebtedness to our neighbors all
over the world oftener," commented Mr. Tolman. "We take so much for
granted these days. To appreciate our blessings to the full we should
have lived in early Colonial times when the arrival of a ship from
across the ocean was such an important event that the wares she brought
were advertised broadcast. Whenever such a vessel came into port a list
of her cargo was issued and purchasers scrambled eagerly to secure the
luxuries she carried. Pipes of wine, bolts of cloth, china, silks,
tea--all were catalogued. It was no ordinary happening when such a boat
docked, I assure you."

"I suppose it was a great event," reflected Mrs. Tolman, "although I
never half realized it."

"And not only was the advent of merchandise a red-letter day but so was
the advent of travelers from the other side of the water. Picture if you
can the excitement that ensued when Jenny Lind, the famous singer,
visited this country! And the fact that we were now to hear this
celebrated woman was not the only reason for our interest. She had
actually come in a ship from across the sea! Others would come also.
America was no longer cut off from the culture of the old world, an
isolated country bereft of the advantages of European civilization. We
were near enough for distinguished persons to make trips here! Charles
Dickens and the Prince of Wales came--and how cosmopolitan we felt to be
entertaining guests from the mother-country! Certainly the Atlantic
could not be very wide if it could be crossed so easily and if we could
have the same speakers, the same readers, the same singers as did the
English! Our fathers and grandfathers must have thrilled with
satisfaction at the thought. The ocean was conquered and was no longer
an estranging barrier."

"What would they have said to crossing the water by aeroplane or bobbing
up in a foreign port in a submarine?" put in Doris.

"And some day I suppose the marvels of our age that cause our mouths to
open wide and our eyes to bulge with amazement will become as humdrum as
the ocean liner and the Pullman have," Mrs. Tolman remarked.

"Yes," returned her husband. "Think of the fight every one of these
innovations has had to put up before it battled its way to success. The
first locomotives, you remember, were not only rated as unsafe for
travel but also actually destructive to property. The major part of the
public had no faith in them and predicted they would never be used for
general travel. As for crossing the ocean--why, one was welcome to take
his life in his hands if he chose, of course; but to cross in an iron
ship--it was tempting Providence! Did not iron always sink? And how
people ridiculed Darius Green and his flying machine! Most of the
prophets were thought to be crazy. History is filled with stories of men
who wrecked their worldly fortunes to perpetuate an idea, and but too
frequently an idea they never lived to see perfected."

During the pause that followed Mr. Ackerman leaned across the table and
as he sipped his coffee asked mischievously:

"Well, Steve, having now heard both stories, have you come to a
conclusion which one you are going to vote for?"

"No, sir," was the dubious response. "I'm farther away from a decision
than ever. Just as I get it settled in my mind that the railroads have
done the biggest things and conquered the most difficulties along come
the steamships and I am certain they are six times as wonderful."

"And you, Dick--what do you say?" questioned the financier, smiling.
"Surely you are going to stand up for the steamboat."

But to his chagrin Dick shook his head.

"I feel as Steve does," replied he. "No sooner do I get settled one way
than something turns me round the other."

"So far as I can see we shall have to leave the matter a draw, shan't
we, Tolman?" observed the New Yorker.

"It would be a jolly subject for a debate, wouldn't it?" put in Stephen.
"Sometimes we have discussions like that at school and the next time we
do I believe I'll suggest this topic. It would be mighty interesting."

"It certainly would," his father echoed. "But it also would be a very
sorry event if you could not demonstrate that the railroads had the
supremacy for were their prestige to be threatened I might have to move
out of town."

"In case Connecticut did not want you, you might come to New York where
you would be sure of being appreciated," put in Mr. Ackerman. "And that
is not all talk, either, for I want you and the whole family to give me
a promise to-day that you will come over and join Dick and me at
Christmas. I've never had a boy of my own to celebrate the holiday with
before, you must remember; but this time I have a real family and I am
going to have a real Christmas," he continued, smiling affectionately at
the lad beside him. "So I want every one of you to come and help me to
make the day a genuine landmark. And if I'm a little new at playing
Santa Claus some of you who have been schooled in the role for many
years can show me how. We can't promise to stage for you such an
excitement as Stephen got up for us this morning, and we never can give
you a dinner equal to this; but we can give you a royal welcome. You can
come by boat or come by train," added he slyly. "No guest who patronizes
the railroads will be shut out, even if he is misguided. The chief thing
is for you to come, one and all, and we will renew our friendship and
once again bless Stephen, Dick, and my lost pocketbook, for bringing us
together."

FINIS

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The first volume in "The Invention Series"

PAUL AND THE PRINTING PRESS

By SARA WARE BASSETT

With illustrations by A. O. Scott

12mo. Cloth. 218 pages.

Paul Cameron, president of the class of 1920 in the Burmingham High
School, conceives the idea of establishing a school paper, to the honor
and glory of his class. So _The March Hare_ comes into existence, and
Paul and his schoolfellows bend all their energies to making it a
success. They have their difficulties and Paul in particular bears the
brunt of their troubles, but _The March Hare_ lives up to its reputation
for life and liveliness and becomes not only a class success, but a town
institution. This is the first volume in "The Invention Series."

"It is the sort of story that boys of fourteen years and upward
will enjoy and ought to enjoy, a combination that is rarely
achieved."--Boston Post.

"A welcome volume which will appeal to boys who want a good story that
will give some information as well."--New York Evening Post.

"'Paul and the Printing Press' not only has a keen story interest, but
has the advantage of carrying much valuable information for all young
folks for whom the mysterious and all-powerful printing press has an
attraction."--Boston Herald.

LITTLE, BROWN & CO., PUBLISHERS
