put on a wooden dish, and two tin cups were ready for the coffee to be
poured into them. We seated ourselves cross-legged on the floor, and
began our meal. What a nice cup of coffee we had! How deliciously it
tasted! How good was our coarse hard black bread and our reindeer
cheese, and smoked reindeer tongue!

After we had drunk our coffee and eaten our supper I noticed that Mikel
was very silent and thoughtful. I wondered if he was thinking of dangers
ahead--of the sudden stopping of our journey,--and just as I was on the
point of asking him why he was so thoughtful he broke the silence
himself and said: "Paulus, I know where there is a big brown bear--a
real big fellow. The Bear's Night is not over with him yet, and he must
be still sleeping under the snow at the place where I saw him last
autumn getting ready to go into his winter quarters."

"You don't say so, Mikel!" I exclaimed. "Is the bear sleeping near where
we are?"

"Not so very near," he replied with a twinkle in his eye. "A few hours
will bring us to his place."

He saw by my looks that I was ready to go after the bear. It was just
what he wished. So he continued: "Paulus, shall we go and kill the bear,
before he awakes and goes into the mountains and forests to commit his
depredations,--for after his long fast he will be very hungry--and are
you willing to lose two or three days and run the risk of having our
journey come to an end?"

When I heard this, I forgot all about the ice cracking over the streams
and lakes, about the snow melting and preventing people from travelling.
"Yes, Mikel," I replied, "let us go after the bear. Afterwards we will
travel as fast as we can and take very little sleep; perhaps we shall
have luck and the weather may be colder than usual for a while."

"All right," replied Mikel; "we will go after the bear."

"Mikel," said I "before we stretch ourselves on the floor and go to
sleep, tell me how you know that the bear is at the spot you suppose and
that he is spending his winter night there."

Mikel took a big pinch of snuff and replied: "Paulus, I think I am the
only one, that knows where this bear is sleeping, for I have kept it a
secret. I hope no other person knows where he is, for I want his skin.
Besides I shall get a premium in money if we kill him."

Then he added: "One day last fall as I was hunting for ptarmigans I saw
in the distance a huge brown bear walking about and getting ready for
his winter quarters. I knew that he was seeking his winter lodgings,
because he was going round and round a big cluster of pines before
entering it. I watched! After a a while he disappeared among the pines
and I saw no more of him. I knew that if he were not disturbed or
frightened away he would stay there. The bear assuredly had seen the
place during the summer and thought it was a good one for his long
sleep. This bear knew that a big snowstorm was coming, and he was not
mistaken, for that night snow fell very heavily and the storm lasted two
days.

"The Bear's Night will soon be over in this region," Mikel continued,
"and at any moment this bear may awaken, break through the snow that is
over him, and go away. Perhaps he is already gone. At this time of the
year the slightest noise will arouse a bear, for by this time he has
ceased to sleep soundly."

Then he added: "We have had very little sleep since we left the coast,
Paulus; we need a good rest before we go after the bear."

"Yes," said I, "my eyes ache for want of a good long sleep."

We stretched ourselves on the earth floor, and soon after I heard the
snoring of Mikel. He was an inveterate snorer,--I thought the champion
snorer of all those I ever had met.

I could not go to sleep, though I was so tired. I turned first on one
side, then on the other, then lay on my back. I was much excited, for I
thought of the big brown bear and of the hunt that was before us. At
last I fell asleep. Suddenly I was awakened by a shaking of Mikel, and
as I opened my eyes he said, "Paulus, what is the matter? You have been
shouting."

I was in a profuse perspiration. I had again had nightmare from lying on
my back. I was fighting with a big bear which had seized me, and we were
wrestling and I was getting the worst of it, and when ready to fall down
in his grasp I had given a big scream.

After our breakfast that morning, Mikel said: "We must go and tell some
of the folks who live in a little hamlet not far from here to come with
us."

"What do you call not far from here?" I asked.

I had begun to know what "not far" meant with the Lapps. "Two hours'
travel, or about fifteen miles," he replied. "I have friends there."

Before leaving the little house of refuge Mikel swept the floor, and
made it as clean as we had found it--for it is the custom of the people
to do this before they leave.

We then started eastward, and after two hours' travelling we came to a
few farms and entered a house. Mikel told the people about the bear. The
news soon spread and there was much excitement. During the day
preparations were made for the hunt.

The next morning men gathered, taking their guns and big long sticks,
with pikes at the ends to prod the bear with; and all the dogs of the
place followed us. Many men started on their skees, others in their
sleighs. According to Mikel the bear was about thirty miles away.

I was full of enthusiasm, and longed to come face to face with the big
brown bear of northern Europe.

About three hours after, we stopped. All the people took counsel
together and spoke in low voices. Then Mikel, pointing out to me a big
cluster of trees, said, "Paulus, the bear is there."

Slowly we made for the spot, and then entered the grove, and went in
different directions seeking for the bear's winter quarters. Soon after
we saw a heap of snow, or little hillock, that covered evidently some
boulders piled on the top of each other or a cluster of fallen broken
pine trees.

We looked at each other and pointed towards the spot--we knew that the
bear was under the snow there. Mikel whispered to me, "The bear sleeps
under that hillock of snow."

We surrounded the place, then on a sudden we shouted and made a terrific
noise. Two or three of the men fired their guns, the dogs barked
furiously.

[Illustration: "He sat on his haunches and looked at us, uttering a
tremendous growl."]

Then we saw the centre of the heap or hillock of snow tremble, as if
some live creature were moving slowly under it. Then the snow moved a
little quicker. There was no mistake, the bear was awakened, had
moved, and was on the point of rising; he was listening, and getting
ready to come out. The noise had frightened him. The snow trembled more
and more and rose higher and higher. Suddenly there was a great
upheaval, and great cracks appeared in the crusted snow. Then we saw
peeping out the head and back of a huge brown bear, then two legs, and
finally the whole animal.

He looked round him with amazement. He seemed to be dazed at the strange
and sudden sight before him. He sat on his haunches and looked at us,
uttering a tremendous growl. We could not tell whether he meant to fight
or to run. The dogs barked angrily around the huge beast, but did not
dare to approach near enough to attack him. In the meantime we had all
drawn together so that we could fire without danger of hitting any of
our party. The bear was getting ugly, gave a series of fierce growls,
and rose on his hind legs. At this moment Mikel and I fired. A grunt of
pain showed that the animal was hit. He ran a few steps towards us and
as we got ready to fire again the big beast fell, his blood reddening
the snow.

We gathered round and looked at him. He was a huge beast, but very thin
from his long fast, for he had been six months or more without food.

After the killing of the bear there was no time to be lost, for we had
deviated from our course and had gone eastward into Finland. So now we
had to go westward, and after two days' travelling we came to the river
Muonio, to a Finnish hamlet called Kuttainen, not far from Karesuando.

Now travelling became really dangerous. The frozen river was full of
treacherous cracks, and others were appearing all the time. Once in a
while we came to small open spaces, where we could see the swift water
of the stream rushing with great rapidity; this made me shudder. In some
places there were large pools of water.

It was getting really warm. Some days my "pesh" was comfortable, at
other times it was much too warm, the thermometer reaching 48 to 50
degrees in the shade and 86 to 88 degrees in the sun. The dripping from
the melted snow came into the river from the hills, and had succeeded in
many places in melting the ice on the banks. This travelling was no
joke. I followed Mikel, and watched him constantly, fearing that his
reindeer and sleigh would disappear under the ice. Travelling appeared
to become more and more perilous as we followed the Muonio southward. At
times I could hear the angry water under the ice striking against
boulders, and this became quite common.

At last I shouted to Mikel, "Let us travel on the land, for surely if we
do not we shall fall through the ice and be engulfed."

"We cannot," he shouted back, "the snow is too soft. Our reindeer could
not pull our sleighs. We can get along much better on the river, though
the ice is very bad. Trust in me, Paulus. I have made this journey over
the Muonio River many times before, but you must follow me very closely,
for sometimes I shall have to pass near rotten ice or open spots."

"I will follow you carefully, dear Mikel. Go on! Go on!" I said.

So I followed Mikel closely, as he had bade me, but what thumps our
sleighs would sometimes get on the now uneven ice of the river!
Fortunately they were very strongly built.

We slept at a place called Songamuodka. In the morning it snowed, but
the flakes were big and soft and melted as they fell on the old snow. I
met no more herds of reindeer, but since I had left on my journey
southward I had seen between sixty-five and seventy thousand of them.

Two days after I saw the church spire of Pajala, rested there, and on
the 24th of May, as I was travelling on the Torne River, I passed once
more the Arctic Circle. It was raining. I was told that it was the first
rain that had fallen for over seven months.

Here I said good-bye to the good Mikel and thanked him cordially for the
care he had taken of me.

I had now left the kingdom of the "Long Night," and the "Long Day" was
to rule over the land through which we have travelled together.

Now, my dear Young Folks, Friend Paul has come back, as you bade him,
and I hope you have enjoyed our travelling together in "The Land of the
Long Night." Good-bye. Do not forget your Friend Paul, who loves you
dearly, for once he was one of the Young Folks himself.




 Paul Du Chaillu's Great Work

 THE VIKING AGE

 THE EARLY HISTORY, MANNERS, &
 CUSTOMS OF THE ANCESTORS OF
 THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING NATIONS

 WITH 1400 ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP
 2 vols., 8vo, $7.50

 CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, Publishers

       *       *       *       *       *

New York Tribune.

"These luxuriously printed and profusely illustrated volumes embody the
fullest account of our Norse ancestors extant. Mr. Du Chaillu has gone
very fully and very carefully over the whole of his ground. This
extensive and important work must be of high interest to all
English-speaking people."


Newark Advertiser.

"Their weapons, ornaments, ships, domestic manners and customs, art and
industries, are all reconstructed with a minuteness that is remarkable,
if we consider (as we must) that all this comes to us after centuries of
neglect."


London Athenaeum.

"What is really valuable in these volumes is the exhaustive digest which
they contain of the extant information respecting the manners and
character of the ancient people of Scandinavia. The work deals with the
entire field of Scandinavian archaeology. In the main, we believe the
picture he has drawn of the manner of life of the Vikings and their
countrymen to be as accurate as it is undoubtedly full of interest."


Edinburgh Review.

"The subject of M. Du Chaillu's work is vast in extent and full of
perplexing difficulties. We have shown that its author has collected a
store of valuable information, a great part of which has hitherto been
inaccessible to English readers. His enthusiasm will have a very useful
effect if it leads the people of this country to study and admire the
ancient civilization and the splendid literature of our Scandinavian
kinsmen."


Springfield Republican.

"Mr. Du Chaillu is every whit as agreeable and entertaining as a student
of history as he has long proved to be in the character of a traveller."


Chicago Inter-Ocean.

"Mr. Du Chaillu has certainly given to the literary world a work full of
interest."


The Nation.

"While in Germany and in Scandinavia itself books have been written upon
the life of the ancient inhabitants of the North, no such comprehensive,
popular work as this, with citations from the old literature and
illustrations of all sorts of objects preserved from the ancient days,
has yet appeared. It is, accordingly, an unused opportunity that the
author of the work, with characteristic energy, has recognized and
seized. The two volumes are filled to overflowing with curious and
interesting facts concerning the people of the Scandinavian North, whose
manners, social customs, and national life the more than thirteen
hundred illustrations serve to bring up almost visibly before us. The
book as a whole is a record of persistent and ingenious research, and of
extraordinary literary zeal."


Philadelphia Record.

"M. Du Chaillu's book is full of valuable information respecting the
manners and character of the ancient Norse people. It is, in fact, a
perfect museum of Northern antiquities, covering the entire field of
Scandinavian archaeology. The extracts from the Sagas which are furnished
must whet the appetite of students of Norse literature."


Boston Transcript.

"Mr. Du Chaillu's monumental work, 'The Viking Age,' upon which the
careful labor of over eight years has been expended, is one for which
scholars will be profoundly grateful. It brings together from
innumerable sources a vast amount of information, relative to the period
covered, never before put in systematic form. The chapters on the
mythology and cosmogony of the Norsemen, on the superstitions, slavery,
graves, finds, weapons, occupations, feasts, warfare, etc., are
intensely interesting. The text is accompanied by nearly fourteen
hundred illustrations."

       *       *       *       *       *

 CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, Publishers
 153-157 Fifth Avenue, New York




 IVAR THE VIKING

 A ROMANTIC HISTORY, BASED
 UPON AUTHENTIC FACTS OF THE
 THIRD AND FOURTH CENTURIES

 12mo, $1.50

 CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, Publishers

       *       *       *       *       *

The Nation.

"'Ivar the Viking' is to be thoroughly recommended. The story is
characteristically spirited, and the romantic part leaves nothing to be
desired."


Chicago Tribune.

"It is full of vigor, and seems to bear internal evidence of
truthfulness as regards its historic side. Ivar was a Viking whose
adventures the juvenile reader, and particularly the boy juvenile, will
follow with eager interest."


Philadelphia Press.

"Of the subsequent adventures of Ivar and his foster-brothers the
interested reader must gain knowledge in the pages of the delightful
narrative itself. Suffice it to say that there is no lack of romantic
incident at any stage of the story. The prowess of the four Vikings is
always potent; they fall in love; Ivar fights a duel, and then wins the
loveliest of brides. There is throughout the volume the stimulating air
which blows through the Sagas, the nipping salt air of the sea."


Richard Henry Stoddard.

"There is that in Mr. Paul Du Chaillu's 'Ivar the Viking' which not only
satisfies the lover of romantic adventure, but carries the scholar back
into the remotest period of Scandinavian history. Beyond all living
writers this traveller in and explorer of many countries has collected
the documents and discovered the secrets of the Norselands."


New York Times.

"The reader who has begun with a blank mind closes the volume with a
tolerably clear impression of a very energetic, powerful, and wealthy
young Viking, capable of strong affections and disaffections, foremost
in games and fights requiring physical force, and with a vast number of
habits and customs. It is a history that interests through its
simplicity."


Boston Transcript.

"For the splendor of the materials and the range and variety of the
information imparted concerning the misty dawn of our Northern
civilization, its religious ideas, its moral conceptions, and its social
conditions, 'Ivar' will have high esteem among the growing number of
