1901.  January 11. Started on a five weeks' hunting tour in Northwest
       Colorado; bringing down many cougars.
       April. Attended the dedication of the Pan-American Exposition
       buildings at Buffalo, New York, and delivered an address.
       September 6. Received word, while at Isle la Motte, Vermont,
       that President McKinley had been shot; hurried at once to
       Buffalo; assured that the President would recover, joined his
       family in the Adirondacks.
       September 14. Death of President McKinley. Roosevelt returned
       to Buffalo; took the oath of office as President of the United
       States at the house of Ansley Wilcox; retained the McKinley
       Cabinet.
       September 15 to 19. Funeral of President McKinley, at Buffalo,
       Washington, and Canton, Ohio. President Roosevelt attended.
       September 20. First regular working day of President Roosevelt
       at the White House.
       December 3. First annual message delivered to Congress.
       December 4. Senate received Hay-Pauncefote canal treaty from
       the President.
       December 17. First break in the McKinley Cabinet. Postmaster
       General Smith resigned; was succeeded by H.C. Payne.

1902.  January 3. Grand ball at the White House, Miss Alice Roosevelt
       formally presented to Washington society.
       January 6. Secretary Gage of the Treasury resigned; was succeeded
       by Ex-Governor Leslie M. Shaw, of Iowa.
       January 20. The President transmitted to Congress report of Canal
       Commission, recommending buying of rights for $40,000,000.
       February 10. Serious sickness of Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. President
       in attendance at Groton, Massachusetts, several days.
       February 24. Reception to Prince Henry of Prussia.
       February 25. Launching of German Emperor's yacht, which was
       christened by Miss Alice Roosevelt.
       March 7. President signed a bill creating a permanent pension
       bureau.
       May 12. Beginning of the great coal strike; largest in the history
       of the United States.
       May 21. President unveiled a monument at Arlington Cemetery, erected
       in memory of those who fell in the Spanish-American War.
       June 9. President reviewed West Point cadets at the centennial
       celebration of that institution.
       July 4. Addressed a great gathering at Pittsburg.
       July 5. Removed his business offices to Oyster Bay for the summer.
       August 11. Retirement of Justice Gray of the Supreme Court; the
       President named Oliver Wendell Holmes as his successor.
       August 22. The President began a twelve days' tour of New
       England.
       September 3. Narrow escape from death near Pittsfield,
       Massachusetts. Trolley car ran down carriage, killing Secret
       Service attendant.
       September 6 and 7. President visited Chattanooga, Tennessee,
       and delivered addresses.
       October 3. President called conference at Washington concerning
       coal strike.
       October 21. As a result of several meetings between the President,
       the mine operators, and the mine workers the miners resumed work,
       and a commission was appointed by the President to adjust matters
       in dispute.
       November 19. Grand reception to the President at Memphis, Tennessee.
       December 2. President's message to Congress was read by both
       branches.

1903.  January 15. President signed the free coal bill passed by Congress.
       January 21. President signed the bill for the reorganization of the
       military system.
       March 5. Special session of Congress called by the President to
       consider Cuban reciprocity bill and Panama Canal treaty with
       Colombia.
       March 12. President appointed a Commission to report on
       organization, needs, and conditions of government work.
       March 18. President received report of Coal Commission.
       April 2. President received degree of LL.D. from the University of
       Chicago. Beginning of long trip to the west.
       April 4. President addressed Minnesota legislature at St. Paul.
       April 30. President delivered address at dedication of buildings
       of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, at St. Louis.
       June 6. President ordered an investigation into the Post-office
       Department scandals.
       July 4. First message around the world, via new Pacific cable,
       received by President at Oyster Bay.
       July 23. The President refused to consider charges made by a
       bookbinders' union against a workman in the Government Printing
       Office, thereby declaring for an "open" shop.
       August 17. Grand naval review by the President, on Long Island
       Sound, near Oyster Bay.
       September 17. President delivered an address at the dedication of
       a monument to New Jersey soldiers, on the battle-field of Antietam.
       October 15. President delivered an address at unveiling of statue
       to General Sherman, at Washington.
       October 20. President called extra session of Congress to consider
       a commercial treaty with Cuba.
       November 3. Panama proclaimed independent of Colombia.
       November 6. The United States government formally recognized the
       independence of the state of Panama.
       November 10. Opening of extra session of Congress called by
       President to consider commercial treaty with Cuba.
       November 18. A new canal treaty was formally signed at Washington
       by Secretary Hay, of the United States, and M. Bunau-Varilla, acting
       for Panama.
       December 2. The canal treaty was ratified at Panama.
       December 7. The President sent regular message to Congress
       especially defending the administration policy regarding Panama
       and the canal.

1904.  January 4. The President sent a special message to Congress
       regarding the recognition of the new republic of Panama. This was
       followed for weeks by debates, for and against the action of the
       administration.
       February. War broke out between Japan and Russia; the President
       issued a proclamation declaring the neutrality of the United States.
       February 22. The President and family assisted at a Washington's
       Birthday tree-planting at the White House grounds.
       February 23. The United States ratified all the provisions of the
       Panama Canal treaty; preparations were made, under the directions
       of the President, to begin work without delay.
       April 30. President, at Washington, delivered address and pressed
       telegraphic key opening World's Fair at St. Louis.




American Boys' Life Of William McKinley

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER. 300 pages. Illustrated by A.B. Shute, and from
photographs $1.25

[Illustration]

Here is told the whole story of McKinley's boyhood days, his life at
school and at college, his work as a school teacher, his glorious career
in the army, his struggles to obtain a footing as a lawyer, his efforts
as a Congressman, and lastly his prosperous career as our President.
There are many side lights on the work at the White House during the war
with Spain, and in China, all told in a style particularly adapted to
boys and young men. The book is full of interesting anecdotes, all taken
from life, showing fully the sincere, honest, painstaking efforts of a
life cut all too short. The volume will prove an inspiration to all boys
and young men, and should be in every one's library.

_For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid, on receipt of price, by
the publishers._

LEE AND SHEPARD
BOSTON

THE FAMOUS "OLD GLORY SERIES"

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

_Author of "The Bound to Succeed Series," "The Ship and Shore Series,"
"Colonial Series," "Pan-American Series," etc._

Six volumes. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume $1.25

[Illustration]

UNDER DEWEY AT MANILA
Or The War Fortunes of a Castaway

A YOUNG VOLUNTEER IN CUBA
Or Fighting for the Single Star

FIGHTING IN CUBAN WATERS
Or Under Schley on the Brooklyn

UNDER OTIS IN THE PHILIPPINES
Or A Young Officer in the Tropics

THE CAMPAIGN OF THE JUNGLE
Or Under Lawton through Luzon

UNDER MACARTHUR IN LUZON
Or Last Battles in the Philippines

"A boy once addicted to Stratemeyer stays by him."--_The Living Church._

"The boys' delight--the 'Old Glory Series.'"--_The Christian Advocate,
New York._

"Stratemeyer's style suits the boys."--JOHN TERHUNE, _Supt. of Public
Instruction, Bergen Co., New Jersey._

"Mr. Stratemeyer is in a class by himself when it comes to writing about
American heroes, their brilliant doings on land and sea."--_Times,
Boston._

"Mr. Stratemeyer has written a series of books which, while historically
correct and embodying the most important features of the
Spanish-American War and the rebellion of the Filipinos, are
sufficiently interwoven with fiction to render them most entertaining to
young readers."--_The Call, San Francisco._

_For sale by all booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on receipt of price by_
LEE AND SHEPARD, Publishers,
BOSTON


THE COLONIAL SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

_Author of "Pan-American Series," "Old Glory Series," "Great American
Industries Series," "American Boys' Biographical Series," etc._

Four volumes. Cloth. Illustrated by A.B. Shute. Price per volume, $1.25

[Illustration]

WITH WASHINGTON IN THE WEST
Or A Soldier Boy's Battles in the Wilderness

MARCHING ON NIAGARA
Or The Soldier Boys of the Old Frontier

AT THE FALL OF MONTREAL
Or A Soldier Boy's Final Victory

ON THE TRAIL OF PONTIAC
Or The Pioneer Boys of the Ohio

"Mr. Stratemeyer has put his best work into the 'Colonial
Series.'"--_Christian Register, Boston._

"A series that doesn't fall so very far short of being history
itself."--_Boston Courier._

"The tales of war are incidental to the dramatic adventures of two boys,
so well told that the historical facts are all the better
remembered."--_Boston Globe._

"Edward Stratemeyer has in many volumes shown himself master of the art
of producing historic studies in the pleasing story form."--_Minneapolis
Journal._

"The author, Edward Stratemeyer, has used his usual care in matters of
historical detail and accuracy, and gives a splendid picture of the
times in general."--_Milwaukee Sentinel._

"Told by one who knows how to write so as to interest boys, while still
having a care as to accuracy."--_Commercial Advertiser, New York._

_For sale by all booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on receipt of price by_
LEE AND SHEPARD, Publishers
BOSTON


TWO GOOD WAR STORIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

_ON TO PEKIN, Or Old Glory in China_

Cloth. 330 pages. Illustrated by A. Burnham Shute. $1.25

[Illustration]

The hero, Gilbert Pennington, has become a lieutenant in the regular
army, and goes from the Philippines with the Ninth Regiment to take part
in the rescue of the beleaguered British Embassy at Pekin by the
international forces. Mr. Stratemeyer has risen to the occasion by
giving, in addition to one of his very best stories, a store of
information concerning China and the Chinese, conveyed in a natural and
entertaining manner.

Mr. Stratemeyer gives his youthful readers plenty of adventures, but
there is little that might not easily happen. His books are eminently
"safe" ones, and their patriotic spirit will be considered
admirable.--_Home Journal, Boston._

_BETWEEN BOER AND BRITON
Or Two Boys' Adventures in South Africa_

Illustrated by A. Burnham Shute 354 pages Price $1.25

Relates the experiences of two boys, cousins to each other, one American
and the other English, whose fathers are engaged in the Transvaal, one
in farming and the other in mining operations. While the two boys are
off on a hunting trip after big game, the war between the Boers and
Britons suddenly breaks out, and the boys find themselves placed between
hostile armies, where their thrilling experiences are brought out in Mr.
Stratemeyer's best style.

Exhibits the same qualities which have given popularity to his former
writings.--_The Times, Pittsburg, Pa._

A stirring story of the South African war.--_The Journal, Indianapolis,
Ind._

The kind of story to please boys and give them a fair idea of a great
historical event.--_St. Louis Post-Despatch._

GREAT AMERICAN INDUSTRIES SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER

VOLUME ONE

_TWO YOUNG LUMBERMEN
Or From Maine to Oregon for Fortune_

320 pages. Cloth. Illustrated. Price $1.00 net

[Illustration]

A splendid new story, undoubtedly the best Mr. Stratemeyer has yet
penned. It covers the whole of the great lumber industry of our country,
the scene shifting from Maine to Michigan and the Great Lakes, and then
to the Columbia and the Great Northwest. The heroes are two sturdy
youths who have been brought up among the lumbermen of their native
State, and who strike out in an honest endeavor to better their
condition. As mill hands, fellers, log drivers, and general camp workers
they have a variety of adventures, absorbing in the extreme. An ideal
volume for the library of every wide-awake American who wishes to know
what our great lumber industry is to-day.

Boys are acquiring the Stratemeyer habit.--_Post, Chicago._

Mr. Stratemeyer's books are not only entertaining but
instructive.--_Daily Press, Portland, Me._

He knows how to attract and hold boy readers.--_Evening Standard, New
Bedford, Mass._

The demands of boy readers are peculiar, and the author who can satisfy
them, not once or twice, but uniformly, must possess rare ability in an
extremely difficult field. Such an author is Edward Stratemeyer.--_Sunday
News, Newark, N.J._

PAN-AMERICAN SERIES

By EDWARD STRATEMEYER


VOLUME ONE

_LOST ON THE ORINOCO
Or American Boys in Venezuela_

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price $1.25

This volume tells of five American youths, who, with their tutor, sail
from New York to La Guayra, touching at Curacao on the way. They visit
Caracas, the capital, Macuto, the fashionable seaside resort, go
westward to the Gulf of Maracaibo and lake of the same name, and at last
find themselves in the region of the mighty Orinoco, and of course they
have some exciting experiences, one of which gives name to the book.
Just the book boys and young men should read, in view of the general
interest in matters Pan-American.

Its pictures of South American life and scenery are novel and
instructive.--_The Literary World, Boston._

The scenes described are of the sort to charm the hearts of adventurous
boys.--_The Outlook, N.Y._


VOLUME TWO

_THE YOUNG VOLCANO EXPLORERS
Or American Boys in the West Indies_

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price $1.25

This is a complete tale in itself, but has the same characters which
