"That surprised me, too; but I have got some light on the subject and I
feel in need of a friend and adviser."

"Then if you'll take Henry Miller for want of a better, I don't believe
you'll regret it."

"I shall be glad to accept your kind offer, Mr. Miller. Now that you
mention your name, I remember it very well. My father often spoke of
you."

"Did he so?" said the stranger, evidently much gratified. "I am glad to
hear it. Of all my school companions, your father was the one I liked
best. And now, before we go any further, I want to tell you two things.
First, I should have hunted you up sooner, but business called me to
California, where I have considerable property. Next, having learned
that you were left destitute, I decided to do something for the son of
my old friend. So I took a hundred shares of stock in a new mine, which
had just been put on the market when I reached 'Frisco, and I said to
myself: 'That is for Kit Watson.' Well, it was a lucky investment. The
shares cost me five dollars apiece, and just before I left California I
sold them for fifty dollars apiece. What do you say to that?"

"Is it possible mining shares rise in value so fast?" asked Kit in
amazement.

"Well, sometimes they do, and sometimes they don't. Often it's the other
way, and I don't advise you or anybody else that knows nothing about it
to speculate in mining shares. It is a risky thing, and you are more apt
to lose than to win. However, this turned out O. K., and you are worth
five thousand dollars to-day, my boy."

"I don't know how to thank you, Mr. Miller," said Kit. "I can't seem to
realize it."

"You needn't thank me at all. I did it for your father's sake, but now
that I know you I am glad to do it for your own. When we get to New York
I advise you to salt it down in government bonds, or in some other good
reliable stock."

"I shall be glad to follow your advice, Mr. Miller."

"Then I'll invest all but five hundred dollars, for you may want to use
that. What sort of a season have you had?"

"I've saved up four hundred dollars," said Kit proudly.

"You don't say so! You must have got pretty good pay."

"Twenty-five dollars a week."

"Your uncle said you probably got two or three dollars a week."

"He probably thought so. He has no idea I have been so well paid. I
chose to keep it from him."

"You said you wanted to ask my advice about something."

"Yes, sir."

"Why not come round to the Delavan and take a room? I am staying there,
and I will tell the clerk to pick you out a room next to mine."

"I will do so. I intended to stay at some hotel to night. This is the
last night of the circus. To-morrow we close up, and separate. I shall
draw my money and bid good-by to my circus friends."

"I am glad of that. We will keep together. I have neither chick nor
child, Kit, and if you'll accept me as your guardian I'll do the best I
can for you. But perhaps you prefer to go back to your uncle."

Kit shook his head.

"I should never do that," he said, "especially after what I have learned
during my trip."

"Let it keep till to-morrow, for we are both tired. Now get ready and
we'll go to the Delavan."

Kit was assigned a nice room next to Mr. Miller, where he passed a
comfortable night.

The next day he revealed to his new friend the discoveries he had made
in his uncle's old home in Pennsylvania--his uncle's poverty up to the
time of his brother's death, and the evident falseness of his claim to
have lent him large sums of money, in payment of which he had coolly
appropriated his entire estate.

His late friend listened to this story in amazement.

"I knew Stephen Watson to be unprincipled," he said, "but I didn't think
him as bad as that. He has swindled you shamefully."

"Just my idea, Mr. Miller."

"While he has carefully feathered his own nest. This wrong must be
righted."

"It was my intention to find some good lawyer, and ask his advice."

"We'll do it, Kit. But, first of all, I'll go with you to this town in
Pennsylvania, and obtain the necessary testimony sworn to before a
justice. Then we'll find a good lawyer, and move on the enemy's works."

"I will be guided by your advice entirely, Mr. Miller."

"It will be a satisfaction to me to get even with your uncle. To swindle
his own nephew in this barefaced manner! We'll bring him up with a short
turn, Kit!"

The next day Kit and his new friend left Albany.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

KIT COMES HOME.


One morning James Schuyler Kit's old acquaintance at Smyrna, received a
letter from Kit, in which he said: "Our circus season is ended, but I am
detained a few days by important business. I will tell you about it when
we meet. If you see my uncle tell him that I expect to reach Smyrna
somewhere about the twenty-fifth of October."

"I wonder what Kit's important business can be," thought James. "I hope
it is something of advantage to him."

James happened to meet Stephen Watson an hour later.

"Mr. Watson," he said, "I had a letter from Kit this morning."

"Indeed!"

"He says that his circus season is over."

"And he is out of employment," said Watson, his lip curling.

"I suppose so; he expects to reach Smyrna somewhere about the
twenty-fifth of the month."

Stephen Watson smiled, but said nothing.

"No doubt he will find it very convenient to stay at home through the
winter," he reflected. "Well, he must think I am a fool to take back a
boy who has defied my authority."

It was Saturday, and Ralph was home from boarding-school.

"Ralph," said his father, "I bring you good news."

"What is it, pa?"

"Your cousin will be home from the circus towards the last of next
week."

"Who told you? Did he write you?"

"He wrote to James Schuyler, who told me."

"I suppose he expects you will give him a home through the winter."

"You may rest easy, Ralph. He won't have his own way with me, I can
assure you."

"What shall you do, pa?"

"I shall see Bickford about taking him back. I have occasion to go over
there on Monday to have the horse shod, and I can speak to him about
it."

Ralph laughed.

"That will bring down his pride," he said. "I suppose he will beg off."

"He will find me firm as a rock. What I decide upon I generally carry
through."

"Good for you, pa! I was afraid you would weaken."

"You don't know me, my son. I have been patient and bided my time. Your
cousin presumed to set up his will against mine. He has got along thus
far because he has made a living by traveling with a circus. Now the
circus season is at an end, and he is glad enough to come back to me."

On Monday Stephen Watson rode over to Oakford, and made it in his way to
call on Aaron Bickford.

"Have you got a boy, Mr. Bickford?" he asked.

"I had one, but he left me last Saturday. He didn't suit me."

This was the blacksmith's interpretation of it. The truth was the boy
became disgusted with the treatment he received and the fare provided at
his employer's table, and left him without ceremony.

"How would you like to take back my nephew?"

"Has he come back?" asked the blacksmith, pricking up his ears.

"Not yet; but I expect him back toward the end of next week."

"Has he left the circus?"

"The circus has left him. That is, it has closed for the season. He has
sent word to a boy in Smyrna that he will be back in a few days."

"He gave me a great deal of trouble, Mr. Watson."

"Just so, and I thought you might like to get even with him," said
Stephen Watson, looking significantly at the blacksmith.

"It would do me good to give him a flogging," said Aaron Bickford.

"I shan't interfere," replied Watson. "The boy has acted badly and he
deserves punishment."

"Yes, I'll take him back," said the blacksmith. "I guess he'll stay this
time," he added grimly.

"I think he will have to. There won't be any circus to give him
employment."

"He is a good strong boy, and he can make a good blacksmith, if he has a
mind to."

"You must make him have a mind to," said Stephen Watson.

When the horse was shod he got into the carriage and drove away.

After this interview Mr. Bickford seemed in unusually good spirits, so
much so that his wife inquired: "Have you had any good luck, Aaron?"

"What makes you ask?"

"Because you look unusually chipper. I was hopin' somebody had died and
left you a fortune."

"Well, not exactly, wife; but I've heard something that makes me feel
good."

"What's that?"

"Stephen Watson, of Smyrna, was over here this morning."

"Well?"

"He says that boy Kit is coming home in a few days."

"What if he is?"

"He's goin' to bring him over here, and apprentice him to me again."

"I should think once would be enough, considerin' how he treated you."

"He ain't goin' to serve me so again, you may bet on that. I'm goin' to
have my way this time."

"Ain't you afraid he'll run away again?"

"Not much. The circus has shut up, and he'll have to stay with me, or
starve. His uncle tells me I can punish him when I think he deserves
it."

"I hope you won't be disappointed, Mr. Bickford, but that boy's rather
hard to handle."

"I know it, but I'm the one that can handle him."

"You thought so before, the evening we went to the show."

"I know so this time."




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CONCLUSION.


Several days passed. On Thursday afternoon Kit arrived in Smyrna,
accompanied by his generous California friend Henry Miller. They put up
at the hotel, and after dinner Kit walked over to the house occupied by
his uncle.

Mr. Watson saw him from the window, and hastening to the door opened it
himself.

"Good afternoon, Uncle Stephen," said Kit.

"So you're back!" said his uncle curtly.

"Yes; did you expect me?"

"James Schuyler told me you were coming."

"Yes, I wrote him that he might inform you."

"That was a good thought of yours. I have made arrangements for you."

"What arrangements?"

"I shall take you over to Oakford on Saturday, and place you with Aaron
Bickford to learn the blacksmith's trade. This time I'd advise you not
to run away."

Kit didn't exhibit any dismay when his uncle informed him of the plan he
had arranged for him.

"I will talk this over with you, Uncle Stephen," he said. "With your
permission I will go into the house."

"You can stay here till Saturday. Then you will go with me to Oakford."

Kit followed his uncle into the house. "I have something important to
say to you, Uncle Stephen," he went on. "Sit down, and I will tell you
what I have discovered within the last few months."

Stephen Watson anxiously awaited Kit's communication.

"Can he have found out?" he asked himself. "But no! it is impossible."

"I will give you five minutes to tell me your astonishing discovery," he
said, with an attempt at his usual sneer.

"I may need a longer time, but I will be as quick as I can. Among the
places where our circus exhibited was Glendale, Pennsylvania.
Remembering that you once lived there, I made inquiries about you in the
village. I saw the house where you lived for many years. Judge of my
surprise when I learned that you were always in extreme poverty. Then I
recalled your story of having lent my father ten thousand dollars, in
payment of which you took the bulk of his property. I mentioned it, and
found that it was pronounced preposterous. I discovered that on the
other hand, you were frequently the recipient of money gifts from my
poor father. In return for this you have attempted to rob his son. The
note which you presented against the estate was undoubtedly a forgery.
But even had it been genuine, the property of which you took possession
must have amounted to at least twenty thousand dollars."

Stephen Watson had not interrupted Kit by a word. He was panic stricken,
and absolutely did not know what to say. He finally succeeded in
answering hoarsely: "This is an outrageous falsehood, Christopher
Watson. It is an ingenious scheme to rob me of what rightfully belongs
to me. You must be a fool to think I am going to be frightened by a
boy's wild fiction. Leave my house! I would have allowed you to stay
till Saturday, but this is too much. If you come here again, I will
horsewhip you!"

But even when he was making this threat his face was pallid, and his
glance uneasy.

At this moment the bell rang.

Kit himself answered the call, and returned with his friend, Henry
Miller.

"Why, it is Mr. Miller!" said Stephen Watson, who had not forgotten that
Miller was very wealthy. "When did you return from California?"

"Kit, have you told your uncle?" asked Henry Miller, ignoring this
greeting.

"Yes, and he orders me to leave the house."

"Hark you, Stephen Watson!" said Henry Miller sternly. "You are in a bad
box. For over a week Kit and I have been looking up matters, and we are
prepared to prove that you have outrageously defrauded him out of his
father's estate. We have enlisted a first class lawyer in the case, and
now we come to you to know whether you will surrender or fight."

"Mr. Miller, this is very strange. Are you in the plot too?"

"Don't talk of any plots, Stephen Watson. Your fraud is so transparent
that I wonder you dare to hope it would succeed. You probably presumed
upon Kit's being a boy of an unsuspicious nature. But he has found a
friend, who was his father's friend before him, and who is determined
that he shall be righted."

"I defy you!" exclaimed Stephen Watson recklessly, for he saw that
submission would be ruin, and leave him penniless.

"Wait a minute! I'll give you another chance. Do you know what we are
prepared to prove? Well, I will tell you. We can prove that you are not
only a swindler but a forger, and our success will consign you to a
prison cell. You deserve it, no doubt, but you shall have a chance."

"What terms do you offer?" asked Stephen Watson, overwhelmed by the
conviction that what Miller said was true.

"Surrender unconditionally, restore to Kit his own property, and----"

"But it will leave me penniless!" groaned Stephen Watson.

"Just as I supposed. In Kit's behalf, I will promise that you shall not
starve. You once kept a small grocery store, and understand the trade.
We will set you up in that business wherever you choose, and will give
you besides a small income, say three hundred dollars a year, so that
you may be able to live modestly."

"But Ralph, my poor boy, what will become of him?"

"I will pay the expenses of his education," said Kit, "and when he
leaves school, I will make him an allowance so that he can enter a store
and qualify himself to earn his own living. He won't be able to live as
he has lived, but he shall not suffer."

"It is more than either of you deserve," said Henry Miller. "I was not
in favor of treating you so generously, but Kit, whom you have
defrauded, insisted upon it. You ought to thank him on your knees."

Stephen Watson did not speak. He looked the picture of misery.
