assure you we all regard you as the preserver of our dear Miss Auberly's
life when you went up the--the--thing.  Here she is.  You must shake--
that's it--so nice!"

The last part of Miss Tippet's remark referred to Loo stretching out her
hand to Frank, who advanced promptly and shook it with great tenderness.
He then shook hands with Fred, who expressed his regard for him in warm
terms; also with Mr Tippet, who paid him some enthusiastic compliments,
and said something to the effect that the parent stem from which two
such branches as he and Willie had grown must be a prime plant.

As he turned from Mr Tippet--who, being very short, appeared to be
looking up at a steeple while he delivered this opinion--Frank's eyes
encountered those of Emma Ward, who was gazing at him in such
undisguised admiration, that, being a somewhat bashful man, he felt a
little confused, and dropped his eyes, figuratively, on the floor.  Emma
blushed scarlet with shame at being caught in this way, and thereafter
became rigidly grave and indifferent.

When Frank again raised his eyes--which, by the way, he did
immediately--they encountered the eagle glance of Miss Deemas frowning
defiance on him, as being a sort of type or pattern specimen of his
highly objectionable race.  Had Miss Deemas been a man (which would have
gratified her more than she could have expressed) Frank could have met
the frown with a smile of pity.  As it was, he turned to the little
eager countenance of Miss Tippet, and felt deeper respect than ever for
the sex; thus showing that just as an exception proves a rule, so an
unfavourable contrast strengthens a cause.

"Pray sit down, Mr Willders," entreated Miss Tippet earnestly; "I
should like _so_ much to hear how you did it from your own lips, and how
you can possibly venture up such dreadful things, just like going up the
outside of the Monument.  Dear Loo, and you came down it, too; but, to
be sure, your eyes were shut, which was as well, for you were only in
your night--Ah, well, yes, _do_ sit down Mr Firem---Willders, I mean."

Frank thanked her, but declined, on the ground that he was on duty, and
that he feared he was doing wrong in even looking in on them for the few
minutes he had stayed.  "Good-night, ma'am," he continued, "good-night.
You'll call at the station on your way home, Willie?"

Willie said he would, and then all the company, excepting the Eagle,
shook hands with the stalwart fireman, looking up at him as if he were a
hero just returned from the proverbial "hundred fights."  Even Emma Ward
condescended to shake hands with him at parting.

"Perhaps you'll be in the middle of a fire this very night," cried Tom
Tippet, following him to the door.

"It is quite possible," said Frank, with a smile.

Miss Deemas was heard to snort contemptuously at this.

"Perhaps you may even save more lives!" cried Miss Tippet.

"It may be so," answered Frank, again smiling, but evidently feeling
anxious to make his escape, for he was not one of those men who like to
be lionised.

"Only think!" exclaimed Miss Tippet as Frank quitted the room.

"Ha!" ejaculated the Eagle, in a tone which was meant to convey her
well-known opinion that women would do such things quite as well as men
if their muscles were a little stronger.

It is but justice to Miss Deemas to explain that she did not champion
and exalt women out of love to her sex.  Love was not one of her strong
points.  Rampant indignation against those whom she bitterly termed
"lords of creation" was her strong tower of refuge, in which she
habitually dwelt, and from the giddy summit of which she hurled would-be
destruction on the doomed males below.  Among her various missiles she
counted the "wrongs of her sex" the most telling shaft, and was in
consequence always busy sharpening and polishing and flourishing this
dread weapon in the eyes of her friends as well as her enemies,
although, of course, she only launched it at the latter.

Perched on her self-exalted eyrie, Miss Deemas did not know that there
was a pretty large number of her own sex in the comparatively humble
multitude below, who, while they clearly recognised the "wrongs of
women" (and preferred to call them "misfortunes") did not attribute them
solely, or even largely, to the wickedness of men, but to the combined
wickedness and folly of society in general, and who were of opinion that
such matters were to be put right by patient, persevering, laborious,
and persistent efforts on the part of men and women acting in concert,
and not by the unwomanly acts and declamation of ladies of the Deemas
stamp, whom they counted the worst enemies of the good cause--some
wittingly, others unwittingly so.  These people among the comparatively
humble multitude below, also had the penetration to perceive that the
so-called "wrongs" did not lie all on one side, but that there was a
pretty large class of the so-called "lords" who went about the world
habitually in a sad and disgraceful state of moral semi-nakedness, in
consequence of their trousers having been appropriated and put on by
their better-halves, and that therefore it was only meet that men and
women should be united (as indeed they were from the first intended to
be) in their efforts to put each other's "wrongs" to "rights."

In addition to all this, these weak-minded (shall we call them?) people,
moving in the comparatively humble multitude below, entertained the
belief that rising in antagonism to the male sex in this matter was not
only unnecessary and unjust and impolitic, but also ungenerous, for they
reflected with much calm satisfaction that the "lords" are, after all,
"under woman's control."

But Miss Deemas and all the ladies of the Eagle stamp did not think so.
They did not believe that a strong mind means a mind strong enough to
exercise its own powers to the ascertainment and reception of truth and
the rejection of falsehood and fallacy; strong enough, under the
influence of God's love, to perceive the paths of duty in all their
ramifications, and to resolve to follow them.  They did not believe that
a high spirit, in the true sense of the word, meant a spirit broken down
altogether and brought into subjection to its owner's, not another's,
will.  By no means.  A strong mind with the Deemas-eagles meant
unutterable and unalterable obstinacy, blind as a bat, with the great
guns blazing all round, and the colours nailed to the mast.  High spirit
with them meant the inclination--ever present, always strong, and often
asserted--to seize all the rest of the world, male and female, and lead
it by the nose!

The Deemas-eagles as a class receive ready-made opinions, fabricated by
someone else, and call them their own--receiving them originally and
holding them subsequently, not because they are true, but because they
are pleasant to their eyes and sweet to their taste.  They hold them
stoutly, too, probably because, having no foundation, they would be apt
to fall and get broken if not upheld.

Having said thus much in behalf of the Deemas eagles, we now dismiss
them, with an apology to the reader.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A FIREMAN'S LIFE.

The clocks were striking nine when Frank issued from Miss Tippet's
dwelling and walked briskly away.  On turning a corner he came upon one
of the numerous fire-escapes that nightly rear their tall heads against
the houses all over London, in a somewhat rampant way, as though they
knew of the fires that were about to take place, and, like mettlesome
war-horses, were anxious to rush into action without delay.

On the pavement, close by the escape, stood a small sentry-box, and the
moment Frank came in sight of it he remembered that it was the nocturnal
habitation of his friend Conductor Samuel Forest.  Sam himself was
leaning his arms on the lower half of his divided door, and gazing
contemplatively along the street.

"Well, Sam, what news?" inquired Frank as he came up.

"That you, Willders?" said Sam, a quiet smile of recognition playing on
his good-humoured features.  "I thought it must be the giant they're
exhibitin' in Saint James's Hall just now, takin' a stroll at night to
escape the boys.  Why, when do you mean to stop growing?"

"I don't mean to interfere with Nature at all," replied Frank; "and I
believe the world will be big enough to hold me, whatever size I grow
to."

"Well, what's the news?" inquired Sam, emerging from his narrow
residence, and proving in the act, that, though not quite so tall as his
friend, he was one who required a pretty fair share of room in the world
for himself.

"Nothing particular," said Frank, leaning against the escape; "only a
chimney and a cut-away affair last night, and a false alarm and a
first-floor burnt out the day before."

"How's Thompson?" asked Forest.

"Poorly, I fear," said Frank, with a shake of his head.  "The sprained
ankle he got when he fell off the folding-board is getting well, but the
injury to his spine from the engine is more serious."

"Ah! poor fellow!" said Forest, "he's just a little too reckless.  How
came he by the sprain?"

"It was in the basement of a bookbinder's in Littleton Street," said
Frank, lighting a cigar.  "We got the call about 11 p.m., and on getting
there found three engines at work.  Mr Braidwood ordered our fellows to
go down into the basement.  It was very dark, and so thick of smoke that
I couldn't see half-an-inch before my nose.  We broke through the
windows, and found ourselves ankle-deep in water.  The engines had been
at work flooding the place for some time, and there was more water than
we expected; but we had got on the folding-boards without knowing it,
an' before we knew where we were, down went Thompson into water four
feet deep.  I think myself some of the water-pipes had burst.  He rose
gasping, and I caught him by the collar and hauled him out.  It was in
trying to recover himself when he fell that he got the sprain.  You've
heard how he came by the other mishap?"

"Yes, it was gallopin' down Ludgate Hill, wasn't it?"

"Ay; the engine went over a barrow, and the jolt threw him off, and
before he got up it was on him.  By good fortune it did not go over him;
it only bruised his back; but it's worse than we thought it would be, I
fear."

"Ah! one never knows," said Forest gravely.  "There's one man Jackson,
now, only two weeks ago he was up in a third floor in Lambeth, and had
brought down two women and a child, and was in the back-rooms groping
for more, when the floor above gave way and came down on him.  We all
thought he was done for, but some of the beams had got jammed, and not
five minutes after he steps out of a window all right--only a scratch or
two, not worth mentioning; yet that same man fell down a flight of
stairs at the same fire, with a boy on his shoulder, and sprained his
ankle so bad that he's bin laid up for three weeks; but he saved the
boy."

"Ah! it was worth the sprain," said Frank.

"It was," responded Forest.

"Well, good-night," said Frank, resuming his walk.

Samuel Forest responded "good-night," and then, getting into his box,
sat down on its little seat, which was warranted not to hold two,
trimmed the lamp that hung at his side, and, pulling out a book from a
corner, began to peruse it.

Sam was of a literary turn of mind.  He read a great deal during his
lonely watches, and used often to say that some of his happiest hours
were those spent in the dead of night in his sentry-box.  His helmet
hung on a peg beside him.  His hatchet was in his girdle, and a small
cap covered his head.  Looking at him in his snug and brightly
illuminated little apartment, he appeared--by contrast with the
surrounding darkness--inexpressibly comfortable.  Nevertheless, Sam
Forest could have told you that appearances are often deceptive, and
that no matter how it looked, his box was but a cold habitation on a
biting December night.

While deeply immersed in his book, Sam heard the sound of approaching
footsteps, and pricked up his ears.  He was a good judge of such sounds.
As they drew near, he quietly took off his cap, put on his helmet, and
stepped from his box.  The street was very silent; and, perhaps, not one
of the hundreds of sleepers there thought of the solitary man who held
vigil, and was so alert to do them service, if the hour of their
extremity should come.

But a cry arose that startled them--"Fire! fire!!"

Another moment, and two men dashed round the corner, yelling at the top
of their voices.  Gasping for breath, they named the locality.  Almost
before they had done so, two policemen were on the spot, and in another
moment the fire-escape was in motion.  Instructed by the conductor, the
two strangers and the policemen lent their willing aid.  Before ten
minutes had passed, the tall machine was run up to a burning house, the
lower part of which was blazing; while, from the upper windows, frantic
cries were heard for help, and sundry figures in dishabille were seen
waving their arms.  The escape was run up, and one after another the
inmates were rescued from their perilous position.

While this scene was enacting Frank was pursuing his way to the Regent
Street Fire Station; but news of the fire got there before him.  He
arrived just in time to don his helmet and take his place on the engine.
Away they went, and in ten minutes after the arrival of the
fire-escape, they dashed up, almost running into an engine which
appeared from an opposite direction.

The fire was blazing brightly by this time, and the whole neighbourhood
was in a state of commotion and excitement.

The two engines were got to work with as little delay as possible.  A
body of police kept the gathering crowd back, and soon volumes of steam
began to mingle with the black smoke of the burning building.  The
superintendent was early on the scene, and he directed Frank and another
fireman to try to persuade the people in the adjoining houses to remain
quiet, and not throw their furniture over the window; but this, some of
them would not consent to do.  It was plain that one or two were mad
with fear and excitement; and as the ruling passion is strong in death,
so it would seem to be by no means weak in the midst of danger from
fire; for many of them bent their whole energies to the saving of their
goods and chattels--regardless of their lives.

One stout old gentleman, in particular, was seen at a third-floor
window, heaving out chairs and stools and books, and small tables, and
clocks, and even quantities of crockery, with desperate energy, to the
great danger of the onlookers, at whose feet the various articles fell,
and were dashed to atoms!

Frank darted up the stairs that led to this man's apartments, and burst
in upon him.

"Oh! come along, fireman; help me to save my things," he exclaimed, as
he struggled with superhuman efforts to thrust a table through the
window, which was too small to permit its passage.

"Stop, sir, are you mad?" cried Frank sternly.

"Help me! help me!  Oh! fireman, it will be all burned.  Fire! fire!
fire!!!"

His voice rose into a fierce yell, as he strove in vain with the table.

"You're quite safe," cried Frank, holding him; "_your_ house ain't
alight, and the engines have got it almost under."

But Frank spoke to deaf ears; so he coolly lifted the man in his arms,
carried him kicking downstairs, and placed him in charge of a policeman.

Just then, a cry was raised that there were two kegs of gunpowder in one
of the shops on the ground floor.  The owner of the shop came up in a
frantic state, and corroborated this statement.

"It'll blow the house to bits, sir," he said to Mr Braidwood.

"Of course it will," remarked the latter in a quiet voice.  "Come here,
my man," he added, taking the shopkeeper apart from the crowd, and
questioning him closely.

Immediately after, he ordered the engines to play on a particular part
of the building.

Just then, Frank came up to the superintendent.

"There's gunpowder in the back-shop somewhere, I'm told, sir; shall I go
in for it?"

"No, Willders; you couldn't find it in the smoke.  Take the branch, lad,
and get up into that window above the door."

Frank sprang to obey.  At the same time, Mr Braidwood suddenly seized a
horse-cloth, and dashed in through the smoke.  In a few seconds, he
returned with one of the kegs of powder in his arms.  Giving it to one
of his men, he darted in again, and speedily re-issued with the second
keg of powder, amid the frantic cheering of the crowd.  Having done
this, he continued to superintend the men until the fire was got under,
which was soon accomplished, having been attacked promptly and with
great vigour soon after it broke out.

"You needn't wait, Mr Dale," said Braidwood, going up to his foreman.
"It's all safe now.  I'll keep one engine; but you and your lads get off
to your beds as fast as ye can."

Dale obeyed, and a few minutes after, the engine was galloping
homewards.

Willie Willders was in the station when it arrived, and so was Fred
Auberly, who, having accompanied Willie, had got into such an
interesting talk with the sub-engineer in charge, that he forgot time,
and was still in animated conversation when the wheels were heard in the
distance.

The three were out at the door in an instant.

On came the engine, the horses' feet and the wheels crashing harshly in
the silent night.  They came round the corner with a sharp swing.
Either the driver had become careless, or he was very sleepy that night,
for he dashed against an iron post that stood at the corner, and carried
off two wheels.  The engine went full thirty yards on the two
off-wheels, before it came to the ground, which it did at last with a
terrific crash, throwing the firemen violently to the ground.

The sub-engineer and Fred and Willie sprang forward in great alarm; but
the most of the men leaped up at once, and one or two of them laughed,
as if to show that they had got no damage.  But one of them lay extended
on the pavement.  It needed not a second glance to tell that it was
Frank Willders.

"Lift him gently, lads," said Dale, who was himself severely bruised.
