being diligently sought for in his hiding-places.

This last piece of information filled the three friends with deep
concern and anxiety.

"He has been so _very_ kind to us," said Mark, "and I know is one of the
most generously disposed and law-respecting subjects of her Majesty."

"That not help for him if he tumbles into the hands of my mother," said
the Prince, sadly.  "He is a Christian.  He has run to the forest, and
has made others to fly."

"But you have much power with the Queen," pleaded Mark, "could you not
induce her to pardon him?"

"Yes--if he will give up Christianity--if not do that--no!"

"That he will never do," said Mark, firmly.  "I know him well.  He will
rather die than deny Christ."

"He is likely to die then," returned Rakota, "for my mother is fixed to
root up the religion of Jesus from the land."

"But surely _you_ don't agree with her," broke in Hockins at this point.

"No, I not agree," said the Prince.  "But I can not command the Queen.
Some time it very hard to move her even a leetle.  My only power with
her is love."

"Das de greatest power in de world!" chimed in Ebony.

"It is," returned the Prince, "and you be very sure I use the power much
as I can for save your friend."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A MALAGASY GARDEN PARTY--THE CLOUD GROWS BLACKER.

The garden party is by no means a novelty of the present day.  In the
early part of this century--if not much earlier--Malagasy sovereigns
seem to have been wont to treat their Court and friends to this species
of entertainment.

The order which the Queen had given that her European visitors should
attend upon her in the garden, was neither more nor less than an
invitation to a garden party, or pic-nic, to be held the following day
at one of her surburban retreats named Anosy, about half-a-mile from the
city.  Accordingly, early in the morning--for the Malagasy are early
risers--their friend the Interpreter came to conduct them to the spot,
with a gift of a striped lamba for each of the white men.

"Why she not send one for _me_?" demanded Ebony, pouting--and Ebony's
pout was something to take note of!

"'Cause you're black and don't need no clothing," said Hockins,
awkwardly attempting to put the lamba on his broad shoulders.

"Humph! if she knowed what splendid lobscouse an' plum duff I kin make,"
returned the negro, "Ranny Valony would hab sent me a silk lamba an'
made me her chief cook.  Hows'ever, dere's a good time comin'.  I s'pose
I ain't to go to the party?"

"Yis--you muss go.  All of you got to go.  Kill-deaded--if you don't
go."

"I'm your man, den, for I don't want to be deaded yet a while; moreover,
I want to see de fun," returned the negro.

Meanwhile the Interpreter showed them how to put on the lamba--with one
end of it thrown over the left shoulder, like the Spaniard's cloak,--and
then conducted them to the palace, where they found three palanquins--or
chairs supported by two staves--awaiting them.  Getting into them they
set off, preceded by the Interpreter in a similar conveyance.  Ebony and
his bearers brought up the rear.

The Queen and her Court had already started some time.  Our party soon
reached the scene of festivities, at the south-east of the city.  It was
a charming spot, having large gardens laid out in the European style,
with goodly trees overshadowing the pleasure-house of Anosy, and an
extensive lake.  The house was on an island in the lake, and was reached
by a narrow causeway.

At the entrance to the place two enormous letters, "R R," formed in
grass borders that surrounded flower-beds, indicated that Radama Rex,
the first king of that name, had originated those gardens.  And they did
him credit; for he had made great exertions to accumulate there
specimens of the most useful and remarkable trees and plants in the
country--especially those that were of service in _materia medica_.
Some immense camphor-wood trees were among the most conspicuous, and
there were several specimens of a graceful fan-palm, as well as clumps
of the long-leaved Rofia.  The lake was covered in part with a profusion
of purple waterlilies, and was well stocked with gold-fish.  In the
garden and on the upper part of the grounds were luxuriant vines,
besides figs, mangoes, pine-apples, and coffee-plants.

Here, to the strains of an excellent band, hundreds of people, in white
and striped lambas, and various gay costumes, were walking about
enjoying themselves, conversing with animation, or consuming rice,
chickens, and beef, on mats beneath the mango and fig-trees.  Elsewhere
the more youthful and lively among them engaged in various games, such
as racing, jumping, etcetera.

"Come," said their friend of the previous day--the Secretary--to Mark
and his comrades, breaking in on their contemplation of the animated
scene, "the Queen wishes to see you."

Her Majesty, who was dressed in a long robe of muslin, embroidered with
gold, sat near the door of the garden-house, surrounded by her ladies,
who all wore the simple but graceful native dress.  A guard of soldiers
stood near at hand.

The Queen merely wished to ask a few ceremonial questions of her
visitors.  While she was engaged with Hockins and the Secretary, Mark
ventured to glance at the ladies of the Court, among whom he observed
one who made a deep impression on him.  She wore, if possible, a simpler
dress than any of her companions, and no ornaments whatever.  Her
features were well formed, and her rather pensive countenance was very
beautiful.  When they were retiring from the presence of the Queen, Mark
could not resist the temptation to ask the Secretary who she was.

"That," said he, "is our self-willed little Christian, Rafaravavy."

"She does not look very self-willed," returned Mark.

"True, and she is not really so--only in the matter of religion.  I fear
we shall lose her ere long, for she minds not the Queen, and no one who
defies Ranavalona lives long.  But come, let us sit down under this
mango tree and eat.  You must be hungry."

He led them as he spoke to a sequestered spot near a coppice which
partially guarded them from public gaze on three sides, and on the
fourth side afforded them a charming view of the gardens, the gay
assemblage, and the country beyond.

At first both Hockins and Ebony hesitated to sit down to breakfast with
so distinguished a person as an Under-Secretary of State.

"We ain't used, you see, doctor," observed the seaman in a low tone, "to
feed wi' the quality."

"Das so, massa," chimed in Ebony in the same tone; "wittles nebber taste
so pleasant in de cabin as in de fo'c's'l."

"Don't object to _anything_," replied Mark, quickly, "just do as I do."

"Hall right, massa.  Neck or nuffin--I'm your man!"

As for the seaman, he obeyed without reply, and in a few minutes they
were busy with the Secretary over drumsticks and rice.

The free-and-easy sociability of that individual would have surprised
them less if they had known that he had been specially commissioned by
the Queen to look well after them, and gather all the information they
might possess about the fugitive Christians who were hiding in the
forests.

Fortunately our young student was quick-witted.  He soon perceived the
drift of the Secretary's talk, and, without appearing to evade his
questions, gave him such replies as conveyed to him no information
whatever of the kind he desired.  At the same time, he took occasion,
when the Secretary's attention was attracted by something that was going
on, to lay his finger on his lips and bestow a look of solemn warning on
his comrades, the effect of which on their intelligent minds was to make
the negro intensely stupid and the seaman miraculously ignorant!

Now, while our friends are thus pleasantly engaged, we will return to
Rafaravavy, whom we left standing among the Queen's ladies.

Of all the ladies there that little brunette was not only the
best-looking, the sweetest, the most innocent, but also, strange to say,
the funniest; by which we do not mean to say that she tried to be
funny--far from it, but that she had the keenest perception of the
ludicrous, and as her perceptions were quick, and little jokes usually
struck her, in vulgar parlance, "all of a heap," her little explosions
of laughter were instantaneous and violently short-lived.  Yet her
natural temperament was grave and earnest, and her habitual expression,
as we have said, pensive.

Indeed it would have been strange had it been otherwise, considering the
times in which she lived, the many friends whom she had seen sacrificed
by the violence of her royal mistress, and the terrible uncertainty that
hung over her own fate.

After a time the Queen dismissed some of her attendants to ramble about
the grounds,--among them Rafaravavy, who sauntered down one of the
side-walks by herself.

She had not gone far when, on reaching a turn of the road where a small
thicket of shrubs concealed her from the more public part of the garden,
she heard her own name pronounced.

Stopping abruptly, she listened with intense anxiety expressed on her
countenance.

"Rafaravavy!" repeated the voice again, "fear not!"  Next moment the
bushes were turned aside, a man stepped on the path, and Ravonino stood
before her!  He seized her in his arms, and printed a fervent kiss upon
her lips.

"Oh!  Samuel," she said, using her lover's Christian name, which she
naturally preferred, and speaking, of course, in her native tongue, "why
did you come here?  You know that it is death if you are caught."

"I would risk more than death, if that were possible, to see you,
Rafaravavy.  But I come to ask you to fly with me.  Our dear Lord's
counsel is that when we are persecuted we should flee to a place of
safety."

"Impossible!" said the girl, in a tone of decision that made her lover's
heart sink.  "Besides, I am not persecuted.  The Queen is fond of me,
and bears much."

"Fond of you she may well be, my loved one, she cannot help that; but
she is fonder of herself, and the moment you go beyond a certain point
she will order you out to execution.  Has she not done the same sort of
thing before?  She is capable of doing it again.  She will _surely_ do
it again.  Come, dearest! let us fly now--this moment.  I have a lamba
here which will conceal most of your dress.  Arrangements are made with
some of our friends in the Lord to aid us.  Bearers are ready.  I will
guide you to the caverns in the forest where my sister Ra-Ruth is
longing to receive you, where many of your old friends are dwelling in
security, where we worship God, and pray to Jesus, and sing the sweet
old hymns in peace.  Come, dear one! will you not come?"

It was evident that the intense earnestness of the lover was exerting
powerful influence over the affectionate maiden, for she began to waver.

"Oh! do not persuade me thus!" she said.  "I know not what God would
have me do.  But the Queen has been _very_ kind to me in spite of my
religion, and sometimes I have thought that she listens to my pleading.
Perhaps God may use me as the means of bringing her to Jesus.  Think
what that would be--not only to her own soul but to the multitudes who
are now suffering in--"

At that moment footsteps were heard on the gravel walk.  They were
evidently approaching the spot where the lovers stood.  Before Ravonino
could make up his mind to drag her into the thicket by main force,
Rafaravavy had disengaged herself and bounded away.  At the same moment
Ravonino glided into the shrubbery and disappeared.

A few seconds later and Mark Breezy stood on the spot they had quitted.
He was alone.

"Strange!" he muttered to himself, "I am almost certain that she took
this path, and I fancy that the man's voice sounded like that of
Ravonino.  Nothing more natural than that he should ferret her out.  Yet
it seems to have been imagination."

"It was not imagination," said a rather stern voice at Mark's elbow.  He
turned quickly.

"I was sure of it!" he exclaimed.

"If you were so sure of it," said the guide, with a touch of bitterness,
"why did you interrupt us and scare the maiden away?"

"You do me wrong in your thoughts," replied the student, flushing.  "One
of the Queen's secretaries is even at this moment coming along this
track in company with Hockins and Ebony.  While seated at breakfast I
saw Rafaravavy walk in this direction, and somehow I took it into my
head that you would surely meet her here--I know not why I thought so,
unless it be that in like circumstances I myself would have acted the
same part--so I hastened on in advance to warn you.  Hush! do you not
hear their steps?"

"Forgive me," said Ravonino, extending his hand, and grasping that of
his friend.  Then, speaking low and hurriedly, "You are in favour at
Court.  Will you befriend her?"

"I will.  You may depend on me!"

There was no time for more.  Already it was almost too late, for the
guide had barely disappeared in the thicket when his comrades and the
Secretary appeared.

"Hallo! doctor," exclaimed Hockins, "was ye arter a pretty girl that you
bolted so, all of a sudden?"

"Yes, I was," answered Mark promptly.  "I saw one of the Queen's ladies
come in this direction and ran after her!  I suppose there is no harm in
that, Mr Secretary?  You don't forbid men to look at your women, do
you, like the Arabs?"

"Certainly not," replied the Secretary, with a slight smile and a
ceremonial bow.

"Come, then, let us follow the track, we may yet meet her."

So saying, Mark led the way along the path where Rafaravavy had
vanished, not for the purpose of overtaking her, but in order to give
his friend time and opportunity to get out of the thicket unperceived.

On the evening of that same day, after the garden festivities were over,
Queen Ranavalona sat in her palace with a frown on her brow, for,
despite her determination and frequent commands, the Christians in the
town still persisted in holding secret meetings for worship.  Those who
knew her moods saw plainly that she was fanning the smouldering fires of
anger, and that it needed but a small matter to cause them to burst out
into a devouring flame.

While she was in this critical frame of mind an influential courtier
appeared before her.  He seemed to be greatly excited.

"Madam," he said, "I request that a bright and sharp spear may be
brought to me!"

Somewhat surprised at the nature of the request, the Queen asked to know
the reason.

"Madam," continued the courtier, "I cannot but see with grief the
dishonour that is done, not only to our idols but to the memory of your
own predecessors, by the doctrines of these foreigners.  Our ancient
customs are being destroyed and the new faith is spreading on every
hand.  All this is but preparatory to the invasion of Madagascar by
Europeans; and, as I would rather die than see my Queen and country so
disgraced, I ask for a spear to pierce my heart before the evil day
arrives."

This speech had a powerful effect on the Queen.  She began to regard
Christianity as not merely a sacrilege, but a political offence; for
were not people learning to despise the idols of their forefathers and
to cease praying to the royal ancestors, by whom the kingdom had been
established, and under whom the country had become great and powerful?
Might they not eventually despise herself and learn to treat their
living sovereign with contempt?

For some time Ranavalona remained silent, leaning her forehead on her
hand.  Suddenly she looked up with a flushed countenance.

"It is true--all true," she said.  "When I was carried along in
procession to-day did I not hear these Christians singing one of their
hated hymns?  They will not cease till some of them lose their heads.
Have you got with you the formal accusation that was made before my
chief judge yesterday?"

"No, madam, I have not."

"Go.  Fetch it and read it to me."

The courtier bowed, left the apartment, and speedily returned with a
paper containing the accusations referred to.  Unfolding it, he read as
follows:--

"First.  The Christians are accused of despising the idols.  Second.
They are always praying.  Third.  They will not swear, but merely
affirm.  Fourth.  Their women are chaste.  Fifth.  They are of one mind
with regard to their religion.  Sixth.  They observe the Sabbath as a
sacred day."

Strange to say, this catalogue of so-called accusations deeply affected
the queen with grief and rage.

"I swear," she said, with flashing eyes and clenched hands, "that I will
root out this religion of the Europeans if it should cost the life of
every Christian in the land!  Go.  Leave me!"

For a fortnight subsequent to this the palace and Court appeared as if
in mourning for some public calamity.  No band played; no amusements
were allowed, and a dread of impending evil seemed to weigh upon the
spirits of all classes.  During this time, also, measures were taken to
effect the final destruction, as far as possible, of all that had been
done in the country by the teaching of the missionaries and their
converts.

At last the storm burst.  A Kabary, or immense general assembly of the
nation, was called by proclamation at the capital.  The people were only
too well aware of what this signified to doubt that the Queen was
thoroughly in earnest and in one of her worst moods.  With trembling
hearts they hastened to obey the summons.



