me. I spoke a good word for you to Mr. Rodman," whined Laud.

"You!" exclaimed Donald, disgusted with this ridiculous pretension. "If
you said anything to Mr. Rodman about it, I wonder he didn't give the
job to somebody else."

"You think I have no influence, but you are mistaken; and if you insist
on quarrelling with me, you will find out, when it is too late, what
folks think of me."

"They think you are a ninny; and when they know what you did to-night,
they will believe you are a knave," replied Donald. "You didn't cover
your tracks so that I couldn't find them; and I can prove all I say. I
didn't think you were such a rascal before."

"You won't make anything out of that sort of talk with me, Don John,"
said Laud, mildly. "You provoke me to throw you overboard, but I don't
want to hurt you."

"I'll risk your throwing me overboard. I can take care of myself."

"I said I didn't want to hurt you, and I don't. I didn't set your boat
afire; I wouldn't do such a thing."

"You can tell that to Squire Peters to-morrow."

"You don't mean to say that you will prosecute me, Don John?"

"Yes; I do mean it."

"I came down from the harbor, and tacked between those two wharves,"
explained Laud. "I was standing off on this tack when you bunted your
skiff into me. That's all I know about it."

"But I saw you on the wharf. No matter; we won't argue the case here,"
said Donald, as he made a movement to go into his skiff.

"Hold on, Don John. I want to talk with you a little."

"What about?"

"Two or three things. I am going off on a long cruise in a day or two. I
think I shall go as far as Portland, and try to get a situation in a
store there."

"I don't believe you will have a chance to go to Portland, or anywhere
else, unless it's Thomaston, where the state prison is located."

"I didn't think you would be so rough on me, Don John. I didn't set your
boat afire; but I can see that it may go hard with me, because I
happened to be near the wharf at the time."

"You will find that isn't the worst of it," added Donald.

"What is the worst of it?"

"Never mind; I'll tell Squire Peters to-morrow, when we come together."

"Don't go to law about it, Don John; for though I didn't do it, I don't
want to be hauled up for it. Even a suspicion is sometimes damaging to
the honor of a gentleman."

"You had better come down from that high horse, and own up that you set
the Maud afire."

"Will you agree not to prosecute, if I do?" asked Laud.

Donald, after his anger subsided, thought more about the "white cross of
Denmark" than he did about the fire; for the latter had done him no
damage, while the former might injure his character which he valued more
than his property.

"I will agree not to prosecute, if you will answer all my questions," he
replied; but I confess that it was an error on the part of the young
man.

Donald fastened the painter of his skiff at the stern, and took a seat
in the standing-room of the Juno.

"I will tell you all I know, if you will keep me out of the courts,"
added Laud, promptly.

"Why did you set the Maud afire?"

"Because I was mad, and meant to get even with you for what you did at
Rodman's this afternoon. You might do me a great service, Don John, if
you would. I like Nellie Patterdale; I mean, I'm in love with her. I
don't believe I can live without her."

"I'll bet you'll have to," interposed Donald, indignantly.

"You don't know what it is to love, Don John."

"I don't want to know yet awhile; and I think you had better live on a
different sort of grub. What a stupid idea, for a fellow like you to
think of such a girl as Nellie Patterdale!"

"Is it any worse for me to think of her, than it is for you to do so?"
asked Laud.

"I never thought of her in any such way as that. We went to school
together, and have always been good friends; that's all."

"That's enough," sighed Laud. "I actually suffer for her sake. If the
quest were hopeless," Laud read novels--"I think I should drown myself."

"You had better do it right off, then," added Donald.

"You can pity me, Don John, for I am miserable. Day and night I think
only of her. My feelings have made me almost crazy, and I hardly knew
what I was about when I applied the incendiary torch to the Maud."

"I thought it was a card of friction matches."

"The world will laugh and jeer at me for loving one above my station;
but love makes us equals."

"Perhaps it does when the love is on both sides," added the practical
boat-builder.

"But I think I am fitted to adorn a higher station than that in which I
was born."

"If so, you will rise like a stick of timber forced under the water; but
it strikes me that you have begun in the wrong way to figure for a
rise."

"But I wish to rise only for Nellie's sake. You can help me, Don John;
you can take me into her presence, where I can have the opportunity to
win her affection."

"I guess not, Laud. Shall I tell you what she said to me this
afternoon?"

"Tell me all."

"She said you were an impudent puppy, and she was sorry I invited you."

"Did she say that?" asked Laud, looking up to the cold, pale moon.

"She did; and I was obliged to tell her that I didn't invite you."

"Perhaps I have been a fool," mused the lover.

"There's no doubt of it. Nellie Patterdale dislikes, and even despises
you. I have heard her say as much, in so many words. That ought to
comfort you, and convince you that it is no use to fish any longer in
those waters."

"Possibly you are right; but it is only because she does not know me. If
she only knew me better--"

"She would dislike and despise you still more," said Donald, sharply.
"If she only knew that you set the Maud afire, she would love you as a
homeless dog likes the brickbats that are thrown at him."

"You will not tell her that, Don John?"

"I will not tell her, or any one else, if you behave yourself. Now I
want to ask some more questions."

"Go on, Don John."

"Where did you get the money you paid for the Juno?" demanded Donald,
with energy.

"Where did I get it?" repeated Laud, evidently startled by the question,
so vigorously put. "I told you where I got it."

"Tell me again."

"Captain Shivernock gave it to me."

"What for?"

"I can't tell you that."

"Why not?"

"Because it is a matter between the captain and me."

"I don't care if it is. You said you would answer all my questions, if I
would not prosecute."

"Questions about the Maud," explained Laud. "I have told you the secret
of my love--"

"Hang the secret of your love!" exclaimed Donald, disgusted with that
topic. "I meant all questions."

"But I cannot betray the secrets of Captain Shivernock. My honor--"

"Stick your honor up chimney!" interrupted Donald. "If you go back on
the agreement, I shall take the fire before Squire Peters. The question
I asked was, why Captain Shivernock gave you four or five hundred
dollars?"

"I wish I could answer you, Don John; but I do not feel at liberty to do
so just now. I will see the captain, and perhaps I may honorably give
you the information you seek."

"You needn't mince the matter with me. I know all about it now; but I
want it from you."

"All about what?" asked Laud.

"You needn't look green about it. Do you remember the Saturday when I
told you the Juno was for sale?"

"I do, very distinctly," answered Laud. "You were in the Juno at the
time."

"I was; we parted company, and you stood over towards the Northport
shore."

"Just so."

"Over there you met Captain Shivernock."

"I didn't say I did."

"But I say you did," persisted Donald. "For some reason best known to
himself, the captain did not want any one to know he was on Long Island
that night."

Laud listened with intense interest.

"Do you know what his reason was, Don John?"

"No, I don't. You saw his boat, and overhauled him near the shore."

"Well?"

"You overhauled him near the shore, and he gave you a pile of money not
to say that you had seen him."

"It is you who says all this, and not I," added Laud, with more spirit
than he had before exhibited. "My honor is not touched."

"I wish you wouldn't say anything more about your honor. It is like a
mustard seed in a haymow, and I can't see it," snapped Donald.

"You can see that I came honorably by the money."

"Honestly by it; I am satisfied on that point," replied Donald. "If I
had not been, I wouldn't have sold you the boat. You see I knew
something of Captain Shivernock's movements about that time. If I
hadn't, I wouldn't have believed that he gave it to you."

"Then you must have seen the captain at the same time."

"I didn't say I saw him," laughed Donald. "But the wind is breezing up,
and we are half way over to Brigadier Island. Come about, Laud."

The skipper acceded to the request, and headed the Juno for Belfast.




CHAPTER XIV.

CAPTAIN SHIVERNOCK'S JOKE.


Donald considered himself shrewd, sharp, and smart, because he had
induced Laud virtually to own that Captain Shivernock had given him the
money to purchase his silence, but Donald was not half so shrewd, sharp,
and smart as he thought he was.

"Mr. Cavendish, it's no use for us to mince this matter," he continued,
determined further to draw out his companion, and feeling happy now, he
was very respectful to him.

"Perhaps not, Don John."

"It can do no harm for you and me to talk over this matter. You saw
Captain Shivernock on that Saturday morning--didn't you?"

"Of course, if I say I did, you will not let on about it--will you?"

"Not if I can help it; for the fact is, I am in the same boat with
you."

"Then you saw the captain."

"Of course I did."

"But what was he doing down there, that made him so particular to keep
shady about it?"

"I haven't the least idea. It was the morning after Hasbrook was pounded
to a jelly in his own house; but I am satisfied that the captain had
nothing to do with it."

"I am not so sure of that," added Laud.

"I am. I went to the captain's house before he returned that day, and
both Sykes and his wife told me he had left home at four o'clock that
morning, and this was after the pounding was done. Besides, the captain
was over on Long Island when I saw him. If he had done the deed, he
would have got home before daylight, for the wind was fresh and fair.
Instead of that, he was over at Turtle Head when I first saw him. The
Juno got aground with him near Seal Harbor, which made him so mad he
would not keep her any longer. He was mad because she wasn't a
centre-boarder. I suppose after we parted he went over to the
