        "You'd best be getting home," he said:
          "The nights are very damp!"

        He thought he saw a Garden Door
          That opened with a key:
        He looked again, and found it was
          A Double-Rule-of-Three:
        "And all its mystery," he said,
          "Is clear as day to me!"

        He thought he saw an Argument
          That proved he was the Pope:
        He looked again, and found it was
          A Bar of Mottled Soap.
        "A fact so dread," he faintly said,
          "Extinguishes all hope!"



339

        Isaac Watts (1674-1748) was an English minister
        and the writer of many hymns still included in
        our hymn books. He had a notion that verse
        might be used as a means of religious and
        ethical instruction for children, and wrote
        some poems as illustrations of his theory so
        that they might suggest to better poets how to
        carry out the idea. But Watts did this work so
        well that two or three of his poems and several
        of his stanzas have become common possessions.
        They are dominated, of course, by the heavy
        didactic moralizing, but are all so genuine and
        true that young readers feel their force and
        enjoy them.


AGAINST IDLENESS AND MISCHIEF

ISAAC WATTS

        How doth the little busy bee
          Improve each shining hour,
        And gather honey all the day
          From every opening flower!

        How skilfully she builds her cell,
          How neat she spreads the wax!
        And labors hard to store it well
          With the sweet food she makes.

        In works of labor or of skill,
          I would be busy too;
        For Satan finds some mischief still
          For idle hands to do.

        In books, or work, or healthful play,
          Let my first years be past,
        That I may give for every day
          Some good account at last.



340


FAMOUS PASSAGES FROM DOCTOR WATTS

        O 'tis a lovely thing for youth
        To walk betimes in wisdom's way;
        To fear a lie, to speak the truth,
        That we may trust to all they say.

        But liars we can never trust,
        Though they should speak the thing that's true;
        And he that does one fault at first,
        And lies to hide it, makes it two.
                                   (From "Against Lying")


        Whatever brawls disturb the street,
          There should be peace at home;
        Where sisters dwell and brothers meet,
          Quarrels should never come.

        Birds in their little nests agree:
          And 'tis a shameful sight,
        When children of one family
          Fall out, and chide, and fight.
                    (From "Love between Brothers and Sisters")


        How proud we are! how fond to show
        Our clothes, and call them rich and new!
        When the poor sheep and silk-worm wore
        That very clothing long before.

        The tulip and the butterfly
        Appear in gayer coats than I;
        Let me be dressed fine as I will,
        Flies, worms, and flowers exceed me still.

        Then will I set my heart to find
        Inward adornings of the mind;
        Knowledge and virtue, truth and grace,
        These are the robes of richest dress.
                        (From "Against Pride in Clothes")


        Let dogs delight to bark and bite,
          For God hath made them so;
        Let bears and lions growl and fight,
          For 'tis their nature to.

        But, children, you should never let
          Such angry passions rise;
        Your little hands were never made
          To tear each other's eyes.
                     (From "Against Quarreling and Fighting")




        Most of the work of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
        (1807-1882) is within the range of children's
        interests and comprehension. Three poems are
        given here, "The Skeleton in Armor," as
        representative of Longfellow's large group of
        narrative poems, "The Day Is Done," as an
        expression of the value of poetry in everyday
        life, and "The Psalm of Life," as the finest
        and most popular example of his hortatory
        poems.



341

        "The Skeleton in Armor" is one of Longfellow's
        first and best American art ballads. In
        Newport, Rhode Island, is an old stone tower
        known as the "Round Tower," which some people
        think was built by the Northmen, though it
        probably was not. In 1836 workmen unearthed a
        strange skeleton at Fall River, Massachusetts.
        It was wrapped in bark and coarse cloth. On the
        breast was a plate of brass, and around the
        waist was a belt of brass tubes. Apparently it
        was not the skeleton of an Indian, and people
        supposed it might have been that of one of the
        old Norsemen. Longfellow used these two
        historic facts as a basis for the plot of his
        poem, which he wrote in 1840.


THE SKELETON IN ARMOR

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

        "Speak! speak! thou fearful guest!
        Who, with thy hollow breast
        Still in rude armor drest,
          Comest to daunt me!
        Wrapt not in Eastern balms,
        But with thy fleshless palms
        Stretched, as if asking alms,
            Why dost thou haunt me?"

        Then, from those cavernous eyes
        Pale flashes seemed to rise,
        As when the Northern skies
            Gleam in December;
        And, like the water's flow
        Under December's snow,
        Came a dull voice of woe
            From the heart's chamber.

        "I was a Viking old!
        My deeds, though manifold,
        No Skald in song has told,
            No Saga taught thee!
        Take heed, that in thy verse
        Thou dost the tale rehearse,
        Else dread a dead man's curse!
            For this I sought thee.

        "Far in the Northern Land,
        By the wild Baltic's strand,
        I, with my childish hand,
            Tamed the ger-falcon;
        And, with my skates fast-bound.
        Skimmed the half-frozen Sound,
        That the poor whimpering hound
            Trembled to walk on.

        "Oft to his frozen lair
        Tracked I the grisly bear,
        While from my path the hare
            Fled like a shadow;
        Oft through the forest dark
        Followed the were-wolf's bark,
        Until the soaring lark
            Sang from the meadow.

        "But when I older grew,
        Joining a corsair's crew,
        O'er the dark sea I flew
            With the marauders.
        Wild was the life we led;
        Many the souls that sped,
        Many the hearts that bled,
            By our stern orders.

        "Many a wassail-bout
        Wore the long Winter out;
        Often our midnight shout
            Set the cocks crowing,
        As we the Berserk's tale
        Measured in cups of ale,
        Draining the oaken pail,
            Filled to o'erflowing.

        "Once, as I told in glee
        Tales of the stormy sea,
        Soft eyes did gaze on me,
            Burning, yet tender;
        And as the white stars shine
        On the dark Norway pine,
        On that dark heart of mine
            Fell their soft splendor.

        "I wooed the blue-eyed maid,
        Yielding, yet half afraid,
        And in the forest's shade
            Our vows were plighted.
        Under its loosened vest
        Fluttered her little breast,
        Like birds within their nest
            By the hawk frighted.

        "Bright in her father's hall
        Shields gleamed upon the wall,
        Loud sang the minstrels all,
            Chanting his glory:
        When of old Hildebrand
        I asked his daughter's hand,
        Mute did the minstrel stand
            To hear my story.

        "While the brown ale he quaffed,
        Loud then the champion laughed,
        And as the wind-gusts waft
            The sea-foam brightly,
        So the loud laugh of scorn,
        Out of those lips unshorn,
        From the deep drinking-horn
            Blew the foam lightly.

        "She was a Prince's child,
        I but a Viking wild,
        And though she blushed and smiled,
            I was discarded!
        Should not the dove so white
        Follow the sea-new's flight,
        Why did they leave that night
            Her nest unguarded?

        "Scarce had I put to sea,
        Bearing the maid with me,--
        Fairest of all was she
            Among the Norsemen!--
        When on the white-sea strand,
        Waving his armed hand,
        Saw we old Hildebrand,
            With twenty horsemen.

        "Then launched they to the blast,
        Bent like a reed each mast,
        Yet we were gaining fast,
            When the wind failed us;
        And with a sudden flaw
        Came round the gusty Skaw,
        So that our foe we saw
            Laugh as he hailed us.

        "And as to catch the gale
        Round veered the flapping sail,
        'Death!' was the helmsman's hail,
            Death without quarter!
        Mid-ships with iron-keel
        Struck we her ribs of steel;
        Down her black hulk did reel
            Through the black water.

        "As with his wings aslant,
        Sails the fierce cormorant,
        Seeking some rocky haunt,
            With his prey laden;
        So toward the open main,
        Beating the sea again,
        Through the wild hurricane,
            Bore I the maiden.

        "Three weeks we westward bore,
        And when the storm was o'er,
        Cloud-like we saw the shore
            Stretching to leeward;
        There for my lady's bower
        Built I the lofty tower,
        Which, to this very hour,
            Stands looking seaward.

        "There lived we many years;
        Time dried the maiden's tears;
        She had forgot her fears,
            She was a mother;
        Death closed her mild blue eyes,
        Under that tower she lies;
        Ne'er shall the sun arise
            On such another!

        "Still grew my bosom then,
        Still as a stagnant fen!
        Hateful to me were men,
            The sunlight hateful!
        In the vast forest here,
        Clad in my warlike gear,
        Fell I upon my spear,
            Oh, death was grateful!

        "Thus, seamed with many scars,
        Bursting these prison bars,
        Up to its native stars
            My soul ascended!
        There from the flowing bowl
        Deep drinks the warrior's soul,
        _Skoal!_ to the Northland! _Skoal!_"
            --Thus the tale ended.



342


THE DAY IS DONE

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

        The day is done, and the darkness
        Falls from the wings of Night.
        As a feather is wafted downward
          From an eagle in its flight.

        I see the lights of the village
          Gleam through the rain and the mist,
        And a feeling of sadness comes o'er me
          That my soul cannot resist:

        A feeling of sadness and longing,
          That is not akin to pain,
        And resembles sorrow only
          As the mist resembles the rain.

        Come, read to me some poem,
          Some simple and heartfelt lay,
        That shall soothe this restless feeling,
          And banish the thoughts of day.

        Not from the grand old masters,
          Not from the bards sublime,
        Whose distant footsteps echo
          Through the corridors of Time.

        For, like strains of martial music,
          Their mighty thoughts suggest
        Life's endless toil and endeavor;
          And to-night I long for rest.

        Read from some humbler poet,
          Whose songs gushed from his heart,
        As showers from the clouds of summer,
          Or tears from the eyelids start;

        Who, through long days of labor,
          And nights devoid of ease,
        Still heard in his soul the music
          Of wonderful melodies.

        Such songs have power to quiet
          The restless pulse of care,
        And come like the benediction
          That follows after prayer.

        Then read from the treasured volume
          The poem of thy choice,
        And lend to the rhyme of the poet
          The beauty of thy voice.

        And the night shall be filled with music,
          And the cares that infest the day,
        Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
          And as silently steal away.



343


A PSALM OF LIFE

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

        Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
          Life is but an empty dream!--
        For the soul is dead that slumbers,
          And things are not what they seem.

        Life is real! Life is earnest!
          And the grave is not its goal;
        Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
          Was not spoken of the soul.

        Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
          Is our destined end or way;
        But to act, that each tomorrow
          Find us farther than today.

        Art is long, and Time is fleeting,
          And our hearts, though stout and brave,
        Still, like muffled drums, are beating
          Funeral marches to the grave.

        In the world's broad field of battle,
          In the bivouac of Life,
        Be not like dumb, driven cattle!
          Be a hero in the strife.

        Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant!
          Let the dead Past bury its dead!
        Act,--act in the living Present!
          Heart within, and God o'erhead!

        Lives of great men all remind us
          We can make our lives sublime,
        And, departing, leave behind us
          Footprints on the sands of time;

        Footprints, that perhaps another,
          Sailing o'er life's solemn main,
        A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
          Seeing, shall take heart again.

        Let us, then, be up and doing,
          With a heart for any fate;
        Still achieving, still pursuing,
          Learn to labor and to wait.



344

        Historians usually mention Charles Kingsley
        (1819-1875) only as an English novelist, but it
        seems probable that eventually he will be
        remembered chiefly for his work in juvenile
        literature. His _Water Babies_ is popular with
        children of the fourth and fifth grade, while
        his book of Greek myths entitled _The Heroes_
        is a classic for older children. The next two
        poems are popular with both adults and
        children. Kingsley was a minister and his
        church was located in Devon so that the
        tragedies of the sea among the fisher folk were
        often brought to his attention. Both these
        poems deal with such tragedies.


THE THREE FISHERS

CHARLES KINGSLEY

        Three fishers went sailing out into the west,--
          Out into the west as the sun went down;
        Each thought of the woman who loved him the best,
          And the children stood watching them out of the town;
        For men must work, and women must weep;
        And there's little to earn, and many to keep,
          Though the harbor bar be moaning.

        Three wives sat up in the light-house tower,
          And trimmed the lamps as the sun went down;
        And they looked at the squall, and they looked at the shower,
          And the rack it came rolling up, ragged and brown;
        But men must work, and women must weep,
        Though storms be sudden, and waters deep,
          And the harbor bar be moaning.

        Three corpses lay out on the shining sands
          In the morning gleam as the tide went down,
        And the women are watching and wringing their hands,
          For those who will never come back to the town;
        For men must work, and women must weep,--
        And the sooner it's over, the sooner to sleep,--
          And good-by to the bar and its moaning.



345


THE SANDS OF DEE

CHARLES KINGSLEY

        "O Mary, go and call the cattle home,
           And call the cattle home,
           And call the cattle home
         Across the sands of Dee!"
        The western wind was wild and dank with foam,
         And all alone went she.

        The western tide crept up along the sand,
           And o'er and o'er the sand,
           And round and round the sand,
         As far as eye could see.
        The rolling mist came down and hid the land:
         And never home came she.

        "Oh! is it weed, or fish, or floating hair--
           A tress of golden hair,
           A drowned maiden's hair
         Above the nets at sea?
        Was never salmon yet that shone so fair
         Among the stakes on Dee."

        They rowed her in across the sailing foam,
           The cruel crawling foam,
           The cruel hungry foam,
         To her grave beside the sea:
        But still the boatmen hear her call the cattle home
         Across the sands of Dee!


        The next two poems, by Alfred Tennyson
        (1809-1892), are very well-known songs. "What
        Does Little Birdie Say" is the mother's song in
        "Sea Dreams." "Sweet and Low" is one of the
        best of the lyrics in "The Princess," and a
        favorite among the greatest lullabies.



346


"WHAT DOES LITTLE BIRDIE SAY?"

ALFRED TENNYSON

        What does little birdie say,
        In her nest at peep of day?
        "Let me fly," says little birdie,
          "Mother, let me fly away."
        "Birdie, rest a little longer,
        Till the little wings are stronger."
        So she rests a little longer,
          Then she flies away.

        What does little baby say,
        In her bed at peep of day?
        Baby says, like little birdie,
          "Let me rise and fly away."
        "Baby, sleep a little longer,
        Till the little limbs are stronger."
        If she sleeps a little longer,
          Baby too shall fly away.



347


SWEET AND LOW

ALFRED TENNYSON

        Sweet and low, sweet and low,
          Wind of the western sea,
        Low, low, breathe and blow,
          Wind of the western sea!
        Over the rolling waters go,
        Come from the dying moon, and blow,
          Blow him again to me;
        While my little one, while my pretty one, sleeps.

        Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
          Father will come to thee soon;
        Rest, rest on mother's breast,
          Father will come to thee soon;
        Father will come to his babe in the nest,
        Silver sails all out of the west
          Under the silver moon:
        Sleep, my little one, sleep, my pretty one, sleep.



348

        This poem is a great poet's expression of what
        a poet's ideal of his mission should be. It is
        summed up in the last two lines. An interesting
        comparison could be made of the purpose of
        poetry as reflected here with that suggested by
        Longfellow in No. 342.


THE POET'S SONG

ALFRED TENNYSON

        The rain had fallen, the Poet arose,
          He pass'd by the town and out of the street,
        A light wind blew from the gates of the sun,
          And waves of shadow went over the wheat,
        And he sat him down in a lonely place,
          And chanted a melody loud and sweet,
        That made the wild-swan pause in her cloud,
          And the lark drop down at his feet.

        The swallow stopt as he hunted the bee,
          The snake slipt under a spray,
        The wild hawk stood with the down on his beak,
          And stared, with his foot on the prey,
        And the nightingale thought, "I have sung many songs,
          But never a one so gay,
        For he sings of what the world will be
          When the years have died away."



349

        Those who live near the sea know that outside a
        harbor a bar is formed of earth washed down
        from the land. At low tide this may be so near
        the surface as to be dangerous to ships passing
        in and out, and the waves may beat against it
        with a moaning sound. In his eighty-first year
        Tennyson wrote "Crossing the Bar" to express
        his thought about death. He represents the soul
        as having come from the boundless deep of
        eternity into this world-harbor of Time and
        Place, and he represents death as the departure
        from the harbor. He would have no lingering
        illness to bar the departure. He would have the
        end of life's day to be peaceful and without
        sadness of farewell, for he trusts that his
        journey into the sea of eternity will be guided
        by "my Pilot." This poem may be somewhat beyond
        the comprehension of eighth-grade pupils, but
        they can perceive the beauty of the imagery and
        music, and later in life it will be a source of
        hope and comfort.


CROSSING THE BAR

ALFRED TENNYSON

        Sunset and evening star,
          And one clear call for me!
        And may there be no moaning of the bar
          When I put out to sea,

        But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
          Too full for sound and foam,
        When that which drew from out the boundless deep
          Turns again home.

        Twilight and evening bell,
          And after that the dark!
        And may there be no sadness of farewell,
          When I embark;

        For though from out our bourne of Time and Place
          The flood may bear me far,
        I hope to see my Pilot face to face
          When I have crossed the bar.



350

        Leigh Hunt (1784-1859) was an English essayist,
        journalist, and poet. His one universally known
        poem is "Abou Ben Adhem." The secret of its
        appeal is no doubt the emphasis placed on the
        idea that a person's attitude toward his
        fellows is more important than mere
        professions. The line "Write me as one that
        loves his fellow men" is on Hunt's tomb in
        Kensal Green Cemetery, London.


ABOU BEN ADHEM

LEIGH HUNT

        Abou Ben Adhem (may his tribe increase!)
        Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace,
        And saw, within the moonlight in his room,
        Making it rich, and like a lily in bloom,
        An angel writing in a book of gold:
        Exceeding peace had made Ben Adhem bold,
        And to the presence in the room he said,
        "What writest thou?"--the vision rais'd its head,
        And with a look made all of sweet accord,
        Answer'd, "The names of those that love the Lord."
        "And is mine one?" said Abou. "Nay, not so,"
        Replied the angel. Abou spoke more low,
        But cheerly still; and said, "I pray thee, then,
        Write me as one that loves his fellow men."
        The angel wrote, and vanished. The next night
        It came again with a great wakening light,
        And show'd the names whom love of God had blest,
        And lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest.



351

        Cincinnatus Heine Miller, generally known as
        Joaquin Miller (1841-1912), revealed in his
        verse much of the restless energy of Western
        America, where most of his life was passed.
        "Columbus" is probably his best known poem.
        "For Those Who Fail" suggests the important
        truth that he who wins popular applause is not
        usually the one who most deserves to be
        honored.


FOR THOSE WHO FAIL

JOAQUIN MILLER

        "All honor to him who shall win the prize,"
          The world has cried for a thousand years;
        But to him who tries and who fails and dies,
          I give great honor and glory and tears.

        O great is the hero who wins a name,
          But greater many and many a time,
        Some pale-faced fellow who dies in shame,
          And lets God finish the thought sublime.

        And great is the man with a sword undrawn,
          And good is the man who refrains from wine;
        But the man who fails and yet fights on,
          'Lo! he is the twin-born brother of mine!



352

        Numerous poems have been written about the
        futility of searching on earth for a place of
        perfect happiness. The next poem, by Edgar
        Allan Poe (1809-1849), seems to deal with this
        subject. Some lines from Longfellow are good to
        suggest its special message:

          "No endeavor is in vain,
        Its reward is in the doing,
        And the rapture of pursuing
          Is the prize the vanquished gain."


ELDORADO

EDGAR ALLAN POE

            Gaily bedight,
            A gallant knight,
        In sunshine and in shadow
            Had journeyed long,
            Singing a song,
        In search of Eldorado.

            But he grew old--
            This knight so bold--
        And o'er his heart a shadow
            Fell as he found
            No spot of ground
        That looked like Eldorado.

            And, as his strength
            Failed him at length,
        He met a pilgrim shadow--
            "Shadow," said he,
            "Where can it be--
        This land of Eldorado?"

            "Over the mountains
            Of the Moon,
        Down the Valley of the Shadow
            Ride, boldly ride,"
            The Shade replied,
        "If you seek for Eldorado!"



353

        Lord Byron (1788-1824) was the most popular
        of English poets in his day. His fame
        has since declined, although his fiery,
        impetuous nature, expressing itself in
        rapid verse of great rhetorical and satiric
        power, still reaches kindred spirits. His
        "Prisoner of Chillon" is often studied in
        the upper grades. It is full of the passion
        for freedom which was the dominating
        idea in Byron's work as it was in his life.
        He gave his life for this idea, striving to
        help the Greeks gain their independence.
        The poem which follows is from an early
        work called _Hebrew Melodies_. We learn
        from II Chronicles 32:21 that Sennacherib,
        King of Assyria, having invaded
        Judah, Hezekiah cried unto heaven, "And
        the Lord sent an angel, which cut off the
        mighty men of valor, and the leaders and
        captains in the camp of the King of Assyria.
        So he returned with shame of face to his
        own land." Byron's title seems to indicate
        that Sennacherib was himself destroyed.
        The fine swinging measure of the lines, and
        the vivid picture of the destroyed hosts in
        contrast to the brilliant glory of their
        triumphant invasion, are two of the chief
        elements in its appeal.


        THE DESTRUCTION OF
        SENNACHERIB

        LORD BYRON

        The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold,
        And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;
        And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,
        When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

        Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green,
        That host with their banners at sunset were seen:
        Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,
        The host on the morrow lay wither'd and strown.

        For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,
        And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed;
        And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,
        And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever grew still!

        And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,
        But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride:
        And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
        And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

        And there lay the rider distorted and pale,
        With the dew on his brow and the rust on his mail;
        And the tents were all silent, the banners alone,
        The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown.

        And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail,
        And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal;
        And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,
        Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord.



354

        The next two poems may represent the youth and
        the maturity of America's first great nature
        poet, William Cullen Bryant (1794-1878),
        although neither is in the style that
        characterizes his nature verse. He wrote "To a
        Waterfowl" in 1815. When he had completed his
        study of law, he set out on foot to find a
        village where he might begin work as a lawyer.
        He was poor and without friends. At the end of
        a day's journey, when he began to feel
        discouraged, he saw a wild duck flying alone
        high in the sky. Then the thought came to him
        that he would be guided aright, just as the
        bird was, and he wrote "To a Waterfowl," the
        most artistic of all his poems. The poem is
        suitable for the seventh or eighth grade.


TO A WATERFOWL

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT

          Whither, midst falling dew,
        While glow the heavens with the last steps of day,
        Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue
          Thy solitary way?

          Vainly the fowler's eye
        Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
        As, darkly painted on the crimson sky,
          Thy figure floats along.

          Seek'st thou the plashy brink
        Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide,
        Or where the rocking billows rise and sink
          On the chafed ocean-side?

          There is a Power whose care
        Teaches thy way along that pathless coast--
        The desert and illimitable air--
          Lone wandering, but not lost.

          All day thy wings have fanned
        At that far height, the cold, thin atmosphere,
        Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land
          Though the dark night is near.

          And soon that toil shall end;
        Soon shalt thou find a summer home, and rest,
        And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend,
          Soon, o'er thy sheltered nest.

          Thou'rt gone, the abyss of heaven
        Hath swallowed up thy form; yet, on my heart
        Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given,
          And shall not soon depart.

          He who, from zone to zone,
        Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
        In the long way that I must tread alone,
          Will lead my steps aright.



355

        Bryant wrote this poem in 1849 after he had
        been planting fruit trees on his country place
        on Long Island.


THE PLANTING OF THE APPLE-TREE

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT

          Come, let us plant the apple-tree.
        Cleave the tough greensward with the spade:
        Wide let its hollow bed be made;
        There gently lay the roots, and there
        Sift the dark mould with kindly care,
          And press it o'er them tenderly,
        As, round the sleeping infant's feet,
        We softly fold the cradle-sheet;
          So plant we the apple-tree.

          What plant we in this apple-tree?
        Buds, which the breath of summer days
        Shall lengthen into leafy sprays;
        Boughs where the thrush, with crimson breast,
        Shall haunt, and sing, and hide her nest;
          We plant, upon the sunny lea,
        A shadow for the noontide hour,
        A shelter from the summer shower,
          When we plant the apple-tree.

          What plant we in this apple-tree?
        Sweets for a hundred flowery springs
        To load the May-wind's restless wings,
        When, from the orchard row, he pours
        Its fragrance through our open doors;
          A world of blossoms for the bee,
        Flowers for the sick girl's silent room,
        For the glad infant sprigs of bloom,
          We plant with the apple-tree.

          What plant we in this apple-tree?
        Fruits that shall swell in sunny June,
        And redden in the August noon,
        And drop, when gentle airs come by,
        That fan the blue September sky,
          While children come, with cries of glee,
        And seek them where the fragrant grass
        Betrays their bed to those who pass,
          At the foot of the apple-tree.

          And when, above this apple-tree,
        The winter stars are quivering bright,
        And winds go howling through the night,
        Girls, whose young eyes o'erflow with mirth,
        Shall peel its fruit by cottage-hearth,
          And guests in prouder homes shall see,
        Heaped with the grape of Cintra's vine
        And golden orange of the line,
          The fruit of the apple-tree.

          The fruitage of this apple-tree
        Winds and our flag of stripe and star
        Shall bear to coasts that lie afar,
        Where men shall wonder at the view,
        And ask in what fair groves they grew;
          And sojourners beyond the sea
        Shall think of childhood's careless day,
        And long, long hours of summer play,
          In the shade of the apple-tree.

          Each year shall give this apple-tree
        A broader flush of roseate bloom,
        A deeper maze of verdurous gloom,
        And loosen, when the frost-clouds lower,
        The crisp brown leaves in thicker shower.
          The years shall come and pass, but we
        Shall hear no longer, where we lie,
        The summer's songs, the autumn's sigh,
          In the boughs of the apple-tree.

          And time shall waste this apple-tree.
        Oh, when its aged branches throw
        Thin shadows on the ground below,
        Shall fraud and force and iron will
        Oppress the weak and helpless still?
          What shall the tasks of mercy be,
        Amid the toils, the strifes, the tears
        Of those who live when length of years
          Is wasting this apple-tree?

          "Who planted this old apple-tree?"
        The children of that distant day
        Thus to some aged man shall say;
        And, gazing on its mossy stem,
        The gray-haired man shall answer them:
          "A poet of the land was he,
        Born in the rude but good old times;
        'T is said he made some quaint old rhymes,
          On planting the apple-tree."



356

        The next poem, by the English poet Thomas
        Edward Brown (1830-1897), deserves to be
        classed with the most beautiful and artistic
        verse in our language. Students will notice the
        allusion to the biblical tradition that God
        walked in the Garden of Eden in the cool of the
        evening.


MY GARDEN

THOMAS EDWARD BROWN

        A garden is a lovesome thing, God wot!
        Rose plot,
        Fringed pool,
        Ferned grot--
        The veriest school
        Of peace; and yet the fool
        Contends that God is not--
        Not God! in gardens! when the eve is cool?
        Nay, but I have a sign;
        'T is very sure God walks in mine.



357

        William Wordsworth (1770-1850) ranks very high
        among English poets. He endeavored to bring
        poetry close to actual life and to get rid of
        the stilted language of conventional verse. The
        struggle was long and difficult, but Wordsworth
        lived long enough to know that the world had
        realized his greatness. Many of his poems are
        suitable for use with children. Their
        simplicity, their directness, and their utter
        sincerity made many of them, while not written
        especially for the young, seem as if directly
        addressed to the childlike mind. "We are
        Seven," "Lucy Gray," and "Michael" belong to
        this number, as do the two masterpieces among
        short poems which are quoted here. "How many
        people," exclaims Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes,
        "have been waked to a quicker consciousness of
        life by Wordsworth's simple lines about the
        daffodils, and what he says of the thoughts
        suggested to him by 'the meanest flower that
        blows'!" In both poems the imagery is of the
        utmost importance. Through it the reader is
        able to put himself with the poet and see
        things as the poet saw them. In "The Daffodils"
        the flowers, jocund in the breeze, drive away
        the melancholy mood with which the poet had
        approached them and enable him to carry away a
        picture in his memory that can be drawn upon
        for help on future occasions of gloom. In "The
        Solitary Reaper" the weird and haunting notes
        of the song coming to his ear in an unknown
        tongue suggest possible ideas back of the
        strong feeling which he recognizes in the
        singer. Here also, the poet's memory carries
        something away,

        "The music in my heart I bore,
        Long after it was heard no more."

        One of the purposes in teaching poetry should
        be to store the mind, not with words only, but
        with impressions that may later be recalled to
        beautify and strengthen life.


DAFFODILS

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

        I wander'd lonely as a cloud
          That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
        When all at once I saw a crowd,
          A host, of golden daffodils;
        Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
        Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

        Continuous as the stars that shine
          And twinkle on the Milky Way,
        They stretch'd in never-ending line
          Along the margin of a bay:
        Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
        Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

        The waves beside them danced, but they
          Outdid the sparkling waves in glee:
        A poet could not but be gay,
          In such a jocund company:
        I gazed--and gazed--but little thought
        What wealth the show to me had brought:

        For oft, when on my couch I lie
          In vacant or in pensive mood,
        They flash upon that inward eye
          Which is the bliss of solitude;
        And then my heart with pleasure fills,
        And dances with the daffodils.



358


THE SOLITARY REAPER

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

        Behold her, single in the field,
          Yon solitary highland lass!
        Reaping and singing by herself;
          Stop here, or gently pass!
        Alone she cuts and binds the grain,
        And sings a melancholy strain;
        Oh, listen! for the vale profound
        Is overflowing with the sound.

        No nightingale did ever chant
          More welcome notes to weary bands
        Of travelers in some shady haunt,
          Among Arabian sands:
        A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard
        In spring-time from the cuckoo-bird,
        Breaking the silence of the seas
        Among the farthest Hebrides.

        Will no one tell me what she sings?
          Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
        For old, unhappy, far-off things,
          And battles long ago!
        Or is it some more humble lay,
        Familiar matter of to-day?
        Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
        That has been, and may be again?

        Whate'er the theme, the maiden sang
          As if her song could have no ending:
        I saw her singing at her work,
          And o'er the sickle bending;--
        I listen'd, motionless and still;
        And, as I mounted up the hill,
        The music in my heart I bore,
        Long after it was heard no more.



359

        Lady Norton (1808-1877) does not belong among
        the great poets, but she wrote several poems
        that were immense favorites with a generation
        now passing away. Among them are "Bingen on the
        Rhine," "The King of Denmark's Ride" and the
        one given below. It will no doubt show that her
        work still has power to stir readers of the
        present day, although we are likely to think of
        her poems as being too emotional or
        sentimental. She wrote the words of the very
        popular song "Juanita."


THE ARAB TO HIS FAVORITE STEED

CAROLINE E. NORTON

   My beautiful! my beautiful! that standest meekly by,
   With thy proudly arched and glossy neck, and dark and fiery eye,
   Fret not to roam the desert now, with all thy winged speed;
   I may not mount on thee again,--thou'rt sold, my Arab steed!
   Fret not with that impatient hoof,--snuff not the breezy wind,--
   The farther that thou fliest now, so far am I behind;
   The stranger hath thy bridle-rein,--thy master hath his gold,--
   Fleet-limbed and beautiful, farewell; thou'rt sold, my steed, thou'rt
        sold.

   Farewell! those free untired limbs full many a mile must roam,
   To reach the chill and wintry sky which clouds the stranger's home;
   Some other hand, less fond, must now thy corn and bed prepare,
   Thy silky mane, I braided once, must be another's care!
   The morning sun shall dawn again, but never more with thee
   Shall I gallop through the desert paths, where we were wont to be;
   Evening shall darken on the earth, and o'er the sandy plain
   Some other steed, with slower step, shall bear me home again.

   Yes, thou must go! the wild, free breeze, the brilliant sun and sky,
   Thy master's house,--from all of these my exiled one must fly;
   Thy proud dark eye will grow less proud, thy step become less fleet,
   And vainly shalt thou arch thy neck, thy master's hand to meet.
   Only in sleep shall I behold that dark eye, glancing bright;--
   Only in sleep shall hear again that step so firm and light;
   And when I raise my dreaming arm to check or cheer thy speed,
   Then must I, starting, wake to feel,--thou'rt sold, my Arab steed.

   Ah! rudely then, unseen by me, some cruel hand may chide,
   Till foam-wreaths lie, like crested waves, along thy panting side:
   And the rich blood that's in thee swells, in thy indignant pain,
   Till careless eyes, which rest on thee, may count each starting vein.
   Will they ill-use thee? If I thought--but no, it cannot be,--
   Thou art so swift, yet easy curbed; so gentle, yet so free:
   And yet, if haply, when thou'rt gone, my lonely heart should yearn,
   Can the hand which casts thee from it now command thee to return?

   Return! alas! my Arab steed! what shall thy master do,
   When thou, who wast his all of joy, hast vanished from his view?
   When the dim distance cheats mine eye, and through the gathering tears
   Thy bright form, for a moment, like the false mirage appears;
   Slow and unmounted shall I roam, with weary step alone,
   Where, with fleet step and joyous bound, thou oft hast borne me on;
   And sitting down by that green well, I'll pause and sadly think,
   "It was here he bowed his glossy neck when last I saw him drink!"

   When last I saw thee drink!--Away! the fevered dream is o'er,--
   I could not live a day, and know that we should meet no more!
   They tempted me, my beautiful! for hunger's power is strong,--
   They tempted me, my beautiful! but I have loved too long.
   Who said that I had given thee up? who said that thou wast sold?
   'T is false!--'t is false, my Arab steed! I fling them back their gold!
   Thus, thus, I leap upon thy back, and scour the distant plains;
   Away! who overtakes us now shall claim thee for his pains!



360

        Robert Southey (1774-1843) was poet laureate of
        England, and a most prolific writer of poetry
        and miscellaneous prose. His great prominence
        in his own day has been succeeded by an
        obscurity so complete that only a few items of
        his work are now remembered. Among these are
        "The Battle of Blenheim," a very brief and
        effective satire against war, "The Well of St.
        Keyne," a humorous poem based on an old
        superstition, and "The Inchcape Rock," a
        stirring narrative of how evil deeds return
        upon the evil doer. (See also No. 153.)


THE INCHCAPE ROCK

ROBERT SOUTHEY

        No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,
        The ship was as still as she could be;
        Her sails from Heaven received no motion,
        Her keel was steady in the ocean.

        Without either sign or sound of their shock,
        The waves flowed over the Inchcape Rock;
        So little they rose, so little they fell,
        They did not move the Inchcape Bell.

        The holy Abbot of Aberbrothok
        Had placed that bell on the Inchcape Rock;
        On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,
        And over the waves its warning rung.

        When the rock was hid by the surges' swell,
        The mariners heard the warning bell;
        And then they knew the perilous Rock,
        And blessed the Abbot of Aberbrothok.

        The Sun in heaven was shining gay,
        All things were joyful on that day;
        The sea-birds screamed as they wheeled around,
        And there was joyance in their sound.

        The buoy of the Inchcape Rock was seen,
        A darker speck on the ocean green;
        Sir Ralph, the Rover, walked his deck,
        And he fixed his eye on the darker speck.

        He felt the cheering power of spring,
        It made him whistle, it made him sing;
        His heart was mirthful to excess;
        But the Rover's mirth was wickedness.

        His eye was on the Inchcape float;
        Quoth he, "My men, put out the boat;
        And row me to the Inchcape Rock,
        And I'll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothok."

        The boat is lowered, the boatmen row,
        And to the Inchcape Rock they go;
        Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,
        And cut the Bell from the Inchcape float.

        Down sank the Bell with a gurgling sound;
        The bubbles rose, and burst around.
        Quoth Sir Ralph, "The next who comes to the Rock
        Will not bless the Abbot of Aberbrothok."

        Sir Ralph, the Rover, sailed away,
        He scoured the seas for many a day;
        And now, grown rich with plundered store,
        He steers his course for Scotland's shore.

        So thick a haze o'erspreads the sky
        They cannot see the Sun on high;
        The wind hath blown a gale all day;
        At evening it hath died away.

        On the deck the Rover takes his stand;
        So dark it is they see no land.
        Quoth Sir Ralph, "It will be lighter soon,
        For there is the dawn of the rising Moon."

        "Canst hear," said one, "the breakers roar?
        For yonder, methinks, should be the shore.
        Now where we are I cannot tell,
        But I wish we could hear the Inchcape Bell."

        They hear no sound; the swell is strong;
        Though the wind hath fallen, they drift along,
        Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock,--
        "O Christ! it is the Inchcape Rock."

        Sir Ralph, the Rover, tore his hair;
        He cursed himself in his despair.
        The waves rush in on every side;
        The ship is sinking beneath the tide.

        But even in his dying fear,
        One dreadful sound he seemed to hear,--
        A sound as if, with the Inchcape Bell,
        The Devil below was ringing his knell.


        The Shakespeare passages which follow are from
        the fairy play "A Midsummer Night's Dream." A
        teacher well acquainted with that play would
        find it possible to delight children with it.
        The fairy and rustic scenes could be given
        almost in their entirety, the other scenes
        could be summarized.



361


OVER HILL, OVER DALE

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

        Over hill, over dale,
          Thorough bush, thorough brier,
        Over park, over pale,
          Thorough flood, thorough fire,
        I do wander everywhere,
        Swifter than the moon's sphere;
        And I serve the fairy queen,
        To dew her orbs upon the green.
        The cowslips tall her pensioners be:
        In their gold coats spots you see;
        Those be rubies, fairy favours,
        In those freckles live their savours:
        I must go seek some dewdrops here,
        And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.



362


A FAIRY SCENE IN A WOOD

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

FAIRY QUEEN TITANIA (_calls to her_ FAIRIES _following her_)

          Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
        Then, for the third part of a minute, hence;
        Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds,
        Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,
        To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
        The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
        At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
        Then to your offices and let me rest.

_She lies down to sleep, and the_ FAIRIES _sing as follows_:

        You spotted snakes with double tongue,
          Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
        Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,
          Come not near our fairy queen.
            Philomel, with melody
            Sing in our sweet lullaby;
        Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby:
            Never harm,
            Nor spell nor charm,
          Come our lovely lady nigh:
          So good-night, with lullaby.

        Weaving spiders, come not here;
          Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence.
        Beetles black, approach not near;
          Worm nor snail, do no offence.
            Philomel, with melody
            Sing in our sweet lullaby;
        Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby:
            Never harm,
            Nor spell nor charm,
          Come our lovely lady nigh;
          So, good-night, with lullaby.

A FAIRY

        Hence, away! now all is well:
        One aloof stand sentinel.



363

        Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882) is America's
        greatest spiritual teacher. His essays, such as
        "Self-Reliance" and "The American Scholar," are
        his chief claim to fame. The two brief poems
        given here are well known. "Fable" should be
        studied along with No. 236, since they
        emphasize the same lesson that size is after
        all a purely relative matter. "Concord Hymn" is
        a splendidly dignified expression of the debt
        of gratitude we owe to the memory of those who
        made our country possible. Of course no reader
        will fail to notice the famous last two lines
        of the first stanza.


FABLE

RALPH WALDO EMERSON

        The mountain and the squirrel
        Had a quarrel,
        And the former called the latter "Little Prig";
        Bun replied,
        "You are doubtless very big;
        But all sorts of things and weather
        Must be taken in together
        To make up a year
        And a sphere.
        And I think it no disgrace
        To occupy my place.
        If I'm not so large as you,
        You are not so small as I,
        And not half so spry.
        I'll not deny you make
        A very pretty squirrel track;
        Talents differ; all is well and wisely put;
        If I cannot carry forests on my back,
        Neither can you crack a nut!"



364


CONCORD HYMN

RALPH WALDO EMERSON

        By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
          Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
        Here once the embattled farmers stood,
          And fired the shot heard round the world.

        The foe long since in silence slept;
          Alike the conqueror silent sleeps;
        And Time the ruined bridge has swept
          Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.

        On this green bank, by this soft stream,
          We set to-day a votive stone;
        That memory may their deed redeem,
          When, like our sires, our sons are gone.

        Spirit, that made those heroes dare
          To die, and leave their children free,
        Bid Time and Nature gently spare
          The shaft we raise to them and thee.



365

        Almost any of the works of Sir Walter Scott
        (1771-1832), whether in prose or verse, is
        within the range of children in the grades.
        Especially the fine ballads, such as
        "Lochinvar" and "Allen-a-Dale," are sure to
        interest them. Children should be encouraged to
        read one of the long story-poems, "The Lady of
        the Lake" or "The Lay of the Last Minstrel."
        The famous expression of patriotism quoted
        below is from the latter poem.


BREATHES THERE THE MAN

SIR WALTER SCOTT

        Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
        Who never to himself hath said,
          This is my own, my native land!
        Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned,
        As home his footsteps he hath turned
          From wandering on a foreign strand!
        If such there be, go, mark him well;
        For him no minstrel raptures swell;
        High though his titles, proud his name,
        Boundless his wealth as wish can claim;
        Despite those titles, power, and pelf,
        The wretch, concentered all in self,
        Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
        And doubly dying, shall go down
        To the vile dust, from whence he sprung,
        Unwept, unhonored, and unsung.



366

        When Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-1894) was
        twenty-one years old, he read that the Navy
        Department had decided to destroy the old,
        unseaworthy frigate "Constitution," which had
        become famous in the War of 1812. In one
        evening he wrote the poem "Old Ironsides." This
        not only made Holmes immediately famous as a
        poet, but so aroused the American people that
        the Navy Department changed its plans and
        rebuilt the ship.


OLD IRONSIDES

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

        Ay, tear her tattered ensign down!
          Long has it waved on high,
        And many an eye has danced to see
          That banner in the sky;
        Beneath it rung the battle shout,
          And burst the cannon's roar:--
        The meteor of the ocean air
          Shall sweep the clouds no more.

        Her deck, once red with heroes' blood,
          Where knelt the vanquished foe,
        When winds were hurrying o'er the flood,
          And waves were white below,
        No more shall feel the victor's tread,
          Or know the conquered knee;--
        The harpies of the shore shall pluck
          The eagle of the sea!

        Oh, better that her shattered hulk
          Should sink beneath the wave;
        Her thunders shook the mighty deep,
          And there should be her grave;
        Nail to the mast her holy flag,
          Set every threadbare sail,
        And give her to the god of storms,
          The lightning and the gale!



367

        William Collins (1721-1759), English poet,
        wrote only a few poems, but among them is this
        short dirge which keeps his name alive in
        popular memory. It was probably in honor of his
        countrymen who fell at Fontenoy in 1745, the
        year before its composition. Its austere
        brevity, its well-known personifications, its
        freedom from fulsome expressions, place it very
        high among patriotic utterances.


HOW SLEEP THE BRAVE

WILLIAM COLLINS

        How sleep the brave, who sink to rest
          By all their country's wishes blest!
        When Spring, with dewy fingers cold,
          Returns to deck their hallowed mould,
        She there shall dress a sweeter sod
          Than Fancy's feet have ever trod.

        By fairy hands their knell is rung;
          By forms unseen their dirge is sung;
        There Honor comes, a pilgrim gray,
          To bless the turf that wraps their clay;
        And Freedom shall awhile repair,
          To dwell a weeping hermit there!



368

        The anonymous ballad dealing with the familiar
        story of Nathan Hale, of Revolutionary times,
        is the nearest approach to the old folk ballad
        in our history. Its repetitions help it in
        catching something of the breathless suspense
        accompanying his daring effort, betrayal, and
        execution. The pathos of the closing incidents
        of Hale's career has attracted the tributes of
        poets and dramatists. Francis Miles Finch,
        author of "The Blue and the Gray," wrote a
        well-known poetic account of Hale, while Clyde
        Fitch's drama of _Nathan Hale_ had a great
        popular success.


THE BALLAD OF NATHAN HALE

        The breezes went steadily through the tall pines,
          A-saying "Oh! hu-ush!" a-saying "Oh! hu-ush!"
        As stilly stole by a bold legion of horse,
          For Hale in the bush; for Hale in the bush.

