
He shook the hand warmly, then drew it through his arm and said, as if
anxious to recover the good opinion with the loss of which he had been
threatened,

"Look here, Rosy, I've put the ring back, and I'm going to try again.
But you don't know how hard it is to stand being laughed at."

"Yes, I do! Ariadne plagues me every time I see her, because I don't
wear ear-rings after all the trouble I had getting ready for them."

"Ah, but her twaddle isn't half as bad as the chaffing I get. It takes
a deal of pluck to hold out when you are told you are tied to an apron
string, and all that sort of thing," sighed Charlie.

"I thought you had a 'deal of pluck,' as you call it. The boys all say
you are the bravest of the seven," said Rose.

"So I am about some things, but I cannot bear to be laughed at."

"It is hard, but if one is right won't that make it easier?"

"Not to me; it might to a pious parson like Arch."

"Please don't call him names! I guess he has what is called moral
courage, and you physical courage. Uncle explained the difference to
me, and moral is the best, though often it doesn't look so," said Rose
thoughtfully.

Charlie didn't like that, and answered quickly, "I don't believe he'd
stand it any better than I do, if he had those fellows at him."

"Perhaps that's why he keeps out of their way, and wants you to."

Rose had him there, and Charlie felt it, but would not give in just
yet, though he was going fast, for somehow, in the dark he seemed to
see things clearer than in the light, and found it very easy to be
confidential when it was "only Rose."

"If he was my brother, now, he'd have some right to interfere," began
Charlie, in an injured tone.

"I wish he was!" cried Rose.

"So do I," answered Charlie, and then they both laughed at his
inconsistency.

The laugh did them good, and when Prince spoke again, it was in a
different tone pensive, not proud nor perverse.

"You see, it's hard upon me that I have no brothers and sisters. The
others are better off and needn't go abroad for chums if they don't
like. I am all alone, and I'd be thankful even for a little sister."

Rose thought that very pathetic, and, overlooking the uncomplimentary
word "even" in that last sentence, she said, with a timid sort of
earnestness that conquered her cousin at once,

"Play I was a little sister. I know I'm silly, but perhaps I'm better
than nothing, and I'd dearly love to do it."

"So should I! and we will, for you are not silly, my dear, but a very
sensible girl, we all think, and I'm proud to have you for a sister.
There, now!" and Charlie looked down at the curly head bobbing along
beside him with real affection in his face.

Rose gave a skip of pleasure, and laid one seal-skin mitten over the
other on his arm, as she said happily,

"That's so nice of you! Now, you needn't be lonely any more, and I'll
try to fill Archie's place till he comes back, for I know he will, as
soon as you let him."

"Well, I don't mind telling you that while he was my mate I never missed
brothers and sisters, or wanted anyone else; but since he cast me off,
I'll be hanged if I don't feel as forlorn as old Crusoe before Friday
turned up."

This burst of confidence confirmed Rose in her purpose of winning
Charlie's Mentor back to him, but she said no more, contented to have
done so well. They parted excellent friends, and Prince went home,
wondering why "a fellow didn't mind saying things to a girl or woman
which they would die before they'd own to another fellow."

Rose also had some sage reflections upon the subject, and fell asleep
thinking that there were a great many curious things in this world, and
feeling that she was beginning to find out some of them.

Next day she trudged up the hill to see Archie, and having told him
as much as she thought best about her talk with Charlie, begged him to
forget and forgive.

"I've been thinking that perhaps I ought to, though I am in the right.
I'm no end fond of Charlie, and he's the best-hearted lad alive; but he
can't say No, and that will play the mischief with him, if he does not
take care," said Archie in his grave, kind way.

"While father was home, I was very busy with him, so Prince got into a
set I don't like. They try to be fast, and think it's manly, and they
flatter him, and lead him on to do all sorts of things play for money,
and bet, and loaf about. I hate to have him do so, and tried to stop it,
but went to work the wrong way, so we got into a mess."

"He is all ready to make up if you don't say much, for he owned to me
he was wrong; but I don't think he will own it to you, in words," began
Rose.

"I don't care for that; if he'll just drop those row-dies and come back,
I'll hold my tongue and not preach. I wonder if he owes those fellows
money, and so doesn't like to break off till he can pay it. I hope not,
but don't dare to ask; though, perhaps, Steve knows, he's always after
Prince, more's the pity," and Archie looked anxious.

"I think Steve does know, for he talked about debts of honour the day I
gave him--" There Rose stopped short and turned scarlet.

But Archie ordered her to "fess," and had the whole story in five
minutes, for none dared disobey the Chief. He completed her affliction
by putting a five-dollar bill into her pocket by main force, looking
both indignant and resolute as he said,

"Never do so again; but send Steve to me, if he is afraid to go to his
father. Charlie had nothing to do with that; he wouldn't borrow a penny
of a girl, don't think it. But that's the harm he does Steve, who adores
him, and tries to be like him in all things. Don't say a word; I'll make
it all right, and no one shall blame you."

"Oh me! I always make trouble by trying to help, and then letting out
the wrong thing," sighed Rose, much depressed by her slip of the tongue.

Archie comforted her with the novel remark that it was always best to
tell the truth, and made her quite cheerful by promising to heal the
breach with Charlie as soon as possible.

He kept his word so well that the very next afternoon, as Rose looked
out of the window, she beheld the joyful spectacle of Archie and Prince
coming up the avenue, arm-in-arm, as of old, talking away as if to make
up for the unhappy silence of the past weeks.

Rose dropped her work, hurried to the door, and, opening it wide, stood
there smiling down upon them so happily, that the faces of the lads
brightened as they ran up the steps eager to show that all was well with
them.

"Here's our little peace-maker!" said Archie, shaking hands with vigour.

But Charlie added, with a look that made Rose very proud and happy, "And
my little sister."



Chapter 24--Which?

"Uncle, I have discovered what girls are made for," said Rose, the day
after the reconciliation of Archie and the Prince.

"Well, my dear, what is it?" asked Dr. Alec, who was "planking the
deck," as he called his daily promenade up and down the hall.

"To take care of boys," answered Rose, quite beaming with satisfaction
as she spoke. "Phebe laughed when I told her, and said she thought girls
had better learn to take care of themselves first. But that's because
she hasn't got seven boy-cousins as I have."

"She is right, nevertheless, Rosy, and so are you, for the two things go
together, and in helping seven lads you are unconsciously doing much
to improve one lass," said Dr. Alec, stopping to nod and smile at the
bright-faced figure resting on the old bamboo chair, after a lively
game of battledore and shuttlecock, in place of a run which a storm
prevented.

"Am I? I'm glad of that; but really, uncle, I do feel as if I must take
care of the boys, for they come to me in all sorts of troubles, and ask
advice, and I like it so much. Only I don't always know what to do,
and I'm going to consult you privately and then surprise them with my
wisdom."

"All right, my dear; what's the first worry? I see you have something on
your little mind, so come and tell uncle."

Rose put her arm in his, and, pacing to and fro, told him all about
Charlie, asking what she could do to keep him straight, and be a real
sister to him.

"Could you make up your mind to go and stay with Aunt Clara a month?"
asked the Doctor, when she ended.

"Yes, sir; but I shouldn't like it. Do you really want me to go?"

"The best cure for Charlie is a daily dose of Rose water, or Rose and
water, or Rose and water; will you go and see that he takes it?" laughed
Dr. Alec.

"You mean that if I'm there and try to make it pleasant, he will stay at
home and keep out of mischief?"

"Exactly."

"But could I make it pleasant? He would want the boys."

"No danger but he'd have the boys, for they swarm after you like bees
after their queen. Haven't you found that out?"

"Aunt Plen often says they never used to be here half so much before I
came, but I never thought I made the difference, it seemed so natural to
have them round."

"Little modesty doesn't know what a magnet she is; but she will find it
out some day," and the Doctor softly stroked the cheek that had grown
rosy with pleasure at the thought of being so much loved. "Now, you see,
if I move the magnet to Aunt Clara's, the lads will go there as sure as
iron to steel, and Charlie will be so happy at home he won't care for
these mischievous mates of his I hope," added the Doctor, well knowing
how hard it was to wean a seventeen-year-old boy from his first taste of
what is called "seeing life," which, alas! often ends in seeing death.

"I'll go, uncle, right away! Aunt Clara is always asking me, and will
be glad to get me. I shall have to dress and dine late, and see lots of
company, and be very fashionable, but I'll try not to let it hurt me;
and if I get in a puzzle or worried about anything I can run to you,"
answered Rose, good-will conquering timidity.

So it was decided, and without saying much about the real reason for
this visit, Rose was transplanted to Aunt Clara's, feeling that she had
a work to do, and very eager to do it well.

Dr. Alec was right about the bees, for the boys did follow their queen,
and astonished Mrs. Clara by their sudden assiduity in making calls,
dropping in to dinner, and getting up evening frolics. Charlie was a
devoted host, and tried to show his gratitude by being very kind to his
"little sister," for he guessed why she came, and his heart was touched
by her artless endeavours to "help him be good."

Rose often longed to be back in the old house with the simpler pleasures
and more useful duties of the life there; but, having made up her mind,
in spite of Phebe, that "girls were made to take care of boys," here
motherly little soul found much to enjoy in the new task she had
undertaken.

It was a pretty sight to see the one earnest, sweet-faced girl among the
flock of tall lads, trying to understand, to help and please them with
a patient affection that worked many a small miracle unperceived. Slang,
rough manners, and careless habits were banished or bettered by the
presence of a little gentlewoman; and all the manly virtues cropping up
were encouraged by the hearty admiration bestowed upon them by one whose
good opinion all valued more than they confessed; while Rose tried to
imitate the good qualities she praised in them, to put away her girlish
vanities and fears, to be strong and just, and frank and brave, as well
as modest, kind, and beautiful.

This trial worked so well that when the month was over, Mac and Steve
demanded a visit in their turn, and Rose went, feeling that she would
like to hear grim Aunt Jane say, as Aunt Clara did at parting, "I wish I
could keep you all my life, dear."

After Mac and Steve had had their turn, Archie and Company bore her away
for some weeks; and with them she was so happy, she felt as if she would
like to stay for ever, if she could have Uncle Alec also.

Of course, Aunt Myra could not be neglected, and, with secret despair,
Rose went to the "Mausoleum," as the boys called her gloomy abode.
Fortunately, she was very near home, and Dr. Alec dropped in so often
that her visit was far less dismal than she expected. Between them, they
actually made Aunt Myra laugh heartily more than once; and Rose did her
so much good by letting in the sunshine, singing about the silent house,
cooking wholesome messes, and amusing the old lady with funny little
lectures on physiology, that she forgot to take her pills and gave up
"Mum's Elixir," because she slept so well, after the long walks and
drives she was beguiled into taking, that she needed no narcotic.

So the winter flew rapidly away, and it was May before Rose was fairly
settled again at home. They called her the "Monthly Rose," because
she had spent a month with each of the aunts, and left such pleasant
memories of bloom and fragrance behind her, that all wanted the family
flower back again.

Dr. Alec rejoiced greatly over his recovered treasure; but as the time
drew near when his year of experiment ended, he had many a secret fear
that Rose might like to make her home for the next twelve month with
Aunt Jessie, or even Aunt Clara, for Charlie's sake. He said nothing,
but waited with much anxiety for the day when the matter should be
decided; and while he waited he did his best to finish as far as
possible the task he had begun so well.

Rose was very happy now, being out nearly all day enjoying the beautiful
awakening of the world, for spring came bright and early, as if anxious
to do its part. The old horse-chestnuts budded round her windows, green
things sprung up like magic in the garden under her hands, hardy flowers
bloomed as fast as they could, the birds sang blithely overhead, and
every day a chorus of pleasant voices cried, "Good morning, cousin,
isn't it jolly weather?"

No one remembered the date of the eventful conversation which resulted
in the Doctor's experiment (no one but himself at least); so when the
aunts were invited to tea one Saturday they came quite unsuspiciously,
and were all sitting together having a social chat, when Brother Alec
entered with two photographs in his hand.

"Do you remember that?" he said, showing one to Aunt Clara, who happened
to be nearest.

"Yes, indeed; it is very like her when she came. Quite her sad,
unchildlike expression, and thin little face, with the big dark eyes."

The picture was passed round, and all agreed that "it was very like
Rose a year ago." This point being settled, the Doctor showed the second
picture, which was received with great approbation, and pronounced a
"charming likeness."

It certainly was, and a striking contrast to the first one, for it was a
blooming, smiling face, full of girlish spirit and health, with no sign
of melancholy, though the soft eyes were thoughtful, and the lines about
the lips betrayed a sensitive nature.

Dr. Alec set both photographs on the chimneypiece, and, falling back
a step or two, surveyed them with infinite satisfaction for several
minutes, then wheeled round, saying briefly, as he pointed to the two
faces,

"Time is up; how do you think my experiment has succeeded, ladies?"

"Bless me, so it is!" cried Aunt Plenty, dropping a stitch in her
surprise.

"Beautifully, dear," answered Aunt Peace, smiling entire approval.

"She certainly has improved, but appearances are deceitful, and she had
no constitution to build upon," croaked Aunt Myra.

"I am willing to allow that, as far as mere health goes, the experiment
is a success," graciously observed Aunt Jane, unable to forget Rose's
kindness to her Mac.

"So am I; and I'll go farther, for I really do believe Alec has done
wonders for the child; she will be a beauty in two or three years,"
added Aunt Clara, feeling that she could say nothing better than that.

"I always knew he would succeed, and I'm so glad you all allow it, for
he deserves more credit than you know, and more praise than he will
ever get," cried Aunt Jessie, clapping her hands with an enthusiasm that
caused Jamie's little red stocking to wave like a triumphal banner in
the air.

Dr. Alec made them a splendid bow, looking much gratified, and then said
soberly,

"Thank you; now the question is, shall I go on? for this is only the
beginning. None of you know the hindrances I've had, the mistakes I've
made, the study I've given the case, and the anxiety I've often felt.
Sister Myra is right is one thing Rose is a delicate creature, quick to
flourish in the sunshine, and as quick to droop without it. She has no
special weakness, but inherits her mother's sensitive nature, and needs
the wisest, tenderest care, to keep a very ardent little soul from
wearing out a finely organised little body. I think I have found the
right treatment, and; with you to help me, I believe we may build up a
lovely and a noble woman, who will be a pride and comfort to us all."

There Dr. Alec stopped to get his breath, for he had spoken very
earnestly, and his voice got a little husky over the last words. A
gentle murmur from the aunts seemed to encourage him, and he went on
with an engaging smile, for the good man was slyly trying to win all the
ladies to vote for him when the time came.

"Now, I don't wish to be selfish or arbitrary, because I am her
guardian, and I shall leave Rose free to choose for herself. We all want
her, and if she likes to make her home with any of you rather than with
me, she shall do so. In fact, I encouraged her visits last winter, that
she might see what we can all offer her, and judge where she will be
happiest. Is not that the fairest way? Will you agree to abide by her
choice, as I do?"

"Yes, we will," said all the aunts, in quite a flutter of excitement at
the prospect of having Rose for a whole year.

"Good! she will be here directly, and then we will settle the question
for another year. A most important year, mind you, for she has got a
good start, and will blossom rapidly now if all goes well with her. So
I beg of you don't undo my work, but deal very wisely and gently with
my little girl, for if any harm come to her, I think it would break my
heart."

As he spoke, Dr. Alec turned his back abruptly and affected to be
examining the pictures again; but the aunts understood how dear the
child was to the solitary man who had loved her mother years ago, and
who now found his happiness in cherishing the little Rose who was so
like her. The good ladies nodded and sighed, and telegraphed to one
another that none of them would complain if not chosen, or ever try to
rob Brother Alec of his "Heart's Delight," as the boys called Rose.

Just then a pleasant sound of happy voices came up from the garden, and
smiles broke out on all serious faces. Dr. Alec turned at once, saying,
as he threw back his head, "There she is; now for it!"

The cousins had been a-Maying, and soon came flocking in laden with the
spoils.

"Here is our bonny Scotch rose with all her thorns about her," said Dr.
Alec, surveying her with unusual pride and tenderness, as she went to
show Aunt Peace her basket full of early flowers, fresh leaves, and
curious lichens.

"Leave your clutter in the hall, boys, and sit quietly down if you
choose to stop here, for we are busy," said Aunt Plenty, shaking her
finger at the turbulent Clan, who were bubbling over with the jollity
born of spring sunshine and healthy exercise.

"Of course, we choose to stay! Wouldn't miss our Saturday high tea for
anything," said the Chief, as he restored order among his men with a
nod, a word, and an occasional shake.

"What is up? a court-martial?" asked Charlie, looking at the assembled
ladies with affected awe and real curiosity, for these faces betrayed
that some interesting business was afloat.

Dr. Alec explained in a few words, which he made as brief and calm as he
could; but the effect was exciting, nevertheless, for each of the lads
began at once to bribe, entice, and wheedle "our cousin" to choose his
home.

"You really ought to come to us for mother's sake, as a relish, you
know, for she must be perfectly satiated with boys," began Archie, using
the strongest argument he could think of at the moment.

"Oh, do! we'll never slam, or bounce at you or call you 'fraid cat,' if you
only will," besought Geordie and Will, distorting their countenances in the
attempt to smile with overpowering sweetness.

"And I'll always wash my hands 'fore I touch you, and you shall be my dolly,
'cause Pokey's gone away, and I'll love you _hard_," cried Jamie, clinging
to her with his chubby face full of affection.

"Brothers and sister ought to live together; especially when the brother
needs some one to make home pleasant for him," added Charlie, with the
