(FELICITY: "Those stories are all very well but they are only true
stories. It's easy enough to write true stories. I thought Peter was
appointed fiction editor, but he has never written any fiction since the
paper started. That's not MY idea of a fiction editor. He ought to make
up stories out of his own head." PETER, SPUNKILY: "I can do it, too,
and I will next time. And it ain't easier to write true stories. It's
harder, 'cause you have to stick to facts." FELICITY: "I don't believe
you could make up a story." PETER: "I'll show you!")


MY MOST EXCITING ADVENTURE

It's my turn to write it but I'm SO NERVOUS. My worst adventure happened
TWO YEARS AGO. It was an awful one. I had a striped ribbon, striped
brown and yellow and I LOST IT. I was very sorry for it was a handsome
ribbon and all the girls in school were jealous of it. (FELICITY: "I
wasn't. I didn't think it one bit pretty." CECILY: "Hush!") I hunted
everywhere but I couldn't find it. Next day was Sunday and I was running
into the house by the front door and I saw SOMETHING LYING ON THE STEP
and I thought it was my ribbon and I made a grab at it as I passed. But,
oh, it was A SNAKE! Oh, I can never describe how I felt when I felt that
awful thing WRIGGLING IN MY HAND. I let it go and SCREAMED AND SCREAMED,
and ma was cross at me for yelling on Sunday and made me read seven
chapters in the Bible but I didn't mind that much after what I had come
through. I would rather DIE than have SUCH AN EXPERIENCE again.

                                         SARA RAY.


         TO FELICITY ON HER BERTHDAY

         Oh maiden fair with golden hair
         And brow of purest white,
         Id fight for you I'd die for you
         Let me be your faithful knite.

         This is your berthday blessed day
         You are thirteen years old today
         May you be happy and fair as you are now
         Until your hair is gray.

         I gaze into your shining eyes,
         They are so blue and bright.
         Id fight for you Id die for you
         Let me be your faithful knite.

                                     A FRIEND.


(DAN: "Great snakes, who got that up? I'll bet it was Peter." FELICITY,
WITH DIGNITY: "Well, it's more than YOU could do. YOU couldn't write
poetry to save your life." PETER, ASIDE TO BEVERLEY: "She seems quite
pleased. I'm glad I wrote it, but it was awful hard work.")


PERSONALS

Patrick Grayfur, Esq., caused his friends great anxiety recently by a
prolonged absence from home. When found he was very thin but is now as
fat and conceited as ever.

On Wednesday, June 20th, Miss Olivia King was united in the bonds of
holy matrimony to Dr. Robert Seton of Halifax. Miss Sara Stanley was
bridesmaid, and Mr. Andrew Seton attended the groom. The young couple
received many handsome presents. Rev. Mr. Marwood tied the nuptial knot.
After the ceremony a substantial repast was served in Mrs. Alex King's
well-known style and the happy couple left for their new home in
Nova Scotia. Their many friends join in wishing them a very happy and
prosperous journey through life.


        A precious one from us is gone,
        A voice we loved is stilled.
        A place is vacant in our home
        That never can be filled.


(THE STORY GIRL: "Goodness, that sounds as if somebody had died. I've
seen that verse on a tombstone. WHO wrote that notice?" FELICITY,
WHO WROTE IT: "I think it is just as appropriate to a wedding as to a
funeral!")

Our school concert came off on the evening of June 29th and was a great
success. We made ten dollars for the library.

We regret to chronicle that Miss Sara Ray met with a misfortune while
taking some violent exercise with a wasps' nest recently. The moral is
that it is better not to monkey with a wasps' nest, new or old.

Mrs. C. B. Hawkins of Baywater is keeping house for Uncle Roger. She
is a very large woman. Uncle Roger says he has to spend too much time
walking round her, but otherwise she is an excellent housekeeper.

It is reported that the school is haunted. A mysterious light was seen
there at two o'clock one night recently.

(THE STORY GIRL AND I EXCHANGE KNOWING SMILES BEHIND THE OTHERS' BACKS.)

Dan and Felicity had a fight last Tuesday--not with fists but with
tongues. Dan came off best--as usual. (FELICITY LAUGHS SARCASTICALLY.)

Mr. Newton Craig of Markdale returned home recently after a somewhat
prolonged visit in foreign parts. We are glad to welcome Mr. Craig back
to our midst.

Billy Robinson was hurt last week. A cow kicked him. I suppose it is
wicked of us to feel glad but we all do feel glad because of the way he
cheated us with the magic seed last summer.

On April 1st Uncle Roger sent Mr. Peter Craig to the manse to borrow the
biography of Adam's grandfather. Mr. Marwood told Peter he didn't think
Adam had any grandfather and advised him to go home and look at the
almanac. (PETER, SOURLY: "Your Uncle Roger thought he was pretty smart."
FELICITY, SEVERELY: "Uncle Roger IS smart. It was so easy to fool you.")

A pair of blue birds have built a nest in a hole in the sides of the
well, just under the ferns. We can see the eggs when we look down. They
are so cunning.

Felix sat down on a tack one day in May. Felix thinks house-cleaning is
great foolishness.


ADS.

LOST--STOLEN--OR STRAYED--A HEART. Finder will be rewarded by returning
same to Cyrus E. Brisk, Desk 7, Carlisle School.

LOST OR STOLEN. A piece of brown hair about three inches long and one
inch thick. Finder will kindly return to Miss Cecily King, Desk 15,
Carlisle School.

(CECILY: "Cyrus keeps my hair in his Bible for a bookmark, so Flossie
tells me. He says he means to keep it always for a remembrance though
he has given up hope." DAN: "I'll steal it out of his Bible in Sunday
School." CECILY, BLUSHING: "Oh, let him keep it if it is any comfort to
him. Besides, it isn't right to steal." DAN: "He stole it." CECILY: "But
Mr. Marwood says two wrongs never make a right.")


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Aunt Olivia's wedding cake was said to be the best one of its kind ever
tasted in Carlisle. Me and mother made it.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER:--It is not advisable to curl your hair with mucilage
if you can get anything else. Quince juice is better. (CECILY, BITTERLY:
"I suppose I'll never hear the last of that mucilage." DAN: "Ask her who
used tooth-powder to raise biscuits?")

We had rhubarb pies for the first time this spring last week. They were
fine but hard on the cream.

                                     FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT

PATIENT SUFFERER:--What will I do when a young man steals a lock of my
hair? Ans.:--Grow some more.

No, F-l-x, a little caterpillar is not called a kittenpillar. (FELIX,
ENRAGED: "I never asked that! Dan just makes that etiquette column
up from beginning to end!" FELICITY: "I don't see what that kind of a
question has to do with etiquette anyhow.")

Yes, P-t-r, it is quite proper to treat a lady friend to ice cream twice
if you can afford it.

No, F-l-c-t-y, it is not ladylike to chew tobacco. Better stick to
spruce gum.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Frilled muslin aprons will be much worn this summer. It is no longer
fashionable to trim them with knitted lace. One pocket is considered
smart.

Clam-shells are fashionable keepsakes. You write your name and the date
inside one and your friend writes hers in the other and you exchange.

                                       CECILY KING.


FUNNY PARAGRAPHS

MR. PERKINS:--"Peter, name the large islands of the world."

PETER:--"The Island, the British Isles and Australia." (PETER,
DEFIANTLY: "Well, Mr. Perkins said he guessed I was right, so you
needn't laugh.")

This is a true joke and really happened. It's about Mr. Samuel Clask
again. He was once leading a prayer meeting and he looked through the
window and saw the constable driving up and guessed he was after him
because he was always in debt. So in a great hurry he called on Brother
Casey to lead in prayer and while Brother Casey was praying with his
eyes shut and everybody else had their heads bowed Mr. Clask got out of
the window and got away before the constable got in because he didn't
like to come in till the prayer was finished.

Uncle Roger says it was a smart trick on Mr. Clask's part, but I don't
think there was much religion about it.

                                        FELIX KING.




CHAPTER XXI. PEG BOWEN COMES TO CHURCH


When those of us who are still left of that band of children who played
long years ago in the old orchard and walked the golden road together
in joyous companionship, foregather now and again in our busy lives and
talk over the events of those many merry moons--there are some of our
adventures that gleam out more vividly in memory than the others, and
are oftener discussed. The time we bought God's picture from Jerry
Cowan--the time Dan ate the poison berries--the time we heard the
ghostly bell ring--the bewitchment of Paddy--the visit of the Governor's
wife--and the night we were lost in the storm--all awaken reminiscent
jest and laughter; but none more than the recollection of the Sunday
Peg Bowen came to church and sat in our pew. Though goodness knows, as
Felicity would say, we did not think it any matter for laughter at the
time--far from it.

It was one Sunday evening in July. Uncle Alec and Aunt Janet, having
been out to the morning service, did not attend in the evening, and we
small fry walked together down the long hill road, wearing Sunday attire
and trying, more or less successfully, to wear Sunday faces also. Those
walks to church, through the golden completeness of the summer evenings,
were always very pleasant to us, and we never hurried, though, on the
other hand, we were very careful not to be late.

This particular evening was particularly beautiful. It was cool after a
hot day, and wheat fields all about us were ripening to their harvestry.
The wind gossiped with the grasses along our way, and over them the
buttercups danced, goldenly-glad. Waves of sinuous shadow went over the
ripe hayfields, and plundering bees sang a freebooting lilt in wayside
gardens.

"The world is so lovely tonight," said the Story Girl. "I just hate the
thought of going into the church and shutting all the sunlight and music
outside. I wish we could have the service outside in summer."

"I don't think that would be very religious," said Felicity.

"I'd feel ever so much more religious outside than in," retorted the
Story Girl.

"If the service was outside we'd have to sit in the graveyard and that
wouldn't be very cheerful," said Felix.

"Besides, the music isn't shut out," added Felicity. "The choir is
inside."

"'Music has charms to soothe a savage breast,'" quoted Peter, who was
getting into the habit of adorning his conversation with similar gems.
"That's in one of Shakespeare's plays. I'm reading them now, since I got
through with the Bible. They're great."

"I don't see when you get time to read them," said Felicity.

"Oh, I read them Sunday afternoons when I'm home."

"I don't believe they're fit to read on Sundays," exclaimed Felicity.
"Mother says Valeria Montague's stories ain't."

"But Shakespeare's different from Valeria," protested Peter.

"I don't see in what way. He wrote a lot of things that weren't true,
just like Valeria, and he wrote swear words too. Valeria never does
that. Her characters all talk in a very refined fashion."

"Well, I always skip the swear words," said Peter. "And Mr. Marwood said
once that the Bible and Shakespeare would furnish any library well. So
you see he put them together, but I'm sure that he would never say that
the Bible and Valeria would make a library."

"Well, all I know is, I shall never read Shakespeare on Sunday," said
Felicity loftily.

"I wonder what kind of a preacher young Mr. Davidson is," speculated
Cecily.

"Well, we'll know when we hear him tonight," said the Story Girl. "He
ought to be good, for his uncle before him was a fine preacher, though a
very absent-minded man. But Uncle Roger says the supply in Mr. Marwood's
vacation never amounts to much. I know an awfully funny story about old
Mr. Davidson. He used to be the minister in Baywater, you know, and he
had a large family and his children were very mischievous. One day his
wife was ironing and she ironed a great big nightcap with a frill round
it. One of the children took it when she wasn't looking and hid it
in his father's best beaver hat--the one he wore on Sundays. When Mr.
Davidson went to church next Sunday he put the hat on without ever
looking into the crown. He walked to church in a brown study and at the
door he took off his hat. The nightcap just slipped down on his head, as
if it had been put on, and the frill stood out around his face and the
string hung down his back. But he never noticed it, because his thoughts
were far away, and he walked up the church aisle and into the pulpit,
like that. One of his elders had to tiptoe up and tell him what he
had on his head. He plucked it off in a dazed fashion, held it up, and
looked at it. 'Bless me, it is Sally's nightcap!' he exclaimed mildly.
'I do not know how I could have got it on.' Then he just stuffed it into
his pocket calmly and went on with the service, and the long strings of
the nightcap hung down out of his pocket all the time."

"It seems to me," said Peter, amid the laughter with which we greeted
the tale, "that a funny story is funnier when it is about a minister
