key and unlock the door. There was certainly plenty of room for a dozen
beggars, for the only occupants of the stable were an old donkey and a
thin ox; and as the night was bitter, the wizard lay down between them
for warmth, with a sack of reeds for a pillow.

He had walked far that day, and even wizards get tired sometimes, so in
spite of the hard floor he was just dropping off to sleep, when midnight
struck from the church tower of Plouhinec. At this sound the donkey
raised her head and shook her ears, and turned towards the ox.

'Well, my dear cousin,' said she, 'and how have you fared since last
Christmas Eve, when we had a conversation together?'

Instead of answering at once, the ox eyed the beggar with a long look of
disgust.

'What is the use of talking,' he replied roughly, 'when a
good-for-nothing creature like that can hear all we say?'

'Oh, you mustn't lose time in grumbling,' rejoined the donkey gaily,
'and don't you see that the wizard is asleep?'

'His wicked pranks do not make him rich, certainly,' said the ox, 'and
he isn't even clever enough to have found out what a piece of luck might
befall him a week hence.'

'What piece of luck?' asked the donkey.

'Why, don't you know,' inquired the ox, 'that once very hundred years
the stones on Plouhinec heath go down to drink at the river, and that
while they are away the treasures underneath them are uncovered?'

'Ah, I remember now,' replied the donkey, 'but the stones return so
quickly to their places, that you certainly would be crushed to death
unless you have in your hands a bunch of crowsfoot and of five-leaved
trefoil.'

'Yes, but that is not enough,' said the ox; 'even supposing you get
safely by, the treasure you have brought with you will crumble into dust
if you do not give in exchange a baptised soul. It is needful that a
Christian should die before you can enjoy the wealth of Plouhinec.'

The donkey was about to ask some further questions, when she suddenly
found herself unable to speak: the time allowed them for conversation
was over.

'Ah, my dear creatures,' thought the beggar, who had of course heard
everything, 'you are going to make me richer than the richest men of
Vannes or Lorient. But I have no time to lose; to-morrow I must begin to
hunt for the precious plants.'

He did not dare to seek too near Plouhinec, lest somebody who knew the
story might guess what he was doing, so he went away further towards the
south, where the air was softer and the plants are always green. From
the instant it was light, till the last rays had faded out of the sky,
he searched every inch of ground where the magic plants might grow; he
scarcely gave himself a minute to eat and drink, but at length he found
the crowsfoot in a little hollow! Well, that was certainly a great deal,
but after all, the crowsfoot was of no use without the trefoil, and
there was so little time left.

He had almost give up hope, when on the very last day before it was
necessary that he should start of Plouhinec, he came upon a little
clump of trefoil, half hidden under a rock. Hardly able to breathe from
excitement, he sat down and hunted eagerly through the plant which
he had torn up. Leaf after leaf he threw aside in disgust, and he had
nearly reached the end when he gave a cry of joy--the five-leaved
trefoil was in his hand.

The beggar scrambled to his feet, and without a pause walked quickly
down the road that led northwards. The moon was bright, and for some
hours he kept steadily on, not knowing how many miles he had gone, nor
even feeling tired. By and bye the sun rose, and the world began to
stir, and stopping at a farmhouse door, he asked for a cup of milk and
slice of bread and permission to rest for a while in the porch. Then he
continued his journey, and so, towards sunset on New Year's Eve, he came
back to Plouhinec.

As he was passing the long line of stones, he saw Bernez working with a
chisel on the tallest of them all.

'What are you doing there?' called the wizard, 'do you mean to hollow
out for yourself a bed in that huge column?'

'No,' replied Bernez quietly, 'but as I happened to have no work to do
to-day, I thought I would just carve a cross on this stone. The holy
sign can never come amiss.'

'I believe you think it will help you to win Rozennik,' laughed the old
man.

Bernez ceased his task for a moment to look at him.

'Ah, so you know about that,' replied he; 'unluckily Marzinne wants a
brother-in-law who has more pounds than I have pence.'

'And suppose I were to give you more pounds than Marzinne ever dreamed
of?' whispered the sorcerer glancing round to make sure that no one
overheard him.

'You?'

'Yes, I.'

'And what am I to do to gain the money,' inquired Bernez, who knew quite
well that the Breton peasant gives nothing for nothing.

'What I want of you only needs a little courage,' answered the old man.

'If that is all, tell me what I have got to do, and I will do it,' cried
Bernez, letting fall his chisel. 'If I have to risk thirty deaths, I am
ready.'

When the beggar knew that Bernez would give him no trouble, he told him
how, during that very night, the treasures under the stones would be
uncovered, and how in a very few minutes they could take enough to make
them both rich for life. But he kept silence as to the fate that awaited
the man who was without the crowsfoot and the trefoil, and Bernez
thought that nothing but boldness and quickness were necessary. So he
said:

'Old man, I am grateful, indeed, for the chance you have given me, and
there will always be a pint of my blood at your service. Just let me
finish carving this cross. It is nearly done, and I will join you in the
fir wood at whatever hour you please.'

'You must be there without fail an hour before midnight,' answered the
wizard, and went on his way.

As the hour struck from the great church at Plouhinec, Bernez entered
the wood. He found the beggar already there with a bag in each hand, and
a third slung round his neck.

'You are punctual,' said the old man, 'but we need not start just yet.
You had better sit down and think what you will do when your pockets are
filled with gold and silver and jewels.'

'Oh, it won't take me long to plan out that,' returned Bernez with a
laugh. 'I shall give Rozennik everything she can desire, dresses of all
sorts, from cotton to silk, and good things of all kinds to eat, from
white bread to oranges.'

'The silver you find will pay for all that, and what about the gold?'

'With the gold I shall make rich Rozennik's relations and every friend
of hers in the parish,' replied he.

'So much for the gold; and the jewels?'

'Then,' cried Bernez, 'I will divide the jewels amongst everybody in the
world, so that they may be wealthy and happy; and I will tell them that
it is Rozennik who would have it so.'

'Hush! it is close on midnight--we must go,' whispered the wizard, and
together they crept to the edge of the wood.

With the first stroke of twelve a great noise arose over the silent
heath, and the earth seemed to rock under the feet of the two watchers.
The next moment by the light of the moon they beheld the huge stones
near them leave their places and go down the slope leading to the river,
knocking against each other in their haste. Passing the spot where stood
Bernez and the beggar, they were lost in the darkness. It seemed as if a
procession of giants had gone by.

'Quick,' said the wizard, in a low voice, and he rushed towards the
empty holes, which even in the night shone brightly from the treasures
within them. Flinging himself on his knees, the old man began filling
the wallets he had brought, listening intently all the time for the
return of the stones up the hill, while Bernez more slowly put handfuls
of all he could see into his pockets.

The sorcerer had just closed his third wallet, and was beginning to
wonder if he could carry away any more treasures when a low murmur as of
a distant storm broke upon his ears.

The stones had finished drinking, and were hastening back to their
places.

On they came, bent a little forward, the tallest of them all at their
head, breaking everything that stood in their way. At the sight Bernez
stood transfixed with horror, and said,

'We are lost! They will crush us to death.'

'Not me!' answered the sorcerer, holding up the crowsfoot and the
five-leaved trefoil, 'for these will preserve me. But in order to keep
my riches, I was obliged to sacrifice a Christian to the stones, and
an evil fate threw you in my way.' And as he spoke he stretched out
the magic herbs to the stones, which were advancing rapidly. As
if acknowledging a power greater than theirs, the monstrous things
instantly parted to the right and left of the wizard, but closed their
ranks again as they approached Bernez.

The young man did not try to escape, he knew it was useless, and sank
on his knees and closed his eyes. But suddenly the tall stone that was
leading stopped straight in front of Bernez, so that no other could get
past.

It was the stone on which Bernez had carved the cross, and it was now a
baptized stone, and had power to save him.

So the stone remained before the young man till the rest had taken their
places, and then, darting like a bird to its own hole, came upon the
beggar, who, thinking himself quite safe, was staggering along under the
weight of his treasures.

Seeing the stone approaching, he held out the magic herbs which he
carried, but the baptized stone was no longer subject to the spells
that bound the rest, and passed straight on its way, leaving the wizard
crushed into powder in the heather.

Then Bernez went home, and showed his wealth to Marzinne, who this
time did not refuse him as a brother-in-law, and he and Rozennik were
married, and lived happy for ever after.

From 'Le Royer Breton,' par Emile Souvestre.




The Castle of Kerglas


Peronnik was a poor idiot who belonged to nobody, and he would have died
of starvation if it had not been for the kindness of the village people,
who gave him food whenever he chose to ask for it. And as for a bed,
when night came, and he grew sleepy, he looked about for a heap of
straw, and making a hole in it, crept in, like a lizard. Idiot though he
was, he was never unhappy, but always thanked gratefully those who fed
him, and sometimes would stop for a little and sing to them. For he
could imitate a lark so well, that no one knew which was Peronnik and
which was the bird.

He had been wandering in a forest one day for several hours, and when
evening approached, he suddenly felt very hungry. Luckily, just at
that place the trees grew thinner, and he could see a small farmhouse
a little way off. Peronnik went straight towards it, and found the
farmer's wife standing at the door holding in her hands the large bowl
out of which her children had eaten their supper.

'I am hungry, will you give me something to eat?' asked the boy.

'If you can find anything here, you are welcome to it,' answered she,
and, indeed, there was not much left, as everybody's spoon had dipped
in. But Peronnik ate what was there with a hearty appetite, and thought
that he had never tasted better food.

'It is made of the finest flour and mixed with the richest milk and
stirred by the best cook in all the countryside,' and though he said it
to himself, the woman heard him.

'Poor innocent,' she murmured, 'he does not know what he is saying, but
I will cut him a slice of that new wheaten loaf,' and so she did, and
Peronnik ate up every crumb, and declared that nobody less than the
bishop's baker could have baked it. This flattered the farmer's wife
so much that she gave him some butter to spread on it, and Peronnik was
still eating it on the doorstep when an armed knight rode up.

'Can you tell me the way to the castle of Kerglas?' asked he.

'To Kerglas? are you really going to Kerglas?' cried the woman, turning
pale.

'Yes; and in order to get there I have come from a country so far off
that it has taken me three months' hard riding to travel as far as
this.'

'And why do you want to go to Kerglas?' said she.

'I am seeking the basin of gold and the lance of diamonds which are in
the castle,' he answered. Then Peronnik looked up.

'The basin and the lance are very costly things,' he said suddenly.

'More costly and precious than all the crowns in the world,' replied the
stranger, 'for not only will the basin furnish you with the best food
that you can dream of, but if you drink of it, it will cure you of any
illness however dangerous, and will even bring the dead back to life, if
it touches their mouths. As to the diamond lance, that will cut through
any stone or metal.'

'And to whom do these wonders belong?' asked Peronnik in amazement.

'To a magician named Rogear who lives in the castle,' answered the
woman. 'Every day he passes along here, mounted on a black mare, with
a colt thirteen months old trotting behind. But no one dares to attack
him, as he always carries his lance.'

'That is true,' said the knight, 'but there is a spell laid upon him
which forbids his using it within the castle of Kerglas. The moment he
enters, the basin and lance are put away in a dark cellar which no
key but one can open. And that is the place where I wish to fight the
magician.'

'You will never overcome him, Sir Knight,' replied the woman, shaking
her head. 'More than a hundred gentlemen have ridden past this house
bent on the same errand, and not one has ever come back.'

'I know that, good woman,' returned the knight, 'but then they did not
have, like me, instructions from the hermit of Blavet.'

'And what did the hermit tell you?' asked Peronnik.

'He told me that I should have to pass through a wood full of all sorts
of enchantments and voices, which would try to frighten me and make me
lose my way. Most of those who have gone before me have wandered they
know not where, and perished from cold, hunger, or fatigue.'

'Well, suppose you get through safely?' said the idiot.

'If I do,' continued the knight, 'I shall then meet a sort of fairy
armed with a needle of fire which burns to ashes all it touches. This
dwarf stands guarding an apple-tree, from which I am bound to pluck an
apple.'

'And next?' inquired Peronnik.

'Next I shall find the flower that laughs, protected by a lion whose
mane is formed of vipers. I must pluck that flower, and go on to the
lake of the dragons and fight the black man who holds in his hand the
iron ball which never misses its mark and returns of its own accord to
its master. After that, I enter the valley of pleasure, where some who
conquered all the other obstacles have left their bones. If I can win
through this, I shall reach a river with only one ford, where a lady
in black will be seated. She will mount my horse behind me, and tell me
what I am to do next.'

He paused, and the woman shook her head.

'You will never be able to do all that,' said she, but he bade her
remembered that these were only matters for men, and galloped away down
the path she pointed out.

The farmer's wife sighed and, giving Peronnik some more food, bade him
good-night. The idiot rose and was opening the gate which led into the
forest when the farmer himself came up.

'I want a boy to tend my cattle,' he said abruptly, 'as the one I had
has run away. Will you stay and do it?' and Peronnik, though he loved
his liberty and hated work, recollected the good food he had eaten, and
agreed to stop.

At sunrise he collected his herd carefully and led them to the rich
pasture which lay along the borders of the forest, cutting himself a
hazel wand with which to keep them in order.

His task was not quite so easy as it looked, for the cows had a way of
straying into the wood, and by the time he had brought one back another
was off. He had gone some distance into the trees, after a naughty black
cow which gave him more trouble than all the rest, when he heard the
noise of horse's feet, and peeping through the leaves he beheld the
giant Rogear seated on his mare, with the colt trotting behind. Round
the giant's neck hung the golden bowl suspended from a chain, and in his
hand he grasped the diamond lance, which gleamed like fire. But as soon
as he was out of sight the idiot sought in vain for traces of the path
he had taken.

This happened not only once but many times, till Peronnik grew so used
to him that he never troubled to hide. But on each occasion he saw him
the desire to possess the bowl and the lance became stronger.

One evening the boy was sitting alone on the edge of the forest, when a
man with a white beard stopped beside him. 'Do you want to know the way
to Kerglas?' asked the idiot, and the man answered 'I know it well.'

'You have been there without being killed by the magician?' cried
Peronnik.
