a gentleman, so far. But slowly a change for the worse was beginning to
show itself, and he felt it. These first steps along the flowery road
were downward, not upward; and the constant sense of disloyalty which
soon began to haunt him made Nat feel, in the few quiet hours he gave
himself, that all was not well with him, spite of the happy whirl in
which he lived.

'Another month, and then I will be steady,' he said more than once,
trying to excuse the delay by the fact that all was new to him, that his
friends at home wished him to be happy, and that society was giving him
the polish he needed. But as each month slipped away it grew harder to
escape; he was inevitably drawn on, and it was so easy to drift with
the tide that he deferred the evil day as long as possible. Winter
festivities followed the more wholesome summer pleasures, and Nat found
them more costly; for the hospitable ladies expected some return from
the stranger; and carriages, bouquets, theatre tickets, and all the
little expenses a young man cannot escape at such times, told heavily
on the purse which seemed bottomless at first. Taking Mr Laurie for
his model, Nat became quite a gallant, and was universally liked; for
through all the newly acquired airs and graces the genuine honesty
and simplicity of his character plainly shone, winning confidence and
affection from all who knew him.

Among these was a certain amiable old lady with a musical
daughter--well-born but poor, and very anxious to marry the aforesaid
daughter to some wealthy man. Nat's little fictions concerning his
prospects and friends charmed the gnadige Frau as much as his music and
devoted manners did the sentimental Minna. Their quiet parlour seemed
homelike and restful to Nat, when tired of gayer scenes; and the
motherly interest of the elder lady was sweet and comfortable to him;
while the tender blue eyes of the pretty girl were always so full of
welcome when he came, of regret when he left, and of admiration when
he played to her, that he found it impossible to keep away from this
attractive spot. He meant no harm, and feared no danger, having confided
to the Frau Mamma that he was betrothed; so he continued to call, little
dreaming what ambitious hopes the old lady cherished, nor the peril
there was in receiving the adoration of a romantic German girl, till it
was too late to spare her pain and himself great regret.

Of course some inkling of these new and agreeable experiences got into
the voluminous letters he never was too gay, too busy, or too tired
to write each week; and while Daisy rejoiced over his happiness and
success, and the boys laughed at the idea of 'old Chirper coming out as
a society man', the elders looked sober, and said among themselves:

'He is going too fast; he must have a word of warning, or trouble may
come.'

But Mr Laurie said: 'Oh, let him have his fling; he's been dependent and
repressed long enough. He can't go far with the money he has, and I've
no fear of his getting into debt. He's too timid and too honest to be
reckless. It is his first taste of freedom; let him enjoy it, and he'll
work the better by and by; I know--and I'm sure I'm right.'

So the warnings were very gentle, and the good people waited anxiously
to hear more of hard study, and less of 'splendid times'. Daisy
sometimes wondered, with a pang of her faithful heart, if one of the
charming Minnas, Hildegardes, and Lottchens mentioned were not stealing
her Nat away from her; but she never asked, always wrote calmly and
cheerfully, and looked in vain for any hint of change in the letters
that were worn out with much reading.

Month after month slipped away, till the holidays came with gifts, good
wishes, and brilliant festivities. Nat expected to enjoy himself very
much, and did at first; for a German Christmas is a spectacle worth
seeing. But he paid dearly for the abandon with which he threw himself
into the gaieties of that memorable week; and on New Year's Day the
reckoning came. It seemed as if some malicious fairy had prepared the
surprises that arrived, so unwelcome were they, so magical the change
they wrought, turning his happy world into a scene of desolation and
despair as suddenly as a transformation at the pantomime.

The first came in the morning when, duly armed with costly bouquets
and bon-bons, he went to thank Minna and her mother for the braces
embroidered with forget-me-nots and the silk socks knit by the old
lady's nimble fingers, which he had found upon his table that day. The
Frau Mamma received him graciously; but when he asked for the daughter
the good lady frankly demanded what his intentions were, adding that
certain gossip which had reached her ear made it necessary for him
to declare himself or come no more, as Minna's peace must not be
compromised.

A more panic-stricken youth was seldom seen than Nat as he received this
unexpected demand. He saw too late that his American style of gallantry
had deceived the artless girl, and might be used with terrible effect
by the artful mother, if she chose to do it. Nothing but the truth could
save him, and he had the honour and honesty to tell it faithfully. A
sad scene followed; for Nat was obliged to strip off his fictitious
splendour, confess himself only a poor student, and humbly ask pardon
for the thoughtless freedom with which he had enjoyed their too
confiding hospitality. If he had any doubts of Frau Schomburg's motives
and desires, they were speedily set at rest by the frankness with which
she showed her disappointment, the vigour with which she scolded him,
and the scorn with which she cast him off when her splendid castles in
the air collapsed.

The sincerity of Nat's penitence softened her a little and she consented
to a farewell word with Minna, who had listened at the keyhole, and was
produced drenched in tears, to fall on Nat's bosom, crying: 'Ah, thou
dear one, never can I forget thee, though my heart is broken!'

This was worse than the scolding; for the stout lady also wept, and it
was only after much German gush and twaddle that he escaped, feeling
like another Werther; while the deserted Lotte consoled herself with the
bonbons, her mother with the more valuable gifts.

The second surprise arrived as he dined with Professor Baumgarten. His
appetite had been effectually taken away by the scene of the morning,
and his spirits received another damper when a fellow student cheerfully
informed him that he was about to go to America, and should make it his
agreeable duty to call on the 'lieber Herr Professor Bhaer', to tell
him how gaily his protege was disporting himself at Leipzig. Nat's heart
died within him as he imagined the effect these glowing tales would have
at Plumfield--not that he had wilfully deceived them, but in his letters
many things were left untold; and when Carlsen added, with a friendly
wink, that he would merely hint at the coming betrothal of the fair
Minna and his 'heart's friend', Nat found himself devoutly hoping that
this other inconvenient heart's friend might go to the bottom of the sea
before he reached Plumfield to blast all his hopes by these tales of a
mis-spent winter. Collecting his wits, he cautioned Carlsen with what
he flattered himself was Mephistophelian art, and gave him such confused
directions that it would be a miracle if he ever found Professor Bhaer.
But the dinner was spoilt for Nat, and he got away as soon as possible,
to wander disconsolately about the streets, with no heart for the
theatre or the supper he was to share with some gay comrades afterwards.
He comforted himself a little by giving alms to sundry beggars, making
two children happy with gilded gingerbread, and drinking a lonely glass
of beer, in which he toasted his Daisy and wished himself a better year
than the last had been.

Going home at length, he found a third surprise awaiting him in the
shower of bills which had descended upon him like a snowstorm, burying
him in an avalanche of remorse, despair, and self-disgust. These bills
were so many and so large that he was startled and dismayed; for, as
Mr Bhaer wisely predicted, he knew little about the value of money.
It would take every dollar at the bankers to pay them all at once, and
leave him penniless for the next six months, unless he wrote home for
more. He would rather starve than do that; and his first impulse was to
seek help at the gaming-table, whither his new friends had often tempted
him. But he had promised Mr Bhaer to resist what then had seemed an
impossible temptation; and now he would not add another fault to the
list already so long. Borrow he would not, nor beg. What could he do?
For these appalling bills must be paid, and the lessons go on; or his
journey was an ignominious failure. But he must live meantime. And how?
Bowed down with remorse for the folly of these months, he saw too late
whither he was drifting, and for hours paced up and down his pretty
rooms, floundering in a Slough of Despond, with no helping hand to pull
him out--at least he thought so till letters were brought in, and among
fresh bills lay one well-worn envelope with an American stamp in the
corner.

Ah, how welcome it was! how eagerly he read the long pages full of
affectionate wishes from all at home! For everyone had sent a line, and
as each familiar name appeared, his eyes grew dimmer and dimmer till, as
he read the last--'God bless my boy! Mother Bhaer'--he broke down; and
laying his head on his arms, blistered the paper with a rain of tears
that eased his heart and washed away the boyish sins that now lay so
heavy on his conscience.

'Dear people, how they love and trust me! And how bitterly they would
be disappointed if they knew what a fool I've been! I'll fiddle in the
streets again before I'll ask for help from them!' cried Nat, brushing
away the tears of which he was ashamed, although he felt the good they
had done.

Now he seemed to see more clearly what to do; for the helping hand had
been stretched across the sea, and Love, the dear Evangelist, had
lifted him out of the slough and shown him the narrow gate, beyond which
deliverance lay. When the letter had been reread, and one corner where
a daisy was painted, passionately kissed, Nat felt strong enough to face
the worst and conquer it. Every bill should be paid, every salable thing
of his own sold, these costly rooms given up; and once back with
thrifty Frau Tetzel, he would find work of some sort by which to support
himself, as many another student did. He must give up the new friends,
turn his back on the gay life, cease to be a butterfly, and take his
place among the grubs. It was the only honest thing to do, but very hard
for the poor fellow to crush his little vanities, renounce the delights
so dear to the young, own his folly, and step down from his pedestal to
be pitied, laughed at, and forgotten.

It took all Nat's pride and courage to do this, for his was a sensitive
nature; esteem was very precious to him, failure very bitter, and
nothing but the inborn contempt for meanness and deceit kept him from
asking help or trying to hide his need by some dishonest device. As he
sat alone that night, Mr Bhaer's words came back to him with curious
clearness, and he saw himself a boy again at Plumfield, punishing his
teacher as a lesson to himself, when timidity had made him lie.

'He shall not suffer for me again, and I won't be a sneak if I am a
fool. I'll go and tell Professor Baumgarten all about it and ask his
advice. I'd rather face a loaded cannon; but it must be done. Then I'll
sell out, pay my debts, and go back where I belong. Better be an honest
pauper than a jackdaw among peacocks'; and Nat smiled in the midst of
his trouble, as he looked about him at the little elegancies of his
room, remembering what he came from.

He kept his word manfully, and was much comforted to find that his
experience was an old story to the professor, who approved his plan,
thinking wisely that the discipline would be good for him, and was very
kind in offering help and promising to keep the secret of his folly from
his friend Bhaer till Nat had redeemed himself.

The first week of the new year was spent by our prodigal in carrying out
his plan with penitent dispatch, and his birthday found him alone in
the little room high up at Frau Tetzel's, with nothing of his former
splendour, but sundry unsalable keepsakes from the buxom maidens, who
mourned his absence deeply. His male friends had ridiculed, pitied,
and soon left him alone, with one or two exceptions, who offered their
purses generously and promised to stand by him. He was lonely and
heavy-hearted, and sat brooding over his small fire as he remembered the
last New Year's Day at Plumfield, when at this hour he was dancing with
his Daisy.

A tap at the door roused him, and with a careless 'Herein', he waited
to see who had climbed so far for his sake. It was the good Frau proudly
bearing a tray, on which stood a bottle of wine and an astonishing
cake bedecked with sugar-plums of every hue, and crowned with candles.
Fraulein Vogelstein followed, embracing a blooming rose-tree, above
which her grey curls waved and her friendly face beamed joyfully as she
cried:

'Dear Herr Blak, we bring you greetings and a little gift or two in
honour of this ever-to-be-remembered day. Best wishes! and may the new
year bloom for you as beautifully as we your heart-warm friends desire.'

'Yes, yes, in truth we do, dear Herr,' added Frau Tetzel. 'Eat of this
with-joy-made Kuchen, and drink to the health of the far-away beloved
ones in the good wine.'

Amused, yet touched by the kindness of the good souls, Nat thanked them
both, and made them stay to enjoy the humble feast with him. This they
gladly did, being motherly women full of pity for the dear youth, whose
straits they knew, and having substantial help to offer, as well as kind
words and creature comforts.

Frau Tetzel, with some hesitation, mentioned a friend of hers who,
forced by illness to leave his place in the orchestra of a second-rate
theatre, would gladly offer it to Nat, if he could accept so humble a
position. Blushing and toying with the roses like a shy girl, good old
Vogelstein asked if in his leisure moments he could give English lessons
in the young ladies' school where she taught painting, adding that a
small but certain salary would be paid him.

Gratefully Nat accepted both offers, finding it less humiliating to be
helped by women than by friends of his own sex. This work would support
him in a frugal way, and certain musical drudgery promised by his master
assured his own teaching. Delighted with the success of their little
plot, these friendly neighbours left him with cheery words, warm
hand-grasps, and faces beaming with feminine satisfaction at the hearty
kiss Nat put on each faded cheek, as the only return he could make for
all their helpful kindness.

It was strange how much brighter the world looked after that; for hope
was a better cordial than the wine, and good resolutions bloomed as
freshly as the little rose-tree that filled the room with fragrance, as
Nat woke the echoes with the dear old airs, finding now as always his
best comforter in music, to whom henceforth he swore to be a more loyal
subject.



Chapter 14. PLAYS AT PLUMFIELD

As it is as impossible for the humble historian of the March family to
write a story without theatricals in it as for our dear Miss Yonge to
get on with less than twelve or fourteen children in her interesting
tales, we will accept the fact, and at once cheer ourselves after
the last afflicting events, by proceeding to the Christmas plays at
Plumfield; for they influence the fate of several of our characters, and
cannot well be skipped.

When the college was built Mr Laurie added a charming little theatre
which not only served for plays, but declamations, lectures, and
concerts. The drop-curtain displayed Apollo with the Muses grouped about
him; and as a compliment to the donor of the hall the artist had given
the god a decided resemblance to our friend, which was considered
a superb joke by everyone else. Home talent furnished stars, stock
company, orchestra, and scene painter; and astonishing performances were
given on this pretty little stage.

Mrs Jo had been trying for some time to produce a play which should
be an improvement upon the adaptations from the French then in vogue,
curious mixtures of fine toilettes, false sentiment, and feeble wit,
with no touch of nature to redeem them. It was easy to plan plays full
of noble speeches and thrilling situations, but very hard to write them;
so she contented herself with a few scenes of humble life in which the
comic and pathetic were mingled; and as she fitted her characters to
her actors, she hoped the little venture would prove that truth and
simplicity had not entirely lost their power to charm. Mr Laurie helped
her, and they called themselves Beaumont and Fletcher, enjoying their
joint labour very much; for Beaumont's knowledge of dramatic art was
of great use in curbing Fletcher's too-aspiring pen, and they flattered
themselves that they had produced a neat and effective bit of work as an
experiment.

All was ready now; and Christmas Day was much enlivened by last
rehearsals, the panics of timid actors, the scramble for forgotten
properties, and the decoration of the theatre. Evergreen and holly from
the woods, blooming plants from the hothouse on Parnassus, and flags of
all nations made it very gay that night in honour of the guests who were
coming, chief among them, Miss Cameron, who kept her promise
faithfully. The orchestra tuned their instruments with unusual care,
the scene-shifters set their stage with lavish elegance, the prompter
heroically took his seat in the stifling nook provided for him, and
the actors dressed with trembling hands that dropped the pins, and
perspiring brows whereon the powder wouldn't stick. Beaumont and
Fletcher were everywhere, feeling that their literary reputation was
at stake; for sundry friendly critics were invited, and reporters, like
mosquitoes, cannot be excluded from any earthly scene, be it a great
man's death-bed or a dime museum.

'Has she come?' was the question asked by every tongue behind the
curtain; and when Tom, who played an old man, endangered his respectable
legs among the footlights to peep, announced that he saw Miss Cameron's
handsome head in the place of honour, a thrill pervaded the entire
company, and Josie declared with an excited gasp that she was going to
have stage fright for the first time in her life.

'I'll shake you if you do,' said Mrs Jo, who was in such a wild state
of dishevelment with her varied labours that she might have gone on as
Madge Wildlife, without an additional rag or crazy elf-lock.

'You'll have time to get your wits together while we do our piece. We
are old stagers and calm as clocks,' answered Demi, with a nod towards
Alice, ready in her pretty dress and all her properties at hand.

But both clocks were going rather faster than usual, as heightened
colour, brilliant eyes, and a certain flutter under the laces and velvet
coat betrayed. They were to open the entertainment with a gay little
piece which they had played before and did remarkably well. Alice was
a tall girl, with dark hair and eyes, and a face which intelligence,
health, and a happy heart made beautiful. She was looking her best now,
for the brocades, plumes, and powder of the Marquise became her stately
figure; and Demi in his court suit, with sword, three-cornered hat, and
white wig, made as gallant a Baron as one would wish to see. Josie was
the maid, and looked her part to the life, being as pretty, pert,
and inquisitive as any French soubrette. These three were all the
characters; and the success of the piece depended on the spirit and
skill with which the quickly changing moods of the quarrelsome lovers
were given, their witty speeches made to tell, and by-play suited to the
courtly period in which the scene was laid.

Few would have recognized sober John and studious Alice in the dashing
gentleman and coquettish lady, who kept the audience laughing at their
caprices; while they enjoyed the brilliant costumes, and admired the
ease and grace of the young actors. Josie was a prominent figure in the
plot, as she listened at keyholes, peeped into notes, and popped in and
out at all the most inopportune moments, with her nose in the air, her
hands in her apron-pockets, and curiosity pervading her little figure
from the topmost bow of her jaunty cap to the red heels of her slippers.
All went smoothly; and the capricious Marquise, after tormenting the
devoted Baron to her heart's content, owned herself conquered in the war
of wits, and was just offering the hand he had fairly won, when a crash
