to her duty, and hopes to do it better than she ever did before. She
ought to be able to, because you have chastened her pride, taught her
the lesson of patience, strengthened her will, purified her spirit, and
cleansed her soul from bitterness and wrath. I waited till afternoon
when all the confessions were over. May I speak now?"

Eldress Abby bowed, but she looked weak and stricken and old.

"I had something you would have called a vision last night, but I think
of it as a dream, and I know just what led to it. You told me Polly
Reed's story, and the little quail bird had such a charm for Sue that
I've repeated it to her more than once. In my sleep I seemed to see a
mother quail with a little one beside her. The two were always together,
happily flying or hopping about under the trees; but every now and then
I heard a sad little note, as of a deserted bird somewhere in the wood.
I walked a short distance, and parting the branches, saw on the open
ground another parent bird and a young one by its side darting hither
and thither, as if lost; they seemed to be restlessly searching for
something, and always they uttered the soft, sad note, as if the nest
had disappeared and they had been parted from the little flock. Of
course my brain had changed the very meaning of the Shaker story and
translated it into different terms, but when I woke this morning, I
could think of nothing but my husband and my boy. The two of them seemed
to me to be needing me, searching for me in the dangerous open country,
while I was hidden away in the safe shelter of the wood--I and the other
little quail bird I had taken out of the nest."

"Do you think you could persuade your husband to unite with us?" asked
Abby, wiping her eyes.

The tension of the situation was too tightly drawn for mirth, or Susanna
could have smiled, but she answered soberly, "No; if John could develop
the best in himself, he could be a good husband and father, a good
neighbor and citizen, and an upright business man, but never a Shaker."

"Did n't he insult your wifely honor and disgrace your home?" "Yes, in
the last few weeks before I left him. All his earlier offenses were more
against himself than me, in a sense. I forgave him many a time, but I am
not certain it was the seventy times seven that the Bible bids us. I
am not free from blame myself. I was hard the last year, for I had lost
hope and my pride was trailing in the dust. I left him a bitter letter,
one without any love or hope or faith in it, just because at the moment
I believed I ought, once in my life, to let him know how I felt toward
him."

"How can you go back and live under his roof with that feeling? It's
degradation."

"It has changed. I was morbid then, and so wounded and weak that I could
not fight any longer. I am rested now, and calm. My pluck has come back,
and my strength. I've learned a good deal here about casting out my own
devils; now I am going home and help him to cast out his. Perhaps he
won't be there; perhaps he does n't want me, though when he was his
very best self he loved me dearly; but that was long, long ago!" sighed
Susanna, drearily.

"Oh, this thing the world's people call love!" groaned Abby.

"There is love and love, even in the world outside; for if it is Adam's
world it is God's, too, Abby! The love I gave my husband was good, I
think, but it failed somewhere, and I am going back to try again. I am
not any too happy in leaving you and taking up, perhaps, heavier burdens
than those from which I escaped."

"Night after night I've prayed to be the means of leading you to the
celestial life," said the Eldress, "but my plaint was not worthy to
be heard. Oh, that God would increase our numbers and so revive our
drooping faith! We work, we struggle, we sacrifice, we pray, we defy the
world and deny the flesh, yet we fail to gather in Believers."

"Don't say you 've failed, dear, dear Abby!" cried Susanna, pressing
the Eldress's work-stained hands to her lips. "God speaks to you in one
voice, to me in another. Does it matter so much as long as we both hear
Him? Surely it's the hearing and the obeying that counts most! Wish me
well, dear friend, and help me to say goodbye to the Elder."

The two women found Elder Gray in the office, and Abby, still
unresigned, laid Susanna's case before him.

"The Great Architect has need of many kinds of workmen in His building,"
said the Elder. "There are those who are willing to put aside the ties
of flesh for the kingdom of heaven's sake; 'he that is able to receive
it, let him receive it!'"

"There may also he those who are willing to take up the ties of the
flesh for the kingdom of heaven's sake," answered Susanna, gently, but
with a certain courage.

Her face glowed with emotion, her eyes shone, her lips were parted. It
was a new thought. Abby and Daniel gazed at her for a moment without
speaking, then Daniel said: "It's a terrible cross to some of the
Brethren and Sisters to live here outside of the world, but maybe it's
more of a cross for such as you to live in it, under such conditions as
have surrounded you of late years. To pursue good and resist evil, to
bear your cross cheerfully and to grow in grace and knowledge of truth
while you're bearing it that's the lesson of life, I suppose. If you
find you can't learn it outside, come back to us, Susanna."

"I will," she promised, "and no words can speak my gratitude for what
you have all done for me. Many a time it will come back to me and keep
me from faltering."

She looked back at him from the open doorway, timidly.

"Don't forget us, Sue and me, altogether," she said, her eyes filling
with tears. "Come to Farnham, if you will, and see if I am a credit to
Shaker teaching! I shall never be here again, perhaps, and somehow it
seems to me as if you, Elder Gray, with your education and your gifts,
ought to be leading a larger life than this."

"I've hunted in the wild Maine forests, in my young days; I've speared
salmon in her rivers and shot rapids ill a birchbark canoe," said the
Elder, looking up from the pine table that served as a desk. "I've been
before the mast and seen strange countries; I've fought Indians; I've
faced perils on land and sea; but this Shaker life is the greatest
adventure of all!"

"Adventure?" echoed Susanna, uncomprehendingly.

"Adventure!" repeated the Elder, smiling at his own thoughts. "Whether I
fail, or whether I succeed, it's a splendid adventure in ethics."

Abby and Daniel looked at each other when Susanna passed out of the
office door.

"'They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been
of us, they would have continued with us,'" he quoted quietly.

Abby wiped her eyes with her apron. "It's a hard road to travel
sometimes, Daniel!" she said.

"Yee; but think where it leads, Abby, think where it leads! You're not
going to complain of dust when you're treading the King's Highway!"


Susanna left the office with a drooping head, knowing the sadness that
she had left behind. Brother Ansel sat under the trees near by, and his
shrewd eye perceived the drift of coming events.

"Well, Susanna," he drawled, "you're goin' to leave us, like most o' the
other 'jiners.' I can see that with one eye shut."

"Yes," she replied with a half smile; "but you see, Ansel, I 'jined'
John Hathaway before I knew anything about Shaker doctrines."

"Yee; but what's to prevent your onjinin' him? They used to tie up
married folks in the old times so't they could n't move an inch. When
they read the constitution and bylaws over 'em they used to put in 'till
death do us part.' That's the way my father was hitched to his three
wives, but death _did_ 'em part--fortunately for him!"

"'Till death us do part' is still in the marriage service," Susanna
said, "and I think of it very often."

"I want to know if that's there yit!" exclaimed Ansel, with apparent
surprise; "I thought they must be leavin' it out, there's so much
onjinin' nowadays! Well, accordin' to my notions, if there is anything
wuss 'n marriage, it's hevin' it hold till death, for then menfolks
don't git any chance of a speritual life till afterwards. They certainly
don't when they're being dragged down by women-folks an' young ones."

"I think the lasting part of the bargain makes it all the more solemn,"
Susanna argued.

"Oh, yes, it's solemn enough, but so's a prayer meetin', an' consid'able
more elevatin' "; and here Ansel regarded the surrounding scenery with
frowning disapproval, as if it left much to be desired.

"Don't you think that there are any agreeable and pleasant women,
Ansel?" ventured Susanna.

"Land, yes; heaps of 'em; but they all wear Shaker bunnits!"

"I suppose you know more about the women in the outside world than most
of the Brothers, on account of traveling so much?"

"I guess anybody 't drives a seed-cart or peddles stuff along the
road knows enough o' women to keep clear of 'em. They 'll come out the
kitchen door, choose their papers o' seasonin' an' bottles o' flavorin',
worry you 'bout the price an' take the aidge off every dime, make up an'
then onmake their minds 'bout what they want, ask if it's pure, an' when
by good luck you git your cart out o' the yard, they come runnin' along
the road after ye to git ye to swap a bottle o' vanilla for some spruce
gum an' give 'em back the change."

Susanna could not help smiling at Ansel's arraignment of her sex. "Do
you think they follow you for the pleasure of shopping, or the pleasure
of your conversation, Ansel?" she asked slyly.

"A little o' both, mebbe; though the pleasure's all on their side,"
returned the unchivalrous Ansel. "But take them same women, cut their
hair close to their heads (there's a heap o' foolishness in hair,
somehow), purge 'em o' their vanity, so they won't be lookin' in the
glass all the time, make 'em depend on one another for sassiety, so they
won't crave no conversation with menfolks, an' you git an article that's
'bout as good and 'bout as stiddy as a man!"

"You never seem to remember that men are just as dangerous to
women's happiness and goodness as women are to men's," said Susanna,
courageously.

"It don't seem so to me! Never see a man, hardly, that could stick to
the straight an' narrer if a woman wanted him to go the other way. Weak
an' unstable as water, menfolks are, an' women are pow'ful strong."

"Have your own way, Ansel! I'm going back to the world, but no man shall
ever say I hindered him from being good. You'll see women clearer in
another world."

"There'll be precious few of 'em to see!" retorted Ansel. "You're about
the best o' the lot, but even you have a kind of a managin' way with
ye, besides fillin' us all full o' false hopes that we'd gathered in a
useful Believer, one cal'lated to spread the doctrines o' Mother Ann!"

"I know, I know, Ansel, and oh, how sorry I am! You would never believe
how I long to stay and help you, never believe how much you have helped
me! Goodbye, Ansel; you've made me smile when my heart was breaking. I
shan't forget you!"




XII. The Hills of Home


Susanna had found Sue in the upper chamber at the Office Building, and
began to make the simple preparations for her homeward journey. It was
the very hour when John Hathaway was saying:--

  "Set her place at hearth and board
   As it used to be."

Sue interfered with the packing somewhat by darting to and fro, bringing
her mother sacred souvenirs given her by the Shaker sisters and
the children--needle-books, pin-balls, thimble-cases, packets of
flower-seeds, polished pebbles, bottles of flavoring extract.

"This is for Fardie," she would say, "and this for Jack and this for
Ellen and this for Aunt Louisa--the needle-book, 'cause she's so useful.
Oh, I'm glad we're going home, Mardie, though I do love it here, and I
was most ready to be a truly Shaker. It's kind of pityish to have your
hair shingled and your stocking half-knitted and know how to say 'yee'
and then have it all wasted."

Susanna dropped a tear on the dress she was folding. The child was going
home, as she had come away from it, gay, irresponsible, and merry; it
was only the mothers who hoped and feared and dreaded. The very universe
was working toward Susanna's desire at that moment, but she was all
unaware of the happiness that lay so near. She could not see the
freshness of the house in Farnham, the new bits of furniture here and
there; the autumn leaves in her own bedroom; her worktable full of
the records of John's sorrowful summer; Jack handsomer and taller, and
softer, also, in his welcoming mood; Ellen rosy and excited. She did not
know that Joel Atterbury had said to John that day, "I take it all back,
old man, and I hope you'll stay on in the firm!" nor that Aunt Louisa,
who was putting stiff, short-stemmed chrysanthemums in cups and tumblers
here and there through the house, was much more flexible and human than
was natural to her; nor that John, alternating between hope and despair,
was forever humming:

  "Set her place at hearth and board
  As it used to be:
  Higher are the hills of home,
  Bluer is the sea!"

It is often so. They who go weeping to look for the dead body of a
sorrow, find a vision of angels where the body has lain.

"I hope Fardie 'll be glad to see us and Ellen will have gingerbread,"
Sue chattered; then, pausing at the window, she added, "I'm sorry to
leave the hills, 'cause I 'specially like them, don't you, Mardie?"

"We are leaving the Shaker hills, but we are going to the hills of
home," her mother answered cheerily. "Don't you remember the Farnham
hills, dear?"

"Yes, I remember," and Sue looked thoughtful; "they were farther off and
covered with woods; these are smooth and gentle. And we shall miss the
lake, Mardie."

"Yes; but we can look at the blue sea from your bedroom window, Sue!"

"And we'll tell Fardie about Polly Reed and the little quail bird, won't
we?"

"Yes; but he and Jack will have a great deal to say to us, and we must
n't talk all the time about the dear, kind Shakers, you know!"

"You're all '_buts_,' Mardie!" at which Susanna smiled through her
tears.

Twilight deepened into dusk, and dusk into dark, and then the moon rose
over the poplar trees outside the window where Susanna and Sue were
sleeping. The Shaker Brethren and Sisters were resting serenely after
their day of confession. It was the aged Tabitha's last Sabbath on
earth, but had she known, it would have made no difference; if ever a
soul was ready for heaven, it was Tabitha's.

There was an Irish family at the foot of the long hill that lay between
the Settlement and the village of Albion; father, mother, and children
had prayed to the Virgin before they went to bed; and the gray-haired
minister in the low-roofed parsonage was writing his communion sermon on
a text sacred to the orthodox Christian world. The same moon shone over
all, and over millions of others worshiping strange idols and holding
strange beliefs in strange far lands, yet none of them owned the whole
of heaven; for as Elder Gray said, "It is a big place and belongs to
God."

Susanna Hathaway went back to John thinking it her plain duty, and to me
it seems beautiful that she found waiting for her at the journey's end a
new love that was better than the old; found a husband to whom she could
say in that first sacred hour when they were alone together, "Never
mind, John! Let's forget, and begin all over again."


When Susanna and Sue alighted at the little railway station at Farnham,
and started to walk through the narrow streets that led to the suburbs,
the mother's heart beat more and more tumultuously as she realized that
the issues of four lives would be settled before nightfall.

Little did Sue reck of life issues, skipping like a young roe from one
side of the road to the other. "There are the hills, not a bit changed,
Mardie!" she cried; "and the sea is just where it was!... Here's the
house with the parrot, do you remember? Now the place where the dog
barks and snarls is coming next... P'raps he'll be dead.., or p'raps
he'll be nicer... Keep close to me till we get past the gate... He did
n't come out, so p'raps he is dead or gone a-visiting.... There's that
'specially lazy cow that's always lying down in the Buxtons' field....
I don't b'lieve she's moved since we came away.... Do you s'pose she
stands up to be milked, Mardie? There's the old bridge over the brook,
just the same, only the woodbine's red.... There's... There's... Oh,
Mardie, look, look!... I do b'lieve it's our Jacky!"

Sue flew over the ground like a swallow, calling "Jack-y! Jack-y! It's
me and Mardie come home!"

Jack extricated himself from his sister's strangling hug and settled his
collar. "I'm awful glad to see you, Sukey," he said, "but I'm getting
too big to be kissed. Besides, my pockets are full of angleworms and
fishhooks."

"Are you too big to be kissed even by mother?" called Susanna, hurrying
to her boy, who submitted to her embrace with better grace. "O Jack,
Jack! say you're glad to see mother! Say it, say it; I can't wait,
Jack!"

"'Course I'm glad! Why would n't I be? I tell you I'm tired of Aunt
Louisa, though she's easier than she was. Time and again I've packed my
lunch basket and started to run away, but I always made it a picnic and
went back again, thinking they'd make such a row over me."

"Aunt Louisa is always kind when you're obedient," Susanna urged, "She
ain't so stiff as she was. Ellen is real worried about her and thinks
she's losing her strength, she's so easy to get along with."

"How's... father...?"

"Better'n he was."

"Has n't he been well?"

"Not so very; always quiet and won't eat, nor play, nor anything. I'm
home with him since Sunday."

"What is the matter with your clothes?" asked Susanna, casting a
maternal eye over him while she pulled him down here and up there, with
anxious disapproving glances. "You look so patched, and wrinkled, and
grubby."

"Aunt Louisa and father make me keep my best to put on for you, if you
should come. I clean up and dress every afternoon at train time, only I
forgot today and came fishing."

"It's too cold to fish, sonny."

"It ain't too cold to fish, but it's too cold for 'em to bite,"
corrected Jack.

"Why were you expecting us just now?" asked Susanna. "I did n't write
because... because, I thought... perhaps... it would be better to
surprise you."

"Father's expecting you every day, not just this one," said Jack.

Susanna sank down on a stone at the end of the bridge, and leaning her
head against the railing, burst into tears. In that moment the worst of
her fears rolled away from her heart like the stone from the mouth of a
sepulcher. If her husband had looked for her return, he must have missed
her, regretted her, needed her, just a little. His disposition was
sweet, even if it were thoughtless, and he might not meet her with
reproaches after all. There might not be the cold greeting she had often
feared--"_Well, you've concluded to come back, have you_? _It was about
time_!" If only John were a little penitent, a little anxious to meet
her on some common ground, she felt her task would be an easier one.

"Have you got a pain, Mardie?" cried Sue, anxiously bending over her
mother.

"No, dear," she answered, smiling through her tears and stretching a
hand to both children to help her to her feet. "No, dear, I've lost
one!"

"I cry when anything aches, not when it stops," remarked Jack, as the
three started again on their walk. "Say, Sukey, you look bigger and
