Maggie tossed the jacket on Polly's bed, touched her hand lightly with
one of her own and left the room. She went quickly back to her own
pretty sitting-room, locked her door, threw herself on her knees by
her bureau and sobbed long and passionately.

During the few days which now remained before the end of the term no
one quite knew what was wrong with Miss Oliphant. She worked hard in
preparation for her lectures and when seen in public was always very
merry. But there was a certain hardness about her mirth which her best
friends detected and which caused Nancy Banister a good deal of
puzzled pain.

Priscilla was treated very kindly by Maggie; she still helped her
willingly with her Greek and even invited her into her room once or
twice. But all the little half-beginnings of confidence which, now and
then, used to burst from Maggie's lips, the allusions to old times,
the sentences which revealed deep thoughts and high aspirations, all
these, which made the essence of true friendship, vanished out of her
conversation.

Priscilla said to herself over and over that there was really no
difference-- that Miss Oliphant was still as kind to her, as valued a
friend as ever-- but in her heart she knew that this was not the case.

Maggie startled all her friends by making one request. Might they
postpone the acting of The Princess until the middle of the following
term?"

"I cannot do it justice now," she said. "I cannot throw my heart and
soul into my part. If you act the play now you must allow me to
withdraw."

The other girls, Constance Field in particular, were astonished. They
even felt resentful. All arrangements had been made for this special
play. Maggie was to be the Princess herself; no one could possibly
take her place. It was most unreasonable of her to withdraw now.

But it was one of the facts well known at St. Benet's that,
fascinating as Miss Oliphant was, she was also unreasonable. On
certain occasions she could even be disobliging. In short, when Maggie
"took the bit between her teeth," to employ an old metaphor, she could
neither be led nor driven. After a great deal of heated discussion and
indignant words, she had her will. The play was deferred till the
following term, and one or two slight comedies, which had been acted
before, were revived in a hurry to take its place.

  CHAPTER XXII

 A BLACK SATIN JACKET

VERY active preparations were being made in a certain rather humble
little cottage in the country for the heroine's return. Three small
girls were making themselves busy with holly and ivy, with badly cut
paper flowers, with enormous texts coarsely illustrated, to render the
home gay and festive in its greeting. A little worn old woman lay on a
sofa and superintended these active measures.

"How soon will she be here now?" said Hattie the vigorous.

"Do stay still, Hattie, and don't fidget. Don't you see how tired Aunt
Raby looks?" exclaimed Rose. "Prissie can't be here yet, and you are
such a worry when you jump up and down like that, Hattie."

Rose's words were quite severe, and Hattie planted herself on the edge
of a chair, folded her plump hands, managed to get a demure look into
her laughing eyes and dimpled mouth and sat motionless for about half
a minute. At the end of that time she tumbled on the floor with a loud
crash and Aunt Raby sprang to her feet with some alarm.

"Good gracious, child! are you hurt? What's the matter?"

Hattie was sitting on the floor in convulsions of mirth.

"I'm not hurt," she exclaimed. "I slipped off the chair. I didn't mean
to; I couldn't help it, really. I'm sorry I woke you, Aunt Raby."

"I wasn't asleep, child." Miss Peel walked across the room and
vanished into the kitchen, from which very savory smells issued.

Hattie and Rose began to quarrel and argue, and Katie, who was more or
less of a little peacemaker, suggested that they should draw up the
blind and all three get into the window to watch for Prissie.

"I wonder how she will look?" said Rose when they were all comfortably
established.

"I hope she won't talk in Latin," exclaimed Hattie.

"Oh, it is nice to think of seeing Prissie so soon," murmured Katie in
an ecstasy.

"I wonder," began Rose in her practical voice, "how soon Prissie will
begin to earn money. We want money even more than when she went away.
Aunt Raby isn't as well as she was then, and since the cows were
sold----"

"Hush!" said Hattie. "You know we promised we wouldn't tell Prissie
about the cows."

Just then a distant sound of wheels was heard. The little girls began
to jump and shout; a moment later and Priscilla stood in the midst of
her family. A great excitement followed her arrival. There were kisses
and hugs and wild, rapturous words from the affectionate little
sisters. Aunt Raby put her arms round Priscilla and gave her a solemn
sort of kiss, and then the whole party adjourned into the supper-room.

The feast which was spread was so dainty and abundant that Katie asked
in a puzzled sort of way if Aunt Raby considered Prissie like the
Prodigal Son.

"What fancies you have, child!" said Aunt Raby. "The Prodigal Son,
indeed! Thank Heaven, I've never had to do with that sort! As to
Priscilla here, she's as steady as Old Time. Well, child, and are you
getting up your learning very fast?"

"Pretty well, Aunt Raby."

"And you like your grand college and all those fine young-lady friends
of yours?"

"I haven't any fine young-lady friends."

"H'm! I dare say they are like other girls; a little bit of learning
and a great deal of dress, eh?"

Priscilla colored.

"There are all sorts of girls at St. Benet's," she said after a pause.
"Some are real students, earnest, devoted to their work."

"Have you earned any money yet, Prissie?" exclaimed Hattie. "For if
you have, I do want-- look----" She thrust a small foot, encased in a
broken shoe, prominently into view.

"Hattie, go to bed this minute!" exclaimed Aunt Raby. "Go up to your
room all three of you little girls. No more words-- off at once, all
of you. Prissie, you and I will go into the drawing-room, and I'll lie
on the sofa while you tell me a little of your college life."

"Aunt Raby always lies on the sofa in the evenings now," burst from
Hattie the irrepressible.

Miss Peel rushed after the plump little girl and pushed her out of the
room.

"To bed, all of you!" she exclaimed. "To bed and to sleep! Now,
Prissie, you are not to mind a word that child says. Come into the
drawing-room and let us have a few words quietly. Oh, yes, I'll lie on
the sofa, my dear, if you wish it. But Hattie is wrong; I don't do it
every night. I suffer no pain either, Prissie. Many a woman of my age
is racked with rheumatics."

The last words were said with a little gasp. The elder woman lay back
on the sofa with a sigh of relief. She turned her face so that the
light from the lamp should not reveal the deathly tired lines round
it.

Aunt Raby was dressed in a rough homespun garment. Her feet were clad
in unbleached cotton stockings, also made at home; her little,
iron-gray curls lay flat at each side of her hollow cheeks. She wore
list slippers, very coarse and common in texture. Her whole appearance
was the essence of the homely, the old-fashioned, even the ungainly.

Priscilla had seen elegance and beauty since she went away; she had
entered into the life of the cultivated, the intellectually great. In
spite of her deep affection for Aunt Raby, she came back to the
ugliness and the sordid surroundings of home with a pang which she
hated herself for feeling. She forgot Aunt Raby's sufferings for a
moment in her uncouthness. She longed to shower riches, refinement,
beauty upon her.

"How has your dress worn, Prissie?" said the elder woman after a
pause. "My sakes, child, you have got your best brown cashmere on! A
beautiful fine bit of cashmere it was, too. I bought it out of the
money I got for the lambs' wool."

Aunt Raby stretched out her hand, and, taking up a fold of the
cashmere, she rubbed it softly between her finger and thumb.

"It's as fine as velvet," she said, "and I put strong work into it,
too. It isn't a bit worn, is it, Prissie?"

"No, Aunt Raby, except just round the tail. I got it very wet one day
and the color went a trifle, but nothing to signify."

A vivid picture rose up before Priscilla's eyes as she spoke of Mrs.
Elliot-Smith's drawing-room, and the dainty, disdainful ladies in
their gay attire, and her own poor, little forlorn figure in her muddy
cashmere dress-- the same dress Aunt Raby considered soft and
beautiful as velvet.

"Oh, Aunt Raby," she said with sudden impulse, "a great many things
have happened to me since I went away. On the whole I have had a very
good time."

Aunt Raby opened her mouth to emit a prodigious yawn.

"I don't know how it is," she said, "but I'm a bit drowsy to-night. I
suppose it's the weather. The day was quite a muggy one. I'll hear
your news another time, Priscilla; but don't you be turned with the
vanities of the world, Priscilla. Life's but a passing day: you mind
that when you're young, and it won't come on you as a shock when you
are old. I'm glad the cashmere has worn well-- aye, that I am,
Prissie. But don't put it on in the morning, my love, for it's a sin
to wear through beautiful fine stuff like that. And, even if the color
is gone a bit round the hem, the stuff itself isn't worn, and looks
don't signify. You'll have to make up your mind to wear the cashmere
for best again next term, Prissie, for, though I'm not pinched in any
way, I'm not overflush either, my love."

Priscilla, who had been sitting in a low chair near her aunt, now rose
to her feet.

"Ought we not to come to bed?" she said. "If you don't feel tired, you
look it, Aunt Raby. Come upstairs, do, and let me help you to take
your things off and put you into bed. Come, Aunt Raby, it will be like
old times to help you, you know."

The girl knelt by the old woman, took one of her withered hands,
raised it suddenly to her lips and kissed it. Aunt Raby's face was
still turned from the light.

"Don't you keep kneeling on your cashmere," she said. "You'll crease
it awfully, and I don't see my way to another best dress this term."

"You needn't, Aunt Raby," said Priscilla in a steady voice. "The
cashmere is quite neat still. I can manage well with it."

Aunt Raby rose slowly and feebly from the sofa.

"You may help me to get into bed if you like," she said. "The muggy
day has made me wonderfully drowsy, and I'll be glad to lie down. It's
only that. I'll be as pert as a cricket in the morning."

The old woman leaned on the girl's strong, young arm and stumbled a
bit as she went up the narrow stairs.

When they entered the tiny bedroom Aunt Raby spoke again:

"Your dress will do, but I have been fretting about your winter
jacket, Prissie. There's my best one, though-- you know, the quilted
satin which my mother left me; it's loose and full, and you shall have
it."

"But you want it to go to church in yourself, Aunt Raby."

"I don't often go to church lately, child. I take a power of comfort
lying on the sofa, reading my Bible, and Mr. Hayes doesn't see
anything contrary to Scripture in it, for I asked him. Yes, you shall
have my quilted satin jacket to take back to college with you,
Prissie, and then you'll be set up fine."

Priscilla bent forward and kissed Aunt Raby. She made no other
response, but that night before she went to sleep she saw distinctly a
vision of herself. Prissie was as little vain as a girl could be, but
the vision of her own figure in Aunt Raby's black satin quilted jacket
was not a particularly inspiriting one. The jacket, full in the
skirts, long in the shoulders, wide in the sleeves and enormous round
the neck, would scarcely bear comparison with the neat, tight-fitting
garments which the other girl graduates of St. Benet's were wont to
patronize. Prissie felt glad she was not attired in it that
unfortunate day when she sat in Mrs. Elliot-Smith's drawing-room; and
yet-- and yet-- she knew that the poor, quaint, old-world jacket meant
love and self-renunciation.

"Dear Aunt Raby!" whispered the girl.

Tears lay heavily on her eyelashes as she dropped asleep, with one arm
thrown protectingly round her little sister Katie.

  CHAPTER XXIII

 THE FASHION OF THE DAY

A THICK mist lay over everything. Christmas had come and gone, and
Priscilla's trunk was packed once more-- Aunt Raby's old-world jacket
between folds of tissue-paper, lying on the top of other homely
garments.

The little sisters were in bed and asleep and Aunt Raby lay on the
sofa. Prissie was accustomed to her face now, so she did not turn it
away from the light. The white lips, the chalky gray tint under the
eyes, the deep furrows round the sunken temples were all familiar to
the younger "Miss Peel." She had fitted once more into the old sordid
life. She saw Hattie in her slipshod feet and Katie and Rose in their
thin winter jackets, which did not half keep out the cold. She saw and
partook of the scanty meals and tried to keep warm by the wretched
fires. Once more she was part and parcel of the household. The
children were so accustomed to her that they forgot she was going away
again.

To-night, however, the fact was brought back to her. Katie cried when
she saw the packed trunk. Hattie pouted and flopped herself about and
became unmanageable. Rose put on her most discontented manner and
voice, and finding that Prissie had earned no money during the past
term, gave utterance to skeptical thoughts.

"Prissie just went away to have a good time, and she never meant to
earn money, and she forgot all about them," grumbled the naughty
little girl.

Hattie came up and pummeled Rose for her bad words. Katie cried
afresh, and altogether the scene was most dismal.

Now, however, it was over. The children were in the land of happy
dreams. They were eating their Christmas dinner over again and looking
with ecstasy at their tiny, tiny Christmas gifts and listening once
more to Prissie, who had a low, sweet voice and who was singing to
them the old and beloved words:

                     "Peace and goodwill to men."

 The children were happy in their dreams, and Prissie was standing by
