Faith's lip quivered.

"Then I might as well go home again," she said miserably.

"I suppose so--unless you think you could bring yourself to talk it over
with me instead," said Miss Rosemary gently. "It IS such a help to talk
things over. _I_ know. I don't suppose I can be as good at understanding
as Mrs. Blythe--but I promise you that I won't laugh."

"You wouldn't laugh outside," hesitated Faith. "But you might--inside."

"No, I wouldn't laugh inside, either. Why should I? Something has hurt
you--it never amuses me to see anybody hurt, no matter what hurts them.
If you feel that you'd like to tell me what has hurt you I'll be glad to
listen. But if you think you'd rather not--that's all right, too, dear."

Faith took another long, earnest look into Miss West's eyes. They were
very serious--there was no laughter in them, not even far, far back.
With a little sigh she sat down on the old pine beside her new friend
and told her all about Adam and his cruel fate.

Rosemary did not laugh or feel like laughing. She understood and
sympathized--really, she was almost as good as Mrs. Blythe--yes, quite
as good.

"Mr. Perry is a minister, but he should have been a BUTCHER," said Faith
bitterly. "He is so fond of carving things up. He ENJOYED cutting
poor Adam to pieces. He just sliced into him as if he were any common
rooster."

"Between you and me, Faith, _I_ don't like Mr. Perry very well myself,"
said Rosemary, laughing a little--but at Mr. Perry, not at Adam, as
Faith clearly understood. "I never did like him. I went to school with
him--he was a Glen boy, you know--and he was a most detestable little
prig even then. Oh, how we girls used to hate holding his fat, clammy
hands in the ring-around games. But we must remember, dear, that he
didn't know that Adam had been a pet of yours. He thought he WAS just a
common rooster. We must be just, even when we are terribly hurt."

"I suppose so," admitted Faith. "But why does everybody seem to think it
funny that I should have loved Adam so much, Miss West? If it had been a
horrid old cat nobody would have thought it queer. When Lottie Warren's
kitten had its legs cut off by the binder everybody was sorry for her.
She cried two days in school and nobody laughed at her, not even Dan
Reese. And all her chums went to the kitten's funeral and helped her
bury it--only they couldn't bury its poor little paws with it, because
they couldn't find them. It was a horrid thing to have happen, of
course, but I don't think it was as dreadful as seeing your pet EATEN
UP. Yet everybody laughs at ME."

"I think it is because the name 'rooster' seems rather a funny one,"
said Rosemary gravely. "There IS something in it that is comical. Now,
'chicken' is different. It doesn't sound so funny to talk of loving a
chicken."

"Adam was the dearest little chicken, Miss West. He was just a little
golden ball. He would run up to me and peck out of my hand. And he was
handsome when he grew up, too--white as snow, with such a beautiful
curving white tail, though Mary Vance said it was too short. He knew
his name and always came when I called him--he was a very intelligent
rooster. And Aunt Martha had no right to kill him. He was mine. It
wasn't fair, was it, Miss West?"

"No, it wasn't," said Rosemary decidedly. "Not a bit fair. I remember
I had a pet hen when I was a little girl. She was such a pretty little
thing--all golden brown and speckly. I loved her as much as I ever loved
any pet. She was never killed--she died of old age. Mother wouldn't have
her killed because she was my pet."

"If MY mother had been living she wouldn't have let Adam be killed,"
said Faith. "For that matter, father wouldn't have either, if he'd been
home and known of it. I'm SURE he wouldn't, Miss West."

"I'm sure, too," said Rosemary. There was a little added flush on her
face. She looked rather conscious but Faith noticed nothing.

"Was it VERY wicked of me not to tell Mr. Perry his coat-tails were
scorching?" she asked anxiously.

"Oh, terribly wicked," answered Rosemary, with dancing eyes. "But _I_
would have been just as naughty, Faith--_I_ wouldn't have told him they
were scorching--and I don't believe I would ever have been a bit sorry
for my wickedness, either."

"Una thought I should have told him because he was a minister."

"Dearest, if a minister doesn't behave as a gentleman we are not bound
to respect his coat-tails. I know _I_ would just have loved to see Jimmy
Perry's coat-tails burning up. It must have been fun."

Both laughed; but Faith ended with a bitter little sigh.

"Well, anyway, Adam is dead and I am NEVER going to love anything
again."

"Don't say that, dear. We miss so much out of life if we don't love. The
more we love the richer life is--even if it is only some little furry or
feathery pet. Would you like a canary, Faith--a little golden bit of a
canary? If you would I'll give you one. We have two up home."

"Oh, I WOULD like that," cried Faith. "I love birds. Only--would Aunt
Martha's cat eat it? It's so TRAGIC to have your pets eaten. I don't
think I could endure it a second time."

"If you hang the cage far enough from the wall I don't think the cat
could harm it. I'll tell you just how to take care of it and I'll bring
it to Ingleside for you the next time I come down."

To herself, Rosemary was thinking,

"It will give every gossip in the Glen something to talk of, but I WILL
not care. I want to comfort this poor little heart."

Faith was comforted. Sympathy and understanding were very sweet. She and
Miss Rosemary sat on the old pine until the twilight crept softly down
over the white valley and the evening star shone over the gray maple
grove. Faith told Rosemary all her small history and hopes, her likes
and dislikes, the ins and outs of life at the manse, the ups and downs
of school society. Finally they parted firm friends.

Mr. Meredith was, as usual, lost in dreams when supper began that
evening, but presently a name pierced his abstraction and brought him
back to reality. Faith was telling Una of her meeting with Rosemary.

"She is just lovely, I think," said Faith. "Just as nice as Mrs.
Blythe--but different. I felt as if I wanted to hug her. She did hug
ME--such a nice, velvety hug. And she called me 'dearest.' It THRILLED
me. I could tell her ANYTHING."

"So you liked Miss West, Faith?" Mr. Meredith asked, with a rather odd
intonation.

"I love her," cried Faith.

"Ah!" said Mr. Meredith. "Ah!"



CHAPTER XXI. THE IMPOSSIBLE WORD

John Meredith walked meditatively through the clear crispness of a
winter night in Rainbow Valley. The hills beyond glistened with the
chill splendid lustre of moonlight on snow. Every little fir tree in the
long valley sang its own wild song to the harp of wind and frost. His
children and the Blythe lads and lasses were coasting down the eastern
slope and whizzing over the glassy pond. They were having a glorious
time and their gay voices and gayer laughter echoed up and down the
valley, dying away in elfin cadences among the trees. On the right the
lights of Ingleside gleamed through the maple grove with the genial lure
and invitation which seems always to glow in the beacons of a home where
we know there is love and good-cheer and a welcome for all kin, whether
of flesh or spirit. Mr. Meredith liked very well on occasion to spend an
evening arguing with the doctor by the drift wood fire, where the famous
china dogs of Ingleside kept ceaseless watch and ward, as became deities
of the hearth, but to-night he did not look that way. Far on the western
hill gleamed a paler but more alluring star. Mr. Meredith was on his way
to see Rosemary West, and he meant to tell her something which had been
slowly blossoming in his heart since their first meeting and had sprung
into full flower on the evening when Faith had so warmly voiced her
admiration for Rosemary.

He had come to realize that he had learned to care for Rosemary. Not as
he had cared for Cecilia, of course. THAT was entirely different. That
love of romance and dream and glamour could never, he thought, return.
But Rosemary was beautiful and sweet and dear--very dear. She was the
best of companions. He was happier in her company than he had ever
expected to be again. She would be an ideal mistress for his home, a
good mother to his children.

During the years of his widowhood Mr. Meredith had received innumerable
hints from brother members of Presbytery and from many parishioners who
could not be suspected of any ulterior motive, as well as from some
who could, that he ought to marry again: But these hints never made any
impression on him. It was commonly thought he was never aware of them.
But he was quite acutely aware of them. And in his own occasional
visitations of common sense he knew that the common sensible thing for
him to do was to marry. But common sense was not the strong point of
John Meredith, and to choose out, deliberately and cold-bloodedly,
some "suitable" woman, as one might choose a housekeeper or a business
partner, was something he was quite incapable of doing. How he hated
that word "suitable." It reminded him so strongly of James Perry. "A
SUIT able woman of SUIT able age," that unctuous brother of the cloth
had said, in his far from subtle hint. For the moment John Meredith
had had a perfectly unbelievable desire to rush madly away and propose
marriage to the youngest, most unsuitable woman it was possible to
discover.

Mrs. Marshall Elliott was his good friend and he liked her. But when she
had bluntly told him he should marry again he felt as if she had torn
away the veil that hung before some sacred shrine of his innermost life,
and he had been more or less afraid of her ever since. He knew there
were women in his congregation "of suitable age" who would marry him
quite readily. That fact had seeped through all his abstraction very
early in his ministry in Glen St. Mary. They were good, substantial,
uninteresting women, one or two fairly comely, the others not exactly so
and John Meredith would as soon have thought of marrying any one of them
as of hanging himself. He had some ideals to which no seeming necessity
could make him false. He could ask no woman to fill Cecilia's place in
his home unless he could offer her at least some of the affection and
homage he had given to his girlish bride. And where, in his limited
feminine acquaintance, was such a woman to be found?

Rosemary West had come into his life on that autumn evening bringing
with her an atmosphere in which his spirit recognized native air. Across
the gulf of strangerhood they clasped hands of friendship. He knew her
better in that ten minutes by the hidden spring than he knew Emmeline
Drew or Elizabeth Kirk or Amy Annetta Douglas in a year, or could know
them, in a century. He had fled to her for comfort when Mrs. Alec Davis
had outraged his mind and soul and had found it. Since then he had gone
often to the house on the hill, slipping through the shadowy paths of
night in Rainbow Valley so astutely that Glen gossip could never be
absolutely certain that he DID go to see Rosemary West. Once or twice he
had been caught in the West living room by other visitors; that was all
the Ladies' Aid had to go by. But when Elizabeth Kirk heard it she put
away a secret hope she had allowed herself to cherish, without a change
of expression on her kind plain face, and Emmeline Drew resolved that
the next time she saw a certain old bachelor of Lowbridge she would not
snub him as she had done at a previous meeting. Of course, if Rosemary
West was out to catch the minister she would catch him; she looked
younger than she was and MEN thought her pretty; besides, the West girls
had money!

"It is to be hoped that he won't be so absent-minded as to propose to
Ellen by mistake," was the only malicious thing she allowed herself
to say to a sympathetic sister Drew. Emmeline bore no further grudge
towards Rosemary. When all was said and done, an unencumbered bachelor
was far better than a widower with four children. It had been only the
glamour of the manse that had temporarily blinded Emmeline's eyes to the
better part.

A sled with three shrieking occupants sped past Mr. Meredith to the
pond. Faith's long curls streamed in the wind and her laughter rang
above that of the others. John Meredith looked after them kindly
and longingly. He was glad that his children had such chums as the
Blythes--glad that they had so wise and gay and tender a friend as Mrs.
Blythe. But they needed something more, and that something would be
supplied when he brought Rosemary West as a bride to the old manse.
There was in her a quality essentially maternal.

It was Saturday night and he did not often go calling on Saturday night,
which was supposed to be dedicated to a thoughtful revision of Sunday's
sermon. But he had chosen this night because he had learned that Ellen
West was going to be away and Rosemary would be alone. Often as he had
spent pleasant evenings in the house on the hill he had never, since
that first meeting at the spring, seen Rosemary alone. Ellen had always
been there.

He did not precisely object to Ellen being there. He liked Ellen
West very much and they were the best of friends. Ellen had an almost
masculine understanding and a sense of humour which his own shy, hidden
appreciation of fun found very agreeable. He liked her interest in
politics and world events. There was no man in the Glen, not even
excepting Dr. Blythe, who had a better grasp of such things.

"I think it is just as well to be interested in things as long as you
live," she had said. "If you're not, it doesn't seem to me that there's
much difference between the quick and the dead."

He liked her pleasant, deep, rumbly voice; he liked the hearty laugh
with which she always ended up some jolly and well-told story. She never
gave him digs about his children as other Glen women did; she never
bored him with local gossip; she had no malice and no pettiness. She
was always splendidly sincere. Mr. Meredith, who had picked up Miss
Cornelia's way of classifying people, considered that Ellen belonged to
the race of Joseph. Altogether, an admirable woman for a sister-in-law.
Nevertheless, a man did not want even the most admirable of women around
when he was proposing to another woman. And Ellen was always around. She
did not insist on talking to Mr. Meredith herself all the time. She let
Rosemary have a fair share of him. Many evenings, indeed, Ellen effaced
herself almost totally, sitting back in the corner with St. George in
her lap, and letting Mr. Meredith and Rosemary talk and sing and read
books together. Sometimes they quite forgot her presence. But if their
conversation or choice of duets ever betrayed the least tendency to what
Ellen considered philandering, Ellen promptly nipped that tendency in
the bud and blotted Rosemary out for the rest of the evening. But not
even the grimmest of amiable dragons can altogether prevent a certain
subtle language of eye and smile and eloquent silence; and so the
minister's courtship progressed after a fashion.

But if it was ever to reach a climax that climax must come when Ellen
was away. And Ellen was so seldom away, especially in winter. She found
her own fireside the pleasantest place in the world, she vowed. Gadding
had no attraction for her. She was fond of company but she wanted it at
home. Mr. Meredith had almost been driven to the conclusion that he must
write to Rosemary what he wanted to say, when Ellen casually announced
one evening that she was going to a silver wedding next Saturday night.
She had been bridesmaid when the principals were married. Only old
guests were invited, so Rosemary was not included. Mr. Meredith pricked
up his ears a trifle and a gleam flashed into his dreamy dark eyes.
Both Ellen and Rosemary saw it; and both Ellen and Rosemary felt, with a
tingling shock, that Mr. Meredith would certainly come up the hill next
Saturday night.

"Might as well have it over with, St. George," Ellen sternly told the
black cat, after Mr. Meredith had gone home and Rosemary had silently
gone upstairs. "He means to ask her, St. George--I'm perfectly sure of
that. So he might as well have his chance to do it and find out he can't
get her, George. She'd rather like to take him, Saint. I know that--but
she promised, and she's got to keep her promise. I'm rather sorry in
some ways, St. George. I don't know of a man I'd sooner have for a
brother-in-law if a brother-in-law was convenient. I haven't a thing
against him, Saint--not a thing except that he won't see and can't be
made to see that the Kaiser is a menace to the peace of Europe. That's
HIS blind spot. But he's good company and I like him. A woman can say
anything she likes to a man with a mouth like John Meredith's and
be sure of not being misunderstood. Such a man is more precious than
rubies, Saint--and much rarer, George. But he can't have Rosemary--and
I suppose when he finds out he can't have her he'll drop us both. And
