wondered where the descendants of the schoolmaster were living.  I knew
there was none on the Island.  Alice--Alice--the first baby ever born
in that little house.  No baby ever brought more joy!  I've dandled her
a hundred times.  It was from my knee she took her first steps alone.
Can't I see her mother's face watching her--and it was near sixty years
ago.  Is she living yet?"

"No, she died when I was only a boy."

"Oh, it doesn't seem right that I should be living to hear that,"
sighed Captain Jim.  "But I'm heart-glad to see you.  It's brought back
my youth for a little while.  You don't know yet what a boon THAT is.
Mistress Blythe here has the trick--she does it quite often for me."

Captain Jim was still more excited when he discovered that Owen Ford
was what he called a "real writing man."  He gazed at him as at a
superior being.  Captain Jim knew that Anne wrote, but he had never
taken that fact very seriously.  Captain Jim thought women were
delightful creatures, who ought to have the vote, and everything else
they wanted, bless their hearts; but he did not believe they could
write.

"Jest look at A Mad Love," he would protest.  "A woman wrote that and
jest look at it--one hundred and three chapters when it could all have
been told in ten.  A writing woman never knows when to stop; that's the
trouble.  The p'int of good writing is to know when to stop."

"Mr. Ford wants to hear some of your stories, Captain Jim" said Anne.
"Tell him the one about the captain who went crazy and imagined he was
the Flying Dutchman."

This was Captain Jim's best story.  It was a compound of horror and
humor, and though Anne had heard it several times she laughed as
heartily and shivered as fearsomely over it as Mr. Ford did.  Other
tales followed, for Captain Jim had an audience after his own heart.
He told how his vessel had been run down by a steamer; how he had been
boarded by Malay pirates; how his ship had caught fire; how he helped a
political prisoner escape from a South African republic; how he had
been wrecked one fall on the Magdalens and stranded there for the
winter; how a tiger had broken loose on board ship; how his crew had
mutinied and marooned him on a barren island--these and many other
tales, tragic or humorous or grotesque, did Captain Jim relate.  The
mystery of the sea, the fascination of far lands, the lure of
adventure, the laughter of the world--his hearers felt and realised
them all.  Owen Ford listened, with his head on his hand, and the First
Mate purring on his knee, his brilliant eyes fastened on Captain Jim's
rugged, eloquent face.

"Won't you let Mr. Ford see your life-book, Captain Jim?" asked Anne,
when Captain Jim finally declared that yarn-spinning must end for the
time.

"Oh, he don't want to be bothered with THAT," protested Captain Jim,
who was secretly dying to show it.

"I should like nothing better than to see it, Captain Boyd," said Owen.
"If it is half as wonderful as your tales it will be worth seeing."

With pretended reluctance Captain Jim dug his life-book out of his old
chest and handed it to Owen.

"I reckon you won't care to wrastle long with my old hand o' write.  I
never had much schooling," he observed carelessly.  "Just wrote that
there to amuse my nephew Joe.  He's always wanting stories.  Comes here
yesterday and says to me, reproachful-like, as I was lifting a
twenty-pound codfish out of my boat, 'Uncle Jim, ain't a codfish a dumb
animal?'  I'd been a-telling him, you see, that he must be real kind to
dumb animals, and never hurt 'em in any way.  I got out of the scrape
by saying a codfish was dumb enough but it wasn't an animal, but Joe
didn't look satisfied, and I wasn't satisfied myself.  You've got to be
mighty careful what you tell them little critters.  THEY can see
through you."

While talking, Captain Jim watched Owen Ford from the corner of his eye
as the latter examined the life-book; and presently observing that his
guest was lost in its pages, he turned smilingly to his cupboard and
proceeded to make a pot of tea.  Owen Ford separated himself from the
life-book, with as much reluctance as a miser wrenches himself from his
gold, long enough to drink his tea, and then returned to it hungrily.

"Oh, you can take that thing home with you if you want to," said
Captain Jim, as if the "thing" were not his most treasured possession.
"I must go down and pull my boat up a bit on the skids.  There's a wind
coming.  Did you notice the sky tonight?

    Mackerel skies and mares' tails
    Make tall ships carry short sails."

Owen Ford accepted the offer of the life-book gladly.  On their way
home Anne told him the story of lost Margaret.

"That old captain is a wonderful old fellow," he said.  "What a life he
has led!  Why, the man had more adventures in one week of his life than
most of us have in a lifetime.  Do you really think his tales are all
true?"

"I certainly do.  I am sure Captain Jim could not tell a lie; and
besides, all the people about here say that everything happened as he
relates it.  There used to be plenty of his old shipmates alive to
corroborate him.  He's one of the last of the old type of P.E. Island
sea-captains.  They are almost extinct now."



CHAPTER 25

THE WRITING OF THE BOOK

Owen Ford came over to the little house the next morning in a state of
great excitement.  "Mrs. Blythe, this is a wonderful book--absolutely
wonderful.  If I could take it and use the material for a book I feel
certain I could make the novel of the year out of it.  Do you suppose
Captain Jim would let me do it?"

"Let you!  I'm sure he would be delighted," cried Anne.  "I admit that
it was what was in my head when I took you down last night.  Captain
Jim has always been wishing he could get somebody to write his
life-book properly for him."

"Will you go down to the Point with me this evening, Mrs. Blythe?  I'll
ask him about that life-book myself, but I want you to tell him that
you told me the story of lost Margaret and ask him if he will let me
use it as a thread of romance with which to weave the stories of the
life-book into a harmonious whole."

Captain Jim was more excited than ever when Owen Ford told him of his
plan.  At last his cherished dream was to be realized and his
"life-book" given to the world.  He was also pleased that the story of
lost Margaret should be woven into it.

"It will keep her name from being forgotten," he said wistfully.

"That's why I want it put in."

"We'll collaborate," cried Owen delightedly.  "You will give the soul
and I the body.  Oh, we'll write a famous book between us, Captain Jim.
And we'll get right to work."

"And to think my book is to be writ by the schoolmaster's grandson!"
exclaimed Captain Jim.  "Lad, your grandfather was my dearest friend.
I thought there was nobody like him.  I see now why I had to wait so
long.  It couldn't be writ till the right man come.  You BELONG
here--you've got the soul of this old north shore in you--you're the
only one who COULD write it."

It was arranged that the tiny room off the living room at the
lighthouse should be given over to Owen for a workshop.  It was
necessary that Captain Jim should be near him as he wrote, for
consultation upon many matters of sea-faring and gulf lore of which
Owen was quite ignorant.

He began work on the book the very next morning, and flung himself into
it heart and soul.  As for Captain Jim, he was a happy man that summer.
He looked upon the little room where Owen worked as a sacred shrine.
Owen talked everything over with Captain Jim, but he would not let him
see the manuscript.

"You must wait until it is published," he said.  "Then you'll get it
all at once in its best shape."

He delved into the treasures of the life-book and used them freely.  He
dreamed and brooded over lost Margaret until she became a vivid reality
to him and lived in his pages.  As the book progressed it took
possession of him and he worked at it with feverish eagerness.  He let
Anne and Leslie read the manuscript and criticise it; and the
concluding chapter of the book, which the critics, later on, were
pleased to call idyllic, was modelled upon a suggestion of Leslie's.

Anne fairly hugged herself with delight over the success of her idea.

"I knew when I looked at Owen Ford that he was the very man for it,"
she told Gilbert.  "Both humor and passion were in his face, and that,
together with the art of expression, was just what was necessary for
the writing of such a book.  As Mrs. Rachel would say, he was
predestined for the part."

Owen Ford wrote in the mornings.  The afternoons were generally spent
in some merry outing with the Blythes.  Leslie often went, too, for
Captain Jim took charge of Dick frequently, in order to set her free.
They went boating on the harbor and up the three pretty rivers that
flowed into it; they had clambakes on the bar and mussel-bakes on the
rocks; they picked strawberries on the sand-dunes; they went out
cod-fishing with Captain Jim; they shot plover in the shore fields and
wild ducks in the cove--at least, the men did.  In the evenings they
rambled in the low-lying, daisied, shore fields under a golden moon, or
they sat in the living room at the little house where often the
coolness of the sea breeze justified a driftwood fire, and talked of
the thousand and one things which happy, eager, clever young people can
find to talk about.

Ever since the day on which she had made her confession to Anne Leslie
had been a changed creature.  There was no trace of her old coldness
and reserve, no shadow of her old bitterness.  The girlhood of which
she had been cheated seemed to come back to her with the ripeness of
womanhood; she expanded like a flower of flame and perfume; no laugh
was readier than hers, no wit quicker, in the twilight circles of that
enchanted summer.  When she could not be with them all felt that some
exquisite savor was lacking in their intercourse.  Her beauty was
illumined by the awakened soul within, as some rosy lamp might shine
through a flawless vase of alabaster.  There were hours when Anne's
eyes seemed to ache with the splendor of her.  As for Owen Ford, the
"Margaret" of his book, although she had the soft brown hair and elfin
face of the real girl who had vanished so long ago, "pillowed where
lost Atlantis sleeps," had the personality of Leslie Moore, as it was
revealed to him in those halcyon days at Four Winds Harbor.

All in all, it was a never-to-be-forgotten summer--one of those summers
which come seldom into any life, but leave a rich heritage of beautiful
memories in their going--one of those summers which, in a fortunate
combination of delightful weather, delightful friends and delightful
doings, come as near to perfection as anything can come in this world.

"Too good to last," Anne told herself with a little sigh, on the
September day when a certain nip in the wind and a certain shade of
intense blue on the gulf water said that autumn was hard by.

That evening Owen Ford told them that he had finished his book and that
his vacation must come to an end.

"I have a good deal to do to it yet--revising and pruning and so
forth," he said, "but in the main it's done.  I wrote the last sentence
this morning.  If I can find a publisher for it it will probably be out
next summer or fall."

Owen had not much doubt that he would find a publisher.  He knew that
he had written a great book--a book that would score a wonderful
success--a book that would LIVE.  He knew that it would bring him both
fame and fortune; but when he had written the last line of it he had
bowed his head on the manuscript and so sat for a long time.  And his
thoughts were not of the good work he had done.



CHAPTER 26

OWEN FORD'S CONFESSION

"I'm so sorry Gilbert is away," said Anne.  "He had to go--Allan Lyons
at the Glen has met with a serious accident.  He will not likely be
home till very late.  But he told me to tell you he'd be up and over
early enough in the morning to see you before you left.  It's too
provoking.  Susan and I had planned such a nice little jamboree for
your last night here."

She was sitting beside the garden brook on the little rustic seat
Gilbert had built.  Owen Ford stood before her, leaning against the
bronze column of a yellow birch.  He was very pale and his face bore
the marks of the preceding sleepless night.  Anne, glancing up at him,
wondered if, after all, his summer had brought him the strength it
should.  Had he worked too hard over his book?  She remembered that for
a week he had not been looking well.

"I'm rather glad the doctor is away," said Owen slowly.  "I wanted to
see you alone, Mrs. Blythe.  There is something I must tell somebody,
or I think it will drive me mad.  I've been trying for a week to look
it in the face--and I can't.  I know I can trust you--and, besides, you
will understand.  A woman with eyes like yours always understands.  You
are one of the folks people instinctively tell things to.  Mrs. Blythe,
I love Leslie.  LOVE her!  That seems too weak a word!"

His voice suddenly broke with the suppressed passion of his utterance.
He turned his head away and hid his face on his arm.  His whole form
shook.  Anne sat looking at him, pale and aghast.  She had never
thought of this!  And yet--how was it she had never thought of it?  It
now seemed a natural and inevitable thing.  She wondered at her own
blindness.  But--but--things like this did not happen in Four Winds.
Elsewhere in the world human passions might set at defiance human
conventions and laws--but not HERE, surely.  Leslie had kept summer
boarders off and on for ten years, and nothing like this had happened.
But perhaps they had not been like Owen Ford; and the vivid, LIVING
Leslie of this summer was not the cold, sullen girl of other years.
Oh, SOMEBODY should have thought of this!  Why hadn't Miss Cornelia
thought of it?  Miss Cornelia was always ready enough to sound the
alarm where men were concerned. Anne felt an unreasonable resentment
against Miss Cornelia.  Then she gave a little inward groan.  No matter
who was to blame the mischief was done.  And Leslie--what of Leslie?
It was for Leslie Anne felt most concerned.

"Does Leslie know this, Mr. Ford?" she asked quietly.

"No--no,--unless she has guessed it.  You surely don't think I'd be cad
and scoundrel enough to tell her, Mrs. Blythe.  I couldn't help loving
her--that's all--and my misery is greater than I can bear."

"Does SHE care?" asked Anne.  The moment the question crossed her lips
she felt that she should not have asked it.  Owen Ford answered it with
overeager protest.

"No--no, of course not.  But I could make her care if she were free--I
know I could."

"She does care--and he knows it," thought Anne.  Aloud she said,
sympathetically but decidedly:

"But she is not free, Mr. Ford.  And the only thing you can do is to go
away in silence and leave her to her own life."

"I know--I know," groaned Owen.  He sat down on the grassy bank and
stared moodily into the amber water beneath him.  "I know there's
nothing to do--nothing but to say conventionally, 'Good-bye, Mrs.
Moore.  Thank you for all your kindness to me this summer,' just as I
would have said it to the sonsy, bustling, keen-eyed housewife I
expected her to be when I came.  Then I'll pay my board money like any
honest boarder and go!  Oh, it's very simple.  No doubt--no
perplexity--a straight road to the end of the world!

"And I'll walk it--you needn't fear that I won't, Mrs. Blythe.  But it
would be easier to walk over red-hot ploughshares."

