disposed to treat him with such friendly familiarity.

"Are you going to stay long in Detroit?" asked the farmer.

"Two or three days. I shall be extremely busy, but I shall find
time to attend to your business. In fact, I feel an interest in you,
my friend, and shall be glad to do you a service."

"You are very kind, and I'm obleeged to you," said the farmer
gratefully.

"Now, if you will excuse me for a few minutes, I will go into the
smoking-car and have a smoke."

When he had left the car, Luke immediately left his seat, and went
forward to where the farmer was sitting.

"Excuse me," he said, "but I saw you talking to a young man
just now."

"Yes," answered the farmer complacently, "he's a relative of
President Madison."

"I want to warn you against him. I know him to be a swindler."

"What!" exclaimed the farmer, eying Luke suspiciously. "Who be you?
You're nothing but a boy."

"That is true, but I am traveling on business. This Mr. Coleman
tried to rob me about a fortnight since, and nearly succeeded. I
heard him talking to you about money."

"Yes, he was going to help me invest some money I have with me. He
said he could get me ten per cent."

"Take my advice, and put it in a savings-bank. Then it will be
safe. No man who offers to pay ten per cent. for money can be
relied upon."

"Perhaps you want to rob me yourself?" said the farmer suspiciously.

"Do I look like it?" asked Luke, smiling. "Isn't my advice good, to
put the money in a savings-bank? But I will tell you how I fell in
with Mr. Coleman, and how he tried to swindle me, and then you can
judge for yourself."

This Luke did briefly and his tone and manner carried conviction.
The farmer became extremely indignant at the intended fraud,
and promised to have nothing to do with Coleman.

"I will take my old seat, then," said Luke. "I don't want Coleman to
know who warned you."

Presently, Coleman came back and was about to resume his seat beside
the farmer.

"You see I have come back," he said.

"You needn't have troubled yourself," said the farmer, with a
lowering frown. "You nearly took me in with your smooth words,
but I've got my money yet, and I mean to keep it. Your friend can't
have it."

"What does all this mean, my friend?" asked Coleman, in real
amazement. "Is it possible you distrust me? Why, I was going to
put myself to inconvenience to do you a service."

"Then you needn't. I know you. You wanted to swindle me out of
my two hundred and fifty dollars."

"Sir, you insult me!" exclaimed Coleman, with lofty indignation.
"What do I--a rich man--want of your paltry two hundred and
fifty dollars?"

"I don't believe you are a rich man. Didn't I tell you, I have
been warned against you?"

"Who dared to talk against me?" asked Coleman indignantly. Then,
casting his eyes about, he noticed Luke for the first time. Now it
was all clear to him.

Striding up to Luke's seat, he said threateningly, "Have you been
talking against me, you young jackanapes?"

"Yes, Mr. Coleman, I have," answered Luke steadily. "I thought it
my duty to inform this man of your character. I have advised him to
put his money into a savings-bank."

"Curse you for an impertinent meddler!" said Coleman wrathfully.
"I'll get even with you for this!"

"You can do as you please," said Luke calmly.

Coleman went up to the farmer and said, abruptly, "You've been
imposed upon by an unprincipled boy. He's been telling you lies
about me."

"He has given me good advice," said the farmer sturdily, "and I
shall follow it."

"You are making a fool of yourself!"

"That is better than to be made fool of, and lose my money."

Coleman saw that the game was lost, and left the car. He would
gladly have assaulted Luke, but knew that it would only get him
into trouble.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

LUKE'S RETURN


Mr. Armstrong was sitting in his office one morning when the door
opened, and Luke entered, his face flushed with health, and his
cheeks browned by exposure.

"You see I've got back, Mr. Armstrong," he said, advancing with a
smile.

"Welcome home, Luke!" exclaimed the merchant heartily, grasping our
hero's hand cordially.

"I hope you are satisfied with me," said Luke.

"Satisfied! I ought to be. You have done yourself the greatest
credit. It is seldom a boy of your age exhibits such good
judgment and discretion."

"Thank you, sir," said Luke gratefully. "I was obliged to spend a
good deal of money," he added, "and I have arrived in New York
with only three dollars and seventy-five cents in my pocket."

"I have no fault to find with your expenses," said Mr. Armstrong
promptly. "Nor would I have complained if you had spent twice as
much. The main thing was to succeed, and you have succeeded."

"I am glad to hear you speak so," said Luke, relieved. "To me it
seemed a great deal of money. You gave me two hundred dollars, and
I have less than five dollars left. Here it is!" and Luke drew the
sum from his pocket, and tendered it to the merchant.

"I can't take it," said Mr. Armstrong. "You don't owe me any money.
It is I who am owing you. Take this on account," and he drew a
roll of bills from his pocketbook and handed it to Luke. "Here are
a hundred dollars on account," he continued.

"This is too much, Mr. Armstrong," said Luke, quite overwhelmed
with the magnitude of the gift.

"Let me be the judge of that," said Mr. Armstrong kindly. "There
is only one thing, Luke, that I should have liked to have you do."

"What is that, sir?"

"I should like to have had you bring me a list of the numbers
certified to by Mr. Harding."

Luke's answer was to draw from the inside pocket of his vest a paper
signed by the old bookkeeper, containing a list of the numbers,
regularly subscribed and certified to.

"Is that what you wished, sir?" he asked.

"You are a wonderful boy," said the merchant admiringly. "Was this
your idea, or Mr. Harding's?"

"I believe I suggested it to him," said Luke modestly.

"That makes all clear sailing," said Mr. Armstrong. "Here are fifty
dollars more. You deserve it for your thoughtfulness."

"You have given me enough already," said Luke, drawing back.

"My dear boy, it is evident that you still have something to learn
in the way of business. When a rich old fellow offers you money,
which he can well afford, you had better take it."

"That removes all my objections," said Luke. "But I am afraid you
will spoil me with your liberality, Mr. Armstrong."

"I will take the risk of it. But here is another of your friends."

The door had just opened, and Roland Reed entered. There was another
cordial greeting, and Luke felt that it was pleasant, indeed, to
have two such good friends.

"When are you going to Groveton, Luke?" asked Mr. Reed.

"I shall go this afternoon, if there is nothing more you wish me
to do. I am anxious to see my mother."

"That is quite right, Luke. Your mother is your best friend, and
deserves all the attention you can give her. I shall probably go
to Groveton myself to-morrow."

After Luke had left the office, Mr. Reed remained to consult
with the merchant as to what was the best thing to do. Both were
satisfied that Prince Duncan, the president of the bank, was the
real thief who had robbed the bank. There were two courses open--a
criminal prosecution, or a private arrangement which should include
the return of the stolen property. The latter course was determined
upon, but should it prove ineffective, severer measures were to be
resorted to.



CHAPTER XXXIX

HOW LUKE WAS RECEIVED


Luke's return to Groveton was received with delight by his mother
and his true friend Linton. Naturally Randolph displayed the same
feelings toward him as ever. It so chanced that he met Luke only
an hour after his arrival. He would have passed him by unnoticed
but for the curiosity he felt to know where he had been, and what
he was intending to do.

"Humph! so you're back again!" he remarked.

"Yes," answered Luke, with a smile. "I hope you haven't missed me
much, Randolph."

"Oh, I've managed to live through it," returned Randolph, with
what he thought to be cutting sarcasm.

"I am glad of that."

"Where were you?" asked Randolph, abruptly.

"I was in New York a part of the time," said Luke.

"Where were you the rest of the time?"

"I was traveling."

"That sounds large. Perhaps you were traveling with a hand-organ."

"Perhaps I was."

"Well, what are you going to do now?"

"Thank you for your kind interest in me, Randolph. I will tell you
as soon as I know."

"Oh, you needn't think I feel interest in you."

"Then I won't."

"You are impertinent," said Randolph, scowling. It dawned upon him
that Luke was chaffing him.

"I don't mean to be. If I have been, I apologize. If you know of
any situation which will pay me a fair sum, I wish you would
mention me."

"I'll see about it," said Randolph, in an important tone. He was
pleased at Luke's change of tone. "I don't think you can get back
as janitor, for my father doesn't like you."

"Couldn't you intercede for me, Randolph?"

"Why, the fact is, you put on so many airs, for a poor boy, that I
shouldn't feel justified in recommending you. It is your own fault."

"Well, perhaps it is," said Luke.

"I am glad you acknowledge it. I don't know but my father will give
you a chance to work round our house, make fires, and run errands."

"What would he pay?" asked Luke, in a businesslike tone.

"He might pay a dollar and a half a week."

"I'm afraid I couldn't support myself on that."

"Oh, well, that's your lookout. It's better than loafing round
doing nothing."

"You're right there, Randolph."

"I'll just mention it to father, then."

"No, thank you. I shouldn't wonder if Mr. Reed might find something
for me to do."

"Oh, the man that robbed the bank?" said Randolph, turning up
his nose.

"It may soon be discovered that some one else robbed the bank."

"I don't believe it."

Here the two boys parted.

"Luke," said Linton, the same day, "have you decided what you
are going to do?"

"Not yet; but I have friends who, I think, will look out for me."

"Because my father says he will find you a place if you fail to
get one elsewhere."

"Tell your father that I think he is very kind. There is no one to
whom I would more willingly be indebted for a favor. If I should
find myself unemployed, I will come to him."

"All right! I am going to drive over to Coleraine"--the next
town--"this afternoon. Will you go with me?"

"I should like nothing better."

"What a difference there is between Randolph and Linton!"
thought Luke.



CHAPTER XL

THE BANK ROBBER IS FOUND


Tony Denton lost no time in going up to the city with the second
bond he had extracted from the fears of Prince Duncan. He went
directly to the office of his brokers, Gay & Sears, and announced
that he was prepared to deposit additional margin.

The bond was received, and taken to the partners in the back office.
Some four minutes elapsed, and the clerk reappeared.

"Mr. Denton, will you step into the back office?" he said.

"Certainly," answered Tony cheerfully.

He found the two brokers within.

"This is Mr. Denton?" said the senior partner.

"Yes, sir."

"You offer this bond as additional margin on the shares we hold
in your name?"

"Yes, of course."

"Mr. Denton," said Mr. Gay searchingly, "where did you get
this bond?"

"Where did I get it?" repeated Denton nervously. "Why, I
bought it."

"How long since?"

"About a year."

The two partners exchanged glances.

"Where do you live, Mr. Denton?"

"In Groveton."

"Ahem! Mr. Sears, will you be kind enough to draw out the
necessary papers?"

Tony Denton felt relieved. The trouble seemed to be over.

Mr. Gay at the same time stepped into the main office and gave
a direction to one of the clerks.

Mr. Sears drew out a large sheet of foolscap, and began, in very
deliberate fashion, to write. He kept on writing for some minutes.
Tony Denton wondered why so much writing should be necessary in a
transaction of this kind. Five minutes later a young man looked
into the office, and said, addressing Mr. Gay. "All right!"

Upon that Mr. Sears suspended writing.

"Mr. Denton," said Mr. Gay, "are you aware that this bond which
you have brought us was stolen from the Groveton Bank?"

"I--don't--believe--it," gasped Denton, turning pale.

"The numbers of the stolen bonds have been sent to all the bankers
and brokers in the city. This is one, and the one you brought us
not long since is another. Do you persist in saying that you bought
this bond a year ago?"

"No, no!" exclaimed Denton, terrified.

"Did you rob the bank?"

"No, I didn't!" ejaculated the terrified man, wiping the
perspiration from his brow.

"Where, then, did you get the bonds?"

"I got them both from Prince Duncan, president of the bank."

Both partners looked surprised.

One of them went to the door of the office, and called in Mr.
Armstrong, who, as well as a policeman, had been sent for.

Tony Denton's statement was repeated to him.

"I am not surprised," he said. "I expected it."

Tony Denton now made a clean breast of the whole affair, and his
words were taken down.

"Are you willing to go to Groveton with me, and repeat this in
presence of Mr. Duncan?" asked Mr. Armstrong.

"Yes."

"Will you not have him arrested?" asked Mr. Gay.

"No, he has every reason to keep faith with me."

It was rather late in the day when Mr. Armstrong, accompanied by
Tony Denton, made their appearance at the house of Prince Duncan.
