"Yes," said the old Witch, nodding her head; "that is the Princess Ozma--the
child brought to me by the Wizard who stole her father's throne. That is
the rightful ruler of the Emerald City!" and she pointed her long bony
finger straight at the boy.

"I!" cried Tip, in amazement. "Why, I'm no Princess Ozma--I'm not a girl!"

Glinda smiled, and going to Tip she took his small brown hand within her
dainty white one.



270               Full page line-art drawing.

               MOMBI POINTED HER LONG, BONY FINGER AT THE BOY



271

"You are not a girl just now" said she, gently, "because Mombi transformed
you into a boy. But you were born a girl, and also a Princess; so you must
resume your proper form, that you may become Queen of the Emerald City."

"Oh, let Jinjur be the Queen!" exclaimed Tip, ready to cry. "I want to stay
a boy, and travel with the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, and the Woggle-
Bug, and Jack--yes! and my friend the Saw-Horse--and the Gump! I don't
want to be a girl!"

"Never mind, old chap," said the Tin Woodman, soothingly; "it don't hurt to
be a girl, I'm told; and we will all remain your faithful friends just the
same. And, to be honest with you, I've always considered girls nicer than
boys."

"They're just as nice, anyway," added the Scarecrow, patting Tip
affectionately upon the head.

"And they are equally good students," proclaimed the Woggle-Bug. "I should
like to become your tutor, when you are transformed into a girl again."

"But--see here!" said Jack Pumpkinhead, with a gasp: "if you become a
girl, you can't be my dear father any more!"

"No," answered Tip, laughing in spite of his anxiety. "and I shall not be
sorry to escape the relationship." Then he added, hesitatingly, as he turned
to



272               Line-Art Drawing

Glinda: "I might try it for awhile,-just to see how it seems, you know. But
if I don't like being a girl you must promise to change me into a boy
again."

"Really," said the Sorceress, "that is beyond my magic. I never deal in
transformations, for they are not honest, and no respectable sorceress likes
to make things appear to be what they are not. Only unscrupulous witches use
the art, and therefore I must ask Mombi to effect your release from her
charm, and restore you to your proper form. It will be the last opportunity
she will have to practice magic."



273

Now that the truth about Princes Ozma had been discovered, Mombi did not
care what became of Tip; but she feared Glinda's anger, and the boy
generously promised to provide for Mombi in her old age if he became the
ruler of the Emerald City. So the Witch consented to effect the
transformation, and preparations for the event were at once made.

Glinda ordered her own royal couch to be placed in the center of the tent.
It was piled high with cushions covered with rose-colored silk, and from a
golden railing above hung many folds of pink gossamer, completely concealing
the interior of the couch.

The first act of the Witch was to make the boy drink a potion which quickly
sent him into a deep and dreamless sleep. Then the Tin Woodman and the
Woggle-Bug bore him gently to the couch, placed him upon the soft cushions,
and drew the gossamer hangings to shut him from all earthly view.

The Witch squatted upon the ground and kindled a tiny fire of dried herbs,
which she drew from her bosom. When the blaze shot up and burned clearly old
Mombi scattered a handful of magical powder over the fire, which straightway
gave off a rich violet vapor, filling all the tent with its fragrance and
forcing the Saw-Horse to sneeze--although he had been warned to keep
quiet.



274               Full page line-art drawing.

               MOMBI AT HER MAGICAL INCANTATIONS.



275

Then, while the others watched her curiously, the hag chanted a rhythmical
verse in words which no one understood, and bent her lean body seven times
back and forth over the fire. And now the incantation seemed complete, for
the Witch stood upright and cried the one word "Yeowa!" in a loud voice.

The vapor floated away; the atmosphere became, clear again; a whiff of fresh
air filled the tent, and the pink curtains of the couch trembled slightly,
as if stirred from within.

Glinda walked to the canopy and parted the silken hangings. Then she bent
over the cushions, reached out her hand, and from the couch arose the form
of a young girl, fresh and beautiful as a May morning. Her eyes sparkled as
two diamonds, and her lips were tinted like a tourmaline. All adown her back
floated tresses of ruddy gold, with a slender jeweled circlet confining them
at the brow. Her robes of silken gauze floated around her like a cloud, and
dainty satin slippers shod her feet.

At this exquisite vision Tip's old comrades stared in wonder for the space
of a full minute, and then every head bent low in honest admiration of the
lovely Princess Ozma. The girl herself cast one look into Glinda's bright
face, which glowed with pleasure and satisfaction, and then turned upon the



276
others. Speaking the words with sweet diffidence, she said:

"I hope none of you will care less for me than you did before. I'm just the
same Tip, you know; only--only--"

"Only you're different!" said the Pumpkinhead; and everyone thought it was
the wisest speech he had ever made.

               Line-Art Drawing



277               Full page line-art drawing.



278               The Riches of Content


When the wonderful tidings reached the ears of Queen Jinjur--how Mombi the
Witch had been captured; how she had confessed her crime to Glinda; and how
the long-lost Princess Ozma had been discovered in no less a personage than
the boy Tip--she wept real tears of grief and despair.

"To think," she moaned, "that after having ruled as Queen, and lived in a
palace, I must go back to scrubbing floors and churning butter again! It is
too horrible to think of! I will never consent!"

So when her soldiers, who spent most of their time making fudge in the
palace kitchens, counseled Jinjur to resist, she listened to their foolish
prattle and sent a sharp defiance to Glinda the Good and the Princess Ozma.
The result was a declaration of war, and the very next day Glinda marched
upon the Emerald City with pennants flying and bands playing,



279
and a forest of shining spears, sparkling brightly beneath the sun's rays.

But when it came to the walls this brave assembly made a sudden halt; for
Jinjur had closed and barred every gateway, and the walls of the Emerald
City were builded high and thick with many blocks of green marble. Finding
her advance thus baffled, Glinda bent her brows in deep thought, while the
Woggle-Bug said, in his most positive tone:

"We must lay siege to the city, and starve it into submission. It is the
only thing we can do."

"Not so," answered the Scarecrow. "We still have the Gump, and the Gump can
still fly"

The Sorceress turned quickly at this speech, and her face now wore a bright
smile.

"You are right," she exclaimed, "and certainly have reason to be proud of
your brains. Let us go to the Gump at once!"

So they passed through the ranks of the army until they came to the place,
near the Scarecrow's tent, where the Gump lay. Glinda and Princess Ozma
mounted first, and sat upon the sofas. Then the Scarecrow and his friends
climbed aboard, and still there was room for a Captain and three soldiers,
which Glinda considered sufficient for a guard.

Now, at a word from the Princess, the queer



280               Line-Art Drawing

Thing they had called the Gump flopped its palm-leaf wings and rose into the
air, carrying the party of adventurers high above the walls. They hovered
over the palace, and soon perceived Jinjur reclining in a hammock in the
courtyard, where she was comfortably reading a novel with a green cover and
eating green chocolates, confident that the walls would protect her from her
enemies. Obeying a quick command, the Gump alighted safely in this very
courtyard, and before Jinjur had time to do more than scream, the Captain
and three soldiers



281
leaped out and made the former Queen a prisoner, locking strong chains upon
both her wrists.

That act really ended the war; for the Army of Revolt submitted as soon as
they knew Jinjur to be a captive, and the Captain marched in safety through
the streets and up to the gates of the city, which she threw wide open. Then
the bands played their most stirring music while Glinda's army marched into
the city, and heralds proclaimed the conquest of the audacious Jinjur and
the accession of the beautiful Princess Ozma to the throne of her royal
ancestors.

At once the men of the Emerald City cast off their aprons. And it is said
that the women were so tired eating of their husbands' cooking that they

               Line-Art Drawing



282
all hailed the conquest of Jinjur with Joy. Certain it is that, rushing one
and all to the kitchens of their houses, the good wives prepared so
delicious a feast for the weary men that harmony was immediately restored in
every family.

Ozma's first act was to oblige the Army of Revolt to return to her every
emerald or other gem stolen from the public streets and buildings; and so
great was the number of precious stones picked from their settings by these
vain girls, that every one of the royal jewelers worked steadily for more
than a month to replace them in their settings.

Meanwhile the Army of Revolt was disbanded and the girls sent home to their
mothers. On promise of good behavior Jinjur was likewise released.

Ozma made the loveliest Queen the Emerald City had ever known; and, although
she was so young and inexperienced, she ruled her people with wisdom and
Justice. For Glinda gave her good advice on all occasions; and the
Woggle-Bug, who was appointed to the important post of Public Educator, was quite
helpful to Ozma when her royal duties grew perplexing.

The girl, in her gratitude to the Gump for its services, offered the
creature any reward it might name.



283

"Then," replied the Gump, "please take me to pieces. I did not wish to be
brought to life, and I am greatly ashamed of my conglomerate personality.
Once I was a monarch of the forest, as my antlers fully prove; but now, in
my present upholstered condition of servitude, I am compelled to fly through
the air--my legs being of no use to me whatever. Therefore I beg to be
dispersed."

So Ozma ordered the Gump taken apart. The antlered head was again hung over
the mantle-piece in the hall, and the sofas were untied and placed in the
reception parlors. The broom tail resumed its accustomed duties in the
kitchen, and finally, the Scarecrow replaced all the clotheslines and ropes
on the pegs from which he had taken them on the eventful day when the Thing
was constructed.

You might think that was the end of the Gump; and so it was, as a
flying-machine. But the head over the mantle-piece continued to talk whenever it
took a notion to do so, and it frequently startled, with its abrupt
questions, the people who waited in the hall for an audience with the Queen.

The Saw-Horse, being Ozma's personal property, was tenderly cared for; and
often she rode the queer creature along the streets of the Emerald City. She
had its wooden legs shod with gold, to keep them



284
from wearing out, and the tinkle of these golden shoes upon the pavement
always filled the Queen's subjects with awe as they thought upon this
evidence of her magical powers.

"The Wonderful Wizard was never so wonderful as Queen Ozma," the people said
to one another, in whispers; "for he claimed to do many things he could not
do; whereas our new Queen does many things no one would ever expect her to
accomplish."

Jack Pumpkinhead remained with Ozma to the end of his days; and he did not
spoil as soon as he had feared, although he always remained as stupid as
ever. The Woggle-Bug tried to teach him several arts and sciences; but Jack
was so poor a student that any attempt to educate him was soon abandoned.

After Glinda's army had marched back home, and peace was restored to the
Emerald City, the Tin Woodman announced his intention to return to his own
Kingdom of the Winkies.

"It isn't a very big Kingdom," said he to Ozma, "but for that very reason it
is easier to rule; and I have called myself an Emperor because I am an
Absolute Monarch, and no one interferes in any way with my conduct of public
or personal affairs. When I get home I shall have a new coat of nickel
plate; for I have become somewhat marred and scratched lately;



285
and then I shall be glad to have you pay me a visit."

"Thank you," replied Ozma. "Some day I may accept the invitation. But what
is to become of the Scarecrow?"

"I shall return with my friend the Tin Woodman," said the stuffed one,
seriously. "We have decided never to be parted in the future."

"And I have made the Scarecrow my Royal Treasurer," explained the Tin
Woodman." For it has occurred to me that it is a good thing to have a Royal
Treasurer who is made of money. What do you think?"

"I think," said the little Queen, smiling, "that your friend must be the
richest man in all the world."

"I am," returned the Scarecrow. "but not on account of my money. For I
consider brains far superior to money, in every way. You may have noticed
that if one has money without brains, he cannot use it to advantage; but if
one has brains without money, they will enable him to live comfortably to
the end of his days."

"At the same time," declared the Tin Woodman, "you must acknowledge that a
good heart is a thing that brains can not create, and that money can not
buy. Perhaps, after all, it is I who am the richest man in all the world."



286

"You are both rich, my friends," said Ozma, gently; "and your riches are the
only riches worth having--the riches of content!"




               The End










End of Project Gutenberg's The Marvellous Land of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

