
"This is David Marston," said Ralph--"the living proof that I have told
you the truth."

Mr. Stanton gazed at him wildly, for to him it was as the face of one
risen from the dead.

"How do you do, Mr. Stanton?" said David Marston, humbly. "It is many,
many years since we met, sir."

"Are you really David Marston?" demanded Mr. Stanton, never taking his
eyes off the shrunken figure of his old clerk.

"I am, sir; greatly changed indeed, but still the David Marston who was
formerly in your employ. Time hasn't treated me as well as it has you,
sir. I've been unlucky, and aged fast."

"I am afraid your mind is also affected. You have been telling strange
stories to Mr. Pendleton here."

"True stories, sir," said David, firmly.

"Come, come, how much is he going to give you for this evidence of
yours?"

"Stop, Mr. Stanton! You insult us both," said Ralph Pendleton, sternly.
"I am not the man to buy false evidence, nor is David Marston the man to
perjure himself for pay. David, I want you, in Mr. Stanton's presence,
to make a clear statement of his connection with the mining company by
which I lost my fortune."

David Marston obeyed, and in a few words as possible unfolded the
story. It is not necessary to repeat it here. Enough that it fully
substantiated the charge which Ralph had brought against his early
guardian.

When he had finished, Ralph said, "You can judge what weight Marston's
testimony would have before a court of justice, and whether it would
help your commercial standing to have his story made public."

"What is it you want of me?" said Mr. Stanton, sullenly.

"I want restitution, dollar for dollar, of my lost money. I will
waive interest, though I might justly claim it. But, were it all paid,
interest and principal, the wrong would not be redressed. You cannot
restore the bride who would have been mine but for your villainy."

"How much time will you give me to pay this money?" asked the merchant,
moodily.

"Ten days."

"It is a short time."

"It must suffice. Do you agree?"

"I must."

"Bind yourself to that, and for ten days I leave you free."

Satisfactory security was given that the engagement would be met, and
Ralph Pendleton left the counting-room. But his countenance was scarcely
more cheerful than that of the man he had conquered.

"I am rich," he said to himself; "but of what avail is it? Whom can I
benefit with my wealth?"

This thought had scarcely crossed his mind when he came face to face
with Herbert, walking with a sad and downcast face in the opposite
direction.




CHAPTER XXXIII

A FRIEND IN NEED


Herbert left Mr. Godfrey's counting-room very much depressed in spirits.
But an hour before he had rejoiced in his excellent prospects, and,
depending on the favor of his employer and his own fidelity, had looked
forward to a bright future. Now all was changed. He was dismissed from
his situation in disgrace, suspected of a mean theft. He had, to be
sure, the consciousness of innocence, and that was a great deal. He was
not weighed down by the feeling of guilt, at least. Still his prospects
were dark. Suppose the matter should not be cleared up, and he should
still remain under suspicion? How could he hope to obtain another place
without a recommendation from his late employer? No; he must resign all
hope of a position and adopt some street occupation, such as selling
papers or vending small articles in a basket, as he had seen boys of
his own age doing. He did not doubt but that in some way he could get
a living, but still he would be under suspicion, and that was hard to
bear.

While these things were passing through his mind he walked down
Broadway, with his eyes fixed upon the sidewalk. All at once he started
to hear his name called, and, looking up, to his unbounded astonishment
he saw before him Ralph the Ranger, whom he had supposed a thousand
miles away in his cabin in the Ohio woods.

The sight of a friendly face was most welcome to him at such a time, and
Ralph's face was friendly.

"Ralph!" he exclaimed, seizing the Ranger's hand. "How did you come
here? When did you arrive? You are the last person I expected to see."

"And you are the one I most wanted to see," said Ralph, his tone
unconsciously softened by his friendly interest in the boy before him.

"I can say the same, Ralph," said Herbert, soberly, "for I am in
trouble."

"In trouble, boy? I am sorry for that. Is it money? I can get you out of
that trouble."

"It is not that exactly, Ralph. If you will come into the City Hall Park
and sit down on a bench with me I will tell you all about it."

"Instead of that, let us go into the Astor House," said Ralph. "It is
where I am stopping."

"You are stopping at the Astor House?" said Herbert, in momentary
surprise. "Perhaps you do not know that there are cheaper hotels. Shall
I direct you to one?"

"No, Herbert, I am not poor, as you perhaps think. I suppose I should
be called rich; but that I can explain afterwards. For the present your
affairs require attention. Come in."

They went up the steps of the Astor House, and Ralph led the way to his
room, an apartment of good size and handsomely furnished.

"Now, Herbert, take a chair and tell me all," he said.

To repeat Herbert's story here is unnecessary. Ralph listened with
attention, and when it was concluded he said: "The main thing is to
account for the money in your possession. Do you think you should
remember the policeman who aided you in recovering your money?"

"I am sure I should."

"Did he know how much money you recovered?"

"Yes, for he saw me count the bills."

"Then we must seek him out and induce him to go with us to Mr. Godfrey's
counting-room and give his testimony."

"I never thought of that," said Herbert, his face brightening. "When
shall we go?"

"Now. I have nothing else to occupy me, and the sooner you are righted
the better."

They went out together, and made their way at once to the spot where
Herbert had encountered Greenleaf. They had to wait but a brief time
when the policeman came up.

"Do you remember me?" asked Herbert, going up to him.

"Yes," he replied; "you are the boy that overhauled a thief the other
day, and got back his money."

"You see, he remembers," said Herbert, with satisfaction.

"My friend," said Ralph, "when will you be off duty?"

"In half an hour," said the policeman, in surprise.

"In half an hour, then, I want you to go with me to this boys employer
and repeat your story. The possession of the money has caused him to
be suspected, and your evidence, confirming his own, will clear him of
having obtained it improperly."

"I will go," said the officer, "and shall be glad to get him out of a
scrape. It was all fair and above-board, and I'll say so cheerfully."

At the end of the half hour the three made their way to Mr. Godfrey's
place of business and entered together.

Mr. Godfrey marked their entrance with surprise, and looked inquiringly
at Herbert.

"Mr. Godfrey," said Herbert, respectfully, "I have come to prove to you
that the money I have in my pocketbook is my own."

"I shall be very glad if you can do so," said Mr. Godfrey; and it was
evident from his manner that he spoke sincerely.

"This officer knows all the circumstances, and will tell you what he
knows."

The policeman made his statement, partly in answer to questions from Mr.
Godfrey.

"The explanation is satisfactory," said Mr. Godfrey, "and convinces me.
It does not, however, absolutely clear you, since between the time of
the money being lost and your being searched you went out to the post
office, and you might have disposed of the pocketbook and its contents
on the way."

Herbert's countenance fell, but Mr. Godfrey hastened to add. "Although
your vindication is not complete, I will say that I believe you fully,
and will receive you back into my employ."

"You have forgotten one thing, sir," said Herbert. "Thomas declares that
he saw me pick up the wallet and put it in my pocket."

"So I did," said Tom, boldly.

Mr. Godfrey looked perplexed, and was hesitating what to say when Mr.
Walton, the owner of the lost pocketbook, hurriedly entered.

"Mr. Godfrey," he said, "I have to beg your pardon, and, most of
all, the pardon of this boy," indicating Herbert. "I have found my
pocketbook. I didn't lose it here, but my pocket was picked in the
street. The pickpocket was arrested, and the wallet has been returned to
me. This boy is innocent."

"I am very glad to hear it," said Mr. Godfrey, with emphasis. "Herbert,
I will try to make amends to you for my transient suspicions of your
honesty. As for you," he continued, turning to Thomas and speaking
sternly, "I despise you for your mean attempt to injure your
fellow-clerk. You must leave my employment to-day. I shall write to your
father the reasons for dismissing you."

"I can get along without your paltry four dollars a week," said Tom,
with bravado. "I am not a beggar."

"You may be something worse, if you do not amend," said Mr. Godfrey."
Mr. Pratt, you may pay him for the entire week, and he can go at once."

Although Tom professed so much disdain for the four dollars a week, he
did not decline the week's pay directed to be paid to him, but placed
the money in his vest pocket and went out with assumed nonchalance,
though, in reality, deeply mortified at the unexpected discovery of his
meanness.

"As for you, Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, "you can come back at once, and
I will raise your pay to eight dollars a week. I owe you some reparation
for the injury you came so near suffering. I will never again doubt your
integrity."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert; "I shall be glad to come back."

"Before this matter is decided," said Ralph, "I have a proposition
to make to Herbert. I am rich, and have no one to share or inherit my
wealth. I propose to adopt him--to give him an opportunity to complete
his education in Europe, whither I propose going, and if some years
hence you shall be willing to receive him, he can then enter your
counting-room to learn business. The amount of compensation will be
unimportant, as I shall provide for him amply."

Herbert stared at Ralph in amazement. He could hardly realize that the
offer was indeed a genuine one.

"Do you mean that I am to go to Europe with you, Ralph?" he said.

"Yes, if you like."

"I shall like it VERY MUCH," said Herbert, enthusiastically. "How can I
thank you for so much generous kindness!"

"Your companionship will cheer me, and give me something to live for,
Herbert," said Ralph. "Through you I hope some day to enjoy life again."

Herbert's clasped the Ranger's hand in impulsive gratitude, while his
face beamed with pleasure.

"I congratulate you, Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, kindly, "though I am
sorry to lose you. Whenever your guardian is ready to have you enter on
a business career, a place in my counting-room shall be open to you."

"Ralph," said Herbert, seriously, as they went from the counting-room
in company, "all that has happened seems so wonderful that I am a little
afraid I shall wake up to find it all a dream."

"It is a change to me also," said Ralph, "to have a new interest in
life. The past is a sealed book. Let us look forward to a bright and
pleasant future. Whatever pleasures and advantages money can obtain for
you shall be yours."

"Thank you," said Herbert, gratefully.




CHAPTER XXXIV

CONCLUSION


"Where are you boarding, Herbert?" asked Ralph.

"In Stanton Street."

"I shall wish you at once to remove to the Astor House, in order that we
may be together until we sail for Europe."

To this pleasant arrangement Herbert made no opposition. He found it a
great change from the dirty and slipshod boarding-house to the elegant
arrangements of a first-class hotel. It is needless to say that he
enjoyed that change not a little. He often had the feeling, of which he
had spoken to Ralph, that it was a dream from which he would some time
awake. But the dream was destined to be a pretty long one.

Within a week, much against his will, Mr. Stanton paid over to Ralph
Pendleton the fifty thousand dollars of which he had years ago defrauded
him, and thus the Ranger found himself master of a fortune of nearly
one hundred and fifty thousand dollars. He settled without delay a
comfortable annuity on David Marston, the old clerk, through whose
evidence he had been able to ferret out the treachery of Mr. Stanton.
Marston needed it, for his health was broken down and he was an invalid,
prematurely old. He is now settled in a comfortable boarding-house
in Clinton Street, and usually spends his mornings at the Mercantile
Library Reading-Room, in Astor Place, reading the morning papers.
Sometimes he ventures downtown, and takes a slow walk through the
streets, crowded with busy, bustling men, and recalls the years when he,
too, was one of them.

Before sailing for Europe, Herbert expressed a desire to repay his uncle
the sum of ten dollars, which the latter had sent to him. Ralph was
surprised when he learned that this uncle, of whom Herbert spoke, was
the same man who had been his former guardian. He approved our hero's
determination, and one morning Herbert entered for the first time his
uncle's place of business.

"Is Mr. Stanton in?" he asked of a clerk.

The clerk, in reply, pointed to the office.

Herbert entered.

His uncle looked up, but although he had seen our hero at a concert
at the Academy of Music, he did not recognize him in the new and
fashionable suit which Ralph had purchased for him.

"Mr. Stanton, I suppose?" said Herbert, with quiet self-possession.

"Yes. Do you wish to speak with me?"

"I must introduce myself," said Herbert. "I am Herbert Mason, your
nephew."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Stanton, surprised. "When did you come to the city?"

"Some weeks since."

"What brought you here?"

"I had my living to make. I preferred to make it in the city."

"The city is crowded. You had better have remained in the country."

"I do not think so," said Herbert.

"You could have got a place on a farm, and in time perhaps might have
bought a little land for yourself."

Herbert smiled.

"I did get a place on a farm," he said; "but I did not like it."

"What are you doing in the city? Have you got a place?"

"Not at present."

"So I supposed," said his uncle, frowning. "I told you the city was
overcrowded. You should not have come here. I suppose you relied on me
to help you to something. But I have my own family to take care of, and
my first duty is to them, as you must be aware."

"I don't think you quite understand my object in calling," said Herbert,
quietly. "I have not come for assistance of any kind."

"Indeed!" returned Mr. Stanton, appearing to be puzzled.

"You sent me ten dollars in a letter to Dr. Kent some months since?"

"Yes. I felt that it was best for you to depend on yourself, and that
more would only encourage you to idleness."

"I have come to thank you for the LOAN," said Herbert, emphasizing the
last word, "and to return the money."

"What!" exclaimed Mr. Stanton, now thoroughly amazed.

Herbert repeated his former words.

"But I don't understand this. You are out of a place; yet you do not
need this money."

"No, I do not need it."

This was certainly astonishing, and Mr. Stanton gazed at his nephew as
if he did not know what to make of it.

"What are your plans?" he asked. "What are you going to do?"

"I sail for Europe next week," said Herbert, enjoying his uncle's
surprise.

"Sail for Europe!" ejaculated Mr. Stanton, scarcely believing his ears.

"Yes, I am to go to school there, and shall probably remain three or
four years."

"You are trifling with me," said his uncle, irritably. "How can you go
to Europe without money?"

Herbert felt that the time had come for an explanation.

"A friend," he said, "kindly undertakes to pay all my expenses. I go
with him."

"Who is your friend?"

"Mr. Ralph Pendleton. I believe you know him."

"Ralph Pendleton!" repeated Mr. Stanton, in renewed surprise. "How did
you become acquainted with him?"

"The farmer with whom I was placed in Ohio ill-treated me. Ralph lived
near by, and helped me to run away."

Mr. Stanton made no comment. Indeed, his surprise was such that he knew
not what to say. His friendless and penniless nephew, as he had regarded
him, was about to share advantages which he would gladly have obtained
for his own son. When, that evening, at home, he told his family of
Herbert's good fortune, Tom was filled with bitter envy. If it had been
any other boy he would have cared less, but for "that begger Herbert"
to go to Europe in charge of a man of wealth was very mortifying to his
pride.

Mr. Stanton made a faint protest against receiving the ten dollars
tendered by his nephew, but Herbert was determined to repay it. He
placed it on the desk and eventually Mr. Stanton placed it in his
