"Does Mr. Sherwood's story seem probable?" now remarked the judge.

"I am convinced that it is true," said the colonel promptly.

The judge saw how matters stood and discharged the prisoner.

"We're left!" said Crane, in a tragic whisper.

"Now, Mr. Sherwood," said the colonel, taking Walter's arm, "you must
accompany me to Shelby."




CHAPTER XXXVIII

AN OPENING AT SHELBY


At length they reached Shelby. Colonel Owen lived in a large and
handsome mansion with ample grounds.

"Yes," he said, "I have a comfortable home, but my boys are away, and my
wife and I feel lonely in this large house. It will brighten us both to
have a young face at the table."

How could Walter feel otherwise than pleased. He was charmed with Mrs.
Owen.

"I am glad to see you," she said. "May I call you Walter?"

"I wish you would, Mrs. Owen," said Walter.

"Did you find your horse, Richard?" she added.

"Yes, my dear."

"Did you see the man that stole it?"

"Yes, my dear," with a quiet wink at Walter.

"I invited the horse thief to come and make us a visit."

Mrs. Owen certainly was amazed.

"You did!" she ejaculated. "When is he coming?"

"He is here already."

"I don't understand you at all, Richard. You seem to be joking."

"Not at all! There he stands!" and the colonel pointed to Walter.

"What, Walter?"

"Perhaps I had better go to the hotel," suggested Walter.

"No, no! I can't believe anything evil of a young man with your face,"
said Mrs. Owen. "I am glad my husband brought you home with him."

"I am sure you will both be kind to me," said Walter earnestly, "and I
shall appreciate it the more because I have neither father nor mother."

One afternoon Colonel Owen came in radiant.

"Well, Walter," he said, "I've got some work for you to do."

"Mr. Hayward, the teacher of our classical school, is summoned to his
home. The question is, Who shall take his place till the end of the
school year?

"I have mentioned your name to the trustees, who are ready to accept you
on my recommendation."

"There is nothing I should like better," he said, "but do you think I am
competent?"

"You ought to be able to teach any of the classes that will come under
your charge. How are you in mathematics?"

"I don't think I shall have any difficulty there, sir."

"Then you're better off than I am."

"How much salary shall I receive?" asked Walter, who was beginning to
grow interested.

"Twenty-five dollars a week. That's what the trustees authorize me to
offer you."

"That will be quite satisfactory. How my old chums will stare when
I tell them I am getting twenty-five dollars a week for teaching a
classical school. I suppose," added Walter, hesitating, "I ought to look
out for a boarding-place."

"What, and leave us?" asked the old lady reproachfully.

"But, Colonel Owen, remember that I shall be earning a good salary."

"You can find a use for it. It will help make up for some of the losses
you have incurred. Shall I say you will accept the post?"

"Yes, sir. I will try it, and hope to succeed."




CHAPTER XXXIX

THE NEW MASTER


On the platform of the main schoolroom in the Shelby Classical Institute
stood Colonel Owen and Walter Sherwood.

"My young friends," began Colonel Owen, "you are all aware that
your respected teacher, Mr. Haywood, is obliged to be absent for the
remainder of the term. I have been able to secure as his substitute Mr.
Walter Sherwood, who will do his best to carry on the work which Mr.
Haywood has so auspiciously commenced. I hope you will receive him
cordially and uphold him in his task."

Walter felt some diffidence as he realized what a responsibility had
been placed upon him.

He cleared his throat and spoke a few words.

"Colonel Owen has introduced me to you and expressed a hope in which I
join him--that you will receive me cordially and uphold me in my work.
I will now go about among the seats, make inquiries as to your progress,
and arrange the classes."

This short speech made a favorable impression upon all the pupils with
two exceptions. These were the largest scholars--Ben Buffum and
Enoch Snow. What they thought of Walter may be gathered from their
conversation as they walked home together.

"What do you think of the new master, Ben?" said Enoch.

"I s'pose he'll do. He ought to, if he's been to college; but I'll tell
you what, Enoch, it riles me to have a boy of my own age set over me."

"Me ditto!"

"He would do for a primary school, but when it comes to young men like
us, I don't like to let people know that he's my teacher."

"It's all right for the others to obey him, but you and I are just as
strong as he, and maybe stronger."

"I guess I could floor him in wrestling."

"You're too much for me, Ben, and I think I can stand up to him, and
maybe lick him."

"It's likely you can. Now, there was Hayward--he was a big man. I didn't
mind obeying him."

"Are you talking about Mr. Sherwood?" asked Harry Howe, a boy of
fourteen.

"No, I'm not. I'm talking about Mr. Hayward."

"How do you like the new teacher?"

"He's only a boy. He'll have a hard row to hoe."

"Who'll make it hard for him?"

"Enoch and I."

"Then it will be a shame. He seems to be a perfect gentleman."

"Gentleman! He's only a boy, like ourselves."

"At any rate, he knows enough to teach us."

"That may be, but he can't keep order."

"Why can't he?"

"You'll see whether he can or not," said Ben, significantly.

"Are you going to make trouble?"

"It isn't best for small boys to know too much."

Walter had not failed to notice the half-rebellious demeanor of his
two oldest pupils. Moreover, he had been warned by the janitor of the
building that they would be likely to give him trouble.




CHAPTER XL.

BEN IS SUBDUED


Ben Buffum was biding his time.

In the seat in front of Ben sat Albert Frost, a much smaller boy.

One day, toward the close of the afternoon, a loud shriek was heard in
the neighborhood of Ben Buffum's desk.

Walter looked up and saw Albert in tears.

"What is the matter, Albert?" asked Walter.

"Ben Buffum stuck a pin in my leg," answered the boy. "Is that true,
Buffum?" demanded Walter sternly.

"Yes, it is," answered Ben, with provoking calmness.

Walter's temper was stirred, but he asked in his ordinary tones: "Why
did you do it?"

"Because I chose," answered Ben.

"Then," said Walter, giving full vent to his scorn, "you are a
contemptible coward and brute!

"You forget that in this schoolroom I am the master, and consider it
my duty to defend my pupils, even the smallest, from the violence of
brutes."

"He'll have to pay for this," he muttered to himself. "I can lick you,
Walter!" he said, with an insolent leer.

He had hardly got the words out of his mouth when Walter was upon him.
He was wonderfully quick in his movements, whereas Ben, though powerful,
was slow, and before he well knew what was going to happen he was
dragged by the collar from his seat into the middle of the floor. Walter
let go for a minute, and Ben, mad all over, prepared to grasp him in
a bearlike hug. A stinging blow in the face convinced him that he had
entirely underrated the powers of the teacher. He tried to return the
blow, but, unable to defend himself, found his own blow parried and
another planted in his chest, causing him to stagger. Then Ben lost all
caution, and with a furious cry rushed upon Walter, in hope of throwing
him down by wrestling. But, instead, he found himself lying on his back
on the floor, looking up at the teacher.

Ben got up slowly and "pitched in" once more, but in about a minute he
found himself again in a recumbent position.

"Have you had enough?" asked Walter.

"I hit my head," answered Ben, in a sulky tone.

"I hope you are not seriously hurt," said Walter, quietly. "If you would
like to be dismissed now, you may go. I shall be glad to see you back
here to-morrow."

Without a word, but looking intensely mortified, Ben took his hat and
slunk out of the room.

When he had gone Walter said: "Scholars, I want to ask of you a favor.
Ben is mortified by what has happened. I wish you would all abstain from
reminding him of it. In that case the lesson he has received may do him
good."

The next day Ben Buffum stayed at home, and did not show himself on
the street till evening. When he found that no one spoke to him of the
affair he took courage to go to school the day after. Walter overtook
him on the way and hailed him in a friendly manner with: "We will forget
all about that little affair day before yesterday, Ben. You are pretty
strong."

"I couldn't do nothin' against you."

"No, because I have taken lessons in boxing."

"I'd like to box."

"If you'll come round and see me this evening, Ben, I'll give you the
first lesson."

The scholars were very much surprised to see Ben and the teacher walking
to school together, and were further surprised at the wonderful change
for the better that took place in the once rebellious pupil.




CHAPTER XLI

CONCLUSION


Mrs. Deborah Simpkins, a near neighbor of Doctor Mack, was an
ill-natured gossip, and had always disliked Walter because he once
interfered to prevent a boy of hers from abusing a young companion. One
day about two months later she put on her bonnet and with a smile of
malicious satisfaction walked over to the doctor's house.

"How do you do, Mrs. Sprague?" she said. "I thought I'd run over and
have a chat with you."

"Come in, Mrs. Simpkins," said Nancy, civilly, but not cordially, for
she did not like her visitor.

"I've got something unpleasant to tell you," went on the widow, as she
sat down in a rocker. "I'm awful sorry."

"Are you?" said Nancy, dryly. "What's it all about?"

"I got a letter from my niece Sophrony, out in Iowa, yesterday, and she
sent me a cuttin' from an old paper. It's somethin' awful!"

"Is it?"

"Yes, and it's about Walter Sherwood!" continued Mrs. Simpkins,
triumphantly.

"He hasn't met with an accident, has he?" inquired Nancy, turning pale.

"It's wuss than that!" answered the widow, nodding her head ominously.

"Worse than an accident?"

"Yes; leastways, I call it so."

"Let me hear it, then, Mrs. Simpkins."

"Here 'tis; you can read it for yourself."

This was the paragraph:

"A young man named Walter Sherwood was arrested yesterday, charged
with stealing a valuable mare belonging to Colonel Richard Owen. We
understand his trial is to take place this morning."

"When is the paper dated?" asked Nancy, who did not appear so much
overcome as her visitor expected.

"Over two months since. Walter Sherwood is probably in jail now. I
feel for you and the doctor," said Mrs. Simpkins, in a tone far from
sympathetic, fixing her beadlike eyes on the housekeeper.

"That's very good of you, but, as we got a letter from Walter yesterday,
there ain't no call to be troubled."

"Did he write from the jail?"

"Don't be a fool, Mrs. Simpkins! He wrote from the town of Shelby, where
he has been teaching a classic school, and he inclosed the program of
the exhibition. Perhaps you would like to look at it."

Mrs. Simpkins took the paper, and looked intensely disappointed as she
saw that Nancy had only told the truth.

"He teach school! A boy like him!" she ejaculated.

"Yes, Mrs. Simpkins, and it's been a great success. They want him to
go back next year, but the doctor prefers to have him finish out his
college course. We're expecting him home every day."

There was a noise heard as of the front door opening, and a moment later
Walter was in the room.

"Oh, Walter!" exclaimed Nancy, overjoyed, in her excitement throwing her
arms around his neck. "I'm so glad to see you!"

"And I am glad to see you, Nancy, How's my guardian?"

"He's well, and will be home soon."

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Simpkins," said Walter, politely.

"Mrs. Simpkins has just been telling me that you were in jail for
horse-stealing," said Nancy. "She is much pleased to find it all a
mistake."

Walter laughed.

"I am still more pleased," he remarked. "I find school-teaching much
pleasanter."

"I guess I must be goin'," said Mrs. Simpkins, hurriedly.

When Doctor Mack returned he welcomed Walter with a joy not inferior to
that of his housekeeper.

"And so you have succeeded?" he said.

"Yes; the trustees of the Shelby Classical School want me to come back,
as my predecessor has accepted a position in New York. But I think I
had better return to college and finish out my course. I have a thousand
dollars saved up, and a little more, and I think with economy I can pay
my own way for the remainder of the course."

