"I shall be busy to-day; but to-night I will look at your father's
model," said the manufacturer. "Probably it will be three or four days
before I can come to any decision."

Herbert passed his time pleasantly for the next three or four days. Yet
he could not avoid feeling anxious. Interest day was close at hand, and
his hopes might end in failure.

On the fourth day Mr. Cameron said to him: "Well, Herbert, I have made
up my mind about your father's invention."

Herbert's suspense was great. His heart almost stopped beating.

The manufacturer went on:

"I consider it practicable, and am disposed to make you an offer for it.
Are you authorized to conclude terms?"

"My mother will agree to anything I propose, sir."

"Then this is my offer. The model must be patented at once. I will see
to that. Then make over to me half the invention, and I will agree to
pay you and your mother one thousand dollars a year for the next ten
years."

"Are you in earnest?" gasped Herbert.

"Entirely so," said Mr. Cameron. "Will that satisfy you?"

"I would have accepted a quarter of the sum you offer, sir."

"Better not tell me that," said Mr. Cameron, smiling. "I might take
advantage of it. Will you consider it a bargain, then?"

"Oh, how happy my mother will be!" said Herbert.

"Don't you want to go home, and carry the news?"

"I should like to very much."

Then his countenance changed. Two days hence, as he reflected, the
interest would be payable. Must they lose the house, after all? If only
he had a small part of the money, it would make matters all right.

"Does anything trouble you?" asked the manufacturer, noticing the sudden
change in his countenance.

Upon this Herbert told him exactly how they were situated in regard to
the house, and in what danger they were of losing it.

"If it's nothing worse that that," said Mr. Cameron, I cheerfully, "you
needn't feel anxious. I will advance you; a hundred dollars on account
of the contract, and you shall give me a receipt for it."

Herbert's face cleared instantly, and he was warm in his gratitude.

The next morning he started for home.

After all, the little model which his father left behind, had proved to
be his most valuable legacy.




CHAPTER XXXV

HERBERT'S RETURN


Mrs. Carter was setting the table for her solitary supper. She had been
very lonely since Herbert went away. The days seemed doubly long. Most
of all she missed him at mealtime. He kept her informed of all that was
going on in the village, and when there was no news to tell he talked
over their plans for the future. Life seemed very dull and monotonous
without him. Yet the poor mother always wrote cheerfully, for she did
not want to damp his courage, or interfere with the plan of life he had
formed. She felt that there was nothing for him to do in Wrayburn, and,
since she could not go to him, they must be content to live apart for
the present.

"I wish I could see my boy," she sighed, as she poured out her solitary
cup of tea, and tried to force down a few mouthfuls of toast. "Shall we
ever be able to live together again?"

There was a noise at the outer door, a quick step was heard, and Herbert
rushed in, nearly upsetting the table in his impetuosity, as he embraced
his mother.

"Are you glad to see me, mother?" he asked.

"You don't know how I have longed to see you!" was the heartfelt reply.

She did not ask what brought him home, nor care to ask just yet. She was
too happy in having him back.

"You don't ask for my news, mother," said Herbert, after a pause.

"Is it good news?" she asked, wistfully.

"Suppose I should tell you that Mr. Cameron's father has agreed to pay
two hundred dollars for father's model!"

"Has he, really?" asked Mrs. Carter, her face lighting up.

"He has bought it, that is, half of it; but he is to pay more than
that."

"More than two hundred dollars, Herbert?"

"More than three hundred. What do you think of that?"

"Are you in earnest, Herbert?"

"Quite in earnest, mother; only it is better than a dream. You mustn't
be too much excited, mother, when you hear the whole. I will only say
that we shan't have to pinch any more, or lie awake thinking how to ward
off starvation."

"And can we be together again, Herbert? You don't know how lonely it is
without you."

"Poor mother! How lonesome it must have been! Yes; we can be together
again, if you think a thousand dollars a year will pay our expenses."

"A thousand dollars a year!" exclaimed Mrs. Carter, thinking that
Herbert was bereft of his senses. "It can't be that your father's
invention is worth as much as that?"

"Mr. Cameron has offered that for half the invention, and I have agreed
to sell to him. I supposed you would not object."

"Object? I did not dream of getting one-tenth as much. It seems to me
like a dream."

"It is a happy dream, mother, and a true one. Father little thought what
a handsome legacy he was leaving us when he left us that model."

"How happy it would have made him had he known it before he died! Tell
me how it all happened."

So Herbert had to tell his mother about his fortunate meeting with Mr.
Cameron, and what resulted from it.

"Mr. Cameron is a very honorable man," he concluded, "for he might
easily have offered one-quarter as much, and I should have agreed to
it. Now, mother, let me tell you my plans for the future. In the first
place, are you willing to leave Wrayburn?"

"I am willing to live anywhere if we are together."

"Mr. Cameron proposed to me to accept a clerkship in his office, but
for the present, I told him, I wished to make up the deficiencies in my
education. In the town where he lives there is a flourishing academy. I
propose that we move there, and I spend the next two years in study. We
shall have a competent income, more than enough to support us, and so I
can afford the time."

"I fully approve of your proposal, Herbert. We may sometime lose our
money, but a good education never."

"I was sure you would agree with me."

"Shall we have any difficulty in finding a house of suitable size?"

"I inquired about that. There is a very pretty cottage just vacated, not
far from the academy. I find we can have it at a moderate rent. I have
already got the refusal of it, and will write at once that we will hire
it."

"And what shall we do with this house?"

"We won't sell it to Squire Leech at a sacrifice. That is one thing
certain. By the way, day after to-morrow is the day for paying the
interest."

"Yes; I have been troubling myself about it."

"There is no occasion; I have a hundred dollars in my pocket, given me
on account by Mr. Cameron. So the squire is checkmated. But, mother, I
have a favor to ask of you."

"What is that?"

"For two days keep secret our good fortune."

"Why, Herbert?"

"I want the squire to be deceived--to think the place is in his grasp,
and realize that there is many a slip between the cup and the lip."

"What shall I say to the neighbors if they ask why you have got home?"

"Say that I am not going back to New York--that I couldn't earn enough
there to save anything."

"I will do as you think best, Herbert; but I am afraid that my joy at
the good news you have brought will betray me."

"It will be attributed to your joy in having me back. We'll keep things
secret for a day or two--that's all."

After supper Herbert walked out. He was popular in the village, and
received many cordial greetings. To the inevitable inquiries he replied
as he had suggested to his mother.

Presently he met James Leech. He smiled to himself as he saw James
advancing to meet him, but assumed a sober, downcast look.

"Hello, Carter! Have you got back?" said James.

"Yes."

"Got tired of New York?"

"I should like New York well enough, if I could make enough money
there."

"Then you're not going back?" asked James, in a tone of satisfaction.

"Not at present."

"I thought you'd be coming back," said James, in a tone of triumph.

"What made you think so?"

"I knew you couldn't get along there."

"I supported myself while I was there."

"But you didn't make anything over?"

"No."

"Then you might as well be back."

"I don't know. I am not sure of doing that in Wrayburn."

"I don't think I shall stay in Wrayburn long. Father talks of moving to
New York," said James, in a burst of confidence. "What do you expect to
do here?"

"Do you think your father would give me work?" asked Herbert, demurely.

"I don't know. He might, if you agreed to sell the house."

"We may, if we can get enough for it."

"You'll have to, anyway. You must be very poor."

"We've got a little money."

"Well, I'll mention your case to father. I'm sorry for you, but I knew
beforehand you wouldn't succeed in New York."

Herbert smiled quietly as James walked away.

"He'll be astonished when he hears the truth," thought he.




CHAPTER XXXVI

CONCLUSION


James repeated to his father what Herbert had told him, and the squire
jumped to the conclusion that Herbert and his mother were in his power,
and must accede to his demand. He decided to take advantage of their
necessities, and allow only three hundred dollars for the house.

He entered the little house with the air of a proprietor.

"I suppose you know my errand, Mrs. Carter," he said pompously.

"I believe this is interest day," returned the widow.

"Yes. I presume you have by this time seen the folly of holding on to
the place. You can't afford it, and it is best to accept my offer."

"My mother and I have thought it over, and decided to sell," said
Herbert.

"I am glad you are so sensible," observed Squire Leech, in a tone of
satisfaction. "I will give you three hundred dollars over and above the
mortgage."

"You offered us fifty dollars more before."

"Then is not now. You should have accepted my offer when I made it."

"We have no idea of selling at that price," said Herbert. "Our lowest
price is six hundred and fifty dollars over and above the mortgage."

"Are you crazy?" ejaculated the squire, angrily.

"No; we have fixed upon that as a fair price," said Herbert, coolly.

"You know you can't get it."

"Then we won't sell."

"Young man, I apprehend you do not understand how the matter stands. You
will have to sell."

"Why must we?"

"You can't live on nothing."

"Of course not."

"You have made a failure in New York."

"I made my expenses while I was there."

"Then why didn't you stay?"

"I wanted to do something for mother's support."

"You have altogether too high an idea of your own abilities."

"I hope not, sir."

"You influence your mother to her harm."

"I don't think so, Squire Leech."

"But in this case you must yield. You can't expect me to wait for my
money."

"Do you mean the interest?"

"Of course I do."

"We shall not ask you to wait. I am ready to pay it."

The squire stared in discomfiture while Herbert drew out the precise sum
needed to pay the interest.

"Where did you get that money?" he inquired, chop-fallen.

"Honestly, Squire Leech. Will you give me a receipt?"

The squire did so mechanically.

"I will give you the three hundred and fifty dollars," he said; "but you
must accept it to-day, or it is withdrawn."

"Neither to-day nor any other day will it be accepted, Squire Leech,"
said Herbert, firmly. "If you choose to pay six hundred and fifty, we
will sell."

"You must think I am crazy."

"No, sir; it is a fair offer. If you don't want to buy, we will make
another offer. We will rent the house for ninety dollars a year. That is
the interest on fifteen hundred dollars at six per cent. I believe a man
in your employ wishes to live here."

"Where do you propose to live?" asked Squire Leech, in surprise.

"We are going to leave town."

"Have you got a chance to work outside?"

"Yes; but I have declined to. I am going to school for two years--to an
academy."

"But how are you going to live all this time?" inquired the squire, in
amazement.

"I shall live on my income," answered Herbert, smiling.

"Income! Have you had a legacy?"

"Yes."

"From whom? I thought you only got a trunk of old clothes from your
uncle."

"My legacy comes from my father."

"But he died poor."

"He left behind him an invention, half of which we have sold for an
income of a thousand dollars a year."

"A thousand a year!" ejaculated the squire.

"Yes. I have sold it to the father of Mr. Cameron, who employed me last
summer. You see, there is no occasion for our selling the house."

"You have been very fortunate," said Squire Leech, soberly. "I
congratulate you both."

"Thank you," said Herbert, who privately thought their visitor looked
excessively annoyed at their good fortune.

"I will see you about the house," he said, as he rose to go.

"Well, the squire congratulated us," said Herbert, after he went away;
