a sight which brought a scream from both their lips. Mrs. Hardy
fell on her knees and covered her eyes, while Ethel, after a
moment's pause, grasped the rifle, which had nearly fallen from her
hands, and ran forward, though her limbs trembled so that they
could scarcely carry her on.

The sight was indeed a terrible one. At a distance of two hundred
yards Hubert was riding for his life. His hat was off, his gun was
gone, his face was deadly pale. Behind him rode three Indians. The
nearest one was immediately behind him, at a distance of scarce two
horses' length; the other two were close to their leader. All were
evidently gaining upon him.

Maud had thrown the gate open, and stood by the post with the
barrel of her rifle resting on one of the wires. "Steady, Ethel,
steady," she said in a hard, strange voice, as her sister joined
her; "Hubert's life depends upon your aim. Wait till I fire, and
take the man on the right. Aim at his chest."

The sound of Maud's steady voice acted like magic upon her sister;
the mist which had swum before her eyes cleared off; her limbs
ceased to tremble, and her hand grew steady. Hubert was now within
a hundred yards, but the leading Indian was scarce a horse's length
behind. He had his tomahawk already in his hand, in readiness for
the fatal blow. Another twenty yards and he whirled it round his
head with a yell of exultation.

"Stoop, Hubert, stoop!" Maud cried in a loud, clear voice; and
mechanically, with the wild war-whoop behind ringing in his ears,
Hubert bent forward on to the horse's mane. He could feel the
breath of the Indian's horse against his legs, and his heart seemed
to stand still.

Maud and her rifle might have been taken for a statue, so immovable
and rigid did she stand; and then as the Indian's arm went back for
the blow, crack, and without a word or a cry the Indian fell back,
struck with the deadly little bullet in the center of the forehead.

Not so silently did Ethel's bullet do its work. A wild cry followed
the report: for an instant the Indian reeled in his saddle, and
then, steadying himself, turned his horse sharp round, and with his
companion galloped off.

[Illustration: HUBERT'S ESCAPE FROM THE INDIANS]

Hubert, as his horse passed through the gate and drew up, almost
fell from his seat; and it was with the greatest difficulty that he
staggered toward Maud, who had gone off in a dead faint as she saw
him ride on alone.

Ethel had sat down on the ground, and was crying passionately, and
Terence came running down from the house with a gun in his hand,
pouring out Irish threats and ejaculations after the Indians. These
were changed into a shout of triumph as Charley stepped from behind
the henhouse, as they passed at a short distance, and at the
discharge of his double barrels the unwounded Indian fell heavily
from his horse.

Anxious as he was to assist his young mistresses, for Hubert was
far too shaken to attempt to lift Maud from the ground, Terence
stood riveted to the spot watching the remaining Indian. Twice he
reeled in the saddle, and twice recovered himself, but the third
time, when he was distant nearly half a mile, he suddenly fell off
to the ground.

"I thought the murdering thief had got it," muttered Terence to
himself, as he ran down to raise Maud, and with the assistance of
Sarah to carry her up to the house, against the doorway of which
Mrs. Hardy was still leaning, too agitated to trust herself to
walk.

Hubert, now somewhat recovered, endeavored to pacify Ethel, and the
two walked slowly up toward the house. In a minute or two Charley
came running up, and the peons were seen hurrying toward them.
After a silent shake of the hand to his brother, and a short "Thank
God!" Charley, with his accustomed energy, took the command.

"Hubert, do you and Terence get all the arms loaded at once. Lopez,
tell the peons to hurry up the plow oxen, shut them in the
enclosure, and padlock all the gates. I will warn you if there's
any danger. Then bring all the men and women up here. I am going to
run up the danger flag. Papa is out somewhere on the plains." So
saying, and taking his Colt's carbine, he ran up the stairs.

In a moment afterward his voice was heard again. "Hubert, Terence,
bring all the guns that are loaded up here at once--quick, quick!"
and then he shouted loudly in Spanish, "Come in all; come in for
your lives!" In another minute they joined him on the tower with
Mr. Hardy's long rifle, Hubert's carbine, and their double-barreled
shotguns, into each of which Terence dropped a bullet upon the top
of the shot. Hubert could scarcely help giving a cry. At a distance
of a quarter of a mile Mr. Hardy and Fitzgerald were coming along,
pursued by at least a dozen Indians, who were thirty or forty yards
in their rear. They were approaching from behind the house, and
would have to make a sweep to get round to the entrance, which was
on the right, on the side facing the dam. This would evidently give
their pursuers a slight advantage.

"They hold their own," Charley said after a minute's silence;
"there is no fear. Lopez!" he shouted, "run and see that the
outside as well as the inside gates are open."

It has been already said that a low wire fence had been placed at a
distance of a hundred yards beyond the inner enclosure, to protect
the young trees from the animals. It was composed of two wires,
only a foot apart, and was almost hidden by the long grass. It had
a low gate, corresponding in position to the inner one. Charley's
quick eye saw at once the importance of the position.

"I think you might use the long rifle now," Hubert said; "it might
stop them if they feel that they are in reach of our guns."

"No, no," Charley said, "I don't want to stop them; don't show the
end of a gun above the wall." Then he was silent until his father
was within three hundred yards. He then shouted at the top of his
voice, "Mind the outside fence, mind the outside fence!"

Mr. Hardy raised a hand to show that he heard, and as he
approached, Charley shouted again, "Sweep well round the fence,
well round it, for them to try and cut you off."

Charley could see that Mr. Hardy heard, for he turned his horse's
head so as to go rather wide of the corner of the fence. "Now,
Hubert and Terence, get ready; we shall have them directly."

Mr. Hardy and his companion galloped past, with the Indians still
fifty yards behind them. Keeping twenty yards from the corner of
the fence, the fugitives wheeled round to the right, and the
Indians, with a cry of exultation, turned to the right also to cut
them off. The low treacherous wire was unnoticed, and in another
moment men and horses were rolling in a confused mass upon the
ground.

"Now," Charley said, "every barrel we have;" and from the top of
the tower a rain of lead poured down upon the bewildered Indians.
The horses, frightened and wounded, kicked and struggled
dreadfully, and did almost as much harm to their masters as the
deadly bullets of the whites; and when the fire ceased not more
than half of them regained their seats and galloped off, leaving
the rest, men and horses, in a ghastly heap. Seeing them in full
retreat, the occupants of the tower descended to receive Mr. Hardy
and Fitzgerald, Terence much delighted at having at last had his
share in a skirmish.

"Well done, boys! Very well planned, Charley!" Mr. Hardy said as he
reined in his horse. "That was a near escape."

"Not as near a one as Hubert has had, by a long way, papa."

"Indeed!" Mr. Hardy said anxiously. "Let me hear all about it."

"We have not heard ourselves yet," Charley answered. "It occurred
only a few minutes before your own. The girls behaved splendidly;
but they are rather upset now. If you will go up to the house to
them, I will be up directly, but there are a few things to see about
first. Lopez," he went on, "carry out what I told you before:
get the men in from the plows and see all secured. Tell them to
hurry, for it will be dark soon. Kill a couple of sheep and bring
them up to the house; we shall be a large party, and it may be
wanted. Then let the peons all have supper. Come up to the house in
an hour for instructions. See yourself that the dogs are fastened
down by the cattle. Terence, take your place on the lookout, and
fire a gun if you see any one moving."

Having seen that his various orders were obeyed, Charley went up to
the house. He found the whole party assembled in the sitting-room.
Maud and Ethel had quite recovered, although both looked pale. Mrs.
Hardy, absorbed in her attention to them, had fortunately heard
nothing of her husband's danger until the firing from above,
followed by a shout of triumph, told her that any danger there was
had been defeated.

"Now, papa," Charley said, "you give us your account first."

"I have not much to tell, Charley. Fitzgerald and I had ridden out
some distance--five miles, I should say--when the dogs stopped at a
thicket and put out a lion. Fitzgerald and I both fired with our
left-hand barrels, which were loaded with ball. The beast fell, and
we got off to skin him. Dash barked furiously, and we saw a couple
of dozen Indians coming up close to us. We stopped a moment to give
them our barrels with duck-shot, and then jumped into our saddles
and rode for it. Unfortunately, we had been foolish enough to go
out without our revolvers. They pressed us hard, but I was never in
fear of their actually catching us; my only alarm was that one of
us might repeat my disaster of the armadillo hole. So I only tried
to hold my own thirty or forty yards ahead. I made sure that one or
other of you would see us coming, and I should have shouted loudly
enough, I can tell you, to warn you as I came up. Besides, I knew
that at the worst the arms were hanging above the fireplace, and
that we only wanted time to run in, catch them up, and get to the
door, to be able to defend the house till you could help us. And
now, what is your story, Charley?"

"I have even less than you, papa. I was down at the dam, and then I
went into the henhouse, and I was just thinking that I could make a
better arrangement for the nests, when I heard an Indian war-yell
between me and the house. It was followed almost directly by two
cracks which I knew were the girls' rifles. I rushed to the door
and looked out, and I saw two Indians coming along at full gallop.
By the direction they were taking, they would pass only a little
way from the henhouse; so I stepped back till I heard they were
opposite, and then, going out, I gave both barrels to the nearest
to me, and stopped his galloping about pretty effectually. When I
reached the place I saw that Hubert had had a narrow squeak of it,
for Maud had fainted, and Ethel was in a great state of cry. But I
had no time to ask many questions, for I ran up to hoist the danger
flag, and then saw you and Fitzgerald coming along with the Indians
after you. Now, Hubert, let's hear your story."

"Well, papa, you know I said yesterday that I was sure that I had
seen a new duck, and this afternoon I rode out to the pools, in
hopes that he might still be there. I left my horse and crept on
very cautiously through the reeds till I got sight of the water.
Sure enough, there was the duck, rather on the other side. I waited
for a long half-hour, and at last he came over rather nearer. He
dived at my first barrel, but as he came up I gave him my second.
Flirt went in and brought him out. He was new, sure enough--two
blue feathers under the eye--"

"Bother the duck, Hubert," Charley put in. "We don't care for his
blue feathers; we want to hear about the Indians."

"Well, I am coming to the Indians," Hubert said; "but it was a new
duck, for all that; and if you like it, I will show it you. There!"
And he took it out of his pocket and laid it on the table. No one
appeared to have the slightest interest in it, or to pay any
attention to it. So Hubert went on: "Well, after looking at the
duck, I put it into my pocket, and went out from the bushes to my
horse. As I got to him I heard a yell, which nearly made me tumble
down, it startled me so; and not a hundred yards away, and riding
to cut me off from home, were thirty or forty Indians. I was not
long, as you may guess, climbing into my saddle, and bolted like a
shot. I could not make straight for home, but had to make a sweep
to get round them. I was better mounted than all of them, except
three; but they kept gradually gaining on me, while all the rest in
turn gave up the chase; and, like papa, I had left my revolver
behind. Black Tom did his best, and I encouraged him to the utmost;
but I began to think that it was all up with me, for I was
convinced that they would catch me before I could get in. When I
was little more than three hundred yards from the gate I saw Maud
come dashing down with her rifle toward the gate, and a little
afterward Ethel came too. The Indians kept getting nearer and
nearer, and I expected every moment to feel the tomahawk. I could
not think why the girls did not fire, but I supposed that they did
not feel sure enough of their aim: and I had the consolation that
the Indian nearest could not be going to strike, or they would risk
a shot. On I went: the Indian was so close that I could feel his
horse's breath, and the idea came across my mind that the brute was
trying to catch hold of the calf of my leg. At a hundred yards I
could see Maud's face quite plain, and then I felt certain I was
saved. She looked as steady as if she had been taking aim at a
mark, and the thought flashed across me of how last week she had
hit a small stone on a post, at eighty yards, first shot, when
Charley and I had missed it half a dozen times each. Then there was
a frightful yell, almost in my ear. Then I heard Maud cry out,
'Stoop, Hubert, stoop!' I was stooping before, but my head went
down to the horse's mane, I can tell you.' And then there was the
crack of the two rifles, and a yell of pain. I could not look
round, but I felt that the horse behind me had stopped, and that I
was safe. That's my story, papa."

A few more questions elicited from Mrs. Hardy all that she knew of
it, and then the warmest commendations were bestowed upon the
girls. Ethel, however, generously disclaimed all praise, as she
said that she should have done nothing at all had it not been for
Maud's steadiness and coolness.

"And now let us have our tea," Mr. Hardy said; "and then we can
talk over our measures for to-night."

"Do you think that they will attack us, papa?" Ethel asked.

"Yes, Ethel, I think that most likely they will. As we came across
the plain I noticed several other parties quite in the distance.
There must be a very strong body out altogether, and probably they
have resolved upon vengeance for their last year's defeat. They had
better have left it alone, for they have no more chance of taking
this house, with us all upon our guard, than they have of flying.
There is one advantage in it--they will get such a lesson that I do
think we shall be perfectly free from Indian attacks for the
future."

After tea Lopez came up for orders. "You will place," Mr. Hardy
said, "two peons at each corner of the outside fence. One of us
will come round every half-hour to see that all is right. Their
instructions are that in case they hear any movement one is to come
up to us immediately with the news, and the other is to go round to
tell the other sentries to do the same. All this is to be done in
perfect silence. I do not want them to know that we are ready for
their reception. Bring some fresh straw up and lay it down here on
the floor: the women can sleep here."

"What shall I do about your own horses, signor?" Lopez asked.

Mr. Hardy thought a moment. "I think you had better send them down
to the enclosure with the others; they might be driven off if they
are left up here, and I do not see that we can require them."

"But what about the cattle, papa?" Charley asked.

"It would be a serious loss if they were driven off, especially the
milch cows. If you like, I will go down with Terence, and we can
take up our station among them. It would be a strong post, for the
Indians of course could not attack us on horseback; and with my
carbine, and Terence's gun, and a brace of revolvers, I think we
could beat them off easily enough, especially as you would cover us
with your guns."

"I had thought of that plan, Charley; but it would be dangerous,
and would cause us up here great anxiety, I imagine, too, that as
no doubt their great object is vengeance, they will attack us first
here, or they may make an effort upon the cattle at the same time
that they attack here. They will not begin with the animals. They
will find it a very difficult business to break down the fence,
which they must do to drive them out; and while they are about it
we shall not be idle, depend upon it."

The preparations were soon made and it was agreed that Mr. Hardy
and Hubert should go the rounds alternately with Charley and
Fitzgerald. As a usual thing, the Indian attacks take place in the
last hour or two of darkness. Mr. Hardy thought, however, that an
exception would be made in the present case, in order that they
might get as far as possible away before any pursuit took place.
The wives of the peons lay down to sleep on the straw which had
been thrown down for them. The men sat outside the door, smoking
