so, but with clenched teeth and quivering nerves lay there until the
Major said, "I fancy we have stopped them working. Now, Doctor, do you,
Hunter, Bathurst, and Farquharson go and lie down for four hours, when I
will send for you to take our places. Before you lie down will you tell
Doolan to send half his party in? Of course you will lie down in your
clothes, ready to fall in at your posts at a moment's notice."

"Let me send another rocket up first, Major, to see what they are doing.
We can sleep tomorrow in the daytime; they won't dare to work under our
fire then. Now, get ready, gentlemen, and don't throw away a shot, if
they are still working there."

The light of the rocket showed that there were now no natives at the
spot where they had been seen at work.

"I thought it would be too hot for them, Major, at such close quarters
as these. We must have played the mischief with them."

"All the better, Doctor; we will send a few shots there occasionally to
show them we have not forgotten them. But the principal thing will be
to keep our ears open to see that they don't bring up ladders and try a
rush."

"I think there is no fear of that tonight, Major. They would not have
set to work at the battery if they had any idea of trying to scale the
wall with ladders. That will come later on; but I don't think you will
be troubled any more tonight, except by these fellows firing away from
the bushes, and I should think they would get tired of wasting their
ammunition soon. It is fortunate we brought all the spare ammunition in
here."

"Yes, they only had ten rounds of ball cartridge, and that must be
nearly used up by this time. They will have to make up their cartridges
in future, and cast their bullets, unless they can get a supply from
some of the other mutineers."

"Well, you will send for us in four hours, Major?"

"You need not be afraid of my forgetting."

Dawn was just breaking when the relief were called up; the firing had
died away, and all was quiet.

"You will take command here, Rintoul," the Major said. "I should keep
Farquharson up here, if I were you, and leave the Doctor and Bathurst to
look after things in general. I think, Doctor, it would be as well if we
appointed Bathurst in charge of the general arrangements of the house.
We have a good amount of stores, but the servants will waste them if
they are not looked after. I should put them on rations, Bathurst; and
there might be regular rations of things served out for us too; then
it would fall in your province to see that the syces water and feed the
horses. You will examine the well regularly, and note whether there is
any change in the look of the water. I think you will find plenty to
do."

"Thank you, Major," Bathurst said. "I appreciate your kindness, and
for the present, at any rate, will gladly undertake the work of looking
after the stores and servants; but there is one thing I have been
thinking of, and which I should like to speak to you about at once, if
you could spare a minute or two before you turn in."

"What is that, Bathurst?"

"I think that we are agreed, Major, that though we may hold this place
for a time, sooner or later we must either surrender or the place be
carried by storm."

Major Hannay nodded.

"That is what it must come to, Bathurst. If they will at last grant
us terms, well and good; if not, we must either try to escape or die
fighting."

"It is about the escape I have been thinking, Major; as our position
grows more and more desperate they will close round us, and although we
might have possibly got through last night, our chances of doing so when
they have once broken into the inclosure and begin to attack the house
itself are very slight. A few of us who can speak the language well
might possibly in disguise get away, but it would be impossible for the
bulk of us to do so."

"I quite see that, Bathurst."

"My proposal is, Major, that we should begin at once to mine; that is,
to drive a gallery from the cellar, and to carry it on steadily as far
as we can. I should say that we have ten days or a fortnight before us
before matters get to an extremity, and in that time we ought to be able
to get, working night and day, from fifty to a hundred yards beyond the
wall, aiming at a clump of bushes. There is a large one in Farquharson's
compound, about a hundred yards off. Then, when things get to the worst,
we can work upwards, and come out on a dark night. We might leave a long
fuse burning in the magazine, so that there should be an explosion an
hour or two after we had left. There is enough powder there to bring the
house down, and the Sepoys might suppose that we had all been buried in
the ruins."

"I think the idea is a very good one, Bathurst. What do you think,
Doctor?"

"Capital," the Doctor said. "It is a light sandy soil, and we should
be able to get through it at a pretty good rate. How many can work
together, do you think, Bathurst?"

"I should say two of us in each shift, to drive, and, if necessary, prop
the roof, with some of the natives to carry out the earth. If we have
three shifts, each shift would go on twice in the twenty-four hours;
that would be four hours on and eight hours off."

"Will you take charge of the operation, Bathurst?"

"With pleasure, Major."

"Very well then. You shall have with you Wilson and Richards and the
three youngest of the civilians, Saunderson, Austin, and Herbert. You
six will be relieved from other duty except when the enemy threaten an
attack. I will put down Saunderson and Austin together. Which of the
others would you like to have with you?"

"I will take Wilson, sir."

"Very well, then, Richards and Herbert will make the third party. After
breakfast we can pick out the twelve strongest of the natives. I will
tell them that they have to work, but that they will be each paid half
a rupee a day in addition to their ordinary wages. Then you will give a
general supervision to the work, Bathurst, in addition to your own share
in it?"

"Certainly, Major, I will take general charge of it."

So at breakfast the Major explained the plan agreed upon. The five men
chosen at once expressed their willingness to undertake the work, and
the offer of half a rupee extra a day was sufficient to induce twelve of
the servants to volunteer for it. The Major went down to the cellars
and fixed upon the spot at which the work should begin; and Bathurst and
Wilson, taking some of the intrenching tools from the storeroom, began
to break through the wall without delay.

"I like this," Wilson said. "It is a thousand times better than sitting
up there waiting till they choose to make an attack. How wide shall we
make it?"

"As narrow as we can for one to pass along at a time," Bathurst said.
"The narrower it is, the less trouble we shall have with the roof."

"But only one will be able to work at a time in that case."

"That will be quite enough,". Bathurst said. "It will be hot work and
hard. We will relieve each other every five minutes or so."

A very short time sufficed to break through the wall.

"Thank goodness, it is earth," Wilson said, thrusting a crowbar through
the opening as soon as it was made.

"I had no fear of its being rock, Wilson. If it had been, they would not
have taken the trouble to have walled the sides of the cellar. The soil
is very deep all over here. The natives have to line their wells thirty
or forty feet down."

The enemy were quiet all day, but the garrison thought it likely that,
warned by the lesson of the night before, they were erecting a battery
some distance farther back, masked by the trees, and that until it was
ready to open fire they would know nothing about it.

"So you have turned miner, Mr. Wilson?" Isobel Hannay said to him as,
after a change and a bath, he came in to get his lunch.

"I calculate I have lost half a stone in weight, Miss Hannay. If I were
to go on at this for a month or two there would be nothing left of me."

"And how far did you drive the hole?"

"Gallery, Miss Hannay; please call it a gallery, it sounds so much
better. We got in five yards. I should hardly have believed it possible,
but Bathurst is a tremendous fellow to work. He uses a pick as if he had
been a sapper all his life. We kept the men pretty hard at work, I can
tell you, carrying up the earth. Richards is at work now, and I bet him
five rupees that he and Herbert don't drive as far as we did."

"There is not much use in betting now, Mr. Wilson," Isobel said sadly.

"No, I suppose not, Miss Hannay; but it gives a sort of interest to
one's work. I have blistered my hands horribly, but I suppose they will
get hard in a day or two."

"I wish we could work at something," Isobel said. "Now that we have
finished with the bags and bandages, the time seems very long; the only
thing there is to do is to play with the children and try to keep them
good; it is fortunate there is a bit of garden for them to play in."

"It is not much of a garden, Miss Hannay. We had something like a garden
when I was a boy at home; the governor's is a jolly old rectory, with a
splendid garden. What fun we used to have there when I was a young one!
I wonder what the dear old governor and mater would say if they knew the
fix we were in here. You know, sometimes I think that Forster's plan
was the best, and that it would be better to try and make a dash through
them."

"We are in your way, Mr. Wilson; you wouldn't be able to do much
fighting if you had one of us clinging to you."

"I don't know, Miss Hannay," Wilson said quietly, "what my fighting
powers are, but I fancy if you were clinging to me I could cut my way
through a good deal."

"I am sure you would do anything that anyone could do," the girl said
kindly; "but whatever you might feel, having another person behind
you could not but hamper you awfully. I would infinitely rather try to
escape on foot, for then I should be relying on myself, while if I was
riding behind anyone, and we were pursued or attacked, I should feel all
the time I was destroying his chances, and that if it were not for me
he would get away. That would be terrible. I don't know whether we were
wise to stay here instead of trying to escape at once; but as uncle and
Mr. Hunter and the others all thought it wiser to stay, I have no doubt
it was; but I am quite sure that it could not have been a good plan to
go off like that on horseback."

Another day passed quietly, and then during the night the watch heard
the sounds of blows with axes, and of falling trees.

"They are clearing the ground in front of their battery," the Major,
who was on the watch with his party, said; "it will begin in earnest
tomorrow morning. The sound came from just where we expected. It is
about in the same line as where they made their first attempt, but a
hundred yards or so further back."

At daylight they saw that the trees and bushes had been leveled, and a
battery, with embrazures for six guns, erected at a distance of about
four hundred yards from the house. More sandbags were at once brought up
from below, and the parapet, on the side facing the battery, raised two
feet and doubled in thickness. The garrison were not disturbed while so
engaged.

"Why the deuce don't the fellows begin?" Captain Forster said
impatiently, as he stood looking over the parapet when the work was
finished.

"I expect they are waiting for the Rajah and some of the principal
Zemindars to come down," replied the Major; "the guns are theirs, you
see, and will most likely be worked by their own followers. No doubt
they think they will knock the place to pieces in a few minutes.

"Listen! there is music; they are coming in grand state. Rintoul, will
you tell the workers in the mine to come up. By the way, who are at work
now?"

"Bathurst and Wilson, sir."

"Then tell Wilson to come up, and request Bathurst to go on with the
gallery. Tell him I want that pushed forward as fast as possible, and
that one gun will not make much difference here. Request the ladies and
children to go down into the storeroom for the present. I don't think
the balls will go through the wall, but it is as well to be on the safe
side."

Captain Rintoul delivered his message to the ladies. They had already
heard that the battery had been unmasked and was ready to open fire, and
lamps had been placed in the storeroom in readiness for them. There
were pale faces among them, but their thoughts were of those on the roof
rather than of themselves.

Mrs. Hunter took up the Bible she had been reading, and said, "Tell
them, Captain Rintoul, we shall be praying for them." The ladies went
into the room that served as a nursery, and with the ayahs and other
female servants carried the children down into the storeroom.

"I would much rather be up there," Isobel said to Mrs. Doolan; "we could
load the muskets for them, and I don't think it would be anything
like so bad if we could see what was going on as being cooped up below
fancying the worst all the time."

"I quite agree with you, but men never will get to understand women.
Perhaps before we are done they will recognize the fact that we are no
more afraid than they are."

The music was heard approaching along the road where the bungalows had
stood. Presently a number of flags were raised in the battery amid a
great beating of drums. On the previous day a flagstaff had been erected
on the roof, and a Union Jack was run up in answer to the enemy's
demonstration.

"A cheer for the old flag, lads," the Major said; and a hearty cheer
broke from the little party on the roof, where, with the exception of
Bathurst, all the garrison were assembled. The cheer was answered by a
yell from the natives not only in the battery, but from the gardens and
inclosures round the house.

"Pay no attention to the fellows in the gardens," the Major said; "fire
at their guns--they must expose themselves to load."

The men were kneeling behind the parapet, where the sandbags had been
so arranged that they could see through between those on the upper line,
and thus fire without raising their heads above it.

"Shall we wait for them or fire first, Major?" the Doctor asked.

"I expect the guns are loaded and laid, Doctor; but if you see a head
looking along them, by all means take a shot at it. I wish we could see
down into the battery itself, but it is too high for that."

The Doctor lay looking along his rifle. Presently he fired, and as if
it had been the signal five cannon boomed out almost at the same moment,
the other being fired a quarter of a minute later. Three of the shot
struck the house below the parapet, the others went overhead.

"I hit my man," the Doctor said, as he thrust another rifle through the
loophole. "Now, we will see if we can keep them from loading."

Simultaneously with the roar of the cannon a rattle of musketry broke
out on three sides of the house, and a hail of bullets whistled over the
heads of the defenders, who opened a steady fire at the embrasures of
the guns. These had been run in, and the natives could be seen loading
them. The Major examined the work through a pair of field glasses.

"You are doing well," he said presently; "I have seen several of them
fall, and there is a lot of confusion among them; they will soon get
tired of that game."

Slowly and irregularly the guns were run out again, and the fire of the
defenders was redoubled to prevent them from taking aim. Only one shot
hit the house this time, the others all going overhead. The fire of the
enemy became slower and more irregular, and at the end of an hour ceased
almost entirely.

"Doctor," the Major said, "I will get you and Farquharson to turn your
attention to some fellows there are in that high tree over there. They
command us completely, and many of their bullets have struck on the
terrace behind us. It would not be safe to move across to the stairs
now. I think we have pretty well silenced the battery for the present.
Here are my glasses. With them you can easily make out the fellows among
the leaves."

"I see them," the Doctor said, handing the glasses to Farquharson; "we
will soon get them out of that. Now, Farquharson, you take that fellow
out on the lower branch to the right; I will take the one close to the
trunk on the same branch."

Laying their rifles on the upper row of sandbags, the two men took a
steady aim. They fired almost together, and two bodies were seen to fall
from the tree.

"Well shot!" the Major exclaimed. "There are something like a dozen of
them up there; but they will soon clear out if you keep that up."

"They are not more than two hundred yards away," the Doctor said, "and
firing from a rest we certainly ought not to miss them at that distance.
Give me the glasses again."

A similar success attended the next two shots, and then a number of
figures were seen hastily climbing down.

"Give them a volley, gentlemen," the Major said.

A dozen guns were fired, and three more men dropped, and an angry yell
from the natives answered the shout of triumph from the garrison.

"Will you go down, Mr. Hunter, and tell the ladies that we have silenced
the guns for the present, and that no one has received a scratch? Now,
let us see what damage their balls have effected."

This was found to be trifling. The stonework of the house was strong,
and the guns were light. The stonework of one of the windows was broken,
and two or three stones in the wall cracked. One ball had entered a
window, torn its way through two inner walls, and lay against the back
wall.

"It is a four pound ball," the Major said, taking it up. "I fancy the
guns are seven pounders. They have evidently no balls to fit, which
accounts for the badness of their firing and the little damage they did;
with so much windage the balls can have had but small velocity. Well,
that is a satisfactory beginning, gentlemen; they will take a long time
to knock the place about our ears at this rate. Now we will see if we
cannot clear them out of the gardens. Captain Doolan, will you take the
glasses and watch the battery; if you see any movement about the guns,
the fire will be reopened at once; until then all will devote their
attention to those fellows among the bushes; it is important to teach
them that they are not safe there, for a chance ball might come in
between the sandbags. Each of you pick out a particular bush, and watch
it till you see the exact position in which anyone firing from it must
be in, and then try to silence him. Don't throw away a shot if you can
help it. We have a good stock of ammunition, but it is as well not to
waste it. I will leave you in command at present, Doolan."

Major Hannay then went down to the storeroom.

"I have come to relieve you from your confinement, ladies," he said. "I
am glad to say that we find their balls will not penetrate the walls
of the house alone, and there is therefore no fear whatever of their
passing through them and the garden wall together; therefore, as long
as the wall is intact, there is no reason whatever why you should not
remain on the floor above."

There was a general exclamation of pleasure.

"That will be vastly better, uncle," Isobel said; "it is hateful being
hidden away down here when we have nothing to do but to listen to the
firing; we don't see why some of us should not go up on the terrace to
load the rifles for you."

"Not at present, Isobel; we are not pressed yet. When it comes to a real
attack it will be time to consider about that. I don't think any of us
would shoot straighter if there were women right up among us in danger."

"I don't at all see why it should be worse our being in danger than for
you men, Major," Mrs. Doolan said; "we have just as much at stake, and
more; and I warn you I shall organize a female mutiny if we are not
allowed to help."

The Major laughed.

"Well, Mrs. Doolan, I shall have to convert this storeroom into a
prison, and all who defy my authority will be immured here, so now you
know the consequence of disobedience."

"And has no one been hurt with all that firing, Major Hannay?" Mary
Hunter asked.

"A good many people have been hurt, Miss Hunter, but no one on our side.
I fancy we must have made it very hot for those at the guns, and the
Doctor and Mr. Farquharson have been teaching them not to climb trees.
At present that firing you hear is against those who are hiding in the
gardens."

An hour later the firing ceased altogether, the natives finding the fire
of the defenders so deadly that they no longer dared, by discharging a
rifle, to show where they were hiding. They had drawn off from the more
distant clumps and bushes, but dared not try and crawl from those nearer
the house until after nightfall.

The next morning it was found that during the night the enemy had closed
up their embrasures, leaving only openings sufficiently large for the
muzzles of the guns to be thrust through, and soon after daybreak they
renewed their fire. The Doctor and Mr. Farquharson alone remained on
the roof, and throughout the day they kept up a steady fire at these
openings whenever the guns were withdrawn. Several of the sandbags were
knocked off the parapet during the course of the day, and a few shot
found their way through the walls of the upper story, but beyond this
no damage was done. The mining was kept up with great vigor, and the
gallery advanced rapidly, the servants finding it very hard work to
remove the earth as fast as the miners brought it down.

Captain Forster offered to go out with three others at night to try
and get into the battery and spike the guns, but Major Hannay would not
permit the attempt to be made.

"We know they have several other guns," he said, "and the risk would be
altogether too great, for there would be practically no chance of your
getting back and being drawn up over the wall before you were overtaken,
even if you succeeded in spiking the guns. There are probably a hundred
men sleeping in the battery, and it is likely they would have sentries
out in front of it. The loss of four men would seriously weaken the
garrison."

The next morning another battery to the left was unmasked, and on
the following day three guns were planted, under cover, so as to play
against the gate. The first battery now concentrated its fire upon the
outer wall, the new battery played upon the upper part of the house, and
the three guns kept up a steady fire at the gate.

There was little rest for the besieged now. It was a constant duel
between their rifles and the guns, varied by their occasionally turning
their attention to men who climbed trees, or who, from the roofs of some
buildings still standing, endeavored to keep down their fire.

Wilson had been released from his labors in the gallery, Bathurst
undertaking to get down the earth single handed as fast as the servants
could remove it.

"I never saw such a fellow to work, Miss Hannay," Wilson said one day,
when he was off duty, and happened to find her working alone at some
bandages. "I know you don't like him, but he is a first rate fellow if
there ever was one. It is unlucky for him being so nervous at the guns;
but that is no fault of his, after all, and I am sure in other things he
is as cool as possible. Yesterday I was standing close to him, shoving
the earth back to the men as he got it down. Suddenly he shouted, 'Run,
Wilson, the roof is coming down!' I could not help bolting a few yards,
for the earth came pattering down as he spoke; then I looked round and
saw him standing there, by the light of the lamp, like those figures
you see holding up pillars; I forget what they call them--catydigs, or
something of that sort."

"Caryatides," Isobel put in.

"Yes, that is the name. Some timber had given way above him, and he was
holding it up with his arms. I should say that there must have been
half a ton of it, and he said, as quietly as possible, 'Get two of those
short poles, Wilson, and put up one on each side of me. I can hold it a
bit, but don't be longer than you can help about it.' I managed to shove
up the timber, so that he could slip out before it came down. It would
have crushed us both to a certainty if he had not held it up."

"Why do you say you know I don't like Mr. Bathurst?"

"I don't exactly know, Miss Hannay, but I have noticed you are the only
lady who does not chat with him. I don't think I have seen you speak
to him since we have come in here. I am sorry, because I like him very
much, and I don't care for Forster at all."

"What has Captain Forster to do with it?" Isobel asked, somewhat
indignantly.

"Oh, nothing at all, Miss Hannay, only, you know, Bathurst used to be
a good deal at the Major's before Forster came, and then after that I
never met him there except on that evening before he came in here. Now
you know, Miss Hannay," he went on earnestly, "what I think about you. I
have not been such an ass as to suppose I ever had a chance, though you
know I would lay down my life for you willingly; but I did not seem to
mind Bathurst. I know he is an awfully good fellow, and would have
made you very happy; but I don't feel like that with Forster. There is
nothing in the world that I should like better than to punch his head;
and when I see that a fellow like that has cut Bathurst out altogether
it makes me so savage sometimes that I have to go and smoke a pipe
outside so as not to break out and have a row with him."

"You ought not to talk so, Mr. Wilson. It is very wrong. You have
no right to say that anyone has cut anyone else out as far as I am
concerned. I know you are all fond of me in a brotherly sort of way,
and I like you very much; but that gives you no right to say such
things about other people. Mr. Bathurst ceased his visits not because of
Captain Forster but from another reason altogether; and certainly I
have neither said nor done anything that would justify your saying that
Captain Forster had cut Mr. Bathurst out. Even if I had, you ought not
to have alluded to such a thing. I am not angry with you," she said,
seeing how downcast he looked; "but you must not talk like that any
more; it would be wrong at any time; it is specially so now, when we are
all shut up here together, and none can say what will happen to us."

"It seemed to me that was just the reason why I could speak about it,
Miss Hannay. We may none of us get out of this fix we are in, and I
