this morning. As these things will be even more useful to us than to
the Spaniards, I mean to have them now. Be as quick as you can. I have
already ordered your horses to be brought round with mine."

In five minutes they were in the saddle and rode quickly to the cavalry
barracks. The streets were still full of people; but the earl in his
simple uniform passed unnoticed through them. The dragoons were already
mounted when they reached the barracks.

"We will go out at the back gate, colonel," the earl said. "Take the
most quiet streets by the way, and make for the west gate. Break your
troop up into four parties, and let them go by different routes, so that
any they meet will suppose they are merely small bodies going out to
relieve the outposts. If it was suspected that I was with you, and that
an expedition was on foot, the Spaniards would hear it in an hour. Loyal
as the population are here, there must be many adherents of Philip among
them, and Las Torres no doubt has his spies as well as we have."

The earl's orders were carried out, and half an hour later the four
parties again assembled at a short distance outside the city gates.
Peterborough placed himself at their head and rode directly for the sea.

"The Spaniards are sure to have outposts placed on all the roads leading
inland," he said to Colonel Zinzendorf, "and the Spanish irregulars will
be scattered all over the country; but I do not suppose they will have
any down as far as the seashore."

When they reached the coast they followed a small road running along its
margin. Two or three miles further they turned off and rode inland till
they struck a main road, so as to avoid following all the windings of
the coast. They now pushed on at a sharp trot, and just at four o'clock
came down upon the little port.

Its streets were cumbered with country carts, and as the dragoons dashed
into the place a few shots were fired by some Spanish soldiers belonging
to a small detachment which had been sent by Las Torres to act as a
convoy for the guns and stores, and who were sleeping on the pavement
or scattered among the houses in readiness for a start at daybreak.
The resistance soon ceased. Before entering the place Peterborough had
placed a cordon of dragoons in a semicircle round it to prevent any one
passing out.

No time was lost; the carts were already loaded, and a troop of cavalry
horses stood picketed by the guns. These were soon harnessed up, and the
few other horses in the place were seized to prevent any one riding off
with the news. The order was given to the peasants to start their carts,
and in ten minutes after their entering the place the convoy was on its
way with its long row of carts laden with ammunition and its sixteen
guns.

The cordon of dragoons was still left round the town, the officer in
command being ordered to allow no one to pass for an hour and a half,
after which time he was to gallop on with his men to overtake the
convoy, as by that time it would be no longer possible for any one to
carry the news to Las Torres in time for him to put his troops into
motion to cut off the convoy from Valencia. The journey back took much
longer than the advance, for the carts, drawn for the most part by
bullocks, made but slow progress. Three hours after the convoy started
the dragoons left behind overtook them. When within three miles of the
town, they were met by a small party of the enemy's Spanish militia; but
these were at once scattered by a charge of the dragoons, and the convoy
proceeded without further molestation until just at noon it entered the
gates of Valencia, where the astonishment and delight of the inhabitants
at its appearance were unbounded.

In a few hours the cannon were all mounted in position on the ramparts,
adding very much to the defensive power of the town, which was now safe
for a time from any attempt at a siege by Las Torres, whose plans would
be entirely frustrated by the capture of the artillery intended for the
siege.

But Peterborough was not yet contented. The junction of the four
thousand Castilians, of whose approach he had heard, with Las Torres
would raise the force under that general to a point which would enable
him to blockade the town pending the arrival of artillery for siege
works; and no sooner had the earl returned to his quarters, after seeing
the cannon placed upon the walls, than he began his preparations for
another expedition. He ordered Colonel Zinzendorf to march quietly out
of the city at eight o'clock with four hundred of his dragoons, and four
hundred British and as many Spanish infantry were to join him outside
the walls. The colonels of these three bodies were ordered to say
nothing of their intended movement, and to issue no orders until within
half an hour of the time named. At the same hour the rest of the troops
were to march to the walls and form a close cordon round them, so as to
prevent any one from letting himself down by a rope and taking the news
that an expedition was afoot to Las Torres.

At a few minutes past eight, eight hundred foot and four hundred horse
assembled outside the gates, and Peterborough took the command. His
object was to crush the Castilians before they could effect a junction
with Las Torres. In order to do this it would be necessary to pass close
by the Spanish camp, which covered the road by which the reinforcements
were advancing to join them.

In perfect silence the party moved forward and marched to a ford
across the river Xucar, a short distance only below the Spanish camp.
Peterborough rode at their head, having by his side a Spanish gentleman
acquainted with every foot of the country. They forded the river without
being observed, and then, making as wide a circuit as possible round the
camp, came down upon the road without the alarm being given; then they
pushed forward, and after three hours' march came upon the Castilians at
Fuente de la Higuera. The surprise was complete. The Spaniards, knowing
that the Spanish army lay between them and the town, had taken no
precautions, and the British were in possession of the place before they
were aware of their danger.

There was no attempt at resistance beyond a few hasty shots. The
Castilians were sleeping wrapped up in their cloaks around the place,
and on the alarm they leaped up and fled wildly in all directions.
In the darkness great numbers got away, but six hundred were taken
prisoners. An hour was spent in collecting and breaking the arms left
behind by the fugitives, and the force, with their prisoners in their
midst, then started back on their return march. The circuit of the
Spanish camp was made, and the ford passed as successfully as before,
and just as daylight was breaking the little army marched into Valencia.

The news rapidly spread, and the inhabitants hurried into the streets,
unable at first to credit the news that the Castilian army, whose
approach menaced the safety of the town, was destroyed. The movement of
the troops on the previous night to the ramparts and the absence of the
greater part of the officers from the festivities had occasioned
some comment; but as none knew that an expedition had set out, it was
supposed that the earl had received news from his spies that Las Torres
intended to attempt a sudden night attack, and the people would have
doubted the astonishing news they now received had it not been for the
presence of the six hundred Castilian prisoners.

These two serious misadventures caused Las Torres to despair of success
against a town defended by so energetic and enterprising a commander as
Peterborough, and he now turned his thoughts toward the small towns of
Sueca and Alcira. Below these towns and commanded by their guns was the
important bridge of Cullera, by which by far the greater portion of
the supplies for the town was brought in from the country. Las Torres
therefore determined to seize these places, which were distant about
fifteen miles from his camp, and so to straiten the town for provisions.

As usual, Peterborough's spies brought him early intelligence of the
intended movement, and the orders issued by Las Torres were known to the
earl a few hours later. It needed all his activity to be in time. Five
hundred English and six hundred Spanish infantry, and four hundred
horse, were ordered to march with all speed to the threatened towns;
and, pushing on without a halt, the troops reached them half an hour
before the Spanish force appeared on the spot. On finding the two towns
strongly occupied by the British, Las Torres abandoned his intention and
drew off his troops.

A portion of the Spanish army were cantoned in a village only some
two miles from Alcira, and a few days later Peterborough determined to
surprise it, and for that purpose marched out at night from Valencia
with an English force of a thousand men, and reached the spot intended
at daybreak as he had arranged. The Spanish garrison of Alcira, also
about a thousand strong, had orders to sally out and attack the village
at the same hour. The Spaniards also arrived punctually, but just as
they were preparing to burst upon the unconscious enemy, who were four
thousand strong, they happened to come upon a picket of twenty horse. An
unaccountable panic seized them; they broke their ranks and fled in such
utter confusion that many of the terror stricken soldiers killed each
other. The picket aroused the enemy, who quickly fell into their ranks,
and Peterborough, seeing that it would be madness to attack them with
his wearied and unsupported force, reluctantly ordered a retreat, which
he conducted in perfect order and without the loss of a man.

This was Peterborough's only failure; with this exception every one of
his plans had proved successful, and he only failed here from trusting
for once to the cooperation of his wholly unreliable Spanish allies.
After this nothing was done on either side for several weeks.

The campaign had been one of the most extraordinary ever accomplished,
and its success was due in no degree to chance, but solely to the
ability of Peterborough himself. Wild as many of his schemes appeared,
they were always planned with the greatest care. He calculated upon
almost every possible contingency, and prepared for it. He never
intrusted to others that which he could do himself, and he personally
commanded every expedition even of the most petty kind.

His extraordinary physical powers of endurance enabled him to support
fatigue and to carry out adventure, which would have prostrated most
other men. The highest praise, too, is due to the troops, who proved
themselves worthy of such a leader. Their confidence in their chief
inspired them with a valor equal to his own. They bore uncomplainingly
the greatest hardships and fatigues, and engaged unquestioningly
in adventures and exploits against odds which made success appear
absolutely hopeless. The hundred and fifty dragoons who followed the
Earl of Peterborough to the conquest of Valencia deserve a place side by
side with the greatest heroes of antiquity.



CHAPTER XII: IRREGULAR WARFARE


From the moment that the news of the loss of Barcelona had reached
Madrid, Philip of Anjou had labored strenuously to collect a force
sufficient to overwhelm his enemies. He had, moreover, written urgently
to Louis XIV for assistance, and although France was at the moment
obliged to make strenuous efforts to show a front to Marlborough and his
allies, who had already at Blenheim inflicted a disastrous defeat
upon her, Louis responded to the appeal. Formidable French armies were
assembled at Saragossa and Roussillon, while a fleet of twelve ships of
the line, under the command of the Count of Toulouse, sailed to blockade
Barcelona, and the Duke of Berwick, one of the ablest generals of the
day, was sent to head the southern army.

In January the French army of Catalonia, under Marshal Tesse, reached
Saragossa, where the arrogance and brutality of the marshal soon excited
a storm of hatred among the Aragonese. The towns resisted desperately
the entry of the French troops; assassinations of officers and men were
matters of daily occurrence, and the savage reprisals adopted by the
marshal, instead of subduing, excited the Spaniards to still fiercer
resistance. But savage and cruel as was the marshal, he was in no haste
to meet the enemy in the field, and Philip, who was with him, had the
greatest difficulty in getting him to move forward.

It was in the last week of February that the news reached the Earl of
Peterborough that Marshal Tesse had left Saragossa, and was marching
toward Lerida. This was two days after the unsuccessful attempt to
surprise the enemy's camp near Alcira; and, menaced as Valencia was by a
force greatly superior to his own, he could not leave the city, which in
his absence would speedily have succumbed to the attack of Las Torres.
He walked quickly up and down his room for some minutes and then said:

"Captain Stilwell, I cannot leave here myself, but I will send you
to the Marquis of Cifuentes. You have shown the greatest activity and
energy with me, and I do not doubt that you will do equally well when
acting independently. I will give you a letter to the marquis, saying
that you are one of my most trusted and valued officers, and begging him
to avail himself to the fullest of your energy and skill. I shall
tell him that at present I am tied here, but that when the enemy reach
Barcelona, I shall at all hazards march hence and take post in their
rear and do what I can to prevent their carrying on the siege. In the
mean time I beg him to throw every obstacle in the way of their advance,
to hold every pass to the last, to hang on their rear, attack baggage
trains, and cut off stragglers. He cannot hope to defeat Tesse, but he
may wear out and dispirit his men by constant attacks. You speak Spanish
fluently enough now, and will be able to advise and suggest. Remember,
every day that Tesse is delayed gives so much time to the king to put
Barcelona in a state of defense. With my little force I cannot do much
even when I come. The sole hope of Barcelona is to hold out until a
fleet arrives from England. If the king would take my advice I will
guarantee that he shall be crowned in Madrid in two months; but those
pig headed Germans who surround him set him against every proposition I
make. You had better start tonight as soon as it gets dark, and take a
mounted guide with you who knows the country thoroughly.

"It will be a change for you, from the pleasures of Valencia to a
guerrilla warfare in the mountains in this inclement season, Stilwell,"
Graham said as they left the general. "I don't think I should care about
your mission. I own I have enjoyed myself in Valencia, and I have lost
my heart a dozen times since we arrived."

"I have not lost mine at all," Jack said laughing, "and I am sick of all
these balls and festivities. I was not brought up to it, you know, and
rough as the work may be I shall prefer it to a long stay here."

"Yes," Graham agreed, "I should not care for a long stay, but you may be
quite certain the earl will not remain inactive here many weeks. He is
waiting to see how things go, and the moment the game is fairly opened
you may be sure he will be on the move."

"Yes, I don't suppose you will be very long after me," Jack said;
"still, I am not sorry to go."

At seven o'clock in the evening Jack set out, taking with him two
dragoons as orderlies, the earl having suggested that he should do so.

"Always do a thing yourself if it is possible, Captain Stilwell; but
there are times when you must be doing something else, and it is as well
to have some one that you can rely upon; besides, the orderlies will
give you additional importance in the eyes of the peasants. Most of the
men have picked up some Spanish, but you had better pick out two of my
orderlies who are best up in it."

Jack had spent the afternoon in making a round of calls at the houses
where he had been entertained, and after the exchange of adieus,
ceremonial speeches, and compliments, he was heartily glad when the
gates closed behind him and he set out on his journey. As the road
did not pass anywhere near the Spanish camp there was little fear of
interruption in the way. The guide led them by little frequented tracks
across the hills, and by morning they were far on their road.

They were frequently obliged to make detours to avoid towns and villages
favorable to King Philip. Why one town or village should take one side,
and the next the other, was inexplicable to Jack, but it was so, and
throughout the country this singular anomaly existed. It could be
accounted for by a variety of causes. A popular mayor or a powerful
landed proprietor, whose sympathies were strong with one side or the
other, would probably be followed by the townspeople or peasants. The
influence of the priests, too, was great, and this also was divided.
However it was, the fact remained that, as with Villa Real and Nules,
neighboring towns were frequently enthusiastically in favor of opposite
parties. As Jack had seen all the dispatches and letters which poured
in to the earl, he knew what were the circumstances which prevailed in
every town and village. He knew to what residences of large proprietors
he could ride up with an assurance of welcome, and those which must be
carefully avoided.

In some parts of the journey, where the general feeling was hostile,
Jack adopted the tactics of his general, riding boldly into the village
with his two dragoons clattering behind him, summoning the head men
before him, and peremptorily ordering that provisions and forage should
be got together for the five hundred horsemen who might be expected to
come in half an hour. The terror caused by Peterborough's raids was
so great that the mere sight of the English uniform was sufficient to
insure obedience, and without any adventure of importance Jack and his
companions rode on, until, on the third day after leaving Valencia,
they approached Lerida. Groups of armed peasants hurrying in the same
direction were now overtaken. These saluted Jack with shouts of welcome,
and he learned that, on the previous day, Marshal Tesse with his army
had crossed from Arragon into Catalonia, and that the alarm bells had
