juicy fresh-caught moccasins.'

'You've got it all wrong,' murmured Cyril angrily.  But Golden
Eagle only looked inquiringly at her.

'Thy customs are other than ours, O Black Panther,' he said.
'Bring up thy tribe, that we may hold pow-wow in state before them,
as becomes great chiefs.'

'We'll bring them up right enough,' said Anthea, 'with their bows
and arrows, and tomahawks, and scalping-knives, and everything you
can think of, if you don't look sharp and go.'

She spoke bravely enough, but the hearts of all the children were
beating furiously, and their breath came in shorter and shorter
gasps.  For the little real Red Indians were closing up round them
- coming nearer and nearer with angry murmurs - so that they were
the centre of a crowd of dark, cruel faces.

'It's no go,' whispered Robert.  'I knew it wouldn't be.  We must
make a bolt for the Psammead.  It might help us.  If it doesn't -
well, I suppose we shall come alive again at sunset.  I wonder if
scalping hurts as much as they say.'

'I'll wave the flag again,' said Anthea.  'If they stand back,
we'll run for it.'

She waved the towel, and the chief commanded his followers to stand
back.  Then, charging wildly at the place where the line of Indians
was thinnest, the four children started to run.  Their first rush
knocked down some half-dozen Indians, over whose blanketed bodies
the children leaped, and made straight for the sand-Pit.  This was
no time for the safe easy way by which carts go down - right over
the edge of the sand-pit they went, among the yellow and pale
purple flowers and dried grasses, past the little sand-martins'
little front doors, skipping, clinging, bounding, stumbling,
sprawling, and finally rolling.

Yellow Eagle and his followers came up with them just at the very
spot where they had seen the Psammead that morning.

Breathless and beaten, the wretched children now awaited their
fate.  Sharp knives and axes gleamed round them, but worse than
these was the cruel light in the eyes of Golden Eagle and his
followers.

'Ye have lied to us, O Black Panther of the Mazawattees - and thou,
too, Squirrel of the Moning Congos.  These also, Pussy Ferox of the
Phiteezi, and Bobs of the Cape Mounted Police - these also have
lied to us, if not with their tongue, yet by their silence.  Ye
have lied under the cover of the Truce-flag of the Pale-face.  Ye
have no followers.  Your tribes are far away - following the
hunting trail.  What shall be their doom?' he concluded, turning
with a bitter smile to the other Red Indians.

'Build we the fire!' shouted his followers; and at once a dozen
ready volunteers started to look for fuel.  The four children, each
held between two strong little Indians, cast despairing glances
round them.  Oh, if they could only see the Psammead!

'Do you mean to scalp us first and then roast us?' asked Anthea
desperately.

'Of course!'  Redskin opened his eyes at her.  'It's always done.'

The Indians had formed a ring round the children, and now sat on
the ground gazing at their captives.  There was a threatening
silence.

Then slowly, by twos and threes, the Indians who had gone to look
for firewood came back, and they came back empty-handed.  They had
not been able to find a single stick of wood, for a fire!  No one
ever can, as a matter of fact, in that part of Kent.

The children drew a deep breath of relief, but it ended in a moan
of terror.  For bright knives were being brandished all about them.
Next moment each child was seized by an Indian; each closed its
eyes and tried not to scream.  They waited for the sharp agony of
the knife.  It did not come.  Next moment they were released, and
fell in a trembling heap.  Their heads did not hurt at all.  They
only felt strangely cool!  Wild war-whoops rang in their ears.
When they ventured to open their eyes they saw four of their foes
dancing round them with wild leaps and screams, and each of the
four brandished in his hand a scalp of long flowing black hair.
They put their hands to their heads - their own scalps were safe!
The poor untutored savages had indeed scalped the children.  But
they had only, so to speak, scalped them of the black calico
ringlets!

The children fell into each other's arms, sobbing and laughing.

'Their scalps are ours,' chanted the chief; 'ill-rooted were their
ill-fated hairs!  They came off in the hands of the victors -
without struggle, without resistance, they yielded their scalps to
the conquering Rock-dwellers!  Oh, how little a thing is a scalp so
lightly won!'

'They'll take our real ones in a minute; you see if they don't,'
said Robert, trying to rub some of the red ochre off his face and
hands on to his hair.

'Cheated of our just and fiery revenge are we,' the chant went on
- 'but there are other torments than the scalping-knife and the
flames.  Yet is the slow fire the correct thing.  O strange
unnatural country, wherein a man may find no wood to burn his
enemy! - Ah, for the boundless forests of my native land, where the
great trees for thousands of miles grow but to furnish firewood
wherewithal to burn our foes.  Ah, would we were but in our native
forest once more!'

Suddenly, like a flash of lightning, the golden gravel shone all
round the four children instead of the dusky figures.  For every
single Indian had vanished on the instant at their leader's word.
The Psammead must have been there all the time.  And it had given
the Indian chief his wish.


Martha brought home a jug with a pattern of storks and long grasses
on it.  Also she brought back all Anthea's money.

'My cousin, she give me the jug for luck; she said it was an odd
one what the basin of had got smashed.'

'Oh, Martha, you arc a dear!' sighed Anthea, throwing her arms
round her.

'Yes,' giggled Martha, 'you'd better make the most of me while
you've got me.  I shall give your ma notice directly minute she
comes back.'

'Oh, Martha, we haven't been so very horrid to you, have we?' asked
Anthea, aghast.

'Oh, it ain't that, miss.'  Martha giggled more than ever.  'I'm
a-goin' to be married.  It's Beale the gamekeeper.  He's been
a-proposin' to me off and on ever since you come home from the
clergyman's where you got locked up on the church-tower.  And
to-day I said the word an' made him a happy man.'

Anthea put the seven-and-fourpence back in the missionary-box, and
pasted paper over the place where the poker had broken it.  She was
very glad to be able to do this, and she does not know to this day
whether breaking open a missionary-box is or is not a hanging
matter.



CHAPTER 11
THE LAST WISH


Of course you, who see above that this is the eleventh (and last)
chapter, know very well that the day of which this chapter tells
must be the last on which Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane will have
a chance of getting anything out of the Psammead, or Sand-fairy.

But the children themselves did not know this.  They were full of
rosy visions, and, whereas on other days they had often found it
extremely difficult to think of anything really nice to wish for,
their brains were now full of the most beautiful and sensible
ideas.  'This,' as Jane remarked afterwards, 'is always the way.'
Everyone was up extra early that morning, and these plans were
hopefully discussed in the garden before breakfast.  The old idea
of one hundred pounds in modern florins was still first favourite,
but there were others that ran it close - the chief of these being
the 'pony each' idea.  This had a great advantage.  You could wish
for a pony each during the morning, ride it all day, have it vanish
at sunset, and wish it back again next day.  Which would be an
economy of litter and stabling.  But at breakfast two things
happened.  First, there was a letter from mother.  Granny was
better, and mother and father hoped to be home that very afternoon.
A cheer arose.  And of course this news at once scattered all the
before-breakfast wish-ideas.  For everyone saw quite plainly that
the wish for the day must be something to please mother and not to
please themselves.

'I wonder what she WOULD like,' pondered Cyril.

'She'd like us all to be good,' said Jane primly.

'Yes - but that's so dull for us,' Cyril rejoined; 'and, besides,
I should hope we could be that without sand-fairies to help us.
No; it must be something splendid, that we couldn't possibly get
without wishing for.'

'Look out,' said Anthea in a warning voice; 'don't forget
yesterday.  Remember, we get our wishes now just wherever we happen
to be when we say "I wish".  Don't let's let ourselves in for
anything silly - to-day of all days.'

'All right,' said Cyril.  'You needn't jaw.'

just then Martha came in with a jug full of hot water for the
teapot - and a face full of importance for the children.

'A blessing we're all alive to eat our breakfasses!' she said
darkly.

'Why, whatever's happened?' everybody asked.

'Oh, nothing,' said Martha, 'only it seems nobody's safe from being
murdered in their beds nowadays.'

'Why,' said Jane as an agreeable thrill of horror ran down her back
and legs and out at her toes, 'has anyone been murdered in their
beds?'

'Well - not exactly,' said Martha; 'but they might just as well.
There's been burglars over at Peasmarsh Place - Beale's just told
me - and they've took every single one of Lady Chittenden's
diamonds and jewels and things, and she's a-goin' out of one
fainting fit into another, with hardly time to say "Oh, my
diamonds!" in between.  And Lord Chittenden's away in London.'

'Lady Chittenden,' said Anthea; 'we've seen her.  She wears a
red-and-white dress, and she has no children of her own and can't
abide other folkses'.'

'That's her,' said Martha.  'Well, she's put all her trust in
riches, and you see how she's served.  They say the diamonds and
things was worth thousands of thousands of pounds.  There was a
necklace and a river - whatever that is - and no end of bracelets;
and a tarrer and ever so many rings.  But there, I mustn't stand
talking and all the place to clean down afore your ma comes home.'

'I don't see why she should ever have had such lots of diamonds,'
said Anthea when Martha had Bounced off.  'She was rather a nasty
lady, I thought.  And mother hasn't any diamonds, and hardly any
jewels - the topaz necklace, and the sapphire ring daddy gave her
when they were engaged, and the garnet star, and the little pearl
brooch with great-grandpapa's hair in it - that's about all.'

'When I'm grown up I'll buy mother no end of diamonds,' said
Robert, 'if she wants them.  I shall make so much money exploring
in Africa I shan't know what to do with it.'

'Wouldn't it be jolly,' said Jane dreamily, 'if mother could find
all those lovely things, necklaces and rivers of diamonds and
tarrers?'

'TI--ARAS,' said Cyril.

'Ti--aras, then - and rings and everything in her room when she
came home?  I wish she would.'  The others gazed at her in horror.

'Well, she WILL,' said Robert; 'you've wished, my good Jane - and
our only chance now is to find the Psammead, and if it's in a good
temper it MAY take back the wish and give us another.  If not -
well - goodness knows what we're in for! - the police, of course,
and - Don't cry, silly!  We'll stand by you.  Father says we need
never be afraid if we don't do anything wrong and always speak the
truth.'

But Cyril and Anthea exchanged gloomy glances.  They remembered how
convincing the truth about the Psammead had been once before when
told to the police.

It was a day of misfortunes.  Of course the Psammead could not be
found.  Nor the jewels, though every one Of the children searched
their mother's room again and again.

'Of course,' Robert said, 'WE couldn't find them.  It'll be mother
who'll do that.  Perhaps she'll think they've been in the house for
years and years, and never know they are the stolen ones at all.'

'Oh yes!' Cyril was very scornful; 'then mother will be a receiver
of stolen goods, and you know jolly well what THAT'S worse than.'

Another and exhaustive search of the sand-pit failed to reveal the
Psammead, so the children went back to the house slowly and sadly.

'I don't care,' said Anthea stoutly, 'we'll tell mother the truth,
and she'll give back the jewels - and make everything all right.'


'Do you think so?' said Cyril slowly.  'Do you think She'll believe
us?  Could anyone believe about a Sammyadd unless they'd seen it?
She'll think we're pretending.  Or else she'll think we're raving
mad, and then we shall be sent to Bedlam.  How would you like it?'
- he turned suddenly on the miserable Jane - 'how would you like
it, to be shut up in an iron cage with bars and padded walls, and
nothing to do but stick straws in your hair all day, and listen to
the howlings and ravings of the other maniacs?  Make up your minds
to it, all of you.  It's no use telling mother.'

'But it's true,' said Jane.

'Of course it is, but it's not true enough for grown-up people to
believe it,' said Anthea.  'Cyril's right.  Let's put flowers in
all the vases, and try not to think about diamonds.  After all,
everything has come right in the end all the other times.'

So they filled all the pots they could find with flowers - asters
and zinnias, and loose-leaved late red roses from the wall of the
stable-yard, till the house was a perfect bower.

And almost as soon as dinner was cleared away mother arrived, and
was clasped in eight loving arms.  It was very difficult indeed not
to tell her all about the Psammead at once, because they had got
into the habit of telling her everything.  But they did succeed in
not telling her.
Mother, on her side, had plenty to tell them - about Granny, and
Granny's pigeons, and Auntie Emma's lame tame donkey.  She was very
delighted with the flowery-boweryness of the house; and everything
seemed so natural and pleasant, now that she was home again, that
the children almost thought they must have dreamed the Psammead.

But, when mother moved towards the stairs to go UP to her bedroom
and take off her bonnet, the eight arms clung round her just as if
she only had two children, one the Lamb and the other an octopus.

'Don't go up, mummy darling,' said Anthea; 'let me take your things
up for you.'

'Or I will,' said Cyril.

'We want you to come and look at the rose-tree,' said Robert.

'Oh, don't go up!' said Jane helplessly.

'Nonsense, dears,' said mother briskly, 'I'm not such an old woman
yet that I can't take my bonnet off in the proper place.  Besides,
I must wash these black hands of mine.'

So up she went, and the children, following her, exchanged glances
of gloomy foreboding.

Mother took off her bonnet - it was a very pretty hat, really, with
white roses on it - and when she had taken it off she went to the
dressing-table to do her pretty hair.

On the table between the ring-stand and the pincushion lay a green
leather case.  Mother opened it.

'Oh, how lovely!' she cried.  It was a ring, a large pearl with
shining many-lighted diamonds set round it.  'Wherever did this
come from?' mother asked, trying it on her wedding finger, which it
fitted beautifully.  'However did it come here?'

'I don't know,' said each of the children truthfully.
