'Where are you taking him?'

The outraged majesty of the magistrate said, 'To prison, you naughty
little girl.'

Alice said, 'Noel will faint. Somebody once tried to take him to prison
before--about a dog. Do please come to our house and see our uncle--at
least he's not--but it's the same thing. We didn't kill the fox, if
that's what you think--indeed we didn't. Oh, dear, I do wish you'd think
of your own little boys and girls if you've got any, or else about when
you were little. You wouldn't be so horrid if you did.'

I don't know which, if either, of these objects the fox-hound master
thought of, but he said--

'Well, lead on,' and he let go Noel's ear and Alice snuggled up to Noel
and put her arm round him.

It was a frightened procession, whose cheeks were pale with
alarm--except those between white whiskers, and they were red--that
wound in at our gate and into the hall among the old oak furniture, and
black and white marble floor and things.

Dora and Daisy were at the door. The pink petticoat lay on the table,
all stained with the gore of the departed. Dora looked at us all, and
she saw that it was serious. She pulled out the big oak chair and said,
'Won't you sit down?' very kindly to the white-whiskered magistrate.

He grunted, but did as she said.

Then he looked about him in a silence that was not comforting, and so
did we. At last he said--

'Come, you didn't try to bolt. Speak the truth, and I'll say no more.'

We said we had.

Then he laid the fox on the table, spreading out the petticoat under it,
and he took out a knife and the girls hid their faces. Even Oswald did
not care to look. Wounds in battle are all very well, but it's different
to see a dead fox cut into with a knife.

Next moment the magistrate wiped something on his handkerchief and then
laid it on the table, and put one of my cartridges beside it. It was the
bullet that had killed the fox.

'Look here!' he said. And it was too true. The bullets were the same.

A thrill of despair ran through Oswald. He knows now how a hero feels
when he is innocently accused of a crime and the judge is putting on the
black cap, and the evidence is convulsive and all human aid is despaired
of.

'I can't help it,' he said, 'we didn't kill it, and that's all there is
to it.'

The white-whiskered magistrate may have been master of the fox-hounds,
but he was not master of his temper, which is more important, I should
think, than a lot of beastly dogs.

He said several words which Oswald would never repeat, much less in
his own conversing, and besides that he called us 'obstinate little
beggars'.

Then suddenly Albert's uncle entered in the midst of a silence freighted
with despairing reflections. The M.F.H. got up and told his tale: it was
mainly lies, or, to be more polite, it was hardly any of it true, though
I supposed he believed it.

'I am very sorry, sir' said Albert's uncle, looking at the bullets.

'You'll excuse my asking for the children's version?'

'Oh, certainly, sir, certainly,' fuming, the fox-hound magistrate
replied.

Then Albert's uncle said, 'Now Oswald, I know I can trust you to speak
the exact truth.'

So Oswald did.

Then the white-whiskered fox-master laid the bullets before Albert's
uncle, and I felt this would be a trial to his faith far worse than the
rack or the thumb-screw in the days of the Armada.

And then Denny came in. He looked at the fox on the table.

'You found it, then?' he said.

The M.F.H. would have spoken but Albert's uncle said, 'One moment,
Denny; you've seen this fox before?'

'Rather,' said Denny; 'I--'

But Albert's uncle said, 'Take time. Think before you speak and say
the exact truth. No, don't whisper to Oswald. This boy,' he said to
the injured fox-master, 'has been with me since seven this morning. His
tale, whatever it is, will be independent evidence.'

But Denny would not speak, though again and again Albert's uncle told
him to.

'I can't till I've asked Oswald something,' he said at last. White
Whiskers said, 'That looks bad--eh?'

But Oswald said, 'Don't whisper, old chap. Ask me whatever you like, but
speak up.'

So Denny said, 'I can't without breaking the secret oath.'

So then Oswald began to see, and he said, 'Break away for all you're
worth, it's all right.'

And Denny said, drawing relief's deepest breath, 'Well then, Oswald
and I have got a pistol--shares--and I had it last night. And when I
couldn't sleep last night because of the toothache I got up and went out
early this morning. And I took the pistol. And I loaded it just for fun.
And down in the wood I heard a whining like a dog, and I went, and there
was the poor fox caught in an iron trap with teeth. And I went to let it
out and it bit me--look, here's the place--and the pistol went off and
the fox died, and I am so sorry.'

'But why didn't you tell the others?'

'They weren't awake when I went to the dentist's.'

'But why didn't you tell your uncle if you've been with him all the
morning?'

'It was the oath,' H. O. said--

     'May I be called a beastly sneak
     If this great secret I ever repeat.'

White Whiskers actually grinned.

'Well,' he said, 'I see it was an accident, my boy.' Then he turned to
us and said--

'I owe you an apology for doubting your word--all of you. I hope it's
accepted.'

We said it was all right and he was to never mind.

But all the same we hated him for it. He tried to make up for his
unbelievingness afterwards by asking Albert's uncle to shoot rabbits;
but we did not really forgive him till the day when he sent the fox's
brush to Alice, mounted in silver with a note about her plucky conduct
in standing by her brothers.


We got a lecture about not playing with firearms, but no punishment,
because our conduct had not been exactly sinful, Albert's uncle said,
but merely silly.

The pistol and the cartridges were confiscated.

I hope the house will never be attacked by burglars. When it is,
Albert's uncle will only have himself to thank if we are rapidly
overpowered, because it will be his fault that we shall have to meet
them totally unarmed, and be their almost unresisting prey.



CHAPTER 10. THE SALE OF ANTIQUITIES

It began one morning at breakfast. It was the fifteenth of August--the
birthday of Napoleon the Great, Oswald Bastable, and another very nice
writer. Oswald was to keep his birthday on the Saturday, so that his
Father could be there. A birthday when there are only many happy returns
is a little like Sunday or Christmas Eve. Oswald had a birthday-card or
two--that was all; but he did not repine, because he knew they always
make it up to you for putting off keeping your birthday, and he looked
forward to Saturday.

Albert's uncle had a whole stack of letters as usual, and presently he
tossed one over to Dora, and said, 'What do you say, little lady? Shall
we let them come?'

But Dora, butter-fingered as ever, missed the catch, and Dick and Noel
both had a try for it, so that the letter went into the place where the
bacon had been, and where now only a frozen-looking lake of bacon fat
was slowly hardening, and then somehow it got into the marmalade, and
then H. O. got it, and Dora said--

'I don't want the nasty thing now--all grease and stickiness.' So H. O.
read it aloud--


MAIDSTONE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUITIES AND     FIELD CLUB
          Aug.  14, 1900

'DEAR SIR,--At a meeting of the--'


H. O. stuck fast here, and the writing was really very bad, like a
spider that has been in the ink-pot crawling in a hurry over the paper
without stopping to rub its feet properly on the mat. So Oswald took
the letter. He is above minding a little marmalade or bacon. He began to
read. It ran thus:

'It's not Antiquities, you little silly,' he said; 'it's Antiquaries.'

'The other's a very good word,' said Albert's uncle, 'and I never
call names at breakfast myself--it upsets the digestion, my egregious
Oswald.'

'That's a name though,' said Alice, 'and you got it out of "Stalky",
too. Go on, Oswald.'

So Oswald went on where he had been interrupted:

'MAIDSTONE SOCIETY OF "ANTIQUARIES" AND FIELD CLUB

Aug.  14,1900.

'DEAR SIR,--At a meeting of the Committee of this Society it was agreed
that a field day should be held on Aug. 20, when the Society proposes to
visit the interesting church of Ivybridge and also the Roman remains
in the vicinity. Our president, Mr Longchamps, F.R.S., has obtained
permission to open a barrow in the Three Trees pasture. We venture to
ask whether you would allow the members of the Society to walk through
your grounds and to inspect--from without, of course--your beautiful
house, which is, as you are doubtless aware, of great historic interest,
having been for some years the residence of the celebrated Sir Thomas
Wyatt.--I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,

'EDWARD K.  TURNBULL (Hon. Sec.).'


'Just so,' said Albert's uncle; 'well, shall we permit the eye of the
Maidstone Antiquities to profane these sacred solitudes, and the foot of
the Field Club to kick up a dust on our gravel?'

'Our gravel is all grass,' H. O. said.

And the girls said, 'Oh, do let them come!' It was Alice who said--

'Why not ask them to tea? They'll be very tired coming all the way from
Maidstone.'

'Would you really like it?' Albert's uncle asked. 'I'm afraid they'll
be but dull dogs, the Antiquities, stuffy old gentlemen with amphorae
in their buttonholes instead of orchids, and pedigrees poking out of all
their pockets.'

We laughed--because we knew what an amphorae is. If you don't you might
look it up in the dicker. It's not a flower, though it sounds like one
out of the gardening book, the kind you never hear of anyone growing.

Dora said she thought it would be splendid.

'And we could have out the best china,' she said, 'and decorate the
table with flowers. We could have tea in the garden. We've never had a
party since we've been here.'

'I warn you that your guests may be boresome; however, have it your own
way,' Albert's uncle said; and he went off to write the invitation to
tea to the Maidstone Antiquities. I know that is the wrong word but
somehow we all used it whenever we spoke of them, which was often.

In a day or two Albert's uncle came in to tea with a lightly-clouded
brow.

'You've let me in for a nice thing,' he said. 'I asked the Antiquities
to tea, and I asked casually how many we might expect. I thought
we might need at least the full dozen of the best teacups. Now the
secretary writes accepting my kind invitation--'

'Oh, good!' we cried. 'And how many are coming?' 'Oh, only about
sixty,' was the groaning rejoinder. 'Perhaps more, should the weather be
exceptionally favourable.'

Though stunned at first, we presently decided that we were pleased.

We had never, never given such a big party.

The girls were allowed to help in the kitchen, where Mrs Pettigrew made
cakes all day long without stopping. They did not let us boys be there,
though I cannot see any harm in putting your finger in a cake before
it is baked, and then licking your finger, if you are careful to put
a different finger in the cake next time. Cake before it is baked is
delicious--like a sort of cream.

Albert's uncle said he was the prey of despair. He drove in to Maidstone
one day. When we asked him where he was going, he said--

'To get my hair cut: if I keep it this length I shall certainly tear it
out by double handfuls in the extremity of my anguish every time I think
of those innumerable Antiquities.'

But we found out afterwards that he really went to borrow china and
things to give the Antiquities their tea out of; though he did have his
hair cut too, because he is the soul of truth and honour.

Oswald had a very good sort of birthday, with bows and arrows as well as
other presents. I think these were meant to make up for the pistol that
was taken away after the adventure of the fox-hunting. These gave us
boys something to do between the birthday-keeping, which was on the
Saturday, and the Wednesday when the Antiquities were to come.

We did not allow the girls to play with the bows and arrows, because
they had the cakes that we were cut off from: there was little or no
unpleasantness over this.

On the Tuesday we went down to look at the Roman place where the
Antiquities were going to dig. We sat on the Roman wall and ate nuts.
And as we sat there, we saw coming through the beet-field two labourers
with picks and shovels, and a very young man with thin legs and a
bicycle. It turned out afterwards to be a free-wheel, the first we had
ever seen.

They stopped at a mound inside the Roman wall, and the men took their
