"Yes; certainly there may be something in it," said the colonel. "I must
look it up at once."

He arose, called his servant, and presently rode off at a sharp trot
towards the town.

And for several days he continued to go there, to hear if the
investigation had produced any result. On the fourth day he came home
towards evening, and sent word to Mrs. Ritter, who was seated by Pussy's
bed, that he had something important to tell her. It was that the police
had been seeking for Jorg, and had found him without much delay; for he
had not taken precautions to conceal himself, being sure that no one had
seen him on the evening when he visited his native village. He had,
therefore, merely gone to the city, and was spending his time in the
taverns. When they took him into custody, and accused him, he denied
every thing; but when he heard that Colonel Ritter had accusations to
make against him, he was intimidated, thinking that the colonel must
have seen him, or he would never have suspected him, as he had just
returned from the Neapolitan army service. It never occurred to him that
one single word that he had thrown to a little child had betrayed him.

When he heard the truth, he began to swear terribly, and declared he had
always known that those aristocrats would bring him into trouble. On
further examination, he said he had gone to his brother's house with the
intention of asking him for a loan of money; but when he looked through
the brilliantly lighted window and saw the big pile of money lying on
the table, it occurred to him that he would strike Andrew down and rob
him. He had not meant to kill him,--only render him insensible. Nearly
all the money was found at his lodgings, and taken. Jorg was lodged in
the prison.

When these facts were made known in the village, everybody was very much
interested and excited, for nothing of the kind had happened before in
that small place. In the school, particularly, every thing was
topsy-turvy, for the children were as much excited as their elders. Otto
scarcely stopped to take breath all day long, for he ran from one place
to another, hoping to hear the latest news at each. He came to the
house, on the third evening, in such a state, that his mother told him
that he must sit perfectly quiet and silent for a little while before he
communicated the piece of news with which he was bursting.

At last he was calm enough to tell them that they wanted to set Joggi
free, for he had been shut up all this time; but the poor fellow was so
convinced that they only wanted to take him out to cut off his head,
that he fought against being removed with all his might. So they decided
to take him out by force, and two men dragged him into the open air. He
fought and screamed so violently, that a crowd soon assembled; and the
poor, foolish fellow, becoming more and more alarmed, had darted away
like an arrow to the nearest barn, where he took refuge from his
imaginary danger in a stall, cowering down in a heap in one corner, and
would not let anybody approach him. His countenance showed his terrible
fear. He had been there all day and night; and now the peasant to whom
the barn belonged said if he did not move soon, he would use the
pitchfork to him.

"It is a sad, sad story, my children," said their mother, when Otto had
finished. "Poor Joggi! how terribly he must suffer from his fear, that
nobody can relieve him of, because he cannot understand what is said;
and yet he is perfectly innocent of any evil deed or wish. Oh, if you
had only told me what had happened that evening on the coast! Your
keeping that a secret has had very, very sad consequences. Cannot we do
something to comfort and reassure him again?"

Pussy was almost crying. "I will give him my red candy cock," she
said, tearfully.

Otto was much disturbed, but he said, scornfully,--

"Yes; a nice present for a grown up man,--a sugar cock! You had better
keep it for yourself."

After a moment he asked his mother, however, to allow Pussy to carry
some food to Joggi in the barn: he had not eaten any thing for
nearly two days.

His mother was more than willing, and had a basket filled at once with
bread and sausage and cheese for the children, and sent them off without
delay. Poor Joggi! there he was cowering in the stall, white as a sheet,
and dared not stir. The children gradually drew near, and presently Otto
held out his basket and showed the food, hoping to tempt Joggi.

"Come out, Joggi. See, all this is for you to eat."

There was no sign of movement.

"Do come out, or the peasant will stick his pitchfork into you."

The poor fellow gave a piteous moan, but still did not stir.

Now Pussy went quite close to him, put her mouth to his ear, and said,
gently, "Do not be frightened, Joggi; they won't cut off your head. My
papa will help you, and will not let anybody harm you. And see, Joggi;
here is a candy cock, all red. Santa Claus sent you this on the
Christmas-tree." And the little girl took the cock very carefully from
her pocket, and held it out to Joggi.

This little gift had a wonderful effect. Joggi looked at his friend
without fear, then at the candy cock, and presently began to laugh. It
was many days since he had laughed. He rose slowly from his corner, and
followed Otto out of the barn behind Pussy. When they got well out of
the yard, Otto said,--

"You can take this basket, Joggi; we are going up there to our house.
Your way is down yonder."

But Joggi shook his head, and followed close to Pussy's heels. They all
went up the hill. Their mother watched the little procession coming, and
her heart began to feel lighter; and she also noticed how the poor,
foolish Joggi held his sugar cock in his hand, and laughed at it with
childish satisfaction.

They all three entered the house and went into the sitting-room, where
Pussy fetched a chair, and, taking the basket in her hand, beckoned
Joggi to come to her; and when he was seated at the table, she spread
out the bread and cheese and sausage before him, saying, very gently,
"Now do eat,--eat up every bit, Joggi, and be happy again."

The poor fellow obeyed, and left no crumbs. He never relinquished his
hold of the red cock, however. He held it in his left hand, and nodded
and smiled at it from time to time. For bread and cheese and sausage he
had often received, but a red candy cock never before.

At last he went down the hill to his cottage. With very happy looks Mrs.
Ritter and Otto and Pussy followed his retreating form, and noticed that
he changed the red cock from one hand to another, and had evidently
forgotten his fears. Mrs. Ritter had not visited Andrew during three
days. There was so much going on all the time, that she had not
perceived how the time passed; and then she no longer felt the least
anxiety about him. He was well cared for,--of that she was certain,--and
was on the best road towards health and strength.

As soon as Colonel Ritter could go, he took the news of the arrest and
imprisonment of Andrew's brother to the good carpenter, who listened to
the story quietly, and said, after a while,--

"It was his will. It would have been far better for him to have asked me
for a little money. I should have given it to him, but his way was ever
a blow rather than a kind word."

Mrs. Ritter went down the mountain one cold, frosty morning, and went
smiling to herself all the way; for she had pleasant plans and projects
in her heart. Just as she opened the door of Andrew's cottage, Wiseli
came out of the sitting-room. Her eyes were swollen and red. She had
been crying. She gave Mrs. Ritter her hand very shyly, and ran into the
kitchen, and shut the door. Mrs. Ritter had never seen Wiseli look in
this way. What could have happened? She went into the sitting-room.
There sat Andrew by the window. He, too, looked as if a bad piece of
news had been brought to him.

"What has happened?" asked Mrs. Ritter; and forgot to say
"good-morning," in her anxiety.

"Oh, oh!" sighed Andrew. "I wish that the child had never entered
my house."

"Wiseli!" exclaimed his visitor. "Is it possible that Wiseli can have
displeased you in any way?"

"Not that, by any means, good lady," Andrew hastened to answer. "No; she
has made my home a paradise for me, and now she is going away; and it
will seem so empty and lonely without her, I cannot bear it. You never
could think, Mrs. Ritter, how I love that child. I cannot bear it, if
they take her away. And the cousin Gotti has sent his boy twice to say
that she is wanted at his house; and, since then, Wiseli has been so
quiet, and cries in secret. It breaks my heart; for I see that she does
not want to go there, though she says nothing, and to-morrow is the last
day. I do not exaggerate, Mrs. Ritter; but I assure you I would prefer
to give all that I have earned and saved for thirty years to her cousin
Gotti, than have him take the child away."

"I would not think of doing that. In your place, Andrew, I would go to
work another way," said Mrs. Ritter, when Andrew had finished his
excited talk.

He questioned her with his eyes in silence.

"I mean in this way. All your worldly goods you will leave to some one
who is very dear to you. You will take Wiseli as your adopted child;
will be a father to her; she shall henceforth live in your house as your
own daughter. You would like that, Andrew, would you not?"

He had listened with all his might, and his eyes grew bigger and bigger.
Presently he grasped Mrs. Ritter's hand, and pressed it almost
painfully. He leaned forward.

"Can that be done? Can I obtain the right to say that Wiseli is really
my own child,--all my own, so that nobody will be able to take her from
me again?"

"You can do all that, Andrew. And, once Wiseli is recognized as your
child, no one will have the least right to her. You will be her father.
And, to tell the truth, Andrew, I hoped that you might wish to do this;
and therefore have kept my husband at home, in case you want to go into
the city to take the necessary steps towards the adoption. You know you
cannot walk, Andrew."

Andrew fairly lost his head over all this. He ran this way and that,
looking for his Sunday coat; and kept asking all the time,

"Can it be true? Is it possible? To-day, did you say? May I go to-day?"

"At once," she said; and gave her hand to Andrew as she left him, to
tell the colonel that all was ready for the visit to the town. "It will
be better not to tell Wiseli until the evening, when every thing is
settled, and you are quietly together here," she said, as she stepped
out of the door. "Do not you agree with me?"

"Yes, certainly," was the answer. "I could not tell her now."

While Andrew was waiting until Colonel Ritter came for him to drive to
the town, he sat trembling in every limb, and thought he could scarcely
stand up, he was so happy and so excited. In about half an hour Wiseli
saw, to her great surprise, the colonel's wagon drive up, stop at
Andrew's door, the servant get down, come to the steps, take Andrew
under the arm, and help him to get into the carriage. The child looked
at it, as it passed away from the house down the road, and could not
understand it at all; for the carpenter had not said any thing to
her,--not even that he was going to drive. He had remained seated where
he was, after Mrs. Ritter's departure, until the colonel's servant came
for him; and the child had kept herself hidden all the time.

After his departure, she went into the sitting-room, and looked out of
the window where Andrew always sat, and kept saying to herself, "To-day
is the last day. To-morrow I must go to cousin Gotti."

Towards noon the child went into the kitchen, put every thing in order,
and arranged Andrew's dinner; but he did not come, and she did not like
to remove the things until he did. So she went back into the
sitting-room; but the sad thought of the coming separation made her
almost ill, and she said to herself, over and over, "To-morrow I must go
to cousin Gotti;" and did not see, in her sadness, that the sunset was
very beautiful, and betokened a still more beautiful morrow.

The child sprang to her feet when presently she heard the door
opened. Andrew the carpenter stood before her with happy eyes, and
with a look that Wiseli had never seen on his face. He sunk into a
chair. He was overcome, but not with fatigue. At last he cried out,
in a triumphant tone,--

"It is true, Wiseli! It is all really true! All the gentlemen said
'Yes,'--every one. You belong to me. I am your father. Call me
'father,' Wiseli."

Wiseli became white as a sheet. She stood staring at Andrew, but did not
speak nor move.

"Oh! of course, of course," said the carpenter. "You can't understand
me, I tell you all so confusedly. Now I will begin at the beginning.
I have just written in the record book in the town, and you are my
child now, and I am your father; and you will always stay here with
me, and not go back to your cousin Gotti again. This is your
home,--here with me."

Wiseli understood now. She sprang into Andrew's arms, clung round his
neck, and cried, "Father, father!" They neither could speak a word after
this for a long time,--too many things were crowding upon them. After a
little, Wiseli felt a sudden light that seemed to break in upon her
thoughts; and she exclaimed, looking up at Andrew,--

"O father! I know how it has all happened, and who has helped us."

"Who may it be, Wiseli?" asked Andrew.

"My mother."

"Your mother, child,--who do you mean? Your mother?"

And Wiseli related her dream about the beautiful garden with the red
carnations, and a rose-bush on the other side, where the sun shone; and
told him how her mother had taken her by the hand and showed her the
garden, and said that her way led through that. And Wiseli was sure that
her mother had not ceased to pray God to let her child's way be through
that garden,--which was Andrew's garden, and the happiest place in the
world for Wiseli.

"Do not you believe it too, father, now that you know that in my dream
my mother showed me my road to your garden?"

Andrew could not answer. Big tears rolled down his face, but he smiled
all the time that he wept. When, at last, he opened his mouth to speak,
there came such a terrible knocking at the door, that nothing else could
be heard. Open flew the door, and Otto was in the middle of the room
with one leap; then he jumped over a chair, and shouted, "Hurrah! we
have won, and Wiseli is delivered." Pussy came in behind him, ran at
once to her friend, and said, pointing towards the door,--

"Now, Andrew, you will see what is coming for you, to celebrate your
recovery."

Scarcely had she spoken, than the baker's boy came struggling through
the doorway with a big tray upon his head that could scarcely come
through. A good push from behind, however, helped him along, and he put
the tray down on the table. Otto and Pussy had ordered the biggest cake,
to be made at the baker's, that was ever known; and as it would not have
been very large if it were round, they ordered it square, and it quite
filled the oven when it was baked. Old Trine stood behind the baker's
boy, and her big basket was at her feet. She had brought, among other
delicacies, a bottle of good wine; for Mrs. Ritter declared that Andrew
had, in all probability, not eaten a morsel since breakfast, and Wiseli
was probably fasting also; and the child remembered the fact, now that
she saw the feast that Trine spread upon the table. They all took their
places, and a merry company they were. To be sure, the grand cake had to
be cut in halves, and part put away, for otherwise there was not room on
the table for the rest of the supper; but after that they were all more
merry than ever feasters were before.

But the time went by, and Trine stood there waiting to take the children
home,--it was late. Andrew said, at leave-taking,--

"To-day you have prepared a feast for me, and I thank you with all my
heart; but I invite you to come here again on Sunday, and I will give
you a feast,--the feast to celebrate my daughter's adoption."

And so they parted, all rejoicing over the fact of Wiseli being so
happily at home with Andrew, and the children promising to come to the
Sunday celebration. At the door Wiseli gave Otto her hand again, and
said, "I thank you a thousand times for all your kindness to me, Otto.
Cheppi never was so rude to me again after you frightened him that day.
He was afraid to throw things at me. I owe it to your kindness."

"And I owe you something, Wiseli," replied Otto. "I have never had to
sweep out the schoolhouse since the time you know of."

"And I thank you, too, Wiseli," said Pussy; for she would not be behind
the others in her thanks.

Now every thing was quiet in the little room, and the moonlight streamed
in through the window where Andrew took his seat, while Wiseli put all
the supper dishes away, and made every thing neat again; then she came
to him, and stood before him with folded hands.

"Father," she said, "let me say my mother's hymn aloud to you. I
have always said it softly to myself; but I shall never forget it
now, I am sure."

Andrew was glad to listen; and the child, raising her eyes to the stars,
said, with the very deepest feeling thrilling through her heart,--

  "To God you must confide
  Your sorrow and your pain;
  He will true care provide,
  And show you heaven again.

  "For clouds and air and wind
  He points the path and way;
  Your road He'll also find,
  Nor let your footsteps stray."

From this day forward the happiest cottage in the whole village was that
of Andrew the carpenter, with its sunny garden. Wherever Wiseli showed
herself, she received the very kindest notice from all the neighbors,
much to the child's surprise. Formerly no one had noticed her
particularly, but now even her cousin Gotti and his wife never passed
the cottage without coming in to take her by the hand, and invite her to
visit them.

This gave the child keen satisfaction, for she had always feared
secretly her cousin's feelings about her adoption; so this kindness on
his part freed her from all anxiety, and she could go her way
peacefully. But these thoughts often rose within her, and she repeated
to herself,--

"Otto and his family have always shown me kindness when I was alone
in the wide world and friendless: these others are only kind to me
since I am happy and have a father. I know well enough who are really
my friends."


