    Are strong as iron bands.

  His hair is crisp, and black, and long,
    His face is like the tan;
  His brow is wet with honest sweat,
    He earns whate'er he can,
  And looks the whole world in the face,
    For he owes not any man.

  Week in, week out, from morn till night,
    You can hear his bellows blow;
  You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
    With measured beat and slow,
  Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
    When the evening sun is low.

  And children coming home from school
    Look in at the open door;
  They love to see the flaming forge,
    And hear the bellows roar,
  And catch the burning sparks that fly
    Like chaff from a threshing-floor.

  He goes on Sunday to the church,
    And sits among his boys;
  He hears the parson pray and preach,
    He hears his daughter's voice,
  Singing in the village choir,
    And it makes his heart rejoice.

  It sounds to him like her mother's voice,
    Singing in Paradise!
  He needs must think of her once more,
    How in the grave she lies;
  And with his hard, rough hand he wipes
    A tear out of his eyes.

  Toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing,
    Onward through life he goes;
  Each morning sees some task begin,
    Each evening sees it close;
  Something attempted, something done,
    Has earned a night's repose.

  Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
    For the lesson thou hast taught!
  Thus at the flaming forge of life
    Our fortunes must be wrought;
  Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
    Each burning deed and thought.




[Illustration: EVANGELINE
    Homeward serenely she walked with God's benediction upon her.
    When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music ]



  EVANGELINE


  This is the forest primeval. The murmuring pines and the hemlocks,
  Bearded with moss, and in garments green, indistinct in the twilight,
  Stand like Druids of eld, with voices sad and prophetic,
  Stand like harpers hoar, with beards that rest on their bosoms.
  Loud from its rocky caverns, the deep-voiced neighboring ocean
  Speaks, and in accents disconsolate answers the wail of the forest.

  This is the forest primeval; but where are the hearts that beneath it
  Leaped like the roe, when he hears in the woodland the voice of the
      huntsman?
  Where is the thatch-roofed village, the home of Acadian farmers,--
  Men whose lives glided on like rivers that water the woodlands,
  Darkened by shadows of earth, but reflecting an image of heaven?
  Waste are those pleasant farms, and the farmers forever departed!
  Scattered like dust and leaves, when the mighty blasts of October
  Seize them, and whirl them aloft, and sprinkle them far o'er the ocean.
  Naught but tradition remains of the beautiful village of Grand-Pre.

  Ye who believe in affection that hopes, and endures, and is patient,
  Ye who believe in the beauty and strength of woman's devotion,
  List to the mournful tradition, still sung by the pines of the forest;
  List to a Tale of Love in Acadie, home of the happy.


  PART THE FIRST

  I

  In the Acadian land, on the shores of the Basin of Minas,
  Distant, secluded, still, the little village of Grand-Pre
  Lay in the fruitful valley. Vast meadows stretched to the eastward,
  Giving the village its name, and pasture to flocks without number.
  Dikes, that the hands of the farmers had raised with labor incessant,
  Shut out the turbulent tides; but at stated seasons the flood-gates
  Opened, and welcomed the sea to wander at will o'er the meadows.
  West and south there were fields of flax, and orchards and cornfields
  Spreading afar and unfenced o'er the plain; and away to the northward
  Blomidon rose, and the forests old, and aloft on the mountains
  Sea-fogs pitched their tents, and mists from the mighty Atlantic
  Looked on the happy valley, but ne'er from their station descended.
  There, in the midst of its farms, reposed the Acadian village.
  Strongly built were the houses, with frames of oak and of hemlock,
  Such as the peasants of Normandy built in the reign of the Henries.
  Thatched were the roofs, with dormer-windows; and gables projecting
  Over the basement below protected and shaded the doorway.
  There in the tranquil evenings of summer, when brightly the sunset
  Lighted the village street, and gilded the vanes on the chimneys,
  Matrons and maidens sat in snow-white caps and in kirtles
  Scarlet and blue and green, with distaffs spinning the golden
  Flax for the gossiping looms, whose noisy shuttles within doors
  Mingled their sounds with the whir of the wheels and the songs of the
      maidens.
  Solemnly down the street came the parish priest, and the children
  Paused in their play to kiss the hand he extended to bless them.
  Reverend walked he among them; and up rose matrons and maidens,
  Hailing his slow approach with words of affectionate welcome.
  Then came the laborers home from the field, and serenely the sun sank
  Down to his rest, and twilight prevailed. Anon from the belfry
  Softly the Angelus sounded, and over the roofs of the village
  Columns of pale blue smoke, like clouds of incense ascending,
  Rose from a hundred hearths, the homes of peace and contentment.
  Thus dwelt together in love these simple Acadian farmers,--
  Dwelt in the love of God and of man. Alike were they free from
  Fear, that reigns with the tyrant, and envy, the vice of republics.
  Neither locks had they to their doors, nor bars to their windows;
  But their dwellings were open as day and the hearts of the owners;
  There the richest was poor, and the poorest lived in abundance.

  Somewhat apart from the village, and nearer the Basin of Minas,
  Benedict Bellefontaine, the wealthiest farmer of Grand-Pre,
  Dwelt on his goodly acres; and with him, directing his household,
  Gentle Evangeline lived, his child, and the pride of the village.
  Stalworth and stately in form was the man of seventy winters;
  Hearty and hale was he, an oak that is covered with snow-flakes;
  White as the snow were his locks, and his cheeks as brown as the
      oak-leaves.
  Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seventeen summers.
  Black were her eyes as the berry that grows on the thorn by the wayside,
  Black, yet how softly they gleamed beneath the brown shade of her tresses!
  Sweet was her breath as the breath of kine that feed in the meadows.
  When in the harvest heat she bore to the reapers at noontide
  Flagons of home-brewed ale, ah! fair in sooth was the maiden.
  Fair was she when, on Sunday morn, while the bell from its turret
  Sprinkled with holy sounds the air, as the priest with his hyssop
  Sprinkles the congregation, and scatters blessings upon them,
  Down the long street she passed, with her chaplet of beads and her missal,
  Wearing her Norman cap, and her kirtle of blue, and the ear-rings,
  Brought in the olden time from France, and since, as an heirloom,
  Handed down from mother to child, through long generations.
  But a celestial brightness--a more ethereal beauty--
  Shone on her face and encircled her form, when, after confession,
  Homeward serenely she walked with God's benediction upon her.
  When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.

  Firmly builded with rafters of oak, the house of the farmer
  Stood on the side of a hill commanding the sea; and a shady
  Sycamore grew by the door, with a woodbine wreathing around it.
  Rudely carved was the porch, with seats beneath; and a footpath
  Led through an orchard wide, and disappeared in the meadow.
  Under the sycamore-tree were hives overhung by a penthouse,
  Such as the traveller sees in regions remote by the roadside,
  Built o'er a box for the poor, or the blessed image of Mary.
  Farther down, on the slope of the hill, was the well with its moss-grown
  Bucket, fastened with iron, and near it a trough for the horses.
  Shielding the house from storms, on the north, were the barns and the
      farm-yard.
  There stood the broad-wheeled wains and the antique ploughs and the
      harrows;
  There were the folds for the sheep; and there, in his feathered seraglio,
  Strutted the lordly turkey, and crowed the cock, with the selfsame
  Voice that in ages of old had startled the penitent Peter.
  Bursting with hay were the barns, themselves a village. In each one
  Far o'er the gable projected a roof of thatch; and a staircase,
  Under the sheltering eaves, led up to the odorous corn-loft.
  There too the dove-cot stood, with its meek and innocent inmates
  Murmuring ever of love; while above in the variant breezes
  Numberless noisy weathercocks rattled and sang of mutation.

  Thus, at peace with God and the world, the farmer of Grand-Pre
  Lived on his sunny farm, and Evangeline governed his household.
  Many a youth, as he knelt in church and opened his missal,
  Fixed his eyes upon her as the saint of his deepest devotion;
  Happy was he who might touch her hand or the hem of her garment!
  Many a suitor came to her door, by the darkness befriended,
  And, as he knocked and waited to hear the sound of her footsteps,
  Knew not which beat the louder, his heart or the knocker of iron;
  Or at the joyous feast of the Patron Saint of the village,
  Bolder grew, and pressed her hand in the dance as he whispered
  Hurried words of love, that seemed a part of the music.
  But, among all who came, young Gabriel only was welcome;
  Gabriel Lajeunesse. the son of Basil the blacksmith,
  Who was a mighty man in the village, and honored of all men;
  For, since the birth of time, throughout all ages and nations,
  Has the craft of the smith been held in repute by the people.
  Basil was Benedict's friend. Their children from earliest childhood
  Grew up together as brother and sister; and Father Felician,
  Priest and pedagogue both in the village, had taught them their letters
  Out of the selfsame book, with the hymns of the church and the plain-song.
  But when the hymn was sung, and the daily lesson completed,
  Swiftly they hurried away to the forge of Basil the blacksmith.
  There at the door they stood, with wondering eyes to behold him
  Take in his leathern lap the hoof of the horse as a plaything,
  Nailing the shoe in its place; while near him the tire of the cart-wheel
  Lay like a fiery snake, coiled round in a circle of cinders.
  Oft on autumnal eves, when without in the gathering darkness
  Bursting with light seemed the smithy, through every cranny and crevice,
  Warm by the forge within they watched the laboring bellows,
  And as its panting ceased, and the sparks expired in the ashes,
  Merrily laughed, and said they were nuns going into the chapel.
  Oft on sledges in winter, as swift as the swoop of the eagle,
  Down the hillside bounding, they glided away o'er the meadow.
  Oft in the barns they climbed to the populous nests on the rafters,
  Seeking with eager eyes that wondrous stone, which the swallow
  Brings from the shore of the sea to restore the sight of its fledglings;
  Lucky was he who found that stone in the nest of the swallow!
  Thus passed a few swift years, and they no longer were children.
  He was a valiant youth, and his face, like the face of the morning,
  Gladdened the earth with its light, and ripened thought into action.
  She was a woman now, with the heart and hopes of a woman.
  "Sunshine of Saint Eulalie" was she called; for that was the sunshine
  Which, as the farmers believed, would load their orchards with apples;
  She, too, would bring to her husband's house delight and abundance,
  Filling it with love and the ruddy faces of children.

  II

  Now had the season returned, when the nights grow colder and longer,
  And the retreating sun the sign of the Scorpion enters.
  Birds of passage sailed through the leaden air, from the ice-bound,
  Desolate northern bays to the shores of tropical islands.
  Harvests were gathered in; and wild with the winds of September
  Wrestled the trees of the forest, as Jacob of old with the angel.
  All the signs foretold a winter long and inclement.
  Bees, with prophetic instinct of want, had hoarded their honey
  Till the hives overflowed; and the Indian hunters asserted
  Cold would the winter be, for thick was the fur of the foxes.
  Such was the advent of autumn. Then followed that beautiful season,
  Called by the pious Acadian peasants the Summer of All-Saints!
  Filled was the air with a dreamy and magical light; and the landscape
  Lay as if new-created in all the freshness of childhood.
  Peace seemed to reign upon earth, and the restless heart of the ocean
  Was for a moment consoled. All sounds were in harmony blended.
  Voices of children at play, the crowing of cocks in the farm-yards,
  Whir of wings in the drowsy air, and the cooing of pigeons,
  All were subdued and low as the murmurs of love, and the great sun
  Looked with the eye of love through the golden vapors around him;
  While arrayed in its robes of russet and scarlet and yellow,
  Bright with the sheen of the dew, each glittering tree of the forest
  Flashed like the plane-tree the Persian adorned with mantles and jewels.

  Now recommenced the reign of rest and affection and stillness.
  Day with its burden and heat had departed, and twilight descending
  Brought back the evening star to the sky, and the herds to the homestead.
  Pawing the ground they came, and resting their necks on each other,
  And with their nostrils distended inhaling the freshness of evening.
