"Look sharp now, lads," said Cameron, impatiently, to several dilatory
members of the band. "Night will be on us ere long."

"Who sold ye the bear-claw collar?" inquired another man of Dick.

"I didn't buy it. I killed the bear and made it."

"Did ye, though, all be yer lone?"

"Ay; that wasn't much, was it?"

"You've begun well, yonker," said a tall, middle-aged hunter, whose
general appearance was not unlike that of Joe Blunt. "Jest keep clear
o' the Injuns an' the grog bottle, an' ye've a glor'ous life before
ye."

At this point the conversation was interrupted by the order being
given to move on, which was obeyed in silence, and the cavalcade,
descending the valley, entered one of the gorges in the mountains.

For the first half-mile Cameron rode a little ahead of his men, then
he turned to speak to one of them, and for the first time observed
Crusoe trotting close beside his master's horse.

"Ah! Master Dick," he exclaimed with a troubled expression, "that
won't do. It would never do to take a dog on an expedition like this."

"Why not?" asked Dick; "the pup's quiet and peaceable."

"I doubt it not; but he will betray our presence to the Indians, which
might be inconvenient."

"I have travelled more than a thousand miles through prairie and
forest, among game an' among Injuns, an' the pup never betrayed me
yet," said Dick, with suppressed vehemence. "He has saved my life more
than once though."

"You seem to have perfect confidence in your dog, but as this is a
serious matter you must not expect me to share in it without proof of
his trustworthiness."

"The pup may be useful to us; how would you have it proved?" inquired
Dick.

"Any way you like."

"You forgot your belt at starting, I think I heerd ye say."

"Yes, I did," replied the trader, smiling.

Dick immediately took hold of Cameron's coat, and bade Crusoe smell
it, which the dog did very carefully. Then he showed him his own belt
and said, "Go back to the camp and fetch it, pup."

Crusoe was off in a moment, and in less than twenty minutes returned
with Cameron's belt in his mouth.

"Well, I'll trust him," said Cameron, patting Crusoe's head. "Forward,
lads!" and away they went at a brisk trot along the bottom of a
beautiful valley on each side of which the mountains towered in dark
masses. Soon the moon rose and afforded light sufficient to enable
them to travel all night in the track of the Indian hunter who said he
had seen the Peigans, and who was constituted guide to the party. Hour
after hour the horsemen pressed on without check, now galloping over a
level plain, now bounding by the banks of a rivulet, or bending their
heads to escape the boughs of overhanging trees, and anon toiling
slowly up among the rocks of some narrow defile. At last the moon set,
and the order was given to halt in a little plain where there were
wood and water.

The horses were picketed, a fire kindled, a mouthful of dried meat
hastily eaten, the watch was set, and then each man scraped away the
snow, spread some branches on the ground, and wrapping himself in his
blanket, went to sleep with his feet presented towards the fire.

Two hours were allowed for rest; then they were awakened, and in a few
minutes were off again by the gray light of dawn. In this way they
travelled two nights and a day. At the end of that time they came
suddenly on a small party of nine Indians, who were seated on the
ground with their snow-shoes and blankets by their sides. They had
evidently been taken by surprise, but they made no attempt to escape,
knowing that it was useless. Each sat still with his bow and arrows
between his legs on the ground ready for instant use.

As soon as Cameron spoke, however, in their own language they felt
relieved, and began to talk.

"Where do you come from, and what are you doing here?" asked the
trader.

"We have come to trade with the white men," one of them replied, "and
to hunt. We have come from the Missouri. Our country is far away."

"Do Peigans hunt with _war-arrows?_" asked Cameron, pointing to their
weapons.

This question seemed to perplex them, for they saw that their
interrogator knew the difference between a war and a hunting
arrow--the former being barbed in order to render its extraction from
the wound difficult, while the head of the latter is round, and can be
drawn out of game that has been killed, and used again.

"And do Peigans," continued Cameron, "come from a far country to trade
with the white men _with nothing?_"

Again the Indians were silent, for they had not an article to trade
about them.

Cameron now felt convinced that this party of Peigans, into whose
hands Joe Blunt and Henri had fallen, were nothing else than a war
party, and that the men now before him were a scouting party sent out
from them, probably to spy out his own camp, on the trail of which
they had fallen, so he said to them:--

"The Peigans are not wise men; they tell lies to the traders. I
will tell you that you are a war party, and that you are only a
few warriors sent out to spy the traders' camp. You have also two
_Pale-face_ prisoners in your camp. You cannot deceive me. It is
useless to try. Now, conduct me to your camp. My object is not war; it
is peace. I will speak with your chiefs about trading with the white
men, and we will smoke the pipe of peace. Are my words good?"

Despite their proverbial control of muscle, these Indians could not
conceal their astonishment at hearing so much of their affairs thus
laid bare; so they said that the Pale-face chief was wise, that he
must be a great medicine man, and that what he said was all true
except about the white men. They had never seen any Pale-faces, and
knew nothing whatever about those he spoke of.

This was a terrible piece of news to poor Dick, and at first his heart
fairly sank within him, but by degrees he came to be more hopeful. He
concluded that if these men told lies in regard to one thing, they
would do it in regard to another, and perhaps they might have some
strong reason for denying any knowledge of Joe and Henri.

The Indians now packed up the buffalo robes on which they had slept,
and the mouthful of provisions they had taken with them.

"I don't believe a word of what they say about your friends," said
Cameron to Dick in a low tone while the Indians were thus engaged.
"Depend upon it they hope to hide them till they can send to the
settlements and get a ransom, or till they get an opportunity of
torturing them to death before their women and children when they get
back to their own village. But we'll balk them, my friend, do not
fear."

The Indians were soon ready to start, for they were cumbered with
marvellously little camp equipage. In less than half-an-hour after
their discovery they were running like deer ahead of the cavalcade in
the direction of the Peigan camp.



CHAPTER XIX.


_Adventures with the Peigans_--_Crusoe does good service as a
discoverer_--_The savages outwitted_--_The rescue_.


A run of twenty miles brought the travellers to a rugged defile in
the mountains, from which they had a view of a beautiful valley of
considerable extent. During the last two days a steady thaw had been
rapidly melting away the snow, so that it appeared only here and
there in the landscape in dazzling patches. At the distance of about
half-a-mile from where they halted to breathe the horses before
commencing the descent into this vale, several thin wreaths of smoke
were seen rising above the trees.

"Is that your camp?" inquired Cameron, riding up to the Indian
runners, who stood in a group in front, looking as fresh after their
twenty miles' run as though they had only had a short walk.

To this they answered in the affirmative, adding that there were about
two hundred Peigans there.

It might have been thought that thirty men would have hesitated to
venture to attack so large a number as two hundred; but it had always
been found in the experience of Indian life that a few resolute white
men well armed were more than a match for ten times their number of
Indians. And this arose not so much from the superior strength or
agility of the Whites over their red foes, as from that bull-dog
courage and utter recklessness of their lives in combat--qualities
which the crafty savage can neither imitate nor understand. The
information was received with perfect indifference by most of the
trappers, and with contemptuous laughter by some; for a large number
of Cameron's men were wild, evil-disposed fellows, who would have as
gladly taken the life of an Indian as that of a buffalo.

Just as the word was given to resume the march, Dick Varley rode up to
Cameron and said in a somewhat anxious tone,--

"D'ye obsarve, sir, that one o' the Redskins has gone off ahead o' his
comrades?"

"I see that, Master Dick; and it was a mistake of mine not to have
stopped him, but he was gone too far before I observed it, and I
thought it better to appear unconcerned. We must push on, though, and
give him as short time as possible to talk with his comrades in the
camp."

The trappers pressed forward accordingly at a gallop, and were soon in
front of the clump of trees amongst which the Peigans were encamped.
Their approach had evidently spread great alarm among them, for there
was a good deal of bustle and running to and fro; but by the time the
trappers had dismounted and advanced in a body on foot, the savages
had resumed their usual quiet dignity of appearance, and were seated
calmly round their fires with their bows and arrows beside them. There
were no tents, no women or children, and the general aspect of the men
showed Cameron conclusively that his surmise about their being a war
party was correct.

A council was immediately called. The trappers ranged themselves on
one side of the council fire and the Indians on the other. Meanwhile,
our friend Crusoe had been displaying considerable irritability
against the Indians, and he would certainly have attacked the whole
two hundred single-handed if he had not been ordered by his master to
lie still; but never in his life before had Crusoe obeyed with such a
bad grace. He bristled and whined in a low tremulous tone, and looked
imploringly at Dick as if for permission to fly at them.

"The Pale-face traders are glad to meet with the Peigans," began
Cameron, who determined to make no allusion to his knowledge that they
were a war party, "for they wish to be friends with all the children
of the woods and prairies. They wish to trade with them--to exchange
blankets, and guns, and beads, and other goods which the Peigans
require, for furs of animals which the Pale-faces require."

"Ho! ho!" exclaimed the Indians, which expression might be translated,
"Hear! hear!"

"But," continued Cameron, "we wish to have no war. We wish to see the
hatchet buried, and to see all the red men and the white men smoking
the pipe of peace, and hunting like brothers."

The "Ho--ho--ing" at this was very emphatic.

"Now," resumed the trader, "the Peigans have got two prisoners--two
Pale-faces--in their camp, and as we cannot be on good terms while our
brothers are detained, we have come to ask for them, and to _present
some gifts_ to the Peigans."

To this there was no "Ho" at all, but a prolonged silence, which was
at length interrupted by a tall chief stepping forward to address the
trappers.

"What the Pale-face chief has said is good," began the Indian. "His
words are wise, and his heart is not double. The Red-men are willing
to smoke the pipe of peace, and to hunt with all men as brothers, but
they cannot do it while many of their scalps are hanging in the lodges
of their enemies and fringing the robes of the warriors. The Peigans
must have vengeance; then they will make peace."

After a short pause he continued,--

"The chief is wrong when he says there are Pale-faces in the Peigan
camp. The Peigans are not at war with the Pale-faces; neither have
they seen any on their march. The camp is open. Let the Pale-faces
look round and see that what we say is true."

The chief waved his hand towards his warriors as he concluded, as if
to say, "Search amongst them. There are no Pale-faces there."

Cameron now spoke to Dick in a low tone. "They speak confidently," he
said, "and I fear greatly that your poor comrades have either been
killed or conveyed away from the camp and hidden among the mountains,
in which case, even though they should not be far off, it would be
next to impossible to find them, especially when such a band of
rascals is near, compelling us to keep together. But I'll try what a
little tempting them with goods will do. At any rate, we shan't give
in without a scuffle."

It now, for the first time, flashed across Dick Varley that there was
something more than he imagined in Crusoe's restless anxiety, which
had not in the least abated, and the idea of making use of him now
occurred to his mind.

"I've a notion that I'll settle this matter in a shorter time than you
think," he said hurriedly, "if you'll agree to try what _threatening_
will do."

The trader looked grave and undecided. "I never resort to that except
as a last hope," he answered; "but I've a good deal of confidence in
your prudence. What would you advise?"

Dick and the trader whispered a few minutes together, while some of
the men, in order to show the Indians how perfectly unconcerned they
were, and how ready for _anything_, took out their pipes and began
to smoke. Both parties were seated on the ground, and during this
interval the Indians also held eager discussion.

At length Cameron stood up, and said to his men in a quiet tone, "Be
ready, lads, for instant action. When I give the word 'Up,' spring to
your feet and cock your guns; but _don't fire a shot till you get the
word_." He then stepped forward and said,--

"The Peigan warriors are double-tongued; they know that they have hid
the Pale-face prisoners. We do not wish to quarrel, but if they are
not delivered up at once the Pale-faces and the Peigans will not be
friends."

Upon this the Indian chief again stood forward and said, "The Peigans
are _not_ double-tongued. They have not seen Pale-faces till to-day.
They can say no more."

Without moving hand or foot, Cameron then said in a firm tone, "The
first Peigan that moves shall die! Up, lads, and ready!"

In the twinkling of an eye the trappers sprang to their feet, and
cocking their rifles stood perfectly motionless, scowling at the
savages, who were completely taken by surprise at the unusual
suddenness and informality of such a declaration of war. Not a man
moved, for, unlike white men, they seldom risk their lives in open
fight; and as they looked at the formidable row of muzzles that waited
but a word to send instant death into their midst, they felt that
discretion was at that time the better part of valour.

"Now," said Cameron, while Dick Varley and Crusoe stepped up beside
him, "my young warrior will search for the Pale-face prisoners. If
they are found, we will take them and go away. If they are not found,
we will ask the Peigans to forgive us, and will give them gifts. But
in the meantime, if a Peigan moves from the spot where he sits, or
lifts a bow, my young men shall fire, and the Peigans know that the
rifle of the Pale-face always kills."

Without waiting for an answer, Dick immediately said, "Seek 'em out,
pup," and Crusoe bounded away.

For a few minutes he sprang hither and thither through the camp, quite
regardless of the Indians, and snuffed the air several times, whining
in an excited tone, as if to relieve his feelings. Then he put his
nose to the ground and ran straight forward into the woods.

