truth, had turned to deeper red than usual, and his eyes lowered. He
was a few years older than Hardy, somewhat stouter, and his heavy
strong features showed a tinge of cruelty. The impression that he made
upon Robert was distinctly unfavorable.

"Yes, I have met Mr. Willet before," said Van Zoon, "but so many years
have passed that I did not know whether he was still living. I can say
the same about young Mr. Lennox."

"Oh, they live hazardous lives, but when one is skilled in meeting
peril life is not snuffed out so easily," rejoined Mr. Hardy who
seemed to be speaking from some hidden motive. "They've returned to
civilization, and I think and trust, Adrian, that we'll hear more of
them than for some years past. They're especial friends of mine, and I
shall do the best I can for them, even though my mercantile rivalry
with you absorbs, of necessity, so much of my energy."

Van Zoon smiled sourly, and then Robert liked him less than ever.

"The times are full of danger," he said, "and one must watch to keep
his own."

He bowed, and turned to other acquaintances, evidently relieved at
parting with them.

"He does not improve with age," said Willet thoughtfully.

Robert was about to ask questions concerning this Adrian Van Zoon, who
seemed uneasy in their presence, but once more he restrained himself,
his intuition telling him as before that neither Willet nor Master
Hardy would answer them.

The play moved on towards its dramatic close and Robert was back in
the world of passion and tragedy, of fancy and poetry. Van Zoon was
forgotten, St. Luc faded quite away, and he was not conscious of the
presence of Tayoga, or of Grosvenor, or of any of his friends.
Shakespeare's _Richard_ was wholly the humpbacked villain to him, and
when he met his fate on Bosworth Field he rejoiced greatly. As the
curtain went down for the last time he saw that Tayoga, too, was
moved.

"The English king was a wicked man," he said, "but he died like a
great chief."

They all passed out now, the street was filled with carriages and the
torches of the link boys and there was a great hum of conversation.
St. Luc returned to Robert's mind, but he kept to himself the fact
that he had been in the theater. It might be his duty to state to the
military that he had seen in the city an important Frenchman who must
have come as a spy, but he could not do so. Nor did he feel any
pricklings of the conscience about it, because he believed, even if he
gave warning of St. Luc's presence, the wary chevalier would escape.

They stood at the edge of the sidewalk, watching the carriages, great
high-bodied vehicles, roll away. Mr. Hardy had a carriage of his own,
but the distance between his house and the theater was so short that
he had not thought it necessary to use it. The night was clear, very
cold and the illusion of the play was still upon the younger members
of his group.

"You liked it?" said Mr. Hardy, looking keenly at Robert.

"It was another and wonderful world to me," replied the youth.

"I thought it would make a great appeal to you," said Master Benjamin.
"Your type of mind always responds quickly to the poetic drama. Ah,
there goes Mynheer Adrian Van Zoon. He has entered his carriage
without looking once in our direction."

He and Willet and Master Jonathan laughed together, softly but with
evident zest. Whatever the feeling between them and whatever the cause
might be, Robert felt that they had the advantage of Mynheer Van Zoon
that night and were pushing it. They watched the crowd leave and the
lights fade in the darkness, and then they walked back together to the
solid red brick house of Mr. Hardy, where Grosvenor took leave of
them, all promising that the acquaintance should be continued.

"A fine young man," said Mr. Hardy, thoughtfully. "I wish that more
of his kind would come over. We can find great use for them in this
country."

Charteris also said farewell to them, telling them that his own house
was not far away, and offering them his services in any way they
wished as long as they remained in the city.

"Another fine young man," said Master Benjamin, as the tall figure of
Charteris melted away in the darkness. "A good representative of our
city's best blood and manners, and yes, of morals, too."

Robert went alone the next morning to the new public library, founded
the year before and known as the New York Society Library, a novelty
then and a great evidence of municipal progress. The most eminent men
of the city, appointed by Governor de Lancey, were its trustees, and,
the collection already being large, Robert spent a happy hour or two
glancing through the books. History and fiction appealed most to him,
but he merely looked a little here and there, opening many volumes. He
was proud that the intelligence and enterprise of New York had founded
so noble an institution and he promised himself that if, in the time
to come, he should be a permanent resident of the city, his visits
there would be frequent.

When he left the library it was about noon, the day being cloudy and
dark with flurries of snow, those who were in the streets shivering
with the raw cold. Robert drew his own heavy cloak closely about him,
and, bending his head a little, strolled toward the Battery, in order
to look again at the ships that came from so many parts of the
earth. A stranger, walking in slouching fashion, and with the collar
of his coat pulled well up about his face, shambled directly in his
way. When Robert turned the man turned also and said in a low tone:

"Mr. Lennox!"

"St. Luc!" exclaimed Robert. "Are you quite mad? Don't you know that
your life is in danger every instant?"

"I am not mad, nor is the risk as great as you think. Walk on by my
side, as if you knew me."

"I did not think, chevalier, that your favorite role was that of a
spy."

"Nor is it. This New York of yours is a busy city, and a man, even a
Frenchman, may come here for other reasons than to learn military
secrets."

Robert stared at him, but St. Luc admonished him again to look in
front of him, and walk on as if they were old acquaintances on some
business errand.

"I don't think you want to betray me to the English," he said.

"No, I don't," said Robert, "though my duty, perhaps, should make me
do so."

"But you won't. I felt assured of it, else I should not have spoken to
you."

"What duty, other than that of a spy, can have brought you to New
York?"

"Why make it a duty? It is true the times are troubled, and full of
wars, but one, on occasion, may seek his pleasure, nevertheless. Let
us say that I came to New York to see the play which both of us
witnessed last night. 'Twas excellently done. I have seen plays
presented in worse style at much more pretentious theaters in
Paris. Moreover I, a Frenchman, love Shakespeare. I consider him the
equal of our magnificent Moliere."

"Which means that if you were not a Frenchman you would think him
better."

"A pleasant wit, Mr. Lennox. I am glad to see it in you. But you will
admit that I have come a long distance and incurred a great risk to
attend a play by a British author given in a British town, though it
must be admitted that the British town has strong Dutch
lineaments. Furthermore, I do bear witness that I enjoyed the play
greatly. 'Twas worth the trouble and the danger."

"Since you insist, chevalier, that you came so great a distance and
incurred so great a risk merely to worship at the shrine of our
Shakespeare, as one gentleman to another I cannot say that I doubt
your word. But when we sailed down the Hudson on a sloop, and were
compelled to tie up in a cove to escape the wrath of a storm, I saw
you on the slope above me."

"I saw you, too, then, Mr. Lennox, and I envied you your snug place on
the sloop. That storm was one of the most unpleasant incidents in my
long journey to New York to see Shakespeare's 'Richard III.'  Still,
when one wishes a thing very badly one must be willing to pay a high
price for it. It was a good play by a good writer, the actors were
most excellent, and I have had sufficient reward for my trouble and
danger."

The collar of his cloak was drawn so high now that it formed almost a
hood around his head and face, but he turned a little, and Robert saw
the blue eyes, as blue as his own, twinkling with a humorous light. It
was borne upon him with renewed force that here was a champion of
romance and high adventure. St. Luc was a survival. He was one of
those knights of the Middle Ages who rode forth with lance and sword
to do battle, perhaps for a lady's favor, and perhaps to crush the
infidel. His own spirit, which had in it a lightness, a gayety and a
humor akin to St. Luc's, responded at once.

"Since you found the play most excellent, and I had the same delight,
I presume that you will stay for all the others. Mr. Hallam and his
fine company are in New York for two weeks, if not longer. Having come
so far and at such uncommon risks, you will not content yourself with
a single performance?"

"Alas! that is the poison in my cup. The leave of absence given me by
the Governor General of Canada is but brief, and I can remain in this
city and stronghold of my enemy but a single night."

They passed several men, but none took any notice of them. The day had
increased in gloominess. Heavy clouds were coming up from the sea,
enveloping the solid town in a thick and somber atmosphere. Snow
began to fall and a sharp wind drove the flakes before it. Pedestrians
bent forward, and drew their cloaks or coats about their faces to
protect themselves from the storm.

"The weather favors us," said St. Luc. "The people of New York
defending themselves from the wind and the flakes will have no time to
be looking for an enemy among them."

"Where are we going, chevalier?"

"That I know not, but being young, healthy and strong, perhaps we walk
in a circle for the sake of exercise."

"For which also you have come to New York--in order that you may walk
about our Battery and Bowling Green."

"True! Quite true! You have a most penetrating mind, Mr. Lennox, and
since we speak of the objects of my errand here I recall a third, but
of course, a minor motive."

"I am interested in that third and minor motive, Chevalier de
St. Luc."

"I noticed last night at the play that you were speaking to a
merchant, one Adrian Van Zoon."

"'Tis true, but how do you know Van Zoon?"

"Let it suffice, lad, that I know him and know him well. I wish you to
beware of him."

He spoke with a sudden softness of tone that touched Robert, and there
could be no doubt that his meaning was good. They were still walking
in the most casual manner, their faces bent to the driving snow, and
almost hidden by the collars of their cloaks.

"What can Adrian Van Zoon and I have in common?"  asked Robert.

"Lad, I bid thee again to beware of him! Look to it that you do not
fall into his treacherous hands!"

His sudden use of the pronoun "thee," and his intense earnestness,
stirred Robert deeply.

"Friends seem to rise around me, due to no merit of mine," he
said. "Willet has always watched over me. Tayoga is my brother.
Jacobus Huysman has treated me almost as his own son, and
Master Benjamin Hardy has received me with great warmth of heart. And
now you deliver to me a warning that I cannot but believe is given
with the best intent. But again I ask you, why should I fear Adrian
Van Zoon?"

"That, lad, I will not tell you, but once more I bid you beware of
him. Think you, I'd have taken such a risk to prepare you for a
danger, if it were not real?"

"I do not. I feel, Chevalier de St. Luc, that you are a friend in
truth. Shall I speak of this to Mr. Willet? He will not blame me for
hiding the knowledge of your presence here."

"No. Keep it to yourself, but once more I tell you beware of Adrian
Van Zoon. Now you will not see me again for a long time, and perhaps
it will be on the field of battle. Have no fears for my safety. I can
leave this solid town of yours as easily as I entered it. Farewell!"

"Farewell!" said Robert, with a real wrench at the heart. St. Luc left
him and walked swiftly in the direction of St. George's Chapel. The
snow increased so much and was driving so hard that in forty or fifty
paces he disappeared entirely and Robert, wishing shelter, went back
to the house of Benjamin Hardy, moved by many and varied emotions.

He could not doubt that St. Luc's warning was earnest and important,
but why should he have incurred such great risks to give it? What was
he to Adrian Van Zoon? and what was Adrian Van Zoon to him?  And what
did the talk at night between Willet and Hardy mean? He, seemed to be
the center of a singular circle of complications, of which other
people might know much, but of which he knew nothing.

Mr. Hardy's house was very solid, very warm and very comfortable. He
was still at the Royal Exchange, but Mr. Pillsbury had come home, and
was standing with his back to a great fire, his coattails drawn under
either arm in front of him. A gleam of warmth appeared in his solemn
eyes at the sight of Robert.

"A fierce day, Master Robert," he said. "'Tis good at such a time to
stand before a red fire like this, and have stout walls between one
and the storm."

"Spoken truly, Master Jonathan," said Robert, as he joined him before
the fire, and imitated his position.

"You have been to our new city library? We are quite proud of it."

"Yes, I was there, but I have also been thinking a little."

"Thought never hurts one. We should all be better if we took more
thought upon ourselves."

"I was thinking of a man whom we saw at the play last night, the
merchant, Adrian Van Zoon."

Master Jonathan let his coattails fall from under his arms, and then
he deliberately gathered them up again.

"A wealthy and powerful merchant. He has ships on many seas."

"I have inferred that Mr. Hardy does not like him."

"Considering my words carefully, I should say that Mr. Hardy does not
like Mr. Van Zoon and that Mr. Van Zoon does not like Mr. Hardy."

"I'm not seeking to be intrusive, but is it just business rivalry?"

"You are not intrusive, Master Robert. But my knowledge seldom extends
beyond matters of business."

"Which means that you might be able to tell me, but you deem it wiser
not to do so."

"The storm increases, Master Robert. The snow is almost blinding. I
repeat that it is a most excellent fire before which we are
standing. Mr. Hardy and your friends will be here presently and we
shall have food."

"It seems to me, Master Jonathan, that the people of New York eat much
and often."

"It sustains life and confers a harmless pleasure."

"To return a moment to Adrian Van Zoon. You say that his ships are
upon every sea. In what trade are they engaged, mostly?"

"In almost everything, Master Robert. They say he does much
smuggling--but I don't object to a decent bit of smuggling--and I fear
that certain very fast vessels of his know more than a little about
the slave trade."

"I trust that Mr. Hardy has never engaged in such a traffic."

"You may put your mind at rest upon that point, Master Robert. No
amount of profit could induce Mr. Hardy to engage in such commerce."

Mr. Hardy, Tayoga and Willet came in presently, and the merchant
remained a while after his dinner. The older men smoked pipes and
talked together and Robert and Tayoga looked out at the driving snow.
Tayoga had received a letter from Colonel William Johnson that
morning, informing him that all was well at the vale of Onondaga, and
the young Onondaga was pleased. They were speaking of their expected
departure to join Braddock's army, but they had heard from Willet that
they were to remain longer than they had intended in New York, as the
call to march demanded no hurry.




CHAPTER XII

THE SLAVER


Robert spent more days in New York, and they were all pleasant. His
own handsome face and winning manner would have made his way anywhere,
but it became known universally that a great interest was taken in him
by Mr. Benjamin Hardy, who was a great figure in the city, a man not
to be turned lightly into an enemy. It also seemed that some mystery
enveloped him--mystery always attracts--and the lofty and noble figure
of the young Onondaga, who was nearly always by his side, heightened
the romantic charm he had for all those with whom he came in
contact. Both Hardy and Willet urged him to go wherever he was asked
by the great, and clothes fitted to such occasions were provided
promptly.

"I am not able to pay for these," said Robert to Willet when he was
being measured for the first of his fine raiment.

"Don't trouble yourself about it," said the hunter, smiling, "I have
sufficient to meet the bills, and I shall see that all your tailors
are reimbursed duly. Some one must always look after a man of
fashion."

