
He took a heavy knapsack from the bottom of the canoe and opened it.

"It is a French knapsack," he said, "and it contains both bread and meat,
which we will enjoy."

They ate in great content, and their spirits rose to an extraordinary
degree, though Tayoga regretted the absence of clothing which his disguise
had made necessary. Having been educated with white lads, and having
associated with white people so much, he was usually clad as completely as
they, either in their fashion or in his own full Indian costume.

"My infinite wisdom was not so infinite that it told me to take a blanket,"
he said, "and the wind coming down from the Canadian shore is growing
cold."

"I'm surprised to hear you speak of such trifles as that, Tayoga, when
we've been dealing with affairs of life and death."

"We are cold or we are warm, Dagaeoga, and peril and suffering do not alter
it. But lo! the wind is bringing the great mists with it, and we will
escape in them."

They turned the canoe toward a point far to the east of the Indian camp and
began to paddle, not hastily but with long, slow, easy strokes that sent
the canoe over the water at a great rate. The fogs and vapors were thick
and close about them, but Tayoga knew the direction. Robert asked him if he
had heard of Willet, and the Onondaga said he had not seen him, but he had
learned from a Mohawk runner that the Great Bear had reached Waraiyageh
with the news of St. Luc's prospective advance, and Tayoga had also
contrived to get news through to him that he was lying in the forest,
waiting a chance to effect the rescue of Robert.

Toward morning they landed on a shore, clothed in deep and primeval forest,
and with reluctance abandoned their canoe.

"It is an Abenaki craft," said Tayoga. "It is made well, it has served us
well, and we will treat it well."

Instead of leaving it on the lake to the mercy of storms they drew it into
some bushes at the mouth of a small creek, where it would stay securely,
and probably serve some day some chance traveler. Then they plunged into
the deep forest, but when they saw a smoke Robert remained hidden while
Tayoga went on, but with the intention of returning.

The Onondaga was quite sure the smoke indicated the presence of a small
village and his quest was for clothes.

"Let Dagaeoga rest in peace here in the thicket," he said, "and when I come
back I shall be clad as a man. Have no fears for me. I will not enter the
village Until after dark."

He glided away without noise, and Robert, having supreme confidence in him,
lay down among the bushes, which were so dense that the keenest eyes could
not have seen him ten feet away. His frame was relaxed so thoroughly after
his immense exertions and he felt such utter thankfulness at his escape
that he soon fell into a deep slumber rather than sleep, and when he awoke
the dark had come, bringing with it Tayoga.

"Lo, Dagaeoga," said the Onondaga, in a tone of intense satisfaction, "I
have done well. It is not pleasant to me to take the property of others,
but in this case what I have seized must have been captured from the
English. No watch was kept in the village, as they had heard of their great
victory and the warriors were away. I secured three splendid blankets, two
of green and one of brown. Since you have a coat, Dagaeoga, you can have
one green blanket and I will take the other two, one to wear and the other
to sleep in. I also took away more powder and lead, and as I have my bullet
molds we can increase our ammunition when we need it. I have added, too, a
supply of venison to our beef and bread."

"You're an accomplished burglar, Tayoga, but I think that in this case your
patron saint, Tododaho, will forgive you. I'm devoutly glad of the blanket.
I feel stiff and sore, after such great exertions, and I find I've grown
cold with the coming of the dark."

"It is a relapse," said Tayoga with some anxiety. "The strain on mind and
body has been too great. Better wrap yourself in the blanket at once, and
lie quiet in the thicket."

Robert was prompt to take his advice, as his body was hot and his sight
was wavering. He felt that he was going to be ill and he might get it over
all the quicker by surrendering to it at once. He rolled the blanket
tightly about himself and lay down on the softest spot he could find. In
the night he became delirious and talked continually of Langlade, St. Luc
and Montcalm. But Tayoga watched by him continually until late, when he
hunted through the forest by moonlight for some powerful herbs known to
the Indians. In the morning he beat them and bruised them and cooked them
as best he could without utensils, and then dropped the juices into his
comrade's mouth, after which he carefully put out the fire, lest it be seen
by savage rovers.

Robert was soon very much better. He had a profuse perspiration and came
out of his unconscious state, but was quite weak. He was also thoroughly
ashamed of himself.

"Nice time for me to be breaking down," he said, "here in the wilderness
near an Indian village, hundreds of miles from any of our friends, save
those who are captured. I make my apologies, Tayoga."

"They are not needed," said the Onondaga. "You defended me with your life
when I was wounded and the wolves sought to eat me, now I repay again.
There is nothing for Dagaeoga to do but to keep on perspiring, see that the
blanket is still wrapped around him, and tonight I will get something in
which to cook the food he needs."

"How will you do that?"

"I will go again to my village. I call it mine because it supplies what we
need and I will return with the spoil. Bide you in peace, Dagaeoga. You
have called me an accomplished burglar. I am more, I am a great one."

Robert had the utmost confidence in him, and it was justified. When he
awoke from a restless slumber, Tayoga stood beside him, holding in his hand
a small iron kettle made in Canada, and a great iron spoon.

"They are the best they had in the village," he said. "It is not a large
and rich village and so its possessions are not great, but I think these
will do. I have also brought with me some very tender meat of a young deer
that I found in one of the lodges."

"You're all you claimed to be and more, Tayoga," said Robert earnestly and
gratefully.

The Onondaga lighted a fire in a dip, and cutting the deer into tiny bits
made a most appetizing soup, which Robert's weak stomach was able to retain
and to crave more.

"No," said Tayoga, "enough for tonight, but you shall have twice as much in
the morning. Now, go to sleep again."

"I haven't been doing anything but sleep for the last day or two. I want to
get up and walk."

"And have your fever come back. Besides, you are not strong enough yet to
walk more than a few steps."

Robert knew that he would be forced to obey, and he passed the night partly
in dozing, and partly in staring at the sky. In the morning he was very
hungry and showed an increase of strength. Tayoga, true to his word, gave
him a double portion of the soup, but still forbade sternly any attempt at
walking.

"Lie there, Dagaeoga," he said, "and let the wind blow over you, and I'll
go farther into the forest to see if friend or enemy be near."

Robert, feeling that he must, lay peacefully on his back after the Onondaga
left him. He was free from fever, but he knew that Tayoga was right in
forbidding him to walk. It would be several days yet before he could
fulfill his old duties, as an active and powerful forest runner. Yet he was
very peaceful because the soreness of body that had troubled him was gone
and strength was flowing back into his veins. Despite the fact that he was
lying on his back alone in the wilderness, with savage foes not far away,
he believed that he had very much for which to be grateful. He had been
taken almost by a miracle out of the hands of his foes, and, when he was
ill and in his weakness might have been devoured by wild beasts or might
have starved to death, the most loyal and resourceful of comrades had been
by his side to save him.

He saw the great star on which Tayoga's Tododaho lived, and he accepted so
much of the Iroquois theology, believing that it was in spirit and essence
the same as his own Christian belief, that he almost imagined he could see
the great Onondaga chieftain who had gone away four centuries ago. In any
event, it was a beneficent star, and he was glad that it shone down on him
so brilliantly.

Tayoga before his departure had loaned him one of his blankets and now he
lay upon it, with the other wrapped around him, his loaded pistol in his
belt and his loaded rifle lying by his side. The fire that the Onondaga had
built in the dip not far away had been put out carefully and the ashes had
been scattered.

Although it was midsummer, the night, as often happened in that northern
latitude, had come on cool, and the warmth of the blankets was not
unwelcome. Robert knew that he was only a mote in all that vast wilderness,
but the contiguity of the Indian village might cause warriors, either
arriving or departing, to pass near him. So he was not surprised when he
heard footsteps in the bushes not far away, and then the sound of voices.
Instinctively he tried to press his body into the earth, and he also lifted
carefully the loaded rifle, but second thought told him he was not likely
to be seen.

Warriors presently came so near that they were visible, and to his surprise
and alarm he saw the huge figure of Tandakora among them. They were about a
dozen in number, walking in the most leisurely manner and once stopped very
close to him to talk. Although he raised himself up a little and clutched
the rifle more tightly he was still hopeful that they would not see him.
The Ojibway chieftain was in full war paint, with a fine new American
rifle, and also a small sword swinging from his belt. Both were undoubtedly
trophies of Oswego, and it was certain that after carrying the sword for a
while as a prize he would discard it. Indians never found much use for
swords.

Robert always believed that Tayoga's Tododaho protected him that night,
because for a while all the chances were against him. As the warriors stood
near talking a frightened deer started up in the thicket, and Tandakora
himself brought it down with a lucky bullet, the unfortunate animal falling
not thirty yards from the hidden youth. They removed the skin and cut it
into portions where it lay, the whole task taking about a half hour, and
all the time Robert, lying under the brush, saw them distinctly.

He was in mortal fear lest one of them wander into the dip where Tayoga had
built the fire, and see traces of the ashes, but they did not do so. Twice
warriors walked in that direction and his heart was in his mouth, but in
neither case did the errand take them so far. Tandakora was not alone in
bearing Oswego spoils. Nearly all of them had something, a rifle, a pistol
or a sword, and two wore officers' laced coats over their painted bodies.
The sight filled Robert with rage. Were his people to go on this way
indefinitely, sacrificing men and posts in unrelated efforts? Would they
allow the French, with inferior numbers, to beat them continuously? He had
seen Montcalm and talked with him, and he feared everything from that
daring and tenacious leader.

While the Indians prepared the deer the moon and stars came out with
uncommon brilliancy, filling the forest with a misty, silver light. Robert
now saw Tandakora and his men so clearly that it seemed impossible for them
not to see him. Once more he had the instinctive desire to press himself
into the earth, but his mind told him that absolute silence was the most
necessary thing. As he lay, he could have picked off Tandakora with a
bullet from his rifle, and, so far as the border was concerned, he felt
that his own life was worth the sacrifice, but he loved his life and the
Ojibway might be put out of the way at some other time and place.

Tayoga's Tododaho protected him once more. Two of the Indians wanted water
and they started in search of a brook which was never far away in that
region. It seemed for a moment or two that they would walk directly into
the dip, where scattered ashes lay, but the great Onondaga turned them
aside just in time and they found at another point the water they wished.
Robert's extreme tension lasted until they were back with the others.
Nevertheless their harmless return encouraged him in the belief that the
star was working in his behalf.

The Indians were in no hurry. They talked freely over their task of
dressing and quartering the deer, and often they were so near that Robert
could hear distinctly what they said, but only once or twice did they use a
dialect that he could understand, and then they were speaking of the great
victory of Oswego, in which they confirmed the inference, drawn from the
spoils, that they like Tandakora had taken a part. They were in high good
humor, expecting more triumphs, and regarded the new French commander,
Montcalm, as a great and invincible leader.

Robert was glad, then, that he was such an insignificant mote in the
wilderness and had he the power he would have made himself so small that he
would have become invisible, but as that was impossible he still trusted
in Tayoga's Tododaho. The Indian chief gave two of the warriors an order,
and they started on a course that would have brought them straight to him.
The lad gave himself up for lost, but, intending to make a desperate fight
for it, despite his weakness, his hand crept to the hammer and trigger of
his rifle. Something moved in the thicket, a bear, perhaps, or a lynx, and
the two Indians, when they were within twenty feet of him, turned aside to
investigate it. Then they went on, and it was quite clear again to Robert
that he had been right about the friendly intervention of Tododaho.

Nor was it long until the truth was demonstrated to him once more, and in a
conclusive manner. The entire party departed, taking with them the portions
of the deer, and they passed so very close to him that their wary eyes,
which always watched on all sides, would have been compelled to see him, if
Tododaho, or perhaps it was Areskoui, or even Manitou, had not seen fit
just at that moment to draw a veil before the moon and stars and make the
shadow so deep under the bush where young Lennox lay that he was invisible,
although they stepped within fifteen feet of him. They went on in their
usual single file, disappearing in the direction of the village, while he
lay still and gave thanks.

They had not been gone more than fifteen minutes when there was a faint
rustle in the thicket, and Tayoga stood before him.

"I was hid in a clump of weeds not far away and I saw," said the Onondaga.
"It was a narrow escape, but you were protected by the great powers of the
earth and the air. Else they would have seen you."

"It is so," said Robert, devoutly, "and it makes me all the more glad to
see you, Tayoga. I hope your journey, like all the others, has been
fruitful."

The Onondaga smiled in the dusk.

"It is a good village to which I go," he replied in his precise fashion.
"You will recall that they had in Albany what they call in the English
tongue a chemist's shop. It is such that I sought in the village, and I
found it in one lodge, the owners of which were absent, and which I could
reach at my leisure. Here is a gourd of Indian tea, very strong, made from
the essence of the sassafras root. It will purge the impurities from your
blood, and, in another day, your appetite will be exceedingly strong. Then
your strength will grow so fast that in a short time you will be ready for
a long journey. I have also brought a small sack filled with samp."

Robert uttered a little cry of joy. He craved bread, or at least something
that would take its place, and samp, a variation of which is known as
hominy, was a most acceptable substitute.

"You are, in truth, a most efficient burglar, Tayoga," he said.

"I obtained also information," continued the Onondaga. "While I lay in one
of the lodges, hidden under furs, I heard two of the old men talking. They
believe since they have taken Oswego that all things are possible for them
and the French. Montcalm appears to them the greatest of all leaders and
he will take them from one victory to another. Their defeat by Andiatarocte
is forgotten, and they plan a great advance toward the south. But they
intend first to sweep up all the scouts and bands of the Americans and
English. Their first attack will be upon Rogers, him whom we call the
Mountain Wolf."

"Rogers! Is he somewhere near us?" exclaimed Robert eagerly.

"Far to the east toward Andiatarocte, but they mean to strike him. The
Frenchmen De Courcelles and Jumonville will join with Tandakora, then St.
Luc will go too and he will lead a great force against the Mountain Wolf,
with whom, I suspect, our friend the Great Bear now is, hoping perhaps, as
they hunt through the forest, to discover some traces of us."

"I knew all along, Tayoga, that Dave would seek me and rescue me if you
didn't, or if I didn't rescue myself, provided I remained alive, as you see
I did."

"The Great Bear is the most faithful of all comrades. He would never desert
a friend in the hands of the enemy."
