For four days the gale continued, keeping the party prisoners in the
hut. On the fifth the force of the wind abated, and the snow ceased to
fall. They were forced to take the door off its hinges to open it, for
the snow had piled up so high that the chimney alone of the hut remained
above its surface. With great difficulty and labor they cleared a way
out, and then the guide again placing himself at their head, they
proceeded on their way. The air was still and cold, and the sky of a
deep, dark blue, which seemed even darker in contrast with the whiteness
of the snow. At times they had great difficulty in struggling through
the deep drifts; but for the most part the wind had swept the path
clear. Where it was deepest, the tops of the posts still showed above
the snow, and enabled the guide to direct their footsteps. They were,
however, obliged to travel slowly, and it was three days before they
gained the village on the northern slope of the mountains, having slept
at refuges by the road.

"What are your plans?" the knight asked Sir Cuthbert that night, as they
sat by the fire of the hostelry. "I would warn you that the town which
you will first arrive at is specially hostile to your people, for the
baron, its master, is a relation of Conrad of Montferat, who is said to
have been killed by order of your king."

"It is false," Cuthbert said. "King Richard had appointed him King of
Jerusalem; and, though he liked him not, thought him the fittest of
those there to exercise sovereignty. He was the last man who would have
had an enemy assassinated; for so open is he of disposition that he
would have fought hand to hand with the meanest soldier of his army had
he desired to kill him."

"I doubt not that it is so, since you tell me," the knight said
courteously. "But the people here have taken that idea into their minds,
and it will be hard to disabuse them. You must therefore keep up your
disguise as a French knight while passing through this neighborhood.
Another week's journeying, and you will reach the confines of Saxony,
and there you will, as you anticipate, be safe. But I would not answer
for your life were you discovered here to be of English birth. And now
tell me if there is aught that I can do for you. I will myself accompany
you into the town, and will introduce you as a French knight, so that no
suspicion is likely to lie upon you, and will, further, ride with you to
the borders of Saxony. I am well known, and trust that my company will
avert all suspicion from you. You have told me that your purse is
ill-supplied; you must suffer me to replenish it. One knight need not
fear to borrow of another; and I know that when you have returned to
your home you will bestow the sum which I now give you upon some holy
shrine in my name, and thus settle matters between us."

Cuthbert without hesitation accepted the offer, and was well pleased at
finding his purse replenished, for its emptiness had caused him serious
trouble. Cuthbert's steed was led by one of the archers, and he himself
walked gayly alongside of Sir Ernest, followed by his retainers. Another
long day's march brought them down to Innsbruck, where they remained
quietly for a week. Then they journeyed on until they emerged from the
mountains, crossed the Bavarian frontier, and arrived at Fussen, a
strong city, with well-built walls and defenses.

They at once proceeded to the principal hostelry, where the young baron
was well known, and where great interest was excited by the news of the
narrow escape which he had had from the attack of the wolves. A journey
across the Alps was in those days regarded as a very perilous enterprise
in the winter season, and the fact that he should have been rescued from
such a strait appeared almost miraculous. They stayed for two days
quietly in the city, Cuthbert declining the invitation of the young
noble to accompany him to the houses of his friends, as he did not wish
that any suspicion should be excited as to his nationality, and
preferred remaining quiet to having forced upon him the necessity of
making false statements. As to his followers, there was no fear of the
people among whom they mixed detecting that they were English. To the
Bavarian inhabitants, all languages, save their native German, were
alike unintelligible; and even had French been commonly spoken, the
dialects of that tongue, such as would naturally be spoken by archers
and men-at-arms, would have been a Greek to those accustomed only to
Norman French.

Upon the third day, however, an incident occurred which upset Cuthbert's
calculations, and nearly involved the whole party in ruin. The town was,
as the young baron had said, governed by a noble who was a near relation
of Conrad of Montferat, and who was the bitter enemy of the English. A
great _fete_ had been given in honor of the marriage of his daughter,
and upon this day the young pair were to ride in triumph through the
city. Great preparations had been made; masks and pageants of various
kinds manufactured; and the whole townspeople, dressed in their holiday
attire, were gathered in the streets. Cuthbert had gone out, followed by
his little band of retainers, and taken their station to see the passing
show. First came a large body of knights and men-at-arms, with gay
banners and trappings. Then rode the bridegroom, with the bride carried
in a litter by his side. After this came several allegorical
representations. Among these was the figure of a knight bearing the arms
of Austria. Underneath his feet, on the car, lay a figure clad in a
royal robe, across whom was thrown a banner with the leopards of
England. The knight stood with his foot on this figure.

This representation of the dishonor of England at the hands of Austria
elicited great acclamations from the crowd. Cuthbert clinched his teeth
and grasped his sword angrily, but had the sense to see the folly of
taking any notice of the insult. Not so with Cnut. Furious it the insult
offered to the standard of his royal master, Cnut, with a bound, burst
through the ranks of the crowd, leaped on to the car, and with a buffet
smote the figure representing Austria into the road, and lifted the flag
of England from the ground. A yell of indignation and rage was heard.
The infuriated crowd rushed forward. Cnut, with a bound, sprang from the
car, and, joining his comrades, burst through those who attempted to
impede them, and darted down a by-street.

Cuthbert, for the moment amazed at the action of his follower, had on
the instant drawn his sword and joined the archers. In the crowd,
however, he was for a second separated from them; and before he could
tear himself from the hands of the citizens who had seized him, the
men-at-arms accompanying the procession surrounded him, and he was led
away by them to the castle, the guards with difficulty protecting him
from the enraged populace. Even at this moment Cuthbert experienced a
deep sense of satisfaction at the thought that his followers had
escaped. But he feared that alone, and unacquainted with the language of
the country, they would find it difficult indeed to escape the search
which would be made for them, and to manage to find their way back to
their country. For himself, he had little hopes of liberty, and scarcely
more of life. The hatred of the baron toward the English would now be
heightened by the daring act of insult to the arms of Austria, and this
would give a pretext for any deed of violence which might be wrought.

Cuthbert was, after a short confinement, brought before the lord baron
of the place, in the great hall of the castle.

"Who art thou, sir," the noble exclaimed, "who darest to disturb the
marriage procession of my daughter, and to insult the standard of the
emperor my master?"

"I am Sir Cuthbert, Earl of Evesham, a baron of England," Cuthbert said
fearlessly, "and am traveling homeward from the Holy Land. My garb as a
Crusader should protect me from all interruption; and the heedless
conduct of my retainer was amply justified by the insult offered to the
arms of England. There is not one of the knights assembled round you who
would not in like manner have avenged an insult offered to those of
Austria; and I am ready to do battle in the lists with any who choose to
say that the deed was a foul or improper one. In the Holy Land Austrians
and English fought side by side; and it is strange indeed to me that on
my return, journeying through the country of the emperor, I should find
myself treated as an enemy, and see the arms of King Richard exposed to
insult and derision by the burghers of this city."

As Cuthbert had spoken he threw down his mailed glove, and several of
the knights present stepped forward to pick it up. The baron, however,
waved them back.

"It is no question," he said, "of honorable fight. This is a follower of
the murderer of my good cousin of Montferat, who died under the hands of
assassins set upon him by Richard of England."

"It is false!" Cuthbert shouted. "I denounce it as a foul lie, and will
maintain it with my life."

"Your life is already forfeited," the baron said, "both by your past
connection with Richard of England and as the insulter of the arms of
Austria. You die, and to-morrow at noon your head shall be struck off in
the great square before my castle."

Without another word Cuthbert was hurried off to his cell, and there
remained, thinking moodily over the events of the day, until nightfall.
He had no doubt that his sentence would be carried out, and his anxiety
was rather for his followers than for himself. He feared that they would
make some effort on his behalf, and would sacrifice their own lives in
doing so, without the possibility of assisting him.

The next morning he was led out to the square before the castle. It was
a large flagged courtyard. Upon one side was the entrance to the castle,
one of whose wings also formed a second side to the square. The side
facing this was formed by the wall of the city, and the fourth opened
upon a street of the town. This side of the square was densely filled
with citizens, while the men-at-arms of the baron and a large number of
knights were gathered behind a scaffold erected in the center. Upon this
was a block, and by the side stood a headsman. As Cuthbert was led
forward a thrill of pleasure ran through him at perceiving no signs of
his followers, who he greatly feared might have been captured in the
night, and brought there to share his fate.

As he was led forward the young noble whose life he had saved advanced
to the baron, and dropping on one knee before him, craved the life of
Cuthbert, relating the event by which he had saved his life in the
passage of the mountains. The baron frowned heavily.

"Though he had saved the life of every noble in Bavaria," he said, "he
should die. I have sworn an oath that every Englishman who fell into my
hands should expiate the murder of my kinsman; and this fellow is,
moreover, guilty of an outrage to the arms of Austria."

The young Sir Ernest drew himself up haughtily.

"My lord baron," he said, "henceforth I renounce all allegiance to you,
and I will lay the case before the emperor, our common master, and will
cry before him at the outrage which has thus been passed upon a noble
gentleman. He has thrown down the glove, and challenged any of your
knights, and I myself am equally ready to do battle in his cause."

The baron grew red with passion, and he would have ordered the instant
arrest of the young man, but as Sir Ernest was connected by blood with
many present, and was indeed one of the most popular among the nobles of
the province, the baron simply waved him aside, and ordered Cuthbert to
be led to the block. The young Englishman was by the executioner
divested of his armor and helmet, and stood in the simple attire worn by
men of rank at that time. He looked around, and holding up his hand,
conveying alike a farewell and a command to his followers to remain in
concealment, he gazed round the crowd, thinking that he might see among
them in some disguise or other the features of Cnut, whose tall figure
would have rendered him conspicuous in a crowd. He failed, however, to
see any signs of him, and turning to the executioner, signified by a
gesture that he was ready.

At this instant an arrow from the wall above pierced the brain of the
man, and he fell dead in his tracks. A roar of astonishment burst from
the crowd. Upon the city wall at this point was a small turret, and on
this were five figures. The wall around was deserted, and for the moment
these men were masters of the position.

"Seize those insolent varlets!" the baron shouted, shaking his sword
with a gesture of fury at them.

His words, however, were arrested, for at the moment another arrow
struck him in the throat, and he fell back into the arms of those around
him.

Quickly now the arrows of the English archers flew into the courtyard.
The confusion which reigned there was indescribable. The citizens with
shouts of alarm took to their heels. The men-at-arms were powerless
against this rain of missiles, and the knights, hastily closing their
visors, shouted contradictory orders, which no one obeyed.

In the confusion no one noticed the prisoner. Seizing a moment when the
attention of all was fixed upon the wall, he leaped from the platform,
and making his way unnoticed through the excited crowd of men-at-arms,
darted down a narrow lane that divided the castle from the wall. He ran
along until, one hundred yards further, he came to a staircase by which
access to the battlements was obtained. Running lightly up this, he kept
along the wall until he reached the turret.

"Thanks, my noble Cnut!" he exclaimed, "and you, my brave fellows. But I
fear you have forfeited your lives. There is no escape. In a minute the
whole force of the place will recover from their confusion, and be down
upon us from both sides."

"We have prepared for that," Cnut said. "Here is a rope hanging down
into the moat."

Glancing over, Cuthbert saw that the moat was dry; and after a final
discharge of arrows into the crowd, the six men slid one after another
down the rope and made their way at full speed across the country.




CHAPTER XIX.

DRESDEN.


It was some ten minutes before the men-at-arms rallied sufficiently from
their surprise to obey orders. Two bodies were then drawn up, and
proceeded at a rapid pace toward the staircases leading to the wall, one
on each side of the turret in which they believed that the little body
of audacious assailants were still lying. Having reached the wall, the
soldiers advanced, covering themselves with their shields, for they had
learned the force with which an English clothyard shaft drawn by a
strong hand flies. Many had been killed by these missiles passing
through and through the cuirass and backpiece. No reply being obtained
to the summons to surrender, they proceeded to break in with their
battle-axes the door of the little turret. Rushing in with ax and pike,
they were astonished to find the place empty. A glance over the wall
showed the rope still hanging, and the manner of the escape became
manifest. The fugitives were already out of sight, and the knights,
furious at the escape of the men who had bearded them in the heart of
the city with such audacity, and had slain the lord baron and several of
his knights, gave orders that an instant pursuit should be organized. It
was, however, a full half hour before the city gates were thrown open,
and a strong troop of knights and mounted men issued out.

Cuthbert had been certain that an instant pursuit would be set on foot,
and the moment that he was out of sight of the battlements he changed
the direction in which he had started, and turning at right angles,
swept round the city, still keeping at a distance, until he reached the
side next the mountains, and then plunged into the woods on the lower
slopes of the hills.

"They will," he said, as they halted breathless from their run, "follow
the road toward the south, and scour the country for awhile before it
occurs to their thick German skulls that we have doubled back on our
tracks. Why, what is it, Cnut?"

This exclamation was provoked by the forester throwing himself on his
knees before Sir Cuthbert, and imploring his pardon for the dire strait
into which his imprudence had drawn him.

"It was a dire strait, certainly, Cnut. But if you got me into it, at
least you have extricated me; and never say more about it, for I myself
was near committing the imprudence to which you gave way, and I can well
understand that your English blood boiled at the sight of the outrage to
the flag of England. Now, let us waste no time in talk, but, keeping to
the foot of this mountain, make along as far as we can to the west. We
must cling to the hills for many days' march before we venture again to
try to cross the plains. If possible, we will keep on this way until we
reach the confines of the country of the Swiss, who will assuredly give
us hospitality, and who will care little for any threats of these German
barons, should they hear that we have reached their asylum."

By nightfall they had already traveled many leagues, and making a fire
in the wood, Cuthbert asked Cnut for an account of what had taken place
on the previous day.

"We ran for life, Sir Cuthbert, and had not noticed that you had been
drawn into the fray. Had we done so, we would have remained, and sold
our lives with yours; but hoping that you had passed unnoticed in the
crowd, and that you would find some means to rejoin us we kept upon our
way. After running down three streets we passed a place where a
courtyard with stables ranged round it was open. There were none about,
and we entered, and taking refuge in a loft hid ourselves beneath some
provender. There we remained all night, and then borrowing some apparel
which some of the stablemen had hung upon the walls, we issued into the
town. As we neared the great square we saw some men employed in erecting
a platform in the midst, and a suspicion that all might not be right,
and that you might have fallen into the hands of these German dogs,
beset our minds. After much consultation we determined to see what the
affair meant, and making our way on to the walls which, indeed, were
entirely deserted, we took refuge in that turret where you saw us.
Seeing the crowd gather, and being still more convinced that some
misfortune was about to occur, I again went back to the stables, where I
had noticed a long rope used by the carters for fastening their loads to
the wagons. With this I returned, for it was clear that if we had to
mingle in this business it would be necessary to have a mode of escape.
Of the rest you are aware. We saw the knights coming out of the castle,
with that portly baron, their lord, at their head. We saw the block and
the headsman upon the platform, and were scarcely surprised when you
were led out, a prisoner, from the gates. We judged that what did happen
would ensue. Seeing that the confusion wrought by a sudden attack from
men perched up aloft as we were, commanding the courtyard, and being
each of us able to hit a silver mark at the distance of one hundred
yards, would be great indeed, we judged that you might be able to slip
away unobserved, and were sure that your quick wit would seize any
opportunity which might offer. Had you not been able to join us, we
should have remained in the turret and sold our lives to the last, as,
putting aside the question that we could never return to our homes,
having let our dear lord die here, we should not, in our ignorance of
