the power to destroy all our people.  If you wish battle, we shall see.
We know your name is great and that all animals bow their heads before
you; but our people can kill you.'

"The Lion jumped high in his rage and said, 'No other creature in the
wilderness has dared to say these things to me--the king.  Have I come
to the vile well of the silly Mosquitoes for wisdom?'  And he held his
head high, and gave the mighty roar of battle, and made ready to kill
all the Mosquitoes.

"Then the Mosquitoes, big and little, flew around him.  Many went into
his ears, and the smallest ones went into his nose, and the big old
ones went into his mouth to sting.  A thousand and a thousand hung in
the air just over his head and made a great noise, and the Lion soon
knew that he could not conquer.

"He roared and jumped, and two of his front feet went down into the
well.  The well was narrow and deep and he could not get out, for his
two hind feet were in the air and his head hung downward.  And as he
died, he said to himself:

"'My pride and anger have brought me this fate.  Had I used gentle
words, the Mosquitoes might have given me water for my thirst.  I was
wise and strong in the wilderness, and even the greatest of the animals
feared my power.  But I fought with the Mosquitoes and I die--not
because I have not strength to overcome, but because of the foolishness
of anger."

EE-SZE (Meaning): The wise can conquer the foolish.  Power is nothing,
strength is nothing.  The wise, gentle and careful can always win.




FABLES OF LA FONTAINE*

  "Of Fables judge not by their face;
  They give the simplest brute a teacher's place.
  Bare precepts were inert and tedious things;
  The story gives them life and wings."

      JEAN DE LA FONTAINE

*Translated by Elizur Wright, Jr.


  FABLES OF LA FONTAINE

  The Grasshopper and the Ant

  A Grasshopper gay
    Sang the summer away,
    And found herself poor
  By the winter's first roar.
  Of meat or of bread,
  Not a morsel she had!
  So a-begging she went,
  To her neighbour the Ant,
    For the loan of some wheat,
    Which would serve her to eat,
  Till the season came round.
    "I will pay you," she saith,
    "On an animal's faith,
  Double weight in the pound
  Ere the harvest be bound."
    The Ant is a friend--
    (And here she might mend)
    Little given to lend.
  "How spent you the summer?"
    Quoth she, looking shame
    At the borrowing dame.
  "Night and day to each comer
    I sang, if you please."
    "You sang!  I'm at ease,
  For 'tis plain at a glance,
  Now, ma'am, you must dance."



  The Swan and the Cook

  The pleasures of a poultry yard
  Were by a Swan and Gosling shared.
  The Swan was kept there for his looks,
  The thrifty Gosling for the Cooks;
  The first the garden's pride, the latter
  A greater favourite on the platter.
  They swam the ditches, side by side,
  And oft in sports aquatic vied,
  Plunging, splashing far and wide,
  With rivalry ne'er satisfied.
    One day the Cook, named Thirsty John,
    Sent for the Gosling, took the Swan,
      In haste his throat to cut,
      And put him in the pot.
    The bird's complaint resounded
      In glorious melody;
    Whereat the Cook, astounded
      His sad mistake to see,
  Cried, "What! make soup of a musician!
  Please God, I'll never set such dish on.
  No, no; I'll never cut a throat
  That sings so passing sweet a note."

  _'Tis thus, whatever peril may alarm us,
  Sweet words will surely never harm us_.



  The Hornets and the Bees

  "The artist by his work is known."
    A piece of honey-comb, one day,
    Discovered as a waif and stray,
  The Hornets treated as their own.
  Their title did the Bees dispute,
  And brought before a Wasp the suit.
  The judge was puzzled to decide,
  For nothing could be testified
  Save that around this honey-comb
  There had been seen, as if at home,
  Some longish, brownish, buzzing creatures,
  Much like the Bees in wings and features.
  But what of that? for marks the same,
  The Hornets, too, could truly claim.
  Between assertion and denial,
  The Wasp, in doubt, proclaimed new trial;
  And, hearing what an ant-hill swore,
  Could see no clearer than before.
  "What use, I pray, of this expense?"
  At last exclaim'd a Bee of sense.
    "We've laboured months in this affair,
    And now are only where we were.
  Meanwhile the honey runs to waste:
  'Tis time the judge should show some haste.
  Both sides have had sufficient bleeding,
  Without more fuss of scrawls and pleading.
  Let's set to work, these drones and we,
  And then all eyes the truth may see,
    Whose art it is that can produce
    The magic cells, the nectar juice."
      The Hornets, flinching on their part,
      Show that the work transcends their art.
      The Wasp at length their title sees,
      And gives the honey to the Bees.

      _Oh, would that suits at law with us
      Might every one be managed thus!_



  The Two Rats, the Fox, and the Egg

  Two Rats in foraging fell on an Egg--
    For gentry such as they
    A genteel dinner every way;
  They needed not to find an ox's leg.
    Brimful of joy and appetite,
      They were about to sack the box,
      So tight without the aid of locks,
    When suddenly there came in sight
  A personage--Sir Slyboots Fox.
    Sure, luck was never more untoward
    Since Fortune was a vixen froward!
  How should they save their Egg--and bacon?
    Their plunder couldn't then be bagg'd.
  Should it in forward paws be taken,
    Or roll'd along, or dragg'd?
    Each method seem'd impossible,
    And each was then of danger full.
  Necessity, ingenious mother,
  Brought forth what help'd them from their pother.
  As still there was a chance to save their prey,
  The sponger yet some hundred yards away--
  One seized the Egg, and turned upon his back,
  And then, in spite of many a thump and thwack,
  That would have torn, perhaps, a coat of mail,
  The other dragg'd him by the tail.
    Who dares the inference to blink,
    That beasts possess wherewith to think?

    _Were I commission'd to bestow
    This power on creatures here below,
    The beasts should have as much of mind
    As infants of the human kind._



  The Lion's Share

  The Heifer, the Goat, and their sister the Sheep,
  Compacted their earnings in common to keep,
  'Tis said, in time past, with a Lion, who swayed
  Full lordship o'er neighbours, of whatever grade.
  The Goat, as it happened, a Stag having snared,
  Sent off to the rest, that the beast might be shared.
  All gathered; the Lion first counts on his claws,
  And says, "We'll proceed to divide with our paws
  The stag into pieces, as fix'd by our laws."
    This done, he announces part first as his own;
    "'Tis mine," he says, "truly, as Lion alone."
    To such a decision there's nought to be said,
    As he who has made it is doubtless the head.
  "Well, also, the second to me should belong;
  'Tis mine, be it known, by the right of the strong.
  Again, as the bravest, the third must be mine.
  To touch but the fourth whoso maketh a sign,
        I'll choke him to death
        In the space of a breath!"



  The Shepherd and His Dog

  A Shepherd, with a single Dog,
  Was ask'd the reason why
  He kept a Dog, whose least supply
  Amounted to a loaf of bread
  For every day.  The people said
  He'd better give the animal
  To guard the village seignior's hall;
  For him, a Shepherd, it would be
  A thriftier economy
  To keep small curs, say two or three,
  That would not cost him half the food,
  And yet for watching be as good.
  The fools, perhaps, forgot to tell
  If they would fight the wolf as well.
  The silly Shepherd, giving heed,
  Cast off his Dog of mastiff breed,
  And took three dogs to watch his cattle,
  Which ate far less, but fled in battle.

  _Not vain our tale, if it convinces
    Small states that 'tis a wiser thing
    To trust a single powerful king,
  Than half a dozen petty princes._



  The Old Man and the Ass

  An Old Man, riding on his Ass,
  Had found a spot of thrifty grass,
  And there turn'd loose his weary beast.
  Old Grizzle, pleased with such a feast,
  Flung up his heels, and caper'd round,
  Then roll'd and rubb'd upon the ground,
  And frisk'd and browsed and bray'd,
  And many a clean spot made.
  Arm'd men came on them as he fed:
  "Let's fly!" in haste the Old Man said.
  "And wherefore so?" the Ass replied;
  "With heavier burdens will they ride?"
    "No," said the man, already started,
    "Then," cried the Ass, as he departed.
    "I'll stay, and be--no matter whose;
    Save you yourself, and leave me loose,
    But let me tell you, ere you go
    (I speak plain English, as you know),
    My master is my only foe."



  The Lion Going to War

  The Lion had an enterprise in hand;
    Held a war-council, sent his provost-marshal,
    And gave the animals a call impartial--
  Each, in his way, to serve his high command.
  The Elephant should carry on his back
  The tools of war, the mighty public pack,
  And fight in elephantine way and form;
  The Bear should hold himself prepared to storm;
  The Fox all secret stratagems should fix;
  The Monkey should amuse the foe by tricks.
  "Dismiss," said one, "the blockhead Asses,
    And Hares, too cowardly and fleet."
  "No," said the King; "I use all classes;
    Without their aid my force were incomplete.
  The Ass shall be our trumpeter, to scare
  Our enemy.  And then the nimble Hare
  Our royal bulletins shall homeward bear."

    _A monarch provident and wise
  Will hold his subjects all of consequence,
    And know in each what talent lies.
  There's nothing useless to a man of sense._



  The Ass and the Lap-dog

  One's native talent from its course
  Cannot be turned aside by force;
  But poorly apes the country clown
  The polish'd manners of the town.
    Their Maker chooses but a few
    With power of pleasing to imbue;
    Where wisely leave it we, the mass,
    Unlike a certain fabled Ass,
  That thought to gain his master's blessing
  By jumping on him and caressing.
    "What!" said the Donkey in his heart;
    "Ought it to be that Puppy's part
      To lead his useless life
        In full companionship
      With master and his wife,
        While I must bear the whip?
  What doth the Cur a kiss to draw
  Forsooth, he only gives his paw!
  If that is all there needs to please,
  I'll do the thing myself, with ease."
    Possess'd with this bright notion--
  His master sitting on his chair,
  At leisure in the open air--
    He ambled up, with awkward motion,
  And put his talents to the proof;
  Upraised his bruised and batter'd hoof,
  And, with an amiable mien,
  His master patted on the chin,
  The action gracing with a word--
  The fondest bray that e'er was heard!
  Oh, such caressing was there ever?
  Or melody with such a quaver?
  "Ho! Martin! here! a club, a club bring!"
    Out cried the master, sore offended.
  So Martin gave the Ass a drubbing--
    And so the comedy was ended.



  The Hare and the Partridge

  A field in common share
  A Partridge and a Hare,
  And live in peaceful state,
  Till, woeful to relate!
  The hunters mingled cry
  Compels the Hare to fly.
  He hurries to his fort,
  And spoils almost the sport
  By faulting every hound
  That yelps upon the ground.
  At last his reeking heat
  Betrays his snug retreat.
  Old Tray, with philosophic nose,
