and reptiles. There was no attempt at carpet or curtain. The table was
entirely occupied by the great work of Martin, the electric machine,
which was covered carefully with the remains of his table-cloth. The
jackdaw cage occupied one wall; and the other was adorned by a small
hatchet, a pair of climbing irons, and his tin candle-box, in which he
was for the time being endeavouring to raise a hopeful young family of
field-mice. As nothing should be let to lie useless, it was well that
the candle-box was thus occupied, for candles Martin never had. A pound
was issued to him weekly, as to the other boys; but as candles were
available capital, and easily exchangeable for birds' eggs or young
birds, Martin's pound invariably found its way in a few hours to
Howlett's the bird-fancier's, in the Bilton road, who would give a
hawk's or nightingale's egg or young linnet in exchange. Martin's
ingenuity was therefore for ever on the rack to supply himself with
a light. Just now he had hit upon a grand invention, and the den was
lighted by a flaring cotton wick issuing from a ginger-beer bottle full
of some doleful composition. When light altogether failed him, Martin
would loaf about by the fires in the passages or hall, after the manner
of Diggs, and try to do his verses or learn his lines by the firelight.

"Well, old boy, you haven't got any sweeter in the den this half. How
that stuff in the bottle stinks! Never mind; I ain't going to stop; but
you come up after prayers to our study. You know young Arthur. We've got
Gray's study. We'll have a good supper and talk about bird-nesting."

Martin was evidently highly pleased at the invitation, and promised to
be up without fail.

As soon as prayers were over, and the sixth and fifth form boys had
withdrawn to the aristocratic seclusion of their own room, and the rest,
or democracy, had sat down to their supper in the hall, Tom and Arthur,
having secured their allowances of bread and cheese, started on their
feet to catch the eye of the prepostor of the week, who remained in
charge during supper, walking up and down the hall. He happened to be an
easy-going fellow, so they got a pleasant nod to their "Please may I go
out?" and away they scrambled to prepare for Martin a sumptuous banquet.
This Tom had insisted on, for he was in great delight on the occasion,
the reason of which delight must be expounded. The fact was that this
was the first attempt at a friendship of his own which Arthur had made,
and Tom hailed it as a grand step. The ease with which he himself became
hail-fellow-well-met with anybody, and blundered into and out of twenty
friendships a half-year, made him sometimes sorry and sometimes angry at
Arthur's reserve and loneliness. True, Arthur was always pleasant, and
even jolly, with any boys who came with Tom to their study; but Tom felt
that it was only through him, as it were, that his chum associated
with others, and that but for him Arthur would have been dwelling in
a wilderness. This increased his consciousness of responsibility;
and though he hadn't reasoned it out and made it clear to himself yet
somehow he knew that this responsibility, this trust which he had taken
on him without thinking about it, head over heels in fact, was the
centre and turning-point of his school-life, that which was to make him
or mar him, his appointed work and trial for the time being. And Tom
was becoming a new boy, though with frequent tumbles in the dirt and
perpetual hard battle with himself, and was daily growing in manfulness
and thoughtfulness, as every high-couraged and well-principled boy must,
when he finds himself for the first time consciously at grips with self
and the devil. Already he could turn almost without a sigh from the
School-gates, from which had just scampered off East and three or four
others of his own particular set, bound for some jolly lark not quite
according to law, and involving probably a row with louts, keepers,
or farm-labourers, the skipping dinner or calling-over, some of Phoebe
Jennings's beer, and a very possible flogging at the end of all as a
relish. He had quite got over the stage in which he would grumble to
himself--"Well, hang it, it's very hard of the Doctor to have saddled me
with Arthur. Why couldn't he have chummed him with Fogey, or Thomkin, or
any of the fellows who never do anything but walk round the close, and
finish their copies the first day they're set?" But although all this
was past, he longed, and felt that he was right in longing, for more
time for the legitimate pastimes of cricket, fives, bathing, and
fishing, within bounds, in which Arthur could not yet be his companion;
and he felt that when the "young un" (as he now generally called him)
had found a pursuit and some other friend for himself, he should be
able to give more time to the education of his own body with a clear
conscience.

And now what he so wished for had come to pass; he almost hailed it as
a special providence (as indeed it was, but not for the reasons he
gave for it--what providences are?) that Arthur should have singled out
Martin of all fellows for a friend. "The old Madman is the very fellow,"
thought he; "he will take him scrambling over half the country after
birds' eggs and flowers, make him run and swim and climb like an Indian,
and not teach him a word of anything bad, or keep him from his lessons.
What luck!" And so, with more than his usual heartiness, he dived into
his cupboard, and hauled out an old knuckle-bone of ham, and two or
three bottles of beer, together with the solemn pewter only used on
state occasions; while Arthur, equally elated at the easy accomplishment
of his first act of volition in the joint establishment, produced from
his side a bottle of pickles and a pot of jam, and cleared the table. In
a minute or two the noise of the boys coming up from supper was heard,
and Martin knocked and was admitted, bearing his bread and cheese; and
the three fell to with hearty good-will upon the viands, talking faster
than they ate, for all shyness disappeared in a moment before Tom's
bottled-beer and hospitable ways. "Here's Arthur, a regular young
town-mouse, with a natural taste for the woods, Martin, longing to break
his neck climbing trees, and with a passion for young snakes."

"Well, I say," sputtered out Martin eagerly, "will you come to-morrow,
both of you, to Caldecott's Spinney then? for I know of a kestrel's
nest, up a fir-tree. I can't get at it without help; and, Brown, you can
climb against any one."

"Oh yes, do let us go," said Arthur; "I never saw a hawk's nest nor a
hawk's egg."

"You just come down to my study, then, and I'll show you five sorts,"
said Martin.

"Ay, the old Madman has got the best collection in the house, out and
out," said Tom; and then Martin, warming with unaccustomed good cheer
and the chance of a convert, launched out into a proposed bird-nesting
campaign, betraying all manner of important secrets--a golden-crested
wren's nest near Butlin's Mound, a moor-hen who was sitting on nine eggs
in a pond down the Barby road, and a kingfisher's nest in a corner of
the old canal above Brownsover Mill. He had heard, he said, that no
one had ever got a kingfisher's nest out perfect, and that the British
Museum, or the Government, or somebody, had offered 100 pounds to any
one who could bring them a nest and eggs not damaged. In the middle of
which astounding announcement, to which the others were listening with
open ears, and already considering the application of the 100 pounds, a
knock came to the door, and East's voice was heard craving admittance.

"There's Harry," said Tom; "we'll let him in. I'll keep him steady,
Martin. I thought the old boy would smell out the supper."

The fact was, that Tom's heart had already smitten him for not asking
his fidus Achates to the feast, although only an extempore affair; and
though prudence and the desire to get Martin and Arthur together alone
at first had overcome his scruples, he was now heartily glad to open the
door, broach another bottle of beer, and hand over the old ham-knuckle
to the searching of his old friend's pocket-knife.

"Ah, you greedy vagabonds," said East, with his mouth full, "I knew
there was something going on when I saw you cut off out of hall so
quick with your suppers. What a stunning tap, Tom! You are a wunner for
bottling the swipes."

"I've had practice enough for the sixth in my time, and it's hard if I
haven't picked up a wrinkle or two for my own benefit."

"Well, old Madman, and how goes the bird-nesting campaign? How's
Howlett? I expect the young rooks'll be out in another fortnight, and
then my turn comes."

"There'll be no young rooks fit for pies for a month yet; shows how much
you know about it," rejoined Martin, who, though very good friends with
East, regarded him with considerable suspicion for his propensity to
practical jokes.

"Scud knows nothing and cares for nothing but grub and mischief," said
Tom; "but young rook pie, specially when you've had to climb for them,
is very pretty eating.--However, I say, Scud, we're all going after a
hawk's nest to-morrow, in Caldecott's Spinney; and if you'll come and
behave yourself, we'll have a stunning climb."

"And a bathe in Aganippe. Hooray! I'm your man."

"No, no; no bathing in Aganippe; that's where our betters go."

"Well, well, never mind. I'm for the hawk's nest, and anything that
turns up."

And the bottled-beer being finished, and his hunger appeased, East
departed to his study, "that sneak Jones," as he informed them, who had
just got into the sixth, and occupied the next study, having instituted
a nightly visitation upon East and his chum, to their no small
discomfort.

When he was gone Martin rose to follow, but Tom stopped him. "No one
goes near New Row," said he, "so you may just as well stop here and do
your verses, and then we'll have some more talk. We'll be no end quiet.
Besides, no prepostor comes here now. We haven't been visited once this
half."

So the table was cleared, the cloth restored, and the three fell to work
with Gradus and dictionary upon the morning's vulgus.

They were three very fair examples of the way in which such tasks were
done at Rugby, in the consulship of Plancus. And doubtless the method
is little changed, for there is nothing new under the sun, especially at
schools.

Now be it known unto all you boys who are at schools which do not
rejoice in the time-honoured institution of the vulgus (commonly
supposed to have been established by William of Wykeham at Winchester,
and imported to Rugby by Arnold more for the sake of the lines which
were learnt by heart with it than for its own intrinsic value, as I've
always understood), that it is a short exercise in Greek or Latin verse,
on a given subject, the minimum number of lines being fixed for each
form.

The master of the form gave out at fourth lesson on the previous day the
subject for next morning's vulgus, and at first lesson each boy had to
bring his vulgus ready to be looked over; and with the vulgus, a
certain number of lines from one of the Latin or Greek poets then being
construed in the form had to be got by heart. The master at first lesson
called up each boy in the form in order, and put him on in the lines.
If he couldn't say them, or seem to say them, by reading them off the
master's or some other boy's book who stood near, he was sent back,
and went below all the boys who did so say or seem to say them; but
in either case his vulgus was looked over by the master, who gave and
entered in his book, to the credit or discredit of the boy, so many
marks as the composition merited. At Rugby vulgus and lines were the
first lesson every other day in the week, on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays; and as there were thirty-eight weeks in the school year, it
is obvious to the meanest capacity that the master of each form had
to set one hundred and fourteen subjects every year, two hundred and
twenty-eight every two years, and so on. Now, to persons of moderate
invention this was a considerable task, and human nature being prone to
repeat itself, it will not be wondered that the masters gave the same
subjects sometimes over again after a certain lapse of time. To meet
and rebuke this bad habit of the masters, the schoolboy mind, with its
accustomed ingenuity, had invented an elaborate system of tradition.
Almost every boy kept his own vulgus written out in a book, and these
books were duly handed down from boy to boy, till (if the tradition has
gone on till now) I suppose the popular boys, in whose hands bequeathed
vulgus-books have accumulated, are prepared with three or four vulguses
on any subject in heaven or earth, or in "more worlds than one," which
an unfortunate master can pitch upon. At any rate, such lucky fellows
had generally one for themselves and one for a friend in my time. The
only objection to the traditionary method of doing your vulguses was the
risk that the successions might have become confused, and so that you
and another follower of traditions should show up the same identical
vulgus some fine morning; in which case, when it happened, considerable
grief was the result. But when did such risk hinder boys or men from
short cuts and pleasant paths?

Now in the study that night Tom was the upholder of the traditionary
method of vulgus doing. He carefully produced two large vulgus-books,
and began diving into them, and picking out a line here, and an ending
there (tags, as they were vulgarly called), till he had gotten all
that he thought he could make fit. He then proceeded to patch his tags
together with the help of his Gradus, producing an incongruous and
feeble result of eight elegiac lines, the minimum quantity for his form,
and finishing up with two highly moral lines extra, making ten in
all, which he cribbed entire from one of his books, beginning "O genus
humanum," and which he himself must have used a dozen times before,
whenever an unfortunate or wicked hero, of whatever nation or language
under the sun, was the subject. Indeed he began to have great doubts
whether the master wouldn't remember them, and so only throw them in as
extra lines, because in any case they would call off attention from the
other tags, and if detected, being extra lines, he wouldn't be sent back
to do more in their place, while if they passed muster again he would
get marks for them.

The second method, pursued by Martin, may be called the dogged or
prosaic method. He, no more than Tom, took any pleasure in the task,
but having no old vulgus-books of his own, or any one's else, could
not follow the traditionary method, for which too, as Tom remarked, he
hadn't the genius. Martin then proceeded to write down eight lines in
English, of the most matter-of-fact kind, the first that came into his
head; and to convert these, line by line, by main force of Gradus and
dictionary into Latin that would scan. This was all he cared for--to
produce eight lines with no false quantities or concords: whether the
words were apt, or what the sense was, mattered nothing; and as the
article was all new, not a line beyond the minimum did the followers of
the dogged method ever produce.

The third, or artistic method, was Arthur's. He considered first what
point in the character or event which was the subject could most neatly
be brought out within the limits of a vulgus, trying always to get his
idea into the eight lines, but not binding himself to ten or even twelve
lines if he couldn't do this. He then set to work as much as possible
without Gradus or other help, to clothe his idea in appropriate Latin or
Greek, and would not be satisfied till he had polished it well up with
the aptest and most poetic words and phrases he could get at.

A fourth method, indeed, was used in the school, but of too simple
a kind to require a comment. It may be called the vicarious method,
obtained amongst big boys of lazy or bullying habits, and consisted
simply in making clever boys whom they could thrash do their whole
vulgus for them, and construe it to them afterwards; which latter is a
method not to be encouraged, and which I strongly advise you all not
to practise. Of the others, you will find the traditionary most
troublesome, unless you can steal your vulguses whole (experto crede),
and that the artistic method pays the best both in marks and other ways.

The vulguses being finished by nine o'clock, and Martin having rejoiced
above measure in the abundance of light, and of Gradus and dictionary,
and other conveniences almost unknown to him for getting through the
work, and having been pressed by Arthur to come and do his verses there
whenever he liked, the three boys went down to Martin's den, and Arthur
was initiated into the lore of birds' eggs, to his great delight.
The exquisite colouring and forms astonished and charmed him, who had
scarcely ever seen any but a hen's egg or an ostrich's, and by the time
he was lugged away to bed he had learned the names of at least twenty
sorts, and dreamed of the glorious perils of tree-climbing, and that he
had found a roc's egg in the island as big as Sinbad's, and clouded like
a tit-lark's, in blowing which Martin and he had nearly been drowned in
the yolk.



CHAPTER IV--THE BIRD-FANCIERS.

     "I have found out a gift for my fair--
     I have found where the wood-pigeons breed;
     But let me the plunder forbear,
     She would say 'twas a barbarous deed."--ROWE.

     "And now, my lad, take them five shilling,
     And on my advice in future think;
     So Billy pouched them all so willing,
     And got that night disguised in drink."--MS. Ballad.

The next morning, at first lesson, Tom was turned back in his lines,
and so had to wait till the second round; while Martin and Arthur said
theirs all right, and got out of school at once. When Tom got out and
ran down to breakfast at Harrowell's they were missing, and Stumps
informed him that they had swallowed down their breakfasts and gone off
together--where, he couldn't say. Tom hurried over his own breakfast,
and went first to Martin's study and then to his own; but no signs of
the missing boys were to be found. He felt half angry and jealous of
Martin. Where could they be gone?

He learnt second lesson with East and the rest in no very good temper,
and then went out into the quadrangle. About ten minutes before school
Martin and Arthur arrived in the quadrangle breathless; and catching
sight of him, Arthur rushed up, all excitement, and with a bright glow
on his face.

"O Tom, look here!" cried he, holding out three moor-hen's eggs; "we've
been down the Barby road, to the pool Martin told us of last night, and
just see what we've got."

Tom wouldn't be pleased, and only looked out for something to find fault
with.

"Why, young un," said he, "what have you been after? You don't mean to
say you've been wading?"

The tone of reproach made poor little Arthur shrink up in a moment and
look piteous; and Tom with a shrug of his shoulders turned his anger on
Martin.

"Well, I didn't think, Madman, that you'd have been such a muff as to
let him be getting wet through at this time of day. You might have done
the wading yourself."

"So I did, of course; only he would come in too, to see the nest. We
left six eggs in. They'll be hatched in a day or two."

"Hang the eggs!" said Tom; "a fellow can't turn his back for a moment
but all his work's undone. He'll be laid up for a week for this precious
lark, I'll be bound."

"Indeed, Tom, now," pleaded Arthur, "my feet ain't wet, for Martin made
me take off my shoes and stockings and trousers."

"But they are wet, and dirty too; can't I see?" answered Tom; "and
you'll be called up and floored when the master sees what a state you're
in. You haven't looked at second lesson, you know."

O Tom, you old humbug! you to be upbraiding any one with not learning
their lessons! If you hadn't been floored yourself now at first lesson,
do you mean to say you wouldn't have been with them? And you've taken
away all poor little Arthur's joy and pride in his first birds' eggs,
and he goes and puts them down in the study, and takes down his books
