are full of Love, and Self-denial, and Goodness. I do so dearly like
to think of it. I lie often on the sofa for hours, and make up stories
about three fairies, whom I call by these names; they are quite
playmates for me, and I talk to them. I often almost fancy they are
real, but the strange thing is, Jasmine, they will only come to me
when I have tried to be unselfish, and cheerful, and done my best to
be bright and happy. Then Goodness comes, and makes the walls shine
with his presence, and Self-denial makes my sofa so soft and easy, and
Love gives me a nice view through the window, for I try to take an
interest in all the men and women and little children who pass, and
when I sit at the window and look at them through Love's glass you
cannot think how nice they all seem. I told the Prince about it one
day, and he said that was making a real Palace Beautiful out of our
rooms."

Jasmine sighed.

"I hear Primrose's step," she said. "Oh, Daisy! you are a darling! how
sweetly you think. I wonder if these rooms could ever come to mean a
Palace Beautiful to me! I don't think fairies could come to me here,
Daisy. I don't think I could see things through their eyes. I want my
palace to be much larger and grander than this. Perhaps if I am a real
genius it will come to me through my story; but, oh! I hope I did not
do wrong in taking Poppy's money."

"No, for you are a genius," said little Daisy, kissing her
affectionately.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

ENDORSING A CHEQUE.


Primrose's life was very busy at this time. Certainly nothing could be
more irksome than the daily task of reading to poor Mrs. Mortlock, but
the fifteen shillings a week which she now earned regularly was a
wonderful help to the household purse, and Primrose performed her
irksome duties with a cheerful, and even thankful heart. Her anxieties
about Daisy were almost laid to rest. Since the child had been moved
to Miss Egerton's house she seemed quite a changed creature. Her old
cheerfulness and sweet calm were returning to her. Morning after
morning she bade Primrose good-bye with a bright smile on her little
face, and however long and dull her day was, she greeted her sister
happily at night. What, therefore, was poor Primrose's consternation
to find, on returning home the evening after Jasmine had made
arrangements for the publication of her manuscript not only Jasmine,
but Miss Egerton and Bridget all surrounding poor little Daisy, who
lay on the sofa with a ghastly white face, and burst into nervous
troubled weeping whenever she was spoken to.

"We found her in such a queer state," said Jasmine; but Miss Egerton
held up a warning hand.

"Let it rest now, my dear," she said; "we need not go into the story
in Daisy's presence; she wants perfect quiet. Primrose, she has been
longing so for you; will you sit down by her, and hold her hand?"

Daisy opened her eyes when she heard Primrose's name, and held up a
hot little hand to her sister, who clasped it very firmly.

"I want to speak to you all by yourself, Primrose," she whispered.
"Please ask Jasmine, and Miss Egerton, and Bridget to go away. I want
to say something most important to you."

"Leave us for a moment," said Primrose to the others; and Jasmine went
down with Miss Egerton to the sitting-room.

The moment Daisy found herself quite alone with Primrose she raised
her head, ceased crying, and looked at her sister with bright feverish
eyes, and cheeks that burned.

"Primrose," she said, "would you think it very, very wrong of me if I
did something that wasn't in itself the very best thing to do, but
something that I had to do to prevent a dreadful ogre putting me down
into a dark dungeon? Would it be very wrong of me to do a very little
thing to prevent it, Primrose?"

"My darling," said Primrose, "your poor little head must be wandering.
I don't understand what you mean, my dear little one. Of course it
would be only right of you to keep away from an ogre, and not to allow
one to touch you--but there are no ogres. Daisy love--there never were
such creatures. You need not make yourself unhappy about beings that
never existed. The fact is, Daisy, you are too much alone, and your
little head has got quite full of the idea of fairies. I must ask Mr.
Noel not to talk to you in so fanciful a manner."

"Oh don't, Primrose, for it is my one and only comfort. Oh! I am glad
you think I ought to keep out of the ogre's power. He is a dreadful,
dreadful ogre, and he has tried to get into the Palace, and I am
awfully afraid of him."

Then Daisy laughed quite strangely, and said, in a wistful little
voice--

"Of course, Primrose, this is only fairy-talk. I always was fond of
fairies, wasn't I? Primrose, darling, I want you to do a little thing
for me, will you?"

"Of course, Daisy. Why, how you are trembling, dear!"

"Hold my hand," said Daisy, "and let me put my head on your shoulder.
Now I'll ask you about the little thing, Primrose; there's your
letter from Mr. Danesfield on the table."

"Has it come?" said Primrose; "I am glad. I expected it yesterday
morning."

"It's on the table," repeated Daisy. "Will you open it, Primrose? I'd
like to see what's inside."

"Oh, there'll be nothing very pretty inside, darling; it is probably a
postal order for our quarter's money."

"Yes, but let me see it, Primrose."

Primrose moved slowly to the table, took up the letter, and opened it.

"It's just as I said, Daisy," she remarked, "only, no--it's not a
postal order, it's a cheque. I must write my name on the back, and
take it to the Metropolitan Bank to cash to-morrow."

"Let me see you writing your name on the back, please, Primrose," said
Daisy, in a queer, constrained little voice.

Primrose smiled to herself at the child's caprice but, taking up a
pen, she put her signature across the back of the cheque.

"May I take it in my hand, Primrose?" said Daisy. "Oh, thank you! My
hand shakes, doesn't it? but that's because I'm so dreadfully subject
to starts. Isn't it funny, Primrose, to think that this little paper
should mean a lot of golden sovereigns? Doesn't it make you feel rich
to have it, Primrose?"

"It makes me feel that with it and the help of my weekly salary we
shall be able to pay for our bread and butter, Daisy."

Daisy turned ghastly white.

"Oh, yes," she said, "oh, yes, dear Primrose. Will you put the cheque
back into the envelope, and may I sleep with it under my pillow? I'll
stay so quiet and still, and I'll not start at all if I have the
cheque that you have signed under my pillow."




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

DAISY'S REQUEST.


Primrose was so anxious to soothe Daisy that she allowed her without a
moment's hesitation to have her way. The moment the child felt her hot
little fingers clasping the letter with its precious enclosure she
became quiet, and ceased to speak. Primrose had undressed her, and
placed her in bed, and she now turned her back on her sister, and
still clasping the letter tightly, closed her eyes. Primrose hoped she
was asleep, and went softly out of the room to talk over matters with
Jasmine and Miss Egerton. Miss Egerton could throw no light on the
subject of Daisy's queer attack, and when Primrose at last went to bed
she had to own that her anxieties with regard to her little sister had
returned.

The next morning she was obliged to leave earlier than usual, and
rather to Daisy's astonishment, and very much to her relief, said
nothing about Mr. Danesfield's letter. Primrose had not forgotten the
letter, but she knew she would not be able to go to the bank that
day, and she thought it would comfort Daisy to take care of it.

"Jasmine," she said to her second sister, "must you go out this
morning? I think it is hardly well to leave Daisy alone."

Jasmine's face clouded over.

"Have you forgotten, Primrose, that Miss Egerton and Mr. Noel were to
take me to South Kensington Museum to-day? They arranged that I should
go with them quite a week ago, and it would never do to put them off
again now. I'll tell you what I'll do, Primrose; I'll take Daisy too;
I'll see that she is not over tired, and Mr. Noel will take great care
of her; they are very fond of each other."

"Try to arrange it so, then, Jasmine," said Primrose; "for I do not
feel happy about her being left."

Primrose went away to spend her day as usual with Mrs. Mortlock, and
sat down to her "continual reading" with a heavy heart.

Mrs. Mortlock was losing her sight rapidly--cataract was forming on
her eyes, and she could now only dimly see the face and form of her
young companion. Primrose, however, always managed to soothe the
somewhat irascible old lady, and was already a prime favorite with
her.

To-day she took up the newspaper with a heavy heart, and the anxiety
which oppressed her made itself felt in a certain weary tone which
came into her voice.

Mrs. Mortlock was fond of Primrose, but was never slow in expressing
an opinion.

"Crisp up, Miss Mainwaring," she said; "crisp up a little; drawling
voices give me the fidgets most terribly. Now, my dear, try to fancy
yourself in the House of Commons; read that speech more animated, my
love. Ah, that's better!"

Primrose exerted herself, and for a few minutes the reading came up to
its usual standard, but then, again, thoughts of Daisy oppressed the
young reader, and once more her voice flagged.

"There, my dear, you had better turn to the bits of gossip; they are
more in your line, I can see, this morning. Dear, dear, dear! I can't
tell what's come to girls these days; they don't seem to find no heart
nor pleasure in anything. Now, if there is a girl who, in my opinion,
has fallen on her feet, it's you, Miss Mainwaring; for, surely, the
handsome salary I allow is earned with next to no trouble. When once a
girl can read she can read continual, and that's all I ask of you."

"I'm sorry," said Primrose; "some things at home are troubling me, and
I cannot help thinking about them. I shall do better over the gossip."

"That's right, my love! I'd ask you about the home troubles, but my
nerves won't stand no worriting. Get on with the gossip, dear, and
make your voice chirrupy and perky, as though you saw the spice of it
all, and enjoyed it--do."

Just at this moment, while poor Primrose was trying to train her
unwilling voice, the door was opened, and Poppy, red in the face, and
with her best hat and jacket on, came in.

"Miss Primrose, I'm come to say good-bye, I am. No, Mrs. Mortlock,
when about to quit I don't fear you no longer--not all the Sarahs in
Europe would have power over me now. I'm going. Aunt Flint and me we
has quarrelled, and I has given her fair warning, and I'm going back
to my native place, maybe this evening. Never no more will this city
of wanities see me. I'm off, Miss Primrose; I leaves Penelope Mansion
now, and I go straight away to your place to bid Miss Jasmine and Miss
Daisy good-bye."

"For goodness sake, Sarah Matilda Ann!" here interrupted Mrs.
Mortlock, speaking with great excitement, "before you go see you bring
me up my beef-tea--Mrs. Flint won't give it a thought, and my nerves
won't keep up without the nourishment. Run down to the kitchen this
minute, Sarah Mary, and bring me up the beef-tea, and a nice little
delicate slice of toast, done to a turn, to eat with it. Mind you,
don't let the toast get burnt, for if I can't see I can taste, and
well know when my toast is burnt."

Poppy was about to give a saucy answer, but a look from Primrose
restrained her, and before she left Penelope Mansion she had provided
the old lady with her luncheon. Primrose said a few words of farewell
and regret, and then Poppy set out, determined to take her chance of
finding Jasmine and Daisy at home.

"I'll go back to my own place to-night," she said to herself, "and
tell my mother that wanity of wanities is London--my fifteen shillings
will just buy me a single third, and I needn't eat nothing until
to-morrow morning."

When Poppy arrived at Miss Egerton's she was told by Bridget that Miss
Jasmine was out, but that she would find Miss Daisy by herself
upstairs. Poppy ran nimbly up the stairs, and knocked at the
sitting-room door; there was no answer, and turning the handle, she
went in. Daisy was lying with her face downwards on the sofa--sobs and
quivers shook her little frame, and for a time she did not even hear
Poppy, who bent over her in some alarm.

"Now, Miss Daisy, darling, I'm real glad I has come in--why, what is
the matter, missie?"

"Nothing, Poppy; nothing indeed," said Daisy, "except that I'm most
dreadfully unhappy. If I was a really quite unselfish little girl I'd
go and live in a dungeon, but I couldn't do it--I couldn't, really."

Whatever Poppy was, she was practical--she wasted no time trying to
find out what Daisy meant, but bringing some cold water, she bathed
the child's face and hands, and then she made her take a drink of
milk, and finally, she lifted her off the sofa, and sitting down in an
arm-chair, took her in her arms, and laid her head on her breast.

"There now, pretty little dear, you're better, aren't you?"

"My body is better, thank you, Poppy--I like to feel your arms holding
me very tight. My mind will never, never be well again, dear Poppy."

"Would it ease it to unburden?" said Poppy. "Sometimes it's a
wonderful soother to speak out about what worries one. At Aunt Flint's
I used to let fly my worries to the walls for want of a better
confidant. You think over about unburdening to me, Miss Daisy. I'll
promise to be a safe receptacle."

Daisy shook her head mournfully.

"It would be no use," she said; "even telling now would be no manner
of use. Oh, Poppy, I wish I had been strong enough, and I wish so
dreadfully I had not minded about the dungeon. If the Prince was here
he would say I ought not to live any longer in the Palace Beautiful,
and I don't think the rooms do look like the rooms of a palace
to-day. Please, Poppy, look round you, and see if you can see any
goodness shining on the walls, and if you can see through Love's glass
into the street."

"Oh lor! no, Miss Daisy; I'm not so fanciful. The walls is just fairly
neat, and the windows, they're just like any other attic windows. Now,
missy, you're just fairly worn out, and you shall shut your eyes and
go to sleep."

Poor little Daisy was so weary and weak that she absolutely did close
her eyes, and comforted and soothed by Poppy's presence, she fell into
a short and uneasy doze. She awoke in about an hour, and lay quite
still, with her eyes wide open. Poppy said something to her, but she
replied, in an imploring tone.

"Please let me think. I had a dream when I was asleep. I did something
in the dream, and I think I'll do it now really--only you must let me
think Poppy."

"Think, away, pretty little miss," said Poppy: "and while you are
worriting your poor little brain over thoughts I'll take it upon me to
prepare a bit of dinner for you."

Poppy made some tea, and boiled an egg, and toasted some bread to a
light and tempting brown. When the meal was prepared she brought it to
Daisy, who said wistfully--

"If I do what I want I must be strong, so I'll eat up that egg, and
I'll take some toast, and you must take something too, Poppy."

"Seeing as I can't get no meal till to-morrow morning I'm not inclined
to refuse a good offer," said Poppy. "You don't know, missy, as I'm
going back to my native 'ome to-night."

"Poppy," said Daisy, suddenly, taking no notice of this remark, "do
you know if Mrs. Ellsworthy is a very rich woman?"

"Mrs. Ellsworthy of Shortlands?" said Poppy; "why, in course; ever
since I can remember, my mother has said to me, 'Poppy, child, them
there Ellsworthys is made of money.'"

"Made of money," repeated Daisy, a little shadowy smile coming to her
face; "then they must be really rich. Do you think, Poppy, that Mrs.
Ellsworthy is rich enough to give away L17 10_s._ to buy the daily
bread, and to help a little girl who could not help being selfish out
of a dreadful dark dungeon? Mrs. Ellsworthy has always been very kind,
and I used to love her when I lived at home, but if I thought she was
not really very, very rich, I would not ask her, for that might be
putting _her_ to great trouble. Losing money makes one's heart ache
terrible, Poppy, and I would rather bear my own heartache than give it
to another person."

"Mrs. Ellsworthy is made of money," repeated Poppy, "and L17 10_s._
would be no more than a feather's weight to her. All the same, I can't
make out what you're driving at, Miss Daisy."

"I wonder if Mrs. Ellsworthy is at Shortlands now," continued Daisy.

"To be sure she is, Miss Daisy; shall I take her any message when I
goes back home?"

"Oh, no, Poppy, thank you very much. Poppy, I wish you had not lent
all that money to Jasmine two days ago--you have not any money in your
pocket now, have you, Poppy?"

Poppy gave a slight sigh.

"Just the price of a third single to Rosebury, and no more, Miss
Daisy, darling."

"Oh, dear me," said Daisy, "it's just exactly that much money which
would make me perfectly happy. Must you go to Rosebury to-night,
Poppy?"

"Well, missy, I'd do something to make you 'appy, but I don't know
where to go if I don't go to my home--to be sure, Aunt Flint would
give her eyes to get me back again, but I fears that even for you,
Miss Daisy, I can't bear no more of that Sarah game."
