mounting bird. John got back his breath and presence of mind.

"Wait, Philip! Wait!" he cried. "We're leaving behind our friend Weber!
He's down there, somewhere by the river!"

Lannes made no reply. The _Arrow_ continued its rise, sharp and swift,
and John heard a crackling sound below. Little missiles, steel and
deadly, shot by them. One passed so close to his face that his breath
went again. When he recovered it once more the _Arrow_, its inmates,
unharmed, was far above the range of rifles, flying in a circle.

"Look down, John," said Lannes.




CHAPTER X

OLD FRIENDS


John, obeying Lannes' command, glanced down, as one looks over the side
of a ship toward the sea, and he saw many horsemen galloping across the
field. He recognized at once the Uhlans, and, for all he knew; they
might be von Boehlen's own command.

"Hand me your glasses, will you?" he said.

When Lannes passed them to him he looked long and well, but he did not
see any sign of a prisoner among the Prussians. He also searched the
woods and other fields near by, but they were empty. The whole Prussian
force was gathered beneath them. John breathed a deep sigh of relief.

"It's evident that Weber has escaped," he said. "Doubtless this was the
very troop of Uhlans of which the Alsatian had caught a glimpse. He is
clever and swift and I've no doubt he found a covert."

"I'm sorry we had to leave him," said Lannes, "but there was no other
choice. I came to the tree to examine the flag, and being above I saw
the Uhlans nearby before you did. Then I heard your shout and dropped
down. But as I knew the Uhlans were coming for us I made you jump almost
before you knew it, and we got away by a hair. The _Arrow_ was struck
twice, but the bullets glanced off its polished sides. There are two
slight scars, but I can have them removed."

John laughed.

"Philip," he said, "I believe you love the _Arrow_ as a fellow loves his
best girl."

"Well spoken, Monsieur Jean the Scott, and the _Arrow_ never fails me.
And so you've been with Weber?"

"It's a long tale. I was in a boat crossing the Marne. It was sunk by
one of the French shells, and I escaped. I reached the deserted cottage
of a peasant, and Weber, who was wandering around, happened to come
there, too. We've been trying to escape today, and we put that flag up
in the tree as a sort of signal, while we hid among the vines below,
until you should come, as he believed you would. He was right, but he
was unlucky enough to be absent when you arrived." "Maybe it couldn't
have happened in a better way. The _Arrow_ can carry only two, and I
don't know what we'd have done with him. He's a clever fellow and he'll
make his way back to the army."

"I hope so, in fact I feel so. But, Philip, it's glorious to be with you
again, and to be up here, where the bullets can't reach you."

"That is, so long as the German flyers don't come near enough to take
shots at us."

"I don't see any in sight, and meanwhile I intend to be comfortable.
Good old _Arrow_! The best little rescuer in the world! Lannes, I
believe it's a large part of your business to fly about over fields of
battle and rescue me."

"You certainly give me plenty of opportunities," laughed Lannes.

"What's been happening? I fancy that a lot of water has flowed under the
bridges of the Marne since I left you."

"We continue to gain," replied Lannes, with quiet satisfaction. "We
press the German armies back everywhere. Our supreme chief is a silent
man, but he has delivered a master stroke. We've emerged from the very
gulf of defeat and despair to the heights of victory. We're not only
driving the Germans across the Marne, but we're driving them further.
Moreover, their armies are cut apart, and one is fighting for its
existence, just as the French and English were fighting for theirs in
that terrible retreat from Mons and Charleroi."

"It's glorious, but we mustn't be too sanguine, Lannes. The powers that
overcome the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires will not forget for a
hundred years that they had a war."

"You're not telling me any news, Monsieur Jean the Scott. I've been in
Germany often, and like you I've seen what they have and what they are.
We're only beginning."

"Where are you going now, Philip?"

"Toward the end of our line. I've some dispatches for the commander of
the British force. Your friends, Carstairs and Wharton, are there, and
you may see them. But I understand that the Strangers are to remain with
the French, so you, Carstairs and Wharton will have to consider
yourselves Frenchmen and stay under our banner."

"That's all right. I hope we'll be under the command of General
Vaugirard. Do you know anything of him?"

"Not today, but he was alive yesterday. Take the glasses now, John, will
you, and be my eyes as you have been before. One needs to watch the
heavens all the time."

John took Lannes' powerful glasses, and objects invisible before leaped
into view.

"I see two or three rivers, a dozen villages, and troops," he said. "The
troops are to the west, and although they are this side of the Marne, I
should judge that they are ours."

"Ours undoubtedly," said Lannes, glancing the way John's glasses
pointed. "Not less than a hundred thousand of our men have crossed the
Marne at that point, and more will soon be coming. It's a part of the
great wedge thrust forward by our chief. But keep your eye on the air,
John. What do you see there?"

"Nothing that's near. In the east I barely catch seven or eight black
dots that I take to be German aeroplanes, but they seem to be content
with hovering over their own lines. They don't approach."

"Doubtless they don't, because they're beginning to watch the air over
the Marne as a danger zone. That pretty little signal of yours may have
scared them."

Lannes laughed. It was evident that he was in a most excellent humor.

"All right, have your fun," said John, showing his own teeth in a smile.
"If our flag didn't frighten away the German army it at least achieved
what we wanted, that is, it brought you. The whole episode would be
perfect if it were not for the fact that we lost sight of Weber."

"I tell you again not to worry about him. That man has shown uncommon
ability to take care of himself."

"All right. I'll let him go for the present. Hello, here we are crossing
the Marne again, and without getting our feet wet."

"We're a good half mile above it, but we'll cross it once more soon. I'm
following the shortest road to the British army and that takes us over a
loop of the river."

"Yes, here we are recrossing, and now we're coming to a region of
chequered fields, green and brown and yellow. I always like these varied
colors of the French country. It's a beautiful land down there, Philip."

"So it is, but see if it isn't defaced by sixty or seventy thousand
sunburnt men in khaki, the khaki often stained with blood. The men, too,
should be tired to death, but you can't tell that from this height."

"The British army you mean? Yes, by all that's glorious, I see them, or
at least a part of them! I see thousands of men lying down in the
fields as if they were dead."

"They're not dead, though. They just drop in their tracks and sleep in
any position."

"I saw the Germans doing that, too. I suppose we'll land soon, Philip,
won't we? They've sighted us and a plane is coming forward to meet us."

"We'll make for the meadow over there just beyond the little stream. I
think I can discern the general's marquee, and I must deliver my message
as soon as possible. Wave to that fellow that we're friends."

An English aeroplane was now very near them and John, leaning over, made
gestures of amity. Although the aviator's head was almost completely
enshrouded in a hood, he discerned a typically British face.

"Kings of the air, with dispatches for your general!" John cried. He
knew that the man would not hear him, but he was so exultant that he
wanted to say something, to shout to him, or in the slang of his own
land, to let off steam.

But while the English aviator could not understand the words the
gestures were clear to him, and he waved a hand in friendly fashion.
Then, wheeling in a fine circle, he came back by their side as an
escort.

The _Arrow_, like a bird, folding its wings, sank gracefully into the
meadow, and Lannes, hastily jumping out, asked John to look after the
aeroplane. Then he rushed toward a group of officers, among whom he
recognized the chief of the army.

John himself disembarked stiffly, and stretched his limbs, while several
young Englishmen looked at him curiously. He had learned long since how
to deal with Englishmen, that is to take no notice of them until they
made their presence known, and then to acquiesce slowly and reluctantly
in their existence. So, he took short steps back and forth on the grass,
flexing and tensing his muscles, as abstractedly as if he were alone on
a desert island.

"I say," said a handsome fair young man at last, "would you mind telling
us, old chap, where you come from?"

John continued to stretch his muscles and took several long and deep
breaths. After the delay he turned to the fair young man and said:

"Beg pardon, but did you speak to me?"

The Englishman flushed a little and pulled at his yellow mustache. An
older man said:

"Don't press His Highness, Lord James. Don't you see that he's an
American and therefore privileged?"

"I'm privileged," said John, "because I was with you fellows from
Belgium to Paris, and since then I've been away saving you from the
Germans."

Lord James laughed. He had a fine face and all embarrassment disappeared
from it.

"We want to be friends," he said. "Shake hands."

John shook. He also shook the hand of the older man and several others.
Then he explained who he was, and told who had come with him, none less
than the famous young French aviator, Philip Lannes.

"Lannes," said Mr. Yellow Mustache, who, John soon learned, was Lord
James Ivor. "Why, we've all heard of him. He's come to the chief with
messages a half-dozen times since this battle began, and I judge from
the way he rushed to him just now that he has another, that can't be
delayed."

"I think so, too," said John, "although I don't know anything about it
myself. He's a close-mouthed fellow. But do any of you happen to have
heard of an Englishman, Carstairs, and an American, Wharton, who belong
to a company called the Strangers in the French army, but who must be at
present with you--that is, if they're alive?"

John's voice dropped a little, as he added the last words, but Lord
James Ivor walked to the brow of a low hill, called to somebody beyond,
and then walked back.

"It's a happy chance that I can tell you what you want to know," he
said. "Those two men have been serving in my own company, and they're
both alive and well. But they were lying on the grass there, dead to the
world, that is, sleeping, as if they were two of the original seven
sleepers."

Two figures appeared on the brow of the hill, gazed at first in a
puzzled manner at John and then, uttering shouts of welcome, rushed
toward him. Carstairs seized him by one hand and Wharton by the other.

"Not killed, I see," said Carstairs.

"Nor is he going to be killed," said Wharton.

"Now, where have you been?" asked Carstairs.

"Yes, where have you been?" asked Wharton.

"I've been taking a couple of pleasure trips with my friend, Lannes,"
replied John. "Between trips I was a prisoner of the Germans, and I've
seen a lot of the great battle. Has the British army suffered much?"

A shade flitted over the face of Carstairs as he replied:

"We haven't been shot up so much since Waterloo. It's been appalling.
For days and nights we've been fighting and marching. Whenever we
stopped even for a moment we fell on the ground and were asleep before
we touched it. Half the fellows I knew have been killed. I think as long
as I live I'll hear the drumming of those guns in my ears, and, confound
'em, I still hear 'em in reality now. If you turn your attention to it
you can hear the confounded business quite plainly! But what I do know,
Scott, is that we've been winning! I don't know where I am and I haven't
a clear idea of what I've been doing all the time, but as sure as we're
in France the victory is ours."

"But won by the French chiefly" John could not keep from saying.

"Quite true. Our own army is not large, but it has done as much per
man."

"And the moral support," added John. "The French have felt the presence
of a friend, a friend, too, who in six months will be ten times as
strong as he is now."

"Where is Lannes?" asked Wharton.

"He's got your job, Wharton," replied John with a smile. "He's Envoy
Extraordinary and Bearer of Messages concerning Life and Death between
the armies. As soon as he landed he went directly to the British
commander, and they're now conferring in a tent. That will never happen
to you. You will never be closeted with the leader of a great army."

"I don't know. I may not be able to fly like the Frenchman, but he can't
handle the wireless as I can, and he isn't the chain-lightning chauffeur
that Carstairs is. Please to remember those facts."

"I do. But here comes Lannes, the man of mystery."

Lannes seemed preoccupied, but he greeted Carstairs and Wharton warmly.

"I'm about to take another flight," he said. "No, thank you so much, but
I've time neither to eat nor to drink. I must fly at once, though it's
to be a short flight. Take care of my friend, Monsieur Jean the Scott,
while I'm gone, won't you? Don't let him wander into German hands again,
because I won't have time to go for him once more."

"We won't!" said Carstairs and Wharton with one voice. "Having got him
back we're going to keep him."

Lannes smiling sprang into the _Arrow_. The willing young Englishmen
gave it a mighty push, and rising into the blue afternoon sky he sailed
away toward the south.

"He'll be back all right," said Carstairs. "I've come to the conclusion
that nothing can ever catch that fellow. He's a wonder, he is. One of
the most difficult jobs I have, Scott, is to give the French all the
credit that's due 'em. I've been trained, as all other Englishmen were,
to consider 'em pretty poor stuff that we've licked regularly for a
thousand years, and here we suddenly find 'em heroes and
brothers-in-arms. It's all the fault of the writers. Was it Shakespeare
who said: 'Methinks that five Frenchmen on one pair of English legs did
walk?'"

"No," said Lord James Ivor, "It was the other way around. 'Methinks that
one Englishman on five pairs of French legs did walk.'"

"I'm not so sure about the number, either," interjected Wharton. "Are
you positive it was five?"

