broken off by heavy snow had rolled, while branches high overhead,
tossed and shaken by the ascending air current, seemed to be writhing in
pain. Perhaps the most startling phenomenon of all was the quick death
of childlike Sequoias only a century or two of age. In the midst of the
other comparatively slow and steady fire work one of these tall,
beautiful saplings, leafy and branchy, would be seen blazing up
suddenly, all in one heaving, booming, passionate flame reaching from
the ground to the top of the tree, and fifty to a hundred feet or more
above it, with a smoke column bending forward and streaming away on the
upper, free-flowing wind. To burn these green trees a strong fire of dry
wood beneath them is required, to send up a current of air hot enough to
distill inflammable gases from the leaves and sprays; then instead of
the lower limbs gradually catching fire and igniting the next and the
next in succession, the whole tree seems to explode almost
simultaneously, and with awful roaring and throbbing a round, tapering
flame shoots up two or three hundred feet, and in a second or two is
quenched, leaving the green spire a black, dead mast, bristled and
roughened with down-curling boughs. Nearly all the trees that have been
burned down are lying with their heads up hill, because they are burned
far more deeply on the upper side, on account of broken limbs rolling
down against them to make hot fires, while only leaves and twigs
accumulate on the lower side and are quickly consumed without injury to
the tree. But green, resinless Sequoia wood burns very slowly, and many
successive fires are required to burn down a large tree. Fires can run
only at intervals of several years, and when the ordinary amount of
fire-wood that has rolled against the gigantic trunk is consumed, only a
shallow scar is made, which is slowly deepened by recurring fires until
far beyond the centre of gravity, and when at last the tree falls, it of
course falls up hill. The healing folds of wood layers on some of the
deeply burned trees show that centuries have elapsed since the last
wounds were made.

When a great Sequoia falls, its head is smashed into fragments about as
small as those made by lightning, which are mostly devoured by the first
running, hunting fire that finds them, while the trunk is slowly wasted
away by centuries of fire and weather. One of the most interesting
fire-actions on the trunk is the boring of those great tunnel-like
hollows through which horsemen may gallop. All of these famous hollows
are burned out of the solid wood, for no Sequoia is ever hollowed by
decay. When the tree falls, the brash trunk is often broken straight
across into sections as if sawed; into these joints the fire creeps,
and, on account of the great size of the broken ends, burns for weeks or
even months without being much influenced by the weather. After the
great glowing ends fronting each other have burned so far apart that
their rims cease to burn, the fire continues to work on in the centres,
and the ends become deeply concave. Then heat being radiated from side
to side, the burning goes on in each section of the trunk independent of
the other, until the diameter of the bore is so great that the heat
radiated across from side to side is not sufficient to keep them
burning. It appears, therefore, that only very large trees can receive
the fire-auger and have any shell-rim left.

Fire attacks the large trees only at the ground, consuming the fallen
leaves and humus at their feet, doing them but little harm unless
considerable quantities of fallen limbs happen to be piled about them,
their thick mail of spongy, unpitchy, almost unburnable bark affording
strong protection. Therefore the oldest and most perfect unscarred trees
are found on ground that is nearly level, while those growing on
hillsides, against which fallen branches roll, are always deeply scarred
on the upper side, and as we have seen are sometimes burned down. The
saddest thing of all was to see the hopeful seedlings, many of them
crinkled and bent with the pressure of winter snow, yet bravely aspiring
at the top, helplessly perishing, and young trees, perfect spires of
verdure and naturally immortal, suddenly changed to dead masts. Yet the
sun looked cheerily down the openings in the forest roof, turning the
black smoke to a beautiful brown as if all was for the best.


NOTES

=Kaweah=:--A river in California, which runs through the Sequoia
National Park.

=Brownie=:--A small donkey which Mr. Muir had brought along to carry his
pack of blankets and provisions. (See pp. 285, 286 of _Our National
Parks_.)

=humus=:--Vegetable mold.


SUGGESTIONS FOR STUDY

In 1875, Mr. Muir spent some weeks in the Sequoia forests, learning what
he could of the life and death of the giant trees. This selection is
from his account of his experiences. How does the author make you feel
the fierceness of the fire? Why does it become calmer when it enters the
forest? Would most people care to linger in a burning forest? What is
shown by Mr. Muir's willingness to stay? Note the vividness of the
passage beginning "Though the day was best": How does the author manage
to make it so clear? Might this passage be differently punctuated, with
advantage? What is the value of the figure "like colossal iron bars"?
Note the vivid words in the passage beginning "The thick" and ending
with "half a ton." What do you think of the expressions _onlooking
trees_, and _childlike Sequoias_? Explain why the burned trees fall up
hill. Go through the selection and pick out the words that show action;
color; sound. Try to state clearly the reasons why this selection is
clear and picturesque.


THEME SUBJECTS

The Forest Fire
A Group of Large Trees
Felling a Tree
A Fire in the Country
A Fire in the City
Alone in the Woods
The Woodsman
In the Woods
Camping Out for the Night
By-products of the Forest
A Tree Struck by Lightning
A Famous Student of Nature
Planting Trees
The Duties of a Forest Ranger
The Lumber Camp
A Fire at Night
Learning to Observe
The Conservation of the Forests
The Pine
Ravages of the Paper Mill


SUGGESTIONS FOR WRITING

=A Fire at Night=:--If possible, found this theme on actual observation
and experience. Tell of your first knowledge of the fire--the smoke and
the flame, or the ringing of bells and the shouting. From what point of
view did you see the fire? Tell how it looked when you first saw it. Use
words of color and action, as Mr. Muir does. Perhaps you can make your
description vivid by means of sound-words. Tell what people did and what
they said. Did you hear anything said by the owners of the property that
was burning? Go on and trace the progress of the fire, describing its
change in volume and color. Try at all times to make your reader see the
beauty and fierceness and destructiveness of the fire. You might close
your theme with the putting out of the fire, or perhaps you will prefer
to speak of the appearance of the ruins by daylight. When you have
finished your theme, read it over, and see where you can touch it up to
make it clearer and more impressive. Read again some of the most
brilliant passages in Mr. Muir's description, and see how you can profit
by the devices he uses.

=In the Woods=:--Give an account of a long or a short trip in the woods,
and tell what you observed. It might be well to plan this theme a number
of days before writing it, and in the interim to take a walk in the
woods to get mental notes. In writing the theme, give your chief
attention to the trees--their situation, appearance, height, manner of
growth from the seedling up, peculiarities. Make clear the differences
between the kinds of trees, especially between varieties of the same
species. You can make good use of color-words in your descriptions of
leaves, flowers, seed-receptacles (cones, keys, wings, etc.), and
berries. Keep your work simple, almost as if you were talking to some
one who wishes information about the forest trees.


COLLATERAL READINGS

Our National Parks                                  John Muir
My First Summer in the Sierra                        "    "
The Mountains of California                          "    "
The Story of my Boyhood and Youth                    "    "
Stickeen: The Story of a Dog                         "    "
The Yosemite                                       John Muir
The Giant Forest (chapter 18 of _The Mountains_)   Stewart Edward White
The Pines (chapter 8 of _The Mountains_)            "      "      "
The Blazed Trail                                    "      "      "
The Forest                                          "      "      "
The Heart of the Ancient Wood                    C.G.D. Roberts
The Story of a Thousand-year Pine
  (in _Wild Life on the Rockies_)                Enos A. Mills
The Lodge-pole Pine
  (in _Wild Life on the Rockies_)                  "       "
Rocky Mountain Forests
  (in _Wild Life on the Rockies_)                  "       "
The Spell of the Rockies                           "      "
Under the Sky in California                      C.F. Saunders
Field Days in California                         Bradford Torrey
The Snowing of the Pines (poem)                  T.W. Higginson
A Young Fir Wood (poem)                          D.G. Rossetti
The Spirit of the Pine (poem)                    Bayard Taylor
To a Pine Tree                                   J.R. Lowell
Silverado Squatters                              Robert Louis Stevenson
Travels with a Donkey                              "      "       "
A Forest Fire (in _The Old Pacific Capital_)       "      "       "
The Two Matches (in _Fables_)                      "      "       "
In the Maine Woods                               Henry D. Thoreau
Yosemite Trails                                  J.S. Chase
The Conservation of Natural Resources            Charles R. Van Hise
Getting Acquainted with the Trees                J.H. McFarland
The Trees (poem)                                 Josephine Preston Peabody

For biographical material relating to John Muir, consult: With John o'
Birds and John o' Mountains, Century, 80:521 (Portraits); At Home with
Muir, Overland Monthly (New Series), 52:125, August, 1908; Craftsman,
7:665 (page 637 for portrait), March, 1905; Craftsman, 23:324
(Portrait); Outlook, 80:303, January 3, 1905; Bookman, 26:593,
February, 1908; World's Work, 17:11355, March, 1909; 19:12529,
February, 1910.




WAITING

JOHN BURROUGHS


    Serene, I fold my hands and wait,
      Nor care for wind, nor tide, nor sea;
    I rave no more 'gainst time or fate,
      For lo! my own shall come to me.

    I stay my haste, I make delays,
      For what avails this eager pace?
    I stand amid the eternal ways,
      And what is mine shall know my face.

    Asleep, awake, by night or day,
      The friends I seek are seeking me;
    No wind can drive my bark astray
      Nor change the tide of destiny.

    What matter if I stand alone?
      I wait with joy the coming years;
    My heart shall reap where it has sown,
      And garner up its fruit of tears.

    The law of love binds every heart
      And knits it to its utmost kin,
    Nor can our lives flow long apart
      From souls our secret souls would win.

    The stars come nightly to the sky,
      The tidal wave comes to the sea;
    Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high
      Can keep my own away from me.


SUGGESTIONS FOR STUDY

This poem is so easy that it needs little explanation. It shows the
calmness and confidence of one who feels that the universe is right, and
that everything comes out well sooner or later. Read the poem through
slowly. _Its utmost kin_ means its most distant relations or
connections. _The tidal wave_ means the regular and usual flow of the
tide. _Nor time nor space_:--Perhaps Mr. Burroughs was thinking of the
Bible, Romans 8:38, 39.

Does the poem mean to encourage mere waiting, without action? Does it
discourage effort? Just how much is it intended to convey? Is the theory
expressed here a good one? Do you believe it to be true? Read the verses
again, slowly and carefully, thinking what they mean. If you like them,
take time to learn them.


COLLATERAL READINGS

For a list of Mr. Burrough's books, see page 177.

Song: The year's at the spring         Robert Browning
The Building of the Chimney            Richard Watson Gilder

With John o'Birds and John o'Mountains (Century Magazine, 80:521)

A Day at Slabsides (Outlook, 66:351) Washington Gladden

Century, 86:884, October, 1915 (Portrait); Outlook, 78:878, December 3,
1904.


EXERCISES

Try writing a stanza or two in the meter and with the rhyme that Mr.
Burroughs uses. Below are given lines that may prove suggestive:--

1. One night when all the sky was clear
2. The plum tree near the garden wall
3. I watched the children at their play
4. The wind swept down across the plain
5. The yellow leaves are drifting down
6. Along the dusty way we sped (In an Automobile)
7. I looked about my garden plot (In my Garden)
8. The sky was red with sudden flame
9. I walked among the forest trees
10. He runs to meet me every day (My Dog)




THE PONT DU GARD

HENRY JAMES

(Chapter XXVI of _A Little Tour in France_)


It was a pleasure to feel one's self in Provence again,--the land where
the silver-gray earth is impregnated with the light of the sky. To
celebrate the event, as soon as I arrived at Nimes I engaged a caleche
to convey me to the Pont du Gard. The day was yet young, and it was
perfectly fair; it appeared well, for a longish drive, to take
advantage, without delay, of such security. After I had left the town I
became more intimate with that Provencal charm which I had already
enjoyed from the window of the train, and which glowed in the sweet
sunshine and the white rocks, and lurked in the smoke-puffs of the
little olives. The olive-trees in Provence are half the landscape. They
are neither so tall, so stout, nor so richly contorted as I have seen
them beyond the Alps; but this mild colorless bloom seems the very
texture of the country. The road from Nimes, for a distance of fifteen
miles, is superb; broad enough for an army, and as white and firm as a
dinner-table. It stretches away over undulations which suggest a kind of
harmony; and in the curves it makes through the wide, free country,
where there is never a hedge or a wall, and the detail is always
exquisite, there is something majestic, almost processional. Some twenty
minutes before I reached the little inn that marks the termination of
the drive, my vehicle met with an accident which just missed being
serious, and which engaged the attention of a gentleman, who, followed
by his groom and mounted on a strikingly handsome horse, happened to
ride up at the moment. This young man, who, with his good looks and
charming manner, might have stepped out of a novel of Octave Feuillet,
gave me some very intelligent advice in reference to one of my horses
that had been injured, and was so good as to accompany me to the inn,
with the resources of which he was acquainted, to see that his
recommendations were carried out. The result of our interview was that
he invited me to come and look at a small but ancient chateau in the
neighborhood, which he had the happiness--not the greatest in the world,
he intimated--to inhabit, and at which I engaged to present myself after
I should have spent an hour at the Pont du Gard. For the moment, when we
separated, I gave all my attention to that great structure. You are very
near it before you see it; the ravine it spans suddenly opens and
exhibits the picture. The scene at this point grows extremely beautiful.
The ravine is the valley of the Gardon, which the road from Nimes has
followed some time without taking account of it, but which, exactly at
the right distance from the aqueduct, deepens and expands, and puts on
those characteristics which are best suited to give it effect. The gorge
becomes romantic, still, and solitary, and, with its white rocks and
wild shrubbery, hangs over the clear, colored river, in whose slow
course there is here and there a deeper pool. Over the valley, from side
to side, and ever so high in the air, stretch the three tiers of the
tremendous bridge. They are unspeakably imposing, and nothing could well
be more Roman. The hugeness, the solidity, the unexpectedness, the
monumental rectitude of the whole thing leave you nothing to say--at the
time--and make you stand gazing. You simply feel that it is noble and
perfect, that it has the quality of greatness. A road, branching from
the highway, descends to the level of the river and passes under one of
the arches. This road has a wide margin of grass and loose stones, which
slopes upward into the bank of the ravine. You may sit here as long as
you please, staring up at the light, strong piers; the spot is extremely
natural, though two or three stone benches have been erected on it. I
remained there an hour and got a complete impression; the place was
perfectly soundless, and for the time, at least, lonely; the splendid
afternoon had begun to fade, and there was a fascination in the object I
had come to see. It came to pass that at the same time I discovered in
it a certain stupidity, a vague brutality. That element is rarely absent
from great Roman work, which is wanting in the nice adaptation of the
means to the end. The means are always exaggerated; the end is so much
more than attained. The Roman rigidity was apt to overshoot the mark,
and I suppose a race which could do nothing small is as defective as a
race that can do nothing great. Of this Roman rigidity the Pont du Gard
is an admirable example. It would be a great injustice, however, not to
insist upon its beauty,--a kind of manly beauty, that of an object
constructed not to please but to serve, and impressive simply from the
scale on which it carries out this intention. The number of arches in
each tier is different; they are smaller and more numerous as they
ascend. The preservation of the thing is extraordinary; nothing has
crumbled or collapsed; every feature remains; and the huge blocks of
stone, of a brownish-yellow (as if they had been baked by the Provencal
sun for eighteen centuries), pile themselves, without mortar or cement,
as evenly as the day they were laid together. All this to carry the
water of a couple of springs to a little provincial city! The conduit on
the top has retained its shape and traces of the cement with which it
was lined. When the vague twilight began to gather, the lonely valley
seemed to fill itself with the shadow of the Roman name, as if the
mighty empire were still as erect as the supports of the aqueduct; and
it was open to a solitary tourist, sitting there sentimental, to believe
that no people has ever been, or will ever be, as great as that,
measured, as we measure the greatness of an individual, by the push they
gave to what they undertook. The Pont du Gard is one of the three or
four deepest impressions they have left; it speaks of them in a manner
with which they might have been satisfied.

I feel as if it were scarcely discreet to indicate the whereabouts of
the chateau of the obliging young man I had met on the way from Nimes; I
must content myself with saying that it nestled in an enchanting
valley,--_dans le fond_, as they say in France,--and that I took my
course thither on foot, after leaving the Pont du Gard. I find it noted
in my journal as "an adorable little corner." The principal feature of
the place is a couple of very ancient towers, brownish-yellow in hue,
and mantled in scarlet Virginia-creeper. One of these towers, reputed to
