"Mr. Curtis tells him she'll come round soon if he'll only be firm. I
don't see, for my part, why Mr. Linden wants her to marry such a
disagreeable man. There's plenty better husbands she could get. Come
in, sir, and I'll tell him as soon as he comes in. Shall you see Miss
Florence soon?"

"I think so."

"Then tell her not to give up. Things will come right some time."

"I'll tell her."

Bolton was ushered into the library, where, amid the fashionable
furniture he looked quite out of place. He did not feel so, however,
for he drew a cigar out of his pocket and, lighting it nonchalantly,
leaned back in a luxurious armchair and began to smoke.

"Curtis Waring is well fixed--that's a fact!" he soliloquized. "I
suppose he is the master here, for the old man isn't likely to
interfere. Still he will like it better when his uncle is out of the
way."

He had to wait but fifteen minutes in solitude, for at the end of that
time Curtis Waring appeared.

He paused on the threshold, and frowned when he saw who it was that
awaited him.

"Jane told me that a gentleman was waiting to see me," he said.

"Well, she was right."

"And you, I suppose, are the gentleman?" said Curtis, in a sneering
tone.

"Yes; I am the gentleman," remarked Bolton, coolly.

"I am not in the habit of receiving visits from gentlemen of your
class. However, I suppose you have an object in calling."

"It shall go hard with me if I don't pay you for your sneers some
day," thought Bolton; but he remained outwardly unruffled.

"Well," he answered, "I can't say that I have any particular business
to see you about. I saw your cousin recently."

"Florence?" asked Curtis, eagerly.

"Yes."

"What did she say? Did you speak with her?"

"Yes. She doesn't seem any more willin' to marry you."

Curtis Waring frowned.

"She is a foolish girl," he said. "She doesn't know her own mind."

"She looks to me like a gal that knows her own mind particularly
well."

"Pshaw! what can you know about it?"

"Then you really expect to marry her some time, Mr. Waring?"

"Certainly I do."

"And to inherit your uncle's fortune?"

"Of course. Why not?"

"I was thinkin' of the boy."

"The boy is dead----"

"What!" exclaimed Bolton, jumping to his feet in irresistible
excitement.

"Don't be a fool. Wait till I finish my sentence. He is dead so far as
his prospects are concerned. Who is there that can identify him with
the lost child of John Linden?"

"I can."

"Yes; if any one would believe you. However, it is for your interest
to keep silent."

"That is just what I want to know. I suppose you can make it for my
interest."

"Yes, and will--after I get the property. I don't believe in counting
my chickens before they are hatched."

"Of course you know that the boy has left me?" said Bolton.

"Yes," answered Curtis, indifferently. "He is with my cousin, I
believe."

"Yes; and through her I can learn where he is, and get hold of him if
I desire."

A cynical smile played over the face of Curtis Waring.

"Do you propose to get him back?" he asked, shrugging his shoulders.

"I am right," thought Bolton, shrewdly. "From his manner it is easy to
see that Curtis is quite at ease as regards Dodger. He knows where he
is!"

"You asked me what business I came about, Mr. Waring," he said, after
a pause.

"Yes."

"Of course I am devoted to your interests, but is it quite fair to
make me wait till you come into your fortune before allowing me
anything?"

"I think so."

"You don't seem to consider that I can bring the boy here and make him
known to your uncle as the son he lost so long ago?"

"You are quite sure you can bring the boy here?" asked Curtis.

"Why not? I have only to go to Florence and ask her to send the boy to
me."

"You are quite at liberty to do so if you like, Tim Bolton," said
Curtis, with a mocking smile. "I am glad, at any rate, that you have
shown me what is in your mind. You are very sharp, but you are not
quite so sharp as I am."

"I don't understand you."

"Then I will be more explicit. It's out of your power to make use of
the boy against me, because----"

"Well?"

"Because he is not in the city."

"Where is he, then?"

"Where you are not likely to find him."

"If you have killed him----" Bolton began, but Curtis interrupted him.

"The boy is safe--I will tell you that much," he said; "but for
reasons which you can guess, I think it better that he should be out
of New York. When the proper time comes, and all is safe, he may come
back, but not in time to help you in your cunning plans, Mr. Tim
Bolton."

"Then, I suppose," said Bolton, assuming an air of mortification and
discomfiture, "it is no use for me to remain here any longer."

"You are quite right. I wish you a pleasant journey home. Give my love
to Florence when you see her."

"That man is a fiend!" soliloquized Bolton, as he walked back,
leisurely, to his place of business. "Let me get hold of Dodger and I
will foil him yet!"




Chapter XXVII.
Dodger Strikes Luck.


When Dodger landed in San Francisco, in spite of the fact that he had
made the journey against his will, he felt a natural exhilaration and
pleasure in the new and striking circumstances and scenes in which he
found himself placed.

It was in the year 1877, and the city was by no means what it is now.
Yet it probably contained not far from two hundred thousand people,
lively, earnest, enterprising. All seemed busy and hopeful, and Dodger
caught the contagion.

As he walked with the reporter to a modest hotel, where the rates were
a dollar and a half a day, not far from Montgomery Street, Randolph
Leslie asked:

"How do you like San Francisco thus far, Arthur?"

It will be remembered that Dodger, feeling that the name by which he
had hitherto been known was hardly likely to recommend him, adopted
the one given him by Curtis Waring.

"I think I shall like it ever so much," answered Dodger. "Everybody
seems to be wideawake."

"Do you think you will like it better than New York?"

"I think a poor boy will have more of a chance of making a living
here. In New York I was too well known. If I got a place anywhere some
one would recognize me as Tim Bolton's boy--accustomed to tend bar--or
some gentleman would remember that he had bought papers of me. Here
nobody knows me, and I can start fair."

"There is a great deal in what you say," returned Leslie. "What do you
think of trying to do?"

"First of all I will write a letter to Florence, and tell her I am all
right. How long does it take a letter to go from here to New York?"

"About seven days."

"And it took us over four months! That seems wonderful."

"Yes; there is a great difference between coming by sea around Cape
Horn and speeding across the country on an express train."

"If I could only know how Florence is getting along," Dodger said,
anxiously. "I suppose she thinks I am dead."

"You forget the letter you gave to the vessel we spoke off the coast
of Brazil."

"Yes; but do you think it went straight?"

"The chances are in favor of it. However, your idea is a good one.
Write, by all means, and then we will discuss future plans."

"What are your plans, Mr. Leslie?"

"I shall try to secure a reporter's berth on one of the daily papers--
the _Call_ or _Chronicle_. I will wait a few days, however, as I have
a few hundred dollars by me, and can afford to take a little time to
look around."

"I wish I were as well provided; but I have less than twenty-five
dollars."

"Don't worry about that, Arthur," said Randolph, laying his hand
affectionately on the boy's shoulder. "I shall not allow you to want."

"Thank you, Mr. Leslie," said Dodger, gratefully. "It's something new
to me to have a friend like you. But I don't want to be any expense to
you. I am large enough and strong enough to earn my own living."

"True; and I feel sure you will have a chance in this enterprising
city."

They bought copies of the day's papers, and Dodger looked eagerly over
the advertising columns.

At length he saw an advertisement that read as follows:

    WANTED--A young man of 18 or 20 to assist in the office of a
    local express. Inquire at No. -- ---- St."

"Do you think I would answer for such a place?" he asked.

"I don't see why not. At any rate, 'nothing venture, nothing gain.'
You may as well go around and inquire. And, by the way, as your suit
is rather shabby, let me lend you one of mine. We are of nearly the
same size."

"Thank you, Mr. Leslie."

"Fine feathers make fine birds, you know, and a neat dress always
increases the chances of an applicant for employment, though, when it
is carried too far, it is apt to excite suspicion. I remember a friend
of mine advertised for a bookkeeper. Among the applicants was a young
man wearing a sixty-dollar suit, a ruffled shirt, a handsome gold
watch and a diamond pin. He was a man of taste, and he was strongly
impressed with the young man's elegant appearance. So, largely upon
the strength of these, he engaged him, and in less than six months
discovered that he had been swindled to the extent of eight hundred
dollars by his aesthetic bookkeeper."

"Then I will leave my diamond pin at home," said Dodger, smiling.
"Suppose they ask me for recommendations?"

"I will go with you and indorse you. I happen to know one or two
prominent gentlemen in San Francisco--among them the president of a
bank--and I presume my indorsement will be sufficient."

Dodger went back to the hotel, put on a suit of Mr. Leslie's, got his
boots blacked, and then, in company with the young reporter, went to
the express office.

"I am afraid some one will have been engaged already," said the
reporter; "but if not, your chances will be good."

They entered a good-sized office on a prominent street, and Dodger
inquired for Mr. Tucker.

A small man of about forty, keen-eyed and alert, eyed him attentively.

"I am Mr. Tucker," he said.

"I saw your advertisement for an assistant, Mr. Tucker," said Dodger,
modestly; "have you filled the place?"

"Let me see," said Tucker, reflectively, "you are the ninth young man
who has applied--but the place is still open."

"Then I am afraid you won't want me, as you have rejected so many."

"I don't know. How long have you been in the city?"

"I only just arrived."

"Where from?"

"From New York."

"Have you any idea of going to the mines when you get money enough?"

"I think I would prefer to remain in the city."
