move out of the place tomorrow, whether the ould pictures and things are
all ready or not."

"Do you think it is as serious as that, Larry?"

"Faith and I do, yer honour. You don't know how bitter the folks are!"

"But there cannot be any danger, Larry, as long as we are here. The
rapparees would never attack a house which has the general's protection,
and with an officer and some troopers of the king to guard it."

"It's meself would not answer for them," Larry said, shaking his head.
"The boys are just disperate, and would care nothing for the protection,
unless there were force to back it. They think that, as all the Catholics
have been robbed by the Protestants, it's only fair that they should get
their turn now; and, if I were your honour, I would lay all my plans out
tonight, how to get away and the rest of it, just as if you were assured
they would come before the morning."

"Why, you have heard nothing certain, Larry?"

"I have not, or I would tell your honour at once; but I know what the
people think and feel, and I know that the rapparees have been plundering
and destroying every Protestant house around, and they will guess that
the ladies will be moving, now that the troop is gone. Besides, won't
they have heard that the news has gone round, for waggons to come to take
away the things?"

The earnestness with which Larry spoke convinced Walter that the danger
was serious. Larry was not given to magnify danger, and usually treated
all risks with carelessness and indifference. Walter knew that he would
gather, from the stablemen and the people who brought in provisions, much
more as to the state of popular feeling in the country than he was likely
to know, and he accordingly went down to dinner grave and preoccupied.

Mrs. Conyers soon noticed the change in his manner, and, as soon as the
servants had retired, asked him if he had received any bad news.

"No," he said, trying to speak lightly. "My boy Larry has been trying to
scare me about the rapparees, and, although I do not think that there is
any danger to be apprehended from them, I do think that it would be just
as well to hurry on your preparations, as much as possible, and for you
and Claire to go in to Limerick tomorrow afternoon. We can finish the
packing up of the goods you wish to take, and any we cannot get off
tomorrow can be sent in the next day."

Mrs. Conyers looked grave.

"But we have heard of no rapparees in this neighbourhood, Walter," she
said. "We have heard of sad excesses in some parts of the country, but
nothing in this neighbourhood."

"There has been small temptation for them about here," Walter said, "for
every house within miles was stripped by the Williamites. Catholic or
Protestant was all the same to them. Besides, they knew well that
Sarsfield's horse would soon have put a stop to that sort of thing. Now,
I do not wish to alarm you in the slightest, and I do not think that
there is any real cause for anxiety. Even if they are in the
neighbourhood, the rapparees will hardly venture an attack upon a house
occupied by even a few of our troops. Still, it is always wisest to be
prepared, and therefore, I should like for us to arrange exactly what had
best be done in the event of an attack. Of course, I shall see that all
the doors and the lower windows are securely fastened, and I shall have
the men from the stables into the house, so we shall be nine or ten men
in all; enough, I hope, for all circumstances. Still, merely as a matter
of discussion, let us suppose the worst. Let us imagine the house
surrounded, the doors burst in, and the resistance on the point of being
overpowered. What would be our best plan for making our escape?

"Do not be frightened, Claire," he went on, seeing how pale the girl had
become. "Every general, when he is going to fight a battle, however sure
he may be of success, decides upon the route by which his army shall
retreat, in case of a defeat, and I am only taking the same precaution."

"If there is to be a retreat made at all," Mrs. Conyers said, "I prefer
that it should be made now. Do you really think that there is any real
danger of attack?"

"I think that there is danger of attack, Mrs. Conyers; but I have no
reason for supposing that there is any particular danger this night."

"Then Claire and I will at once start for the town, under the escort of
two of your men. It would be folly, indeed, to run the risk of another
attack here. If the house is to be burned, it must be burned. For, if
they were beaten off once, they would come again when the house was
undefended. As for the things, should all be quiet tonight, they can be
sent in tomorrow as arranged. The things that are to go are all got
together."

"I do think that the best way," Walter said. "Of course, I shall ride in
with you, and hand you over to the friends you are going to, in the town,
and shall then come back here again with a light heart. But I own that I
am nervous at the thought of you and Claire being here, should the
rapparees attack the house."

"But mind, Walter, there is to be no fighting. If they come tonight, I
had rather that they took everything, than that you should risk your life
in its defence. The silver and valuables we took across before are all
safe in Limerick. As for the other things, they can go. Now, mind, we
shall not leave unless we have your promise that, if a band of these men
come tonight to sack the place, you and your men will offer no
resistance."

"If they come in numbers which render successful resistance out of the
question, I promise you that we will not draw a trigger, Mrs. Conyers."

"In that case I am satisfied, Walter. Against you and your men these
peasants have no quarrel."

Walter at once called Larry.

"Larry, get my horse saddled, and tell Browning to saddle his. Place two
pillions behind the saddles. Mrs. Conyers and her daughter are going to
ride into Limerick at once."

"The Lord be praised!" Larry said piously. "That's the best news I have
heard this many a day."

"And, Larry," Mrs. Conyers said, "tell the three boys in the stable to
saddle the three best horses, and ride with us. If we lose everything
else, we may as well retain them, for it would not be easy to buy others
now."

In ten minutes, all was ready for a start. Walter and the trooper took
their places in the saddles, chairs were brought out, and Mrs. Conyers
and Claire mounted behind them. Walter had asked Mrs. Conyers to take her
seat on the pillion on his horse, but she did not answer, and when Walter
turned to see that she was comfortably placed behind him, he found that
it was Claire who was seated there.

"Mamma told me to," the girl said. "I suppose she thought this was,
perhaps, the last ride we should take together."

"For the present, Claire--you should say, for the present. I hope it will
not be long before we are together again.

"And for good," he added, in a low voice.

Mrs. Conyers made no comment, when they dismounted and entered the house
of a friend at Limerick, upon Claire's swollen eyes and flushed cheeks,
but said "goodbye" lightly to Walter, thanked him for his escort, and
said that she hoped to see him, with her household goods, on the
following afternoon.

On leaving them, Walter went straight to the house where an officer of
his acquaintance was quartered.

"Hullo, Davenant! I didn't expect to see you here at this time of the
evening. I heard you were still laid up with your wound."

"That is an old affair now," Walter said. "I am not quite strong again,
but there is little the matter now. I have come in to ask you if you will
let me have five-and-twenty of your men. I have strong reason to believe
that it is likely one of the bands of rapparees will make an attack on
Mrs. Conyers' house tonight. The tenants have been asked to send in their
waggons, tomorrow, to remove some of the furniture in here, and I think
it probable they will try to take what they fancy, before it starts. I
have brought Mrs. Conyers and her daughter into the town, but, as I have
only four men, I cannot defend the house if it is attacked in any force.
I wish you would let me have five-and-twenty men, and a sergeant, just
for tonight. I will march them in with the baggage in the afternoon."

"Certainly I will," Captain Donovan said. "I need not disturb the
colonel, at this time of the evening, but will take it on myself. There
are just that number quartered in the storehouse, close to the gate. I
will go down with you, at once, and turn them out and give them orders.
It will be a good thing for the rapparees to have a lesson. They bring
disgrace upon our cause by their doings."

In a few minutes the men, who had not retired to bed, were turned out.

"You have got a four-mile march before you, boys," Walter said, when they
were drawn up; "but there will be a pint of good wine, and some supper
for you, when you get there. So step out as briskly as you can."

After a cordial goodnight to Captain Donovan, Walter placed himself at
the head of the infantry, and, in little over an hour, arrived at the
house. He knocked loudly at the door. A minute later, Larry put his head
out of the window above.

"Who is there? What do you want knocking at a peaceful house at this time
of night? You had best go away, boys, for the house is chock full of
soldiers. We are only waiting for orders to blow you to smithereens."

Walter burst into a laugh.

"Very well done, Larry. It is I, with some soldiers. So you needn't give
orders to the men to fire."

Larry gave a cry of satisfaction, and ran down to open the door.

"It's glad I am to see you, Master Walter, entirely. I have been
listening ever since you went, and, when I heard the tramp of feet, I
made sure it was the boys."

"But I gave orders that there was to be no resistance, Larry."

"And I wasn't going to resist, your honour; but I thought I might just
frighten them away."

"Now, Larry, get up a pint of wine for each of these good fellows, and
what victuals you can find in the house. We need have no fear of an
attack tonight."

When the soldiers had finished their supper, they lay down in the hall.
Walter placed a sentry at a window, at each side of the house, and he
then lay down on a sofa, for the ride to Limerick and back had greatly
fatigued him, much to his surprise, for he had no idea how far his
strength had been pulled down.

He was aroused, just as day was breaking, by a loud knocking at the door,
and at the same moment a shot was fired from a window above. The soldiers
had started to their feet, and seized their arms as he ran out and bade
them follow him upstairs. He threw up a window.

"Who are you? And what do you want?"

"Never mind who we are," a voice replied. "We want the door opened, and
you had best do it quick."

"Look here, my man," Walter said in a loud, steady voice, "there are
thirty soldiers in this house, and, if I give the word, you will get such
a volley among you, that half of you will never go home to tell about it,
so I warn you to depart quietly."

"It's a lie," the man said. "If you are the officer, you have got only
four men, and you know it. We want to do you no harm, and we don't want
to harm the ladies; but what's in the house is ours--that's the law of
William's troops, and we mean to act up to it."

A chorus of approbation rose from a throng of peasants gathered round the
door. A few of them carried muskets, but the greater part were armed with
rude pikes.

"Show yourselves at the windows, boys," Walter said to his men. "Level
your muskets, but don't fire until I give the word."

It was light enough for those without to make out the threatening
figures, which showed themselves at every window, and, with a cry of
alarm, they ran back among the shrubs for shelter.

"Now you see," Walter said, "that I have spoken the truth. I have thirty
soldiers here, and you know as well as I do what will come of it, if you
attempt to break into this house.

"For shame, men! Your deeds bring disgrace on the king's cause, and on
our religion. It is not because the scum who march with the Dutchman
behave like brutal savages, that we should do the same. There's plenty of
work for you, in fighting against the enemies of your country, instead of
frightening women and pillaging houses. Return to your homes, or, better
still, go and join the king's army, and fight like men for your homes and
your religion."

He listened, but there was no answer. The rapparees knew they had no
chance of breaking into the house, so defended, and, when Walter ceased,
each man slunk away in the darkness.

The next morning, a number of waggons arrived, and Walter, with the aid
of the soldiers, had the satisfaction of loading them with everything of
any value in the house, and of escorting them without interruption to
Limerick. Mrs. Conyers was filled with gratitude, when she heard the
events of the night, and how narrowly she and her daughter had escaped
another attack. One of the principal tenants had come in with his waggon,
and he agreed to move into the house, with his wife and family, until she
should return. Seeing that now everything worth taking had been removed,
he thought there was little chance of any attempt to destroy the house.



Chapter 12: Winter Quarters.


Two or three days later, Captain Davenant returned to Limerick with his
troop. He had stopped at the house on his way, and learned there of the
move which had been made.

"Well, Walter, so you nearly had to defend Mrs. Conyers against odds,
again," he said, as Walter joined him in the marketplace, where the troop
was dismounting. "I have come here for a day, only, for we are on our way
south. It is thought likely that the enemy's next move may be against
Cork, so some of us are detached in that direction.

"To my mind," he went on, after he had seen the troop quartered, in some
houses which formerly belonged to the Protestants, but were now used as
barracks--"in my opinion, we are wasting precious time. We ought not to
allow the enemy to go into winter quarters. Our best season is just
coming on. We can stand the wet far better than they can, and we ought
not to give them a moment's rest, but should keep our army together, and
beat up one garrison after another; threaten the strongest places; compel
them to keep constantly on the move; and, before the spring, completely
wear out and exhaust those whom we cannot conquer. If England found that
she had the whole work to begin over again, she would think twice before
she went further.

"These petty German princes would not find their men so ready to embark
in a quarrel, with which they have no concern, when they learned that all
who had done so had laid their bones in the swamps of Ireland, and,
without his mercenaries, William would find it hard to gather an army,
for the English themselves have no heart whatever in the war. If we
remain inactive all the winter, and enable them to retain their foothold
everywhere, fresh reinforcements will arrive in the spring, and so, bit
by bit, all Ireland will be won.

"It is disheartening in the extreme, after seeing the enemy retire,
repulsed and utterly disheartened, from Athlone and Limerick, to allow
them unmolested to rest and gather strength again. If we could but get
rid of the French, there would be some hope for us. They have scarce
fired a shot, since the war began, and yet they assume superiority over
our generals. They thwart us at every turn. They not only refuse to
combine in any action, but they prevent our doing so.

"Since the Boyne, our army has lain inactive and has done nothing,
although they might have done everything. All Ireland was open to them,
on the day when William, with all his forces, sat down here before
Limerick. Why, they could have marched straight for Dublin and captured
it, before William heard that they had crossed the Shannon. They might
have cut off his supplies from Waterford. They might have starved him out
in his camp here. They have had the game in their hands, and they have
allowed it to slip altogether through their fingers. The only hope I
have, now, is that before the spring the French will go. It is but too
clear that Louis has no intention, whatever, of helping us in earnest.
Had he chosen he could, any time during the last six months, have landed
an army here, which would have decided the struggle. Instead of that, he
has sent five thousand men, and had in return as many of our best
soldiers; and the officers he sent seem to have been furnished with
secret instructions, not only to do nothing themselves, but to prevent us
from doing anything."

"Whom would you like to see in command, father?"

"I should not care much, Walter, so that it was one man. I had rather
have any soldier you might take at random from our army, so that he
possessed a fair share of common sense, than the chaos which now
prevails; but, of course, the man whom we would rather have is Sarsfield.
Whether he is a great general or not, we have no means of knowing, for he
has never yet had the slightest opportunity of showing it; but I do not
