at once a likeness between them and the condensed steam of a locomotive.
At every puff of the engine, a cloud is projected into the air. Watch
the cloud sharply: you notice that it first forms at a little distance
from the top of the funnel. Give close attention, and you will sometimes
see a perfectly clear space between the funnel and the cloud. Through
that clear space the thing which makes the cloud must pass. What, then,
is this thing which at one moment is transparent and invisible, and at
the next moment visible as a dense opaque cloud?

It is the _steam_ or _vapour of water_ from the boiler. Within the
boiler this steam is transparent and invisible; but to keep it in this
invisible state a heat would be required as great as that within the
boiler. When the vapour mingles with the cold air above the hot funnel,
it ceases to be vapour. Every bit of steam shrinks, when chilled, to a
much more minute particle of water. The liquid particles thus produced
form a kind of _water-dust_ of exceeding fineness, which floats in the
air, and is called a _cloud_.

Watch the cloud-banner from the funnel of a running locomotive; you see
it growing gradually less dense. It finally melts away altogether; and
if you continue your observations, you will not fail to notice that the
speed of its disappearance depends upon the character of the day. In
humid weather the cloud hangs long and lazily in the air; in dry weather
it is rapidly licked up. What has become of it? It has been reconverted
into true invisible vapour.

The _drier_ the air, and the _hotter_ the air, the greater is the amount
of cloud which can be thus dissolved in it. When the cloud first forms,
its quantity is far greater than the air is able to maintain in an
invisible state. But, as the cloud mixes gradually with a larger mass of
air, it is more and more dissolved, and finally passes altogether from
the condition of a finely-divided liquid into that of transparent vapour
or gas.

Make the lid of a kettle air-tight, and permit the steam to issue from
the spout; a cloud is formed in all respects similar to that issuing
from the funnel of the locomotive. To produce the cloud, in the case of
the locomotive and the kettle, _heat_ is necessary. By heating the water
we first convert it into steam, and then by chilling the steam we
convert it into cloud. Is there any fire in Nature which produces the
clouds of our atmosphere? There is: the fire of the sun.

When the sunbeams fall upon the earth, they heat it, and also the water
which lies on its surface, whether it be in large bodies, such as seas
or rivers, or in the form of moisture. The water being thus warmed, a
part of it is given off in the form of aqueous vapour, just as invisible
vapour passes off from a boiler when the water in it is heated by fire.
This vapour mingles with the air in contact with the earth. The
vapour-charged air, being heated by the warm earth, expands, becomes
lighter, and rises. It expands also, as it rises, because the pressure
of the air above it becomes less and less with the height it attains.
But an expanding body always becomes colder as the result of its
expansion. Thus the vapour-laden air is chilled by its expansion. It is
also chilled by coming in contact with the colder, higher air. The
consequence is that the invisible vapour which it contains is chilled,
and forms into tiny water-drops, like the steam from a kettle or the
funnel of the locomotive. And so, as the air rises and becomes colder,
the vapour gathers into visible masses, which we call clouds.

This ascending moist air might become chilled, too, by meeting with a
current of cold, dry air, and then clouds would be formed; and should
this chilling process continue in either case until the water-drops
become heavier than the surrounding air, they would fall to the earth as
raindrops. Rain is, therefore, but a further stage in the condensation
of aqueous vapour caused by the chilling of the air.

Mountains also assist in the formation of clouds. When a wind laden with
moisture strikes against a mountain, it is tilted and flows up its side.
The air expands as it rises, the vapour is chilled and becomes visible
in the form of clouds, and if sufficiently chilled, it comes down to the
earth in the form of rain, hail, or snow.

Thus, by tracing a river backwards, from its end to its real beginning,
we come at length to the sun; for it is the sun that produces aqueous
vapour, from which, as we have seen, clouds are formed, and it is from
clouds that water falls to the earth to become the sources of rivers.

There are, however, rivers which have sources somewhat different from
those just mentioned. They do not begin by driblets on a hillside, nor
can they be traced to a spring. Go, for example, to the mouth of the
river Rhone, and trace it backwards. You come at length to the Lake of
Geneva, from which the river rushes, and which you might be disposed to
regard as the source of the Rhone. But go to the head of the lake, and
you find that the Rhone there enters it; that the lake is, in fact, an
expansion of the river. Follow this upwards; you find it joined by
smaller rivers from the mountains right and left. Pass these, and push
your journey higher still. You come at length to a huge mass of ice--the
end of a glacier--which fills the Rhone valley, and from the bottom of
the glacier the river rushes. In the glacier of the Rhone you thus find
the source of the river Rhone.

But whence come the glaciers? Wherever lofty mountains, like the Alps,
rise into the high parts of the atmosphere where the temperature is
below the freezing-point, the vapour condensed from the air falls upon
them, not as rain, but as snow. In such high mountainous regions, the
heat of the summer melts the snow from the lower hills, but the higher
parts remain covered, for the heat cannot melt all the snow which falls
there in a year. When a considerable depth of snow has accumulated, the
pressure upon the lower layers squeezes them into a firm mass, and after
a time the snow begins to slide down the slope of the mountain. It
passes downward from one slope to another, joined continually by other
sliding masses from neighbouring slopes, until they all unite into one
long tongue, which creeps slowly down some valley to a point where it
melts. This tongue from the snow-fields is called a glacier.

Without solar fire, therefore, we could have no atmospheric vapour,
without vapour no clouds, without clouds no snow, and without snow no
glaciers. Curious then as the conclusion may be, the cold ice of the
Alps has its origin in this heat of the sun.

Tyndall: "The Forms of Water."
(Adapted)




    For what are men better than sheep or goats
    That nourish a blind life within the brain,
    If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
    Both for themselves and those who call them friend?

Tennyson




FITZ-JAMES AND RODERICK DHU


    The Chief in silence strode before,
    And reached that torrent's sounding shore,
    Which, daughter of three mighty lakes,
    From Vennachar in silver breaks,
    Sweeps through the plain, and ceaseless mines
    On Bochastle the mouldering lines,
    Where Rome, the Empress of the world,
    Of yore her eagle wings unfurled.
    And here his course the Chieftain staid,
    Threw down his target and his plaid,
    And to the Lowland warrior said--
    "Bold Saxon! to his promise just,
    Vich Alpine has discharged his trust.
    This murderous Chief, this ruthless man,
    This head of a rebellious clan,
    Hath led thee safe, through watch and ward,
    Far past Clan-Alpine's outmost guard.
    Now, man to man, and steel to steel,
    A Chieftain's vengeance thou shalt feel.
    See here, all vantageless I stand,
    Armed, like thyself, with single brand:
    For this is Coilantogle ford,
    And thou must keep thee with thy sword."

    The Saxon paused:--"I ne'er delayed,
    When foeman bade me draw my blade;
    Nay, more, brave Chief, I vowed thy death:
    Yet sure thy fair and generous faith,
    And my deep debt for life preserved,
    A better meed have well deserved:
    Can nought but blood our feud atone?
    Are there no means?"--"No, Stranger, none;
    And hear,--to fire thy flagging zeal,--
    The Saxon cause rests on thy steel;
    For thus spoke Fate, by prophet bred
    Between the living and the dead:
    'Who spills the foremost foeman's life,
    His party conquers in the strife.'"--
    "Then, by my word," the Saxon said,
    "The riddle is already read.
    Seek yonder brake beneath the cliff,--
    There lies Red Murdoch, stark and stiff.
    Thus Fate has solved her prophecy,
    Then yield to Fate, and not to me.
    To James, at Stirling, let us go,
    When, if thou wilt be still his foe,
    Or if the King shall not agree
    To grant thee grace and favour free,
    I plight mine honour, oath, and word,
    That, to thy native strengths restored,
    With each advantage shalt thou stand,
    That aids thee now to guard thy land."

    Dark lightning flashed from Roderick's eye--
    "Soars thy presumption, then, so high,
    Because a wretched kern ye slew,
    Homage to name to Roderick Dhu?
    He yields not, he, to man nor Fate!
    Thou add'st but fuel to my hate:--
    My clansman's blood demands revenge.
    Not yet prepared?--By heaven, I change
    My thought, and hold thy valour light
    As that of some vain carpet knight,
    Who ill deserved my courteous care,
    And whose best boast is but to wear
    A braid of his fair lady's hair."--
    "I thank thee, Roderick, for the word!
    It nerves my heart, it steels my sword;
    For I have sworn this braid to stain
    In the best blood that warms thy vein.
    Now, truce, farewell! and, ruth, begone!--
    Yet think not that by thee alone,
    Proud Chief! can courtesy be shown;
    Though not from copse, or heath, or cairn,
    Start at my whistle clansmen stern,
    Of this small horn one feeble blast
    Would fearful odds against thee cast.
    But fear not--doubt not--which thou wilt--
    We try this quarrel hilt to hilt."--
    Then each at once his falchion drew,
    Each on the ground his scabbard threw,
    Each looked to sun, and stream, and plain,
    As what they ne'er might see again;
    Then foot, and point, and eye opposed,
    In dubious strife they darkly closed.

    Ill fared it then with Roderick Dhu,
    That on the field his targe he threw,
    Whose brazen studs and tough bull-hide
    Had death so often dashed aside;
    For, trained abroad his arms to wield,
    Fitz-James's blade was sword and shield.
    He practised every pass and ward,
    To thrust, to strike, to feint, to guard;
    While less expert, though stronger far,
    The Gael maintained unequal war.
    Three times in closing strife they stood,
    And thrice the Saxon blade drank blood;
    No stinted draught, no scanty tide,
    The gushing flood the tartans dyed.
    Fierce Roderick felt the fatal drain,
    And showered his blows like wintry rain;
    And, as firm rock, or castle-roof,
    Against the winter shower is proof,
    The foe, invulnerable still,
    Foiled his wild rage by steady skill;
    Till, at advantage ta'en, his brand
    Forced Roderick's weapon from his hand,
    And backward borne upon the lea,
    Brought the proud Chieftain to his knee.

    "Now, yield thee, or by Him who made
    The world, thy heart's blood dyes my blade!"--
    "Thy threats, thy mercy, I defy!
    Let recreant yield, who fears to die."
    --Like adder darting from his coil,
    Like wolf that dashes through the toil,
    Like mountain-cat who guards her young,
    Full at Fitz-James's throat he sprung;
    Received, but recked not of a wound,
    And locked his arms his foeman round.--
    Now, gallant Saxon, hold thine own!
    No maiden's hand is round thee thrown!
    That desperate grasp thy frame might feel,
    Through bars of brass and triple steel!--
    They tug, they strain! down, down they go,
    The Gael above, Fitz-James below.
    The Chieftain's gripe his throat compressed,
    His knee was planted on his breast;
    His clotted locks he backward threw,
    Across his brow his hand he drew,
    From blood and mist to clear his sight,
    Then gleamed aloft his dagger bright!--
    --But hate and fury ill supplied
    The stream of life's exhausted tide,
    And all too late the advantage came,
    To turn the odds of deadly game;
    For, while the dagger gleamed on high,
    Reeled soul and sense, reeled brain and eye,
    Down came the blow! but in the heath
    The erring blade found bloodless sheath.
    The struggling foe may now unclasp
    The fainting Chief's relaxing grasp;
    Unwounded from the dreadful close,
    But breathless all, Fitz-James arose.

Scott: "The Lady of the Lake."




THE INDIGNATION OF NICHOLAS NICKLEBY

("Nicholas Nickleby" deals with the gross mismanagement of schools in
Yorkshire, England. Squeers, a vulgar, crafty despot, is head of
Dotheboys Hall. Nicholas is an usher or undermaster in the school;
Smike, a little, friendless, starved pupil who has run away to escape
from drudgery and harshness.)


"He is off," said Mrs. Squeers. "The cow-house and stable are locked up,
so he can't be there; and he's not down-stairs anywhere, for the girl
has looked. He must have gone York way, and by a public road, too."

"Why must he?" inquired Squeers.

"Stupid!" said Mrs. Squeers, angrily. "He hadn't any money, had he?"

"Never had a penny of his own in his whole life, that I know of,"
replied Squeers.

"To be sure," rejoined Mrs. Squeers, "and he didn't take anything to eat
with him; that I'll answer for. Ha! ha! ha!"

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Squeers.

"Then, of course," said Mrs. S., "he must beg his way, and he could do
that nowhere but on the public road."

"That's true," exclaimed Squeers, clapping his hands.

"True! yes; but you would never have thought of it for all that, if I
hadn't said so," replied his wife. "Now, if you take the chaise and go
one road, and I borrow Swallow's chaise and go the other, what with
keeping our eyes open, and asking questions, one or other of us is
pretty sure to lay hold of him."

The worthy lady's plan was adopted and put in execution without a
moment's delay. After a hasty breakfast, and the prosecution of some
inquiries in the village, the result of which seemed to show that he was
on the right track, Squeers started forth in the pony-chaise, intent
upon discovery and vengeance. Shortly afterwards, Mrs. Squeers, arrayed
in the white topcoat and tied up in various shawls and handkerchiefs,
issued forth in another chaise in another direction, taking with her a
good-sized bludgeon, several odd pieces of strong cord, and a stout
labouring man; all provided and carried upon the expedition with the
sole object of assisting in the capture, and (once caught) insuring the
safe custody of the unfortunate Smike.

Nicholas remained behind, in a tumult of feeling, sensible that whatever
might be the upshot of the boy's flight, nothing but painful and
deplorable consequences were likely to ensue from it. Death, from want
and exposure to the weather, was the best that could be expected from
the protracted wanderings of so poor and helpless a creature, alone and
unfriended, through a country of which he was wholly ignorant. There was
little, perhaps, to choose between this fate and a return to the tender
mercies of the Yorkshire school: but the unhappy being had established a
hold upon his sympathy and compassion, which made his heart ache at the
prospect of the suffering he was destined to undergo. He lingered on in
restless anxiety, picturing a thousand possibilities, until the evening
of the next day when Squeers returned alone and unsuccessful.

"No news of the scamp!" said the schoolmaster, who had evidently been
stretching his legs, on the old principle, not a few times during the
journey. "I'll have consolation for this out of somebody, Nickleby, if
Mrs. Squeers don't hunt him down. So I give you fair warning."

"It is not in my power to console you, sir," said Nicholas. "It is
nothing to me."

"Isn't it?" said Squeers, in a threatening manner. "We shall see!"

"We shall," rejoined Nicholas.

"Here's the pony run right off his legs, and me obliged to come home
with a hack cob, that'll cost fifteen shillings besides other expenses,"
said Squeers; "who's to pay for that, do you hear?"

Nicholas shrugged his shoulders and remained silent.

"I'll have it out of somebody, I tell you," said Squeers, his usual
