Your everlasting rivers speak their dialect of yore.

Old Massachusetts wears it upon her lordly crown,
And broad Ohio bears it amid his young renown;
Connecticut hath wreathed it where her quiet foliage waves,
And bold Kentucky breathes it hoarse through all her ancient caves.

Wachusett hides its lingering voice within his rocky heart,
And Alleghany graves its tone throughout his lofty chart;
Monadnock on his forehead hoar doth seal the sacred trust;
Your mountains build their monument, though ye destroy their dust.

Ye call those red-browed brethren the insects of an hour,
Crushed like the noteless worm amid the regions of their power;
Ye drive them from their fathers' lands, ye break of faith the seal,
But can ye from the court of heaven exclude their last appeal?

Ye see their unresisting tribes, with toilsome steps and slow,
On through the trackless desert pass, a caravan of woe.
Think ye the Eternal Ear is deaf? His sleepless vision dim?
Think ye the soul's blood may not cry from that far land to Him?

    _Lydia H. Sigourney._




More Cruel Than War

(During the Civil War, a Southern prisoner at Camp Chase in Ohio lay
sick in the hospital. He confided to a friend, Colonel Hawkins of
Tennessee, that he was grieving because his fiancee, a Nashville girl,
had not written to him. The soldier died soon afterward, Colonel Hawkins
having promised to open and answer any mail that came for him. This poem
is in reply to a letter from his friend's fiancee, in which she curtly
broke the engagement.)


Your letter, lady, came too late,
  For heaven had claimed its own;
Ah, sudden change--from prison bars
  Unto the great white throne;
And yet I think he would have stayed,
  To live for his disdain,
Could he have read the careless words
  Which you have sent in vain.

So full of patience did he wait,
  Through many a weary hour,
That o'er his simple soldier-faith
  Not even death had power;
And you--did others whisper low
  Their homage in your ear,
As though among their shallow throng
  His spirit had a peer?

I would that you were by me now,
  To draw the sheet aside
And see how pure the look he wore
  The moment when he died.
The sorrow that you gave to him
  Had left its weary trace,
As 'twere the shadow of the cross
  Upon his pallid face.

"Her love," he said, "could change for me
  The winter's cold to spring."
Ah, trust of fickle maiden's love,
  Thou art a bitter thing!
For when these valleys, bright in May,
  Once more with blossoms wave,
The northern violets shall blow
  Above his humble grave.

Your dole of scanty words had been
  But one more pang to bear
For him who kissed unto the last
  Your tress of golden hair;
I did not put it where he said,
  For when the angels come,
I would not have them find the sign
  Of falsehood in the tomb.

I've read your letter, and I know
  The wiles that you have wrought
To win that trusting heart of his,
  And gained it--cruel thought!
What lavish wealth men sometimes give
  For what is worthless all!
What manly bosoms beat for them
  In folly's falsest thrall!

You shall not pity him, for now
  His sorrow has an end;
Yet would that you could stand with me
  Beside my fallen friend!
And I forgive you for his sake,
  As he--if he be forgiven--
May e'en be pleading grace for you
  Before the court of Heaven.

To-night the cold winds whistle by,
  As I my vigil keep
Within the prison dead-house, where
  Few mourners come to weep.
A rude plank coffin holds his form;
  Yet death exalts his face,
And I would rather see him thus
  Than clasped in your embrace.

To-night your home may shine with light
  And ring with merry song,
And you be smiling as your soul
  Had done no deadly wrong;
Your hand so fair that none would think
  It penned these words of pain;
Your skin so white--would God your heart
  Were half as free from stain.

I'd rather be my comrade dead
  Than you in life supreme;
For yours the sinner's waking dread,
  And his the martyr's dream!
Whom serve we in this life we serve
  In that which is to come;
He chose his way, you--yours; let God
  Pronounce the fitting doom.

    _W.S. Hawkins._




Columbus


A harbor in a sunny, southern city;
Ships at their anchor, riding in the lee;
A little lad, with steadfast eyes, and dreamy,
Who ever watched the waters lovingly.

A group of sailors, quaintly garbed and bearded;
Strange tales, that snared the fancy of the child:
Of far-off lands, strange beasts, and birds, and people,
Of storm and sea-fight, danger-filled and wild.

And ever in the boyish soul was ringing
The urging, surging challenge of the sea,
To dare,--as these men dared, its wrath and danger,
To learn,--as they, its charm and mystery.

Columbus, by the sunny, southern harbor,
You dreamed the dreams that manhood years made true;
Thank God for men--their deeds have crowned the ages--
Who once were little dreamy lads like you.

    _Helen L. Smith._




The September Gale


I'm not a chicken; I have seen
  Full many a chill September,
And though I was a youngster then,
  That gale I well remember;
The day before, my kite-string snapped,
  And I, my kite pursuing,
The wind whisked off my palm-leaf hat;--
  For me two storms were brewing!

It came as quarrels sometimes do,
  When married folks get clashing;
There was a heavy sigh or two,
  Before the fire was flashing,--
A little stir among the clouds,
  Before they rent asunder,--
A little rocking of the trees,
  And then came on the thunder.

Lord! how the ponds and rivers boiled,
  And how the shingles rattled!
And oaks were scattered on the ground,
  As if the Titans battled;
And all above was in a howl,
  And all below a clatter,--
The earth was like a frying-pan.
  Or some such hissing matter.

It chanced to be our washing-day,
  And all our things were drying:
The storm came roaring through the lines,
  And set them all a-flying;
I saw the shirts and petticoats
  Go riding off like witches;
I lost, ah! bitterly I wept,--
  I lost my Sunday breeches!

I saw them straddling through the air,
  Alas! too late to win them;
I saw them chase the clouds, as if
  The devil had been in them;
They were my darlings and my pride,
  My boyhood's only riches,--
"Farewell, farewell," I faintly cried,--
"My breeches! O my breeches!"

That night I saw them in my dreams,
  How changed from what I knew them!
The dews had steeped their faded threads,
  The winds had whistled through them!
I saw the wide and ghastly rents
  Where demon claws had torn them;
A hole was in their amplest part,
  As if an imp had worn them.

I have had many happy years
  And tailors kind and clever,
But those young pantaloons have gone
  Forever and forever!
And not till fate has cut the last
  Of all my earthly stitches,
This aching heart shall cease to mourn
  My loved, my long-lost breeches!

    _O.W. Holmes_




When My Ship Comes In


Somewhere, out on the blue sea sailing,
  Where the winds dance and spin;
Beyond the reach of my eager hailing,
  Over the breakers' din;
Out where the dark storm-clouds are lifting,
Out where the blinding fog is drifting,
Out where the treacherous sand is shifting,
  My ship is coming in.

O, I have watched till my eyes were aching,
  Day after weary day;
O, I have hoped till my heart was breaking
  While the long nights ebbed away;
Could I but know where the waves had tossed her,
Could I but know what storms had crossed her,
Could I but know where the winds had lost her,
  Out in the twilight gray!

But though the storms her course have altered,
  Surely the port she'll win,
Never my faith in my ship has faltered,
  I know she is coming in.
For through the restless ways of her roaming,
Through the mad rush of the wild waves foaming,
Through the white crest of the billows combing,
  My ship is coming in.

Beating the tides where the gulls are flying,
  Swiftly she's coming in:
Shallows and deeps and rocks defying,
  Bravely she's coming in.
Precious the love she will bring to bless me,
Snowy the arms she will bring to caress me,
In the proud purple of kings she will dress me--
  My ship that is coming in.

White in the sunshine her sails will be gleaming,
  See, where my ship comes in;
At masthead and peak her colors streaming,
  Proudly she's sailing in;
Love, hope and joy on her decks are cheering,
Music will welcome her glad appearing,
And my heart will sing at her stately nearing,
  When my ship comes in.

    _Robert Jones Burdette._




Solitude


Laugh, and the world laughs with you,
  Weep, and you weep alone;
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth,
  But has trouble enough of its own.

Sing, and the hills will answer,
  Sigh, it is lost on the air;
The echoes bound to a joyful sound,
  But shirk from voicing care.

Rejoice and men will seek you;
  Grieve, and they turn and go;
They want full measure of all your pleasure,
  But they do not need your woe.

Be glad, and your friends are many;
  Be sad, and you lose them all,
There are none to decline your nectar'd wine,
  But alone you must drink life's gall.

Feast, and your halls are crowded;
  Fast, and the world goes by;
Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
  But no man can help you die.

There is room in the halls of pleasure
  For a large and lordly train,
But one by one we must all file on
  Through the narrow aisle of pain.

    _Ella Wheeler Wilcox._




Sin of the Coppenter Man


The coppenter man said a wicked word,
  When he hitted his thumb one day,
En I know what it was, because I heard,
  En it's somethin' I dassent say.

He growed us a house with rooms inside it,
  En the rooms is full of floors
It's my papa's house, en when he buyed it,
  It was nothin' but just outdoors.

En they planted stones in a hole for seeds,
  En that's how the house began,
But I guess the stones would have just growed weeds,
  Except for the coppenter man.

En the coppenter man took a board and said
  He'd skin it and make some curls,
En I hung 'em onto my ears en head,
  En they make me look like girls.

En he squinted along one side, he did,
  En he squinted the other side twice,
En then he told me, "You squint it, kid,"
  'Cause the coppenter man's reel nice.

But the coppenter man said a wicked word,
  When he hitted 'his thumb that day;
He said it out loud, too, 'cause I heard,
  En it's something I dassent say.

En the coppenter man said it wasn't bad,
  When you hitted your thumb, kerspat!
En there'd be no coppenter men to be had,
  If it wasn't for words like that.

    _Edmund Vance Cooke_.




The Bells of Ostend


No, I never, till life and its shadows shall end,
Can forget the sweet sound of the bells of Ostend!
The day set in darkness, the wind it blew loud,
And rung as it passed through each murmuring shroud.
My forehead was wet with the foam of the spray,
My heart sighed in secret for those far away;
When slowly the morning advanced from the east,
The toil and the noise of the tempest had ceased;
The peal from a land I ne'er saw, seemed to say,
"Let the stranger forget every sorrow to-day!"
Yet the short-lived emotion was mingled with pain,
I thought of those eyes I should ne'er see again;
I thought of the kiss, the last kiss which I gave,
And a tear of regret fell unseen on the wave;
I thought of the schemes fond affection had planned,
Of the trees, of the towers, of my own native land.
But still the sweet sounds, as they swelled to the air,
Seemed tidings of pleasure, though mournful to bear,
And I never, till life and its shadows shall end,
Can forget the sweet sound of the bells of Ostend!

    _W.L. Bowles._




You Put No Flowers on My Papa's Grave


With sable-draped banners and slow measured tread,
The flower laden ranks pass the gates of the dead;
And seeking each mound where a comrade's form rests
Leave tear-bedewed garlands to bloom, on his breast.
Ended at last is the labor of love;
Once more through the gateway the saddened lines move--
A wailing of anguish, a sobbing of grief,
Falls low on the ear of the battle-scarred chief;
Close crouched by the portals, a sunny-haired child
Besought him in accents with grief rendered wild:

"Oh! sir, he was good, and they say he died brave--
Why, why, did you pass by my dear papa's grave?
I know he was poor, but as kind and as true
As ever marched into the battle with you;
His grave is so humble, no stone marks the spot,
You may not have seen it. Oh, say you did not!
For my poor heart will break if you knew he was there,
And thought him too lowly your offerings to share.
He didn't die lowly--he poured his heart's blood
In rich crimson streams, from the top-crowning sod
Of the breastworks which stood in front of the fight--
And died shouting, 'Onward! for God and the right!'
O'er all his dead comrades your bright garlands wave,
But you haven't put _one_ on _my_ papa's grave.
If mamma were here--but she lies by his side,
Her wearied heart broke when our dear papa died!"

"Battalion! file left! countermarch!" cried the chief,
"This young orphaned maid hath full cause for her grief."
Then up in his arms from the hot, dusty street,
He lifted the maiden, while in through the gate
The long line repasses, and many an eye
Pays fresh tribute of tears to the lone orphan's sigh.
"This way, it is--here, sir, right under this tree;
They lie close together, with just room for me."
"Halt! Cover with roses each lowly green mound;
A love pure as this makes these graves hallowed ground."

"Oh! thank you, kind sir! I ne'er can repay
The kindness you've shown little Daisy to-day;
But I'll pray for you here, each day while I live,
'Tis all that a poor soldier's orphan can give.
I shall see papa soon and dear mamma, too--
I dreamed so last night, and I know 'twill come true;
And they will both bless you, I know, when I say
How you folded your arms round their dear one to-day;
How you cheered her sad heart and soothed it to rest,
And hushed its wild throbs on your strong, noble breast;
And when the kind angels shall call _you_ to come
We'll welcome you there to our beautiful home
Where death never comes his black banners to wave,
And the beautiful flowers ne'er weep o'er a grave."

    _C.E.L. Holmes._




The Two Little Stockings


Two little stockings hung side by side,
Close to the fireside broad and wide.
"Two?" said Saint Nick, as down he came,
Loaded with toys and many a game.
"Ho, ho!" said he, with a laugh of fun,
"I'll have no cheating, my pretty one.

"I know who dwells in this house, my dear,
There's only one little girl lives here."
So he crept up close to the chimney place,
And measured a sock with a sober face;
Just then a wee little note fell out
And fluttered low, like a bird, about.

"Aha! What's this?" said he, in surprise,
As he pushed his specs up close to his eyes,
And read the address in a child's rough plan.
"Dear Saint Nicholas," so it began,
"The other stocking you see on the wall
I have hung up for a child named Clara Hall.

"She's a poor little girl, but very good,
So I thought, perhaps, you kindly would
Fill up her stocking, too, to-night,
And help to make her Christmas bright.
If you've not enough for both stockings there,
Please put all in Clara's, I shall not care."

Saint Nicholas brushed a tear from his eye,
And, "God bless you, darling," he said with a sigh;
Then softly he blew through the chimney high
A note like a bird's, as it soars on high,
When down came two of the funniest mortals
That ever were seen this side earth's portals.

"Hurry up," said Saint Nick, "and nicely prepare
All a little girl wants where money is rare."
Then, oh, what a scene there was in that room!
Away went the elves, but down from the gloom
Of the sooty old chimney came tumbling low
A child's whole wardrobe, from head to toe.

How Santa Clans laughed, as he gathered them in,
And fastened each one to the sock with a pin;
Right to the toe he hung a blue dress,--
"She'll think it came from the sky, I guess,"
Said Saint Nicholas, smoothing the folds of blue,
And tying the hood to the stocking, too.

When all the warm clothes were fastened on,
And both little socks were filled and done,
Then Santa Claus tucked a toy here and there,
And hurried away to the frosty air,
Saying, "God pity the poor, and bless the dear child
Who pities them, too, on this night so wild."

The wind caught the words and bore them on high
Till they died away in the midnight sky;
While Saint Nicholas flew through the icy air,
Bringing "peace and good will" with him everywhere.

    _Sara Keables Hunt._




I Have a Rendezvous with Death


  I have a rendezvous with Death
At some disputed barricade,
When Spring comes back with rustling shade
And apple-blossoms fill the air--
I have a rendezvous with Death
When Spring brings back blue days and fair.

  It may be he shall take my hand
And lead me into his dark land
And close my eyes and quench my breath--
It may be I shall pass him still.
I have a rendezvous with Death
On some scarred slope of battered hill,
When Spring comes round again this year
