staff, stretched the other man on the road.

"Ride on, girls! We will follow you," Oswald shouted.

Jessie was sitting behind John, and they and Janet dashed forward, and
rode into the water. Oswald and Roger followed, as six men, armed with
spear and sword, ran out from the house. Seeing that they were too
late, the leader shouted to the others: "Fetch out the horses, and
chase them!" and, before the party had gained the opposite bank, their
pursuers dashed into the water.

"Don't press your horses too hardly," Oswald said, as they galloped
along. "They are too close behind us for us to get help from any of the
small villages, but they dare not follow us into Longtown, and we have
barely a ten miles' ride."

They had some two hundred yards' start, and for the first four miles
held their own; then their pursuers began to gain upon them. One of the
horses was carrying double, and Roger and Oswald were both heavier than
any of the moss troopers.

"We shall have a fight for it, Roger."

"That is just what I was thinking, master. Well, there are three of us;
and, as there are only six of them, we ought not to have much trouble.
John will be a match for one. Methinks you and I can each make short
work of a man when they first come up; and with but three of them
against two, it will be mere child's play."

The road was a narrow one, and little used; and, when they came to the
foot of a sharp rise, Oswald called to those ahead to stop.

"Jump down, Jessie, and mount behind Janet, and ride on ahead. We will
soon get rid of these fellows. Be quick!"

The moss troopers were now but seventy or eighty yards behind.

"I shall fight on foot," Roger said, as he leapt off his horse. "I want
both hands, for this staff."

Turning his horse, and bidding John to do the same, Oswald reined back
his animal three or four lengths; and when the Bairds' party were
within twenty yards, touched it with his spur and dashed at them,
meeting them just abreast of Roger. The first man he met thrust at him
with his spear, but Oswald parried with his sword, and with a
back-handed blow smote the man just under the chin, and he fell with a
crash from his horse. At the same moment he heard a blow like that of a
smith's hammer, as Roger's staff fell upon the steel cap of the first
who attacked him.

John was less fortunate, for his opponent's spear struck him in the
throat, and he fell heavily from his saddle.

"Well stricken, Jock!" one of them shouted. "Ride on after the women.
We will settle with these fellows."

But before the moss trooper could obey the order, Oswald, with a touch
of the spur and the bridle, caused his horse to curvet round, and smote
the man so mighty a blow on the shoulder as well-nigh to sever his arm
from his body. As he wheeled his horse again he was nigh unseated, by a
spear thrust that struck him on the breast piece; but, upon recovering,
he struck his opponent, as he passed, so heavy a blow in the face, with
the pommel of his sword, that he sent him senseless to the ground.

The other two men had furiously attacked Roger, but, whirling his staff
round his head, he had kept them both at bay; then the staff descended
between the ears of one of the horses, which fell headlong; and before
the rider could get his foot from the stirrup, the staff struck him
below the steel cap, just in front of the ear, and without a cry he
fell dead beside his horse. At that the last of the moss troopers
turned his horse, and galloped off at full speed.

"We have not taken long over that, master," Roger said, with a grim
smile. "Five men in a minute is not so bad."

"I am afraid John is killed, Roger. See to him."

"Ay, he is sped," Roger replied, as he turned the body over. "The spear
struck him full in the throat. That is what comes of not learning to
use your weapons. What shall we do with him?"

"He was a faithful fellow, Roger, and as there is no need for haste
now, we will give him some sort of burial, and not let him lie here in
the road."

"We have nought to dig a grave with," Roger remarked.

"No, but there are plenty of stones about."

He dismounted, and with Roger's help carried the dead man a short
distance away, laid him down by the side of a great boulder, and then
piled stones around and over him.

"That will do, Roger. 'Tis not like that anyone will disturb those
stones, for years to come. He will rest as well there as if he lay in a
grave. Now, let us look to the others."

The man he had struck across the throat, and the last Roger had hit,
were both dead. Two of the others were but stunned, while the one upon
whose shoulder Roger's blow had fallen was lying insensible, and
evidently was fast bleeding to death.

"We can do naught for him," Oswald said. "Even had we the king's leech
here, we could not save him. Now let us be off."

"Shall we take the horses, master?"

"No, they will be but an encumbrance; and now that poor fellow has
gone, we have one apiece. Bring his horse along with you."

Mounting, they rode quickly on, and at the top of the hill came up with
the girls; who, having seen the result of the combat, had waited for
them.

"Now we are safe and free, thanks to you both," Janet said. "Jessie
looked back, and saw the fight as we rode. How quickly it was over! But
I am grieved, indeed, that John has fallen. We saw you carrying off his
body, and covering it. Jessie had noticed him fall, and we feared 'twas
all over with him. He was an old retainer of our father's, and a
faithful one."

"I am sorry, indeed, that he has been slain, Janet; but we could hardly
expect to come out altogether scatheless."

"Are all the others killed?" Jessie asked.

"No. Two of them are but stunned; and will, ere long, be able to mount
and ride off again."

"Master Oswald has gained the most honours in the fight. I killed one,
and stunned another. He has stunned one also, but has slain two."

"I had a better arm, Roger."

"I know not that," Roger replied. "A quarterstaff, of that weight, is a
fine weapon. I say not that it is to be compared to a mace but, when on
foot, I would as lief have it as a sword."

"Now, Jessie, do you mount John's horse. We can ride quietly, for
Longtown is but some three miles ahead."

They rested there for a couple of hours, then mounted again, and
crossed the Pentlands by a horse track between Cristindury and Gele
Craigs. Coming down into Tynedale, they put up for the night at the
first place they came to. At daybreak they set off northwards, crossed
Reddesdale, and came down, in the afternoon, into the valley of the
Coquet, within two miles of Yardhope.

Great indeed was the surprise and joy of John Forster and his wife,
when they made out the two girls riding, with Oswald, towards the hold.

"What miracle is this, lad?" the former said, while his wife was
embracing her nieces. "We heard, but two days since, of the raid on the
Armstrongs, and how the girls were carried off by the Bairds."

Here Oswald put his finger to his lips, to stop him from saying aught
of Jane Armstrong's death. He had, after dismounting, whispered in his
mother's ear, before she had time to speak to the girls, that as yet
they knew nought of their mother's death, and that he had left it to
her to break it to them.

"I have been, since, scouring the country," his father went on, "to try
to get my friends to take the matter up; but in truth, they were not
over willing to do so. All know that it is no slight enterprise to
attack the Bairds in their stronghold. We fared but badly, last time we
went there, though that was but a blow and a retreat; but all know that
the Bairds' hold is not to be taken like a country tower. 'Tis greatly
bigger and stronger than ours, and scarce to be attempted save by a
royal army; especially as the whole countryside would be swarming round
us, in a few hours after we crossed the border. This time, too, it is
no quarrel of my people; and, as they say, the risk would be indeed
great, and the loss very heavy.

"I sent off a messenger this morning to Armstrong, to tell him that I
feared I could not raise more than sixty spears; but with these I would
ride to Hiniltie, and join any force he could collect, and try with him
to surprise the Bairds' hold and rescue the girls, though it seemed to
be a mighty dangerous enterprise."

"He will have learnt, yesterday morning, Father, that we have carried
them off. We could have brought you the news last night, but to do so
we must have ridden fast and, the girls being with us, we thought it
were better to take two days over the journey. So we slept in Tynedale
last night."

"And how did you manage it? For unless you and Roger flew into the
Bairds' hold, and carried them off on your backs, I see not how it
could be managed. Why, the place is so strong that even the Douglases
have not cared to carry out the terms of the treaty, for the arrest of
William Baird as a notorious breaker of the truce between the two
countries."

"It was because I knew Armstrong deemed that it was scarce likely a
force could be gathered, by you and his friends, strong enough to
undertake such an enterprise, that we decided to rescue them by
strategy. The affair turned out to be easy enough."

And he then related, in detail, the manner in which he and Roger had
obtained entry into the hold, and had succeeded in rescuing his
cousins.

"By the bones of Saint Oswald, from whom you got your name, lad," John
Forster exclaimed, when he had finished his story, "you have carried
out the matter marvellously well! Hotspur himself could not have
contrived it better; and I own that I was wrong, and that that fancy of
yours, to be able to read and write, has not done you the damage that I
feared it would. Henceforth I will maintain, with all my might, that
these things in no way tend to soften a man; but on the contrary, in
some way sharpen his wits, and enable him to carry out matters with
plans, and contrivances, such as would scarce be conceived by men who
had not such advantage.

"But why do we not go inside?"

"I have been keeping you here, Father, because I doubt not that my
mother has been breaking the news to the girls, of their mother's
slaughter. I said nought to them about it. They knew the hold was
burnt, and I told them that Allan was wounded; but I thought that, if I
gave them the worst part of the news, it would throw them into such
deep grief as to unfit them for the journey. It might not have been
discovered till two hours after we had started that they had escaped,
and in that case we should have been mounted before the Bairds overtook
us, and it would have been a ride for life, and the girls would have
needed all their strength and courage to keep them up."

"It was as well so, Oswald, and doubtless your mother will break it
more easily to them than you could have done. Women are better at such
things than men, who are given to speak, bluntly and straight, what has
to be told."



Chapter 15: Another Mission To Ludlow.


While Oswald was talking with his father, Roger had taken the four
horses round to the long shed, that ran along one side of the wall; and
had there been telling the moss troopers the same story Oswald had been
relating to his father, whom he now joined.

"Well, friend Roger," John Forster said as he came up, shaking him
heartily by the hand; "by my faith, my son is fortunate in having so
stout a fellow as his henchman."

"'Tis rather that I am fortunate in having him as a master," Roger
replied. "I have but to strike as he bids me, and there is no need for
me to think, for my brain bears no proportion to my bulk; and indeed,
even in the matter of strength he bids fair to equal me, for he seems
to me to grow taller and stronger every month; which is not surprising,
seeing that you are, yourself, much beyond the common. In all this
matter there is no credit due to me, save that I have, as faithfully as
I could, carried out his orders."

"All men can try to carry out orders, Roger, but it is not all who can
do it with intelligence. Doubtless, it has something to do with the
book learning that you have, and in which you were his instructor."

"I think not that it is so, in any way, Master Forster," Roger replied
quickly, for he liked not the thought that he had gained any advantage,
whatever, from his stay in the convent. "It might likely be useful to a
man of small stature, whose thoughts would naturally turn to being a
scribe, and to making his living by such finicking ways instead of by
bearing himself as a man should; but for one like myself, 'tis but time
thrown away. Yet I say not that it may not be useful to Master Oswald,
who will some day be a knight, and go to court, and have occasion to
write letters, when he has no scribe at hand to do it for him; but a
good downright blow is more advantage, to the man that strikes it, than
all the book learning that he can get."

"I have done well enough without it, Roger; but I think that it must be
of some use, else why is it that Oswald is so good at devising plans?
Had I been in his place, when he heard the news of the harrying of
Hiniltie, and the carrying off of Armstrong's daughters, I should never
have thought of starting on such an adventure as he did."

"It may be that it may improve the mind, Master Forster, just as
wielding a mace strengthens the muscles of the arm. I only speak from
my own experience; and, so far as I can see, all the hours I spent on
these matters have been as good as wasted."

"Nay, Roger," Oswald, who had been an amused listener to the
conversation, broke in, "you have had evidence, but lately, that it is
not so. Had you not been able to read the priest's missal, he would
have seen, at once, that you were not a monk; but the fact that you did
so, and that much better and more fluently than he could, himself, have
read a strange manuscript, was to him a confirmation of your story;
which not only enabled us to rescue my cousins, but probably saved your
own skin, to say nothing of mine; for had Baird learned that you were
deceiving him, he would as likely as not have hung us both over the
gateway of his hold, as spies."

Roger scratched his head, in some embarrassment.

"I cannot gainsay it, Master Oswald, though I did not think of it
before; and it is certainly a proof that the time I spent in learning
was not thrown away; for, as you say, had I not been able to read that
missal, doubtless it would have gone hard with both of us. I am not
ashamed to own when I am wrong. It would not be English, or honest, not
to do so. Reading certainly came in mightily useful, there."

"And you must also remember, Roger," Oswald said with a smile, "that if
it had not been that you read and wrote, better than most of the other
monks, the abbot would not have picked you out as my instructor, I
should not have asked for you to come with me to Scotland, and Sir
Henry Percy would never have begged the abbot to allow you to go forth
into the world."

"Say no more, Master Oswald--never again will I say a word against
reading and writing--I see that they are excellent things, and it never
entered my thick head how greatly I have benefited by acquiring
them--but will maintain, against all who say the contrary, that they
are of great value; and that they in no way tend to soften a man, as I
can prove in my own person, and also in yours."

At this moment, Mary Forster appeared at the top of the steps.

"Supper is ready," she said. "I have broken the news to the girls. They
are quite broken hearted, poor things, and I have sent them to bed.

"I suppose you are not leaving us, tomorrow morning, Oswald?"

"No, I shall be off at daybreak, the next day. I must not stay longer,
for I ought to have been back three days ago, and Sir Henry will be
wondering what has befallen me."

Talking the matter over, that evening, as to what had best be done with
the girls, Mary Forster said that they had expressed great anxiety to
get back, as soon as they could, in order that they might try and
comfort their father, and nurse Allan; and John Forster said that he
would ride with them, with four of his men, to Hiniltie, in a day or
two. The next evening, however, there was a knock at the outside gate;
and on its being opened, Adam Armstrong himself entered.

"I could not rest, for thinking of the girls," he said, as he entered
the house. "The man arrived safely, yesterday morning, after having,
with great difficulty, made his way unobserved through the Bairds, who
had some fifty or sixty men scattered, all over the hills."

"Do you go to them, Wife, and tell them that their father has arrived.

"They have been terribly upset," John went on, as his wife left the
room. "They were only told of the loss of their mother after they
arrived, yesterday. Oswald thought that they would need all their
strength for the journey, and that it were better that Mary should
break the news to them, when they got here. We have all felt for you
sorely, Adam, since your messenger brought the news."

Armstrong pressed his hand, silently.

"She was a good wife to me, John, a right good wife. We buried what
seemed to be her remains, yesterday morning. It was that, that kept me
from starting the moment the man came in with the news that Oswald had
got the girls out of the hands of the Bairds."

"And how is Allan?"

"I trust he will get right, now. He has come partly to his senses,
though he is still dazed. We had him carried, in a litter, to the
monastery where I obtained the monk's robe for your man; for I feared
to leave him in the village, lest the Bairds, furious at the escape of
the girls, might return to finish their work."

He was about to speak to Oswald, when the door opened, and the girls
ran in, and it was some time before Adam Armstrong again turned to him.

"Now, lad," he said, "do not think, because I am a long time coming to
the point, that I think lightly of the service you have rendered me.
Ah, lad! I could scarce believe my ears, when Fergus told me that you
and your henchman had got the lasses out of the Bairds' hands, and had
gone off on horseback with them. I had to put the question, again and
again, as to whether he was sure that it was really the girls you had
with you. It seemed to me to be altogether impossible; but I had to
believe him, at last, though how it came about he could not tell me."

"We had no time for talking," Oswald said. "Every moment was of
importance. But the matter was simple enough, and worth but a few
words' telling."

And he then related the manner in which he and Roger had obtained
entrance to the hold, and had succeeded in getting the girls away.

"It sounds simple enough, in the telling," Armstrong said; "but it
needed stout hearts, and good nerves, to enter the Bairds' den on such
an errand. You carried your lives in your hands, and well must you have
borne out your story, to have passed without suspicion. It was well
thought of, indeed, and well carried out, and would have done credit to
the boldest and craftiest leader on the border.

"What say you, John?"

"I am proud of him, Adam. As for myself, I should never have thought of
such a plan. If I had had the matter in hand, I might have taken twenty
stout fellows, and tried to scale the walls unseen, and to fall upon
them with spear and sword, and in the confusion carry the girls off;
but it would have been a desperate plan, with but small hope of
success."

"Small indeed, John, small indeed," Armstrong said, shaking his head.
"With prisoners in the hold, the Bairds were not likely to be caught
sleeping; and had they been, accustomed to surprises as they are, the
whole garrison would have been afoot in a minute, and not a man of ye
would have lived to tell the story. Some such mad thought passed
through my brain, when I first heard the news, but it was not for long.
Even with your spears, and others you might gather, and all my friends
in Tweeddale, we should have had but a small chance of capturing the
Bairds' hold. We should have had all Annandale and Nithsdale down on
us, before we could have done it. At any rate, we should have had to
bide our time, and wait until the Bairds were away to England with all
their dalesmen; and by that time, none could say what would have become
of the girls. In fact, there was but one way of doing it, and that is
the way Oswald hit upon.

"Well, lad, I fear I shall never have an opportunity of repaying the
debt I owe you; but after this, there is not an Armstrong on the
border, on our side or yours--for we are half English and half
Scotch--but will hold you as among our closest of kin, and will give
you welcome and aid, whensoever you may need it. And where is your man
Roger?"

"I will call him," Oswald said and, stepping to the door, he shouted to
his follower; who came out, at once, from one of the outhouses occupied
by the retainers of the hold.

"Come up, Roger!" Oswald said; "Master Armstrong wishes to see you."

Roger came up and, as he entered, Adam grasped him by the hand.

"Whenever your time for fighting is over, my brave fellow, remember
that there is a home for you at Hiniltie, so long as an Armstrong
dwells there. I thought, when I fetched that monk's gown for you, that
you and my nephew Oswald might be able to gather some news; and let me
know, possibly, how the girls were faring; but little did I think that,
alone and unaided, you would rescue them from the hands of the Bairds."

"It was a merry business, Master Armstrong, and pleased me hugely, save
that it went against my heart to have this bald patch on my head again,
just when the hair had so well grown and covered it; but it was well
nigh as good as fighting, to trick the Bairds in their own hold, when
they, as they thought, were so mightily sure that I was but a harmless
brother of a monastery. For the rest, it was an easy business, and
scarce worth talking of."

"It was done easily because it was done well, Roger. It was well
planned, and well carried out."

"I had nought to do with the planning, and the carrying out was simple
enough. There were those there who tested me, as to my knowledge of
Dunbar, and of the monastery I came from, and who further tested my
knowledge of reading. Once assured that my story was true, they paid no
further attention to me, believing that I should stay but a day or two,
to rest myself on my way south."

"You had occasion, however, to use that heavy staff you carried."

"Some slight occasion, but I would that I had had the chance to have
used it on the heads of some of the Bairds. For what little I did,
master Armstrong, your daughters thanked me very prettily, and more
than enough; and therefore, I pray thee, say no more of it.

"And how is your son?"

"He is going on well, and both Meg Margetson and the monks, in whose
hands I have put him, say that they hope he is out of danger."

The next morning Oswald and Roger mounted, soon after daybreak, and
