to me; but I was not aware, till afterwards, that a soldierlike,
resolute looking officer beside him, was General Graham. It was the
latter who first addressed me.

"Are you aware, Sir," said he, "if Grouchy's force is arrived?"

"They had not: on the contrary, shortly before I escaped, an aid-de-camp
was despatched to Gembloux, to hasten his coming. And the troops, for
they must be troops, debouching from the wood yonder--they seem to form
a junction with the corps to the right--they are the Prussians. They
arrived there before noon from St. Lambert, and are part of Buelow's
corps. Count Loebau and his division of ten thousand men were despatched,
about an hour since, to hold them in check."

"This is great news," said Lord Uxbridge. "Fitzroy must know it at
once."

So saying he dashed spurs into his horse, and soon disappeared amid the
crowd on the hill top.

"You had better see the Duke, Sir," said Graham: "your information is
too important to be delayed. Captain Calvert, let this officer have a
horse; his own is too tired to go much further."

"And a cap, I beg of you," added I, in an under tone; "for I have
already found a sabre."

By a slight circuitous route, we reached the road upon which a mass of
dismounted artillery-carts, baggage-wagons, and tumbrils, were heaped
together as a barricade against the attack of the French dragoons, who
more than once had penetrated to the very crest of our position. Close
to this, and on a little rising ground, from which a view of the entire
field extended from Hougoumont to the far left, the Duke of Wellington
stood, surrounded by his staff. His eye was bent upon the valley before
him, where the advancing columns of Ney's attack still pressed onwards;
while the fire of sixty great guns poured death and carnage into his
lines. The second Belgian division, routed and broken, had fallen back
upon the twenty-seventh regiment, who had merely time to throw
themselves into square, when Milhaud's cuirassiers, armed with a
terrible long straight sword, came sweeping down upon them. A line of
impassable bayonets, a living _chevaux-de-frise_ of the best blood of
Britain, stood firm and motionless before the shock: the French
_mitraille_ played mercilessly on the ranks; but the chasms were filled
up like magic, and in vain the bold horsemen of Gaul galloped round the
bristling files. At length the word "fire!" was heard within the square,
and as the bullets at pistol range rattled upon them, the cuirass
afforded them no defence against the deadly volley. Men and horses
rolled indiscriminately upon the earth: then would come a charge of our
dashing squadrons, who, riding recklessly upon the foe, were, in their
turn, to be repulsed by numbers, when fresh attacks would pour down upon
our unshaken infantry.

"That column yonder is wavering: why does he not bring up his
supporting squadrons?" inquired the Duke, pointing to a Belgian regiment
of light dragoons, who were formed in the same brigade with the seventh
hussars.

"He refuses to oppose his light cavalry to cuirassiers, my lord," said
an aid-de-camp, who had just returned from the division in question.

"Tell him to march his men off the ground," said the Duke, with a quiet
and impassive tone.

In less than ten minutes the regiment was seen to defile from the mass,
and take the road to Brussels, to increase the panic of that city, by
circulating and strengthening the report, that the English were
beaten,--and Napoleon in full march upon the capital.

"What's Ney's force? can you guess, Sir?" said Lord Wellington turning
to me.

"About twelve thousand men, my lord."

"Are the Guard among them?"

"No, Sir; the Guard are in reserve above La Belle Alliance."

"In what part of the field is Buonaparte?"

"Nearly opposite to where we stand."

"I told you, gentlemen, Hougoumont never was the great attack. The
battle must be decided here," pointing, as he spoke, to the plain
beneath us, where still Ney poured on his devoted columns, where yet the
French cavalry rode down upon our firm squares.

As he spoke an aid-de-camp rode up from the valley.

"The ninety-second requires support, my lord: they cannot maintain their
positions half an hour longer, without it."

"Have they given way, Sir?"

"No----"

"Well, then, they must stand where they are. I hear cannon towards the
left; yonder, near Frischermont."

At this moment the light cavalry swept past the base of the hill on
which we stood, hotly followed by the French heavy cuirassier brigade.
Three of our guns were taken; and the cheering of the French infantry,
as they advanced to the charge, presaged their hope of victory.

"Do it, then," said the Duke, in reply to some whispered question of
Lord Uxbridge; and shortly after the heavy trot of advancing squadrons
was heard behind.

They were the Life Guards and the Blues, who, with the first Dragoon
Guards and the Enniskilleners, were formed into close column.

"I know the ground, my Lord," said I to Lord Uxbridge.

"Come along, Sir, come along," said he, as he threw his hussar jacket
loosely behind him, to give freedom to his sword-arm.--"Forward, my men,
forward; but steady, hold your horses in hand; threes about, and
together charge."

"Charge!" he shouted; while, as the word flew from squadron to squadron,
each horseman bent upon his saddle, and that mighty mass, as though
instinct with but one spirit, dashed like a thunder-bolt upon the column
beneath them. The French, blown and exhausted, inferior beside in weight
both of man and horse, offered but a short resistance. As the tall corn
bends beneath the sweeping hurricane, wave succeeding wave, so did the
steel-clad squadrons of France fall before the nervous arm of Britain's
cavalry. Onward they went, carrying death and ruin before them, and
never stayed their course, until the guns were recaptured, and the
cuirassiers, repulsed, disordered, and broken, had retired beneath the
protection of their artillery.

There was, as a brilliant and eloquent writer on the subject
mentions, a terrible sameness in the whole of this battle. Incessant
charges of cavalry upon the squares of our infantry, whose sole
manoeuvre consisted in either deploying into line to resist the
attack of infantry, or falling back into square when the cavalry
advanced--performing those two evolutions under the devastating fire
of artillery, before the unflinching heroism of that veteran infantry
whose glories had been reaped upon the blood-stained fields of
Austerlitz, Marengo, and Wagram--or opposing an unbroken front to the
whirlwind swoop of infuriated cavalry;--such were the enduring and
devoted services demanded from the English troops, and such they
failed not to render. Once or twice had temper nearly failed them,
and the cry ran through the ranks, "Are we never to move
forward?--Only let us at them!" But the word was not yet spoken which
was to undam the pent-up torrent, and bear down with unrelenting
vengeance upon the now exulting columns of the enemy.

It was six o'clock: the battle had continued with unchanged fortune for
three hours. The French, masters of La Haye Sainte, could never advance
further into our position. They had gained the orchard of Hougoumont,
but the chateau was still held by the British Guards, although its
blazing roof and crumbling walls made its occupation rather the
desperate stand of unflinching valor than the maintenance of an
important position. The smoke which hung upon the field rolled in slow
and heavy masses back upon the French lines, and gradually discovered to
our view the entire of the army. We quickly perceived that a change was
taking place in their position. The troops which on their left
stretched far beyond Hougoumont, were now moved nearer to the centre.
The attack upon the chateau seemed less vigorously supported, while the
oblique direction of their right wing, which, pivoting upon Planchenoit,
opposed a face to the Prussians,--all denoted a change in their order of
battle. It was now the hour when Napoleon was at last convinced that
nothing but the carnage he could no longer support could destroy the
unyielding ranks of British infantry; that although Hougoumont had been
partially, La Haye Sainte, completely, won; that although upon the right
the farm-houses Papelotte and La Haye were nearly surrounded by his
troops, which with any other army must prove the forerunner of defeat:
yet still the victory was beyond his grasp. The bold stratagems, whose
success the experience of a life had proved, were here to be found
powerless. The decisive manoeuvre of carrying one important point of
the enemy's lines, of turning him upon the flank, or piercing him
through the centre, were here found impracticable. He might launch his
avalanche of grape-shot, he might pour down his crashing columns of
cavalry, he might send forth the iron storm of his brave infantry; but,
though death in every shape heralded their approach, still were others
found to fill the fallen ranks, and feed with their heart's blood the
unslaked thirst for slaughter. Well might the gallant leader of this
gallant host, as he watched the reckless onslaught of the untiring
enemy, and looked upon the unflinching few, who, bearing the proud badge
of Britain, alone sustained the fight, well might he exclaim, "Night,
or Bluecher!"

It was now seven o'clock, when a dark mass was seen to form upon the
heights above the French centre, and divide into three gigantic
columns, of which the right occupied the Brussels road. These were the
reserves, consisting of the Old and Young Guards, and amounting to
twelve thousand--the _elite_ of the French army--reserved by the Emperor
for a great _coup-de-main_. These veterans of a hundred battles had been
stationed, from the beginning of the day, inactive spectators of the
fight; their hour was now come, and, with a shout of "_Vive
l'Empereur!_" which rose triumphantly over the din and crash of battle,
they began their march. Meanwhile, aids-de-camp galloped along the
lines, announcing the arrival of Grouchy, to reanimate the drooping
spirits of the men; for, at last, a doubt of victory was breaking upon
the minds of those who never before, in the most adverse hour of
fortune, deemed _his_ star could set that led them on to glory.

"They are coming: the attack will be made on the centre, my lord," said
Lord Fitzroy Somerset, as he directed his glass upon the column.
Scarcely had he spoke when the telescope fell from his hand, as his arm,
shattered by a French bullet, fell motionless to his side.

"I see it," was the cool reply of the Duke, as he ordered the Guards to
deploy into line, and lie down behind the ridge, which now the French
artillery had found the range of, and were laboring at with their guns.
In front of them the fifty-second, seventy-first, and ninety-fifth were
formed; the artillery, stationed above and partly upon the road, loaded
with grape, and waited but the word to open.

It was an awful, a dreadful moment: the Prussian cannon thundered on our
left; but so desperate was the French resistance, they made but little
progress: the dark columns of the Guard had now commenced the ascent,
and the artillery ceased their fire as the bayonets of the grenadiers
showed themselves upon the slope. Then began that tremendous cheer from
right to left of our line which those who heard never can forget. It was
the impatient, long-restrained burst of unslaked vengeance. With the
instinct which valor teaches, they knew the hour of trial was come; and
that wild cry flew from rank to rank, echoing from the blood-stained
walls of Hougoumont to the far-off valley of La Papelotte. "They come!
they come!" was the cry; and the shout of "_Vive l'Empereur!_" mingled
with the outburst of the British line.

Under an overwhelming shower of grape, to which succeeded a charge of
cavalry of the Imperial Guard, the head of Ney's column fired its volley
and advanced with the bayonet. The British artillery now opened at half
range, and although the plunging fire scathed and devastated the dark
ranks of the Guards, on they came,--Ney himself, on foot, at their head.
Twice the leading division of that gallant column turned completely
round, as the withering fire wasted and consumed them; but they were
resolved to win.

Already they had gained the crest of the hill, and the first line of the
British were falling back before them. The artillery closes up; the
flanking fire from the guns upon the road opens upon them; the head of
their column breaks like a shell; the Duke seizes the moment, and
advances on foot towards the ridge.

"Up, Guards, and at them!" he cried.

The hour of triumph and vengeance had arrived. In a moment the Guards
were on their feet; one volley was poured in; the bayonets were brought
to the charge; they closed upon the enemy: then was seen the most
dreadful struggle that the history of all war can present. Furious with
long restrained passion, the guards rushed upon the leading divisions;
the seventy-first, and ninety-fifth, and twenty-sixth overlapped them on
the flanks. Their generals fell thickly on every side; Michel, Jamier,
and Mallet are killed: Friant lies wounded upon the ground; Ney, his
dress pierced and ragged with balls, shouts still to advance; but the
leading files waver; they fall back; the supporting divisions thicken;
confusion, panic succeeds; the British press down; the cavalry come
galloping up to their assistance; and, at last, pell-mell, overwhelmed
and beaten, the French fall back upon the Old Guard. This was the
decisive moment of the day;--the Duke closed his glass, as he said:

"The field is won. Order the whole line to advance."

On they came, four deep, and poured like a torrent from the height.

"Let the Life Guards charge them," said the Duke; but every aid-de-camp
on his staff was wounded, and I myself brought the order to Lord
Uxbridge.

Lord Uxbridge had already anticipated his orders, and bore down with
four regiments of heavy cavalry upon the French centre. The Prussian
artillery thundered upon their flank, and at their rear. The British
bayonet was in their front; while a panic fear spread through their
ranks, and the cry "_Sauve qui peut!_" resounded on all sides. In vain
Ney, the bravest of the brave; in vain Soult, Bertrand, Gourgaud, and
Labedoyere, burst from the broken disorganized mass, and called on them
to stand fast. A battalion of the Old Guard, with Cambronne at their
head, alone obeyed the summons: forming into square, they stood between
the pursuers and their prey, offering themselves a sacrifice to the
tarnished honor of their arms: to the order to surrender, they answered
with a cry of defiance; and, as our cavalry, flushed and elated with
victory, rode round their bristling ranks, no quailing look, no craven
spirit was there. The Emperor himself endeavored to repair the disaster;
he rode with lightening speed hither and thither, commanding, ordering,
nay imploring too; but already the night was falling, the confusion
became each moment more inextricable, and the effort was a fruitless
one. A regiment of the Guards, and two batteries were in reserve behind
Planchenoit; he threw them rapidly into position; but the overwhelming
impulse of flight drove the mass upon them, and they were carried away
upon the torrent of the beaten army. No sooner did the Emperor see this
his last hope desert him, than he dismounted from his horse, and,
drawing his sword, threw himself into a square, which the first regiment
of chasseurs of the Old Guard had formed with a remnant of the
battalion; Jerome followed him, as he called out:

"You are right, brother: here should perish all who bear the name of
Buonaparte."

The same moment the Prussian light artillery rend the ranks asunder, and
the cavalry charge down upon the scattered fragments. A few of his
staff, who never left him, place the Emperor upon a horse,--and fly.

       *       *       *       *       *


          _Wellington,
    Thy great work is but begun!
    With quick seed his end is rife
    Whose long tale of conquering strife
    Shows no triumph like his life
          Lost and won._

        DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.--1828-1882.
            _On Wellington's Funeral, Nov. 18th, 1852._




LX. THE DIVER.

EDWARD BULWER, LORD LYTTON.--1805-1873.

_Translated from the German of Schiller_.


    "O where is the knight or the squire so bold
      As to dive to the howling Charybdis below?--
    I cast in the whirlpool a goblet of gold,
      And o'er it already the dark waters flow;
    Whoever to me may the goblet bring,
    Shall have for his guerdon that gift of his king."

    He spoke, and the cup from the terrible steep,
      That, rugged and hoary, hung over the verge
    Of the endless and measureless world of the deep,
      Swirl'd into the maelstrom that madden'd the surge.
    "And where is the diver so stout to go--
    I ask ye again--to the deep below?"

    And the knights and the squires that gather'd around,
      Stood silent--and fix'd on the ocean their eyes;
    They look'd on the dismal and savage profound,
      And the peril chill'd back every thought of the prize.
    And thrice spoke the monarch: "The cup to win,
    Is there never a wight who will venture in?"

    And all as before heard in silence the king,
      Till a youth with an aspect unfearing but gentle,
    'Mid the tremulous squires stepp'd out from the ring,
      Unbuckling his girdle, and doffing his mantle;
    And the murmuring crowd, as they parted asunder,
    On the stately boy cast their looks of wonder.

    As he strode to the marge of the summit, and gave
      One glance on the gulf of that merciless main,
    Lo! the wave that for ever devours the wave,
      Casts roaringly up the Charybdis again:
    And, as with the swell of the far thunder-boom,
    Rushes foamingly forth from the heart of the gloom.

    And it bubbles and seethes, and it hisses and roars,
      As when fire is with water commix'd and contending,
    And the spray of its wrath to the welkin up-soars,
      And flood upon flood hurries on, never ending;
    And it never _will_ rest, nor from travail be free,
    Like a sea that is laboring the birth of a sea.

    Yet, at length, comes a lull o'er the mighty commotion,
      And dark through the whiteness, and still through the swell,
    The whirlpool cleaves downward and downward in ocean
      A yawning abyss, like the pathway to hell;
    The stiller and darker the farther it goes,
    Suck'd into that smoothness the breakers repose.

    The youth gave his trust to his Maker! Before
      That path through the riven abyss closed again,
    Hark! a shriek from the gazers that circle the shore,--
      And, behold! he is whirl'd in the grasp of the main!
    And o'er him the breakers mysteriously roll'd,
    And the giant-mouth closed on the swimmer so bold.

    All was still on the height, save the murmur that went
      From the grave of the deep, sounding hollow and fell,
    Or save when the tremulous, sighing lament
      Thrill'd from lip unto lip, "Gallant youth, fare thee well!"
    More hollow and more wails the deep on the ear,--
    More dread and more dread grows suspense in its fear.

    --If thou shouldst in those waters thy diadem fling,
      And cry, "Who may find it shall win it and wear";
    God wot, though the prize were the crown of a king,
      A crown at such hazard were valued too dear.
    For never shall lips of the living reveal
    What the deeps that howl yonder in terror conceal.

    Oh, many a bark, to that breast grappled fast,
      Has gone down to the fearful and fathomless grave;
    Again, crash'd together the keel and the mast,
      To be seen toss'd aloft in the glee of the wave!--
    Like the growth of a storm ever louder and clearer,
    Grows the roar of the gulf rising nearer and nearer.

    And it bubbles and seethes, and it hisses and roars,
      As when fire is with water commix'd and contending;
    And the spray of its wrath to the welkin up-soars,
      And flood upon flood hurries on, never ending,
    And as with the swell of the far thunder-boom,
    Rushes roaringly forth from the heart of the gloom.

    And, lo! from the heart of that far-floating gloom,
      Like the wing of the cygnet--what gleams on the sea?
    Lo! an arm and a neck glancing up from the tomb!
      Steering stalwart and shoreward: O joy, it is he!
    The left hand is lifted in triumph; behold,
    It waves as a trophy the goblet of gold!

    And he breathed deep, and he breathed long,
      And he greeted the heavenly light of the day.
    They gaze on each other,--they shout as they throng,
      "He lives--lo, the ocean has render'd its prey!
    And safe from the whirlpool, and free from the grave,
    Comes back to the daylight the soul of the brave!"

    And he comes, with the crowd in their clamor and glee;
      And the goblet his daring has won from the water
    He lifts to the king as he sinks on his knee
      And the king from her maidens has beckon'd his daughter.
    She pours to the boy the bright wine which they bring,
    And thus spoke the diver; "Long life to the King!

    "Happy they whom the rose-hues of daylight rejoice,
      The air and the sky that to mortals are given!
    May the horror below nevermore find a voice,--
      Nor man stretch too far the wide mercy of Heaven!
    Nevermore,--nevermore may he lift from the sight
    The veil which is woven with terror and night!

    "Quick brightening like lightning the ocean rush'd o'er me,
      Wild floating, borne down fathom-deep from the day;
    Till a torrent rush'd out on the torrents that bore me,
      And doubled the tempest that whirl'd me away.
    Vain, vain was my struggle,--the circle had won me,
    Round and round in its dance the mad element spun me.

    "From the deep then I call'd upon God, and He heard me;
      In the dread of my need, He vouchsafed to mine eye
    A rock jutting out from the grave that interr'd me;
      I sprung there, I clung there,--and death pass'd me by.
    And, lo! where the goblet gleam'd through the abyss,
    By a coral reef saved from the far Fathomless.

    "Below, at the foot of that precipice drear,
      Spread the gloomy and purple and pathless Obscure!
    A silence of horror that slept on the ear,
      That the eye more appall'd might the horror endure;
    Salamander, snake, dragon--vast reptiles that dwell
    In the deep--coil'd about the grim jaws of their hell.

    "Dark crawl'd, glided dark, the unspeakable swarms,
      Clump'd together in masses, misshapen and vast;
    Here clung and here bristled the fashionless forms;
      Here the dark-moving bulk of the hammer-fish pass'd;
    And, with teeth grinning white, and a menacing motion,
    Went the terrible shark,--the hyena of ocean.

    "There I hung, and the awe gather'd icily o'er me,
      So far from the earth, where man's help there was none!
    The one human thing, with the goblins before me--
      Alone--in a loneness so ghastly--ALONE!
    Deep under the reach of the sweet living breath,
    And begirt with the broods of the desert of Death.

    "Methought, as I gazed through the darkness, that now
      IT saw--a dread hundred-limb'd creature--its prey!
    And darted, devouring; I sprang from the bough
      Of the coral, and swept on the horrible way;
    And the whirl of the mighty wave seized me once more,
    It seized me to save me, and dash to the shore."

    On the youth gazed the monarch, and marvell'd: quoth he,
      "Bold diver, the goblet I promised is thine;
    And this ring I will give, a fresh guerdon to thee--
      Never jewels more precious shone up from the mine--
    If thou'lt bring me fresh tidings, and venture again,
    To say what lies hid in the _innermost_ main."

    Then out spake the daughter in tender emotion:
      "Ah! father, my father, what more can there rest?
    Enough of this sport with the pitiless ocean:
      He has serv'd thee as none would, thyself hast confest.
    If nothing can slake thy wild thirst of desire,
    Let thy knights put to shame the exploit of the squire!"

    The king seized the goblet, he swung it on high,
      And whirling, it fell in the roar of the tide;
    "But bring back that goblet again to my eye,
      And I'll hold thee the dearest that rides by my side;
    And thine arms shall embrace as thy bride, I decree,
    The maiden whose pity now pleadeth for thee."

    And Heaven, as he listen'd, spoke out from the space,
      And the hope that makes heroes shot flame from his eyes;
    He gazed on the blush in that beautiful face--
      It pales--at the feet of her father she lies!
    How priceless the guerdon!--a moment--a breath--
    And headlong he plunges to life and to death!

    They hear the loud surges sweep back in their swell,
      Their coming the thunder-sound heralds along!
    Fond eyes yet are tracking the spot where he fell.
      They come, the wild waters, in tumult and throng,
    Roaring up to the cliff,--roaring back as before,
    But no wave ever brings the lost youth to the shore!




LXI. THE PLAGUE OF LOCUSTS.

CARDINAL NEWMAN.--1801-

_From_ CALLISTA.


Juba's finger was directed to a spot where, amid the thick foliage, the
gleam of a pool or of a marsh was visible. The various waters round
about, issuing from the gravel, or drained from the nightly damps, had
run into a hollow, filled with the decaying vegetation of former years.
Its banks were bordered with a deep, broad layer of mud, a transition
substance between the rich vegetable matter which it once had been, and
the multitudinous world of insect life which it was becoming. A cloud or
mist at this time was hanging over it, high in air. A harsh and shrill
sound, a whizzing or a chirping, proceeded from that cloud to the ear of
the attentive listener. What these indications portended was plain....

The plague of locusts, one of the most awful visitations to which the
countries included in the Roman empire were exposed, extended from the
Atlantic to Ethiopia, from Arabia to India, and from the Nile and Red
Sea to Greece and the north of Asia Minor. Instances are recorded in
history of clouds of the devastating insect crossing the Black Sea to
Poland, and the Mediterranean to Lombardy. It is as numerous in its
species as it is wide in its range of territory. Brood follows brood,
with a sort of family likeness, yet with distinct attributes. It wakens
into existence and activity as early as the month of March; but
instances are not wanting, as in our present history, of its appearance
as late as June. Even one flight comprises myriads upon myriads passing
imagination, to which the drops of rain or the sands of the sea are the
only fit comparison; and hence it is almost a proverbial mode of
expression in the East, by way of describing a vast invading army, to
liken it to the locusts. So dense are they, when upon the wing, that it
is no exaggeration to say that they hide the sun, from which
circumstance indeed their name in Arabic is derived. And so ubiquitous
are they when they have alighted on the earth, that they simply cover or
clothe its surface.

This last characteristic is stated in the sacred account of the plagues
of Egypt, where their faculty of devastation is also mentioned. The
corrupting fly and the bruising and prostrating hail preceded them in
that series of visitations, but _they_ came to do the work of ruin more
thoroughly. For not only the crops and fruits, but the foliage of the
forest itself, nay, the small twigs and the bark of the trees are the
victims of their curious and energetic rapacity. They have been known
