
Hamilton looked, as he was, seriously annoyed. He did not remember the
expression that had given so much offence, and was quite at a loss to
understand the mystery:--he looked from one to the other for explanation;
at one time inclined to walk away as proudly as Trevannion could have
done; at another, his more moderate feelings triumphing, urged him into
an inquiry.

"I really cannot understand you," he said, at length; "do explain
yourself. If I have done any thing to offend you, let me know what
it is, and, if reasonable, I am willing to apologize."

Trevannion sneered. "Apologies can do little good--eh, Norman?"

"If you know what this is, Norman," said Hamilton, "I must beg you
to enlighten me."

"I have no business to interfere," said Norman, carelessly.

"What a tragedy scene! What's the matter?" cried Reginald Mortimer,
who came up at the moment. "You lazy-bones of a Louis! where are you?"

"The matter is simply this," said Frank Digby: "Norman has heard from
a veracious source that Mr. Hamilton once said, in confidence (between
you and me, you know), that the reason he retained Mr. Philip Trevannion
in the rank of first bosom-friend, was because he was too lazy to look
out for one better suited to his tastes: consequently, as Mr. Trevannion
can aver that Mr. Hamilton never confided this matter to him, it is
certain that some one has betrayed confidence reposed in him--oh, yes!
oh, yes!"

"What a fuss about a nonsensical report!" exclaimed Reginald.
"Do you believe it?"

"Does he deny it?" said Trevannion, tuning to Hamilton.

Hamilton's color rose; and, after a little pause, in which he carefully
considered what he had said, he replied, "No, I do not deny having said
something like this one day when Trevannion and I had fallen out; but
how much it was more than a momentary fit of anger our long friendship
ought to decide. Trevannion, we have been friends too long for such a
silly thing as this to separate us. I am very sorry it should ever have
escaped my lips; but if every thing we say in a moment of impatience and
vexation were repeated and minded, there would be very little friendship
in the world. Come, Trevannion, shake hands, and forget it for auld lang
syne, as I will do when any one brings such a tale to me."

As Hamilton spoke, his eye rested on Norman, fired with indignation,
and lighted a second on the principal offender, but no longer, for he
did not wish to draw Louis into notice.

"It may seem a little nonsensical matter to you, Hamilton," said
Trevannion, putting his hand behind him; "but these little things
exhibit more than the greatest professions. I am not too lazy to
cure myself of old habits, if you are."

"I never make professions," said Hamilton, proudly; "and I have done."

He was turning away, when a sudden motion from Jones arrested him.
Jones had been standing silently by Trevannion, and now, leaping over
a desk, seized Louis, and dragged him in the centre of the group, to
the great astonishment of both himself and his brother, exclaiming:

"Here's the offender, the tell-tale, the hypocrite, the meek good boy,
so anxious of Ferrers' reputation!"

"What do you want with me?" exclaimed Louis angrily, struggling to free
himself from his captor.

"Hands off! Leave him alone, Jones," shouted Reginald. "What's all
this about?"

"Do let him go," said Hamilton. "Can't you let him alone?"

"He's the traitor, Hamilton."

Hamilton could not deny it, for it could have been no one else.

"Well, it is past, and the punishment he has in his own feelings will
be enough," he said. "Let him alone."

"Louis, _you_ haven't been telling tales and making mischief?"
cried Reginald.

"I don't know," said Louis. "I said something to Mrs. Paget, I believe--I
didn't know there was any harm. Hamilton didn't say he didn't want any
thing said about it."

"_Didn't say!_" echoed Jones, scornfully.

Hamilton's look was more in reproach than anger. Louis felt struck to
the heart with shame and anger; but so much had he lately been nursed
in conceit and self-sufficiency, that he drove away the better impulse;
and, instead of at once acknowledging himself in the wrong and begging
pardon, he stood still, endeavoring to look unconcerned, repeating,
"I didn't mean any harm."

"Oh, Louis!" exclaimed Reginald, reproachfully, "I didn't think
you could."

"Let the boy go, Jones," said Hamilton, trying to remove the grasp
from Louis' shoulders.

"Not so fast, an't please your majesty," said Jones: "I like to see
hypocrites unmasked. Here, gentlemen, forsooth, here in this soonified
youth, the anxious warden of Ferrers' reputation, you see the young
gentleman who not only tells the story, but gives the name of the
party concerned to a dear, good, gossiping soul--"

"Gently, gently there, Jones," remarked Norman.

"A gossiping old soul," repeated Jones, "who'd have the greatest
delight in retailing the news, with decorations and additions, all
over the kingdom with the greatest possible speed."

"I don't believe a word of that, Jones," said Reginald.
"It is impossible!"

"What! is it impossible?" asked Jones, giving Louis a shake.

"What business have you to question me?"

"Did you?" repeated Jones, with another shake.

"Fair questioning, Jones," cried Reginald. "No coercion, if you please."

"Hold him back, Mason, if you please. Norman, will you hold him back?
Now, Louis, if you don't answer I'll give you a thrashing."

"You and I are friends, Mortimer," said Salisbury, jumping off the
desk and coming close up to Reginald; "but I mean to have fair play
in this matter. He shan't be hurt--but, if you interfere till they've
done questioning him, I shall help them to hold you back."

"Don't meddle with it, Salisbury," said Hamilton; "it's nobody's affair."

"Nobody's affair, indeed!" exclaimed Frank. "Here we've been making a
_cher ami_, a _rara avis_, or something or other of this boy, because he
professed to be something superior to us all--and now, when we find
he has been telling tales of all of us, we are told it's _nobody's
affair_. He's been obtaining credit upon false pretences. We're the
strongest party, and we'll do what we please."

Reginald restrained himself with a violent effort, and Jones proceeded.

"Now, sir, answer directly--is this impossible?"

Louis felt very much inclined to cry, but he replied without tears
very reluctantly, "Mrs. Paget would make me tell her some things--she
had heard almost all from others. I don't know how the name slipped
out; I didn't mean to tell, I am sure."

"WHAT?" said Hamilton; "you tell _that_ story, Louis!"

Louis felt that Hamilton despised him; and perhaps, had they known
all the circumstances relative to the Heronhurst disclosure, the clamor
would not have been so great; so much evil is done by repeating a small
matter, exaggerated, as these repetitions usually are, according to the
feelings of the speaker. But in every case now bearing so unexpectedly
down upon him, had Louis, thoughtless of himself, been less anxious for
admiration, he would not have committed himself; had he not attracted
Norman's attention by his folly and conceit, the circumstance of his
having disclosed the name of the offender, at Heronhurst, would, most
probably, not only have been unknown to his school-fellows, but to
Norman also.

"Oh, Hamilton, I didn't tell all the story!" he exclaimed.

"No, only just enough to appear magnanimous," said Frank.

"Seeing that such is the case," continued Jones, "it cannot be a
matter of great astonishment, that the same meek crocodile should
also deliver to the same tender mercy various particulars of minor
import respecting sundry others of his school-fellows; among which,
we discover the private conversation of an intimate and too indulgent
friend. Upon my word, young gentleman, I've a great mind to make you
kiss Ferrers' shoes. Where's Ferrers?"

Jones turned round with his victim towards the door, perceiving that
Ferrers was not in the room, but neither Hamilton nor Reginald would
permit matters to proceed further.

"Let him go," said Norman; "it is not worth while taking so much trouble
about it. You know whom you have to deal with, and will be careful."

"Thanks to you," said Hamilton in a tone of the most cutting irony.

He released Louis, and stood still till he saw him safely in the
playground, whither he was followed by the hisses and exclamations
of his inquisitors, and then turned in the opposite direction to
the class-room.

"Mr. Hamilton!" exclaimed Norman, "may I ask what your words meant
just now?"

"You may," said Hamilton, turning round and eyeing the speaker from
head to foot, with the most contemptuous indifference. "You are at
liberty to put whatever construction you please upon them; and perhaps
it will save trouble if I inform you at once that I never fight."

"Then, sir," said Norman, whose anger was rising beyond control,
"you should weigh your words a little more cautiously, if you are
so cowardly."

Hamilton deigned no reply, and proceeded to the class-room, where
he shut himself up, leaving the field clear for Reginald, who,
before long, was engaged in a pitched battle with Norman.

Louis retreated to his play-fellows who were yet unconscious of
his disgrace with the higher powers; and, after playing for a little
while, wandered about by himself, too uneasy and sick at heart to
amuse himself. He found now, alas! that he was alone; that he had
lost all pleasure in holy things; and, conscious of his falling away,
he was now afraid to pray,--foolish boy. And thus it is--Satan tempts
us to do wrong, and then tempts us to doubt God's willingness to
forgive us, in order that, being without grace and strength, we may
fall yet deeper.

As Louis wandered along, he heard sounds familiar enough to him,
which portended a deadly fray, and when he came upon the combatants,
he discovered that one of them was his own brother. He knew it was
useless to attempt to stop the fight, and he wandered away again,
and cried a little, for he thought that something would happen, and
he and Reginald would be placed together in some unpleasant situation;
and he dreaded Dr. Wilkinson's hearing of either affair.

I must be excused for stopping my story to remark here, that in this
world, it is certain that we have great influence on one another, and
that for this influence we are responsible. Had Louis' school-fellows
acted more kindly, endeavoring to set before him the fault of tattling,
the effect would have been to raise a feeling of gratitude in his mind,
which would have been far more effectual in preventing the recurrence
of the fault, than the plan of repudiation they had adopted. Had they,
even after a day or two's penance, given him an opening into their
good graces, he would not have felt, as he did, that he had lost his
character, and it was "no use caring about it," and so gone from bad
to worse, till his name was associated with those of the worst boys
in the school. It may be said, How can school-boys be expected to have
so much consideration? but this a school-boy may do. He may mentally
put himself in the position of the delinquent, and considering how he
would wish to be treated, act accordingly.

Every thing seemed to go wrong with Louis that day. The Herodotus
that Hamilton was to have heard, was scarcely looked at; and Louis
lost two or three places in his class. Hamilton never noticed him,
and even Reginald was offended with him. Louis tried to brave it out,
and sung in a low tone, whistled, and finally, when he was roughly
desired to be quiet, walked into the school-room, and finished his
evening with Casson and Churchill.




CHAPTER XIX

  "Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good
   manners."--1 Cor. xv. 32.


For the next few days Louis was regularly sent to Coventry, and
though Hamilton took no part in any thing that was said against him,
his manner had so entirely changed, and his tone was so cold when he
addressed or answered him, that Louis needed no further demonstration
to feel assured of the great difference in the feeling with which he
was regarded. Clifton alone remained unchanged, but he was so much
absorbed in his dear classics that he had hardly time to notice that
any thing was the matter: and as Reginald, thoroughly disappointed,
was also highly displeased with his brother, Louis was either thrown
entirely upon his own resources, or driven to seek the society of the
lower school; and, as he was in a very unhappy state, and could not
bear to be left alone, he naturally chose the latter. For the first
two days he struggled to assume an independent air, and, changing his
place of his own accord from Hamilton to Clifton, talked incessantly,
though nearly unheeded by the latter, to show how perfectly well able
he was to do his own business without assistance. Hamilton missed him,
and glanced down the table with a gaze of mingled disappointment and
displeasure. A few words from him might have recalled Louis, but they
were not spoken, and the only impression conveyed to the poor truant
was, that the friend he most cared about, in common with the rest,
considered him beneath his notice.

The third evening some affair was to be taken into consideration, of
which the proceedings were intended to be kept very secret. Louis was
sitting by Clifton, when Trevannion, who was to open the business,
entered with a folded paper and a pencil in one hand, and took his
place at the head of the long table. He looked down the table, and
his eyes meeting Louis', he laid down his pencil, and taking up a
book, began, or pretended to begin, to read.

"Hey! What's that, Trevannion?" asked Salisbury. "Are we to be prepared
with a choice quotation from Thucydides, or is it a hint that we are to
remember duty first and pleasure afterwards?"

"Rather," said Frank, "that some people have long ears and tongues."

"Perhaps," said Trevannion, looking over the top of his book,
"Louis Mortimer will have the civility to hasten his studies
this evening, as we have pressing business to perform."

"And why need I prevent it?" said Louis, crimsoning.

"Simply for this reason," said Trevannion, "that we do not choose
to have every thing that passes our lips this night carried over the
country; therefore, Master Louis, we can dispense with your company."

"Without so much circumlocution, either," said Jones. "We like your
room better than your company just now, Louis Mortimer; so please
to decamp."

"Evaporate!" said Meredith.

"I have my lessons to learn," said Louis.

"Is there any moral or physical impossibility in your lessons being
learned in the school-room?" asked Smith.

"I don't choose."

"Don't choose!" repeated Jones. "We'll see about that. Do you choose
to go quietly, or to be turned out, eh?"

"You have no right to do it," exclaimed Louis. "I have as much right
to be here as you."

"Ho, ho!" exclaimed Jones. "You'll find might is right here, my pretty
young gentleman. Salisbury, will you have the kindness to put the door
between us and his impertinence?"

"The procacity of the juvenile is progressing," remarked Frank.

Hamilton was not in the room, and there was no one to assist
Reginald in his resistance to the numbers by whom he was soon
overpowered, and in a few minutes, in spite of his exertions,
he found himself turned out with Louis, whom he had vainly
endeavored to defend.

Boiling with fury, Reginald at first attempted to kick open the door,
and then, being called to his senses by the interference of the usher
in the room, walked into the playground, and getting in at one of the
class-room windows, opened the door to Louis before his antagonists
had recovered from their surprise.

There was another scuffle, which was at length settled by the usher's
taking Louis' side, and desiring him to go in; but Louis found the study
so thoroughly uncomfortable, that in a few minutes he returned to the
school-room, and seated himself, in a restless, idle mood, by Casson.

The idle conversation of an idle, uprincipled boy is sure to be of a
hurtful description, and after Casson had heard Louis' grievances, and
condoled with him in the fashion of encouraging him in all that was bad,
the discourse fell upon Casson's last school, and many things Louis heard
and learned of which he had remained, till then, in blissful ignorance.
One or two ushers usually sat with the boys in the evening. One of these
was an elderly man, uncouth and ungainly in person, and possessed of a
very unfortunate temper, that was irritated in every possible manner by
those whose duty it was to have soothed the infirmities and considered
the trials of one whose life was spent in their service. Louis had felt
a great pity for the poor solitary man who never seemed to have a friend,
and now and then had spared a few minutes of his play-time to talk to
him, and would ask to be allowed to cut the pencil that was employed so
constantly in ruling the ciphering books; and when his flowers were in
bloom, a half-open rosebud was usually presented to Mr. Garthorpe to
put in his button-hole on Sunday morning. The poor usher loved Louis
as warmly as any one else in that house, nor would he have believed
that "that good lad," as he called him, could have spent a great part
of an evening in laughing at practical jokes played off on him, though
Louis could not yet be prevailed upon to take part in them.

The next few days were spent as might be expected. Louis had now put
himself under the guidance of some of the worst boys in the school,
and the consequence was (for the downward path is easy) the neglect of
all that was good, and the connivance at, if not actual participation
in all that was wrong. His place was lost, his lessons so ill prepared,
that, as formerly, he was kept in day after day, and Casson, his chief
adviser, persuaded him that Mr. Danby was unjust and tyrannical, and
instigated him to impertinence as a retaliation. Louis was miserable,
for miserable must he be who sins against light.

It was not long before Dr. Wilkinson became aware of a change in Louis'
conduct, and he took an early opportunity of speaking very seriously to
him on the subject. Louis was very humble, and longed to throw open all
his troubles to his master, the only person who had spoken kindly and
sensibly to him since his disgrace, yet foolishly afraid to declare the
whole truth to him, especially as, by the doctor's recommendation to him
to follow the example of his friends Hamilton and Clifton, he found that
his master was not aware that Hamilton was so much displeased with him.
Unhappily, Dr. Wilkinson did not know of Louis' intimacy with Casson,
nor had Casson been long enough with him to enable him to know more of
him than as an idle, troublesome dunce. The doctor's admonitions were
so far beneficial to Louis, that besides producing decidedly better
behavior for a few days, they were instrumental in restraining him
afterwards from the commission of many things which might have been
