half ago; but there is no doubt that at the end of a day's hard
work, or when you have got to do a long ride in the dark, it is
very comforting."

His efforts to keep the conversation going were not very
successful. The two officers were evidently determined to maintain
the distinction of rank and, saying to himself that they would
probably soon get tired of it, he ceased to attempt to break down
the barrier they insisted upon keeping up. After dinner was over
they lighted their cigars, and then went out and mounted the steps
from the yard to the ramparts.

They were soon joined by the officers from the other casemates and,
separating into groups, strolled up and down, making remarks on the
country round and the town behind them. Fergus had at once left his
fellow prisoners and joined two or three others with whom he had
been previously acquainted, one being a captain of the 3rd Royal
Dragoons.

"You are with Stauffen and Ritzer, are you not, major?" the latter
said. "I have a brother in the same regiment, and so know them. How
do you get on with them?"

"At present they are rather stiff and distant, and insist upon
treating me as the senior officer; which is absurd when we are
prisoners, and they are both some fifteen years older than I am. I
detest that sort of thing. Of course in a great garrison town like
Berlin or Dresden the strict rules of discipline must be observed.
I think they are carried altogether too far, but as it is the
custom of the service there is nothing to be said about it; but
here, as we are all fellows in misfortune, it seems to me simply
ridiculous."

"It becomes a second nature after a time," the officer said. "The
two with me are both lieutenants, and I should feel a little
surprised if they did not pay me the usual respect."

"Yes, but then you are the older man, and would naturally take the
lead, in any case. To me, I can assure you, it is most disagreeable
to have men much older than myself insisting upon treating me as
their superior officer; especially as, their regiment having only
recently joined us, I suppose they set me down as some young
favourite or other, who has got his promotion over the heads of
deserving officers because he is related to someone in power."

"They ought to know that there is not much promotion to be gained
in that way in our army, major. The king is the last man who would
promote anyone for that cause. Why, Schwerin's son has served for
four years and is still a cornet in our regiment! No doubt the king
would be glad to promote him if he specially distinguished himself,
but as he has had no opportunity of doing so, he will probably work
his way up in the regiment as everyone else does."

Two or three more officers came up and joined the party, and
presently Captain Ronsfeldt strolled away and joined another group.
It was not long before he engaged Stauffen and Ritzer in
conversation.

"You have Major Drummond in with you, have you not?"

"Yes," Stauffen said shortly. "Who is the young fellow, do you know
him?"

"Yes, he first joined our regiment as junior cornet. It was less
than two years and a half ago. I was senior lieutenant at the time,
and now I am pretty well up on the list of captains, thanks to the
work we have done and the vacancies that death has made."

"And that boy has gone over your head, and is now walking about as
a major, with the order on his breast. It is enough to make one
sick of soldiering. Who is he related to?"

"He is related to Marshal Keith," Ronsfeldt said quietly.

"Ah! That explains it."

"I don't think you quite understand the case, Stauffen. Certainly
you don't, if you think that there has been any favouritism. I
don't think anyone ever heard of Frederick promoting a man out of
his turn, save for merit; and I suppose there is no one in the army
who has won his rank more worthily, and who is more generally
recognized as deserving it. I have never heard a single word raised
against the honours he has received.

"When he rides through the camp men nudge each other and say, 'That
young fellow in staff uniform is Major Drummond;' and there is not
a soldier but tries to put a little extra respect into his salute."

"Are you joking, Ronsfeldt?" Ritzer asked in astonishment.

"I was never less so, Ritzer;" and he then gave them an account of
the manner in which Fergus had obtained his promotion.

The two officers were silent when Ronsfeldt concluded.

"We have made fools of ourselves," Stauffen said at last, "and we
must apologize, Ritzer."

"Certainly we must," the other agreed heartily. "It seemed to us
that his trying to make us put aside the respect due to his rank
was a sort of affectation, and really impressed it more
disagreeably upon us. We took him for an upstart favourite; though
we might have known, had we thought of it, that the king never
promotes unduly. Who could possibly have believed that a young
fellow, not yet twenty, I should say, could have so distinguished
himself? It will be a lesson to us both not to judge by
appearances."

The day was cold and cheerless, and after an hour spent on the
rampart most of the party were glad to return to the casemates.
Fergus was one of the last to go back. To his disgust the two
officers rose and saluted formally, as he came in.

"We wish," Captain Stauffen said, "to express to you our deep
regret at the unworthy way in which we received your request, this
morning, to lay aside the distinction of rank while we are
prisoners here. We were both under an error. Our regiments having
only joined from Berlin a short time before the king marched with
us to Hochkirch, we were altogether ignorant of the manner in which
you had gained your rank, and had thought that it was the result of
favouritism. We now know your highly distinguished services, and
how worthily you have gained each step; and we both sincerely hope
that you will overlook our boorish conduct, and will endeavour to
forget the manner in which we received your kindly advances."

"Say no more about it, gentlemen," Fergus replied heartily. "I have
had luck, and availed myself of it, as assuredly you would have
done had the same opportunities occurred to you. I can quite
understand that it seemed to you monstrous that, at my age, I
should be your senior officer. I feel it myself. I am often
inclined to regret that I should thus have been unduly pushed up.

"However, let us say no more about it. I do hope that we shall be
as three good comrades together; and that, within this casemate at
any rate, there will be no question whatever of rank, and that you
will call me Drummond, as I shall call you both by your names.

"Now, let us shake hands over the bargain. Let us draw our stools
round the stove and have a comfortable talk.

"I have been speaking to Major Leiberkuhn about ordering things. He
tells me that the commandant says that one list must be made. On
this the orders of each of the casemates must be put down
separately. A sergeant will go out every day with it. Money must be
given to him to cover the full extent of the orders. He will return
the change, each day, when he hands in the articles required.

"I have ordered some tobacco, some better cigars than these, and
three bottles of good Hungarian wine. The sergeant is going in half
an hour, so we shall be able to enjoy our chat this evening. I
always take the precaution of carrying twenty golden Fredericks,
sewn up in the lining of my tunic. It comes in very useful, in case
of an emergency of this kind."

"I am afraid that neither of us has imitated your forethought,"
Ritzer said with a laugh. "I have only my last month's pay in my
pocket, and Stauffen is no better off."

"Ah, well! With thirty pounds among us, we shall do very well,"
Fergus said. "We must be careful because, if we do make our escape,
we shall want money to get disguises."

"You are not really in earnest, Drummond," Stauffen said, "in what
you say about escaping?"

"I am quite in earnest about getting away, if I see a chance;
though I admit that, at present, the matter seems a little
difficult."

"Perhaps if you will tell us about your escape from Spielberg, we
shall be able to get a hint from it."

They now drew up their seats round the stove, and Fergus told them
in detail the manner of his escape, omitting only the name of the
noblemen at Vienna who had assisted him.

"It was excellently done," Ritzer said warmly. "Your making off in
that Austrian uniform, at the only moment when such a thing could
be done, was certainly a masterly stroke."

"So was the taking of the post horses," Stauffen agreed, "and your
getting a disguise from the postmaster. I should like to have seen
the Austrian's look of surprise, when he got his uniform back
again.

"I am afraid that your adventures do not afford us any hint for
getting away from here. Even you will admit that three Austrian
uniforms could not be secured, and the tale by which you procured
the post horses would hardly hold good in the case of three."

"No, if we get away at all it must be done in an entirely different
manner. The place is not so difficult to get out of as Spielberg
was, for with patience we could certainly manage to cut off the
rivet heads of the bars. But I don't see, at present, how we could
cross this wide moat, with a sentry pacing up and down thirty feet
above us; nor climb up the brick wall on the other side, without
making a noise. That done, of course we could, on a dark night,
cross the glacis and swim the outer moat. All that accomplished,
the question of disguises will come in. Just at present it is not
very easy to see how that is to be managed.

"Can you swim?"

Both officers replied in the affirmative.

"Well, that is something gained. As to the rest, we need not bother
about it, at present. We are not uncomfortable where we are, and if
we get back in time for the next campaign, that is all that really
matters."

The others laughed at the confident tone in which he spoke, but
after hearing the details of the prior attempt, it seemed to them
that their companion was capable of accomplishing what almost
seemed to be impossibilities. They had, they knew, very slight
chance of being exchanged so long as the war lasted. A few general
officers, or others whose families possessed great influence, were
occasionally exchanged; but it was evidently the policy of Austria
to retain all prisoners. In the first place she desired to reduce
Frederick's fighting force, and in the second, the number of
Austrians taken had been very much larger than that of the
Prussians captured, and the support of some fifteen or twenty
thousand prisoners of war added to the drain on Frederick's
resources. Three campaigns had passed without materially altering
the position of the combatants, and as many more might elapse
before the war came to an end. Indeed, there was no saying how long
it might last, and the prospect was so unpleasant that the two
officers were inclined to run a very considerable risk in
attempting to obtain freedom.

A week later the snow began to fall heavily, and the moat froze.

"There is no getting across that without being seen, even on the
darkest night," Fergus said, as he walked up and down the rampart
with his two companions, "unless the sentry was sound asleep; and
in such weather as this, that is the last thing likely to happen.
Unless something altogether unexpected occurs, we shall have to
postpone action till spring comes.

"Now that we have bought some books we can pass the time away
comfortably. It was a happy thought of Major Leiberkuhn that each
of us should buy one book, so that altogether we have got some
forty between us; which, taking our reading quietly, will last us
for a couple of months. They mayn't be all equally interesting; but
as the sergeant bought them second-hand, at about half a franc a
volume, we can lay in another stock without hurting ourselves,
whenever we choose."

A few days later they bought several sets of draughts, chessmen,
and dominoes, and a dozen packs of cards. This had been arranged at
a general meeting, held in the major's casemate. Strict rules had
been laid down that there should be no playing for money. Several
of the prisoners had had only a few marks in their pockets when
captured.

They agreed to meet at three o'clock, in two of the casemates by
turn, as one would not hold the whole number. This made a great
break in their day. It would have been better if the meeting had
been held in the evening; but the regulation that, during the
winter months, they were locked up at five, prevented this being
adopted. So the cold weather passed not altogether unpleasantly.
The strict rule that every case in which the slightest difference
of opinion arose should, at once, be submitted to the adjudication
of Major Leiberkuhn and the senior officer of the casemate in which
it occurred, effectually prevented all disputes and quarrels over
the cards and other games; and their good fellowship remained,
therefore, unbroken.

In March the sun gained power, the snow and ice began to melt, and
Fergus again began to think how an escape could be effected.

"I can think of only one plan," he said to his two companions, one
evening. "It is clear that it is altogether hopeless to think of
getting out by the door but, as we agreed, it would be possible to
chip off the heads of the rivets, unbar the shutters, and let
ourselves down into the moat. If we were to make our way along at
the foot of the wall, the chance of our being seen by the sentry
above would be very slight; for of course we should choose a night
when the wind was blowing hard, and the water ruffled. In that case
any splash we might make would not be heard.

"Swimming along to the corner of this face of the fort, we would
turn and keep along until we reached the spot where the cut runs to
the river. Crossing the moat to that would be the most dangerous
part of the business, and we ought, if possible, to dive across.
There is a low wall there, and a cheval-de-frise on the top of it.
We should have to get out by the side of that, and then either swim
along the cut, or crawl along the edge of it till we get to the
river.

"Then we must crawl along under the shelter of its banks towards
the town, till we get to a boat hauled up, or swim to one moored a
little way out in the stream. Then we must row up the river for
some distance, and land."

"That all seems possible enough, Drummond," Captain Ritzer said;
"but what about our uniforms?"

"We must leave them behind, and swim in our underclothes. I should
say we should take a couple of suits with us. We could make them up
into bundles, and carry them on our heads while we swim. Of course,
if we take them we shall not be able to dive; but must swim across
the moat to the cut, and trust to the darkness for the sentries not
seeing us. Then, once on board a boat, we could take off our wet
things and put the dry ones on."

"But we can hardly wander about the country in shirts and drawers,
Drummond," Stauffen suggested.

"Certainly not. My idea is that, as soon as we are a mile or two
away, we should either board some boat where we see a light, and
overpower the boatmen and take their clothes, if they will not sell
them to us; or else land at some quiet house, and rig ourselves
out. There should be no great difficulty about that. Once rigged
out we must make south, for as soon as our escape is found out the
next morning, cavalry will scour the country in every direction on
this side of the river, and give notice of our escape at every town
and village.

"After lying up quiet for a time, we must journey at least fifty
miles west. We might make for Munich if we like; or strike the Isar
at Landshut, and then work up through Ratisbon, and then through
the Fichtel Mountains to Bayreuth, and so into Saxony; or from
Landshut we can cross the Bohmerwald Mountains into Bohemia; or, if
we like, from Munich we can keep west into Wuertemberg, up through
Hesse-Darmstadt and Cassel into Hanover; or, lastly, we can go on
to Mannheim and down the Rhine, and then come round by sea to
Hamburg."

The others laughed.

"It looks a tremendous business, anyhow, Drummond, and I should
never think of attempting it by myself," Ritzer said; "but if you
assure me that you think it will be possible, I am ready to try
it."

"I think that there is every chance of success, Ritzer. I really do
not see why it should fail. Of course there is risk in it, but once
fairly on the other side of the moat, and on the river bank, it
seems comparatively safe. We can see that there are always a lot of
boats moored in the stream, this side of the bridge; and by taking
a small boat, we might put off to one of them and get our change of
clothes, at once bind and gag the crew--there are not likely to be
above two or three of them--give them a piece of gold to pay for
the clothes, and then row straight up the river and land a mile or
two away. That would make it plain sailing.

"Of course we should push the boat off when we landed, and it would
float down past the town before daylight. The chances are that the
boatmen, finding that they are no losers by the affair, would make
no complaint to the authorities; but even if they did, we should be
far beyond their reach by that time. All we have got to do is to
choose a really dark night, with wind and rain.

"The first job to be done is to get the heads off these rivets. I
have examined them carefully. They are roughly done, and I don't
fancy that the iron is very hard; and our knives will, I think,
make a comparatively short job of it."

"We could not work at night," Ritzer said. "The sentry in front
would hear the noise."

"I think of sawing the heads off," Fergus said. "With the help of a
little oil, I fancy the steel will cut through the iron. Yesterday
I tapped the edge of my knife against the edge of the stone
parapet--it is good steel, but very brittle--and I managed to make
a pretty fair saw of it. Tomorrow I will do yours, if you like."

All carried clasp knives for cutting their food with, when serving
in the field. They had oil which they had bought for dressing
salads with, and Fergus at once attacked one of the rivets.

"It cuts," he said, after three or four minutes' work. "Of course
it will be a long job, but we ought to do it in a week. There are
three bars, and if we cut the rivets at one end of each, I have no
doubt we shall be able to turn the bars on the rivets at the other
end."

They relieved each other at short intervals, and worked the greater
part of the night. At the end of that time the head of one of the
rivets was cut almost through.

"We will leave it as it is now," Fergus said. "A quarter of an
hour's work will take it off. As it is, no one would notice what
has been done, unless he inspected it closely."

Greatly encouraged by this success, the others now entered warmly
into his plans. Using his knife instead of a stone, he was able the
next day to convert their knives into much better saws than his own
had been; and the other two rivets were cut in a much shorter time
than the first.

They waited another week and then the wind began to rise, and by
evening half a gale was blowing, and the rain falling heavily.
There was no moon, and the night would be admirably suited for
their purpose. Their supper was brought in at six o'clock. Knowing
that they would not be visited again until the morning, they at
once began work.

As soon as they had finished cutting one rivet they tried the bar,
and their united strength was quite sufficient to bend it far
enough to allow it being withdrawn from the rivet; then, throwing
their weight upon it, it turned upon the bolt at the other end,
until it hung perpendicularly. In another half hour the other two
bars were similarly removed, and the heavy shutters opened. They
were closed again, until their preparations were complete.

First they ate their supper, then sat and talked until nine. Then
they knotted their sheets together, and tied the underclothes into
bundles.

"The Austrian government will be no losers," Fergus laughed. "They
will get three Prussian uniforms, instead of six suits of prison
underclothing. Now, shall I go first, or will one of you?"

"We will go according to rank," Ritzer laughed.

"Very well. Now mind, gentlemen, whatever you do, take the water
quietly. I will wait until you are both down, then we will follow
each other closely, so that we can help one another if necessary. I
can hardly see the water from here; and the sentry, being twice as
far off from it as we are, will see it less. Besides, I think it
likely that they will be standing in their sentry boxes, in such a
rain as this; and I feel confident that we shall get across without
being seen. The river is high, and the opposite wall of the moat is
only a foot above the water, so we shall have no difficulty in
getting out on the other side.

"I have the money sewn in a small bag round my neck. We may as well
take our knives with us. They will help us to tackle the boatmen. I
think that is everything. Now, we will be off."

Fastening the sheet firmly to one of the bars, he swung himself
out, slid down the rope quietly and noiselessly, and entered the
water, which was so cold that it almost took his breath away. He
swam a stroke or two along the wall, and waited until joined by
both his comrades. Their casemate being the end one, they had but
some ten or twelve yards to swim to the angle of the wall.

Another fifty took them to a point facing the cut. Fergus had paced
it on the rampart above, and calculated that each stroke would take
them a yard. It was too dark to see more than the dim line of the
wall on the other side. He waited until the others joined him.

"Are you all right?" he asked, in a low voice.

"Yes, but this cold is frightful."

"We shall soon be out of it," he said. "Wait till I have gone a few
yards, and then follow, one after the other."

The surface of the moat was so ruffled by the wind that Fergus had
little fear of being seen, even if the sentry above was out and
watching; but he felt sure that he would be in his sentry box, and
so swam boldly across. He at once climbed onto the lower wall, and
helped his two companions out. They were completely numbed by the
cold.

"Come along," he said. "We are on the lower side of the cut. Crawl
for a short distance, then we can get up and run, which will be the
best thing for us."

In three minutes they were up on the river bank.

"Now we can change our clothes," he said. "The others will soon get
wet through, but they won't be as cold as these are."

The things were soon stripped off. Each gave himself a rub with one
of the dry shirts, and they were soon dressed in the double suits
and stockings.

"That is better," Fergus said cheerfully. "Now for a run along the
towing path."

A quarter of a mile's run and circulation was restored, and all
felt comparatively comfortable. They had, at the suggestion of
Fergus, wrung out the things they had taken off; and thrown them
over their shoulders, so as to afford some protection against the
rain. They now dropped into a slower pace and, after going for a
mile, they neared the spot where the craft were lying moored in the
river.

