information that would lead to the discovery of the missing Eagle.

Promising himself to deal with the matter even more thoroughly in the
morning, he had at last dismissed his subordinates and retired.  If
Marteau was within the city walls--and it was impossible to see how he
could have got out of the town without a pass after twelve o'clock at
night--he would find him if he had to search every house in the town.
The spirit of the old man was high and aflame.  To be so braved, to
have his command the scene of such an outbreak of disloyalty and
treason to the King was more than he could bear with equanimity.

There was another regiment in the town that had formerly been known as
the Seventh-of-the-Line, commanded by Colonel Labedoyere, and there
were detachments of artillery.  The Eagle of the Seventh had never been
sent to the War Office in Paris.  It, too, had disappeared.  But that
had been months before the Marquis' time, and he had no responsibility
for that.  Colonel Labedoyere was more than suspected of lukewarmness,
but as he was a young man of great influence, high social standing and
much personal popularity no steps had as yet been taken against him.
The Marquis determined to have it out with him also at the first
convenient season, and unless he could be assured of his absolute
devotion to King Louis, he would report to the Minister of War the
necessity of the Colonel's removal.

The old man was fully alive to the Napoleonic sentiment among the
soldiers, a sentiment which arose from a variety of motives.  In the
first place, war was the trade of most of the soldiers.  They lived on
it, thrived by it, delighted in it.  The permanence of the monarchy
meant peace.  There would be little chance for advancement and none at
all for plunder.  Self-interest predisposed every old soldier to
continue an imperialist.

In the second place, the finances of France were naturally in a most
disordered condition.  The pay of officers and men was greatly in
arrears; promises made had not been kept, and there was much heart-felt
dissatisfaction on that account.  The pay of a soldier is in no sense
an adequate compensation for the risks he runs, the perils to which he
voluntarily and willingly subjects himself, but it is a universal
experience that although his pay is in no degree commensurate, yet the
soldier whose pay is withheld instantly becomes insubordinate and
mutinous, however high or patriotic the motives back of his enlistment.

Again the officers had, most of them, been degraded in rank.  Many of
them had been retired on pittances which were not paid.  Those who were
lucky enough to be retained in active service were superseded by
superannuated, often incompetent old officers of the old royal army
before the revolution, or by young scions of nobility with no knowledge
or fitness to command veterans, to whom the gross-bodied, uninspiring,
gouty old King did not appeal.  Again, the regimental names and
associations had been changed and the old territorial or royal and
princely designations had been reestablished; the Napoleonic victories
had been erased from the battle-flags; the Eagles had been taken away.

The plain people of France were more or less apathetic toward Emperor
or King.  France had been drained of its best for so long that it
craved rest and peace and time to recuperate above everything else.  It
had been sated with glory and was alike indifferent to victory or
defeat.  But the army was a seething mass of discontent.  It had
nothing to gain by the continuance of present conditions and everything
to lose.  It was a body of soldiers-of-fortune held in control
temporarily by circumstances but ready to break the leash and respond
instantly to the call of the greatest soldier-of-fortune of all.

And while all this is true it must also be admitted that there were
many officers and men like Marteau who were profoundly humiliated and
distressed over conditions in France and who, passionately wrapped up
in and devoted to the Emperor, had spurned commissions and dignities
and preferments.  If they were obscure men they remained in France
unnoticed; if they were great men they had expatriated themselves and
sought seclusion and safety in other countries, oftentimes at great
personal sacrifice of property, ease and comfort.

The King, who was by no means lacking in shrewdness and wit, and his
chief advisers in Paris, did not fail to realize something of this, but
keen-sighted men like the Marquis d'Aumenier, away from the person of
the monarch, realized it much more fully, although even he had not the
least idea of the wide extent and depth of this feeling.  But the old
man knew instinctively that he must control things in Grenoble at least
with an iron hand and that no temporizing was possible.  The return of
Marteau, who was a man of parts and power, he admitted--he recalled how
well he had borne himself before the little group in the
drawing-room!--followed by the midnight gathering, the joy of the
veterans, their worship almost of the Eagle, enlightened him.  He would
put down sedition with an iron hand, he swore to himself.  The King had
committed this important place to him.  It was, in a certain sense, a
frontier city if the impossible happened.  Well, the King should find
that he had not reposed trust in the Marquis for nothing.

So the old man thought as he lay sleepless during the night.  He was
not the only one who lay sleepless during the night.  Laure d'Aumenier
sought rest and oblivion in vain.  She had been more moved by Marteau's
conduct and bearing and presence in the old Chateau d'Aumenier, a year
ago, than she had been willing to admit until she thought him dead.
The Marteaux had always been a good-looking, self-respecting people.
Madame Marteau, his mother, had been an unusual woman who had, it was
said, married beneath her when she became the wife of old Jean Marteau,
although she never in her long married life thought of it in that way.
The present Jean Marteau was as handsome and distinguished looking a
man as there was in France.  The delicacy and refinement of his bearing
and appearance did not connote weakness either, as she could testify.

The young woman owed her life and honor to the young soldier.  But long
before that chance meeting they had been companions in childhood,
intimate companions, too.  The boy had been her servitor, but he had
been more.  He had been her protector and friend.  In her memory she
could recall incident after incident when he had helped her, shielded
her.  Never once had he failed to show anything but devotion absolute
and unbounded toward her.

The proposition of marriage he had made in the old hall, which she had
laughed to scorn, had by no means escaped her memory.  She had dwelt
upon it, she had even speculated upon the possibility of an acceptance
of his proposal.  Why not?  She knew no man more gentle at heart, more
gallant in soul, more noble in spirit than he.  That, too, she had
turned over and over in her mind.

She admired Frank Yeovil.  He was a likable man, frank by nature as
well as name and brave, sunny in disposition and ardently devoted to
her.  When the betrothal had been made at her uncle's urgent insistence
that she accept Captain Yeovil's suit, it had been a great match for
her, for the d'Aumeniers were impoverished exiles, while the Yeovils
were a rich family and of a line almost as long as her own.  It had
been easy enough to plight her troth to the young Englishman at first,
but since she had seen Marteau, she realized that it would not be easy
to keep that engagement.  Fortunately, Captain Yeovil had been on
service in Spain and the South of France with the Duke of Wellington's
army, and only a few weeks before had he joined her uncle and herself
in Paris on leave of absence.  He had pressed her to name the day but
she had temporized and avoided the issue; not for any definite reason
but because as the time drew near she became less and less willing to
be the Englishman's wife.

Marteau had been reported killed at Arcis.  Perhaps that report had
done more to enlighten her to the true state of her affections than
anything else.  Her pride of birth, her rank and station would never
have permitted her, it may be, to dwell upon a living Marteau as a
possible husband, but since he was dead there could be no harm in
dreams of that kind; and in her grief she had indulged herself in them
to the full.  It had been a shock to her, of course, but not so great a
shock as it would have been if an engagement had subsisted between the
two, or she had permitted herself to think that she could ever look
favorably on the proposition he had made to her.  Nevertheless, it had
been a great sorrow.  There were some alleviations to the situation,
however.  Since it had become impossible, since she believed Marteau
dead, she could indulge her grief and her mind could dwell upon those
attractions which had influenced her so powerfully.

The period was one of intense anxiety and excitement.  The old Marquis
had lived much alone.  He was not versed in woman's ways.  Her
agitation and grief passed unnoticed.  By degrees she got control of
herself.  Since it was not to be Marteau it might as well be young
Yeovil.  The whole episode with which the French officer was concerned
she viewed from a point of detachment as a romantic dream.  His arrival
had rudely shattered that dream and awakened her to the reality of the
situation.  She loved him.

For Laure d'Aumenier to marry Marteau was impossible.  The Marquis
would never consent.  He was her legal guardian, the head of her race.
Marriage without his consent was unthinkable.  Loving Marteau she would
fain not marry Yeovil; yet her troth being plighted in the most public
manner and with her consent, the Marquis would force her to keep her
word.  She knew exactly the pressure that would be brought to bear upon
her.  Although she had lost some of the pride of her ancestors, she
could see the situation from their point of view.  There was a deadlock
before her and there appeared to be no way of breaking it.

It was a wild night outside.  The rain beat upon the casement windows
of the old castle.  The tempest without seemed fit accompaniment to the
tempest within, thought the woman.

A long time she lay thinking, planning, hoping, praying; alike
unavailingly.  Toward morning, utterly exhausted by the violence of her
emotions, the scene she had gone through--and it had been a torture to
stand and receive the townspeople after the departure of Marteau--she
fell at last into a troubled sleep.

She was awakened by a slight sound, as of a light footstep.  She
enjoyed the faculty of awakening with full command of her senses at
once.  She parted the curtains of the bed.  With her eyes wide open,
holding her breath, she listened.  She heard soft movements.  There was
someone in the room!

Laure d'Aumenier, as has been said, had been trained to self-reliance.
She could wield a sword expertly and was an accurate shot with a
firearm.  She could ride with any woman in England.  She had, in full,
the intrepidity and courage of her ancestors.  Her prowess, so strange
and so unusual in that day in a woman, had been a subject of
disapproval on the part of her uncle, but Sir Gervaise Yeovil and his
son had viewed it with delight.  Frank Yeovil had brought her from
Spain a beautiful Toledo blade and a pair of Spanish dueling pistols,
light, easily handled and of deadly accuracy.  The blade hung from a
peg in the wall by the head of her bed.  The pistols lay in a case on
the table upon which her lighted bedroom candle stood.  They were
charged and ready for use.

Throwing back the cover without a sound, presently she stepped through
the hangings and out on the floor.  A loose wrapper lay at the foot of
the bed, which was a tall old four-poster, heavily curtained.  Whoever
was in the room was on the other side of the bed, near the wall.  The
curtains hung between.

She was as light as a bird in her movements.  She drew the bed-gown
nearer, thrust her feet into heelless slippers, placed convenient for
her morning rising by her maid, opened the box of pistols, lifted one
of them, examining it on the instant to see that it was ready for use,
slipped on the wrapper, stepped toward the foot of the bed and waited.

The beat of the rain, the shriek of the wind, the roar of the thunder
filled the room with sound, but the woman had good ears and they were
well trained.  She could hear someone softly moving.  Sometimes, in
lulls in the storm, she thought she could detect heavy breathing.

The natural impulse of the ordinary woman would have been to scream or
if not that, having gained the floor, to rush to the door, or if not
that to pull the bell cord and summon help.  But Laure d'Aumenier was
not an ordinary woman.  She knew that any sound would bring aid and
rescue at once.  There would be plenty of time to scream, to pull the
bell or to do whatever was necessary later.  And something, she could
not tell what, something she could not recognize, impelled her to take
the course she did; to wait, armed.

But the wait began to tell on her sensibilities.  The sound of somebody
or something moving mysteriously to-and-fro behind the curtains over
against the wall at the other end of the room began to work on her
nerves.  It takes an iron steadiness, a passive capacity for endurance
which is quite different from woman's more or less emotional courage,
to wait under circumstances like that.

Just when she had reached the limit of her endurance and was persuaded
that she could stand no more, her attention was attracted by a slight
click as of a lock or catch, a movement as of something heavy, as of a
drawer or door, and then the footsteps turned and came toward the
window.  The moment of action had arrived and with it came the return
of her wavering courage.

To reach the window the intruder must pass by the foot of the bed where
she stood.  Now the light was on the table at the head of the bed and
the table was far enough from the bed to shine past her into the room.
The moving figure suddenly came into view.  It was a man, shrouded in a
heavy cloak.  He did not glance toward the bed.  His eyes were fixed on
the window.  His astonishment, therefore, was overwhelming when he
suddenly found himself looking into the barrel of a pistol and
confronted by a woman.




CHAPTER XXII

IN THE COUNTESS LAURE'S BED-CHAMBER

That astonishment was so great when the man recognized the woman that
he threw up his hands and stepped backward.  As he did so his sodden
cloak, which he had gathered closely around him, opened and fell.  The
next instant his hand tore his hat from his head and he stood revealed
in the full light of the candle.

"Marteau!" exclaimed the woman in a surprise and dismay equal to that
of the man she confronted.

Her arm that held the pistol dropped weakly to her side.  With the
other hand she drew the peignoir about her, a vivid crimson wave rushed
over her whole body.  To surprise a man, a thief, in her room at night,
was one thing; to confront the man she loved in such a guise was
another.  Her heart rose in her throat.  For a moment she thought she
would have fainted.

"You!  You!" she choked out brokenly.  "Mon Dieu!"

"Mademoiselle," began the man desperately, his confusion and dismay
growing with every flying moment, "I----"

"What do you here," she went on impetuously, finding voice, "in my
bedroom at night?  I thought you----"

"For God's sake hear me.  I came to----" and then he stopped lamely and
in agonized embarrassment.

"For what did you come?" she insisted.

"Mademoiselle," he said, throwing his head up, "I cannot tell you.  But
when I was stationed here before this was the bedroom of the
Commanding-Officer.  I supposed it was so still.  I had not the
faintest idea that you--that it was----"

"And what would you do in the bedroom of the Commanding-Officer?" asked
the woman, forgetting for the moment the strangeness of the situation
in her anxiety to solve the problem.

"And that, I repeat, I cannot tell."

"Not even to me, who----" she stopped in turn.

"Yes, yes, go on," urged the young man, stepping nearer to her.  "Not
even to you who----"

"Who espoused your cause in the hall this very night, who befriended
you," she went on rather lamely and inadequately having checked herself
in time.

"Oh," said the young officer in great disappointment, "that?"

"Yes."

"You see, the Governor----"

"Did you wish to kill him?"

"Mademoiselle!" he protested.  "I swear to you that I would not harm
him for the world but I----"

"Are you in need?  He offered you money.  I have a few resources."

"For God's sake, mademoiselle," interposed the officer desperately, but
she went resolutely on.

"Whatever I have is yours.  See----" she stripped rings from her
fingers and proffered them--"take them."

"Mademoiselle," said the young man sadly, "you wrong me."

"Well, if it was not for murder or for gain, for what cause did you
take so frightful a risk?"

"Is there no other motive, mademoiselle, that makes men risk their
lives than revenge or greed?"

"What do you mean?"

"Love."

"But you said you did not know this was my room!"

The words came from her impetuously and before she thought she realized
when it was too late.

"Ah, mademoiselle, love of woman is a great passion.  I know it only
too well, too sadly.  But it is not the only love."

"Have you another in your heart?" asked the Countess with a sinking in
her own.

"Love of honor."

"I don't understand."

"And yet I know that you are the very soul of honor yourself."

"I thank you, but----"

"Mademoiselle," said the young man, coming to a sudden resolution,
"appearances are frightfully against me.  That I should be here, in
your room, at this hour of the night, under the circumstances, condemns
