remark. She was carried away with the agreeable surprise of having
stumbled on somebody connected with St. Ebbe's who knew all about Annie.
She chatted on in the frankest, friendliest way, plying him with
girlish questions, and supplying free comments on his answers; and he
was an auditor who was nothing loth to be so treated, and to be
furnished with stores of information on points which had aroused his
ardent curiosity. She forgot all about taking him out of his way, and
when they reached Welby Square she crowned her unbounded faith in him by
inviting him into the house. On his acceptance of her invitation, after
a moment's hesitation, she presented him to Mrs. Jennings as a friend of
Annie's from St. Ebbe's.

The young man had the grace to feel his ears tingle while Mrs. Jennings,
looking a little astonished, took him on Rose's word, bowed her welcome,
begged him to sit down with her usual gracious, languid good-breeding,
and said she was glad to see any friend of Miss Annie Millar's.

He did his best, with a flushed face, to remedy his and Rose's rashness.
He put down his card, with Harry Ironside, M.D., engraved on it, at Mrs.
Jennings's elbow. He set himself with a strenuous and sincere effort to
talk to her, and so to conduct himself as to do credit to Rose's
voucher.

Mrs. Jennings was easily propitiated on receiving the attention which
was due to her. She thought the young man's manners perfectly good; they
had well-bred ease, and at the same time the modesty which ought to
accompany youth, though his introduction to her had been somewhat
informal.

Irregularity and singularity were among the fashions of the day. She
would have been glad if her daughter Hester, in carrying out these
fashions, had brought forward no rougher, or commoner-looking, or more
eccentric satellites and proteges--secretaries of those horrid women's
unions and clubs--than this friend of Rose and Annie Millar's.

Mrs. Jennings never forgot a name and its social connection. "Ironside?"
she repeated tentatively, but with an air of agreeable expectation. "I
am familiar with the name. One of my sons, Captain Lawrence Jennings,
when his regiment was at Manchester, knew and received much kindness
from a family named Ironside."

"It must have been the family of one of my uncles," said Dr. Harry
Ironside, eagerly. "My Uncle John, and my Uncle Charles too, for that
matter, stay in Manchester. Both are married men with families. My Uncle
John was mayor a few years ago."

"The same," cried Mrs. Jennings with bland satisfaction. "Lawrie's
Ironsides were the family of the mayor, I remember perfectly when you
mention it;" and she added the mental note, "They were among the richest
cotton-brokers in the place--well-nigh millionaires."

"Were you all named from Cromwell's Ironsides?" inquired Rose, lightly,
inclined to laugh and colour at the absurd recollection that, though she
had seemed to know all about him from the moment he spoke of St. Ebbe's
and Annie, she had been ignorant of his very name till he put down his
card. If he had not done so, she would have had to describe him to Annie
as the big, fair-haired young doctor with the Roman nose, or by some
other nonsensical item, such as the signet-ring on his left hand, or the
trick of putting his hand to his chin.

"I am sure I cannot tell"--he met her question with an answering
laugh--"except that, so far as I know, we have had more to do with
cotton than with cannon-balls. My father was a Manchester man, like my
uncles. I have struck out a new line in handling--not to say a sword,
but a lancet."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Jennings with mild superiority, "all my sons are in the
services--I have given them to their Queen and country. Two of my
sons-in-law are also in the army, and I often say of the third--a
clergyman in a sadly heathen part of the Black Country--that, engaged as
he is in the Church militant, he is as much a fighter as the rest of
them." Having thus in the mildest, most ladylike manner, established her
social supremacy, Mrs. Jennings was doubly gracious to the visitor.
They made such progress in their acquaintance by means of the Manchester
Ironsides and other members of her very large circle of friends, with
regard to whom the two discovered the names at least of several were
also known to Harry Ironside, that the lady made another marked
concession. When he said he was in rooms in London, and had his only
sister with him, she signified with a kind and graceful bend of the
lace-enfolded shoulders and the bewigged head within the wonderful
edifice of a cap, that she meant to have the pleasure of calling on Miss
Ironside.

Rose could hardly believe her ears; and she did not wonder, though she
was glad that he had the sense and good feeling to thank Mrs. Jennings
with warmth, since Rose knew what a testimony it was to the genuine
liking which the mistress of the house had taken to her chance guest.
For Mrs. Jennings went very little out, and was exceedingly particular
in adding to her visiting-list, as became the head of a select
boarding-house, and the mother of so many officers and gentlemen, not to
say gentlewomen.

But matters did not end even there. He managed to convey the impression
that his sister and he were rather lonely in their rooms, while he
alluded to the facts that he and she were orphans, and with the
exception of each other had neither brother nor sister. They had looked
forward to being together, and making a home as soon as Kate left
school, and he had taken furnished lodgings at Campden Hill till he
settled down somewhere. But somehow the lodgings were not very
home-like. He should prize highly the friendship of Mrs. Jennings for
his sister. At this point the slightest gleam of a business interest
awoke in Mrs. Jennings's steel gray eyes, though she only told him
softly that she had known it all--the loneliness of one or two members
of a family in London, the comfortlessness of even the best of furnished
apartments. It was such considerations, in a great measure, which had
induced her to utilize her large house, much too large for herself and
the only daughter left at home with her, to receive a few old friends as
suitable boarders into her family. She had hoped to form a cheerful and
refined little society round her, and so to be of a little use to her
fellow-creatures. She might say she had succeeded in her humble mission,
she finished with artless benevolence. He met her half-way with
breathless alacrity. Had he and Kate but known in time Mrs. Jennings's
generous idea, what a boon it would have been if she had let them avail
themselves of it! Even yet if there ever occurred any change, any
opening--but he was afraid, he added in disconsolate tones, there never
would--the fortunate people would know too well when they were
happy--it would be doing him and Kate the greatest favour, the utmost
kindness to let them know. This was exactly the complimentary,
beseeching, deprecatory mode in which Mrs. Jennings liked business to be
conducted; whereas, if Hester had been present, she would have said in
the clumsiest, coarsest manner, "Mamma, there are some rooms vacant,
which any respectable person who cares to pay the rent may have."

But that was not Mrs. Jennings's plan. She said in her blandest
voice--"Well, Dr. Ironside, we must see what we can do for you and your
sister; I cannot bear to think of your feeling forlorn after what your
cousins did for my son Lawrence. We must stretch a point with regard to
accommodating you--that is, if you are not, both of you, dreadfully
particular. No, you are not at all difficult to put up, you and your
sister, you say? I am happy to hear it. It is such a good thing for
young people to be easily pleased. I am not sure that something could
not be contrived in the course of a week or two. I think I heard my old
servant speak of rooms which were to have been kept for cousins of my
friend Mr. Lyle, two charming ladies who were to have come up from the
country for the season. But their dear old aunt died unexpectedly, and
of course they are not inclined for any gaiety at present. I leave the
details of arranging the sets of rooms and letting them to my Susan. I
never interfere with her; she knows far better than I what is wanted,
and she is a sensible, practical person to deal with. If you care to
speak to Susan, I shall ring for her to see you in the dining-room, and
she will tell you at once what she can do for you," Mrs. Jennings
finished sweetly.

He did care; indeed he was so intent on benefiting by what Mrs.
Jennings, in her ladylike way, made so great an obligation conferred by
her on her fellow-creatures, that he caught at the hope held out to him.
He had an interview with the potent Susan, and came back radiant to tell
that the housekeeper had been nearly as kind to him as her mistress had
shown herself. He and Susan had settled everything. He was free to give
up the rooms which he and his sister were occupying the following week.

"What, without consulting Miss Ironside?" protested Mrs. Jennings in
pretty alarm.

"Oh! Kate will like any arrangement I make," he cried confidently; and
Rose came to the conclusion either that "Kate" was the simple
school-girl he represented her, or that Dr. Harry Ironside was an
autocrat in his domestic relations.

He insisted on furnishing references, because business was business,
even in the light of the dawning friendship which he trusted Mrs.
Jennings was going to extend to him and Kate, and they would come as
soon as she would let them.

Oh! he must arrange it all with Susan. Mrs. Jennings put up her still
dainty hands, and waived him off playfully. She dared not interfere with
Susan. All she would say was that she was delighted to look forward to
such an agreeable addition to her pleasant little circle. She was fond
of having young people about her, and was always ready to do what she
could (which was no more than the truth) to make them happy.

Rose was driven to the conclusion that Dr. Harry Ironside must have
found furnished lodgings such a pandemonium, that he was induced to
believe a select boarding-house must be a paradise by comparison. It was
comical how it had all come about. It did seem as if Rose's
heedlessness, if she had been heedless in drifting without an
introduction into an acquaintance with one of Annie's doctors, was
likely to bear good fruits to Mrs. Jennings, among other people. Hester
had been looking worried lately, and had not scrupled to give as the
reason of her pre-occupation--family affairs not prosperous. The whole
of the house was not let. Old Mr. and Mrs. Foljambe had actually been
unreasonable enough to try to exchange the best rooms, which they had
chosen for themselves in the winter for shabbier, cheaper quarters
during the summer, when the husband and wife might be occasionally
absent paying visits. Old Susan, in her black cap and gold-rimmed
spectacles, was especially triumphant in seeing the scheme balked, and
confided her mingled exultation and indignation to Rose, who had helped
to balk the schemers. The confidential family servant even forgot some
of her polite mannerliness in her excitement. "Now, Miss Millar, them
Foljambes has done for themselves; serve them right for seeking to get a
catch from a friend like Missus, as is that kind to her boarders, which
you can testify, Miss; they might be her own flesh and blood. Bless you!
she'll never make a rap by keeping boarders. She never grudges them
anythink, and would sooner deny herself than that they should go without
their fancies. But there, now, that fine young gentleman you brought,"
went on Susan with the slightest respectful significance, "I'm sure
we're greatly indebted to you, Miss--speaks as if he meant to stay on
here with his sister for the present. He has taken our largest rooms off
our hands, so that we may be easy on that head, and I for one won't be
sorry if Mr. and Mrs. Foljambe ain't able to shift back into them at
their will and pleasure. The young gent, as is a gent, had no
hargle-bargling about terms. He was satisfied to pay what we asked,
because he knew that though it was not a common boarding-house, and
though it was no more than right that he and his sister should pay for
the privilege of being under the roof of a real lady like Missus, we
were not the sort to ask more than our due."

The moment Rose got quit of Susan, she said to herself complacently, "It
is very nice to have done such a service to Mrs. Jennings and Hester and
everybody, instead of having got into a scrape and being scolded, as I
almost feared at one moment. If only Miss Kate Ironside is not too much
of a dumb belle and a mere school-girl," reflected Rose, with the
supercilious consciousness of maturity in a girl who had been more than
a year away from all teaching except what she had herself practised, and
what she received as a grown-up woman at Mr. St. Foy's. "I wonder if Dr.
Harry Ironside will have spoken of our encounter, and what came of it,
to Annie before I can tell her. I should like to see her face when she
learns that I know somebody who goes to St. Ebbe's," ended Rose, with
persistent audacity.

Annie's face was a study when she heard of it. Rose had been guilty of a
little wilful self-deception, still she received a shock.

The first time the sisters were able to meet and have a walk together,
after Rose's encounter with Dr. Ironside, Rose broached the great piece
of news, and witnessed the effect it produced. The girls had managed to
reach the Marble Arch into Hyde Park, beyond which they found a seat for
a few minutes. It was not too early in the season for them to take
possession of it, and they were still sufficiently strangers in London
to suppose that seats were placed for the accommodation of the weary of
all ranks and both sexes, and not merely for the benefit of nurse-maids
and their charges, or of able-bodied tramps. The sisters prepared to
talk over their own concerns and Redcross with the _empressement_ of
girls, to forget all about the moving crowd around them, and the
grinding of that great mill of London in the traffic that is never for
an instant still.

"Oh! Annie, have you seen him lately?" began Rose--"Dr. Harry Ironside,
I mean. Has he told you that he and his sister are coming to board at
Mrs. Jennings's?"

"Seen him! Dr. Harry Ironside! What do you know about Dr. Harry
Ironside? What are you saying, Rose?" cried Annie, sitting bolt upright,
opening wide her dark eyes, and fixing them in the most amazed,
displeased, discomfiting gaze on Rose. The rate at which the two had
been walking and talking, the suspicion of east wind, the premature heat
of the May sun, had converted the soft red in Annie's cheeks to a
brilliant scarlet.

"What I am saying," answered Rose, nodding gaily, and trying hard not to
flinch under the trying reception of her precious piece of information,
"is that, by the funniest chance, I made the acquaintance of a friend of
yours at St. Ebbe's. And the laughable coincidence of our meeting and
happening to speak to each other, and then of my finding out that he
knew all about you, is going to be a very good thing for poor dear Mrs.
Jennings," Rose hastened to add, taking the first word in self-defence.
"He is coming with his sister to board in Welby Square."

"He is not a friend of mine," said Annie, severely. "Is it possible that
you are such a simpleton as to believe that all the doctors, medical
students, and nurses--the whole staff of St. Ebbe's, in fact, are
intimately acquainted with each other, are acquainted at all, for the
most part, unless as doctors and nurses? Please, Rose, tell me at once
what nonsense this is--what foolish thing you have been about."

When Annie said "please" to her sisters the situation was alarming.

On the other hand, Rose had not come up to London to be an artist, who
was already getting orders for scroll-work and executing them
successfully, to be put down by a sister not above four years her
senior.

"What are you making such a fuss about, Annie?" protested Rose, "I am
telling you as fast as you will let me. I came out this morning for the
express purpose, and I thought--I was almost sure--you would be amused
and interested, instead of 'getting into a wax'"--using one of Hester
Jennings's slang words, which set Annie's fine little teeth on edge. "It
is you who ought to explain and apologize to me," proceeded Rose,
boldly; "I am surely at liberty to make the acquaintance of anybody you
know without your looking annoyed, and accusing me of being foolish and
nonsensical. It is very unjust and ungrateful of you besides, for he
spoke very highly of you," Rose finished innocently.

"He spoke highly of me to my own sister!" repeated Annie, her lips
curling with unutterable disdain, and her cheeks in a wilder flame than
ever. "He had nothing to do speaking of me at all. And how did he come
to speak to you? I insist upon your telling me, Rose. I am older than
you, and we are alone in London. I am answerable for you to father and
mother."

"Well, I always thought I was answerable for myself," said Rose,
indignantly. "But I don't want to conceal anything from you; it is
insulting me to suppose so," and Rose showed herself highly resentful
in her turn. "As to how I met and spoke with Dr. Harry Ironside, I was
just coming to that," she was going on deliberately, when she was
stopped by Annie's irritable protest--

"I wish you would not bring forward that man's name and dwell upon it in
the way you are doing."

"Why, Annie, what ails you?" cried Rose in her bewilderment at Annie's
unreasonableness and excitement, forgetting any verdict that might be
passed on her own neglect of the code of conduct imposed upon her.

"Well, if you only knew how I have been tried--and molested--and laughed
at," Annie began wrathfully, saying the last words as if to be laughed
at was equivalent to being burnt alive. Then she stopped short and
turned again upon Rose. "What have you been doing? tell me this instant,
Rose."

"I don't think you ought to speak to me in this manner," said Rose,
rebelliously, holding her head high in the air, and forgetting in her
soreness of spirit either to crumple her nose or wrinkle her forehead;
"and I am not at all ashamed of myself. I have done nothing wrong;
indeed, I believe I have conferred a real benefit on Mrs. Jennings,
though she is apt to put it the other way, and indirectly on Hester. I
