stupid.  But with it all he had an air as if he believed everybody at
heart was bad, and as if morality and sobriety and unselfishness were
mere affectation and cant.

Has any of my readers ever met such a one as Masham?  I hope not.  If he
should, let him beware of him as the worst enemy a boy could encounter.
For no poison is more deadly than that which strives to make one man
lose all faith in his fellow-man.

I was so far infected by his manner that, though I felt ashamed to be
sitting and listening to his bad talk, I dared not protest, for fear of
appearing (what he would be sure to consider me), a hypocrite.

And so, unprofitably, the journey was beguiled, not without frequent
stoppings and refreshings, each of which had the effect of exhilarating
Whipcord's spirits and making Masham's tongue looser and looser.

At length Windsor was reached, and I looked forward to exchanging my
undesirable companion for more interesting occupation in seeing over the
town with its grand old castle.

But in this I was woefully disappointed.  Whipcord drove straight up to
an inn in the town, where he ordered the horse and trap to be put up,
while we all entered the smoky coffee-room and discussed the
desirability of having dinner.

"I thought we were going to picnic out of doors?"  I said, mildly, in
answer to Masham's appeal whether we should not order dinner where we
were.

"All very well if you could get your liquor laid on," said Whipcord.  "I
fancy we'd better stay where we are.  What do you say, Hawkesbury?"

"I'm sorry to disappoint Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, smiling, "but I
really think we shall get dinner more comfortably here.  We've no plates
or knives; and, as Whipcord says, there would be a difficulty about the
beer."

I was outvoted, and had to give up my idea of a rustic meal in the open
air.

It was not a very pleasant dinner.  Masham, despite Hawkesbury's
protests, persisted in interlarding it with his offensive stories, and
Whipcord, who was taking very decided measures to excite his spirits,
chimed in with his horsey slang, not unmixed with profanity.

"How are you getting on, Batchelor?" said the former presently to me.
"Don't be afraid of that bottle, man, it's only whisky!"

"Don't you believe him; it's gin," laughed Whipcord.

"I thought you said it was brandy," said Hawkesbury.

"There you are!" said Masham.  "One says one thing, one another, and one
another.  Now I tell you what, Batchelor shall be umpire, and we'll each
put five shillings on it, eh?  What do you say to that?"

"I'd rather not bet," replied Hawkesbury, "but I'd like to know what
Batchelor says it is."

"I'll go half-sovs. with you on it," said Whipcord.

"Done with you!" said Masham; "but Hawkesbury must go too, for if it's
brandy we both lose."

"I'd rather not bet," said Hawkesbury, "but if it will spoil your fun if
I don't I'll join."

"Thanks.  Now, Batchelor, fill up, old toper, and give us your verdict."

"I really am no judge of spirits," said I.  "Innocent babe," said
Masham, "how well he does it!  But he doesn't seem to know the rule in
these cases," added he, winking at the other two.  "What rule?"  I
asked.

"Why, about hanging back.  Half a tumbler for every twenty seconds,
isn't that it, Whipcord?"

"I thought it was a whole tumbler!"

"Ah, wouldn't you take your time to decide, eh?  Come now," said Masham,
taking out his watch, "we'll start now."

"Hold hard," said Whipcord.  "Surely we are to have glasses too, to see
if he guesses right."

"Very well, fill all round.  Now, Batchelor."

"I really can't do it," I said, faintly.  "Five seconds gone!" bawled
Masham, laughing.  "Please, don't be so foolish," I cried, getting
alarmed.  "Hawkesbury, please stop them!"

"Ten seconds gone, eleven, twelve!"

"I tell you, I--"

"Seventeen, eighteen," said Masham, rising and reaching out his arm for
the bottle.

There was no help for it.  I seized my glass and gulped down its
contents.  It made me cough and sputter, and my eyes watered, greatly to
the amusement of my persecutors.

"What is it?" they all cried.

I could scarcely speak for anger and the burning in my throat.

"It's a shame!"  I began.

"That's not what it is," cried Whipcord.  "Come, give it a name, or
you'll have to drink another!"

"Oh, brandy," I almost shrieked, willing to do anything rather than
that.  "I say, Hawkesbury," I said, reproachfully, "I didn't expect you
were bringing me to this sort of thing."

"It is a shame," he said to me aside.  "I would have stopped it if I
could; but don't you see they were eager about their bet, and it was the
only way of quieting them.  Never mind."

The rest of the afternoon passed away much as it had begun.  After
dinner we went down to the river and took a boat, in which Masham and
Whipcord lay and slept all the time, while Hawkesbury and I rowed them
about.  It was with difficulty, about five o'clock, that we got them
ashore again, and half led, half dragged them back to the inn.

"Come," said Hawkesbury to Whipcord, "it's time to be getting the trap
ready for the start back, isn't it?"

"Is it?  Go and tell the fellow, some of you," replied our driver.
"I'll be ready pretty soon," said he, moving once more towards the bar.

"You surely aren't going to drink any more," cried I, taking his arm and
trying gently to stop him.

He wrenched his arm loose and gave me a push back, saying, "Young prig!
what's it to do with you?"

"I think he wants to come too," said Masham.  "Come along, Batchelor."

I had positively to run away to elude them, and made the pretext of
going to the stable to see after the harnessing of the horse.

When this was done I sought for Hawkesbury.

"Do you think it's safe for Whipcord to drive in the state he's in?"

"Oh, yes.  With a horse like that too.  He's pretending to be a great
deal worse than he is, just to horrify you."

It seemed ages before we actually started.  Whipcord, in a most
quarrelsome humour, had to be dragged almost by force from the bar.
Hawkesbury, at the last moment, discovered that he was going without
paying the bill; while Masham, having once made himself comfortable in
the bar parlour, flatly refused to be moved, and had finally to be left
behind.

The only consolation in this was that I had the tail of the dogcart to
myself, which was infinitely preferable to the odious society of Masham.

It was nearly six when we finally started from Windsor and turned our
horse's head homeward.  And this had been my day's enjoyment!



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

HOW I FELL BADLY, AND WAS PICKED UP IN A WAY I LITTLE EXPECTED.

The delightful picnic to which I had looked forward with such
satisfaction had certainly not come off as I expected.  And it was not
_yet_ over, for the drive home under the conduct of Mr Whipcord
promised to be the most exciting portion of the whole day.

As long as we were in the country roads the unsteadiness of our Jehu did
not so much matter, for he was sober enough to keep the horse upon the
road, though hardly fit to steer him past other vehicles.  However, it
was marvellous how we did get on.  What hairbreadth escapes we had!  It
was useless attempting to remonstrate with the fellow.  He was in that
quarrelsome and mischievous humour which would brook no protest.  Once,
very soon after starting, in passing a country cart we as nearly as
possible upset against it, a misadventure which Whipcord immediately set
down as a deliberate insult intended for himself, and which nothing
would satisfy him but to avenge then and there.

He leaped down off the dogcart, heedless of what became of the horse,
and, throwing off his coat, shouted to the countryman to "Come on!" an
invitation which the countryman answered with a crack of his whip which
made the doughty hero leap as high into the air as he had ever done in
his life.

As might be expected, this incident did not tend to pacify the outraged
feelings of the tipsy Whipcord, who, disappointed of his vengeance on
the countryman, was most pressing in his invitations to Hawkesbury or me
or both of us to dismount and "have it out."  Indeed, he was so eager
for satisfaction that he all but pulled me off my seat on to the road,
and would have done so quite had not the horse given a start at the
moment, which put me out of his reach, and nearly upset him in the dust.

Things certainly did not look promising for a nice quiet drive home.
With difficulty we coaxed him back into the trap, where he at once began
to vent his spleen on the horse in a manner which put that animal's
temper to a grand test.

He further insisted on pulling up at every wayside inn for refreshment,
until it became quite evident, if we ever reached London at all, we
should certainly not do so till nearly midnight.

I held a hurried consultation with Hawkesbury as to what ought to be
done.

"Don't you think," suggested I, "we had almost better go on by ourselves
and leave him behind?"

"Oh no," said Hawkesbury; "that would never do.  It wouldn't be
honourable."

It occurred to me it would not be much less honourable than inviting a
fellow to a quiet picnic and letting him in for an expedition like this.

"Well," said I, "suppose we let him drive home, and you and I go back
some other way?"

"You forget I'm responsible for the trap.  No, we'd better go on as we
are.  We've not come to grief so far.  Perhaps, though," said he, "you'd
sooner drive?"

"What's that about sooner drive?" shouted Whipcord, coming up at this
moment.  "Who'd sooner drive?  You, young Batchelor?  All right; off
with your coat!"  And he threw himself on me in a pugilistic attitude.

After a long delay we got once more under way, the vehicle travelling
more unsteadily than ever, and my misgivings as to ever reaching London
becoming momentarily more numerous.

How we ever got back I can't imagine, unless it was that after a time
Whipcord finally dropped the reins and allowed the horse to find its own
way home.  He certainly thought he was driving, but I fancy the truth
was that one of the ostlers on the road, seeing his condition, had
cunningly looped the reins round the front rail of the trap, so that,
drive all he would, he could not do much more harm than if he was
sitting idle.

At length the lateness of the hour and the frequent lights announced
that London must be near.  It was fortunate it was so late, or we should
certainly have come to grief in the first crowded street.  As it was,
Whipcord had already got command of the reins again, as the sudden jerks
and shies of the horse testified.

My impulse was to avoid the danger by quietly jumping down from my seat
and leaving the other two to proceed alone.  But somehow it seemed a
shabby proceeding to leave Hawkesbury in the lurch, besides which, even
if I had overcome that scruple, the seat was so high that at the
unsteady rate we were going I would run considerable risk by jumping.
So I determined to hold on and hope for the best.

We got safely down Oxford Street, thanks to its emptiness, and were just
proceeding towards Holborn, when Whipcord gave his horse a sudden turn
down a side street to the right.

"Where are you going?"  I cried; "it's straight on."

He pulled up immediately, and bidding Hawkesbury hold the reins, pulled
off his coat for the twentieth time, and invited me to come and have it
out on the pavement.

"Don't be a fool," said Hawkesbury; "drive on now, there's a good
fellow."

"What does he want to tell me which way to drive for?" demanded the
outraged charioteer.

"He didn't mean to offend you--did you, Batchelor?  Drive on now,
Whipcord, and get out of this narrow street."

With much persuasion Whipcord resumed his coat and seized the reins.

"Thinks I don't know the way to drive," he growled.  "I'll teach him!"

I had been standing up, adding my endeavours to Hawkesbury's to pacify
our companion, when he suddenly lashed furiously at the horse.  The
wretched animal, already irritated beyond endurance, gave a wild bound
forward, which threw me off my feet, and before I could put out a hand
to save myself pitched me backwards into the road.

I was conscious of falling with a heavy crash against the kerb with my
arm under me, and of seeing the dogcart tearing down the street.  Then
everything seemed dark, and I remember nothing more.

When I did recover consciousness I was lying in a strange room on a
strange bed.  It took an effort to remember what had occurred.  But a
dull pain all over reminded me, and gradually a more acute and intense
pain on my left side.  I tried to move my arm, but it was powerless, and
the exertion almost drove back my half-returning senses.

"Lie quiet," said a voice at my side, "the doctor will be here
directly."

The voice was somehow familiar; but in my weak state I could not
remember where I had heard it.  And the exertion of turning my head to
look was more than I could manage.

I lay there, I don't know how long, with half-closed eyes, seeing
nothing, hearing nothing, and feeling only the pain and an occasional
grateful passing of a wet sponge across my forehead.

Then I became aware of more people in the room and a man's voice
saying--

"How was it?"

"I found him lying on the pavement.  I think he must have been thrown
out of a vehicle."

That voice I had certainly heard, but where?

"It's the arm--broken!" said the voice.

"Ah," said the doctor, leaning over me and touching me lightly near the
elbow.

I groaned with agony as he did so.

"Go round to the other side," said he, hurriedly.  "I must examine where
the fracture is.  I'm afraid, from what you say, it must be rather a bad
one."

I just remembered catching sight of a well-known face bending over me,
and a familiar voice whispering--

"Steady, old man, try to bear it."

The next moment I had fainted.

It may have been minutes or it may have been hours before I next came to
myself, and then my arm lay bandaged by my side, and the sharpness of
the pain had gone.

"Fred, old man," was the first thing I heard as I opened my eyes.  I
knew the voice now, and the face with its two great eyes which bent over
me.

I had found my friend at last!

"Hush, don't talk now," he said, as I tried to speak; "lie quiet now,
there's a dear fellow."

"Jack!"  I said.  I could not resist uttering his name, his old familiar
long-lost name.

"Yes, it's Jack," he whispered, "but don't talk now."

"You forgive me, Jack?"  I murmured, heedless of his injunction.

"Yes, a hundred times!" he said, brushing back the hair from my
forehead, and putting his finger to my lips.

Then I obeyed him, and lay silent and happy all day.  Happier with all
my pain than I had been for months.

The doctor came later on and looked at my arm.

"He'll do now, I think," said he, "but he will very likely be feverish
after it.  You should have him taken to the hospital."

"Oh no," cried Jack.  "He must stay here, please.  I can look after him
quite well."

"If it was only the arm," said the doctor.  "But he's had a bad fall and
is a good deal bruised and shaken besides.  He would get better
attention, I think, at the hospital."

"I would so much sooner he stayed here," said Jack; "but if he'd really
be better at the hospital, I suppose I ought to let him go."

"I won't go to the hospital!" exclaimed I, making the longest speech I
had yet made since my accident, with a vehemence that positively
startled the two speakers.

This protest settled the question.  If only a sick person threatens to
get excited about anything, he is pretty sure to have his own way.  And
so it proved in my case.

"But will you be able to stay at home all day from business to look
after him?" asked the doctor.

"No, I'm afraid not," said Jack, "but I think I know some one who will.
He sha'n't be left alone, and I can always just run home in the dinner-
hour to see how he's getting on."

The doctor left, only half satisfied with this arrangement, and
repeating that it would have been far better to move me to the hospital.

When he was gone Jack came and smoothed my pillow.  "I am glad you're to
stay," he said.  "Now, for fear you should begin to talk, I'm going out
to Billy to get my boots blacked.  So good-bye for a bit, old boy."

"But, Jack--" I began, trying to keep him.

"Not a word now," said he, going to the door.  "Presently."

I was too contented and comfortable to fret myself about anything, still
more to puzzle my brains about what I couldn't understand.  So I lay
still thinking of nothing, and knowing nothing except that I had found
my friend once more, and that he was more to me than ever.

Nothing makes one so sleepy as thinking of nothing at all; and long
before Jack returned from his visit to Billy I was asleep, and slept
soundly all through the night.

Next morning I woke invigorated in body and mind.  Jack was up and about
before I opened my eyes.  He was at my side in a moment as I moved.

"Well, you have had a sleep," he said, cheerily.  "I have," replied I.
"But, Jack, where am I?"

"Oh, this is my lodgings," said he.  "I'm pretty comfortable here."

I looked round the room.  It was a poor, bare apartment, with only two
beds, a chair, a small table, and a washstand to furnish it.  The table
was covered with papers and books.

"You've got a sitting-room too, I suppose?"  I said, after taking the
room in.

He laughed.

"I find this quite as good a room to sit in as to lie in," said he, "for
the matter of that.  But I have got the use of another room belonging to
a fellow-lodger.  He's a literary man, and writes for the papers; but in
his spare moments he coaches me in Latin and Greek, in consideration of
which I give him half my room to sleep in."

"Whatever's he to do now when I'm here?"  I asked.

"Oh, he's going to have a shake-down in his own room.  You'll like him,
Fred; he's a very good-natured, clever man."

"How old?"  I asked.

"About fifty, I should think.  And I fancy he's seen a good deal of
trouble in his time, though I don't like to ask him."

"I say, Jack," I began in an embarrassed manner, "ever since that
time--"

"Shut up, now," said Jack, briskly.  "The doctor says unless you obey me
in everything you're to go straight to the hospital.  And one of my
rules is, you're to talk about nothing I don't approve of."

"I was only going to say--"

"There you go.  I don't approve of what you were going to say.  I
suppose you'll be interested to hear I reported your case to the firm
yesterday, and they were very sorry to hear of it, and told me there
were other fellows in the office they could have spared better.  There's
a compliment!"

"Was Hawkesbury at the office?"  I asked.

Jack's face clouded for a moment.

"Yes, Hawkesbury was there."

"You know he was with me when the accident happened?"  I said, by way of
explanation.

"Oh," said Jack.  "Hullo! here comes Billy.  I hope, you won't be
horrified to have him to look after you while I'm at the office.  He's
the only person I could think of."

"Billy and I are very good friends," I said, somewhat taken aback,
however, by the prospect of being consigned to that young gentleman's
charge for several hours every day.

"Here you are, Billy," said Jack, as the boy entered.  "You needn't have
brought your blacking-box with you, though."

"What, ain't none of the blokes here got no boots, then?" remarked the
youth, depositing his burden.

"The bloke, as you call him, who lies there," said Jack, pointing to me,
"won't be putting on his boots for a good many days yet."

Billy approached my bed with his most profuse grin.

"I say, ain't you been and done it?  Do you hear? you've broke your
arm!"

This piece of news being so remarkably unexpected visibly affected me.

"Yes," said Jack, "and I want you to sit here while I'm away, and see
nobody breaks it again."

"I'll give the fust bloke that tries it on a topper, so I will," said
Billy, fiercely, sitting down on his box and preparing to mount guard.

"I quite believe you," said Jack, laughing.  "But mind, Billy, you
mustn't make a noise or disturb him when he's resting.  And if anything
special happens and I'm badly wanted, you must run to my office and
fetch me.  You know where it is?"

"Yaas, I know," said Billy.

"If Mr Smith comes up, you may let him in and make yourself scarce till
he goes away again."

"What Mr Smith?"  I asked.

"Oh, my fellow-lodger.  Isn't it funny his name's Smith?  At least,
wouldn't it be funny if every other person weren't called Smith?"

"It is rather a large family," said I, laughing.

Billy having received his full instructions, including the serving of
certain provisions out of a cupboard in a corner of the room, made
himself comfortable on his perch, and sat eyeing me, after Jack had
gone, as if I were a criminal of some sort whom it was his duty to
prevent from escaping.

It was a queer situation to be in, certainly.  Left alone in a friend's
lodging with a broken arm and other contusions, and a small shoeblack to
look after me, who had once robbed me of my penknife and a sixpence!

I was rather doubtful whether his new employment was quite as congenial
to him as his old.  Indeed, I rather pitied him as he sat there silent
and motionless like a watch-dog on guard.

"You may stand on your hands if you like, Billy," I said, presently.

He eyed me sharply and doubtfully.

"You're 'avin' a lark with me," he said.

"No, I'm not.  You really may do it."

"Ain't a-goin' to do it," replied he, decisively.

"Why not?"  I asked.

"T'other bloke ain't said I'm to do it," replied he.

"Well," said I, "if you don't think he'd like it, don't do it.  For I'm
sure he's very good to you, Billy, isn't he?"

"'Tain't no concern of yourn," responded my genial guardian.

After this there was a long silence, and I was getting drowsy, when
Billy said, "That there 'orse was a-goin' it."

"What horse?"

"Why, as if you didn't know!  That there 'orse as was drivin' you blokes
a' Monday night."

"What, did you see us, then?"  I asked.

"In corse I did.  I seen you as I was a-comin' back from the racket
school.  My eye, wasn't you tidy and screwed though!  You don't ought to
be trusted with 'orses, you don't."

"I wasn't screwed, Billy," said I, "and I wasn't driving."

"No, that you wasn't driving.  But I knows the bloke as was."

"Do you know Mr Whipcord?"

"Yaas, I knows the animal," he replied, with a grin.  "He gave me a
doin' with his stick once, he did."

"But did you see me pitched out?"  I asked, not feeling particularly
interested in the last reminiscence.

"In corse I did.  I seen you.  Thought you was dead, and I fetches the
bloke to yer, and the bloke sends me for the doctor, and the doctor--"

At this moment the door opened and a stranger entered.

