and, of course, he won't wish to leave after that."

Mrs Niven shook her head, and observed that she rather feared Miss
Lizzie Gordon's image was already indelibly impressed on Master
Kenneth's heart, but Miss Peppy replied that that was all nonsense, and
that, at all events, her brother, Mr Stuart, would never permit it.
She did not find it difficult to gain over Mrs Niven to her views, for
that worthy woman, (like many other worthy women in this world), held
the opinion that a "good match" meant a match where money existed on one
or both sides, and that love was a mere boyish and girlish idea, which
should not be taken into consideration at all.

The two were still discussing this important subject when Mrs Gaff laid
violent hands on the door-bell.

On being admitted to the presence of Miss Peppy, Mrs Gaff sat down on
the packed trunk, and all but stove in the lid; whereupon she rose
hastily with many apologies, and afterwards in her confusion sat down on
the bonnet-box, which she stove in so completely as to render it
_hors-de-combat_ for all future time.

"I'm awful sorry," she began.

"Oh, no harm; at least no matter," said Miss Peppy, "it's quite a
useless sort of thing," (this was literally true), "and I mean to get a
new one immediately."

Mrs Gaff became suddenly comforted, and said, with a bland smile, that,
having heard only that morning of her intention to visit the town of
Athenbury, she had called to ask her to do her a great favour.

"With the greatest pleasure; what can I do for you?" said Miss Peppy,
who was the essence of good-nature.

"Thank 'ee, ma'am, it's to take charge o' a bit parcel, about the size
of my head, or thereaway, and give it to a poor relation o' mine as
lives there when he an't afloat."

"A seaman?" said Miss Peppy.

"Yes, ma'am."

"Very well; but," continued Miss Peppy, "you say the parcel is the size
of your head: do you mean your head with or without the bonnet?  Excuse
me for--"

"La! ma'am, _without_ the bonnet, of course.  It may perhaps be rather
heavy, but I an't quite sure yet.  I'll let you know in an hour or so."

Mrs Gaff rose abruptly, left the house, with Tottie, precipitately, and
made her way to the bank, where she presented herself with a defiant air
to the teller who had originally supplied her with a hundred pounds in
gold.  She always became and looked defiant, worthy woman, on entering
the bank, having become unalterably impressed with the idea that all the
clerks, tellers, and directors had entered into an agreement to throw
every possible difficulty in the way of her drawing out money, and
having resolved in her own determined way that she wouldn't give in as
long as, (to borrow one of her husband's phrases), "there was a shot in
the locker!"

"Now, sir," she said to the elderly teller, "I wants twenty pounds, if
there's as much in the shop."

The elderly teller smiled, and bade her sit down while he should write
out the cheque for her.  She sat down, gazing defiance all round her,
and becoming painfully aware that there were a number of young men
behind various screened rails whose noses were acting as safety-valves
to their suppressed feelings.

When the cheque was drawn out and duly signed, Mrs Gaff went to the
rails and shook it as she might have shaken in the face of her enemies
the flag under which she meant to conquer or to die.  On receiving it
back she returned and presented it to the elderly teller with a look
that said plainly--"There! refuse to cash that at your peril;" but she
said nothing, she only snorted.

"How will you have it?" inquired the teller blandly.

"In coppers," said Mrs Gaff stoutly.

"Coppers!" exclaimed the teller in amazement.

"Yes, coppers."

"My good woman, are you aware that you could scarcely lift such a sum in
coppers."

"How many would it make?" she inquired with an air of indecision.

"Four thousand eight hundred pence."

Mrs Gaff's resolution was shaken; after a few moments' consideration
she said she would take it in silver, and begged to have it mixed--with
a good number of sixpences amongst it.

"You see, my lamb," she whispered to Tottie, while the teller was
getting the money, "my poor cousin George is a'most too old to go to sea
now, and he han't got a penny to live on, an' so I wants to gladden his
heart and astonish his eyes wi' a sight o' such a heap o' silver.  Mix
it all together, sir," she said to the teller.

He obeyed, and pushed the pile towards Mrs Gaff, who surveyed it first
with unmixed delight; but gradually her face was clouded with a look of
concern as she thought of the counting of it.

If the counting of the gold was terrible to her, the counting of the
silver was absolutely appalling, for the latter, consisting as it did of
half-crowns, shillings, and sixpences, numbered nearly five hundred
pieces.

The poor woman applied herself to the task with commendable energy, but
in ten minutes she perceived that the thing was utterly beyond her
powers, so she suddenly exclaimed to Tottie, who stood looking on with
tears in her eyes,--"Surely the elderly teller must be an honest man,
and would never cheat me;" having come to which conclusion she swept the
silver into the bag previously prepared for it, and consigned that to
the basket which was the inseparable companion of her left arm.
Thereafter she left the bank and hastened to a grocer in the town with
whom she was acquainted, and from whom she obtained brown paper and
twine with which she made the money up into a parcel.  Her next act was
to purchase a new bonnet-box, which she presented to Miss Peppy with
many earnest protestations that she would have got a better if she
could, but a better was not to be had in town for love or money.

Having executed all her commissions, Mrs Gaff returned to Cove and
spent an hour or two with Tottie in the four-poster--not by any means
because she was lazy, but because it afforded her peculiar and
inexpressible pleasure to stare at the damask curtains and wonder how
Gaff would like it, and think of the surprise that he would receive on
first beholding _such_ a bed.  So anxious did the good woman become in
her desire to make the most of the new bed, that she once or twice
contemplated the propriety of Stephen and herself, and the Bu'ster and
Tottie, spending the first night, "after their return," all together in
it, but on mature consideration she dismissed the idea as untenable.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

MISS PEPPY UNDERTAKES A JOURNEY.

The scene is changed now to the railway station at Wreckumoft, where
there is the usual amount of bustle and noise.  The engines are
shrieking and snorting as if nothing on earth could relieve their
feelings but bursting.  Bells are ringing; porters are hurrying to and
fro with luggage on trucks, to the risk of passengers' shins and toes;
men, women, and children, young and old, high and low, rich and poor,
are mixed in confusion on the platform, some insanely attempting to
force their way into a train that is moving off, under the impression
that it is _their_ train, and they are too late "after all!"  Others are
wildly searching for lost luggage.  Many are endeavouring to calm their
own spirits, some are attempting to calm the spirits of others.  Timid
old ladies, who _cannot_ get reconciled to railways at all, are
convinced that "something is going to happen," and testy old gentlemen
are stumping about in search of wives and daughters, wishing that
railways had never been invented, while a good many self-possessed
individuals of both sexes are regarding the scene with serene composure.

When Miss Peppy made her appearance she was evidently not among the
latter class.  She was accompanied by Kenneth, and attended by Mrs
Niven.

Neither mistress nor maid had ever been in a railway station before.
They belonged to that class of females who are not addicted to
travelling, and who prefer stage-coaches of the olden times to railways.
They entered the station, therefore, with some curiosity and much
trepidation--for it chanced to be an excursion day, and several of the
"trades" of Athenbury were besieging the ticket-windows.

"It is very good of you to go with me, Kennie," said Miss Peppy, hugging
her nephew's arm.

"My dear aunt, it is a pleasure, I assure you," replied Kenneth; "I am
quite anxious to make the acquaintance of Colonel Crusty and his pretty
daughter."

"O dear! what a shriek!  Is anything wrong, Kennie?"

"Nothing, dear aunt; it is only a train about to start."

"What's the matter with you, Niven?" inquired Miss Peppy with some
anxiety, on observing that the housekeeper's face was ashy pale.

"Nothink, ma'am; only I feels assured that _everythink_ is a-goin' to
bu'st, ma'am."

She looked round hastily, as if in search of some way of escape, but no
such way presented itself.

"Look-out for your legs, ma'am," shouted a porter, as he tried to stop
his truck of luggage.

Mrs Niven of course did not hear him, and if she had heard him, she
would not have believed it possible that he referred to _her_ legs, for
she wore a very long dress, and was always scrupulously particular in
the matter of concealing her ankles.  Fortunately Kenneth observed her
danger, and pulled her out of the way with unavoidable violence.

"It can't 'old on much longer," observed Niven with a sigh, referring to
an engine which stood directly opposite to her in tremulous and
apparently tremendous anxiety to start.

The driver vented his impatience just then by causing the whistle to
give three sharp yelps, which produced three agonising leaps in the
bosoms of Miss Peppy and Mrs Niven.

"_Couldn't_ it all be done with a little less noise," said Miss Peppy to
Kenneth, "it seems to me so aw--oh! look! surely that old gentleman has
gone mad!"

"Not he," said Kenneth with a smile; "he has only lost his wife in the
crowd, and thinks the train will start before he finds her; see, she is
under the same impression, don't you see her rushing wildly about
looking for her husband, they'll meet in a moment or two if they keep
going in the same direction, unless that luggage-truck should
interfere."

"Look-out, sir!" shouted the porter at that moment.  The old gentleman
started back, and all but knocked over his wife, who screamed,
recognised him, and clung to his arm with thankful tenacity.

A bell rang.

The crowd swayed to and fro; agitated people became apparently insane;
timid people collapsed; strong people pushed, and weak folk gave way.
If any man should be sceptical in regard to the doctrine of the thorough
depravity of the human heart, he can have his unbelief removed by going
into and observing the conduct of an eager crowd!

"What a hinfamous state of things!" observed Mrs Niven.

"Yell!--shriek!" went the engine whistle, drowning Miss Peppy's reply.

"Take your seats!" roared the guard.

The engine gave a sudden snort, as if to say, "You'd better, else I'm
off without you."

"Now aunt," said Kenneth, "come along."

In another moment Miss Peppy was seated in a carriage, with her head out
of the window, talking earnestly and rapidly to Mrs Niven.

It seemed as if she had reserved all the household directions which she
had to give to that last inopportune moment!

"Now, take good care of Emmie, Niven, and don't forget to get her--"

The remainder was drowned by "that irritating whistle."

"Get her what, ma'am?"

"Get her shoes mended before Sunday, and remember that her petticoat was
torn when she--bless me! has that thing burst at last?"

"No, ma'am, not yet," said Niven.

"Now then, keep back; show your tickets, please," said the inspector,
pushing Niven aside.

"Imperence!" muttered the offended housekeeper, again advancing to the
window when the man had passed.

As the train was evidently about to start, Miss Peppy's memory became
suddenly very acute, and a rush of forgotten directions almost choked
her as she leaned out of the window.

"Oh!  Niven, I forgot--the--the--dear me, what is it?  I know it so well
when I'm not in a flurry.  It's awful to be subjected so constantly to--
the Child's History of England! that's it--on the top of my--my--which
trunk _can_ it be?  I know, oh yes, the leather one.  Emmie is to read--
well now, that is too bad--"

As Miss Peppy stopped and fumbled in her pocket inquiringly, Mrs Niven
asked, in some concern, if it was her purse.

"No, it's my thimble; ah! here it is, there's a corner in that pocket
where everything seems to--well," (shriek from the whistle), "oh! and--
and--the baker's book--it must be--by the bye, that's well remembered,
you must get money from Mr Stuart--"

"What _now_, ma'am," inquired Mrs Niven, as Miss Peppy again paused and
grew pale.

"The key!"

"Of the press?" inquired Niven.

"Yes--no; that is, it's the key of the press, and not the key of my
trunk.  Here, take it," (she thrust the key into the housekeeper's hand,
just as the engine gave a violent snort.) "What shall I do?  My trunk
won't open without, at least I suppose it won't, and it's a new lock!
what shall--"

"Make a parcel of the key, Niven," said Kenneth, coming to the rescue,
"and send it by the guard of next train."

"And oh!" shrieked Miss Peppy, as the train began to move, "I forgot
the--the--"

"Yes, yes, quick, ma'am," cried Niven eagerly, as she followed.

"Oh! can't they stop the train for a moment?  It's the--it's--dear me--
the pie--pie!"

"What pie, ma'am?"

"There's three of them--for my brother's dinner--I forgot to tell cook--
it'll put him out so--there's three of 'em.  It's not the--the--two but
the--the--_other_ one, the what-d'ye-call-it pie."  Miss Peppy fell back
on her seat, and gave it up with a groan.  Suddenly she sprang up, and
thrust out her head--"The _deer_ pie," she yelled.

"The dear pie!" echoed the astonished Mrs Niven interrogatively.

Another moment and Miss Peppy vanished from the scene, leaving the
housekeeper to return home in despair, from which condition she was
relieved by the cook, who at once concluded that the "dear pie" must
mean the venison pasty, and forthwith prepared the dish for dinner.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

PERPLEXITIES AND MUSICAL CHARMS.

My son Gildart, with his hands in his pockets and his cap very much on
one side of his head, entered my drawing-room one morning with a
perplexed air.

"What troubles you to-day?" asked Lizzie Gordon, who was seated at the
window winding up a ball of worsted, the skein of which was being held
by Miss Puff, who was at that time residing with us.

"What troubles me?--everything troubles me," said the middy with a stern
air, as he turned his back to the fire; "the world troubles me,
circumstances trouble me, my heart troubles me, my pocket troubles me,
my friends and relations trouble me, and so do my enemies; in fact, it
would be difficult to name the sublunary creature or thing that does
_not_ trouble me.  It blows trouble from every point of the compass, a
peculiarity in moral gales that is never observed in physical breezes."

"How philosophically you talk this morning," observed Lizzie with a
laugh.  "May it not be just possible that the trouble, instead of
flowing from all points to you as a centre, wells up within and flows
out in all directions, and that a warped mind inverts the process?"

"Perhaps you are right, sweet cousin!  Anyhow we can't be both wrong,
which is a comfort."

"May I ask what is the heart-trouble you complain of?" said Lizzie.

"Love and hatred," replied Gildart with a sigh and a frown.

