"Can it be possible," said Ned, "that our eyes don't deceive us!  Surely
some peculiarity in the atmosphere gives that tree false proportions?"

Without answering, Tom galloped towards the tree in question, closely
followed by his friend.

Instead of any delusive haze being cleared away, however, the tree grew
larger as they approached, and when they halted about twenty yards from
it, they felt that they were indeed in the presence of the monarch of
the forest.  The tree, which they measured, after viewing it in
wondering admiration from all points of view, was ninety-three feet in
circumference, and it could not have been less than three hundred and
sixty feet high.  They little knew that, many years afterwards, the bark
of this giant tree, to the height of a hundred and sixteen feet, was to
be removed to England, built up in its original form, and exhibited in
the great Crystal Palace of Sydenham; yet so it was, and part of the
"mother of the forest" may be seen there at this day.

Towards evening the travellers drew near to the head of the valley.

"We must be approaching a waterfall of no ordinary size," remarked Tom,
as they rode through the dark shades of the forest, which were pretty
extensive there.

"I have heard its roar for some time," answered Ned, "but until we clear
this belt of trees we shan't see it."

Just then the roar of the fall burst upon them with such deafening
violence, that they involuntarily started.  It seemed as if a mighty
torrent had burst its bounds and was about to sweep them away, along
with the forest through which they rode.  Pressing forward in eager
haste, they soon found that their having doubled round a huge mountain
barrier, which the trees had hitherto concealed from them, was the cause
of the sudden increase in the roar of the fall, but they were still
unable to see it, owing to the dense foliage that overshadowed them.  As
they galloped on, the thunder of falling waters became more deep and
intense, until they reached an elevated spot, comparatively free from
trees, which overlooked the valley, and revealed a sight such as is not
equalled even by Niagara itself.

A succession of wall-like mountains rose in two tiers before them
literally into the clouds, for several of the lower clouds floated far
below the highest peaks, and from the summit of the highest range a
river, equal to the Thames at Richmond, dropt sheer down a fall of above
two thousand feet.  Here it met the summit of the lower mountain-range,
on which it burst with a deep-toned, sullen, never-ceasing roar,
comparable only to eternal thunder.  A white cloud of spray received the
falling river in its soft embrace, and sent it forth again--turbulent
and foam bespeckled--towards its second leap, another thousand feet,
into the plain below.  The entire height of the fall was above three
thousand feet.  Its sublimity no language can convey.  Its irresistible
effect on the minds of the wanderers was to turn their thoughts to the
almighty Creator of so awe-inspiring and wonderful a scene.

Here they discovered another tree, which was so large that their
thoughts were diverted even from the extraordinary cataract for a short
time.  Unlike the previous one, this monarch of the woods lay prostrate
on the ground, but its diameter near the root was so great that they
could not see over it though seated on horseback.  It measured a hundred
and twenty feet in circumference, and, when standing, must have been
little, if at all, short of five hundred feet in height.

Surrounded as they were by such noble and stupendous works of God, the
travellers could not find words to express their feelings.  Deep emotion
has no articulate language.  The heaving breast and the glowing eye
alone indicate the fervour of the thoughts within.  For a long time they
sat gazing round them in silent wonder and admiration, then they
dismounted to measure the great tree, and after that Ned sat down to
sketch the fall, while his companion rode forward to select a spot for
camping on.

Tom had not proceeded far when he came upon the track of wheels in the
grass, a sight which surprised him much, for into that remote region he
had supposed few travellers ventured, even on horseback.  The depth and
breadth of the tracks, too, surprised him not a little.  They were much
deeper and broader than those caused by any species of cart he had yet
seen or heard of in the country, and the width apart was so great, that
he began to suspect he must have mistaken a curious freak of nature for
the tracks of a gigantic vehicle.  Following the track for some
distance, he came to a muddy spot, where the footprints of men and
horses became distinctly visible.  A little further on he passed the
mouth of what appeared to be a cavern, and, being of an inquisitive
disposition, he dismounted and tied his horse to a tree, intending to
examine the entrance.

To enter a dark cave, in a wild, unknown region, with the din of a
thundering cataract filling the ears, just after having discovered
tracks of a mysterious nature in the neighbourhood, was so trying to
Tom's nervous system, that he half resolved to give it up; but the
exploration of a cavern has a fascination to some dispositions which
every one cannot understand.  Tom said "Pshaw!" to himself in an
undertone, and boldly stepping into the dark portals of the cave, he
disappeared.

Meanwhile, Edward Sinton finished his sketch, and, supposing that Tom
was waiting for him in advance, he mounted and galloped forward as fast
as the nature of the ground would allow.

Soon he came to the tracks before mentioned, and shortly after to the
muddy spot with the footprints.  Here he drew rein, and dismounted to
examine the marks more closely.  Our hero was as much perplexed as his
friend had been at the unusually broad tracks of the vehicle which had
passed that way.  Leading his horse by the bridle, he advanced slowly
until he came to the spot where Tom's horse stood fastened to a tree,--a
sight which alarmed him greatly, for the place was not such as any one
would have selected for an encampment, yet had any foul play befallen
his friend, he knew well that the horse would not have been left quietly
there.

Sorely puzzled, and filled with anxious fears, he examined the spot
carefully, and at last came upon the entrance to the cavern, before
which he paused, uncertain what to do.  The shadows of evening were fast
falling on the scene, and he experienced a feeling of dread as he gazed
into the profound gloom.  He was convinced that Tom must be there; but
the silence, and the length of time he had been absent, led him to fear
that some accident had befallen his friend.

"Ho!  Tom!" he shouted, on entering, "are you there?"  There was a
rolling echo within, but no voice replied to the question.

Again Ned shouted at the full pitch of his lungs, and this time he
thought he heard a faint reply.  Hurrying forward eagerly, as quickly as
he dared, he repeated his shout, but the declivity of the entrance
became so great that he lost his footing and well-nigh fell headlong
down a steep incline.  He succeeded, however, in regaining his hold, and
clambered back to the entrance as quickly as possible.

Here he caught up a pine-knot, struck a light and kindled it, and, with
this torch held high above his head, advanced once more into the cavern.

The voice of Tom Collins at this moment came loud and full from the
interior,--"Take care, Ned, there's a sharp descent; I've tumbled down
it, but I don't think I'm much hurt."

"Cheer up, my boy," cried Ned, heartily; "I'll get you out in a minute."

The next moment he stood beside his friend, who had risen from the
rugged floor of the cave, and sat on a piece of rock, resting his head
on his hand.

"Are you badly hurt, my poor fellow?" said Ned, anxiously, going down on
one knee and endeavouring to raise his friend's head.  "I fear you are.
Here, try a drop of this brandy.  That's it.  Why, you look better
already.  Come, now, let me examine you."

The spirit revived Tom at once, and he replied cheerfully, as he
submitted to inspection,--"All right, I was only stunned a little by the
fall.  Catch me exploring again without a light!"

On examination, Ned found, to his great relief; that his friend's hurts
were slight.  He had been stunned by the severity of his fall, but no
bones were broken, and only a few scratches received, so that, after
another sip of brandy, he felt almost as well as ever.  But he firmly
resisted his companion's entreaty to leave the cavern.

"No, my boy," said he, "after paying such a price as entrance fee, I'm
not going to quit until I have explored the whole of this cave, so
please go out for another pine-knot or two, and I'll wait for you."

Seeing that he was determined, Ned obeyed, and soon returned with
several fresh torches, two of which were ignited, and a bright light
sent far and wide into the roof of the cave, which was at a great height
above them.

The walls were of curious, and in some places grotesque, forms.  Immense
stalactites hung from the roof, and these were of varied colours,--pale
green, pink, and white,--while some of them looked like cascades, which
sprang from the walls, and had been petrified ere they quite reached the
ground.  The roof was supported by natural pillars, and various arched
openings led into similar chambers, some of which were larger and more
curious than the outer one.

"Do you know," said Ned Sinton, as they sat down on a rock in one of the
inner chambers to rest, "this place recalls vividly to my remembrance a
strange dream which I had just before leaving England."

"Indeed!" said Tom; "I hope you're not a believer in dreams.  Don't, I
beseech you, take it into your head that it's going to be realised at
this particular moment, whatever it was."

"It would take a very strong amount of belief indeed to induce me to
expect the realisation of _that_ dream.  Shall I tell it you?"

"Is it a very ghostly one?" inquired Tom.

"No; not at all."

"Then out with it."

Ned immediately began the narration of the remarkable dream with which
this story opens, and as he went on to tell of how the stout old
gentleman snuffed gold-dust, and ultimately shot up to the roof of the
cave, and became a golden stalactite, Tom Collins, whose risible
tendencies were easily roused, roared with laughter, until the vaulted
caverns echoed again.  At the end of one of these explosions, the two
friends were struck dumb by certain doleful and mysterious sounds which
proceeded from the further end of the inmost chamber.  In starting to
his feet, Tom Collins let fall his torch, and in the convulsive clutch
which he made to catch it, he struck the other torch out of Ned's hand,
so that instantly both were left in the profoundest darkness, with their
hearts beating like sledge-hammers against their ribs.

To flee was their first and natural impulse; but to flee in the dark,
over rough ground, and with very imperfect ideas as to the position of
the cave's outlet, was dangerous.

"What _is_ to be done?" ejaculated Tom Collins in a tone that indicated
the perturbation of his heart too clearly.

At that moment Ned remembered that he had a box of matches in the pocket
of his hunting-coat; so, without answering, he drew it forth, struck a
light, and re-ignited the torches.

"Now, Tom," he said, "don't let us give way to unmanly fears.  I have no
belief whatever in ghosts or spirits, good or evil, being permitted to
come in visible or audible form to frighten poor mortals.  Every effect
has a cause, and I'm determined to find out the cause of these strange
sounds.  They certainly proceed from animal lungs, whether from man or
beast remains to be seen."

"Go ahead, then, I'll follow," said Tom, whose courage had returned with
the light, "I'm game for anything that I can see; but I confess to you
that I can _not_ stand howls, and groans and darkness."

Notwithstanding their utmost efforts they failed to discover the cause
of the mysterious sounds, which seemed at times to be voices muttering,
while at other times they swelled out into a loud cry.  All that could
be certainly ascertained was, that they proceeded from the roof of the
innermost cavern, and that the centre of that roof was too high to be
discerned by torch-light.

"What shall we do now?" inquired Tom.

"We shall go to the summit of the hill above this cave, and see what is
to be seen there.  Always look at both sides of a mystery if you would
fathom it; come along."

In a few minutes they stood in open air, and once more breathed freely.
Mounting their horses, they ascended the steep slope of the hill above
the cave, and, after some trouble, reached the summit.  Here the first
thing that met their gaze was a camp-fire, and near to it several men
engaged in harnessing their horses to a large waggon or van.  The
frantic haste with which they performed the operation convinced Ned that
he had discovered the cause of the mysterious voices, and that he and
Tom had been the innocent cause of frightening the strangers nearly out
of their wits.  So engrossed were they with their work, that our
travellers advanced within the circle of light of their fire before they
were discovered.  The man who first saw them uttered a yell, and the
whole party turned round, seized their rifles, and, with terror depicted
on their countenances, faced the intruders.

"Who comes here?" shouted one.

"Friends," answered Ned, laying down his rifle and advancing.

Instantly the men threw down their arms and resumed the work of
harnessing their horses.

"If ye be friends," cried the one who spoke first, "give us a hand.  I
guess all the fiends in the bottomless pit are lo-cated jist below our
feet."

"Listen to me for one moment, gentlemen," cried Ned Sinton.  "I think I
can relieve your minds.  What have you heard or seen?"

At these words the men stopped, and looked inquiringly at their
questioner.

"Seen! stranger, we've seed nothin', but we've _hear'd_ a sight, we
have, I calc'late.  We hear'd the imps o' darkness talkin' as plain as I
hear you.  At first I thought it was somebody at the foot o' the hill,
but all of a suddent the imps took to larfin' as if they'd split, jist
under my feet, so I yelled out to my mate here to come an' yoke the
beasts and git away as slick as we could.  We wos jist about ready to
slope when you appeared."

Ned now explained to them the cause of their alarms, and on search being
made, a hole was found, as he had anticipated, close at hand among the
bushes, which communicated with the cavern below, and formed a channel
for the conveyance of the so-called mysterious sounds.

"And now," said Ned, "may I ask permission to pass the night with you?"

"You're welcome, stranger," replied he who seemed to be the chief of the
band--a tall, bearded American, named Croft, who seemed more like a
bandit than an honest man.  His comrades, too, six in number, appeared a
wild and reckless set of fellows, with whom one would naturally desire
to hold as little intercourse as possible; but most men at the
Californian diggings had more or less the aspect of brigands, so Ned
Sinton and his companion felt little concern as to their characters,
although they did feel a little curious as to what had brought them to
such a wild region.

"If it is not taking too great a liberty," said Ned, after answering the
thousand questions put to him in rapid succession by his Yankee host,
"may I ask what has brought you to this out-of-the-way valley?"

"Bear-catchin'," answered the man, shortly, as he addressed himself to a
large venison steak, which a comrade had just cooked for him.

"Bear-catching?" ejaculated Ned.

"Ay, an' screamin' hard work it is too, I guess; but it pays well."

"What do you do with them when caught?" inquired Tom Collins, in a
somewhat sceptical tone.

"Take 'em down to the cities, an' sells 'em to fight with wild bulls."

At this answer our travellers stared at the man incredulously.

"You're strangers here, I see," he resumed, "else you'd know that we
have bull and bear fights.  The grizzlies are chained by one leg and the
bulls let loose at 'em.  The bulls charge like all possessed, but they
find it hard to do much damage to Caleb, whose hide is like a
double-extra rhinoceros.  The grizzlies ginerally git the best of it;
an' if they was let loose, they'd chaw up the bulls in no time, they
would.  There's a great demand for 'em jist now, an' my trade is
catchin' 'em alive here in the mountains."

The big Yankee stretched out his long limbs and smoked his pipe with the
complacent aspect of a man who felt proud of his profession.

"Do you mean that you seven men catch fall-grown grizzly-bears alive and
take them down to the settlements?" inquired Ned in amazement.

"Sartinly I do," replied the bear-catcher; "an' why not, stranger?"

"Because I should have thought it impossible."

"Nothin''s impossible," replied the man, quietly.

"But how do you manage it?"

Instead of replying, the Yankee inquired if "the strangers" would stay
over next forenoon with them.

"With much pleasure," answered Ned, not a little amused at the
invitation, as well as the man's _brusque_ manner.

"Well, then," continued the bear-catcher, shaking the ashes out of his
pipe, and putting it into his hat, "I'll let ye see how we do it in the
mornin'.  Good-night."

So saying, he drew his blanket over his head and resigned himself to
sleep, an example which was speedily followed by the whole party.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

GRIZZLY-BEAR-CATCHING IN THE MOUNTAINS--NED AND TOM DINE IN THE MIDST OF
ROMANTIC SCENERY, AND HOLD SAGACIOUS CONVERSE--THE STRANGE DEVICES OF
WOODPECKERS.

Just as day began to peep on the following morning, the camp was roused
by one of the bear-catchers, a Mexican, who had been away to visit the
bear-trap during the night, and now came rushing in among the sleepers,
shouting--

"Hoor-roo! boy, him cotch, him cotch! big as twinty mans! fact!"

At first Ned thought the camp was attacked by savages, and he and Tom
sprang to their feet and grasped their rifles, while they sought to rub
their eyes open hastily.  A glance at the other members of the camp,
however, shewed that they were unnecessarily alarmed.  Croft leisurely
stretched his limbs, and then gathered himself slowly into a sitting
posture, while the others arose with various degrees of reluctance.

"Bin long in?" inquired Croft.

"No, jist cotched," answered the Mexican, who sat down, lit his pipe,
and smoked violently, to relieve his impatient feelings.

"Big 'un?" inquired Croft, again.

To this the Mexican answered by rolling his eyes and exclaiming "Hoh!"
