have looked better simply whitewashed.  They were suffocating in summer
and draughty in winter, and at nights afforded rendezvous to a whole
colony of rats.  Every step on the staircase above thundered down into
the study; the loosely-hung windows rattled even in a light breeze, and
the flavours of the college dustbins, hard by, appeared to have selected
these chambers, above all others, for their favourite haunt.  I am told
Saint George's College has recently undergone renovation.  It so, it is
probable "the Mouse-trap"--for this was the designation by which George
Reader's classical domain was familiarly styled--has disappeared.  Let
us hope so, for a more miserable, uncomfortable, and uninviting couple
of rooms I never saw.

But they had one merit, and that a great one: they were cheap, which to
George Reader meant everything.  He had gained a small entrance
scholarship, by the help of which he hoped, with the most rigid economy,
to support himself during his college career.  Most other young fellows
would have shrunk from the prospect, but such was my master's ambition
that I believe he would have endured life in a stable if only he could
have there enjoyed the advantages and encouragements of a college
course.

It was, at any rate, a fine sight to see him settle down in his new
dispiriting quarters, determined to make the best of everything, and
suffer nothing to damp his ardour for work.  He unpacked his few
precious books and laid them on the shelf; he hung up the likenesses of
his father and mother over the chimney-piece; he produced the cheese
which the latter had insisted on his bringing with him, and, as a
crowning-effect, set me up on the mantel-shelf with as much pride as if
I had been a marble clock.

"That looks something like!" he said to himself.  "Now for a little tea,
and then--grind!"

The little tea, however, was "sooner said than done."  It involved a
prolonged hunt for the "gyp," or attendant, and a still more prolonged
conference on the subject of hot water, tea, and bread.  The suggestions
thrown out by the college official, too, were so very lordly and
extravagant--such, for instance, as ham and eggs, chicken, marmalade,
and chocolate--that poor George's heart fluttered as much as his mouth
watered while he listened.  Chicken and chocolate for a poor student who
had barely enough money to afford so much as the luxury of living in the
"Mouse-trap" of Saint George's!  Well he might be scared at the idea!
He politely declined the grand offer of his scout, and asking him to
light a small fire and procure him a loaf, sallied out himself into the
town and purchased a small and very cheap quantity of groceries.  With
these he returned in triumph to his rooms, and, with the utmost
satisfaction, partook of his first college meal, with a Euclid open on
the table beside him.

Then pouring out a final cup of tea to enjoy, cold, later on, he
"cleared the decks for action," as he called it, which meant putting
away the tea, butter, sugar, and bread in a cupboard, and folding up the
table cloth.  Poor George! he had no false pride to forbid such menial
offices; he had not the brag about him which would have led another to
stand on the staircase and howl "Gyp" till every one far and near should
be made aware that he had had a meal which required clearing away.  No;
he was only a gamekeeper's son, in a hurry to get at his books; and to
him it was far more natural to wait on his own frugal table than sit in
state till a servant should come and clear it.

"Now," said he to himself, "I shall get a good quiet time for work.
After all it's not bad to be one's own master where reading is
concerned."

And without more ado he set himself down to his books, with me on the
table at his elbow, and his cup of tea within reach, when such
refreshment should be desirable.  It was a fine thing to see this young
fellow plunging straight into his work.

Assuredly he had not come to college to fritter away his time--to row,
play cricket, give wine-parties, or drive dog-carts; he had not even
come because it was "the thing," or afforded a "good introduction into
the world."  No, he was here for one purpose, and one alone.  That was
work.  To him the days were as precious mines, and every minute a
nugget.  It mattered nothing to him who won the cricket-match this year,
who occupied the rooms next his, how many bumps the Saint George's boat
made on the river; far more important was the thought that perhaps the
oil in his lamp would run short before the night was out, or whether the
edition of Plato his friend the Muggerbridge clergyman had given him was
the best, and contained the fullest notes.  In short, George Reader was
in earnest.

But, like the tea, the "good quiet time" he hoped for was not so easy to
secure.  Scarcely had he settled down when the voices of two men in loud
conversation rose, immediately under his window.  Now, when one is in
the agony of trying to understand how it comes that a certain number of
angles in one figure are equal to a certain number of angles in another,
it is, to say the least of it, confusing to have to listen to a spirited
account of a boxing-match between Jack Straight and the Hon.  Wilfred
Dodge; and when that account manages to get interwoven inextricably with
the problem in hand the effect is likely to be distracting; for
instance:--

"Since the solid angle at B is contained by three plane angles, BAF,
FAC, and CAB, then--"

"Jack let out and got in sweetly under his man's guard," and so on.

"Therefore," persevered George, "the angles ABC and ABF--"

"Rounded on him grandly, and--"

"The angles ABC and ABF are together greater than the angle CBF; and,
similarly--"

Here the conversation was continued in language far more worthy of the
disgraceful prize-ring than a college, until George could bear it no
longer.  He leapt from his seat and sprang to the window, which he
opened.  Leaning out, he surveyed the two disturbers of his peace with
very little affection, but controlled himself sufficiently to say
politely,--

"Would you mind not talking just here?  I'm reading."

One of the two scowled up at him, and replied,--

"What business is it of yours where we talk?"

"Come on, Fisher," said the other, taking his arm; "let the man read if
he wants; I suppose that's the poor beggar who's come to the `trap.'"

"He's got a cool cheek of his own, whoever he is," retorted the
indignant Fisher.

George was too relieved to be rid of their clatter under his window to
trouble himself as to their sentiments towards himself, and he therefore
once again settled down to work.

But now a new interruption occurred.

There arose a sudden rush of feet outside his door, a laughing and a
cheering, in the midst of which he caught the following confused
utterances:

"George's has bumped Corpus!" cried a voice.

[See Note 1.]

"Hurrah!" yelled half a dozen voices.

"It was the finest bit of rowing ever you saw," continued the first
speaker.  "Bailey put it on from the very first stroke, and was on the
top of them before the Point."

And then the three cheers and yells rose again.

"You can fancy how black and blue Corpus looked--it's the biggest sell
they've had for a long time."

Once more the shouts.

"And what do you think?" resumed the first speaker.  "Old Bailey vows he
won't come to the supper to-night.  Did ever you hear of such an old
bear?"

"He'll have to come," cried the rest; "let's waylay him here and carry
him off."

"All serene," said the leader; "he's sure to come here--let's hang about
on the stairs."

Oh, horrors! here were six noisy men going to establish themselves on
the stairs over poor George's head, and remain there until their victim
arrived, when, unless college traditions were utterly false, there would
certainly be a battle royal.  It was impossible, with the cheering and
stamping and shouting and laughing, and scuffling overhead, to do a
stroke of work, and yet George did his best.  He pulled his table into
the corner of the room farthest away from the noise, and, burying his
head in his hands, struggled desperately to abstract himself from the
disturbance.  But as sure as he succeeded for a minute, a clamour louder
than ever would drive _every_ idea out of his head.  It was vain to
attempt expostulation--what would these jubilant revellers care for a
poor new man like him!--and he had nowhere else to go to escape them
there was nothing for it but to be patient.  In due time the victorious
and unsuspecting Bailey, accompanied by four of his friends, appeared on
the scene, and their approach was the immediate signal for action.  With
a cheer and a howl the ambush sprang upon their victims; and, with equal
vehemence, these, having rapidly taken in the state of affairs, prepared
to defend themselves.  Poor George might as well have been sitting under
Niagara.  Step by step, the new-comers strove to force a passage up to
Bailey's rooms, and step by step the opposing force strove to repulse
them.  The balustrades creaked, the ceiling of George's room quaked, and
the walls thundered with the weight of conflicting bodies.  The
occupants of every room on the staircase turned out to see the fun, and
on hearing of Bailey's contumacy, joined with his persecutors in
refusing him the shelter of his own sanctuary.  Bailey's party, on the
other hand, was joined by reinforcements from without, who stormed up
the stairs with the noise of an earthquake.  The opposing forces soon
became so great that the press of battle raged even to the door of
George's study, which creaked and rattled as if every moment it were
about to yield and admit the whole tide of conflict.

For half an hour the tumult roared and the battle swayed, and neither
party gained nor yielded a foot.

Then suddenly from the confines of the battle rose and spread a cry of
"Cave canem!" on which, as if by magic, the action was suspended, and
retreating footsteps betokened a panic.  A rally was sounded by Bailey's
foes, but too late; the hero of the day had taken advantage of the
momentary pause to dash past his persecutors and gain his study, and
once there no force could dislodge him.  The vanquished ones stormed and
raged outside his door for another ten minutes, threatening all sorts of
vengeance; then with three mighty cheers they struck camp and retired,
leaving the staircase in peace.

Thus ended the famous battle of Bailey's Staircase, at the end of which
George, with sunken spirits but indomitable resolution, sat down again
to work.

For half an hour he made good progress, without let or hindrance, when--
ah, cruel fate!--a wretch calling himself a man, in a neighbouring
apartment, began to practise on the ophicleide!  At the first note
George bounded from his seat as if he had been shot, and literally tore
his hair.  This was worse than all that had gone before.  To one of his
musical inspiration, the human voice divine in conversation was,
endurable, and the roar of battle might even be tolerable, but to hear a
creature attempt to play one of the "songs without words" on an
instrument he knew as little of as the music he was parodying, was
beyond all bearing!  Then, if ever, did my wretched master dig his
fingers into his ears, and writhe and shiver and groan at each discord
produced by that inhuman performer.  He retreated into the innermost
recess of his bedroom; he even hid his unhappy head beneath the clothes,
if haply he might escape the agony of this torture.  But it was
hopeless.  The shrieks and groans of that brutal ophicleide would have
penetrated the walls of the Tower of London.

It lasted, I should not like to say how long; and when it was over, the
recollection of its horrors was almost as bad as their endurance.  When
George set himself again to work, it was with nerves unstrung and
unutterable forebodings, yet still unconquered.

"At any rate," said he to himself, with a sigh, "there can't be anything
worse than that--unless, indeed, he invites a friend like himself to
practise duets with him!"

Happily this climax was not reached, and for one evening the worst of
George Reader's persecutions had been suffered--but not the last.

By the time the last wail of the ophicleide had wriggled away into
silence it was getting late, and the college was meditating retirement
to rest.  This operation was not got through, as may be imagined,
without a good deal of clamour and a good deal of scuffling on the
staircase, and a good deal of dialogue outside the window; but in due
time silence reigned, and George congratulated himself that he had a
quiet time at last before him.

Unlucky boast!  Not an hour had passed, the lights in the windows round
the courtyard had vanished, the distant shouts had ceased, and the
footsteps on the pavement without had died away, when George was
startled by a sound that seemed like the boring of a hole under his
fireplace.  The noise grew, and other similar noises rose in different
parts.  What was it?  Surely the gay students of Saint George's were not
about to effect an amateur burglary on the friendless owner of the
"Mouse-trap?"

Nearer and nearer came the sounds, and George's heart beat loud.  He
closed his book and pushed his chair back from the table, ready to
defend himself, on an emergency, to the bitter end.  Then, under the
hearth, there was a sound of scraping and grating, then a rushing noise,
and then George saw--two enormous rats!

Loud and long laughed my master to himself at the discovery.  What cared
_he_ for rats?  He pulled his chair back to the table, and buried
himself in his book for the next three hours, until his lamp began to
burn low, and the letters on the pages grew blurred and dim, and the
rats had scuffled back by the way they came, and my flagging hands
pointed to four o'clock.

Then George Reader, after kneeling in silent prayer, went to bed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  At the college races at Cambridge the boats start one behind
the other at fixed distances, and any boat overtaking and "bumping" the
one in front of it moves up a place nearer to the "Head of the River."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

HOW MY MASTER FARED AT SAINT GEORGE'S COLLEGE AND MET AN OLD
ACQUAINTANCE OF THE READER'S THERE.

It is not my intention in these pages to give a full and particular
account of George Reader's college life.  It would neither be on the
whole interesting, nor would it be found to have much bearing on my own
career, which is the ostensible theme of the present veracious history.

Stories of college life have furnished amusing material for many a book
before now, to which the reader must turn, should his curiosity in that
direction require to be satisfied.  The life of a hard--a too hard-
working student in his cell under the college staircase is neither
amusing nor sensational, and it is quite enough to say that, after his
first eventful evening, George Reader pursued his studies with
unflagging ardour, though with greater precaution than ever.

He soon discovered which hours of the day and night were most favourable
for uninterrupted work.

He made a point of taking his constitutional during the hour made
hideous by the ill-starred aspirant on the ophicleide.  He invested in a
trap for the rats, which, with the aid of his mother's cheese, yielded
him a nightly harvest of victims, and he arranged with Benson, the
"gyp," not to interrupt him, preferring rather to wait on himself--nay,
even to dust out his own room--than have to sacrifice precious time
while the same offices were being performed by another, especially by
such an overpowering and awe-inspiring person as Benson.

So he set himself to work, attending lectures by day, reading every
night into the small hours, spending scarcely anything, shrinking from
all acquaintanceships, taking only a minimum of recreation, and living
almost the life of a hermit, until I could see his cheeks grow pale, and
his eyes dark round the rims, and feared for his health.

He treated me uniformly well.  Of course, as the gift of his fellow-
villagers, he prized me highly, but by no means consigned me to the
stately repose of a purely ornamental treasure.  I lay nightly beside
his elbow on the table, and counted for him the hours as they sped from
night to morning.  I lay beneath his pillow at night, and helped him to
rise betimes.  I insured his punctual attendance at lectures, and drove
him home from his scanty walks in the fresh air more quickly than I
myself would have cared to do if I could have helped it.  In short, I
