They were of the shape of large cones, or rounded pyramids, with a
number of smaller cones rising around their bases, and clustering like
turrets along their sides.  I knew they were the hills of a species of
white ant called by entomologists _Termes bellicosus_.

"There were other hills, of cylinder shape and rounded tops, that stood
only about a yard high; looking like rolls of unbleached linen set
upright--each with an inverted basin upon its end.  These were the homes
of a very different species, the _Termes mordax_ of the entomologists;
though still another species of _Termes_ (_Termes atrox_) build their
nests in the same form.

"I did not stop then to examine these curious structures.  I only speak
of them now, to give you an idea of the sort of place it was, so that
you may understand what followed.

"What with the cone-shaped hills and the cylinders, the plain was pretty
well covered.  One or the other was met with every two hundred yards;
and I fancied with these for a shelter I should have but little
difficulty in getting within shot of the gnoos.

"I made a circuit to head them, and crept up behind a large cone-shaped
hill, near which the thick of the drove was feeding.  When I peeped
through the turrets, to my chagrin, I saw that the cows and younger ones
had been drawn off beyond reach, and the two old bulls were, as before,
capering between me and the herd.

"I repeated the manoeuvre, and stalked in behind another large cone,
close to which the beasts were feeding.  When I raised myself for a
shot, I was again disappointed.  The herd had moved off as before, and
the brace of bulls still kept guard in the rear.

"I began to feel provoked.  The conduct of the bulls annoyed me
exceedingly, and I really fancied that they knew it.  Their manoeuvres
were of the oddest kind, and some of them appeared to be made for the
purpose of mocking me.  At times they would charge up very close--their
heads set in a menacing attitude; and I must confess that with their
black shaggy fronts, their sharp horns, and glaring red eyes, they
looked anything but pleasant neighbours.

"I got so provoked with them at last, that I resolved they should bother
me no longer.  If they would not permit me to shoot one of the others, I
was determined they themselves should not escape scot-free, but should
pay dearly for their temerity and insolence.  I resolved to put a bullet
through one of them, at least.

"Just as I was about raising my gun to fire, I perceived that they had
placed themselves in attitude for a new fight.  This they did by
dropping on their knees, and sliding forward until their heads came in
contact.  They would then spring up, make a sudden bound forward, as if
to get uppermost, and trample one another with their hoofs.  Failing in
this, both would rush past, until they were several yards apart; then
wheel round, drop once more to their knees; and advance as before.

"Hitherto I had looked upon these conflicts as merely playful; and so I
fancy most of them were.  But this time the bulls seemed to be in
earnest.  The loud cracking of their helmet-covered foreheads against
each other, their fierce snorting and bellowing, and, above all, their
angry manner, convinced me that they had really quarrelled, and were
serious about it.

"One of them, at length, seemed to be getting knocked over repeatedly.
Every time he had partially risen to his feet, and before he could quite
recover them, his antagonist rushed upon him, and butted him back upon
his side.

"Seeing them so earnestly engaged, I thought I might as well make a sure
shot of it, by going a little nearer; so I stepped from behind the
ant-hill, and walked towards the combatants.  Neither took any notice of
my approach--the one because he had enough to do to guard himself from
the terrible blows, and the other because he was so occupied in
delivering them.

"When within twenty paces I levelled my gun.  I chose the bull who
appeared victor, partly as a punishment for his want of feeling in
striking a fallen antagonist, but, perhaps, more because his broadside
was towards me, and presented a fairer mark.

"I fired.

"The smoke hid both for a moment.  When it cleared off, I saw the bull
that had been conquered still down in a kneeling attitude, but, to my
great surprise, the one at which I had aimed was upon his feet,
apparently as brisk and sound as ever!  I knew I had hit him somewhere--
as I heard the `thud' of the bullet on his fat body--but it was plain I
had not crippled him.

"I was not allowed time for reflection as to where I had wounded him.
Not an instant indeed, for the moment the smoke cleared away, instead of
the bulls clearing off also, I saw the one I had shot at fling up his
tail, lower his shaggy front, and charge right towards me!

"His fierce eyes glanced with a revengeful look, and his roar was enough
to have terrified one more courageous than I.  I assure you I was less
frightened the other day when I encountered the lion.

"I did not know what to do for some moments.  I thought of setting
myself in an attitude of defence, and involuntarily had turned my gun
which was now empty--intending to use it as a club.  But I saw at once,
that the slight blow I could deliver would not stop the onset of such a
strong fierce animal, and that he would butt me over, and gore me, to a
certainty.

"I turned my eyes to see what hope there lay in flight.  Fortunately
they fell upon an ant-hill--the one I had just emerged from.  I saw at a
glance, that by climbing it I would be out of reach of the fierce
wildebeest.  Would I have time to get to it before he could overtake me?

"I ran like a frightened fox.  You, Hendrik, can beat me running upon
ordinary occasions.  I don't think you could have got quicker to that
ant-hill than I did.

"I was not a second too soon.  As I clutched at the little turrets, and
drew myself up, I could hear the rattle of the wildebeest's hoofs behind
me, and I fancied I felt his hot breath upon my heels.

"But I reached the top cone in safety; and then turned and looked down
at my pursuer.  I saw that he could not follow me any farther.  Sharp as
his horns were, I saw that I was safe out of their reach."



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

BESIEGED BY THE BULL.

"Well," continued Hans, after a pause, "I began to congratulate myself
on my fortunate escape; for I was convinced that but for the ant-hill I
would have been trampled and gored to death.  The bull was one of the
largest and fiercest of his kind, and a _very_ old one too, as I could
tell by the bases of his thick black horns nearly meeting over his
forehead, as well as by his dark colour.  I had plenty of time to note
these things.  I felt that I was now safe--that the wildebeest could not
get near me; and I sat perched upon the top of the central cone,
watching his movements with perfect coolness.

"It is true he did everything to reach my position.  A dozen times he
charged up the hill, and more than once effected a lodgment among the
tops of the lower turrets, but the main one was too steep for him.  No
wonder!  It, had tried my own powers to scale it.

"At times he came so close to me in his desperate efforts, that I could
have touched his horns with the muzzle of my gun; and I had prepared to
give him a blow whenever I could get a good chance.  I never saw a
creature behave so fiercely.  The fact was, that I had hit him with my
bullet,--the wound was there along his jaw, and bleeding freely.  The
pain of it maddened him; but that was not the only cause of his fury, as
I afterwards discovered.

"Well.  After several unsuccessful attempts to scale the cone, he varied
his tactics, and commenced butting the ant-heap as though he would bring
it down.  He repeatedly backed, and then charged forward upon it with
all his might; and, to say the truth, it looked for some time as though
he would succeed.

"Several of the lesser cones were knocked over by his powerful blows;
and the hard tough clay yielded before his sharp horns, used by him as
inverted pickaxes.  In several places I could see that he had laid open
the chambers of the insects, or rather the ways and galleries that are
placed in the outer crust of the hill.

"With all this I felt no fear.  I was under the belief that he would
soon exhaust his rage and go away; and then I could descend without
danger.  But after watching him a good long spell, I was not a little
astonished to observe that, instead of cooling down, he seemed to grow
more furious than ever.  I had taken out my handkerchief to wipe the
perspiration off my face.  It was as hot as an oven where I sat.  Not a
breath of air was stirring, and the rays of the sun, glaring right down
and then reflecting up again from the white clay, brought the
perspiration out of me in streams.  Every minute I was obliged to rub my
eyes clear of it with the handkerchief.

"Now, before passing the kerchief over my face, I always shook it open;
and each time I did so, I noticed that the rage of the wildebeest seemed
to be redoubled!  In fact, at such times he would leave off goring the
heap, and make a fresh attempt to rush up at me, roaring his loudest as
he charged against the steep wall!

"I was puzzled at this, as well as astonished.  What could there be in
my wiping my face to provoke the wildebeest anew?  And yet such was
clearly the case.  Every time I did so, he appeared to swell with a
fresh burst of passion!

"The explanation came at length.  I saw that it was not the wiping off
the perspiration that provoked him.  It was the shaking out of my
handkerchief.  This was, as you know, of a bright scarlet colour.  I
thought of this, and then, for the first time, remembered having heard
that anything scarlet has a most powerful effect upon the wildebeest,
and excites him to a rage resembling madness.

"I did not wish to keep up his fury.  I crumpled up the handkerchief and
buried it in my pocket--preferring to endure the perspiration rather
than remain there any longer.  By hiding the scarlet, I conceived a hope
he would the sooner cool down, and go away.

"But I had raised a devil in him too fierce to be so easily laid.  He
showed no signs of cooling down.  On the contrary, he continued to
charge, butt, and bellow, as vengefully as ever--though the scarlet was
no longer before his eyes.

"I began to feel really annoyed.  I had no idea the gnoo was so
implacable in his rage.  The bull evidently felt pain from his wound.  I
could perceive that he moaned it.  He knew well enough it was I who had
given him this pain.

"He appeared determined not to let me escape retribution.  He showed no
signs of an intention to leave the place; but laboured away with hoof
and horns, as if he would demolish the mound.

"I was growing very tired of my situation Though not afraid that the
bull could reach me, I was troubled by the thought of being so long
absent from our camp.  I knew I should have been there.  I thought of my
little sister and brother.  Some misfortune might befall them.  I was
very sad about that, though up to that time I had little or no fears for
myself.  I was still in hopes the wildebeest would tire out and leave
me, and then I could soon run home.

"I say, up to that time I had no very serious fears for myself--
excepting the moment or two when the bull was chasing me to the hill;
but that little fright was soon over.

"But now appeared a new object of dread--another enemy, as terrible as
the enraged bull--that almost caused me to sprint down upon the horns of
the latter in my first moments of alarm!

"I have said that the wildebeest had broken down several of the lesser
turrets--the outworks of the ant-hill--and had laid open the hollow
spaces within.  He had not penetrated to the main dome, but only the
winding galleries and passages that perforate the outer walls.

"I noticed, that, as soon as these were broken open, a number of ants
had rushed out from each.  Indeed, I had observed many of the creatures
crawling outside the hill, when I first approached it, and had wondered
at this--as I knew that they usually keep under ground when going and
coming from their nests.  I had observed all this, without taking note
of it at the time--being too intent in my stalk to think of anything
else.  For the last half-hour I was too busy watching the manoeuvres of
the wildebeest bull, to take my gaze off him for a moment.

"Something in motion directly under me at length caught my eye, and I
looked down to see what it was.  The first glance caused me to jump to
my feet; and, as I have already said, very nearly impelled me to leap
down upon the horns of the bull!

"Swarming all over the hill, already clustering upon my shoes, and
crawling still higher, were the crowds of angry ants.  Every hole that
the bull had made was yielding out its throng of spiteful insects; and
all appeared moving towards _me_!

"Small as the creatures were, I fancied I saw design in their movements.
They seemed all actuated with the same feeling--the same impulse--that
of attacking me.  I could not be mistaken in their intent.  They moved
all together, as if guided and led by intelligent beings; and they
advanced towards the spot on which I stood.

"I saw, too, that they were the _soldiers_.  I knew these from the
workers, by their larger heads and long horny mandibles.  I knew they
could bite fiercely and painfully.

"The thought filled me with horror.  I confess it, I never was so
horrified before.  My late encounter with the lion was nothing to
compare with it.

"My first impression was that I would be destroyed by the termites.  I
had heard of such things--I remembered that I had.  It was that, no
doubt, that frightened me so badly.  I had heard of men in their sleep
being attacked by the white ants, and bitten to death.  Such memories
came crowding upon me at the moment, until I felt certain, that if I did
not soon escape from that spot, the ants would _sting me to death and
eat me up_!"



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

A HELPLESS BEAST.

"What was to be done?  How was I to avoid both enemies?  If I leaped
down, the wildebeest would kill me to a certainty.  He was still there,
with his fierce eye bent upon me continually.  If I remained where I
was, I would soon be covered with the swarming hideous insects, and
eaten up like an old rag.

"Already I felt their terrible teeth.  Those that had first crawled to
my feet I had endeavoured to brush off; but some had got upon my ankles,
and were biting me through my thick woollen socks!  My clothes would be
no protection.

"I had mounted to the highest part of the cone, and was standing upon
its apex.  It was so sharp I could scarcely balance myself, but the
painful stings of the insects caused me to dance upon it like a
mountebank.

"But what signified those, that had already stung my ankles, to the
numbers that were likely soon to pierce me with their venomous darts?
Already these were swarming up the last terrace.  They would soon cover
the apex of the cone upon which I was standing.  They would crawl up my
limbs in myriads--they would--

"I could reflect no longer on what they would do.  I preferred taking my
chance with the wildebeest.  I would leap down.  Perhaps some lucky
accident might aid me.  I would battle with the gnoo, using my gun.
Perhaps I might succeed in escaping to some other hill.  Perhaps--

"I was actually on the spring to leap down, when a new thought came into
my mind; and I wondered I had been so silly as not to think of it
before.  What was to hinder me from keeping off the termites?  They had
no wings--the soldiers have none--nor the workers neither, for that
matter.  They could not fly upon me.  They could only crawl up the cone.
With my jacket I could brush them back.  Certainly I could--why did I
not think of it before?

"I was not long in taking off my jacket.  I laid aside my useless gun,
dropping it upon one of the lower terraces.  I caught the jacket by the
collar; and, using it as a duster, I cleared the sides of the cone in a
few moments, having sent thousands of the termites tumbling headlong
below.

"Pshaw! how simply the thing was done! why had I not done it before?  It
cost scarcely an effort to brush the myriads away, and a slight effort
would keep them off as long as I pleased.

"The only annoyance I felt now was from the few that had got under my
trousers, and that still continued to bite me; but these I would get rid
of in time.

"Well--I remained on the apex, now bending down to beat back the
soldiers that still swarmed upward, and then occupying myself in trying
to get rid of the few that crawled upon me.  I felt no longer any
uneasiness on the score of the insects--though I was not a bit better
off as regarded the bull, who still kept guard below.  I fancied,
