the innumerable sisterhood of departed Years, there came a young
maiden treading lightsomely on tiptoe along the street, from the
direction of the Railroad Depot.  She was evidently a stranger, and
perhaps had come to town by the evening train of cars.  There was a
smiling cheerfulness in this fair maiden's face, which bespoke her
fully confident of a kind reception from the multitude of people, with
whom she was soon to form acquaintance.  Her dress was rather too airy
for the season, and was bedizened with fluttering ribbons and other
vanities, which were likely soon to be rent away by the fierce storms,
or to fade in the hot sunshine, amid which she was to pursue her
changeful course.  But still she was a wonderfully pleasant looking
figure, and had so much promise and such an indescribable hopefulness
in her aspect, that hardly anybody could meet her without anticipating
some very desirable thing--the consummation of some long-sought good--from
her kind offices.  A few dismal characters there may be, here and
there about the world, who have so often been trifled with by young
maidens as promising as she, that they have now ceased to pin any
faith upon the skirts of the New Year. But, for my own part, I have
great faith in her; and should I live to see fifty more such, still,
from each of those successive sisters, I shall reckon upon receiving
something that will be worth living for.

The New Year--for this young maiden was no less a personage--carried
all her goods and chattels in a basket of no great size or weight,
which hung upon her arm.  She greeted the disconsolate Old Year with
great affection, and sat down beside her on the steps of the City
Hall, waiting for the signal to begin her rambles through the world.
The two were own sisters, being both granddaughters of Time; and
though one looked so much older than the other, it was rather owing to
hardships and trouble than to age, since there was but a twelvemonth's
difference between them.

"Well, my dear sister," said the New Year, after the first
salutations, "you look almost tired to death.  What have you been
about during your sojourn in this part of Infinite Space?"

"O, I have it all recorded here in my Book of Chronicles," answered
the Old Year, in a heavy tone.  "There is nothing that would amuse
you; and you will soon get sufficient knowledge of such matters from
your own personal experience.  It is but tiresome reading."

Nevertheless, she turned over the leaves of the folio, and glanced at
them by the light of the moon, feeling an irresistible spell of
interest in her own biography, although its incidents were remembered
without pleasure.  The volume, though she termed it her Book of
Chronicles, seemed to be neither more nor less than the Salem Gazette
for 1838; in the accuracy of which journal this sagacious Old Year
had so much confidence, that she deemed it needless to record her
history with her own pen.

"What have you been doing in the political way?" asked the New Year.

"Why, my course here in the United States," said the Old Year,--"though
perhaps I ought to blush at the confession,--my political
course, I must acknowledge, has been rather vacillatory, sometimes
inclining towards the Whigs,--then causing the Administration party to
shout for triumph,--and now again uplifting what seemed the almost
prostrate banner of the Opposition; so that historians will hardly
know what to make of me, in this respect.  But the Loco Focos--"

"I do not like these party nicknames," interrupted her sister, who
seemed remarkably touchy about some points.  "Perhaps we shall part in
better humor, if we avoid any political discussion."

"With all my heart," replied the Old Year, who had already been
tormented half to death with squabbles of this kind.  "I care not if
the navies of Whig or Tory, with their interminable brawls about Banks
and the Sub-Treasury, Abolition, Texas, the Florida War, and a million
