the mother's heart.

"And did you really come to this land for the sole purpose of seeing my
dear boy?" asked the queen.

"I did.  You cannot imagine how much we loved each other.  We were
thrown together daily--almost hourly.  We studied together; we competed
when I was preparing for the Olympic games; we travelled in Egypt and
hunted together.  Indeed, if it had not been for my dear old mother, we
should have travelled to this land in the same ship."

"Your mother did not wish you to leave her, I suppose?"

"Nay, it was I who would not leave _her_.  Her unselfish nature would
have induced her to make any sacrifice to please me.  It was only when
she died that my heart turned with unusual longing to my old companion
Bladud, and I made up my mind to quit home and traverse the great sea in
search of him."

A grateful look shot from Hafrydda's blue eyes, but it was lost on the
youth, who sat gazing at the floor as if engrossed with his great
disappointment.

"I cannot understand," he continued, in an almost reproachful tone, "how
you could ever make up your minds to banish him, no matter how deadly
the disease that had smitten him."

The princess's fair face flushed deeply, and she shook back her golden
curls--her eyes flashing as she replied--

"We did not `make up our minds to banish him.'  The warriors and people
would have compelled us to do it whether we liked or not, for they have
heard, alas! of the terrible nature of the disease.  But the dear boy,
knowing this, went off in the night unknown to us, and without even
saying farewell.  We have sent out parties to search for him several
times, but without success."

The youth was evidently affected by this burst of feeling.

"Ah," he returned, with a look of admiration at the princess, "that was
like him--like his noble, self-denying nature.  But I will find him out,
you may depend on it, for I shall search the land in all directions till
I discover his retreat.  If King Hudibras will grant me a few men to
help me--well.  If not, I will do it by myself."

"Thank you, good Dromas, for your purpose and your sympathy," said the
queen.  "The king will be only too glad to help you--but here he comes
to speak for himself."

The curtain door was tossed aside at the moment, and Hudibras strode
into the room with a beaming smile and a rolling gait that told of
redundant health, and showed that the cares of state sat lightly on him.

"Welcome, good Dromas, to our board.  I was too sleepy to see much of
you after your arrival last night.  Mine eyes blinked like those of an
owl.  Kiss me, wife and daughter," he added, giving the ladies a salute
that resounded through the room.  "Have they told you yet about our poor
son Bladud?"

The visitor had not time to reply, when a domestic appeared and said
there was an old woman at the door who would not go away.

"Give her some cakes and send her off!" cried the king with a frown.

"But she will not go till she has had converse with the princess."

"I will go to her," said Hafrydda, rising.

"Ay, go, my girl, and if thy sweet tongue fails to prevail, stuff her
mouth with meat and drink till she is too stout to walk.  Come, my
queen, what have we this morning for breakfast?  The very talking of
meat makes me hungry."

At this juncture several dogs burst into the room and gambolled with
their royal master, as with one who is a familiar friend.

When the princess reached the outer door she found the woman standing,
and evidently in a rage.

"Is this the way King Hudibras teaches his varlets to behave to poor
people who are better than themselves?"

"Forgive them, granny," said the princess, who was inclined to laugh,
but strove to keep her gravity, "they are but stupid rogues at worst."

"Nay, but they are sly rogues at best!" retorted the old woman.  "The
first that came, took me for a witch, and was moderately civil, but the
second took away my stool and threatened to set the dogs at me."

"If this be so, I will have him cow-hided; but tell me--what would you
with me?  Can I help you?  Is it food that you want, or rest?"

"Truly it is both food and rest that I want, at the proper times, but
what I want with you now, is to take me to your own room, and let me
talk to you."

"That is a curious desire," returned Hafrydda, smiling, "but I will not
deny you.  Come this way.  Have you anything secret to tell me?" she
asked, when they were alone.

"Ay, that have I," answered the woman in her natural voice, throwing off
her shawl and standing erect.

The princess remained speechless, for her friend Branwen stood before
her.

"Before I utter a word of explanation," she said, "let me say that your
brother is found, and safe, and well--or nearly so.  This is the main
thing, but I will not tell you anything more, unless you give me your
solemn promise not to tell a word of it all to any one, till I give you
leave.  Do you promise?"

Hafrydda was so taken aback that she could do nothing for some time but
gaze in the girl's face.  Then she laughed in an imbecile sort of way.
Then she burst into tears of joy, threw her arms round her friend's
neck, hugged her tight, and promised anything--everything--that she
chose to demand.

When, an hour later, the Princess Hafrydda returned to the breakfast
room, she informed the king and queen that the old woman was not a
beggar; that she had kept her listening to a long story about lost men
and women and robbers; that she was a thorough deceiver; that some of
the servants believed her to be a witch, and that she had sent her away.

"With an invitation to come back again, I'll be bound," cried the king,
interrupting.  "It's always your way, my girl,--any one can impose on
you."

"Well, father, she _did_ impose on me, and I _did_ ask her to come back
again."

"I knew it," returned the king, with a loud laugh, "and she'll come, for
certain."

"She will, you may be quite sure of that," rejoined the princess with a
gleeful laugh, as she left the room.

About the same time, the little old woman left the palace and returned
to the hut of the Hebrew.

Here, as she expected, she found that her escort had flown, and, a brief
inspection of their footprints showed that, instead of proceeding
towards the town, they had returned the way they came.

CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

FURTHER SEARCHINGS AND PERPLEXITIES.

While these events were taking place at court, the bold chief Gadarn was
ranging the country far and wide in search of his daughter Branwen.

There was something in his manner which puzzled his followers not a
little, for he seemed to have changed his character--at least to have
added to it a strange, wild hilarity which suggested the idea that he
enjoyed the hunt and was in no hurry that it should come to an end.
Those who knew him best began at last to fear that anxiety had unsettled
his reason, and Bladud, who liked the man's gay, reckless disposition
and hearty good-humour, intermingled with occasional bursts of fierce
passion, was not only puzzled but distressed by the wild inconsistency
of his proceedings.  The Hebrew, knowing to some extent the cause of
what he did, and feeling bound by his promise to conceal his knowledge,
was reduced to a state of mind that is not describable.

On the one hand there was the mystery of Cormac's total disappearance in
a short walk of three miles.  On the other hand, there was the utter
uselessness of searching for Branwen, yet the urgent need of searching
diligently for Cormac.  Then there was the fear of consequences when the
fiery Gadarn should come to find out how he had been deceived, or
rather, what moderns might style humbugged; add to which he was debarred
the solace of talking the subject over with Bladud, besides being, in
consequence of his candid disposition, in danger of blurting out words
that might necessitate a revelation.  One consequence was that, for the
time at least, the grave and amiable Hebrew became an abrupt,
unsociable, taciturn man.

"What ails you just now, Beniah?" asked Bladud, one evening as they
walked together to Gadarn's booth, having been invited to supper.  "You
seem out of condition mentally, if not bodily, as if some one had rubbed
you the wrong way."

"Do I?" answered Beniah, with a frown and something between a grin and a
laugh.  "Well, it is not easy to understand one's mental complaints,
much less to explain them."

Fortunately their arrival at the booth put a timely end to the
conversation.

"Ha! my long-legged prince and stalwart Hebrew!" cried the jovial chief
in a loud voice, "I began to fear that you had got lost--as folk seem
prone to do in this region--or had forgotten all about us!  Come in and
sit ye down.  Ho! varlet, set down the victuals.  After all, you are
just in the nick of time.  Well, Beniah, what think you of our search
to-day?  Has it been close?  Is it likely that we have missed any of the
caves or cliffs where robbers might be hiding?"

"I think not.  It seems to me that we have ransacked every hole and
corner in which there is a chance that the lad could be found."

"The _lad_!" exclaimed Gadarn.

"I--I mean--your daughter," returned the Hebrew, quickly.

"Why don't you say what you mean, then?  One expects a man of your years
to talk without confusion--or is it that you are really more anxious
about finding the boy than my girl?"

"Nay, that be far from me," answered the Hebrew.  "To say truth, I am to
the full as anxious to find the one as the other, for it matters not
which you--"

"Matters not!" repeated Gadarn, fiercely.

"Well, of course, I mean that my friendship for you and Bladud makes me
wish to see you each satisfied by finding both the boy and the girl."

"For my part," said Bladud, quietly, "I sincerely hope that we may find
them both, for we are equally anxious to do so."

"Equally!" exclaimed Gadarn, with a look of lofty surprise.  "Dost mean
to compare your regard for your young friend with a father's love for
his only child!"

The prince did not easily take offence, but he could not refrain from a
flush and a frown as he replied, sharply--

"I make no useless comparisons, chief.  It is sufficient that we are
both full of anxiety, and are engaged in the same quest."

"Ay, the same quest--undoubtedly," observed the Hebrew in a grumbling,
abstracted manner.

"If it were possible," returned Gadarn, sternly, "to give up the search
for your boy and confine it entirely to my girl, I would do so.  But as
they went astray about the same place, we are compelled, however little
we like it, to hunt together."

"Not compelled, chief," cried Bladud, with a look and a flash in his
blue eye which presaged a sudden rupture of friendly relations.  "We can
each go our own way and hunt on our own account."

"Scarcely," replied the chief, "for if you found my daughter, you would
be bound in honour to deliver her up; and if I found your boy, I should
feel myself bound to do the same."

"It matters not a straw which is found," cried the Hebrew, exasperated
at the prospect of a quarrel between the two at such an inopportune
moment.  "Surely, as an old man, I have the right to remonstrate with
you for encouraging anything like disagreement when our success in
finding the boy,--I--I mean the girl,--depends--"

A burst of laughter from the chief cut him short.

"You don't seem to be quite sure of what you mean," he cried, "or to be
able to say it.  Come, come, prince, if the Hebrew claims a right to
remonstrate because he is twenty years or so older than I am, surely I
may claim the same right, for I am full twenty years older than you.  Is
it seemly to let your hot young blood boil over at every trifle?  Here,
let me replenish your platter, for it is ill hunting after man, woman,
or beast without a stomach full of victuals."

There was no resisting the impulsive chief.

Both his guests cleared their brows and laughed--though there was still
a touch of exasperation in the Hebrew's tone.

While the search was being thus diligently though needlessly prosecuted
in the neighbourhood of the Hot Swamp by Gadarn, who was dearly fond of
a practical joke, another chief, who was in no joking humour, paid a
visit one evening to his mother.  Perhaps it is unnecessary to say that
this chief was Gunrig.

"From all that I see and hear, mother," he said, walking up and down the
room, as was his habit, with his hands behind him, "it is clear that if
I do not go about it myself, the king will let the matter drop; for he
is convinced that the girl has run off with some fellow, and will easily
make her way home."

"Don't you think he may be right, my son?"

"No, I don't, my much-too-wise mother.  I know the girl better than
that.  It is enough to look in her face to know that she could not run
away with any fellow!"

"H'm!" remarked the woman significantly.

"What say you?" demanded the chief, sharply.

"I scarcely know what to say.  Perhaps the best thing to do would be to
take a band of our own men and go off in search of the girl yourself."

"That's just what I've made up my mind to do; but I wanted to see if
Hudibras would get up a band to join mine, for I dare not take many away
from the town when that scoundrel Addedomar is threatening to make a
raid upon us."

"My son," said the woman anxiously, "what threatened raid do you speak
of?"

"Did you not hear?  Since the last time we gave that robber a drubbing
at the Hot Swamp, he has taken to the woods and gathered together a
large band of rascals like himself.  We would not have minded that--for
honest men are always numerous enough to keep villains in order--but two
chiefs who have long been anxious to take possession of the land round
the Swamp have agreed to join with him, so that they form a formidable
body of warriors--too large to be treated with contempt."

"This is bad news, Gunrig.  How does the king take it?"

"In his usual way.  He does not believe in danger or mischief till it
has overtaken him, and it is almost too late for action.  There is one
hope, however, that he will be induced to move in time.  A young fellow
has come from the far East, who was a great friend of that long-legged
fellow Bladud, and he is bent on finding out where his friend has gone.
Of course the king is willing to let him have as many men as he wants,
though he sternly refuses to let Bladud return home; and I hope to
induce this youth--Dromas, they call him--to join me, so that we may
search together; for, of course, the search for the man may result in
finding the girl.  My only objection is that if we do find Bladud, I
shall have to fight and kill him--unless the leprosy has happily killed
him already.  So, now, I will away and see what can be done about this
hunt.  My object in coming was to get my men, and to warn those left in
charge of the town to keep a keen look-out for Addedomar, for he is a
dangerous foe.  Farewell, mother."

The woman was not addicted to the melting mood.  She merely nodded as
her son went out.

In pursuance of this plan, a band of about two hundred warriors was
raised, armed, and provisioned for a long journey.  Gunrig put himself
at the head of a hundred and fifty of these, and Dromas, being a skilled
warrior, was given command of the remaining fifty, with Captain Arkal,
who begged to be allowed to go as his lieutenant, and little Maikar as
one of his fighting men.

The orders were, that they should start off in the direction of the Hot
Swamp, searching the country as they went, making diligent inquiries at
the few villages they might pass, and questioning all travellers whom
they might chance to meet with by the way.  If Branwen should be found,
she was to be sent back escorted by a detachment of a hundred men.  If
the retreat of Bladud should be discovered, news of the fact was to be
sent to the king, and the prince was to be left there in peace with any
of the men who might volunteer to live with him.  But on no account were
they or Bladud to return to Hudibras' town as long as there was the
least danger of infection.

"Is he _never_ to return?" asked the queen, whimpering, when she heard
these orders given.

"No, _never_!" answered the king in that awful tone which the poor queen
