The British tar was not slow to return the compliment with a grasp that
was still less childlike--at the same time he gasped in much anxiety--

"Howld on, ye spalpeen, it's after yersilf I've come, sure; what,
_won't_ ye let go--eh?"

It was quite evident, from the tightening of the grip, that Mariano had
no intention of letting go, for the good reason that, not understanding
a word of what was said, he regarded the seaman as an enemy.  Feeling
rather than seeing this, for the hole was deep and dark, Flaggan was
under the necessity of showing fight in earnest, and there is no saying
what would have been the result had not Lucien suddenly appeared from
the interior of a subterranean cavern with which the hole communicated.

Lucien understood English well and spoke it fluently.  One or two of
Flaggan's exclamations enlightened him as to the true character of their
unexpected visitor.

"Hold, Mariano!" he cried; "the man is evidently a friend."

"What's that ye're saying?" cried Flaggan, looking up, for he was still
busy attempting to throttle Mariano.

"I tell my brother that you are a friend," said Lucien, scarce able to
restrain laughter.

"Faix, then, it don't look like it from the tratement I resaive at yer
hands.--Howsoever," said the seaman, relaxing his grip and rising, while
Mariano did the same, "it's well for you that I am.  Bacri sent me wid a
few words o' comfort to 'ee, an' some purvisions, which I raither fear
we've bin tramplin' about in the dirt; but--no, here it is," he added,
picking up the wallet, which had come off in the struggle, "all right,
an' I make no doubt it'll be of use to 'ee.  But it's a poor sort o'
lodgin' ye've got here: wouldn't it be better for all parties if we was
to go on deck?"

"Not so," said Lucien, with a smile, as he fell in with the seaman's
humour.  "'Twere better to come to our cabin; this is only the hold of
our ship.--Follow me."

So saying he went down on his hands and knees and disappeared in an
impenetrably dark hole, not three feet high, which opened off the hole
in which they stood.

Mariano pointed to it and motioned to the sailor to follow.

"Arter you, sir," said Ted, bowing politely.

Mariano laughed and followed his brother, and Ted Flaggan, muttering
something about its being the "most strornar companion hatch _he'd_ ever
entered," followed suit.

A creep of two or three yards brought him into a cavern which was just
high enough to admit of a man standing erect, and about eight or ten
feet wide.  At the farther extremity of it there was a small stone lamp,
the dim light of which revealed the figure of stout Francisco Rimini
sound asleep on a bundle of straw, wrapped negligently in his burnous,
and with a stone for his pillow.  Beside him stood an empty tin dish and
a stone jar of the picturesque form peculiar to the inhabitants of the
Atlas Mountains; the sword given to him by Bacri lay within reach of his
half-open hand.

Neither the scuffle outside nor the entrance of the party had disturbed
the old man.

"My father is worn out with a fruitless search for food!" said Lucien,
sitting down on a piece of rock and motioning to the seaman to do
likewise.  "We can venture out in search of food only at night, and last
night was so intensely dark as well as stormy that we failed to procure
anything.  Our water jar and platter are empty."

"Then I've just come in the nick of time," said Flaggan, proceeding to
unfasten his wallet and display its much-needed contents.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

SOCIAL INTERCOURSE IN THE CAVERN.

"Here you are," cried the sympathetic Irishman, enlarging on the nature
of the viands, as he spread them temptingly before the hungry men;
"here's food fit for a Dey, to say nothin' of a month.  Here's a loaf--
ain't it?--about a fut an' a half long an' three inch thick.  Coorious
to look at, but a good un to eat I make no doubt--that's a foundation
for 'ee--there, cut 'im up an' fire away; ye can't listen properly to me
discoorse till you git yer jaws to work.  This here is a pie o' some
sort, I shud say, havin' regard to the shape, only that ain't the sort
o' wittles a Jew would send 'ee, is it?  P'raps it's wild-boar, for I've
seed no end o' them critters in the market.  Maybe it's lion, for they
do says there's lots o' the king o' beasts in the mountains hereabouts,
though I can't say I've heerd 'em roar yet.  Hows'ever, wotever it is,
here it is, so go ahead.--Hallo!" exclaimed Flaggan remonstratively, as
he cast a glance at the sleeping man beside him, "you've begun without
the ould man.  Don't 'ee think it 'ud be but filial-like to wake him up
an' start fair?"

"No, we'll let him sleep on," answered Lucien, as he began to eat with
right good-will, in which he was ably seconded by his brother.  "My
father needs rest quite as much as food at present.  He shall eat when
he awakes."

"Well, you knows best," returned the seaman, taking out his pipe and
tobacco-pouch; "it's wan comfort anyhow that the wittles can't get
colder than they be now, and there's overmuch for 'ee to ait the whole
consarn at one bout, so the ould man'll git his grub, though I must own
it'd have liked to have seed 'im start fair.--Hand over the glim,
plaise."

Lucien passed the small lantern to Flaggan, whose hard good-humoured
features were for a few seconds suffused with a ruddy glow as he put the
light close to it, and drew the flame vigorously into the bowl of his
very black little pipe.  Then, setting it down beside him, he smoked in
silence and in much satisfaction, as he contemplated the hearty manner
in which the young men enjoyed their meal.

When he had finished, Lucien bowed his head for a few seconds in silent
thanksgiving, and Mariano paused respectfully while he did so.  Then,
taking a long draught from the earthenware bottle; the elder brother
expressed his gratitude to the Jew for the opportune relief.

"That seems to be good stuff to judge be the way ye smacked yer lips,"
observed Ted, removing his pipe and wiping his mouth with the sleeve of
his coat.

"Try it," said Lucien, handing him the bottle with a smile.

"Got no smell," remarked the tar, as he put the bottle to his
mouth--"wather!" he added contemptuously, as he put it down and resumed
the pipe.

"The best of drink for man and beast," said Lucien, laughing.

"May be so," returned Flaggan shortly, "but I ain't used to it."

"Is it long since you came to this country?" asked Lucien, while he and
Mariano rolled up two of those neat little cigarettes with which the
denizens of Algiers at the present day are wont frequently to solace
themselves.

This question called forth from the seaman the greater part of his
recent history, in return for which Lucien, drawing forward the hood of
his burnous, and resting his elbows on his knees, briefly related that
of himself and his kindred.

"But why are _you_ staying here, since, being a British subject, you are
free to go when you please?" asked Lucien.

"Bekaise," answered Flaggan, "it ain't every day that a British ship
calls in at this piratical nest, and I'd raither go off in a man-o'-war
if I could manage it.  There's a merchantman came into port yesterday,
I'm towld, an' the cownsl advised me to go away with it; but it seems
the Turks have made some difficulty about her, so I'll wait.  I'm in no
hurry.  The Flaggans, as a race, have been noted since the time of
Adam--if not earlier--for takin' life aisy."

"Then the Flaggans must be nearly related to the Arabs, for they take
life easier than any race I ever met with," said Lucien, laughing.

"I shud doubt that, 'cause they're lazy, and _we_ ain't.--Talkin' o'
that, sir," said the seaman, as a sudden thought struck him, "I'm towld
that you are learned in lingos an' histories: could ye tell me who was
the first people that got howld o' this country? 'cause I'm coorious to
know, having had a stiffish argiment on that pint with Rais Ali.  He
howlds that it was the Moors, an' I've heerd say it was the Arabs."

"You are both partly right," replied Lucien; "for the Arabs were among
the first conquerors of the land, but you are wrong in supposing Moors
and Arabs to be altogether different races.  When the Arabs came into
the land some of them took to the plains inland, and continued their
wild wandering idle style of life--half predatory, half pastoral; others
took up their abode on the coast, became more mingled with the people of
other sea-faring tribes, built towns, and came at last to be known as
Mauri or Moors, from which the part of the land they dwelt in was known
of old by the name of Mauritania."

"But the aborigines," continued Lucien--

"The abor-what? sir," asked Flaggan, removing his pipe.

"The aborigines--the original inhabitants of the land--"

"Ah, I see, sir," returned Ted; "them as was at the _werry_ beginnin',
just arter Adam and Eve like; 'zactly so--fire away!"

"Well, I'm not quite sure," replied Lucien, with a laugh, "that they
came here immediately after the time of Adam, but at all events they
came before the time of an authentic history, for our earliest
historians record the fact that before any other nation invaded the
northern shores of Africa, the country was in possession of a very
warlike race, who, although overcome and driven from the plains by the
more civilised and better-armed nations that successively attacked them,
remained in the fastnesses of the Atlas Mountains absolutely
unconquerable, and the descendants of these original inhabitants, known
as Kabyles, remain a free and independent people at the present day,
having successfully defied the might of Romans, Vandals, Arabs, and
others, since the beginning of time."  (See Note 1.)

"You don't say so, sir," remarked Flaggan, blowing a thin cloud of
admiration into the air; "well, an' how did things git along arter the
abridginal inhabitants was fust druv back into the mountains?"

"They did not get along quite so quietly as might have been desired,"
said Lucien.

"The early history of the northern shores of Africa, now known as
Algeria," he continued, "is involved in the mists of antiquity."

"Arrah! now, don't misremimber," said Ted, with a quiet grin, "that I
ain't bin edicated quite up to _that_."

"Well, the beginning of it all," said Lucien, returning the grin with a
smile, "is rather foggy."

"Ah! that's plain enough.  Heave ahead, an' whativer ye do, steer clear
o' jaw-breakers," murmured the seaman.

"The region," said Lucien, "was first known as Numidia and Mauritania;
Numidia being so named by the Greeks, who styled its wandering tribes
_Nomads_.  They were pastoral in their habits and thievish in their
propensities, without laws or government worthy of the name.  The Mauri,
or Moors, devoted themselves to more settled pursuits, became traders
and inhabitants of towns, and were a mixed race, although originally
springing from the same stock as the _Nomads_, or Arabs.  These were the
early inhabitants, who lived during the foggy period.

"The Medes, Armenians, and Persians afterwards founded a colony, and
traded with the natives of the interior.  Then the Phoenicians landed,
and began to build towns, of which Carthage, founded B.C. 853, was the
chief.  The Punic wars followed; Carthage, the city of Dido, fell, and
Mauritania was annexed to Rome.  For hundreds of years after this the
country was a scene of frequent and bloody warfare, in which many great
historical names figured, and many great armies were swept away to
gratify human pride, ambition, and cupidity on the one hand, and to
defend hearth and home on the other, until the Roman power extended far
and wide, from the Libyan desert to the Atlantic, and from the
Mediterranean to the Zahara.  Near the time of our Saviour, (B.C. 46),
Sallust was established by Julius Caesar as governor of Numidia, where
he collected materials for his history of the Jugurthine wars, and at
the same time enriched himself by the plunder of the now highly
civilised and prosperous country."

"Trust 'em, they're all sure to do that, the haythens!" said Ted, whose
pipe, by its varying cloudlets, became a pretty fair index to his
feelings.

"Roman remains are now to be found," continued Lucien, "all over the
land, even in the wildest regions of the Atlas Mountains, although the
Romans utterly failed to subdue the hardy prehistoric natives of these
mountains, who rose against them at frequent intervals, despite
temporary defeats, and successfully defied all the various races who
assailed them.  During this Roman period the country was so well
cultivated that it became, and was styled, `the granary of the Roman
Empire.'  Christianity was also introduced, and became so wide-spread
that at one time there were no fewer than a hundred and sixty bishoprics
in northern Africa.  Unquestionably there were then, as there always
were and will be, some who were imbued with the peace-loving spirit of
Christianity, including among them such men as Augustine, Tertullian,
and Cyprian--whom, I dare say, Signor Flaggan, you never before heard
of,--but it cannot be doubted that a vast majority possessed nothing of
our religion but the name, for they constantly resorted to the most
bitter warfare and violence to maintain their views.

"Towards the decline of the Roman Empire, Boniface, the proconsul,
revolted against the Emperor Valentinian.  The latter asked the aid of
Genseric, king of the Vandals.  Genseric most willingly agreed, went to
Africa with 90,000 of his stalwart light-haired `barbarians' of the
north, was joined by the natives, and conquered the whole of Barbary,
not for the Romans, but for himself!  This was in the year 428, and the
Vandals held the land for a hundred years.

"The Romans, in the year 533, again invaded northern Africa, re-took
Carthage, and finally regained the country from the Vandals, but for
only a short time, for the Moors constantly harassed them, until the
land became desert in many places, owing to the decreasing population.

"Then came the followers of Mohammed, about the year 645, from across
the Eastern deserts, enforcing religion by their favourite means, the
sword; and in half a century they swept completely over the land to the
Atlantic, causing the Crescent to supplant the Cross.

"But the Arabs did not stop here.  About 711 they crossed over the sea,
and carried the Crescent into Europe, under the bold and daring General
Tarick, (Gebel-el-Tarick), from whom the spot where they landed came to
be called Gibraltar.  Hosts of Moors followed the Arab conquerors, and
the Spaniards, confounding them, styled them all Moors.

"Barbary was for a long time after this under the rule of Emirs,
appointed by the Caliphs; but they found little rest in Africa, for the
Berbers and others harassed them continually.--It would weary you to go
over the whole history of the wars and disputes which tore the wretched
country to pieces during hundreds of years after this; but it may
interest you to know that this city of Algiers was founded in the year
944 by Ziri, governor of Aschir, who established a hereditary throne for
his race.  But his dynasty came to an end in course of time, and so did
that of others.  Race rose against race, and tribe against tribe,
conquering and re-conquering; only a few of the coast towns being able
to maintain their position as independent powers, and supporting
themselves by piracy.

"By degrees the pirates of the Barbary coast began to be very formidable
and daring, insomuch that from time to time various nations sent
expeditions against them, with more or less success, but without
materially checking their depredations.  They were greatly strengthened
in numbers at the time of the expulsion of the Moors from Spain.  An
expedition was fitted out against them by Ferdinand in 1501, and in 1505
the Spaniards made themselves masters of some of the chief Barbary
towns, including Algiers.

"About this time two famous pirates ravaged the coasts of the
Mediterranean--the brothers Barbarossa, sons of a fisherman.  They were
ambitious scoundrels, and aimed at a throne.  An opportunity ere long
presented itself.  The Algerines invited them, in 1510, to come and free
them from the Spanish yoke.  They went gladly, defeated the Spaniards,
and then the elder Barbarossa proclaimed himself king, after beheading
Hassan, another famous corsair, killing the king, and committing fearful
excesses on the inhabitants.  This villain was slain by the men of an
expedition sent against the Algerines by Charles the Fifth, but the
Turks made his brother Hayradin king in his stead.  In 1518 Hayradin
Barbarossa sought recognition by the Sultan of Turkey.  He was made
Pasha, and from that time till now Algiers has remained a nominal
dependency of Turkey;--a pest to the civilised world, and a disgrace to
humanity."

"Well, now," observed Ted Flaggan, knocking the ashes out of his pipe,
and refilling it; "there are more surprisin' things in the history of
this here world than I was aware of.  It's my unwarnished opinion--"

The expression of the seaman's opinion was here cut short by the sudden
awakening of the elder Rimini, who immediately sat bolt upright and
stared at the stranger with eyes like those of an owl in sunshine.

Lucien hastened to explain, and to spread the food sent by Bacri before
his father.

Feeling sensations like those of a starved wolf, Francisco merely
smiled, nodded, and shook hands with the sailor, and then, seizing the
remains of the loaf and the pork,--"wild-boar," or "lion," pie,
commenced with infinite gusto to his unexpected meal.

