"Pooh!" cried Bremner, as he proceeded coolly to wash up his dishes,
"that's nothing, boys.  Has not this old timber house weathered all the
gales o' last winter, and d'ye think it's goin' to come down before a
summer breeze?  Why, there's a lighthouse in France, called the Tour de
Cordouan, which rises light out o' the sea, an' I'm told it had some
fearful gales to try its metal when it was buildin'.  So don't go an'
git narvous."

"Who's gittin' narvous?" exclaimed George Forsyth, at whom Bremner had
looked when he made the last remark.

"Sure ye misjudge him," cried O'Connor.  "It's only another twist o' the
toothick.  But it's all very well in you to spake lightly o' gales in
that fashion.  Wasn't the Eddystone Lighthouse cleared away one stormy
night, with the engineer and all the men, an' was niver more heard on?"

"That's true," said Ruby.  "Come, Bremner, I have heard you say that you
had read all about that business.  Let's hear the story; it will help to
while away the time, for there's no chance of anyone gettin' to sleep
with such a row outside."

"I wish it may be no worse than a row outside," said Forsyth in a
doleful tone, as he shook his head and looked round on the party
anxiously.

"Wot! another fit o' the toothick?" enquired O'Connor ironically.

"Don't try to put us in the dismals," said Jamie Dove, knocking the
ashes out of his pipe, and refilling that solace of his leisure hours.
"Let us hear about the Eddystone, Bremner; it'll cheer up our spirits a
bit."

"Will it though?" said Bremner, with a look that John Watt described as
"awesome", "Well, we shall see."

"You must know, boys--"

"'Ere, light your pipe, my 'earty," said Dumsby.

"Hold yer tongue, an' don't interrupt him," cried one of the men,
flattening Dumsby's cap over his eyes.

"And don't drop yer _h_aitches," observed another, "'cause if ye do
they'll fall into the sea an' be drownded, an' then ye'll have none left
to put into their wrong places when ye wants 'em."

"Come, Bremner, go on."

"Well, then, boys," began Bremner, "you must know that it is more than a
hundred years since the Eddystone Lighthouse was begun--in the year
1696, if I remember rightly--that would be just a hundred and thirteen
years to this date.  Up to that time these rocks were as great a terror
to sailors as the Bell Rock is now, or, rather, as it was last year, for
now that this here comfortable beacon has been put up, it's no longer a
terror to nobody--"

"Except Geordie Forsyth," interposed O'Connor.

"Silence," cried the men.

"Well," resumed Bremner, "as you all know, the Eddystone Rocks lie in
the British Channel, fourteen miles from Plymouth and ten from the Ram
Head, an' open to a most tremendious sea from the Bay o' Biscay and the
Atlantic, as I knows well, for I've passed the place in a gale, close
enough a'most to throw a biscuit on the rocks.

"They are named the Eddystone Rocks because of the whirls and eddies
that the tides make among them; but for the matter of that, the Bell
Rock might be so named on the same ground.  Howsever, it's six o' one
an' half a dozen o' t'other.  Only there's this difference, that the
highest point o' the Eddystone is barely covered at high water, while
here the rock is twelve or fifteen feet below water at high tide.

"Well, it was settled by the Trinity Board in 1696, that a lighthouse
should be put up, and a Mr Winstanley was engaged to do it.  He was an
uncommon clever an' ingenious man.  He used to exhibit wonderful
waterworks in London; and in his house, down in Essex, he used to
astonish his friends, and frighten them sometimes, with his queer
contrivances.  He had invented an easy chair which laid hold of anyone
that sat down in it, and held him prisoner until Mr Winstanley set him
free.  He made a slipper also, and laid it on his bedroom floor, and
when anyone put his foot into it he touched a spring that caused a ghost
to rise from the hearth.  He made a summer house, too, at the foot of
his garden, on the edge of a canal, and if anyone entered into it and
sat down, he very soon found himself adrift on the canal.

"Such a man was thought to be the best for such a difficult work as the
building of a lighthouse on the Eddystone, so he was asked to undertake
it, and agreed, and began it well.  He finished it, too, in four years,
his chief difficulty being the distance of the rock from land, and the
danger of goin' backwards and forwards.  The light was first shown on
the 14th November, 1698.  Before this the engineer had resolved to pass
a night in the building, which he did with a party of men; but he was
compelled to pass more than a night, for it came on to blow furiously,
and they were kept prisoners for eleven days, drenched with spray all
the time, and hard up for provisions.

"It was said the sprays rose a hundred feet above the lantern of this
first Eddystone Lighthouse.  Well, it stood till the year 1703, when
repairs became necessary, and Mr Winstanley went down to Plymouth to
superintend.  It had been prophesied that this lighthouse would
certainly be carried away.  But dismal prophecies are always made about
unusual things.  If men were to mind prophecies there would be precious
little done in this world.  Howsever, the prophecies unfortunately came
true.  Winstanley's friends advised him not to go to stay in it, but he
was so confident of the strength of his work that he said he only wished
to have the chance o' bein' there in the greatest storm that ever blew,
that he might see what effect it would have on the buildin'.  Poor man!
he had his wish.  On the night of the 26th November a terrible storm
arose, the worst that had been for many years, and swept the lighthouse
entirely away.  Not a vestige of it or the people on it was ever seen
afterwards.  Only a few bits of the iron fastenings were left fixed in
the rocks."

"That was terrible," said Forsyth, whose uneasiness was evidently
increasing with the rising storm.

"Ay, but the worst of it was," continued Bremner, "that, owing to the
absence of the light, a large East Indiaman went on the rocks
immediately after, and became a total wreck.  This, however, set the
Trinity House on putting up another, which was begun in 1706, and the
light shown in 1708.  This tower was ninety-two feet high, built partly
of wood and partly of stone.  It was a strong building, and stood for
forty-nine years.  Mayhap it would have been standin' to this day but
for an accident, which you shall hear of before I have done.  While this
lighthouse was building, a French privateer carried off all the workmen
prisoners to France, but they were set at liberty by the King, because
their work was of such great use to all nations.

"The lighthouse, when finished, was put in charge of two keepers, with
instructions to hoist a flag when anything was wanted from the shore.
One of these men became suddenly ill, and died.  Of course his comrade
hoisted the signal, but the weather was so bad that it was found
impossible to send a boat off for four weeks.  The poor keeper was so
afraid that people might suppose he had murdered his companion that he
kept the corpse beside him all that time.  What his feelin's could have
been I don't know, but they must have been awful; for, besides the
horror of such a position in such a lonesome place, the body decayed to
an extent--"

"That'll do, lad; don't be too partickler," said Jamie Dove.

The others gave a sigh of relief at the interruption, and Bremner
continued--

"There were always _three_ keepers in the Eddystone after that.  Well,
it was in the year 1755, on the 2nd December, that one o' the keepers
went to snuff the candles, for they only burned candles in the
lighthouses at that time, and before that time great open grates with
coal fires were the most common; but there were not many lights either
of one kind or another in those days.  On gettin' up to the lantern he
found it was on fire.  All the efforts they made failed to put it out,
and it was soon burned down.  Boats put off to them, but they only
succeeded in saving the keepers; and of them, one went mad on reaching
the shore, and ran off, and never was heard of again; and another, an
old man, died from the effects of melted lead which had run down his
throat from the roof of the burning lighthouse.  They did not believe
him when he said he had swallowed lead, but after he died it was found
to be a fact.

"The tower became red-hot, and burned for five days before it was
utterly destroyed.  This was the end o' the second Eddystone.  Its
builder was a Mr John Rudyerd, a silk mercer of London.

"The third Eddystone, which has now stood for half a century as firm as
the rock itself, and which bids fair to stand till the end of time, was
begun in 1756 and completed in 1759.  It was lighted by means of
twenty-four candles.  Of Mr Smeaton, the engineer who built it, those
who knew him best said that `he had never undertaken anything without
completing it to the satisfaction of his employers.'

"D'ye know, lads," continued Bremner in a half-musing tone, "I've
sometimes been led to couple this character of Smeaton with the text
that he put round the top of the first room of the lighthouse--`Except
the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it;' and also
the words, `Praise God,' which he cut in Latin on the last stone, the
lintel of the lantern door.  I think these words had somethin' to do
with the success of the last Eddystone Lighthouse."

"I agree with you," said Robert Selkirk, with a nod of hearty approval;
"and, moreover, I think the Bell Rock Lighthouse stands a good chance of
equal success, for whether he means to carve texts on the stones or not
I don't know, but I feel assured that _our_ engineer is animated by the
same spirit."

When Bremner's account of the Eddystone came to a close, most of the men
had finished their third or fourth pipes, yet no one proposed going to
rest.

The storm without raged so furiously that they felt a strong
disinclination to separate.  At last, however, Peter Logan rose, and
said he would turn in for a little.  Two or three of the others also
rose, and were about to ascend to their barrack, when a heavy sea struck
the building, causing it to quiver to its foundation.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE STORM.

"'Tis a fearful night," said Logan, pausing with his foot on the first
step of the ladder.  "Perhaps we had better sit up."

"What's the use?" said O'Connor, who was by nature reckless.  "Av the
beacon howlds on, we may as well slape as not; an' if it don't howld on,
why, we'll be none the worse o' slapin' anyhow."

"_I_ mean to sit up," said Forsyth, whose alarm was aggravated by
another fit of violent toothache.

"So do I," exclaimed several of the men, as another wave dashed against
the beacon, and a quantity of spray came pouring down from the rooms
above.

This latter incident put an end to further conversation.  While some
sprang up the ladder to see where the leak had occurred, Ruby opened the
door, which was on the lee-side of the building, and descended to the
mortar-gallery to look after his tools, which lay there.

Here he was exposed to the full violence of the gale, for, as we have
said, this first floor of the beacon was not protected by sides.  There
was sufficient light to enable him to see all round for a considerable
distance.  The sight was not calculated to comfort him.

The wind was whistling with what may be termed a vicious sound among the
beams, to one of which Ruby was obliged to cling to prevent his being
carried away.  The sea was bursting, leaping, and curling wildly over
the rocks, which were now quite covered, and as he looked down through
the chinks in the boards of the floor, he could see the foam whirling
round the beams of his trembling abode, and leaping up as if to seize
him.  As the tide rose higher and higher, the waves roared straight
through below the floor, their curling backs rising terribly near to
where he stood, and the sprays drenching him and the whole edifice
completely.

As he gazed into the dark distance, where the turmoil of waters seemed
to glimmer with ghostly light against a sky of the deepest black, he
missed the light of the _Smeaton_, which, up to that time, had been
moored as near to the lee of the rock as was consistent with safety.  He
fancied she must have gone down, and it was not till next day that the
people on the beacon knew that she had parted her cables, and had been
obliged to make for the Firth of Forth for shelter from the storm.

While he stood looking anxiously in the direction of the tender, a wave
came so near to the platform that he almost involuntarily leaped up the
ladder for safety.  It broke before reaching the beacon, and the spray
dashed right over it, carrying away several of the smith's tools.

"Ho, boys! lend a hand here, some of you," shouted Ruby, as he leaped
down on the mortar-gallery again.

Jamie Dove, Bremner, O'Connor, and several others were at his side in a
moment, and, in the midst of tremendous sprays, they toiled to secure
the movable articles that lay there.  These were passed up to the
sheltered parts of the house; but not without great danger to all who
stood on the exposed gallery below.

Presently two of the planks were torn up by a sea, and several bags of
coal, a barrel of small-beer, and a few casks containing lime and sand,
were all swept away.  The men would certainly have shared the fate of
these, had they not clung to the beams until the sea had passed.

As nothing remained after that which could be removed to the room above,
they left the mortar-gallery to its fate, and returned to the kitchen,
where they were met by the anxious glances and questions of their
comrades.

The fire, meanwhile, could scarcely be got to burn, and the whole place
was full of smoke, besides being wet with the sprays that burst over the
roof, and found out all the crevices that had not been sufficiently
stopped up.  Attending to these leaks occupied most of the men at
intervals during the night.  Ruby and his friend the smith spent much of
the time in the doorway, contemplating the gradual destruction of their
workshop.

For some time the gale remained steady, and the anxiety of the men began
to subside a little, as they became accustomed to the ugly twisting of
the great beams, and found that no evil consequences followed.

In the midst of this confusion, poor Forsyth's anxiety of mind became as
nothing compared with the agony of his toothache!

Bremner had already made several attempts to persuade the miserable man
to have it drawn, but without success.

"I could do it quite easy," said he, "only let me get a hold of it, an'
before you could wink I'd have it out."

"Well, you may try," cried Forsyth in desperation, with a face of ashy
paleness.

It was an awful situation truly.  In danger of his life; suffering the
agonies of toothache, and with the prospect of torments unbearable from
an inexpert hand; for Forsyth did not believe in Bremner's boasted
powers.

"What'll you do it with?" he enquired meekly.

"Jamie Dove's small pincers.  Here they are," said Bremner, moving about
actively in his preparations, as if he enjoyed such work uncommonly.

By this time the men had assembled round the pair, and almost forgot the
storm in the interest of the moment.

"Hold him, two of you," said Bremner, when his victim was seated
submissively on a cask.

"You don't need to hold me," said Forsyth, in a gentle tone.

"Don't we!" said Bremner.  "Here, Dove, Ned, grip his arms, and some of
you stand by to catch his legs; but you needn't touch them unless he
kicks.  Ruby, you're a strong fellow; hold his head."

The men obeyed.  At that moment Forsyth would have parted with his
dearest hopes in life to have escaped, and the toothache, strange to
say, left him entirely; but he was a plucky fellow at bottom; having
agreed to have it done, he would not draw back.

Bremner introduced the pincers slowly, being anxious to get a good hold
of the tooth.  Forsyth uttered a groan in anticipation!  Alarmed lest he
should struggle too soon, Bremner made a sudden grasp and caught the
tooth.  A wrench followed; a yell was the result, and the pincers
slipped!

This was fortunate, for he had caught the wrong tooth.

"Now be aisy, boy," said Ned O'Connor, whose sympathies were easily
roused.

"Once more," said Bremner, as the unhappy man opened his mouth.  "Be
still, and it will be all the sooner over."

Again Bremner inserted the instrument, and fortunately caught the right
tooth.  He gave a terrible tug, that produced its corresponding howl;
but the tooth held on.  Again! again! again! and the beacon house
resounded with the deadly yells of the unhappy man, who struggled
violently, despite the strength of those who held him.

"Och! poor sowl!" ejaculated O'Connor.

Bremner threw all his strength into a final wrench, which tore away the
pincers and left the tooth as firm as ever!

Forsyth leaped up and dashed his comrades right and left.

"That'll do," he roared, and darted up the ladder into the apartment
above, through which he ascended to the barrack-room, and flung himself
on his bed.  At the same time a wave burst on the beacon with such force
that every man there, except Forsyth, thought it would be carried away.
The wave not only sprang up against the house, but the spray, scarcely
less solid than the wave, went quite over it, and sent down showers of
water on the men below.

