broke into platoons, retreated from the stage, and were succeeded by a
troop of horse, who came prancing onward with such a sound of trumpets
and trampling of hoofs, as might have startled Don Quixote himself;
while an old toper, of inveterate ill habits, uplifted his black
bottle and took off a hearty swig.  Meantime the Merry-Andrew began to
caper and turn somersets, shaking his sides, nodding his head, and
winking his eyes in as life-like a manner as if he were ridiculing the
nonsense of all human affairs, and making fun of the whole multitude
beneath him.  At length the old magician (for I compared the showman
to Prospero, entertaining his guests with a mask of shadows) paused
that I might give utterance to my wonder.

"What an admirable piece of work is this!" exclaimed I, lifting up my
bands in astonishment.

Indeed, I liked the spectacle, and was tickled with the old man's
gravity as he presided at it, for I had none of that foolish wisdom
which reproves every occupation that is not useful in this world of
vanities.  If there be a faculty which I possess more perfectly than
most men, it is that of throwing myself mentally into situations
foreign to my own, and detecting, with a cheerful eye, the desirable
circumstances of each.  I could have envied the life of this
gray-headed showman, spent as it had been in a course of safe and
pleasurable adventure, in driving his huge vehicle sometimes through
the sands of Cape Cod, and sometimes over the rough forest roads of
the north and east, and halting now on the green before a village
meeting-house, and now in a paved square of the metropolis.  How often
must his heart have been gladdened by the delight of children, as they
viewed these animated figures!  or his pride indulged, by haranguing
learnedly to grown men on the mechanical powers which produced such
wonderful effects! or his gallantry brought into play (for this is an
attribute which such grave men do not lack) by the visits of pretty
maidens!  And then with how fresh a feeling must he return, at
intervals, to his own peculiar home!

"I would I were assured of as happy a life as his," thought I. Though
the showman's wagon might have accommodated fifteen or twenty
spectators, it now contained only himself and me, and a third person
at whom I threw a glance on entering.  He was a neat and trim young
man of two or three and twenty; his drab hat, and green frock-coat
with velvet collar, were smart, though no longer new; while a pair of
green spectacles, that seemed needless to his brisk little eyes, gave
him something of a scholar-like and literary air.  After allowing me a
sufficient time to inspect the puppets, he advanced with a bow, and
drew my attention to some books in a corner of the wagon.  These he
forthwith began to extol, with an amazing volubility of well-sounding
words, and an ingenuity of praise that won him my heart, as being
myself one of the most merciful of critics.  Indeed, his stock
required some considerable powers of commendation in the salesman;
there were several ancient friends of mine, the novels of those happy
days when my affections wavered between the Scottish Chiefs and Thomas
Thumb; besides a few of later date, whose merits had not been
acknowledged by the public.  I was glad to find that dear little
venerable volume, the New England Primer, looking as antique as ever,
though in its thousandth new edition; a bundle of superannuated gilt
picture-books made such a child of me, that, partly for the glittering
covers, and partly for the fairy-tales within, I bought the whole; and
an assortment of ballads and popular theatrical songs drew largely on
my purse.  To balance these expenditures, I meddled neither with
sermons, nor science, nor morality, though volumes of each were there;
nor with a Life of Franklin in the coarsest of paper, but so showily
bound that it was emblematical of the Doctor himself, in the court
dress which he refused to wear at Paris; nor with Webster's Spelling
Book, nor some of Byron's minor poems, nor half a dozen little
Testaments at twenty-five cents each.

Thus far the collection might have been swept from some great
bookstore, or picked up at an evening auction-room; but there was one
small blue-covered pamphlet, which the peddler handed me with so
peculiar an air, that I purchased it immediately at his own price; and
then, for the first time, the thought struck me, that I had spoken
face to face with the veritable author of a printed book.  The
literary man now evinced a great kindness for me, and I ventured to
inquire which way he was travelling.

"O," said he, "I keep company with this old gentleman here, and we are
moving now towards the camp-meeting at Stamford!"

He then explained to me, that for the present season he had rented a
corner of the wagon as a bookstore, which, as he wittily observed, was
a true Circulating Library, since there were few parts of the country
where it had not gone its rounds.  I approved of the plan exceedingly,
and began to sum up within my mind the many uncommon felicities in the
life of a book-peddler, especially when his character resembled that of
the individual before me.  At a high rate was to be reckoned the daily
and hourly enjoyment of such interviews as the present, in which he
seized upon the admiration of a passing stranger, and made him aware
that a man of literary taste, and even of literary achievement, was
travelling the country in a showman's wagon.  A more valuable, yet not
infrequent triumph, might be won in his conversation with some elderly
clergyman, long vegetating in a rocky, woody, watery back settlement of
New England, who, as he recruited his library from the peddler's stock
of sermons, would exhort him to seek a college education and become
the first scholar in his class.  Sweeter and prouder yet would be his
sensations, when, talking poetry while he sold spelling-books, he
should charm the mind, and haply touch the heart of a fair country
schoolmistress, herself an unhonored poetess, a wearer of blue
stockings which none but himself took pains to look at.  But the scene
of his completest glory would be when the wagon had halted for the
night, and his stock of books was transferred to some crowded bar-room.
Then would he recommend to the multifarious company, whether
traveller from the city, or teamster from the hills, or neighboring
squire, or the landlord himself, or his loutish hostler, works suited
to each particular taste and capacity; proving, all the while, by
acute criticism and profound remark, that the lore in his books was
