place.  Meanwhile Giants Cormoran and Galligantus are prepared to
receive visitors daily at 3 and 8 p.m.

From the _Evening Tell-Tale_, July 28th.

The Missing Tourists.--

Extraordinary Rumours.--No News of the Lincoln Clergyman.--

Fifty Scientific Men Missing.--The most astonishing rumours continue to
come in from Giants' Bay.  In addition to the disappearance recorded in
a recent issue, we have received information that a whole congress of
anthropomorphists has been missing for a week.  They were quartered at
Cormoran's Hotel, where their personal effects still remain.

Many conjectures are afloat, the most reasonable of which appears to
point to the probability of the unfortunate tourists having been
engulfed in the sands, which at certain states of the tide are said to
be highly dangerous along this coast.

Later.--At the Round Table to-night a question was asked as to the
extraordinary disappearances reported from Giants' Bay.  The Home
Secretary requested the hon, member to give notice of the question for
this day week.

From the _Giants Bay Broadsheet_, July 28th.

The following bulletins have been issued:--

12:30 p.m.--Giant Blunderbore is decidedly worse.  Contrary to medical
advice, he partook of a hearty meal last night.  Dr Smith is still in
attendance.

4 p.m.--Giant Blunderbore lies in a hopeless state.  He has again
disregarded medical advice, and eaten solid food.  Dr Smith is still in
attendance.

8 p.m.--It is with the deepest regret that we have to announce the death
of our esteemed patron Giant Blunderbore, which took place suddenly this
evening, after a somewhat painful operation.  Details are not yet
forthcoming; but we expect to issue an extra double number to-morrow,
with a coloured photograph of the deceased.  As only a limited number
will be printed, copies should be ordered early.  The attention of
advertisers is drawn to the present unusual opportunity.

Latest.--Just as we go to press we hear that Dr Smith has been summoned
to attend Giant Cormoran, who is ailing of a complaint which presents
symptoms similar to those of the late Giant Blunderbore.

From the _Scampingtonian_, July 27th.

Dear Chappies,--No end of a go!  Can't find my people high or low.
People been sloping off all round.  Fancy I know why now.  On Monday I
saw Blunderbore's door open as I passed, and I thought I'd pop in and
see what he knew about it.  He was sitting in his chair, looking jolly
blue.

"What's up, Blundy?"  I said.

"I'm awfully hungry," said he.

"Why don't you have some grub?"  I said.

"Doctors won't let me," said he.  "You see, a week ago I happened to eat
something that disagreed with me.  Between me and you," said he, "it was
a knight in armour.  I didn't mind the knight, but the armour gave me a
very bad turn."

"Do you know," said I, "that was my governor?"

"My dear boy," said he, "I'm awfully sorry.  I feel for you.  I wish I
hadn't done it--sincerely.  But a fellow must live.  Really, I
sympathise with you; let me grasp your hand."

"Not if I know it, you cad," said I; "and where's my mother?"

"That's another thing that troubles me," said he.  "Tell me, did she
wear a brocaded silk gown with beads?  Most unlucky for us both!  Beads
never did agree with me.  It's a warning to both of us to be more
particular.  Really, you _must_ let me grasp your hand."

"Not much!" said I.  "Look here, Blunderbore, I mean to show you up.
I'll let some of our fellows know about you, and you see if they don't
make you sit up before long."

"I feel much more like lying down," said he.  "Would you mind handing me
that medicine bottle?"

"Don't you wish _you_ may get it!" said I, and cut.

I told Jack Smith about it, and he was no end riled.  I must say, I feel
riled myself.  It's specially awkward, because the mater had our return
tickets in her pocket; and I can't get away from here.  I wish you'd
send me a sov., some of you.  I'll square up after vac.

Yours ever, Hugh a Pie.

P.S.--Here's a go!  Old Blunderbore's gone at last!  Smith says it was
the steel armour inside him that did it.  Serves him jolly well right!

From the _Giants' Bay Broadsheet_, July 29th.

It is with feelings almost akin to consternation that we announce the
sudden and critical illness of our esteemed fellow-citizen Giant
Cormoran.  The regret with which we make this announcement will be
shared by all those visitors to this charming retreat who during the
last months have come into contact with the amiable and accommodating
gentleman.

Giant Cormoran is one of the old school of Englishmen whom we can ill
afford to lose.  Capacious in mind and body, with a large sense of
humour, of strict personal integrity, and a hearty enjoyment of life, it
is indeed sad to think of him at the present moment as lying on a bed of
languishing, from which it is doubtful whether he will rise more.  Very
little news leaks out from the sick-chamber.  Dr Smith is in regular
attendance, and, according to a curt bulletin published an hour ago,
reports his patient's condition as exceedingly grave: "Giant Cormoran is
in a state of collapse.  There is a complete loss of nervous power.  The
patient has quite lost his head."

We have no doubt that the melancholy death of his comrade Giant
Blunderbore has seriously affected his nerves.  Happily, his condition
spares him the additional pang of knowing that Giant Galligantus is also
on the sick list, with what it is feared is a mild attack of the
prevailing epidemic.  Later.

The following bulletins have just appeared: "The condition of Giant
Cormoran remains unchanged.

"John Smith, M.D."

"Giant Galligantus is suffering from a severe shock to the system, with
complications.  It is feared that the attack is of a similar nature to
that of Giants Blunderbore and Cormoran.

"John Smith, M.D."

Latest.--Giant Cormoran is no more.  A memoir will appear in our next.
Special space will be reserved for advertisements on the cover.

From the _Evening Tell-Tale_, August 1st.

The Giants' Bay Mysteries.--

The Plot Thickens.--

Sudden Death of Giants.--

Rumoured Government Intervention.--

Further Wholesale Disappearances.--The plot thickens at Giants' Bay.
Two of the leading giants of the place, Giants Blunderbore and Cormoran,
have died of what is apparently an acute gastric epidemic.  Meanwhile
hundreds of inquiries are pouring into the place respecting missing
relatives and friends.  It is stated that an entire learned society has
disappeared.

Owing to the urgent representations of the _Tell-Tale_ and other
journals, the Government has at last awakened to a sense of the gravity
of the situation.  At the Round Table last night a commission was
appointed to inquire into the matter.  It will meet this day week, and
after appointing president and secretary, adjourn till October.

The police are reticent; but on inquiry at the head office we understand
that search is being made in the atlas for Giants' Bay.  For the
information of our readers, we give a map of the locality of the
mysteries, and fancy portraits of the three giants.  During the present
excitement, and in the interests of our subscribers, it has been decided
permanently to double the price of the _Tell-Tale_.

From the _West Anglian Anthropomorphist_, August 2nd.

In the continued unexplained absence of the president and members of the
society, the usual meetings will not be held in August.  We may point
out for the benefit of advertisers that a considerable amount of
additional space will thus be available for their announcements.

From the _Giants' Bay Broadsheet_, August 3rd.

It is with feelings of unfeigned melancholy that we announce the demise
of our excellent neighbour Giant Galligantus, after a brief illness.
The lamented giant never rallied from the nervous shock which overtook
him a few days since.  Although details are still a-wanting, we
understand that his head was seriously affected.  Dr John Smith was in
attendance to the last.  Further particulars, with an extra supplement
and portrait memoirs of the three giants, will be given in our next.  In
order not to disappoint our readers and advertisers, the prices in each
department will be further doubled.

Departure.--John Smith, Esquire, M.D., has left Giants' Bay.

From the _Hue and Cry_, August 14th.  Police Notice.

Whereas several persons have recently disappeared from the neighbourhood
of Giants' Bay, in the county of Cornwall, a reward of One Pound will be
offered to any person, not a principal, who shall give any information
leading to the detection of the aforesaid.

From the _Evening Tell-Tale_, August 6th.

Our special correspondent at Giants' Bay writes: "The excitement here is
unabated.  All sorts of conjectures are afloat.  General opinion seems
to connect the wholesale disappearance of tourists and the sudden death
of the three giants as parts of the fiendish scheme of some person
unknown.  The miscreant is supposed to be interested in some other
watering-place.

"We have been fortunate enough to secure a personal interview with the
celebrated Dr John Smith, whose remarks--in view of his recent close
personal relations with the deceased giants--will be read with interest.
We found the youthful doctor enjoying a fragrant weed in the verandah
of his father's bijou residence in Scilly.

"`A beautiful day, doctor,' we said, taking the vacant seat beside him.

"`Is it?' replied he, placing his two feet in a graceful attitude on the
elaborately-polished balustrade of the balcony.

"`Heard of you at Giants' Bay,' we remarked, by way of leading up to the
subject.  There was a pause, and then the doctor replied, `Oh!'

"`A strange affair the sudden mortality in that place, doctor.'

"`What about it?' was the unexpected rejoinder, as the man of physic
slowly assumed a standing attitude.

"He was dressed in a light check suit, which reflected considerable
credit on the provincial tailor who made it.

"`That's the question,' we replied, with a touch of humour.

"The doctor appeared to feel the heat, but presently recovered
sufficiently to call our attention to the peculiar make of his boots.
They were large, with flapped uppers and clumped soles, and could hardly
have cost less than a guinea the pair.  We congratulated him warmly upon
his possession.  Dr Smith was evidently proud of them.

"`See them?' said he, pointing to the right foot.

"We nodded a friendly assent, inwardly amused at our friend's
eccentricity.

"`Do you see that hill there?' said he, abruptly pointing over our
shoulder.

"We turned to look.  It was indeed a fine view which met our eyes--a
view of which any native of Scilly might be proud.  We were about to
make an observation to the effect, when he interrupted us.

"`Feel them?'

We certainly did feel something--not in front of us--and not being
anxious to take up more of our friend's valuable time, we thanked him
for his courtesy and retired.

From the _Round Table Hansard_, August 25th.

Giants' Bay Select Committee.--Lord Merlin was in the chair.  The
committee sat for a short time to draw up rules of procedure and arrange
an adjournment.  It was decided to prorogue the inquiry for six months,
in order to allow witnesses to attend.  A brief discussion ensued on the
question of costs, and a short Bill was drafted, which it is proposed to
add to the estimates.

The Chairman expressed an opinion that an additional twopence on the
income-tax would amply cover the costs of the commission; and it was
agreed to await the passing of the Bill before fixing the date for the
next meeting.  The committee then adjourned.

From the _Giants' Bay Broadsheet_, September 10th.

Preliminary Notice.--On the 1st of April next, at the Mart, will be sold
those three eligible hotels--namely, Blunderbore Hotel, Cormoran Hotel,
and Galligantus Hotel, pleasantly situated in Giants' Bay, Cornwall,
commanding fine views of the sea.  These palatial houses, standing in
their own grounds, are fitted with every comfort and replete with every
convenience.  Fixtures at a valuation.  By order of the executors of the
late Giants Blunderbore, Cormoran, and Galligantus.

Catalogues and orders to view on application.

From the _Army Gazetteer_, December 1st.

Captain Tom Thumb to be Major-General, _vice_ Sir Cap a Pie, deceased.

From the _Lincoln Weekly Supplement_, December 25th.

The Reverend Friar Tucker has been appointed to the living lately held
by the Reverend Simon Cellarer.

From the _West Anglian Anthropomorphist_, January 1st.

At a meeting held last week it was decided to reorganise this society.
A new president was elected.  It was announced that an exhibition would
be offered yearly, to be called the "Hardhide Exhibition," for the best
essay on the gigantic remains of south-west Britain.

From the _Scampingtonian_, January 25th.

Term has begun.  We are glad to say that our chum, a Pie--now Sir Hugh a
Pie--has been unanimously elected captain of the football club.

From the _Stilly Gazette_, April 3rd.

At the mart on Monday were sold the three Giant Hotels of Giants' Bay.
The bidding was very slack, but we understand the lots were eventually
knocked down to a dealer in old bricks.

Our respected fellow-islander, Dr John Smith, has had the honour of
being presented at court, where his Majesty has been pleased to confer
on him several stripes, and the order of the Giant Killer.  A public
reception is to be held in the market-place to welcome home Sir John
Smith, G.K., M.D., on his return from London.

From the _Giants' Bay Broadsheet_, June 1st.

The offices of this paper being now closed, subscribers are requested to
forward outstanding accounts by return to Messrs. Payup and Shellout,
Solicitors, London.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

Sub-Chapter I.
