
"It matters little to me," returned the outlaw languidly, "and it won't
matter to anybody long.  I should prefer `Ralph,' for it is not
associated with so much evil as the other, but you know our
circumstances are peculiar just now, so, all things considered, I had
better remain Buck Tom to the end of the chapter.  I'll answer to
whichever name comes first when the roll is called in the next world."

The conversation was interrupted at this point by the entrance of Hunky
Ben bearing a deer on his lusty shoulders.  He was followed by Dick
Darvall.

"There," said the former, throwing the carcass on the floor, "I told ye
I wouldn't be long o' bringin' in somethin' for the pot."

"Ay, an' the way he shot it too," said the seaman, laying aside his
rifle, "would have made even a monkey stare with astonishment.  Has
Leather come back, by the way?  I see'd him goin' full sail through the
woods when I went out this mornin'."

"He has not yet returned," said Charlie.  "When I relieved him and sat
down to watch by our friend here, he said he felt so much better and
stronger that he would take his gun and see if he couldn't find
something for the pot.  I advised him not to trust his feelings too
much, and not to go far, but--ah, here he comes to answer for himself."

As he spoke a step was heard outside, and next moment Shank entered,
carrying a brace of rabbits which he flung down, and then threw himself
on a couch in a state of considerable exhaustion.

"There," said he, wiping the perspiration from his forehead.  "They've
cost me more trouble than they're worth, for I'm quite done up.  I had
no idea I had become so weak in the legs.  Ralph, my dear fellow," he
added, forgetting himself for the moment as he rose and went to his
friend's side, "I have more sympathy with you, now that I have found out
the extent of my own weakness.  Do you feel better!"

"Yes, old boy--much--much better."

"That's all right.  I'm convinced that--hallo! why, who shot the deer!"

"Hunky Ben has beat you," said Charlie.

"Beat Leather!" exclaimed Darvall, "why, he beats all creation.  I never
see'd anything like it since I went to sea."

"Since you came ashore, you should say.  But come, Dick," said Charlie,
"let's hear about this wonderful shooting.  I'm sure it will amuse
Buck--unless he's too wearied to listen."

"Let him talk," said the invalid.  "I like to hear him."

Thus exhorted and encouraged the seaman recounted his day's experience.

"Well, you must know, messmates," said he, "that I set sail alone this
mornin', havin' in my pocket the small compass I always carry about me--
also my bearin's before startin', so as I shouldn't go lost in the
woods--though that wouldn't be likely in such an narrow inlet as this
Traitor's Trap, to say nothin' o' the landmarks alow and aloft of all
sorts.  I carried a Winchester with me, because, not bein' what you may
call a crack shot, I thought it would give me a better chance to have a
lot o' resarve shots in the locker, d'ye see?  I carried also a
six-shooter, as it might come handy, you know, if I fell in wi' a
Redskin or a bear, an' got to close quarters.  Also my cutlass, for I've
bin used to that aboard ship when I was in the navy.

"Well, away I went--makin' sail down the valley to begin with, an' then
a long tack into the mountains right in the wind's eye, that bein' the
way to get on the blind side o' game.  I hadn't gone far when up starts
a bird o' some sort--"

"What like was it?" asked the scout.

"No more notion than the man in the moon," returned the sailor.  "What
wi' the flutter an' scurry an' leaves, branches an' feathers--an' the
start--I see'd nothin' clear, an' I was so anxious to git somethin' for
the pot, that six shots went arter it out o' the Winchester, before I
was quite sure I'd begun to fire--for you must know I've larned to fire
uncommon fast since I come to these parts.  Hows'ever, I hit nothin'--"

"Not quite so bad as that, Dick," interrupted the scout gravely.

"Well, that's true, but you better tell that part of it yourself, Hunky,
as you know more about it than me."

"It wasn't of much consequence," said the scout betraying the slightest
possible twinkle in his grey eyes, "but Dick has a knack o' lettin'
drive without much regard to what's in front of him.  I happened to be
more in front of him than that bird when he began to fire, an' the first
shot hit my right leggin', but by good luck only grazed the bark.  Of
course I dropped behind a rock when the storm began and lay quiet there,
and when a lull came I halloo'd."

"Yes, he did halloo," said Dick, resuming the narrative, "an' that
halloo was more like the yell of a bull of Bashan than the cry of a
mortal man.  It made my heart jump into my throat an' stick there, for I
thought I must have killed a whole Redskin tribe at one shot--"

"Six shots, Dick.  Tell the exact truth an' don't contradic' yourself,"
said Hunky.

"No, it wasn't," retorted the seaman stoutly.  "It was arter the _first_
shot that you gave the yell.  Hows'ever, I allow that the echoes kep' it
goin' till the six shots was off--an' I can tell you, messmates, that
the hallooin' an' flutterin' an' scurryin' an echoin' an' thought of
Redskins in my brain all mixed up wi' the blatterin' shots, caused such
a rumpus that I experienced considerable relief when the smoke cleared
away an' I see'd Hunky Ben in front o' me laughin' fit to bu'st his
sides."

"Well, to make a long yarn short, I joined Hunky and allowed him to
lead, seein' that he understands the navigation hereaway better than me.

"`Come along,' says he, `an' I'll let you have a chance at a deer.'

"`All right,' says I, an' away we went up one hill an' down another--for
all the world as if we was walkin' over a heavy Atlantic swell--till we
come to a sort o' pass among the rocks.

"`I'm goin' to leave you here to watch,' says he, `an' I'll go round by
the futt o' the gully an' drive the deer up.  They'll pass quite close,
so you've only to--'

"Hunky stopped short as he was speakin' and flopped down as if he'd bin
shot-haulin' me along wi' him.

"`Keep quiet,' says he, in a low voice.  `We're in luck, an' don't need
to drive.  There's a deer comin' up at this very minute--a young one.
You'll take it.  I won't fire unless you miss.'

"You may be sure I kep' quiet, messmates, arter that.  I took just one
peep, an' there, sure enough, I saw a brown beast comin' up the pass.
So we kep' close as mice.  There was a lot o' small bushes not ten yards
in front of us, which ended in a cut--a sort o' crack--in the hill-side,
a hundred yards or more from the place where we was crouchin'.

"`Now,' whispers Hunky to--"

"I never whisper!" remarked the scout.

"Well, well; he said, in a low v'ice to me, says he, `d'ye see that
openin' in the bushes?'  `I do,' says I.  `Well then,' says he, `it's
about ten yards off; be ready to commence firin' when it comes to that
openin'.'  `I will,' says I.  An', sure enough, when the brown critter
came for'id at a walk an' stopped sudden wi' a look o' surprise as if it
hadn't expected to see me, bang went my Winchester four times, like
winkin', an' up went the deer four times in the air, but niver a bit the
worse was he.  Snap I went a fifth time; but there was no shot, an' I
gave a yell, for I knew the cartridges was done.  By that time the
critter had reached the crack in the hill I told ye of, an' up in the
air he went to clear it, like an Indy-rubber ball.  I felt a'most like
to fling my rifle at it in my rage, when bang! went a shot at my ear
that all but deaf'ned me, an' I wish I may niver fire another shot or
furl another t'gallant-s'l if that deer didn't crumple up in the air an'
drop down stone dead--as dead as it now lays there on the floor."

By the time Dick Darvall had ended his narrative--which was much more
extensive than our report of it--steaks of the deer were sputtering in a
frying-pan, and other preparations were being made for a hearty meal, to
which all the healthy men did ample justice.  Shank Leather did what he
could, and even Buck Tom made a feeble attempt to join.

That night a strict watch was kept outside the cave--each taking it by
turns, for it was just possible, though not probable, that the outlaws
might return to their old haunt.  No one appeared, however, and for the
succeeding eight weeks the party remained there undisturbed, Shank
Leather slowly but surely regaining strength; his friend, Buck Tom, as
slowly and surely losing it; while Charlie, Dick, and Hunky Ben ranged
the neighbouring forest in order to procure food.  Leather usually
remained in the cave to cook for and nurse his friend.  It was pleasant
work to Shank, for love and pity were at the foundation of the service.
Buck Tom perceived this and fully appreciated it.  Perchance he obtained
some valuable light on spiritual subjects from Shank's changed tone and
manner, which the logic of his friend Brooke had failed to convey.  Who
can tell?



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

SHOWS HOW THE SEAMAN WAS SENT ON A DELICATE MISSION AND HOW HE FARED.

"Shank," said Charlie one day as they were sitting in the sunshine near
the outlaws' cave, waiting for Dick and the scout to return to their
mid-day meal, "it seems to me that we may be detained a good while here,
for we cannot leave Ralph, and it is evident that the poor fellow won't
be able to travel for many a day--"

"If ever," interposed Shank sorrowfully.

"Well, then, I think we must send down to Bull's Ranch, to see if there
are any letters for us.  I feel sure that there must be some, and the
question arises--who are we to send?"

"_You_ must not go, Charlie, whoever goes.  You are the only link in
this mighty wilderness, that connects Ralph and me with home--and hope.
Weak and helpless as we are, we cannot afford to let you out of our
sight."

"Well, but if I don't go I can't see my way to asking the scout to go,
for he alone thoroughly understands the ways of the country and of the
Indians--if any should chance to come this way.  Besides, considering
the pledge he is under to be accountable for Buck Tom, I doubt if he
would consent to go."

"The question is answered, then," said Shank, "for the only other man is
Dick Darvall."

"True; and it strikes me that Dick will be very glad to go," returned
Charlie with a smile of peculiar meaning.

"D'ye think he's getting tired of us, Charlie?"

"By no means.  But you know he has a roving disposition, and I think he
has a sort of fondness for Jackson--the boss of the ranch."

It was found when the question was put to him, that Dick was quite ready
to set out on the mission required of him.  He also admitted his
fondness for Roaring Bull!

"But what if you should lose your way?" asked the scout.

"Find it again," was Dick's prompt reply.

"And what if you should be attacked by Indians?"

"Fight 'em, of course."

"But if they should be too many to fight?"

"Why, clap on all sail an' give 'em a starn chase, which is always a
long one.  For this purpose, however, I would have to command a good
craft so I'd expect you to lend me yours, Hunky Ben."

"What! my Polly?"

"Even so.  Black Polly."

The scout received this proposal gravely, and shook his head at first,
for he was naturally fond of his beautiful mare, and, besides, doubted
the sailor's horsemanship, though he had perfect faith in his courage
and discretion.  Finally, however, he gave in; and accordingly, one fine
morning at daybreak, Dick Darvall, mounted on Black Polly, and armed
with his favourite Winchester, revolvers, and cutlass, "set sail" down
Traitor's Trap to visit his lady-love!

Of course he knew that his business was to obtain letters and gather
news.  But honest Dick Darvall could not conceal from himself that his
main object was--Mary Jackson!

Somehow it has come to be supposed or assumed that a jack-tar cannot
ride.  Possibly this may be true of the class as a whole to which Jack
belongs, but it is not necessarily true of all, and it certainly is not
true of some.  Dick Darvall was an expert horseman--though a sailor.  He
had learned to ride when a boy, before going to sea, and his after-habit
of riding the "white horses" of the Norseman, did not cause him to
forget the art of managing the "buckers" of the American plains.  To use
his own words, he felt as much at home on the hurricane deck of a
Spanish pony, as on the fo'c'sl of a man-of-war, so that the scout's
doubt of his capacity as a rider was not well founded.

Tremendous was the bound of exultation which our seaman felt, then, when
he found himself on the magnificent black mare, with the fresh morning
air fanning his temples, and the bright morning sun glinting through a
cut in the eastern range.

Soon he reached the lower end of the valley, which, being steep, he had
descended with tightened rein.  On reaching the open prairie he gave the
mare her head and went off with a wild whoop like an arrow from a bow.

Black Polly required neither spur nor whip.  She possessed that
charmingly sensitive spirit which seems to receive an electric shock
from its rider's lightest chirp.  She was what you may call an anxiously
willing steed, yet possessed such a tender mouth that she could be
pulled up as easily as she could be made to go.  A mere child could have
ridden her, and Dick found in a few minutes that a slight check was
necessary to prevent her scouring over the plains at racing speed.  He
restrained her, therefore, to a grand canter, with many a stride and
bound interspersed, when such a thing as a rut or a little bush came in
her way.

With arched neck, glistening eyes, voluminous mane, and flowing tail she
flew onward, hour after hour, with many a playful shake of the head, and
an occasional snort, as though to say, "This is mere child's play; _do_
let me put on a spurt!"

It may not be fair to credit such a noble creature with talking, or even
thinking, slang, but Dick Darvall clearly understood her to say
something of the sort, for after a while he reduced speed to a kind of
india-rubber walk and patted her neck, saying--

"No, no, lass, you mustn't use up your strength at the beginning.  We've
got a longish trip before us, Polly, an' it won't do to clap on all sail
at the beginnin' of the voyage."

At David's store Dick stopped for a short time to obtain a little
refreshment for himself and Polly.  There he found a group of cow-boys
discussing the affairs of their neighbours, and enlarging noisily on
things in general under the brain-clearing and reason-inspiring
influence of strong drink!  To these he recounted briefly the incidents
of the recent raid of the troops into Traitor's Trap, and learned that
Jake the Flint had "drifted south into Mexico where he was plying the
trade of cattle and horse stealer, with the usual accompaniments of that
profession--fighting, murdering, drinking, etcetera."  Some of the deeds
of this notorious outlaw, as narrated by the cow-boy Crux, who happened
to be there, made the blood of Dick run cold--and Dick's blood was not
easily made to run otherwise than naturally by any one--except, of
course, by Mary Jackson, who could at all events make it run hot, also
fast or slow, very much according to her own sweet will!

But the seaman had no time to lose.  He had still a long way to go, and
the day was advancing.  Remounting Black Polly he was soon out again on
the prairie, sweeping over the grassy waves and down into the hollows
with a feeling of hilarious jollity, that was born of high health,
good-nature, pleasant circumstances, and a free-and-easy mind.

Nothing worthy of particular notice occurred after this to mar the
pleasure of our sailor's "voyage" over the prairie until he reached a
belt of woodland, through which for half a mile he had to travel.  Here
he drew rein and began to traverse the bit of forest at a quiet amble,
partly to rest Polly, and partly that he might more thoroughly enjoy the
woodland scenery through the umbrageous canopy of which the sun was
sending his slanting rays and covering the sward with a confused
chequer-work of green and gold.

And here Dick Darvall became communicative; entered into conversation,
so to speak, with himself.  After a few minutes, however, this did not
prove a sufficient outlet to his exuberant spirits.

"Come, Dick," he exclaimed, "give us a song.  Your voice ain't, perhaps,
much to speak of as to quality, but there's no end of quantity.  Strike
up, now; what shall it be?"

Without replying to the question he struck up "Rule Britannia" in tones
that did not justify his disparaging remark as to quality.  He reached
the other end of the wood and the end of the song at the same time.
"Britons," shouted he with unalterable determination--"Never, never,
ne-ever, shall be--Redskins!"

This unnatural termination was not an intentional variation.  It was the
result of a scene that suddenly burst upon his view.

Far away on the prairie two riders were seen racing at what he would
have styled a slant away from him.  They were going at a pace that
suggested fleeing for life.

"Redskins--arter somethin'," murmured Dick, pulling up, and shading his
eyes from the sun with his right hand, as he gazed earnestly at the two
riders.

"No-n-no.  They're whites," he continued, "one o' them a man; t'other a
woman.  I can make that out, anyhow."

As he spoke, the racing riders topped a far-off knoll; halted, and
turned round as if to gaze back towards the north--the direction from
which they had come.  Then, wheeling round as if in greater haste than
ever, they continued their headlong gallop and disappeared on the other
side of the knoll.

Dick naturally turned towards the north to see, if possible, what the
two riders were flying from.  He was not kept long in doubt, for just
then a band of horsemen was seen topping the farthest ridge in that
direction, and bearing down on the belt of woodland, along the edge of
which they galloped towards him.

There was no mistaking who they were.  The war-whoop, sounding faint and
shrill in the distance, and the wild gesticulations of the riders, told
the story at once to our seaman--two pale-faces, pursued by a band of
bloodthirsty savages!

Unskilled though he was in backwoods warfare, Dick was not unfamiliar
with war's alarms, nor was he wanting in common sense.  To side with the
weaker party was a natural tendency in our seaman.  That the pursuers
were red, and the pursued white, strengthened the tendency, and the fact
that one of the latter was a woman settled the question.  Instantly Dick
shook the reins, drove his unarmed heels against the sides of Polly, and
away they went after the fugitives like a black thunderbolt, if there be
such artillery in nature!

A wild yell told him that he was seen.

