scatter brightness where the deep shadows fell. But, setting forth at
the same time with this youthful pair, there was a dismal figure,
wrapped in a black velvet cloak that might have been made of a coffin
pall, and with a sombre hat, such as mourners wear, drooping its broad
brim over his heavy brows.  Glancing behind them, the lovers well knew
who it was that followed, but wished from their hearts that he had
been elsewhere, as being a companion so strangely unsuited to their
joyous errand.  It was a near relative of Lilies Fay, an old man by
the name of Walter Gascoigne, who had long labored under the burden of
a melancholy spirit, which was sometimes maddened into absolute
insanity, and always had a tinge of it.  What a contrast between the
young pilgrims of bliss and their unbidden associate! They looked as
if moulded of Heaven's sunshine, and he of earth's gloomiest shade;
they flitted along like Hope and Joy, roaming hand in hand through
life; while his darksome figure stalked behind, a type of all the
woeful influences which life could fling upon them.  But the three had
not gone far, when they reached a spot that pleased the gentle Lily,
and she paused.

"What sweeter place shall we find than this?" said she.  "Why should
we seek farther for the site of our Temple?"

It was indeed a delightful spot of earth, though undistinguished by
any very prominent beauties, being merely a nook in the shelter of a
hill, with the prospect of a distant lake in one direction, and of a
church-spire in another.  There were vistas and pathways leading
onward and onward into the green woodlands, and vanishing away in the
glimmering shade.  The Temple, if erected here, would look towards the
west: so that the lovers could shape all sorts of magnificent dreams
out of the purple, violet, and gold of the sunset sky; and few of
their anticipated pleasures were dearer than this sport of fantasy.

"Yes," said Adam Forrester, "we might seek all day, and find no
lovelier spot.  We will build our Temple here."

But their sad old companion, who had taken his stand on the very site
which they proposed to cover with a marble floor, shook his head and
frowned; and the young man and the Lily deemed it almost enough to
blight the spot, and desecrate it for their airy Temple, that his
dismal figure had thrown its shadow there.  He pointed to some
scattered stones, the remnants of a former structure, and to flowers
such as young girls delight to nurse in their gardens, but which had
now relapsed into the wild simplicity of nature.

"Not here!" cried old Walter Gascoigne.  "Here, long ago, other
mortals built their Temple of Happiness.  Seek another site for
yours!"

"What!" exclaimed Lilias Fay.  "Have any ever planned such a Temple,
save ourselves?"

"Poor child!" said her gloomy kinsman.  "In one shape or other, every
mortal has dreamed your dream."

Then he told the lovers, how--not, indeed, an antique Temple--but a
dwelling had once stood there, and that a dark-clad guest had dwelt
among its inmates, sitting forever at the fireside, and poisoning all
their household mirth.  Under this type, Adam Forrester and Lilias saw
that the old man spake of Sorrow.  He told of nothing that might not
be recorded in the history of almost every household; and yet his
hearers felt as if no sunshine ought to fall upon a spot where human
grief had left so deep a stain; or, at least, that no joyous Temple
should be built there.

"This is very sad," said the Lily; sighing.

"Well, there are lovelier spots than this," said Adam Forrester,
soothingly,--"spots which sorrow has not blighted."
