"It's blowing over," said Wally.  "We'd better make back for the hill-
side, and get out of this ravine till it clears up."

It was no easy task scrambling back, down that difficult way, over
boulders already made slippery by the moist mist, and not able to see
four yards ahead.  The clouds poured up to meet them in column upon
column, growing denser and wetter every minute.  At last, how they
scarcely knew, they came down to where the rush of the water ceased and
the stones gave place to wet grass.

"We must be somewhere near where we sat down last," said Ashby.  "Whew!
it's cold."

"The thing is," said Percy, "aren't we too much out to the left?
There's no sign of a path that I can see."

"This looks like one," said a voice ahead, which they recognised as
Wally's.  "Come along--this way."

They followed as well as they could, and groped about for the path.
Then they shouted.

Wally replied out of the mist.

"Stay there a bit--it's not a path.  I'll yell when I've got it."

They waited, and for five minutes listened anxiously for the signal.
Then they thought they heard it away to the right, and floundered off in
pursuit.  But after a little they discovered that they were going
uphill.

"Hadn't we better go back to where we were," said Cash, "or we may miss
him?"

It occurred to most of the party that they had missed him already.
Still, they decided to go back.

Presently they distinctly heard what sounded like a voice below them.

"That must be he.  Yell!"

They shouted, and again there seemed to come a faint response.

"All right," said Percy.  "Stay where you are, and I'll go and fetch him
up."

And he vanished into the mist.

"What's the time?" said Ashby, as the party stood dismally waiting.

"Half-past four.  It's a good job it doesn't get dark till six."

"Only an hour and a half," said Cottle; "I wish those chaps would come."

But though they strained their ears and eyes, no sign of the missing
ones came; nothing but the swish of the rain and the whistle of the wind
through the grass.

"We'd better go on," said D'Arcy presently; "they'll probably get down
some other way.  Look sharp, or it will be dark."

So they started at a fast walk down the boggy slope.

"Keep close," said D'Arcy after a time.  "Are you all there?"

Everybody answered for himself, but not for his neighbour.

"You there, young Fisher minor?"

"Yes," replied Fisher's voice from the rear.

He seemed so near that they started on again.

But after another five minutes, Ashby, who was last but one, shouted
again.

"Where are you, Fisher minor?"

There was no answer.

"Wait a bit, you fellows.  Fisher minor's behind."

But no answer came from that direction either.

"Here's a go," said Ashby to himself.  "That kid Fisher's gone lame, and
he'll be lost if I don't wait for him."

So he dismally turned back, shouting and whistling as he went.

The clouds all round grew duller and heavier in the fading light, and
the wind-blown rain struck keenly on the wanderer's cheek.

"That kid," said Ashby to himself, as he sturdily tramped through the
marsh, "ought not to have come.  He's not up to it."

But despite all his shouting and whistling and cooeying, not a sound
came out of the mist but the wind and the driving of the rain.

Still Ashby could not bring himself to leave the "kid" in the lurch.
Even if he did not find him it would be better to--

"Ah! what was that?"

He clapped his hands to his mouth and shouted against the wind with all
his might.

His voice was flung back in his face; but with it there came the feeble
sound of a "coo-ey" somewhere near.

Ashby sprang to it like a drowning man to a straw.  If it was only a
lost sheep it would be some company.  For ten minutes he beat round,
shouting all the time, and once or twice fancying he heard an answer.

Then suddenly he came upon a great boulder, against which leaned Fisher
minor, whimpering and shivering.

"Here you are!" said Ashby, joyously.  "Thank God for it!  I gave you up
for lost.  The others are gone on.  Come on.  Hang on my arm, old hoss."

"I can't; I'm too fagged to go on.  I'm awfully sleepy, Ashby.  You go
on; I'll come presently."

Ashby's reply was prompt and vigorous.  He took his fellow-junior by the
arm and began to march him down the slope as fast, almost faster than
his weary legs would carry him.

And as they started, the last of the light died out of the mist, and
left them in blank darkness.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

ROLLITT MAKES A RECORD FOR FELLSGARTH.

The Modern seniors had slept on soundly that morning, secure of their
prey.  The military operations of the preceding evening, although they
resulted in the night of the besieged, had not tended to the glory of
the besiegers.  Indeed, when the door had at last been broken in and it
was discovered that the birds had flown, a titter had gone round at the
expense of Messrs. Clapperton, Dangle, and Brinkman, which had been
particularly riling to those gentlemen.

When in the morning the birds were found to have flown once more, the
position of the seniors became positively painful.  Fullerton, as usual,
did not salve the wound.

"I should say--not that it matters much to me--that that scores another
to the rebels," said he.  "How very naughty of them not to stay and be
whopped, to be sure!"

"The young cads!" growled Clapperton, who had the grace to be perfectly
aware that he had been made ridiculous.  "I don't envy them when I get
hold of them."

"No more do I," said Fullerton, "with their door off its hinges.  It
will be very draughty."

"Do shut up.  Why don't you go and join the enemy at once, if you're so
fond of them?" said Dangle.

"Well," said Clapperton, "they will keep; but we must have it out with
Corder now.  It's no use simply cutting him; he'll have to be taught
that he can't defy the house for nothing.  Go and tell him to come,
Brinkman."

But Corder's back was against the wall, literally and metaphorically.

To Brinkman's demand (almost the first voice he had heard speaking to
him for a week) he returned a curt refusal.

"Well, I'll make you come," said Brinkman.  Whereupon Corder retreated
behind his table and invited the interloper to begin.

To dodge round and round a study table after a nimble boy is not a very
dignified operation for a prefect, particularly when the object of his
chase is a prefect too; and Brinkman presently abandoned the quest and
went off, breathing threatenings and slaughter, for reinforcements.

So did Corder.  Less sensitive than his junior fellow-martyrs, he
marched straight across to Yorke's study.  The captain was away, but in
the adjoining room he found Fisher major and Denton, poring over their
endless accounts.

"You two," said Corder, "you're prefects.  You're wanted over on the
other side to stop bullying."

"Who's being bullied?"

"I am.  I've been cut dead for a week.  I'm sick of it.  Now they're
going to lick me.  I'd take my chance against them one at a time, but I
can't tackle three of them."

"Is it for playing in the match?"

"Yes, that and going to the meeting.  Nothing else.  I'd go to twenty a
day, if I had the chance, to spite them."

"Who are bullying you?"

"Clapperton, Brinkman, and Dangle, of course."

"I tell you what," said Denton, "we couldn't go over.  We've no
authority.  But there's nothing to prevent you staying here and letting
them fetch you.  Then we can interfere."

"All serene," said Corder; "I hope they will come.  I say, I wish you'd
let me wait here and hear you fellows talk.  I've not had a word spoken
to me for a week.  I can tell you it's no joke.  I laughed at it at
first, and thought it would be nice rather than otherwise.  But after
two days, you chaps, it gets to be decidedly slow; you begin to wonder
if it isn't worth caving in.  But that would be _such_ a howling come
down, when all you've done is to do what you had a right to do--or
rather what you're bound to do--play up for the School."

"And jolly well you played too," said Usher.

"It was a lucky turn.  You know I was so awfully glad to be in the
fifteen, and felt I could do anything.  Of course the lucky thing was my
getting past their forwards, and then--" And then Corder bunched into a
delighted account of the never-to-be-forgotten match, during which the
cloud passed away from his face, the light came back to his eyes, and
the spirit into his voice.

"What business have they to stop me," said he, "or bully me for it?"

"None.  And Yorke, when he hears of it, will report it to the doctor."

"No, don't let him do that.  What's the use?  If I can stay here it's
all right."

An hour later, about the time that the young mountaineers were beginning
to look out for their second wind on the lower slope, Dangle came across
in a vicious temper.

He had not come to look for Corder, the sight of whom in the sanctuary
of a Classic study took him aback.

"That's where you're sneaking, is it?" said he.  "I'm not surprised."

"Not much need to sneak from _you_.  It's three against one I object
to," said Corder.  "But if you like to fetch Clapperton and Brinkman
over here, we can have it out comfortably now."

"You must think yourself uncommonly important if you suppose we're going
to trouble about an ass like you," said Dangle.  "I never once thought
of you."

"What have you come for, then?" said Fisher.  "Hadn't you better wait
till you're invited before you come where you're not wanted?"

"I've come on club business, and I've a perfect right to come.  You
fellows, I hear, have taken it into your heads to dissolve the club."

"What of that?  Why didn't you come and vote against it if you didn't
like it?"

"Thank you.  It wasn't quite good enough.  What I want to know is, what
is the treasurer going to do with the money?  I suppose that's hardly
going to be treated as a perquisite for him?"

Fisher major looked troubled.  He had dreaded this awkward question for
days.  For the lost money was still missing.

"You know it's nothing of the kind."

"What are you going to do with it, then?"

"That's for the club to decide.  If you'd come to the meeting you could
have proposed something."

"It's funny how sore you are about that precious hole-and-corner meeting
of yours.  How much is there on hand?"

"You'll know presently."

"I dare say--as soon as you've hit on a dodge for getting over that
little deficiency of four or five pounds--eh?"

Fisher major looked up in astonishment.  How had the fellow heard about
that?

Dangle laughed.

"You thought it was a snug little secret of your own, didn't you?
You're mistaken.  And you're mistaken if you think we aren't going to
get at the bottom of it."

Fisher major rose to his feet.

"Look here, Dangle," said he; "do you mean to insinuate that _I've_
taken the club money!"

"I never said so."

"Or that I was going to cook the accounts so that it should not be
known?"

"I didn't mean _you_ were."

"Whom did you mean?  Me?" said Denton.

"No; I didn't say anybody," said Dangle, beginning to feel himself in a
fix.  "All I meant was, we want to know what's become of the money?"

"You don't want to know more than I do," said Fisher major.  "I'd have
handed over the money days ago, if I could only have found it."

"Do you suspect any one?" said Dangle.

"Suspect?  No.  No one comes here that would be likely to take it."

"You leave it about, though.  I've noticed that myself.  Who's your
fag?"

"As honest a man as you, every bit, and that's saying a good deal for
_you_," retorted Fisher major, hotly.

"Keep your temper.  Who's study is that next yours?"

"That's Yorke's."

"No: on the other side."

"That's Rollitt's.  I suppose you're going to insinuate--"

"Stop a bit," said Dangle, suddenly, turning to close the door before he
proceeded.  "When did you first miss the money?"

"You're uncommonly interested in the accounts," said Fisher; "if you
want to know so much, it was ten days ago."

"I'm interested because I've an idea.  When did you get in the
subscriptions?"

"They were all in a week before the first Rendlesham match, the match
where you--"

Fisher major stopped.

Dangle took no notice of the broken taunt, and said--

"Look here, Fisher.  There's no love lost between you and me, and it
doesn't affect me."

"Or me."

"For all that, I don't care to see you or the clubs robbed without
giving you a friendly hint."

"You're very kind.  Who is the culprit?  The doctor?"

"No; _Rollitt_.  Stay," said he, waving down the interruption, "I
shouldn't be fool enough to say it unless I was pretty sure.  Tell me
this, Fisher; when you go out and leave money about do you lock your
door?"

"No.  We don't have to do that this side."

"Did you ever see Rollitt in here?"

"No."

"Do you know that on the first half-holiday this term Rollitt nearly
came to grief on the river?"

"What on earth has that to do with it?"

"Everything.  You heard of it?  Your young brother was with him, of
course.  And you heard that he lost Widow Wisdom's boat over the falls."

"Yes," said Fisher, suddenly beginning to see the drift of the cross-
examination.

"And you heard that the very next day he bought her a new one for five
pounds?"

"Yes, I did; but whatever right have you to connect that with the
missing money?"

"Wait a bit.  You were away all that afternoon, weren't you!"

"Yes."

"I wasn't.  I happened to come over to look for you, and found you were
out.  The only fellow I met in the house was Rollitt.  He'd just got
back, and I met him at the door of this room.  There, you can make what
you like of it.  Even a Classic knows what twice two makes."

And he turned on his heel and left the room.

"There's goes a thoroughbred cad for you," said Denton.
