we begin the better."

By this time they were joined by Edith and her mother, who, although
much surprised, were not at all alarmed; for rough travelling in a wild
land had taught them to regard nothing as being dangerous until it was
proved to be so.  Besides, Stanley had assured them that they had
nothing to fear, as the only evil he anticipated would be the trouble
they were sure to have in getting rid of the superabundant snow.  While
they were talking, the back door was opened violently, and La Roche, in
a state of dishabille, burst into the room.

"O messieurs, c'est fini!  Oui, le world him shut up tout togedder.  Oh,
misere!  Fat shall ye to do?"

"Hold your tongue, La Roche," said Frank, "and bring the kitchen
shovel."

The cook instantly turned to obey, and as he rushed towards the kitchen
his voice was heard exclaiming in the passage--

"Ah, c'est terrible!  Mais I ver' moshe fear de shovel be out in de
neige.  Ah, non; here it is.  C'est bien."

Returning in haste to the hall, he handed a much dilapidated iron shovel
to Frank, who threw off his coat and set to work with vigour.  The
tables and chairs, and all the furniture, were removed into the inner
apartments, in order to afford room for the snow which Frank dug from
the open doorway and shovelled into the centre of the room.  As only one
at a time could work in the narrow doorway, the three men wrought with
the shovel by turns; and while one was digging the tunnel, the other two
piled the debris in a compact mound beside the stove.  As no fire had
yet been kindled, the snow, of course, did not melt, but remained crisp
and dry upon the floor.  Meanwhile Edith looked on with deep interest,
and occasionally assisted in piling the snow; while her mother, seeing
that her presence was unnecessary, retired to her own room.

"There," cried Frank, pausing and surveying an immense cavern which he
had dug into the drift, "that's a good spell.  Take a turn now, La
Roche, and dig upwards; we should see daylight soon."

"Ah, vraiment, it be time, for it am von o'clock," replied La Roche, as
he plied the shovel.

The tunnel was cut in such a way as that, while it ran outwards, it also
sloped upwards; and, from the angle at which it lay, Stanley calculated
that thirty feet or thereabouts would bring them to the surface.  In
this he was correct, for when La Roche had worked for half an hour, the
snow above became slightly luminous.  But the labour of conveying it
from the end of the tunnel into the hall became, of course, greater as
the work advanced.  At length the light penetrated so clearly that La
Roche was induced to thrust his shovel upwards, in the expectation of
penetrating the mass.  The effect of this action was striking and
unexpected.  Instantly the roof fell in, and a flood of sunshine poured
into the tunnel, revealing the luckless Frenchman struggling amid the
ruins.

"Oh, pull me hout!" he spluttered, as Frank and Stanley stood laughing
heartily at his misfortune.  One of his legs happened to protrude from
the mass as he made this earnest request; so Frank seized it, and
dragged the poor man by main force from his uncomfortable position.
Immediately afterwards they all three scrambled through the aperture,
and stood in open day.

The sight that met their eyes was a curious though not a satisfactory
one.  All that remained visible of Fort Chimo were, as we have said, the
chimneys and the flagstaff.  In regard to the general aspect of the
neighbourhood, however, there was little alteration; for the change of
position in the drifts among the mountain gorges, and the addition to
their bulk, made no striking alteration in the rugged landscape.  In
some places the gale had cleared the sides of the mountains and left
their cliffs exposed to view; in other spots the gorges and ravines were
choked up, and the pine tops nearly covered; and the open water in the
lake was more encumbered than usual with icebergs.

"Now, La Roche," said Stanley, after they had surveyed the desolate
scene for a few minutes in silence, "go fetch the shovel and we'll dig
out the men.  I daresay, poor fellows, they're beginning to wonder at
the length of the night by this time."

La Roche prepared to descend into the tunnel, when their attention was
arrested by a strange sound beneath the snow.  In a few minutes the
crust began to crack at a spot not more than two yards from where they
stood; then there was a sudden rupture, accompanied by a growl, and
followed by the appearance of the dishevelled head and arms of a man.

"Musha, boys, but I'm out!"  Bryan coughed the snow from around his
mouth, and winked it from his eyes, as he spoke.  The first sight that
met his bewildered gaze was three pair of expanded eyeballs and three
double rows of grinning teeth, a few feet from his face.  Uttering a cry
of terror, he fell back into the hole, the snow closed over him, and he
was gone!

It need scarcely be added that Frank and Stanley commenced to dig into
this hole with as much vigour as their frequent explosions of laughter
would allow.  In a few minutes it was re-opened, and the men issued one
by one from durance vile.

"Och, sirs, ye gave me a mortial start!" exclaimed Bryan, as he rose to
view the second time.  "I thought for sartin ye were all polar bears.
Faix we've had a job o't down there.  I'll be bound to say there's
twinty ton o' snow--bad luck to it--in the middle o' the floor."

"There's work for us here that'll last two weeks, I guess," said Massan,
as he and several of the others stooped down and gazed into the tunnel
leading to the hall, at the end of which Edith's laughing face met their
view.

"When did you awake, and begin to suspect that something was wrong?"
inquired Stanley of Dick Prince.

"Awake!" cried Bryan, answering the question; "we awoke at laste a dozen
times.  I suppose it must have bin the time for brikfust; for, ye see,
although we could ha' slept on long enough; our intariors couldn't, be
no manes, forgit their needcessities."

"We shall have to work a bit yet ere these necessities are attended to,
I fear," said Stanley.  "Go, Francois, and one or two of you, and open
up the dog-kennel.  The rest of you get all the shovels you can lay
hands on, and clear out the houses as fast as you can."

"Clear out de chimbleys fust, mes garcons," cried La Roche, looking up
from the tunnel.  "Den ve vill git dejeuner ready toute suite."

"That will we, lad," said Bryan, shouldering a spade and proceeding
towards the chimney of the hall; while the rest of the party, breaking
up into several groups, set to work, with spades, shovels, and such
implements as were suitable, to cut passages through the square of the
fort towards the doors of the several buildings.  As Massan had said, it
proved to be no light work.  The north-west gale had launched the snow
upon the exposed buildings of Fort Chimo until the drift was fifteen or
sixteen feet deep, so that the mere cutting of passages was a matter of
considerable time and severe labour.

Meanwhile, Maximus awoke, and sought to raise himself from his lair at
the foot of the rock.  But his first effort failed.  The drift above him
was too heavy.  Abandoning, therefore, the idea of freeing himself by
main force, he turned round on his side and began to scrape away the
snow that was directly above his head.  The masses that accumulated in
the course of this process he forced down past his chest; and, as his
motions tended to compress and crush the drift around him in all
directions, he soon made room enough to work with ease.  In ten minutes
he approached so near to the surface as to be able, with a powerful
effort, to burst it upwards, and step out of his strange dormitory into
the sunshine.

This method of spending the night has been resorted to more than once by
arctic travellers who had lost their way; and it is sad to think that
many who have perished might have saved their lives had they known that
burrowing could be practised with safety.  The Esquimaux frequently
spend the night in this manner, but they prefer building a snow-house to
burrowing, if circumstances will permit.

Cutting a slice of seal-meat, and eating as he went, Maximus resumed his
journey, and soon afterwards arrived at the fort, where he found the men
busied in excavating their buried dwellings.

Here he stated the case of the old woman, and received such medicines as
Stanley, in his amateur medical wisdom, saw fit to bestow.  With these
he started immediately to retrace his steps, having been directed to
proceed, after administering them, to the lake where Frank meant to try
the fishing under the ice.  A family of Esquimaux had been established
on another lake not so far distant from the fort; and having been taught
by the fur-traders how to set nets under the ice, they succeeded in
procuring more than enough for their subsistence.  It was hoped,
therefore, that the larger lake would afford a good supply; and, the
weather having become decidedly fine, Frank prepared to set out on the
following day.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

AN EXCURSION--IGLOO BUILDING, AND FISHING UNDER THE ICE--A SNOW-TABLE
AND A GOOD FEAST--EDITH SPENDS THE NIGHT UNDER A SNOW-ROOF FOR THE FIRST
BUT NOT THE LAST TIME.

"Now then, Edith," cried Frank, looking in at the door of the hall,
"your carriage waits, and Chimo is very restive."

"Coming, coming," exclaimed a treble voice within; "I'm getting new
lines put to my snow-shoes, and will be ready in two minutes."

Two minutes, translated into female language, means ten, sometimes
twenty.  Frank knew this, and proceeded to re-adjust the sash that
secured his leathern capote, as he walked towards the little sledge in
front of the fort.  He then tied down the ear-pieces of his fur cap more
carefully, for it was very cold, though clear and sunny.  The frost had
set fast the lake opposite the fort, and, by thus removing the
frost-cloud that overhung the open water farther out to sea, relieved
the fort from the mists in which it was usually enveloped.  By this time
fifteen out of the "two" minutes having elapsed, he re-examined the lock
of his gun, and adjusted the warm deerskin robe on Edith's little
sledge, patted Chimo on the head, looked up at the clouds, and began to
whistle.

"Now, Frank, here I am," cried Edith, running towards him with her
snow-shoes in her hand, followed by her father and mother.

"Quiet, Chimo--down, sir!" said Frank, restraining the dog as it sought
to bound towards its mistress.  Being harnessed to the sledge, this was
a very improper proceeding and was rebuked accordingly; so Chimo was
fain to crouch on the snow and look back at Edith as Frank placed her in
the sledge, and arranged the deerskin robes round her.

Edith wore a long fur cloak and cloth leggings.  Her feet were protected
from the cold by two pair of blanket socks, besides very thick moccasins
of deerskin.  The usual head-dress of civilised females in these regions
is a round fur cap; but Edith had a peculiar affection for the Cree
Indian headdress, and, upon the present occasion, wore one which was
lined with fur and accommodated with ear-pieces, to defy the winter
cold.  The child's general appearance was somewhat rotund.  Painters
would probably have said there was a little too much breadth, perhaps,
in the picture.  Her pointed cap, however, with the little bow of ribbon
on the top, gave her a piquant air, and did away with the heavy
appearance of her costume to some extent; in fact, Edith looked like a
fat little witch.  But if she looked fat before being wrapped up in the
sledge furs, she looked infinitely fatter when thus placed, and nothing
of her visible except her two twinkling eyes.  So grotesque was she that
the whole party burst into a loud laugh as they surveyed her.  The laugh
made Chimo start off at full gallop, which caused Frank to grasp the
line of the sledge that trailed behind, and hurry over the snow at a
most undignified pace.

"Take care of her," cried Mr Stanley.

"Ay, ay," shouted Frank.--"Softly, Chimo--softly, you rascal!"

In ten minutes the travellers were round the point and fairly out of
sight; but the shouts of Frank, and an occasional howl from Chimo,
floated back on the breeze as Stanley and his wife returned leisurely to
the hall.

The road, or rather the ground, over which Frank Morton drove Edith that
day was exceedingly rough and rugged--so rough that we will not try the
endurance of the reader by dragging him over it.  We will merely
indicate its general features.  First of all, they drove about three
miles along the level snow at the foot of the mountains.  So far the
road was good; and Chimo went along merrily to the music of the little
thimble-like brass bells with which his harness was garnished.  Then
they came to a ravine, and Edith had to get out, put on her snow-shoes,
and clamber up, holding by Frank's hand; while Chimo followed, dragging
the sledge as he best could.  Having gained one of the terraces, Edith
slipped her feet out of the snow-shoe lines, jumped into the sledge, and
was swept along to the next ravine, where she got out again, resumed her
snow-shoes, and ascended as before.  Thus they went up the ravines and
along the terraces until the summit of the first mountain range was
reached.  Having rested here a few minutes, Edith once more got into the
sledge, and Chimo set off.  But as there was now a long piece of level
ground over which for some miles they could travel in the direction of
the coast, Frank took the sled-line in his hand, and held the dog at a
quick walking pace.  Afterwards they turned a little farther inland, and
came into a more broken country, where they had sometimes to mount and
sometimes to descend the hills.  There were many gorges and narrow
fissures in the ground here, some of which were covered over and so
concealed with snow that the travellers ran some risk of falling into
them.  Indeed, at one place, so narrow was their escape that Chimo fell
through the crust of snow, and disappeared into a fissure which
descended a hundred feet sheer down; and the sledge would certainly have
followed had not Frank held it back by the line; and Chimo was not
hauled up again without great difficulty.  After this, Frank went in
front with a pole, and sounded the snow in dangerous-looking places as
he went along.

Towards the afternoon they arrived at the lake where they intended to
encamp, and, to their great delight, found Maximus there already.  He
had only arrived a few minutes before them, and was just going to
commence the erection of a snow-house.

"Glad to see you, Maximus," cried Frank, as he drove up.  "How's the old
woman, eh?"

"She small better," replied Maximus, assisting Edith to alight.  "Dis
goot for fish."

Maximus was a remarkably intelligent man, and, although his residence at
the fort had been of short duration as yet, he had picked up a few words
of English.

"A good lake, I have no doubt," replied Frank, looking round.  "But we
need not search for camping ground.  There seems to be very little wood,
so you may as well build our hut on the ice.  We shall need all our
time, as the sun has not long to run."

The lake, on the edge of which they stood, was about a mile in
circumferenee, and lay in a sort of natural basin formed by
savage-looking hills, in which the ravines were little more than narrow
fissures, entirely devoid of trees.  Snow encompassed and buried
everything, so that nothing was to be seen except, here and there, crags
and cliffs of gray rock, which were too precipitous for the snow to rest
on.

"Now, Eda, I will take a look among these rocks for a ptarmigan for
supper; so you can amuse yourself watching Maximus build our house till
I return."

"Very well, Frank," said Edith; "but don't be long.  Come back before
dark; Chimo and I will weary for you."

In a few minutes Frank disappeared among the rocks upon the shore; and
Maximus, taking Edith by the hand, and dragging her sledge after him,
led her a couple of hundred yards out on to the ice, or, more properly
speaking, the hard beaten snow with which the ice was covered.  Chimo
had been turned loose, and, being rather tired after his journey, had
coiled himself up on a mound of snow and fallen fast asleep.

"Dis place for house," said Maximus, pausing near a smooth, level part
of the lake.  "You stop look to me," he added, turning to the little
girl, who gazed up in his large face with an expression half of wonder
and half of fun.  "When you cold, run; when you hot, sit in sled and
look at me."

In compliance with this request, Edith sat down in her sledge, and from
this comfortable point of view watched the Esquimau while he built a
snow-hut before her.

First of all, he drew out a long iron knife, which had been constructed
specially far him by Bryan, who looked upon the giant with special
favour.  With the point of this he drew a circle of about seven feet in
diameter; and so well accustomed was he to this operation that his
circle, we believe, could not have been mended even by a pair of
compasses.  Two feet to one side of this circle he drew a smaller one,
of about four feet in diameter.  Next, he cut out of the snow a number
of hard blocks, which were so tough that they could not be broken
without a severe blow, but were as easily cut as you might have sliced a
soft cheese with a sharp knife.  These blocks he arranged round the
large circle, and built them above each other, fashioning them, as he
proceeded, in such a manner that they gradually rose into the form of a
dome.  The chinks between them he filled compactly with soft snow, and
the last block, introduced into the top of the structure, was formed
exactly on the principle of the key-stone of an arch.  When the large
dome was finished, he commenced the smaller; and in the course of two
hours both the houses--or, as the Esquimaux call them, igloos--were
completed.

Long before this, however, Frank had returned, from an unsuccessful
hunt, to assist him; and Edith had wondered and wearied, grown cold and
taken to running with Chimo, and grown warm and returned to her sledge,
several times.  Two holes were left in the igloos to serve as doors;
and, after they were finished, the Esquimau cut a square hole in the top
of each, not far from the key-stones, and above the entrances.  Into
these he fitted slabs of clear ice, which formed windows as beautiful
and useful as if they had been made of glass.  There were two doorways
in the large igloo, one of which faced the doorway of the smaller.
Between these he built an arched passage, so that the two were thus
connected, and the small hut formed a sort of inner chamber to the
larger.

"Now, dem done," said Maximus, surveying his work with a satisfied
smile.

"And very well done they are," said Frank.  "See here, Eda, our
snow-fort is finished.  The big one is to be the grand hall and
banqueting-room, and yonder little hut is your private boudoir."

"Mine!" exclaimed Edith, running away from Chimo, with whom she had been
playing, and approaching the new houses that had been so speedily put
up.  "Oh, how nice! what fun! only think!--a snow bedroom!  But won't it
be cold, Frank?  And is the bed to be of snow too?"

The black moustache of the giant curled with a smile at the energy with
which this was said.

"We will make the bedsteads of snow, Eda," replied Frank, "but I think
we shall manage to find blankets of a warmer material.--Now, Maximus,
get the things put inside, and the lamp lighted, for we're all tired and
very hungry."

The lamp to which Frank referred was one which Maximus had brought,
along with a few other articles, from the Esquimau camp.  It was made of
soft stone, somewhat in the form of a half moon, about eight inches long
and three broad, and hollowed out in the inside.  Esquimaux burn
seal-fat in it, and in winter have no other means of warming their
houses or cooking their food.  But for both purposes it is quite
sufficient.  The heat created by these lamps, combined with the natural
warmth of the inhabitants, is frequently so great in the igloos of the
Esquimaux that they are fain to throw off a great portion of their upper
garments, and sit in a state of partial nudity; yet the snow-walls do
not melt, owing to the counteracting influence of the intense cold
without.

Maximus had brought some seal-fat, or blubber, along with him.  A
portion of this he now put into the lamp, and, placing the latter on a
snow-shelf prepared expressly for it, he set it on fire.  The flame,
although not very steady, was bright enough to illuminate the large
igloo, and to throw a strong gleam into the smaller one.  Over this lamp
Frank placed a small tin kettle, filled with snow, which was speedily
converted into water; and while this was being boiled, he assisted Edith
in spreading out the bedding.  As we have already said, the floor of
this snow-house was of the same material as the walls.  But one-half of
it was raised about a foot above the other half, according to Esquimau
rules of architecture.  This elevated half was intended for the bed,
which consisted of a large deer-skin robe, spread entirely over it, with
the soft hair upwards.  Another large robe was placed above this for a
