if he did not deserve her love, she would remain true--secretly but
unalterably true--to him as the needle is to the pole!

"Has it not occurred to you, dear," said her mother, pursuing her
advantage in a meditative tone, "that if Miles has been so plain-spoken
and eloquent with his blue eye, that your pretty brown ones may have
said something to _him_?"

"Never!" exclaimed the girl, with an indignant flash.  "Oh! mother, can
you believe me capable of--of--no, I never looked at him except with the
air of a perfect stranger--at least of a--a--but why should I try to
deny what could not possibly be true?"

Mrs Drew felt that nothing was to be gained from pursuing the subject--
or one aspect of it--further.

"At any rate," she said, "I am glad, for his own sake, poor young
fellow, that Sergeant Hardy spoke so hopefully."

"And for his comrades' sakes as well," said Marion.  "You know, mother,
that his friend Armstrong is also reported as missing, and Stevenson the
marine, as well as that dear big bluff sailor, Jack Molloy.  By the way,
do you feel well enough to go to the lecture to-night?  It is to be a
very interesting one, I am told, with magic-lantern illustrations, and I
don't like to go alone."

"I am going to-night, so you may make your mind easy," said her mother.
"I would not miss this lecturer, because I am told that he is a
remarkably good one, and the hall is likely to be quite full."

In regard to this lecture and some other things connected with the
Alexandrian Institute, our friend Sergeant Hardy learned a good deal
from the lady at the head of it, not long after the time that Mrs Drew
had the foregoing conversation with Marion.

It is scarcely needful to say that the Lady-Superintendent was a capable
Christian as well as an enthusiast in her work.

"Come to my room, Sergeant Hardy, and I'll tell you all about it," she
said, leading the way to her apartment, where the sergeant placed
himself upon a chair, bolt upright, as if he were going to have a tooth
drawn, or were about to illustrate some new species of sitting-drill.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

SHOWS HOW THE LADY OF THE INSTITUTE DISCOURSES TO THE SERGEANT, HOW
JACK-TARS GO OUT ON THE SPREE, AND HOW MUSIC CONQUERS WARRIORS.

"It seems wonderful to me, madam," said Sergeant Hardy, looking round
the lady's room with an admiring gaze, "how quickly you have got things
into working order here.  When I remember that last year this place was
a heap of rubbish, it seems like magic."

"Ah! the work of God on earth seems magical the more we reflect on it,"
returned the lady.  "The fact that our Institute was conceived, planned,
and carried into successful operation by an invalid lady, in spite of
discouragement, and, at first, with inadequate means, is itself little
short of miraculous, but what is even more surprising is the fact that
the Government, which began by throwing cold water on her Portsmouth
work, has ended by recognising it and by affording us every facility
here in Alexandria."

"Well, you see, madam, I suppose it's because they see that we soldiers
and sailors likes it, an' it does a power o' good--don't you think?"

"No doubt, but whatever may be the reason, Sergeant, we are very
thankful for the encouragement.  I suppose you have heard what a grand
occasion our opening day was?"

"No, madam, I haven't.  You see, away at Suakim we was so constantly
taken up with the attentions of Osman Digna that we had little time for
anything but eatin' and sleepin' when we wasn't on sentry an' fightin',
so that we often missed bits of news.  Was there a great turn-out o'
men?"

"Indeed there was," returned the lady, with animation; "and not only of
men, but of all the Alexandrian notables.  It was on the 23rd of
February last (1885) that our Institute was opened by Major-General
Lennox, V.C., C.B., who was in command of the garrison.  This was not
the first time by any means that the soldiers had paid us a visit.  A
number of men, who, like yourself, Sergeant Hardy, sympathise with our
work in its spiritual aspects, had been frequently coming to see how we
were getting on, and many a pleasant hour's prayer and singing we had
enjoyed with them, accompanied by our little harmonium, which had been
sent to us by kind friends in England; and every Sunday evening we had
had a little service in the midst of the shavings and carpenters'
benches.

"But on this grand opening day the men came down in hundreds, and a
great surprise some of them got--especially the sceptical among them.
The entrance was decorated with palms.  At the further end of the
reading-room the trophy of Union Jacks and the Royal Standard, which you
see there now, was put up by a band of Jack-tars who had come to help us
as well as to see the fun.  Over the trophy was our text, `In the name
of the Lord will we set up our banners,' for we liked to feel that we
had taken possession of this little spot in Egypt for God--and we
believe that it will always be His.

"Everything was bright and hearty.  There were about five hundred
soldiers and sailors, and between two and three hundred officers and
civilians of all nationalities.  On the platform we had Osman Pasha--"

"Ha!" interrupted the sympathetic sergeant, "I only wish we could have
had Osman Digna there too!  It would do more to pacify the Soudan than
killing his men does!"

"I daresay it would," responded the lady with a laugh, "but have
patience, Hardy; we shall have him there yet, and perhaps the Mahdi
too--or some future grand occasion.  Well, as I was saying, we had
Osman, the Governor of Alexandria, on our platform, and a lot of
big-wigs that you know nothing about, but whose influence was of
importance, and whose appearance went far to make the place look gay.
Of course we had music, beginning with `God save the Queen,' and
speeches--brilliant as well as heavy; sententious and comic--like all
other similar gatherings, and the enthusiasm was unbounded.  How could
it be otherwise with sailors to cheer and soldiers to back them up?  And
you may be sure that in such a meeting the enthusiasm about the
undertaking did not fail to extend to the `Soldiers' Friend' who had
originated the whole.  In short, it was a splendid success."

"Of course it was," said the sergeant, with emphasis; "first, because of
God's blessing, an', second, because the Institoot was greatly needed.
Why, madam, if it wasn't for this place the thousands of soldiers
stationed here, not to mention the sailors, would have no place to go to
spend their leave and leisure time but the drinkin' dens o' the town; an
_you_ know well, though p'r'aps not so well as I do, what terrible
places these are, where men are tempted, fleeced, debauched, and
sometimes murdered."

"Quite true, Hardy.  Did you hear of the case that occurred just two
days ago?  A sergeant of one of the regiments, I forget which, after
paying his fare to a donkey-boy, turned quietly to walk away, when the
scoundrel felled him with a stick and robbed him of one pound 10
shillings.  The case is before the law-court now, and no doubt the
robber will receive a just reward.

"Well, as I was remarking, the opening day carried us to high tide, so
to speak, and there has been no ebb from that day to this.  One comical
incident, however, occurred just at the beginning, which might have done
us damage.  The day after the opening all was prepared for the reception
of our soldier and sailor friends.  The tables were arranged with books
and games, the writing-table with pens, ink, and blotting-paper, and the
bar with all sorts of eatables, magnificent urns, coloured glass,
etcetera.  About one o'clock William, our barman, tasted the coffee.
His usual expression of self-satisfaction gave place to one of horror.
He tasted the coffee again.  The look of horror deepened.  He ran to the
boiler, and the mystery was cleared up.  The boiler had been filled with
salt-water!  Our Arab, Ibraim, who carries up seawater daily to fill our
baths, had filled the boiler with the same.  Luckily there was time to
correct the mistake, and when our friends came trooping in at four
o'clock they found the coffee quite to their taste.

"You know very well," continued the superintendent, "our rules never to
force religion on any of our customers, our object being to _attract_ by
all the legitimate means in our power.  We have our Bible-classes,
prayer-meetings, temperance soirees, and the like, distinct--as at
Portsmouth--from the other advantages of the Institute; and are quite
content if some, who come at first from mere curiosity or for the
enjoyment of temporal good things, should afterwards continue to come
from higher and spiritual motives.  But if our military friends prefer
to read our papers and books, and play our games, and use our bar, they
are at perfect liberty to do so, without what I may style religious
interference.  It's all fair and above-board, you see.  We fully
recognise the freedom of will that God has bestowed on man.  If you
don't care for our spiritual fare you may let it alone.  If you relish
it--there it is, and you are welcome.  Yet we hold by our right to win
men if we can.  In point of fact, we have been very successful already
in this way, for our motive power from beginning to end is Love.

"One of our most helpful soldier friends--a sergeant--has brought
several men to the Saviour, who are now our steady supporters.  One of
these men, whom our sergeant was the means of bringing in, was a
professed unbeliever of good standing and ability.  The first time he
was prevailed on to come to a prayer-meeting, he sat bolt upright while
we knelt, being a straightforward sort of man who refused to pretend
when he could not really pray.  He is now a happy follower of Jesus.

"Our large rooms are constantly filled with soldiers, some chatting,
some making up for past privations by having a good English meal, and
others reading or playing games.  Just now happens to be our quietest
hour, but it won't be long before we have a bustling scene."

As if to verify the lady's words there came through the doorways at that
moment a sound of shouting and cheering, which caused all the staff of
the Institute to start into active life.

"There they come!" exclaimed the lady, with an intelligent smile, as she
hurried from the room, leaving Hardy to follow at a pace that was more
consistent with his dignity--and, we may add, his physical weakness.

The shouts proceeded from a party of sailors on leave from one of the
ironclads lying in the harbour.  These, being out for the day--on a
spree as some of them styled it--had hired donkeys, and come in a body
to the Institute, where they knew that food of the best, dressed in
British fashion, and familiar games, were to be had, along with British
cheer and sympathy.

When Hardy reached the door he found the place swarming with
blue-jackets, trooping up at intervals on various animals, but none on
foot, save those who had fallen off their mounts and were trying to get
on again.

"They're all donkeyfied together," remarked a sarcastic old salt--not
one of the party--who stood beside Hardy, looking complacently on, and
smoking his pipe.

"They don't steer as well on land as on sea," replied Hardy.

"'Cause they ain't used to such craft, you see--that's w'ere it is,
sarjint," said the old salt, removing his pipe for a moment.  "Just look
at 'em--some comin' along sidewise like crabs, others stern foremost.
W'y, there's that grey craft wi' the broad little man holdin' on to its
tail to prevent his slidin' over its head.  I've watched that grey craft
for some minutes, and its hind propellers have bin so often in the air
that it do seem as if it was walkin' upon its front legs.  Hallo!  I was
sure he'd go down by the head at last."

The donkey in question had indeed gone down by the head, and rolled
over, pitching its rider on his broad shoulders, which, however, seemed
none the worse for the fall.

"Ketch hold of his tail, Bill," cried another man, "and hold his stern
down--see if that won't cure his plungin'.  He's like a Dutchman in a
cross sea."

"Keep clear o' this fellow's heels, Jack, he's agoin' to fire another
broadside."

"If he does he'll unship you," cried Jack, who was himself at the same
moment unshipped, while the owner of the donkey, and of the other
donkeys, shouted advice, if nothing worse, in Arabic and broken English.

In a few minutes the sailors "boarded" the Institute, and drew the whole
force of the establishment to the bar in order to supply the demand.

"Ah! thin, ye've got Irish whisky, haven't ye?" demanded a facetious
seaman.

"Yes, plenty, but we call it coffee here!" answered the equally
facetious barman, whose satellites were distributing hot and cold drinks
with a degree of speed that could only be the fruit of much practice.

"You'll have to be jolly on mild swipes," said one; "no tostikatin'
liquors allowed, Dick."

"H'm!" growled Dick.

"Got any wittles here?" demanded another man, wiping his lips with his
sleeve.

"Yes, plenty.  Sit down and order what you want."

"For nothin'?" asked the tar.

"For _next_ to nothing!" was the prompt reply.  Meanwhile, those whose
appetites were not quite so urgent had distributed themselves about the
place, and were already busy with draughts, billiards, etcetera, while
those who were of more sedate and inquiring temperament were deep in the
columns of the English papers and magazines.

"I say, Fred Thorley, ain't it bang up?" remarked a sturdy little man,
through a huge slice of cake, with which he had just filled his mouth.

"Fuss-rate!" responded Fred, as he finished a cup of coffee at a draught
and called for more.  "Didn't I tell you, Sam, that you'd like it better
than the native grog-shops?"

"If they'd on'y got bitter beer!" sighed Sam.

"They've got better beer," said his friend; "try some ginger-pop."

"No thankee.  If I can't git it strong, let's at least have it hot.
But, I say, what's come o' the lobsters?  Don't seem to be many about.
I thought this here Institoot was got up a-purpose for _them_.

"So it was, lad, includin' us; but you don't suppose that because _you_
are out on the spree, everybody else is.  They're on dooty just now.
Wait a bit an' you'll see plenty of 'em afore long."

"Are all that come here Blue Lights?" asked Sam, with a somewhat doleful
visage.

"By no manner o' means," returned his friend, with a laugh; "tho' for
the matter o' that they wouldn't be worse men if they was, but many of
'em are no better than they should be, an' d'ee know, Sam, there are
some of 'em actually as great blackguards a'most as yourself!"

"There's some comfort in that anyhow," returned Sam, with a pleasant
smile, "for I hates to be pecooliar.  By the way, Fred, p'r'aps they may
be able to give you some noos here, if you ax 'em, about your friend
Jack Molloy.  _He_ was a Blue Light, wasn't he?"

"Not w'en I know'd 'im, but he was a fuss-rate seaman an' a good friend,
though he _was_ fond of his glass, like yourself, Sam."

It chanced that at this point Sergeant Hardy, in moving about the place,
taking profound interest in all that he saw, came within earshot of the
two friends, to whom he at once went up and introduced himself as a
friend of Jack Molloy.

"Indeed," said he, "Molloy and I fought pretty near to each other in
that last affair under General McNeill, so I can give you the latest
news of him."

"Can you, old man?  Come, sit down here, an' let's have it then," said
Thorley.  "Jack was an old messmate o' mine.  What'll you take to drink,
mate?"

"Nothing, thankee.  I'm allowanced by the doctor even in the matter o'
tea and coffee," said the sergeant.  "As to bein' an' old man--well, I
ain't much older than yourself, I daresay, though wounds and sickness
and physic are apt to age a man in looks."

Sitting down beside the sailors, Hardy told of the great fight at
McNeill's zereba, and how Molloy and others of his friends had gone to
rescue a comrade and been cut off.  He relieved Fred's mind, however, by
taking the most hopeful view of the matter, as he had previously
relieved the feelings of Marion.  And then the three fell to chatting on
things in general and the war in particular.

"Now don't this feel homelike?" said Sam, looking round the room with
great satisfaction.  "If it wasn't for the heat I'd a'most think we was
in a temperance coffee-house in old England."

"Or owld Ireland," chimed in a sailor at the neighbouring table.

"To say naething o' auld Scotland," added a rugged man in red hair, who
sat beside him.

"Well, messmate," assented Fred, "it _do_ feel homelike, an' no mistake.
Why, what ever is _that_?"

The sailor paused, and held up a finger as if to impose silence while he
listened, but there was no need to enforce silence, for at that moment
the sweet strains of a harmonium were heard at the other end of the long
room, and quietude profound descended on the company as a rich baritone
voice sang, with wonderful pathos, the familiar notes and words of
"Home, Sweet Home!"

Before that song was finished many a warrior there had to fight
desperately with his own spirit to conceal the fact that his eyes were
full of tears.  Indeed, not a few of them refused to fight at all, but,
ingloriously lowering their colours, allowed the tell-tale drops to
course over their bronzed faces, as they thought of sweethearts and
wives and friends and home circles and "the light of other days."



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

LED INTO CAPTIVITY.

We turn once more to the Nubian desert, where, it will be remembered, we
left several of our friends, cut off from McNeill's zereba at a critical
moment when they were all but overwhelmed by a host of foes.

The grand-looking Arab who had so opportunely appeared on the scene and
arrested the spears which were about to finish the career of Jack Molloy
was no other than the man who had been saved by Miles from the bullet of
his comrade Rattling Bill.  A kind act had in this case received its
appropriate reward, for a brief though slight glance, and a gracious
inclination of the Arab's head, convinced our hero that the whole party
