Raoul's conjecture proved correct.  We were taken out of our saddles,
and, being carefully bound as before, we were hauled into a damp room,
and flung down upon the floor.  Our captors went out.  A heavy door
closed after them, and we could hear the regular footfall of a sentry on
the stone pavement without.  For the first time since our capture we
were left alone.  This my comrades tested by rolling themselves all over
the floor of our prison to see if anyone was present with us.  It was
but a scant addition to our liberty; but we could converse freely, and
that was something.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  Desayuna is a slight early meal.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

AN ODD WAY OF OPENING A LETTER.

"Has any of you heard of Dubrosc on the route?"  I inquired of my
comrades.

No; nothing had been heard of him since the escape of Lincoln.

"Faix, Captain," said the Irishman, "it's meself that thinks Mister
Dubrosc won't throuble any ov us any more.  It was a purty lick that
same, ayquil to ould Donnybrook itself."

"It is not easy to kill a man with a single blow of a clubbed rifle,"
observed Clayley; "unless, indeed, the lock may have struck into his
skull.  But _we_ are still living, and I think that is some evidence
that the deserter is dead.  By the way, how has the fellow obtained such
influence as he appeared to have among them, and so soon, too?"

"I think, Lieutenant," replied Raoul, "Monsieur Dubrosc has been here
before."

"Ha! say you so?"  I inquired, with a feeling of anxiety.

"I remember, Captain, some story current at Vera Cruz, about a Creole
having married or run away with a girl of good family there.  I am
almost certain Dubrosc was the name; but it was before my time, and I am
unacquainted with the circumstances, I remember, however, that the
fellow was a gambler, or something of the sort; and the occurrence made
much noise in the country."

I listened with a sickening anxiety to every word of these details.
There was a painful correspondence between them and what I already knew.
The thought that this monster could be in any way connected with _her_
was a disagreeable one.  I questioned Raoul no further.  Even could he
have detailed every circumstance, I should have dreaded the relation.

Our conversation was interrupted by the creaking of a rusty hinge.  The
door opened, and several men entered.  Our blinds were taken off, and,
oh, how pleasant to look upon the light!  The door had been closed
again, and there was only one small grating, yet the slender beam
through this was like the bright noonday sun.  Two of the men carried
earthen platters filled with frijoles, a single tortilla in each
platter.  They were placed near our heads, one for each of us.

"It's blissid kind of yez, gentlemen," said Chane; "but how are we goin'
to ate it, if ye plaze?"

"The plague!" exclaimed Clayley; "do they expect us to lick this up
without either hands, spoons, or knives?"

"Won't you allow us the use of our fingers?" asked Raoul, speaking to
one of the guerilleros.

"No," replied the man gruffly.

"How do you expect us to eat, then?"

"With your mouths, as brutes should.  What else?"

"Thank you, sir; you are very polite."

"If you don't choose that, you can leave it alone," added the Mexican,
going out with his companions, and closing the door behind them.

"Thank you, gentlemen!" shouted the Frenchman after them, in a tone of
subdued anger.  "I won't please you so much as to leave it alone.  By my
word!" he continued, "we may be thankful--it's more than I expected from
Yanez--that they've given us any.  Something's in the wind."  So saying,
the speaker rolled himself on his breast, bringing his head to the dish.

"Och! the mane haythins!" cried Chane, following the example set by his
comrade; "to make dacent men ate like brute bastes!  Och! murder an'
ouns!"

"Come, Captain; shall we feed?" asked Clayley.

"Go on.  Do not wait for me," I replied.

Now was my time to read the note.  I rolled myself under the grating,
and, after several efforts, succeeded in gaining my feet.  The window,
which was not much larger than a pigeon-hole, widened inwards like the
embrasure of a gun-battery.  The lower slab was just the height of my
chin; and upon this, after a good deal of dodging and lip-jugglery, I
succeeded in spreading out the paper to its full extent.

"What on earth are you at, Captain?" inquired Cayley, who had watched my
manoeuvres with some astonishment.

Raoul and the Irishman stopped their plate-licking and looked up.

"Hush! go on with your dinners--not a word!"  I read as follows:

  _To-night your cords shall be cut, and you must escape as you best can
  afterwards.  Do not take the road back, as you will be certain to be
  pursued in that direction; moreover, you run the risk of meeting other
  parties of the guerilla.  Make for the National Road at San Juan or
  Manga de Clavo.  Your posts are already advanced beyond these points.
  The Frenchman can easily guide you.  Courage, Captain!  Adieu_!

  _P.S.--They waited for you.  I had sent one to warn you; but he has
  either proved traitor or missed the road.  Adieu! adieu_!

"Good heavens!"  I involuntarily exclaimed; "the man that Lincoln--."

I caught the paper into my lips again, and chewed it into a pulp, to
avoid the danger of its falling into the hands of the guerilla.

I remained turning over its contents in my mind.  I was struck with the
masterly style--the worldly cunning exhibited by the writer.  There was
something almost _unfeminine_ about it.  I could not help being
surprised that one so young, and hitherto so secluded from the world,
should possess such a knowledge of men and things.  I was already aware
of the presence of a powerful intellect, but one, as I thought,
altogether unacquainted with practical life and action.  Then there was
the peculiarity of her situation.

Is she a prisoner like myself? or is she disguised, and perilling her
life to save mine? or can she be--Patience!  To-night may unravel the
mystery.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

THE COBRA-DI-CAPELLO.

Up to this moment my intention had been engrossed with the contents of
the note, and I had no thought of looking outward.  I raised myself on
tiptoe, stretching my neck as far as I could into the embrasure.

A golden sunlight was pouring down upon broad, green leaves, where the
palms grew wildly.  Red vines hung in festoons, like curtains of scarlet
satin.  There were bands of purple and violet--the maroon-coloured
morus, and the snowy flowers of the magnolia--a glittering opal.
Orange-trees, with white, wax-like flowers, were bending under their
golden globes.  The broad plumes of the corozo palm curved gracefully
over, their points trailing downwards, and without motion.

A clump of these grew near, their naked stems laced by a parasite of the
lliana species, which rose from the earth, and, traversing diagonally,
was lost in the feathery frondage above.  These formed a canopy,
underneath which, from tree to tree, three hammocks were extended.  One
was empty; the other two were occupied.  The elliptical outlines,
traceable through the gauzy network of Indian grass, proved that the
occupants were females.

Their faces were turned from me.  They lay motionless: they were asleep.

As I stood gazing upon this picture, the occupant of the nearest hammock
awoke, and turning, with a low murmur upon her lips, again fell asleep.
Her face was now towards me.  My heart leaped, and my whole frame
quivered with emotion.  I recognised the features of Guadalupe Rosales.

One limb, cased in silk, had fallen over the selvage of her pendent
couch, and hung negligently down.  The small satin slipper had dropped
off, and was lying on the ground.  Her head rested upon a silken pillow,
and a band of her long black hair, that had escaped from the comb,
straggling over the cords of the hammock, trailed along the grass.  Her
bosom rose with a gentle heaving above the network as she breathed and
slept.

My heart was full of mixed emotions--surprise, pleasure, love, pain.
Yes, pain; for she could thus sleep--sleep sweetly, tranquilly--while I,
within a few paces of her couch, was bound and brutally treated!

"Yes, she can sleep!"  I muttered to myself, as my chagrin predominated
in the tumult of emotions.  "Ha! heavens!"

My attention was attracted from the sleeper to a fearful object.  I had
noticed a spiral-like appearance upon the lliana.  It had caught my eye
once or twice while looking at the sleeper; but I had not dwelt upon it,
taking it for one vine twined round another--a peculiarity often met
with in the forests of Mexico.

A bright sparkle now attracted my eye; and, on looking at the object
attentively, I discovered, to my horror, that the spiral protuberance
upon the vine was nothing else than the folds of a snake!  Squeezing
himself silently down the parasite--for he had come from above--the
reptile slowly uncoiled two or three of the lowermost rings, and
stretched his glistening neck horizontally over the hammock.  Now, for
the first time, I perceived the horned protuberance on his head, and
recognised the dreaded reptile--the _macaurel_ (the _cobra_ of America).

In this position he remained for some moments, perfectly motionless, his
neck proudly curved like that of a swan, while his head was not twelve
inches from the face of the sleeper.  I fancied that I could see the
soft down upon her lip playing under his breath!

He now commenced slowly vibrating from side to side, while a low,
hissing sound proceeded from his open jaws.  His horns projected out,
adding to the hideousness of his appearance; and at intervals his forked
tongue shot forth, glancing in the sun like a purple diamond.

He appeared to be gloating over his victim, in the act of charming her
to death.  I even fancied that her lips moved, and her head began to
stir backward and forward, following the oscillations of the reptile.

All this I witnessed without the power to move.  My soul as well as my
body was chained; but, even had I been free, I could have offered no
help.  I knew that the only hope of her safety lay in silence.  Unless
disturbed and angered, the snake might not bite; but was he not at that
moment distilling some secret venom upon her lips?

"Oh, Heaven!"  I gasped out, in the intensity of my fears, "is this the
fiend himself?  She moves!--now he will strike!  Not yet--she is still
again.  Now--now!--mercy! she trembles!--the hammock shakes--she is
quivering under the fascin-- Ha!"

A shot rang from the walls--the snake suddenly jerked back his head--his
rings flew out, and he fell to the earth, writhing as if in pain!

The girls started with a scream, and sprang simultaneously from their
hammocks.

Grasping each other by the hand, with terrified looks they rushed from
the spot and disappeared.

Several men ran up, ending the snake with their sabres.  One of them
stooped, and examining the carcase of the dead reptile, exclaimed:

"_Carai_! there is a hole in his head--he has been shot!"

A moment after, half a dozen of the guerilleros burst open the door and
rushed in, crying out as they entered:

"_Quien tira_?"  (Who fired?)

"What do you mean?" angrily asked Raoul, who had been in ill-humour ever
since the guerillero had refused him a draught of water.

"I ask you who fired the shot?" repeated the man.

"Fired the shot!" echoed Raoul, knowing nothing of what had occurred
outside.  "We look like firing a shot, don't we?  If I possessed that
power, my gay friend, the first use I should make of it would be to send
a bullet through that clumsy skull of yours."

"_Santissima_!" ejaculated the Mexican, with a look of astonishment.
"It could not be these--they are all tied!"

And the Mexicans passed out again, leaving us to our reflections.



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE HEAD-QUARTERS OF THE GUERILLA.

Mine were anything but agreeable.  I was pained and puzzled.  I was
pained to think that _she_--dearer to me than life--was thus exposed to
the dangers that surrounded us.  It was her sister that had occupied the
other hammock.

"Are they alone?  Are they prisoners in the hands of these half-robbers?
May not their hospitality to us have brought them under proscription?
And are they not being carried--father, mother, and all--before some
tribunal?  Or are they travelling for protection with this band--
protection against the less scrupulous robbers that infest the country?"

It was not uncommon upon the Rio Grande, when rich families journeyed
from point to point, to pay for an escort of this sort.  This may
elucidate--.

"But I tell yez I did hear a crack; and, be my sowl! it was the
sargint's rifle, or I've lost me sinses intirely."

"What is it?"  I asked, attracted to the conversation of my comrades.

"Chane says he heard a shot, and thinks it was Lincoln's," answered
Clayley.

"His gun has a quare sound, Captain," said the Irishman, appealing to
me.  "It's diffirint intirely from a Mexican piece, and not like our own
nayther.  It's a way he has in loadin' it."

"Well--what of that?"

"Why, Raowl says one of them axed him who fired.  Now, I heerd a shot,
for my ear was close till the door here.  It was beyant like; but I cud
swear upon the blissed crass it was ayther the sargint's rifle or
another as like it as two pays."

"It is very strange!"  I muttered, half in soliloquy, for the same
thought had occurred to myself.

"I saw the boy, Captain," said Raoul; "I saw him crossing when they
opened the door."

"The boy!--what boy?"  I asked.

"The same we brought out of the town."

"Ha!  Narcisso!--you saw him?"

"Yes; and, if I'm not mistaken, the white mule that the old gentleman
rode to camp.  I think that the family is with the guerilla, and that
accounts for our being still alive."

A new light flashed upon me.  In the incidents of the last twenty hours
I had never once thought of Narcisso.  Now all was clear--clear as
daylight.  The zambo whom Lincoln had killed--poor victim!--was our
friend, sent to warn us of danger; the dagger, Narcisso's--a token for
us to trust him.  The soft voice--the small hand thrust under the
tapojo--yes, all were Narcisso's!

A web of mystery was torn to shreds in a single moment.  The truth did
not yield gratification.  No--but the contrary.  I was chagrined at the
indifference exhibited in another quarter.

"She must know that I am here, since her brother is master of the fact--
here, bleeding and bound.  Yet where is her sympathy?  She sleeps!  She
journeys within a few paces of me, where I am tied painfully; yet not a
word of consolation.  No!  She is riding upon her soft cushion, or
carried upon a _litera_, escorted, perhaps, by this accomplished
villain, who plays the gallant cavalier upon my own barb!  They converse
together, perhaps of the poor captives in their train, and with jest and
ridicule--he at least; and _she_ can hear it, and then fling herself
into her soft hammock and sleep--sleep sweetly--calmly?"

These bitter reflections were interrupted.  The door creaked once more
upon its hinges.  Half a dozen of our captors entered.  Our blinds were
put on, and we were carried out and mounted as before.

In a few minutes a bugle rang out, and the route was resumed.

We were carried up the stream bottom--a kind of glen, or _Canada_.  We
could feel by the cool shade and the echoes that we were travelling
under heavy timber.  The torrent roared in our ears, and the sound was
not unpleasant.  Twice or thrice we forded the stream, and sometimes
left it, returning after having travelled a mile or so.  This was to
avoid the _canons_, where there is no path by the water.  We then
ascended a long hill, and after reaching its summit commenced going
downwards.

"I know this road well," said Raoul.  "We are going down to the hacienda
of Cenobio."

"_Pardieu_!" he continued.  "I ought to know this hill!"

"For what reason?"

"First, Captain, because I have carried many a _bulto_ of cochineal and
many a bale of smuggled tobacco over it; ay, and upon nights when my
eyes were of as little service to me as they are at present."

"I thought that you _contrabandistas_ hardly needed the precaution of
dark nights?"

"True, at times; but there were other times when the Government became
lynx-eyed, and then smuggling was no joke.  We had some sharp
skirmishing.  _Sacre_!  I have good cause to remember this very hill.  I
came near making a jump into purgatory from the other side of it."

"Ha! how was that?"

"Cenobio had got a large lot of cochineal from a crafty trader at
Oaxaca.  It was _cached_ about two leagues from the hacienda in the
hills, and a vessel was to drop into the mouth of the Medellin to take
it on board.

"A party of us were engaged to carry it across to the coast; and, as the
cargo was very valuable, we were all of us armed to the teeth, with
orders from the _patrone_ to defend it at all hazards.  His men were
just the fellows who would obey that order, coming, as it did, from
Cenobio.

"The Government somehow or other got wind of the affair, and slipped a
strong detachment out of Vera Cruz in time to intercept us.  We met them
on the other side of this very hill, where a road strikes off towards
Medellin."

"Well! and what followed?"

"Why, the battle lasted nearly an hour; and, after having lost half a
score of their best men, the valiant lancers rode back to Vera Cruz
quicker than they came out of it."

