
The little black skeleton began to chew the dry meal with evident
satisfaction, but without taking her eyes off her deliverer.

"Who are _you_?" asked a somewhat older girl of Harold, whom she
regarded with looks of reverence and wonder.

Of course Harold did not understand her, but he immediately called
Antonio, who translated.

"Who are you?" she said; "the other people tied and starved us, but you
cut the ropes and tell us to eat; what sort of people are you?  Where
did you come from?"

To this Harold replied briefly that he was an Englishman, who hated
slavers and slavery, but he said nothing more at that time, as he
intended to have a palaver and explanation with the freed captives after
their meal was over.

There was a great clapping of hands among the slaves, expressive of
gratitude, on hearing that they were free.

About a hundred sat down to that meal, most of whom were women and
children, and the manner in which they devoured the food set before
them, told eloquently of their previous sufferings.  At first they
timidly held back, scarce venturing to believe that their new captors,
as they thought them, were in earnest.  But when their doubts and fears
were removed, they attacked the mapira porridge like ravening wolves.
Gradually the human element began to reappear, in the shape of a comment
or a smile, and before long the women were chatting together, and a few
of the stronger among the young children were making feeble attempts to
play.

When the oldest man of the party, who appeared to be between twenty and
thirty, was brought forward and questioned, he gave some interesting and
startling information.

"Tell him," said Harold to Antonio, "that we are Englishmen; that we
belong to the same nation as the great white man Dr Livingstone, who
travelled through this land some years ago--the nation which hates
slavery because the Great God hates it, and would have all men to be
free, to serve each other in love, and to do to other people as they
would have other people do to them.  Ask him, also, where he comes from,
and who captured him and his companions."

To this the negro replied--"What the white man says may be true, but the
white men seem to tell lies too much.  The men who killed our warriors,
burned our villages, and took our women and children away, came to us
saying that they were friends; that they were the servants of the same
people as the white man Livingstone, and wanted to trade with us.  When
we believed and trusted them, and were off our guard, they fired on us
with their guns.  We know not what to think or to believe."

Harold was much perplexed by this reply, for he knew not what evidence
to cite in proof that he, at least was not a deceiver.

"Tell him," he said at length, "that there are false white men as well
as true, and that the best proof I can give him that I am one of the
true is, to set him and his friends at liberty.  They are now as free to
go where they please as we are."

On receiving this assurance the negro retired to consult with his
friends.  Meanwhile Antonio, who seemed to have been touched by the
unvarying kindness with which he had been treated by his employers,
opened his mind to them, and gave them a good deal of information, of
which the substance is as follows:--

At that time the merchants of the Portuguese inland town of Tette, on
the Zambesi, were carrying on the slave-trade with unusual vigour, for
this reason, that they found it difficult to obtain ivory except in
exchange for slaves.  In former years they had carried on a trade in
ivory with a tribe called the Banyai, these Banyai being great
elephant-hunters, but it happened that they went to war with another
tribe named the Matabele, who had managed to steal from them all their
women and children.  Consequently, the forlorn Banyai said to the Tette
merchants, when they went to trade with them as they had been accustomed
to do, "We do not want your merchandise.  Bring us women and children,
and you shall have as much ivory as you wish."

These good people of Tette--being chiefly half-caste Portuguese, and
under Portuguese government, and claiming, as they do, to be the
possessors of that region of Africa--are so utterly incapable of holding
their own, that they are under the necessity of paying tribute to a
tribe of savages who come down annually to Tette to receive it, and who,
but for that tribute, would, as they easily could, expel them from the
land.  These merchants of Tette, moreover, in common with all the
Portuguese in Africa, are by the laws of Portugal prohibited from
engaging in the _export_ slave-trade.  They are not, however, forbidden
to engage temporarily in the "domestic slave-trade," hence they had sent
out slaving parties--in other words, robbers, kidnappers, murderers--who
hired the warlike Ajawa tribe to aid them in killing the Manganja men,
and robbing them of their wives and little ones, by which means they
were enabled to supply the demand for such "cattle" among the Banyai,
and thus obtained the desired supply of ivory!  So vigorously had this
slave traffic been carried on, at the time of which we write, that no
fewer than two hundred people--mostly women and children--were carried
out of the hill-country every week.  [See _The Universities' Mission to
Central Africa_, page 112.]

In a short time the negro returned to the place where Harold and Disco
were seated, and said that he believed his white deliverers were true
men, but added that he and his people had no home to go to; their
village having been burnt, and all the old people and warriors killed or
dispersed by Marizano, who was a terribly cruel man.  In proof of this
assertion he said that only the day before, Marizano had shot two of the
women for attempting to untie their thongs; a man had been killed with
an axe because he had broken-down with fatigue; and a woman had her
infant's brains dashed out because she was unable to carry it, as well
as the load assigned to her.

"It is difficult to decide what one should do in these circumstances,"
said Harold to Disco.  "You know it would never do to leave these
helpless people here to starve; but if we take them on with us our
progress will be uncommonly slow."

"We'd better take 'em back," said Disco.

"Back!  Where to?"

"W'y, to the last village wot we passed through.  It ain't more than a
day's march, an' I'm sure the old feller as is capting of it would take
care o' the lot."

"There is good advice in that, yet I grudge to go back," said Harold;
"if there were a village the same distance in advance, I would rather
take them on."

"But there ain't," returned Disco.  "Hallo!  I say, wot's wrong with
Tony?"

The interpreter came forward with a look of much excitement as he spoke.

"What now, Antonio?"

"Oh! it's drefful," replied the interpreter.  "Dey tells me have hear
Marizano speak ob anoder slaving party what go straight to Kambira's
village for attack it."

"Who told you that?  Are they sure?" asked Harold hastily.

"Two, t'ree mans tole me," replied Antonio.  "All say same ting.  Too
late to help him now, me's 'fraid."

"Never say too late," cried Disco, starting up; "never say die while
there's a shot in the locker.  It may be time enough yet if we only look
sharp.  I votes that we leave nearly all the provisions we have with
these poor critters here; up anchor, 'bout ship, clap on all sail, and
away this werry minit."

Harold agreed with this advice heartily, and at once acted on it.  The
arrangements were quickly made, the provisions distributed, an
explanation made, and in less than an hour the travellers were retracing
their steps in hot haste.

By taking a straight line and making forced marches, they arrived in
sight of the ridge where they had last seen Kambira, on the evening of
the third day.  As they drew near Harold pushed impatiently forward,
and, outrunning his companions, was first to reach the summit.  Disco's
heart sank within him, for he observed that his companion stood still,
bowed his head, and covered his face with both hands.  He soon joined
him, and a groan burst from the seaman's breast when he saw dense
volumes of smoke rising above the spot where the village had so recently
lain a picture of peaceful beauty.

Even their followers, accustomed though they were, to scenes and deeds
of violence and cruelty, could not witness the grief of the Englishmen
unmoved.

"P'raps," said Disco, in a husky voice, "there's some of 'em left alive,
hidin' in the bushes."

"It may be so," replied Harold, as he descended the slope with rapid
strides.  "God help them!"

A few minutes sufficed to bring them to the scene of ruin, but the
devastation caused by the fire was so great that they had difficulty in
recognising the different spots where the huts had stood.  Kambira's hut
was, however, easily found, as it stood on a rising ground.  There the
fight with the slavers had evidently been fiercest, for around it lay
the charred and mutilated remains of many human bodies.  Some of these
were so far distinguishable that it could be told whether they belonged
to man, woman, or child.

"Look here!" said Disco, in a deep, stern voice, as he pointed to an
object on the ground not far from the hut.

It was the form of a woman who had been savagely mangled by her
murderers.  The upturned and distorted face proved it to be Yohama, the
grandmother of little Obo.  Near to her lay the body of a grey-haired
negro, who might to judge from his position, have fallen in attempting
to defend her.

"Oh! if the people of England only saw this sight!" said Harold, in a
low tone; "if they only believed in and _realised_ this fact, there
would be one universal and indignant shout of `No toleration of slavery
anywhere throughout the world!'"

"Look closely for Kambira or his son," he added, turning to his men.

A careful search among the sickening remains was accordingly made, but
without any discovery worth noting being made, after which they searched
the surrounding thickets.  Here sad evidence of the poor fugitives
having been closely pursued was found in the dead bodies of many of the
old men and women, and of the very young children and infants; also the
bodies of a few of the warriors.  All these had been speared, chiefly
through the back.  Still they were unsuccessful in finding the bodies of
the chief or his little boy.

"It's plain," said Disco, "that they have either escaped or been took
prisoners."

"Here is some one not quite dead," said Harold,--"Ah! poor fellow!"

He raised the unfortunate man's head on his knee, and recognised the
features of the little man who had entertained them with his tunes on
the native violin.

It was in vain that Antonio tried to gain his attention while Disco
moistened his lips with water.  He had been pierced in the chest with an
arrow.  Once only he opened his eyes, and a faint smile played on his
lips, as if he recognised friends, but it faded quickly and left the
poor musician a corpse.

Leaving, with heavy hearts, the spot where they had spent such pleasant
days and nights, enjoying the hospitality of Kambira and his tribe, our
travellers began to retrace their steps to the place where they had left
the rescued slaves, but that night the strong frame of Disco Lillihammer
succumbed to the influence of climate.  He was suddenly stricken with
African fever, and in a few hours became as helpless as a little child.

In this extremity Harold found it necessary to encamp.  He selected the
highest and healthiest spot in the neighbourhood, caused his followers
to build a rude, but comparatively comfortable, hut and set himself
diligently to hunt for, and to tend, his sick friend.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

TREATS OF LOVE, HATRED, AND SORROW, AND PROVES THAT SLAVERY AND ITS
CONSEQUENCES ARE NOT CONFINED TO BLACK MEN AND WOMEN.

We must now change the scene to the garden of that excellent Governor,
Senhor Francisco Alfonso Toledo Bignoso Letotti, and the date to three
months in advance of the period in which occurred the events related in
the last chapter.

"Maraquita, I am sorry to find that you still persist in encouraging
that morbid regret for the loss of one who cannot now be recovered."

Thus spoke the Governor in tones that were unusually petulant for one
who idolised his child.

"Father, why did you sell her without saying a word to me about your
intention?  It was very, very, _very_ unkind--indeed it was."

Poor Maraquita's eyes were already red and swollen with much weeping,
nevertheless she proceeded to increase the redness and the swelling by a
renewed burst of passionate distress.

The worthy Governor found it difficult to frame a reply or to administer
suitable consolation, for in his heart he knew that he had sold Azinte,
as it were surreptitiously, to Marizano for an unusually large sum of
money, at a time when his daughter was absent on a visit to a friend.
The noted Portuguese kidnapper, murderer, rebel and trader in black
ivory, having recovered from his wound, had returned to the town, and,
being well aware of Azinte's market value, as a rare and remarkably
beautiful piece of ivory of extra-superfine quality, had threatened, as
well as tempted, Governor Letotti beyond his powers of resistance.
Marizano did not want the girl as his own slave.  He wanted dollars,
and, therefore, destined her for the markets of Arabia or Persia, where
the smooth-tongued and yellow-skinned inhabitants hold that robbery,
violence, and cruelty, such as would make the flesh of civilised people
creep, although horrible vices in themselves, are nevertheless, quite
justifiable when covered by the sanction of that miraculous talisman
called a "domestic institution."  The British Government had, by treaty,
agreed to respect slavery in the dominions of the Sultan of Zanzibar, as
a domestic institution with which it would not interfere!

Governor Letotti's heart had smitten him at first for he really was an
amiable man, and felt kindly disposed to humanity at large, slaves
included.  Unfortunately the same kindliness was concentrated with
tenfold power on himself, so that when self-interest came into play the
amiable man became capable of deeds that Marizano himself might have
been proud of.  The only difference, in fact, between the two was that
the Governor, like the drunkard, often felt ashamed of himself, and
sometimes wished that he were a better man, while the man-stealer
gloried in his deeds, and had neither wish nor intention to improve.

"Maraquita," said Senhor Letotti, still somewhat petulantly, though with
more of remonstrance in his tone, "how can you speak so foolishly?  It
was out of my power you know, to speak to you when you were absent about
what I intended to do.  Besides, I was, at the time, very much in need
of some ready money, for, although I am rich enough, there are times
when most of my capital is what business men called `locked up,' and
therefore not immediately available.  In these circumstances, Marizano
came to me with a very tempting offer.  But there are plenty of
good-looking, amiable, affectionate girls in Africa.  I can easily buy
you another slave quite as good as Azinte."

"As good as Azinte!" echoed Maraquita wildly, starting up and gazing at
her father with eyes that flashed through her tears, "Azinte, who has
opened her heart to me--her bursting, bleeding heart--and told me all
her former joys and all her present woes, and who loves me as she
loves--ay, better than she loves--her own soul, merely because I dropped
a few tears of sympathy on her little hand!  Another as good as Azinte!"
she cried with increasing vehemence; "would _you_ listen with patience
to any one who should talk to you of another as good as Maraquita?"

"Nay, but," remonstrated the Governor, "you are now raving; your
feelings towards Azinte cannot be compared with my love for _you_."

"If you loved me as I thought you did, you would not--you could not--
have thus taken from me my darling little maid.  Oh! shame, shame on
you, father--"

She could say no more, but rushed from the room to fling herself down
and sob out her feelings in the privacy of her own chamber, where she
was sought out by the black cook, who had overheard some of the
conversation, and was a sympathetic soul.  But that amiable domestic
happened to be inopportunely officious; she instantly fled from the
chamber, followed by the neatest pair of little slippers imaginable,
which hit her on the back of her woolly head,--for Maraquita, like other
spoilt children, had made up her mind _not_ to be comforted.

Meanwhile the Governor paced the floor of his drawing-room with uneasy
feelings, which, however, were suddenly put to flight by the report of a
gun.  Hastening to the window, he saw that the shot had been fired by a
war-steamer which was entering the bay.

"Ha! the `Firefly;' good!" exclaimed the Governor, with a gratified
look; "this will put it all right."

He said nothing more, but left the room hastily.  It may however be as
well to explain that his remark had reference to the mutual affection
which he was well aware existed between his daughter and the gallant
Lieutenant Lindsay.  He had not, indeed, the most remote intention of
permitting Maraquita to wed the penniless officer, but he had no
objection whatever to their flirting as much as they pleased; and he
readily perceived that nothing would be more likely to take the
Senhorina's thoughts off her lost maid than the presence of her lover.

There was a bower in a secluded corner of the Governor Letotti's garden,
a very charming bower indeed, in which Lieutenant Lindsay had been wont
at times when duty to the Queen of England permitted, to hold sweet
converse with the "queen of his soul."  What that converse was it
neither becomes us to say nor the reader to inquire.  Perhaps it had
reference to astronomy, perchance to domestic economy.  At all events it
was always eminently satisfactory to both parties engaged, save when the
Senhorina indulged in a little touch of waywardness, and sent the poor
officer back to his ship with a heavy heart, for the express purpose of
