


CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

FATE OF THE LOST ONES.

Leo, Anders, and timid little Oblooria, however, were not lost!  Their
case was bad enough, but it had not quite come to that.

On parting from Benjy, as described in the last chapter, these three
went after a walrus, which coquetted with them instead of attacking, and
drew them a considerable distance away from the island.  This would have
been a matter of trifling import if the weather had remained calm, but,
as we have seen, a sudden and violent gale arose.

When the coming squall was first observed the boat was far to leeward of
Paradise Isle, and as that island happened to be one of the most
northerly of the group over which Amalatok ruled, they were thus far to
leeward of any land with the exception of a solitary sugar-loaf rock
near the horizon.  Still Leo and his companions were not impressed with
any sense of danger.  They had been so long accustomed to calms, and to
moving about in the india-rubber boats by means of paddles with perfect
ease and security, that they had half forgotten the force of wind.
Besides, the walrus was still playing with them provokingly--keeping
just out of rifle-shot as if he had studied fire-arms and knew their
range exactly.

"The rascal!" exclaimed Leo at last, losing patience, "he will never let
us come an inch nearer."

"Try 'im once more," said Anders, who was a keen sportsman, "push him,
paddle strong.  Ho!  Oblooria, paddle hard and queek."

Although the interpreter, being in a facetious mood, addressed Oblooria
in English, she quite understood his significant gestures, and bent to
her work with a degree of energy and power quite surprising in one
apparently so fragile.  Leo also used his oars, (for they had both oars
and paddles), with such good-will that the boat skimmed over the Arctic
sea like a northern diver, and the distance between them and the walrus
was perceptibly lessened.

"I don't like the looks o' the southern sky," said Leo, regarding the
horizon with knitted brows.

"Hims black 'nough--any'ow," said Anders.

"Hold.  I'll have a farewell shot at the brute, and give up the chase,"
said Leo, laying down the oars and grasping his rifle.

The ball seemed to take effect, for the walrus dived immediately with a
violent splutter, and was seen no more.

By this time the squall was hissing towards them so fast that the
hunters, giving up all thought of the walrus, turned at once and made
for the land, but land by that time lay far off on the southern horizon
with a dark foam-flecked sea between it and them.

"There's no fear of the boat, Oblooria," said Leo, glancing over his
shoulder at the girl, who sat crouching to meet the first burst of the
coming storm, "but you must hold on tight to the life-lines."

There was no need to caution Anders.  That worthy was already on his
knees embracing a thwart--his teeth clenched as he gazed over the bow.

On it came like a whirlwind of the tropics, and rushed right over the
low round gunwale of the boat, sweeping loose articles overboard, and
carrying her bodily to leeward.  Leo had taken a turn of the life-lines
round both thighs, and held manfully to his oars.  These, after stooping
to the first rush of wind and water, he plied with all his might, and
was ably seconded by Oblooria as well as by the interpreter, but a very
few minutes of effort sufficed to convince them that they laboured in
vain.  They did not even "hold their own," as sailors have it, but
drifted slowly, yet steadily, to the north.

"It's impossible to make head against _this_," said Leo, suddenly
ceasing his efforts, "and I count it a piece of good fortune, for which
we cannot be too thankful, that there is still land to leeward of us."

He pointed to the sugar-loaf rock before mentioned, towards which they
were now rapidly drifting.

"Nothing to eat dere.  Nothing to drink," said Anders, gloomily.

"Oh! that won't matter much.  A squall like this can't last long.  We
shall soon be able to start again for home, no doubt.  I say, Anders,
what are these creatures off the point there?  They seem too large and
black for sea-birds, and not the shape of seals or walruses."

The interpreter gazed earnestly at the objects in question for some
moments without answering.  The rock which they were quickly nearing was
rugged, barren, and steep on its southern face, against which the waves
were by that time dashing with extreme violence, so that landing there
would have been an impossibility.  On its lee or northern side, however
they might count on quiet water.

"We have nothing to fear," said Leo, observing that Oblooria was much
agitated; "tell her so, Anders; we are sure to find a sheltered creek of
some sort on the other side."

"I fear not the rocks or storm," replied the Eskimo girl to Anders.  "It
is Grabantak, the chief of Flatland, that I fear."

"Grabantak!" exclaimed Anders and Leo in the same breath.

"Grabantak is coming with his men!"

Poor little Oblooria, whose face had paled while her whole frame
trembled, pointed towards the dark objects which had already attracted
their attention.  They were by that time near enough to be
distinguished, and as they came, one after another, round the western
point of Sugar-loaf rock, it was all too evident that the girl was
right, and that the fleet of kayaks was probably bearing the northern
savage and his men to attack the inhabitants of Poloe.

Leo's first impulse was to seize his repeating rifle and fill its
cartridge-chamber quite full.  It may be well to observe here that the
cartridges, being carried in a tight waterproof case, had not been
affected by the seas which had so recently overwhelmed them.

"What's de use?" asked Anders, in an unusually sulky tone, as he watched
the youth's action.  "Two men not can fight all de mans of Flatland."

"No, but I can pick off a dozen of them, one after another, with my good
rifle, and then the rest will fly.  Grabantak will fall first, and his
best men after him."

This was no idle boast on the part of Leo.  He knew that he could
accomplish what he threatened long before the Eskimos could get within
spear-throwing distance of his boat.

"No use," repeated Anders, firmly, still shaking his head in a sulky
manner.  "When you's bullets be done, more an' more inimies come on.
Then dey kill you, an' me, an' Oblooria."

Leo laid down his weapon.  The resolve to die fighting to the last was
the result of a mere impulse of animal courage.  Second thoughts cooled
him, and the reference to Oblooria's fate decided him.

"You are right, Anders.  If by fighting to the death I could save
Oblooria, it would be my duty as well as my pleasure to fight; but I see
that I haven't the ghost of a chance against such a host as is
approaching, and it would be simply revengeful to send as many as I can
into the next world before going there myself.  Besides, it would
exasperate the savages, and make them harder on the poor girl."

In saying this Leo was rather arguing out the point with himself than
talking to the interpreter, who did not indeed understand much of what
he said.  Having made up his mind how to act, Leo stowed his precious
rifle and ammunition in a small bag placed for that purpose under one of
the thwarts, and, resuming the oars, prepared to meet his fate, whatever
it should be, peacefully and unarmed.

While thus drifting in silence before the gale, the thought suddenly
occurred to Leo, "How strange it is that I, who am a Christian--in name
at least--should feel as if it were absurd to pray for God's help at
such a time as this!  Surely He who made me and these Eskimos is capable
of guarding us?  The very least we can do is to ask Him to guide us!"

The youth was surprised at the thought.  It had flashed upon him like a
ray of light.  It was not the first time that he had been in even more
imminent danger than the present, yet he had never before thought of the
necessity of asking help from God, as if He were really present and able
as well as willing to succour.  Before the thought had passed he acted
on it.  He had no time for formal prayer.  He looked up!  It was prayer
without words.  In a few minutes more the boat was surrounded by the
fleet of kayaks.  There were hundreds of these tiny vessels of the
north, each with its solitary occupant, using his double-bladed paddle
vigorously.

Need we say that the strangers were at first gazed on with speechless
wonder? and that the Eskimos kept for some time hovering round them at a
respectful distance, as if uncertain how to act, but with their
war-spears ready?  All the time the whole party drifted before the gale
towards the island-rock.

"Anders," said Leo, while the natives remained in this state of
indecision, "my mind is made up as to our course of action.  We will
offer no resistance whatever to these fellows.  We must be absolutely
submissive, unless, indeed, they attempt to ill-treat Oblooria, in which
case of course we will defend her.  Do you hear?"

This was said with such quiet decision, and the concluding question was
put in such a tone, that the interpreter replied, "Yis, sar," promptly.

As Leo made no sign of any kind, but continued to guide the boat
steadily with the oars, as if his sole anxiety was to round the western
point of the island and get into a place of shelter, the natives turned
their kayaks and advanced along with him.  Naturally they fell into the
position of an escort--a part of the fleet paddling on each side of the
captives, (for such they now were), while the rest brought up the rear.

"What ails Oblooria, Anders?" asked Leo in a low tone.

"What is the matter?" asked the interpreter, turning to the girl, who,
ever since the approach of the Eskimos, had crouched like a bundle in
the bottom of the boat with her face buried in her hands.  "There is no
fear.  Grabantak is a man, not a bear.  He will not eat you."

"Grabantak knows me," answered the poor girl, without lifting her head;
"he came to Poloe once, before the war, and wanted me to be the wife of
his son.  I want not his son.  I want Oolichuk!"

The simplicity and candour of this confession caused Leo to laugh in
spite of himself, while poor little Oblooria, who thought it no laughing
matter, burst into tears.

Of course the men of Flatland kept their eyes fixed in wide amazement on
Leo, as they paddled along, and this sudden laugh of his impressed them
deeply, being apparently without a cause, coupled as it was with an air
of absolute indifference to his probable fate, and to the presence of so
many foes.  Even the ruthless land-hungerer, Grabantak, was solemnised.

In a few minutes the whole party swept round the point of rocks, and
proceeded towards the land over the comparatively quiet waters of a
little bay which lay under the lee of the Sugar-loaf rock.

During the brief period that had been afforded for thought, Leo had been
intently making his plans.  He now proceeded to carry them out.

"Hand me the trinket-bundle," he said to Anders.

The interpreter searched in a waterproof pouch in the stern of the boat,
and produced a small bundle of such trinkets as are known to be valued
by savages.  It had been placed and was always kept there by Captain
Vane, to be ready for emergencies.

"They will be sure to take everything from us at any rate," remarked
Leo, as he divided the trinkets into two separate bundles, "so I shall
take the wind out of their sails by giving everything up at once with a
good grace."

The Grabantaks, if we may so style them, drew near, as the fleet
approached the shore, with increasing curiosity.  When land was reached
they leaped out of their kayaks and crowded round the strangers.  It is
probable that they would have seized them and their possessions at this
point, but the tall strapping figure of Leo, and his quiet manner,
overawed them.  They held back while the india-rubber boat was being
carried by Leo and Anders to a position of safety.

Poor Oblooria walked beside them with her head bowed down, shrinking as
much as possible out of sight.  Everybody was so taken up with the
strange white man that no one took any notice of her.

No sooner was the boat laid down than Leo taking one of the bundles of
trinkets stepped up to Grabantak, whom he easily distinguished by his
air of superiority and the deference paid him by his followers.

Pulling his own nose by way of a friendly token, Leo smiled benignantly
in the chief's face, and opened the bundle before him.

It is needless to say that delight mingled with the surprise that had
hitherto blazed on the visage of Grabantak.

"Come here, Anders, and bring the other bundle with you.  Tell this
warrior that I am very glad to meet with him."

"Great and unconquerable warrior," began the interpreter, in the dialect
which he had found was understood, by the men of Poloe, "we have come
from far-off lands to bring you gifts--"

"Anders," said Leo, whose knowledge of the Eskimo tongue was sufficient,
by that time, to enable him in a measure to follow the drift of a
speech, "Anders, if you don't tell him _exactly_ what I say I'll kick
you into the sea!"

As Anders stood on a rock close to the water's edge, and Leo looked
unusually stern, he thereafter rendered faithfully what the latter told
him to say.  The speech was something to the following effect:--

"I am one of a small band of white men who have come here to search out
the land.  We do not want the land.  We only want to see it.  We have
plenty of land of our own in the far south.  We have been staying with
the great chief Amalatok in Poloeland."

At the mention of his enemy's name the countenance of Grabantak
darkened.  Without noticing this, Leo went on:--

"When I was out hunting with my man and a woman, the wind arose and blew
us hither.  We claim your hospitality, and hope you will help us to get
back again to Poloeland.  If you do so we will reward you well, for
white men are powerful and rich.  See, here are gifts for Grabantak, and
for his wife."

This latter remark was a sort of inspiration.  Leo had observed, while
Anders was speaking, that a stout cheerful-faced woman had been pushing
aside the men and gradually edging her way toward the Eskimo chief with
the air of a privileged person.  That he had hit the mark was obvious,
for Grabantak turned with a bland smile, and hit his wife a facetious
and rather heavy slap on the shoulder.  She was evidently accustomed to
such treatment, and did not wince.

Taking from his bundle a gorgeous smoking-cap richly ornamented with
brilliant beads, Leo coolly crowned the chief with it.  Grabantak drew
himself up and tried to look majestic, but a certain twitching of his
face, and sparkle in his eyes, betrayed a tendency to laugh with
delight.  Fortunately, there was another cap of exactly the same pattern
in the bundle, which Leo instantly placed on the head of the wife--whose
name he afterwards learned was Merkut.

The chief's assumed dignity vanished at this.  With that childlike
hilarity peculiar to the Eskimo race, he laughed outright, and then,
seizing the cap from Merkut's head, put it above his own to the
amusement of his grinning followers.

Leo then selected a glittering clasp-knife with two blades, which the
chief seized eagerly.  It was evidently a great prize--too serious a
gift to be lightly laughed at.  Then a comb was presented to the wife,
and a string of gay beads, and a pair of scissors.  Of course the uses
of combs and scissors had he explained, and deep was the interest
manifested during the explanation, and utter the forgetfulness of the
whole party for the time being in regard to everything else in the
world--Oblooria included, who sat unnoticed on the rocks with her face
still buried in her hands.

When Grabantak's possessions were so numerous that the hood of his coat,
and the tops of his wife's boots were nearly filled with them, he became
generous, and, prince-like, (having more than he knew what to do with),
began to distribute things to his followers.

Among these followers was a tall and stalwart son of his own, to whom he
was rather stern, and not very liberal.  Perhaps the chief wished to
train him with Spartan ideas of self-denial.  Perhaps he wanted his
followers to note his impartiality.  Merkut did not, however, act on the
same principles, for she quietly passed a number of valuable articles
over to her dear son Koyatuk, unobserved by his stern father.

Things had gone on thus pleasantly for some time; the novelty of the
gifts, and the interest in their explanation having apparently rendered
these people forgetful of the fact that they might take them all at
once; when a sudden change in the state of affairs was wrought by the
utterance of one word.

"We must not," said Leo to Anders, looking at his follower over the
heads of the Eskimos, "forget poor little Oblooria."

"Oblooria!" roared Grabantak with a start, as if he had been
electrified.

"Oblooria!" echoed Koyatuk, glaring round.

"Oblooria!" gasped the entire band.

Another moment and Grabantak, bursting through the crowd, leaped towards
the crouching girl and raised her face.  Recognising her he uttered a
yell which probably was meant for a cheer.

Hurrying the frightened girl into the circle through which he had
broken, the chief presented her to his son, and, with an air worthy of a
civilised courtier, said:--

"Your _wife_, Koyatuk--your Oblooria!--Looria!"

He went over the last syllables several times, as if he doubted his
senses, and feared it was too good news to be true.

This formal introduction was greeted by the chief's followers with a
series of wild shouts and other demonstrations of extreme joy.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A FIGHT IN DEFENCE OF WOMAN, AND RIFLE-SHOOTING EXTRAORDINARY.

When the excitement had somewhat abated, Leo stepped to the side of
Oblooria, and laying his hand on her shoulder said firmly, through
Anders:--

"Pardon me, Grabantak, this girl is _not_ the wife of Koyatuk; she is my
_sister_!"

The chief frowned, clenched his teeth, and grasped a spear--

"When did Kablunet men begin to have Eskimo sisters?"

"When they took all distressed women under their protection," returned
