other end of the boat.

"What a beautiful girl you are!" little Agnes kept saying; "and how
happy my sister ought to be, living always with you!"

"Don't ask her if she is happy for a day or two. I have given directions
about your room. You shall sleep in the little pink room next to mine."




CHAPTER XIX.

A SORT OF ANGEL.


Irene pulled with swift, sure strokes across the summer lake. The lake
was one of the great features of the place. It was a quarter of a mile
wide, and half a mile in length, and had been carefully attended to by
owner after owner for generations; so that groups of water-lilies grew
here, and swans arched their proud white necks and spread out their
feathered plumes. Little Agnes had never seen anything so lovely before,
and when she bent forward and saw her own reflection in the water she
gave a scream of childish pleasure.

"Oh, how happy sister Emily must be!" was her remark.

Again Irene made the strange answer, "Don't ask for a day or two."

Then little Agnes raised grave dark eyes to Irene's face.

"But any one would be happy with you," she said. "To look at you is such
a comfort."

"Tell me about yourself," said Irene suddenly, shipping her oars,
bending forward, and fixing her intensely bright eyes on the child.

She did not feel at all like a changeling now. That wild thing in her
breast was still. She felt somewhat like a mother, somewhat like an
ordinary little girl might feel towards a loved baby-sister, or even
towards a doll. This new sense of protection had a marvelous effect upon
her. She would not have minded if little Agnes had crept into her arms
and laid her head on her breast.

"Tell me what you did before you came here," she said.

"But don't you know?" said Agnes. "Sister Emily has been living with you
for a long time. She must have told you about me."

"I am ashamed to say I never asked her anything about you."

"I suppose that is because you are very thoughtful. You were
determined--yes, determined--not to give her pain. She is always so sad
when she thinks of us; but Hughie and I are not really unhappy. We don't
mind things now."

"What do you mean by 'now'? Tell me--do tell me."

"Oh, we are at school. Hughie is at a pretty good school, although it is
rather rough. He is learning hard. He is to be apprenticed to a trade
some day. Dear sister Emily cannot afford to bring him up as a
gentleman; but she is saving every penny of her money to put him into a
really good trade. Perhaps he will be a bookbinder, or perhaps a
cabinetmaker."

"But people of that sort are not gentry," said Irene. Then she colored
and bit her lips.

Little Agnes had seen so much of the rough side of life that she was not
at all offended.

"Sister Emily says that she could not afford to bring us up as a lady
and gentleman, and so we are to be trained for something else. I think
she is going to put me into a shop."

"Indeed she won't," said Irene fiercely, "for I won't let her."

There was a new tone in her voice which frightened little Agnes. She
sank back among her soft cushions.

"You mustn't be angry with her, for she is the best sister in all the
world. No one else would work so hard to support us. You know, when
father and mother died there wasn't a penny-piece to keep us, and we
were both very young; and if it hadn't been for Emily I might have been
sent to one of those dreadful charity schools. But as it is, I am being
taught, and now I am staying at this lovely place for the holidays, and
I have met you, and I think you are a sort of angel."

Irene burst into a ringing laugh.

"You're the very first person who has ever called me that," she said.
"Now look here, Agnes; there's just one thing I want to ask you."

"What is that?" asked little Agnes.

"Don't speak to the servants about me, nor even to your beloved Emily,
nor much to Rosamund. You think certain things about me. Other people
may not agree with you."

"I should like to fight them if they differed," said the little girl.

"Well, that's all right; you can fight them by-and-by if you like; but
at present say nothing about me. I am your friend; it will depend on
whether you keep silence or not whether I continue to be your friend. As
long as I am your friend you are safe and happy here, so that is all
right."

Little Agnes, never having heard anything about Irene except that she
was her sister Emily's pupil, believed these words, and continued to
look with a fascinated gaze at the white-throated swans, at the
beautiful water-lilies, and at the calm reflection of the boat and their
two selves in the water. She saw nothing whatever of the rapid stream in
the centre of the lake, where poor Miss Carter had almost met her death,
nor did she see any fierce or turbulent side to Irene's erratic nature.

By-and-by the bell sounded, and Irene exclaimed, "I declare it is time
for us to go in. You are much too young to sit up to dinner. I will see
that you are put to bed, and have something very nice for you to eat,
and I will sit with you until you fall asleep."

"But you will want your own dinner," said little Agnes.

"My own dinner doesn't matter in the very least. I will have a snatch of
something when I go downstairs. Now come along."

She began to ply her oars again, and in a minute or two they had landed,
the boat had been moored, and the two children went up to the house.

Hughie was standing on the steps, blowing a loud whistle through his
fingers.

"Hullo, Aggie!" he cried. "Why, you are looking as fresh as possible;
and Miss Irene--the wonderful Miss Irene"--here he gave a mocking bow
to Irene--"has taken you under her wing. I can tell you sister Emily is
pretty jealous."

Irene looked at him with small favor.

"Will you please let us pass?" she said.

The boy made another sweeping bow, and Irene and little Agnes passed
into the house. They went upstairs. Irene took her little friend to the
pink room next to her own. Here all her things had been unpacked already
by Miss Frost herself, who had now, however, vanished. Agnes, tired,
happy, pleased with her new friend, fearing nothing, trusting all
things, was soon got into bed, and Irene sat by her until she dropped
asleep. Then she laid a light kiss on her forehead, closed the door
softly, and went downstairs.

Dinner was a thing of the past. Hughie and Miss Frost were pacing about
in one of the corridors. Irene ran into the drawing-room. Lady Jane was
lying on one of the sofas, half-asleep. She started up when she saw her
daughter, and said in a quiet tone, "You will want some dinner, won't
you?"

"Yes; I have desired James to give me something. He is getting it
ready."

"I will come and sit with you while you eat it," said Rosamund, who was
also there, jumping up and tossing down the book she had been looking
through somewhat restlessly.

The two girls moved off. Irene satisfied her appetite, and then Rosamund
asked her to come with her into one of the greenhouses.

"Well," said Irene, her eyes sparkling, "I suppose you are satisfied
with me to-night. I have behaved well to little Agnes, have I not?"

"In one sense you have behaved well enough; but you have quite forgotten
one thing."

"I do hope you are not going to scold me, I feel so wonderfully
virtuous. She is a dear little soul, and I have promised to take her
under my protection--that is, if no one will interfere. But I see you
mean to begin at once. It is exceedingly unkind of you. What is wrong
now?"

"Only Miss Frost--poor Miss Frost! You seem to have taken the little
sister quite away from her. She has not been able to speak to the little
thing since she arrived, and she has done everything for her."

"It doesn't matter what Frosty has done in the past. I mean to do
everything for little Agnes in the future--that is, if I am not bullied.
If I am, I----What is it, Rosamund?"

"Dear Irene, I quite know what you feel. It is the first time you have
found some one absolutely to trust you. Little Agnes trusts you; but you
ought to remember that she is Miss Frost's little sister. You ought not
to hurt her feelings. You ought to let Miss Frost do something for her,
too. If you had been supporting somebody very precious and very dear for
a great many years, and then quite a fresh person came along and took
that treasure from you, how would you feel?"

"I'm sure I don't know. I can't understand the position. I only know
that I like little Agnes, and as long as she is left with me I shall be
good to her. The best possible thing for Frosty and yourself and that
horrid, tiresome boy to do is to go away, I'll look after little Agnes."

"You were very sweet to her to-day, I will admit that; but what I want
to say is, do try and remember that Miss Frost will want to see
something of her too. Don't let Miss Frost become too jealous, for she
is devoted to her little sister."

"Well, I hate the boy," said Irene. "He was so rude when we came off the
lake, and he whistled in such a defiant way. He isn't one bit a
gentleman. Little Agnes told me that he was going to be a sort of
tradesman. We oughtn't to have those people coming to the house. You
shouldn't have insisted on my inviting them; you really shouldn't,
Rosamund."

"I thought you were quite above that sort of thing," said Rosamund in a
lofty tone. "But never mind. Do what you wish; only remember that both
the boy and girl are your guests, and that I am going away next week."

Irene suddenly felt that Rosamund, much as she adored her, was a little
too dictatorial that evening. She had expected great praise for her
conduct, instead of which she had been blamed. She ran out into the cool
night air, notwithstanding the expostulations of her mother, and came in
late, feeling fagged and wearied. She did not invite Rosamund, as was
her custom, to come to her bedroom; but she went there alone, locking
the outer door, and then softly opening the door between herself and the
new treasure she had found. Yes, little Agnes was a treasure. She was
something more precious than gold. She was like a doll of the most
beautiful order.

Now, Irene had always despised dolls; but this living doll, with the
pink cheeks, and the black eyelashes, and the soft hair, and the sweet
little face, was altogether a different matter. The little one stirred
in her sleep and breathed a name softly. Irene bent to listen--the name
was her own.

"Irene darling!" murmured little Agnes.

"Oh, she is a pet! I am so glad she has come! I'd almost die for her!"
thought the girl.

She went back to her own room after gazing once again at the sweet
little face. That night, for the first time for years, Irene
deliberately dropped on her knees and uttered a prayer full of
thankfulness to God. "I thank Thee, great good God, for having given me
a darling little girl to protect and love. Please don't allow Frosty to
be jealous, and please let her stay with me, for she is just the person
to quiet that horrid living thing inside me," whispered the child. Then
she got into bed and fell fast asleep.

She was awakened by cries before morning dawned. In a moment she started
up, sprang out of bed, and rushed into the next room. Little Agnes was
sitting up in her bed, puzzled and terrified.

"Where am I? Oh, what has happened?"

"Are you frightened, darling?" said Irene. "Are you really frightened?
Would you like to come into my bed? Have you had a bad dream?"

"I have. I thought I was at school, and that Mrs. Treadgold, one of our
mistresses, had beaten me. I fancied that she was beating me hard, and
that made me wake. Now I remember that I am with you. Oh, yes, I should
like to come into your bed."

"Then you shall come at once," said Irene.

She lifted the little girl out. She herself felt quite old and motherly
beside the little one. During the remainder of the night they slept in
each other's arms, and much of the hardness and the wildness of Irene's
nature melted away during that sleep, and some of that motherhood which
is the most blessed gift God can give to a girl visited her.

She herself insisted on helping Agnes to dress in the morning, and then
they went down to breakfast hand in hand.




CHAPTER XX.

A SORT OF WITCH.


Hughie was a dictatorial, troublesome sort of boy; but Rosamund took him
in hand from the first, and kept him somewhat in order. Miss Frost,
looking very patient, followed her brother and sister and Irene about.
Once little Agnes was all alone in a bower, where she was waiting for
Irene to come to her. This was Rosamund's opportunity. She went straight
up to the child, took one of her hands, and sat down near her.

"I am so glad, Agnes," she said, "that you love Irene. But now I want to
say something to you."

"I love you, too," said little Agnes, who was the gentlest and most
affectionate creature under the sun.

"And don't you love your own dear sister Emily?"

"Oh, of course I do! I love her very much indeed."

"Then I wish you would go and tell her so, for she is sitting not far
away crying very bitterly."

"Crying?" said little Agnes.

"Yes--because you haven't been with her at all to-day, and hardly
yesterday; she can't make out what it means, and it troubles her a good
deal. Do go and put your arms round her neck, and tell her that although
you love Irene, you can never love any one like you do her."

"But I think," said little Agnes, who was the soul of truth, "that I do
love Irene quite as much as I love Emily."

"Then you oughtn't to, for Miss Frost is your own sister, and she has
done so much for you--far more than you can in the least understand at
present."

"Anyhow, I do love her very much, and I'll tell her so," said the little
girl.

She flew away from Rosamund, who sat down on the seat which Agnes had
occupied. She had not been there more than a minute or two before Irene,
carrying a basket of fruit in her hand, entered in great excitement.

"Where is Agnes? Where is my dear little pet? Oh, you are there,
Rosamund!"

"Yes, Irene, and I hope you are glad to see me."

"Of course I am, Rosamund. I am always that. But where is my little
Agnes? I want her to have some of these ripe plums. She is so fond of
plums."

"Well, she oughtn't to have any more, for she ate too many yesterday,
and Miss Frost says they don't agree with her."

"As if Frosty knew anything about the matter! I am the person who is
going to take care of Agnes in the future. I have settled all that with
myself. As to mother, she will do as I wish. I am going to adopt Agnes;
I call her my adopted child."

"But that is rather ridiculous, isn't it, Irene, seeing that you are
almost the same age?"

"There are two years between us; but then, Agnes is so very small, so
_petite_ in every way, and so--so sweet and so defenseless."

"I always thought you did not care for defenseless people, nor for weak
people, nor timid people."

"Oh, I like her sort. You see, she believed in me from the first."

"I hope she always will," said Rosamund.

"Well, where is she now?"

"She has gone to talk to her sister. You cannot expect her to give up
all her time to you."

"But indeed that is just what I do. What can she have in common with
that tiresome, frowzy old Frosty?"

"Only she happens to be her sister, and that tiresome, frowzy old
Frosty, as you call her, has looked after her since she was a little
child, when her mother died."

"Oh, yes, I've heard all that story. I suppose it's very noble; but, all
the same, little Agnes is fonder of me."

"You have no right to steal her heart from Miss Frost."

"Rosamund, I don't know what to make of you. You always have a great
influence over me; but what is the matter now? Do you want to take Agnes
away from me? If you wish to, you may; but I shall follow, for I don't
intend to give her up, and nobody living will make me. I am sure you can
do what you like with that detestable Hugh, and Frosty can go for her
holidays. It would be a very good idea. Agnes and I would be quite happy
