"It is Nanny. I have seen her many times since you have. Illness makes a
great difference."

"Why, that girl must have been to the back of the north wind!" thought
Diamond, but he said nothing, only stared; and as he stared, something
of the old Nanny began to dawn through the face of the new Nanny. The
old Nanny, though a good girl, and a friendly girl, had been rough,
blunt in her speech, and dirty in her person. Her face would always
have reminded one who had already been to the back of the north wind
of something he had seen in the best of company, but it had been coarse
notwithstanding, partly from the weather, partly from her living amongst
low people, and partly from having to defend herself: now it was so
sweet, and gentle, and refined, that she might have had a lady and
gentleman for a father and mother. And Diamond could not help thinking
of words which he had heard in the church the day before: "Surely it is
good to be afflicted;" or something like that. North Wind, somehow or
other, must have had to do with her! She had grown from a rough girl
into a gentle maiden.

Mr. Raymond, however, was not surprised, for he was used to see
such lovely changes--something like the change which passes upon the
crawling, many-footed creature, when it turns sick and ill, and revives
a butterfly, with two wings instead of many feet. Instead of her having
to take care of herself, kind hands ministered to her, making her
comfortable and sweet and clean, soothing her aching head, and giving
her cooling drink when she was thirsty; and kind eyes, the stars of the
kingdom of heaven, had shone upon her; so that, what with the fire of
the fever and the dew of tenderness, that which was coarse in her had
melted away, and her whole face had grown so refined and sweet that
Diamond did not know her. But as he gazed, the best of the old face, all
the true and good part of it, that which was Nanny herself, dawned upon
him, like the moon coming out of a cloud, until at length, instead of
only believing Mr. Raymond that this was she, he saw for himself that it
was Nanny indeed--very worn but grown beautiful.

He went up to her. She smiled. He had heard her laugh, but had never
seen her smile before.

"Nanny, do you know me?" said Diamond.

She only smiled again, as if the question was amusing.

She was not likely to forget him; for although she did not yet know
it was he who had got her there, she had dreamed of him often, and had
talked much about him when delirious. Nor was it much wonder, for he was
the only boy except Joe who had ever shown her kindness.

Meantime Mr. Raymond was going from bed to bed, talking to the little
people. Every one knew him, and every one was eager to have a look, and
a smile, and a kind word from him.

Diamond sat down on a stool at the head of Nanny's bed. She laid her
hand in his. No one else of her old acquaintance had been near her.

Suddenly a little voice called aloud--

"Won't Mr. Raymond tell us a story?"

"Oh, yes, please do! please do!" cried several little voices which also
were stronger than the rest. For Mr. Raymond was in the habit of telling
them a story when he went to see them, and they enjoyed it far more than
the other nice things which the doctor permitted him to give them.

"Very well," said Mr. Raymond, "I will. What sort of a story shall it
be?"

"A true story," said one little girl.

"A fairy tale," said a little boy.

"Well," said Mr. Raymond, "I suppose, as there is a difference, I may
choose. I can't think of any true story just at this moment, so I will
tell you a sort of a fairy one."

"Oh, jolly!" exclaimed the little boy who had called out for a fairy
tale.

"It came into my head this morning as I got out of bed," continued Mr.
Raymond; "and if it turns out pretty well, I will write it down, and get
somebody to print it for me, and then you shall read it when you like."

"Then nobody ever heard it before?" asked one older child.

"No, nobody."

"Oh!" exclaimed several, thinking it very grand to have the first
telling; and I daresay there might be a peculiar freshness about it,
because everything would be nearly as new to the story-teller himself as
to the listeners.

Some were only sitting up and some were lying down, so there could not
be the same busy gathering, bustling, and shifting to and fro with which
children generally prepare themselves to hear a story; but their faces,
and the turning of their heads, and many feeble exclamations of expected
pleasure, showed that all such preparations were making within them.

Mr. Raymond stood in the middle of the room, that he might turn from
side to side, and give each a share of seeing him. Diamond kept his
place by Nanny's side, with her hand in his. I do not know how much of
Mr. Raymond's story the smaller children understood; indeed, I don't
quite know how much there was in it to be understood, for in such a
story every one has just to take what he can get. But they all listened
with apparent satisfaction, and certainly with great attention. Mr.
Raymond wrote it down afterwards, and here it is--somewhat altered no
doubt, for a good story-teller tries to make his stories better every
time he tells them. I cannot myself help thinking that he was somewhat
indebted for this one to the old story of The Sleeping Beauty.




CHAPTER XXVIII. LITTLE DAYLIGHT


NO HOUSE of any pretension to be called a palace is in the least worthy
of the name, except it has a wood near it--very near it--and the nearer
the better. Not all round it--I don't mean that, for a palace ought to
be open to the sun and wind, and stand high and brave, with weathercocks
glittering and flags flying; but on one side of every palace there must
be a wood. And there was a very grand wood indeed beside the palace of
the king who was going to be Daylight's father; such a grand wood, that
nobody yet had ever got to the other end of it. Near the house it was
kept very trim and nice, and it was free of brushwood for a long way in;
but by degrees it got wild, and it grew wilder, and wilder, and wilder,
until some said wild beasts at last did what they liked in it. The king
and his courtiers often hunted, however, and this kept the wild beasts
far away from the palace.

One glorious summer morning, when the wind and sun were out together,
when the vanes were flashing and the flags frolicking against the blue
sky, little Daylight made her appearance from somewhere--nobody could
tell where--a beautiful baby, with such bright eyes that she might have
come from the sun, only by and by she showed such lively ways that she
might equally well have come out of the wind. There was great jubilation
in the palace, for this was the first baby the queen had had, and there
is as much happiness over a new baby in a palace as in a cottage.

But there is one disadvantage of living near a wood: you do not know
quite who your neighbours may be. Everybody knew there were in it
several fairies, living within a few miles of the palace, who always had
had something to do with each new baby that came; for fairies live
so much longer than we, that they can have business with a good many
generations of human mortals. The curious houses they lived in were well
known also,--one, a hollow oak; another, a birch-tree, though nobody
could ever find how that fairy made a house of it; another, a hut of
growing trees intertwined, and patched up with turf and moss. But there
was another fairy who had lately come to the place, and nobody even knew
she was a fairy except the other fairies. A wicked old thing she was,
always concealing her power, and being as disagreeable as she could,
in order to tempt people to give her offence, that she might have the
pleasure of taking vengeance upon them. The people about thought she was
a witch, and those who knew her by sight were careful to avoid offending
her. She lived in a mud house, in a swampy part of the forest.

In all history we find that fairies give their remarkable gifts to
prince or princess, or any child of sufficient importance in their eyes,
always at the christening. Now this we can understand, because it is
an ancient custom amongst human beings as well; and it is not hard to
explain why wicked fairies should choose the same time to do unkind
things; but it is difficult to understand how they should be able to
do them, for you would fancy all wicked creatures would be powerless on
such an occasion. But I never knew of any interference on the part of
the wicked fairy that did not turn out a good thing in the end. What a
good thing, for instance, it was that one princess should sleep for a
hundred years! Was she not saved from all the plague of young men who
were not worthy of her? And did she not come awake exactly at the right
moment when the right prince kissed her? For my part, I cannot help
wishing a good many girls would sleep till just the same fate overtook
them. It would be happier for them, and more agreeable to their friends.

Of course all the known fairies were invited to the christening. But the
king and queen never thought of inviting an old witch.

For the power of the fairies they have by nature; whereas a witch gets
her power by wickedness. The other fairies, however, knowing the danger
thus run, provided as well as they could against accidents from her
quarter. But they could neither render her powerless, nor could they
arrange their gifts in reference to hers beforehand, for they could not
tell what those might be.

Of course the old hag was there without being asked. Not to be asked
was just what she wanted, that she might have a sort of reason for doing
what she wished to do. For somehow even the wickedest of creatures likes
a pretext for doing the wrong thing.

Five fairies had one after the other given the child such gifts as each
counted best, and the fifth had just stepped back to her place in the
surrounding splendour of ladies and gentlemen, when, mumbling a laugh
between her toothless gums, the wicked fairy hobbled out into the middle
of the circle, and at the moment when the archbishop was handing the
baby to the lady at the head of the nursery department of state affairs,
addressed him thus, giving a bite or two to every word before she could
part with it:

"Please your Grace, I'm very deaf: would your Grace mind repeating the
princess's name?"

"With pleasure, my good woman," said the archbishop, stooping to shout
in her ear: "the infant's name is little Daylight."

"And little daylight it shall be," cried the fairy, in the tone of a dry
axle, "and little good shall any of her gifts do her. For I bestow upon
her the gift of sleeping all day long, whether she will or not. Ha, ha!
He, he! Hi, hi!"

Then out started the sixth fairy, who, of course, the others had
arranged should come after the wicked one, in order to undo as much as
she might.

"If she sleep all day," she said, mournfully, "she shall, at least, wake
all night."

"A nice prospect for her mother and me!" thought the poor king; for they
loved her far too much to give her up to nurses, especially at night, as
most kings and queens do--and are sorry for it afterwards.

"You spoke before I had done," said the wicked fairy. "That's against
the law. It gives me another chance."

"I beg your pardon," said the other fairies, all together.

"She did. I hadn't done laughing," said the crone. "I had only got to
Hi, hi! and I had to go through Ho, ho! and Hu, hu! So I decree that if
she wakes all night she shall wax and wane with its mistress, the moon.
And what that may mean I hope her royal parents will live to see. Ho,
ho! Hu, hu!"

But out stepped another fairy, for they had been wise enough to keep two
in reserve, because every fairy knew the trick of one.

"Until," said the seventh fairy, "a prince comes who shall kiss her
without knowing it."

The wicked fairy made a horrid noise like an angry cat, and hobbled
away. She could not pretend that she had not finished her speech this
time, for she had laughed Ho, ho! and Hu, hu!

"I don't know what that means," said the poor king to the seventh fairy.

"Don't be afraid. The meaning will come with the thing itself," said
she.

The assembly broke up, miserable enough--the queen, at least, prepared
for a good many sleepless nights, and the lady at the head of the
nursery department anything but comfortable in the prospect before her,
for of course the queen could not do it all. As for the king, he made up
his mind, with what courage he could summon, to meet the demands of the
case, but wondered whether he could with any propriety require the First
Lord of the Treasury to take a share in the burden laid upon him.

I will not attempt to describe what they had to go through for some
time. But at last the household settled into a regular system--a very
irregular one in some respects. For at certain seasons the palace rang
all night with bursts of laughter from little Daylight, whose heart the
old fairy's curse could not reach; she was Daylight still, only a little
in the wrong place, for she always dropped asleep at the first hint of
dawn in the east. But her merriment was of short duration. When the moon
was at the full, she was in glorious spirits, and as beautiful as it was
possible for a child of her age to be. But as the moon waned, she faded,
until at last she was wan and withered like the poorest, sickliest child
you might come upon in the streets of a great city in the arms of a
homeless mother. Then the night was quiet as the day, for the little
creature lay in her gorgeous cradle night and day with hardly a motion,
and indeed at last without even a moan, like one dead. At first they
often thought she was dead, but at last they got used to it, and only
consulted the almanac to find the moment when she would begin to revive,
which, of course, was with the first appearance of the silver thread of
the crescent moon. Then she would move her lips, and they would give her
a little nourishment; and she would grow better and better and better,
until for a few days she was splendidly well. When well, she was always
merriest out in the moonlight; but even when near her worst, she seemed
better when, in warm summer nights, they carried her cradle out into
the light of the waning moon. Then in her sleep she would smile the
faintest, most pitiful smile.

For a long time very few people ever saw her awake. As she grew older
she became such a favourite, however, that about the palace there were
always some who would contrive to keep awake at night, in order to be
near her. But she soon began to take every chance of getting away from
her nurses and enjoying her moonlight alone. And thus things went on
until she was nearly seventeen years of age. Her father and mother had
by that time got so used to the odd state of things that they had ceased
to wonder at them. All their arrangements had reference to the state
of the Princess Daylight, and it is amazing how things contrive to
accommodate themselves. But how any prince was ever to find and deliver
her, appeared inconceivable.

As she grew older she had grown more and more beautiful, with the
sunniest hair and the loveliest eyes of heavenly blue, brilliant and
profound as the sky of a June day. But so much more painful and sad was
the change as her bad time came on. The more beautiful she was in the
full moon, the more withered and worn did she become as the moon waned.
At the time at which my story has now arrived, she looked, when the moon
was small or gone, like an old woman exhausted with suffering. This was
the more painful that her appearance was unnatural; for her hair and
eyes did not change. Her wan face was both drawn and wrinkled, and had
an eager hungry look. Her skinny hands moved as if wishing, but unable,
to lay hold of something. Her shoulders were bent forward, her chest
went in, and she stooped as if she were eighty years old. At last she
had to be put to bed, and there await the flow of the tide of life. But
she grew to dislike being seen, still more being touched by any hands,
during this season. One lovely summer evening, when the moon lay all but
gone upon the verge of the horizon, she vanished from her attendants,
and it was only after searching for her a long time in great terror,
that they found her fast asleep in the forest, at the foot of a silver
birch, and carried her home.

A little way from the palace there was a great open glade, covered with
the greenest and softest grass. This was her favourite haunt; for here
the full moon shone free and glorious, while through a vista in the
trees she could generally see more or less of the dying moon as it
crossed the opening. Here she had a little rustic house built for her,
and here she mostly resided. None of the court might go there without
leave, and her own attendants had learned by this time not to be
officious in waiting upon her, so that she was very much at liberty.
Whether the good fairies had anything to do with it or not I cannot
tell, but at last she got into the way of retreating further into the
wood every night as the moon waned, so that sometimes they had great
trouble in finding her; but as she was always very angry if she
discovered they were watching her, they scarcely dared to do so. At
length one night they thought they had lost her altogether. It was
morning before they found her. Feeble as she was, she had wandered into
a thicket a long way from the glade, and there she lay--fast asleep, of
course.

Although the fame of her beauty and sweetness had gone abroad, yet as
everybody knew she was under a bad spell, no king in the neighbourhood
had any desire to have her for a daughter-in-law. There were serious
objections to such a relation.

About this time in a neighbouring kingdom, in consequence of the
wickedness of the nobles, an insurrection took place upon the death of
the old king, the greater part of the nobility was massacred, and
the young prince was compelled to flee for his life, disguised like a
peasant. For some time, until he got out of the country, he suffered
much from hunger and fatigue; but when he got into that ruled by the
princess's father, and had no longer any fear of being recognised, he
fared better, for the people were kind. He did not abandon his disguise,
however. One tolerable reason was that he had no other clothes to put
on, and another that he had very little money, and did not know where to
get any more. There was no good in telling everybody he met that he
was a prince, for he felt that a prince ought to be able to get on like
other people, else his rank only made a fool of him. He had read of
princes setting out upon adventure; and here he was out in similar case,
only without having had a choice in the matter. He would go on, and see
what would come of it.

For a day or two he had been walking through the palace-wood, and had
had next to nothing to eat, when he came upon the strangest little
house, inhabited by a very nice, tidy, motherly old woman. This was one
of the good fairies. The moment she saw him she knew quite well who
he was and what was going to come of it; but she was not at liberty to
interfere with the orderly march of events. She received him with the
kindness she would have shown to any other traveller, and gave him bread
and milk, which he thought the most delicious food he had ever tasted,
wondering that they did not have it for dinner at the palace sometimes.
The old woman pressed him to stay all night. When he awoke he was amazed
to find how well and strong he felt. She would not take any of the money
he offered, but begged him, if he found occasion of continuing in the
