CHAPTER TWENTY.

A GREAT KABARY IS HELD, FOLLOWED BY DREADFUL MARTYRDOMS.

No rank or age was exempt from attendance at the great assembly.
Soldiers were sent about the city and suburbs to drive the people
towards the place of assembly near the palace, and the living stream
continued to pour onwards until many thousand souls were gathered
together at Imahamasina.

Here a body of troops fifteen thousand strong was posted, and in the
earlier part of the day the cannon along the heights of the city
thundered out a salute to inspire the people with awe and respect for
the royal authority.  The highest civil and military officers were there
in their varied and gay trappings, but Ranavalona herself did not appear
in person.  Her message was conveyed to the people by one of the chief
officers of state.  It was interspersed here and there with the various
titles of the Queen, and was to the following effect:--

"I announce to you, oh ye people!  I am not a sovereign that deceives.
I therefore tell to you what I purpose to do, and how I shall govern
you.  Who, then, is that man who would change the customs of our
ancestors and the twelve sovereigns in this country?  To whom has the
kingdom been left by inheritance, by Impoin, Imerina, and Radama, except
to me?  If any, then, would change the customs of our ancestors, I abhor
that, saith Rabodon-Andrian-Impoin-Imerina."

After a good deal more to much the same effect, the message went on to
say:--

"As to baptisms, societies, places of worship distinct from schools, and
the observance of the Sabbath, how many rulers are there in the land?
Is it not I alone that rule?  These things are not to be done; they are
unlawful in my country, saith Ranavalo-manjaka, for they are not the
customs of our ancestors; and I do not change their customs, excepting
as to things alone that improve my country.  And then, in your worship,
you say `Believe!'  `Follow the Christian customs!' and thus you change
the customs of the ancestors, for you do not invoke all that is sacred
in heaven and earth, and all that is sacred in the twelve sovereigns and
the idols.  And is not this changing the customs of the ancestors?  I
detest that; and I tell you plainly that such things shall not be done
in my country, saith Ranavalo-manjaka.

"Now I decree that all Bibles and books of the new religion shall be
delivered up to be destroyed, that all who are guilty shall come in
classes, according to the nature of their offences, and accuse
themselves of having been baptized, of being members of the church, of
having taught slaves to read--all shall come to the officers and
confess; but those who conceal their offence and are accused by others
shall be subjected to the ordeal of the tangena, and those who resist my
commands shall die, saith Ranavalo-manjaka."

This message was no idle threat.  The people were well aware of that,
and the city was filled with weeping and consternation.

It was while things were in this state that Mamba arrived at
Antananarivo with his precious New Testament and Psalms in the folds of
his lamba.  Although well aware of what had taken place, he recklessly
visited his friends in the city.  From them he learned more particulars,
and saw, when too late, that it would be impossible for him now to pass
out of the gates with the Testament on his person, as the guards had
been cautioned to search every one whom they had the slightest reason to
suspect.

Hearing of the sudden exaltation of his English friends, he formed the
wise resolution to place his treasure in their hands.

Boldness is often successful where timidity would fail.  Without
hesitation, or even consultation with his friends, Mamba went straight
to the palace and demanded permission to visit the Maker of Medicine.
He was allowed to pass and conducted by an official to the quarters of
Mark Breezy, who was seated with Hockins and Ebony at the time.

Great was their surprise at seeing their friend.

"Why, Mamba!  I thought you had gone to Tamatave?" said Mark, shaking
hands heartily with him.

"Yis--yis--I hoed," said Mamba, and then endeavoured to tell something
of his doings in English; but his knowledge of that language was so very
imperfect that they could make nothing of it.  They understood him,
however, when he cautiously and lovingly drew the Testament from its
hiding-place and gave it into Mark's hands.

"What am I to do with it, my poor friend?" said Mark.  "I know that you
have no chance of retaining it, after the decree that has just been
passed."

"Keep 'im--keep--for _me_," said Mamba, anxiously.

"I will do so, if I can, but it may not be possible," answered Mark.

"Yis, keep--safe.  Got 'im for me mudder."

"You're a brick," cried Ebony, enthusiastically grasping the man's hand,
for he had a great love for his own mother, and experienced a gush of
sympathy.

At that moment there was a loud knocking at the door, and Mark had
barely time to slip the Testament into his coat pocket when
Hater-of-lies entered with his silver spear and attendants.  Seizing
hold of poor Mamba, without uttering a word they led him away.

Hockins instantly followed, and Ebony was about to do the same when Mark
laid his hand on his shoulder and checked him.

"What would you do, Ebony?"

"Look arter 'Ockins, massa."

"Hockins is well able to look after himself.  No doubt he has gone to
see where they take Mamba to.  One pair of eyes is enough for that.
Your company would only trouble him."

A few minutes later the seaman returned with the information that the
unfortunate man had been cast into the prison, from which they had been
so recently released.

At this time the Christians in the island possessed numerous entire
copies of the Scriptures, besides a large number of Testaments and
Psalms, and books of a religious character, which, having been secreted,
had escaped the destruction of previous persecutions.  Some of these
were now given up and destroyed.  Many of the more timid among the
natives came forward, as commanded, and accused themselves, thus
escaping punishment; but there were others who would neither give up
their Bibles nor accuse themselves.  Some of these were accused by their
slaves, others by their so-called friends and kindred--in some cases
falsely.

Next day the Prime Minister came to the Queen and reported that one
lady, named Rasalama, who had not accused herself, had been accused by
some of her slaves of attending religious meetings.

"Is it possible," exclaimed the Queen, "that there is one so daring as
to defy me?  Go, let her be put to death at once!"

The intercession of friends of the accused produced no effect on the
Queen, and even the pleading of Prince Rakota failed, in this instance,
to do more than delay the execution for a few days.

Meanwhile Rasalama was cast into prison and loaded with chains.

"Is it not strange," she said to her jailors, "that I should be put in
chains, and some of my friends should be sent to perpetual slavery and
some killed, though we have done no evil?  We have neither excited
rebellion, nor stolen the property of any, nor spoken ill of any--yet we
are treated thus, and our property is confiscated.  It will be wise if
the persecutors think what they do, lest they bring on themselves the
wrath of God.  But I do not fear.  When Hater-of-lies came to my house I
rejoiced that I was counted worthy to suffer affliction for believing in
Jesus."

When this speech was reported to the judges, Rasalama was ordered to be
put into heavier irons and severely beaten.  This cruel order was
carried out; and after her tender limbs had been additionally weighted,
her delicate skin was lacerated with terrible stripes.  Yet her
fortitude never forsook her.  Nay more--through the grace bestowed on
her she actually sang hymns in the midst of her torment!  Sometimes,
indeed, her physical strength failed for a brief space.  At other times
the song of triumph blended with a wail of agony, but she always
recovered to renew the hymn of praise.

Her tormentors were confounded.  This was something quite beyond their
understanding, and their only solution of the mystery was that she must
be under the influence of some powerful charm.  Others there were,
however, who listened to her triumphant songs, and beheld her calm
steadfast countenance with widely different thoughts and feelings.

But the sufferings of this poor creature had not yet terminated.  The
rage of her persecutors was not yet appeased.  Next day the ordinary
chains she wore were exchanged for others, consisting of rings and bars
fastened around her wrists, knees, ankles, and neck, and these, when
drawn together, forced her whole body into a position that caused
intense agony--something like that which we have described as having
been seen by Mark and his comrades in the same prison-house.  In this
posture it was impossible to use the voice in song, but, doubtless, she
was not even then prevented from making melody in her heart to the Lord,
for whose name she suffered so much.  All night long was this terrific
trial endured, but with the dawn of day came relief, for then the chains
were relaxed; and so great was the change that poor Rasalama looked
forward to the fate which she knew awaited her with feelings of joy.

That fate was not long delayed.  Soon they led her out of the prison,
and took the road which conducted towards the southern extremity of the
hill, on which the city stood, where was the tremendous precipice down
which many a criminal and many a Christian martyr had already in
Ranavalona's evil reign been hurled out of Time into Eternity.  Yet this
was not the gate through which Rasalama was to pass into Paradise.  _See
Note 1_.

As she walked along, the poor martyr began again to sing a favourite
hymn.  When passing the place of worship, at that time closed, she
exclaimed, "There have I heard the words of the Saviour."  Hundreds of
people accompanied her.  Some even ventured to whisper words of comfort
to her as she went along, although by doing so they imperilled their own
lives, and one young man, utterly regardless of consequences, walked
boldly by her side, speaking to her of the Saviour, till the place of
execution was reached.

To this spot Mark Breezy and his companions in exile had hastened, for
the Secretary had told them that some of the Christians were about to be
executed, and a fearful suspicion that their friend Mamba might be among
the number impelled them to hasten to the spot with some half-defined
intention of interfering in his behalf.  For they had gradually, and
imperceptibly to themselves, acquired a great liking for the young
native, whose earnest, straightforward, yet playful spirit, together
with his great kindness to his mother, had deeply impressed them during
the brief time they had sojourned together in the forest.

"Will we fight for 'im, massa?" asked Ebony, with anxious looks, as they
ran to the place of execution, which was not far-off.

"That would be useless," answered Mark.  "If we were thirty Samsons
instead of three ordinary men, we could not overcome the Queen's army."

"I've half a mind to try," said Hockins, with something unusually fierce
in his expression.  "Many a man has run a-muck before now.  I've got to
die once at any rate!"

"And what good would that do to Mamba?" asked Mark.  "No, I will try
another plan.  I have fortunately done service to the Queen in saving
the life of her son.  If Mamba is to be martyred, I will throw my arms
round him and ask the Queen in return to spare the life of my friend."

They had by that time mingled with the dense crowd that stood on the
brow of the precipice of Ambohipotsy to witness the execution.  Pushing
to the front with breathless anxiety, they were just in time to see
Rasalama led forward by two men armed with spears.  In front of them was
a shallow ditch, and a little further on the brow of the precipice, from
which was seen a magnificent prospect of the surrounding country.  But
no prospect, however sublime, could have attracted the eyes of the three
friends just then, for in front of them stood two crosses supporting the
bodies of two Christians who had been crucified thereon the day before.
Even these, however, lost their horrible power of fascination, when they
observed the cheerful holy expression of Rasalama's countenance as she
was led to the edge of the ditch which was to be her grave.  The bottom
of that grave was already strewn with the bloody remains and the
bleaching bones of other martyrs who had preceded her.

The crowd, who had followed the procession with imprecations against the
Christians, now ceased to shout.

"Will you allow me a short time to pray?" asked Rasalama of the
executioners.

Her request being granted, she kneeled on the rocky ground, clasped her
hands, and raised to Heaven a look of calm trustfulness, as she held
communion for the last time on earth with her Redeemer.

"Where is the God she prays to that he does not save her now?" whispered
some.  Others held their peace, but laid these things to heart.

While the poor creature was thus engaged, the two executioners, without
warning, thrust their spears deep into her body.  It was the custom of
these men to plunge the spears into the loins of their victims on each
side of the back-bone in such a position that they did not produce
immediate death, but allowed the martyrs to tumble into the ditch and
writhe there in agony for some time with the spears still sticking in
them.  Happily, in the case of Rasalama, the thrusts were--either
intentionally or accidentally--more effective than usual.  After a very
brief struggle, her happy soul was set free to be "for ever with the
Lord."

In that ditch her poor mangled body was left to be devoured by the wild
dogs that frequent all places in Madagascar where criminals suffer.
_See Note 2_.

"Oh, God!" exclaimed Mark, unable to repress a groan.  "Let us quit this
accursed spot."

"Stay, sir, stay," whispered the sailor at his elbow, "you forget Mamba.
More are comin'."

More martyrs were indeed coming, as the singing of hymns proved.

Close on the heels of Rasalama, a band of nine other Christians were
carried to the place of execution, each with his feet and hands tied
together and slung on a pole, the ends of which were borne by two men.
Straw had been stuffed into their mouths to prevent praying or singing,
but several of them, managing to get rid of the straw, burst into the
triumphal songs which had attracted the attention of our seaman.

Arrived at the ditch, the victims were asked if they would give up
praying to Jesus.  In every case the answer was a decided "No!"  They
were then thrust into the ditch, forced down on their knees, and made to
bend forward.  While this was being done, the shuddering friends of
Mamba perceived that he was not among the martyrs.  One by one each
unfortunate was stabbed in the loins, close on either side of the
back-bone, but not one was terrified into recanting, although by so
doing he might have been restored at once to life and liberty.  The
truth of that word, "As thy days thy strength shall be," was clearly and
wonderfully proved in the case of these sufferers.  After all had
fallen, their heads were cut off and placed in a row on the edge of the
ditch.  Five of the nine belonged to one family.

One man who had been reserved to the last, for some reason or other that
was net explained, was led to the brow of the precipice, and the same
question was put to him that had been put to his fellow-martyrs.  From
the spot on which he stood he could look down into the awful gulf, a
sheer descent of sixty feet first to a place where a ledge projected,
and then, a further descent of still greater depth to the bottom, where
the ground was covered with rocks and debris from the cliffs.

Unfaltering in courage and allegiance to the Master, his "No!" was
distinct and decisive.  Next moment he was hurled over.  With terrific
force he struck the ledge, and it must have been a lifeless body that
was finally shattered on the plain below.

As the people immediately began to disperse after this, Mark and his
friends hastened sway from the place with an overwhelming sense of
horror upon them, but thankful as well as relieved to know that their
friend Mamba was not yet among the martyrs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Rasalama was in truth the first martyr of Madagascar.  She was
slain in the year 1837.  We have only transposed the date.  Her story is
given, without variation worthy of mention, from authentic records.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 2.  Close to the spot where the heroic Rasalama knelt to pray and
die, a large Memorial Church now stands, the spire of which forms a
conspicuous object in every distant view of the city.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

MAMBA, SUBJECTED TO THE ORDEAL OF THE "TANGENA," ESCAPES, BUT AFTERWARDS
ACCUSES HIMSELF AND IS CONDEMNED.

If not yet among the martyrs, it was soon evident that Mamba stood a
good chance of being among them before long--and that the mother of whom
he was so fond, and for the gratification of whose spiritual longings he
had risked so much, would probably never receive the Gospel of Peace
from his hands.

While in prison under accusation of being a believer in the religion of
the white man, he had debated much with himself as to what was his duty
in the present distress.  Was he bound to confess Christ and take the
consequence--which, of course, he knew to be death?  To deny Him was out
of the question.  He at once dismissed that idea as untenable.  But was
there no other mode of escape?  Did not the Word itself advise that when
persecuted in one city he was not only entitled but advised to escape to
another?  "But how am I to escape?  Oh God, guide me!" he cried, lifting
his clasped hands as he converted the question into a prayer.

The rattling of his chains seemed to bid him dismiss all hope, but he
did not lose faith.  He continued to pray and meditate.  And the longer
he meditated the more anxiously did he long to be back in the cave
beside his Reni--his humble-minded loving little mother--and beside--
yes, he made no attempt to conceal it from himself--beside the beautiful
queen-like sister of Laihova.  The more he meditated, however, the more
hopeless did his case seem to become.  To lie he would not--not even to
gain Ramatoa.  To die he would _rather_ not!  To escape he could not!

At last he hit upon an idea.  He would refuse to answer.  He would take
refuge in absolute silence!

As might have been expected, this course of policy did not avail him
much.  When it was found that he would not say whether he was a
Christian or not, it was resolved that the matter should be settled by
an appeal to the ordeal of the Tangena.

This used to be a common and much-practised ordeal in Madagascar in days
but recently past.  It consisted in the administration of poison.  Other
ordeals existed in the island--such as passing a red-hot iron over the
tongue, or plunging the naked arm into a large pot of boiling water and
picking out a pebble thrown therein for the purpose of trial.  Alas for
both innocent and guilty subjected to either trial!  But the ordeal most
universally in favour was that of the Tangena.

The Tangena is in fact a poisonous nut about the size of a chestnut
