        "Keep still!" said the thrush as she nestled her young,
          In a nest by the road; in a nest by the road.
        "For the tyrants are near, and with them appear
          What bodes us no good; what bodes us no good."

        The brave captain heard it, and thought of his home
          In a cot by the brook; in a cot by the brook;
        With mother and sister and memories dear,
          He so gayly forsook; he so gayly forsook.

        Cooling shades of the night were coming apace,
          The tattoo had beat; the tattoo had beat.
        The noble one sprang from his dark lurking-place,
          To make his retreat; to make his retreat.

        He warily trod on the dry rustling leaves,
          As he passed through the wood; as he passed through the wood;
        And silently gained his rude launch on the shore,
          As she played with the flood; as she played with the flood.

        The guards of the camp, on that dark, dreary night,
          Had a murderous will; had a murderous will.
        They took him and bore him afar from the shore,
          To a hut on the hill; to a hut on the hill.

        No mother was there, nor a friend who could cheer,
          In that little stone cell; in that little stone cell.
        But he trusted in love, from his Father above.
          In his heart, all was well; in his heart, all was well.

        An ominous owl, with his solemn bass voice,
          Sat moaning hard by; sat moaning hard by;
        "The tyrant's proud minions most gladly rejoice,
          For he must soon die; for he must soon die."

        The brave fellow told them, no thing he restrained,--
          The cruel general! the cruel general!--
        His errand from camp, of the ends to be gained,
          And said that was all; and said that was all.

        They took him and bound him and bore him away,
          Down the hill's grassy side; down the hill's grassy side.
        'Twas there the base hirelings, in royal array,
          His cause did deride; his cause did deride.

        Five minutes were given, short moments, no more,
          For him to repent; for him to repent.
        He prayed for his mother, he asked not another,
          To Heaven he went; to Heaven he went.

        The faith of a martyr the tragedy showed,
          As he trod the last stage; as he trod the last stage.
        And Britons will shudder at gallant Hale's blood,
          As his words do presage; as his words do presage:

        "Thou pale King of terrors, thou life's gloomy foe,
          Go frighten the slave; go frighten the slave;
        Tell tyrants, to you their allegiance they owe.
          No fears for the brave; no fears for the brave."



369

        That men of great courage are certain to
        recognize and pay tribute to courage in others,
        even if those others are their enemies, is the
        theme of "The Red Thread of Honor." Sir Francis
        Hastings Doyle (1810-1888) wrote two other
        stirring poems of action, "The Loss of the
        Birkenhead" and "The Private of the Buffs."


THE RED THREAD OF HONOR

FRANCIS HASTINGS DOYLE

        Eleven men of England
          A breastwork charged in vain;
        Eleven men of England
          Lie stripp'd, and gash'd, and slain.
        Slain; but of foes that guarded
          Their rock-built fortress well,
        Some twenty had been mastered,
          When the last soldier fell.

        The robber-chief mused deeply,
          Above those daring dead;
        "Bring here," at length he shouted,
          "Bring quick, the battle thread.
        Let Eblis blast forever
          Their souls, if Allah will:
        But we must keep unbroken
          The old rules of the Hill.

        "Before the Ghiznee tiger
          Leapt forth to burn and slay;
        Before the holy Prophet
          Taught our grim tribes to pray;
        Before Secunder's lances
          Pierced through each Indian glen;
        The mountain laws of honor
          Were framed for fearless men.

        "Still, when a chief dies bravely,
          We bind with green one wrist--
        Green for the brave, for heroes
          One crimson thread we twist.
        Say ye, oh gallant Hillmen,
          For these, whose life has fled,
        Which is the fitting color,
          The green one, or the red?"

        "Our brethren, laid in honor'd graves, may wear
          Their green reward," each noble savage said;
        "To these, whom hawks and hungry wolves shall tear,
          Who dares deny the red?"

        Thus conquering hate, and steadfast to the right,
          Fresh from the heart that haughty verdict came;
        Beneath a waning moon, each spectral height
          Rolled back its loud acclaim.

        Once more the chief gazed keenly
          Down on those daring dead;
        From his good sword their heart's blood
          Crept to that crimson thread.
        Once more he cried, "The judgment,
          Good friends, is wise and true,
        But though the red be given,
          Have we not more to do?

        "These were not stirred by anger,
          Nor yet by lust made bold;
        Renown they thought above them,
          Nor did they look for gold.
        To them their leader's signal
          Was as the voice of God:
        Unmoved, and uncomplaining,
          The path it showed they trod.

        "As, without sound or struggle,
          The stars unhurrying march,
        Where Allah's finger guides them,
          Through yonder purple arch,
        These Franks, sublimely silent,
          Without a quickened breath,
        Went, in the strength of duty,
          Straight to their goal of death.

        "If I were now to ask you,
          To name our bravest man,
        Ye all at once would answer,
          They call'd him Mehrab Khan.
        He sleeps among his fathers,
          Dear to our native land,
        With the bright mark he bled for
          Firm round his faithful hand.

        "The songs they sing of Roostum
          Fill all the past with light;
        If truth be in their music,
          He was a noble knight.
        But were those heroes living,
          And strong for battle still,
        Would Mehrab Khan or Roostum
          Have climbed, like these, the Hill?"

        And they replied, "Though Mehrab Khan was brave,
          As chief, he chose himself what risks to run;
        Prince Roostum lied, his forfeit life to save,
          Which these had never done."

        "Enough!" he shouted fiercely;
          "Doomed though they be to hell,
        Bind fast the crimson trophy
          Round BOTH wrists--bind it well.
        Who knows but that great Allah
          May grudge such matchless men,
        With none so decked in heaven,
          To the fiend's flaming den?"

        Then all those gallant robbers
          Shouted a stern "Amen!"
        They raised the slaughter'd sergeant,
          They raised his mangled ten.
        And when we found their bodies
          Left bleaching in the wind,
        Around BOTH wrists in glory
          That crimson thread was twined.



370

        In the year 1897 a great diamond jubilee was
        held in England in honor of the completion of
        sixty years of rule by Queen Victoria. Many
        poems were written for the occasion, most of
        which praised the greatness of Britain, the
        extent of her dominion, the strength of her
        army and navy, and the abundance of her wealth.
        The "Recessional" was written for the occasion
        by Rudyard Kipling (1865--). It is in the form
        of a prayer, but its purpose was to tell the
        British that they were forgetting the "God of
        our fathers" and putting their trust in wealth
        and navies and the "reeking tube and iron
        shard" of the cannon. The poem rang through
        England like a bugle call and stirred the
        British people more deeply than any other poem
        of recent times.


RECESSIONAL

RUDYARD KIPLING

        God of our fathers, known of old--
          Lord of our far flung battle-line--
        Beneath whose awful hand we hold
          Dominion over palm and pine--
        Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
        Lest we forget--lest we forget!

        The tumult and the shouting dies--
          The captains and the kings depart--
        Still stands Thine ancient Sacrifice,
          A humble and a contrite heart.
        Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
        Lest we forget--lest we forget!

        Far-called our navies sink away--
          On dune and headland sinks the fire
        Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
          Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
        Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
        Lest we forget--lest we forget!

        If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
          Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe--
        Such boasting as the Gentiles use
          Or lesser breeds without the law--
        Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
        Lest we forget--lest we forget!

        For heathen heart that puts her trust
          In reeking tube and iron shard--
        All valiant dust that builds on dust,
          And guarding calls not Thee to guard--
        For frantic boast and foolish word,
        Thy Mercy on Thy People, Lord!



371

        William Ernest Henley (1849-1903) was an
        English critic and journalist of great force
        and a poet whose verse is full of manliness and
        tenderness. His life was a constant and
        courageous struggle against disease. The spirit
        in which he faced conditions that would have
        conquered a weaker man breathes through the
        famous poem quoted below. Such a spirit is not
        confined to any particular stage of maturity as
        represented by years, and many young people
        will find themselves buoyed up in the face of
        difficulties by coming into touch with the
        unconquered and unconquerable voice in this
        poem. The last two lines in particular are
        often quoted.


INVICTUS

WILLIAM E. HENLEY

        Out of the night that covers me,
          Black as the pit from pole to pole,
        I thank whatever gods may be
          For my unconquerable soul.

        In the fell clutch of circumstance
          I have not winced nor cried aloud:
        Under the bludgeonings of chance
          My head is bloody, but unbowed.

        Beyond this place of wrath and tears
          Looms but the horror of the shade,
        And yet the menace of the years
          Finds and shall find me unafraid.

        It matters not how strait the gate,
          How charged with punishments the scroll,
        I am the master of my fate;
          I am the captain of my soul.



372

        James Russell Lowell (1819-1891) is a poet of
        such high idealisms that many of his poems seem
        to form the natural heritage of youth. Among
        such are "The Vision of Sir Launfal," "The
        Present Crisis," "The Fatherland," and
        "Aladdin." "The Falcon" is not so well known as
        any of these, but its fine image for the seeker
        after truth should appeal to most children of
        upper grades. "The Shepherd of King Admetus" is
        a very attractive poetizing of an old myth (see
        No. 261) and lets us see something of how the
        public looks upon its poets and other artistic
        folk.


THE FALCON

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

        I know a falcon swift and peerless
          As e'er was cradled in the pine;
        No bird had ever eye so fearless,
          Or wing so strong as this of mine.

        The winds not better love to pilot
          A cloud with molten gold o'errun,
        Than him, a little burning islet,
          A star above the coming sun.

        For with a lark's heart he doth tower,
          By a glorious upward instinct drawn;
        No bee nestles deeper in the flower
          Than he in the bursting rose of dawn.

        No harmless dove, no bird that singeth,
          Shudders to see him overhead;
        The rush of his fierce swooping bringeth
          To innocent hearts no thrill of dread.

        Let fraud and wrong and baseness shiver,
          For still between them and the sky
        The falcon Truth hangs poised forever
          And marks them with his vengeful eye.



373


THE SHEPHERD OF KING ADMETUS

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

        There came a youth upon the earth,
          Some thousand years ago,
        Whose slender hands were nothing worth,
        Whether to plough, or reap, or sow.

        Upon an empty tortoise-shell
          He stretched some chords, and drew
        Music that made men's bosoms swell
        Fearless, or brimmed their eyes with dew.

        Then King Admetus, one who had
          Pure taste by right divine,
        Decreed his singing not too bad
        To hear between the cups of wine:

        And so, well pleased with being soothed
          Into a sweet half-sleep,
        Three times his kingly beard he smoothed,
        And made him viceroy o'er his sheep.

        His words were simple words enough,
          And yet he used them so,
        That what in other mouths was rough
        In his seemed musical and low.

        Men called him but a shiftless youth,
          In whom no good they saw;
        And yet, unwittingly, in truth,
        They made his careless words their law.

        They knew not how he learned at all,
          For idly, hour by hour,
        He sat and watched the dead leaves fall,
        Or mused upon a common flower.

        It seemed the loveliness of things
          Did teach him all their use,
        For, in mere weeds, and stones, and springs,
        He found a healing power profuse.

        Men granted that his speech was wise,
          But, when a glance they caught
        Of his slim grace and woman's eyes,
        They laughed, and called him good-for-naught.

        Yet after he was dead and gone,
          And e'en his memory dim,
        Earth seemed more sweet to live upon,
        More full of love, because of him.

        And day by day more holy grew
          Each spot where he had trod,
        Till after-poets only knew
        Their first-born brother as a god.



374

        Sir William S. Gilbert (1837-1911), an English
        dramatist, is known to us as the librettist of
        the popular Gilbert and Sullivan operas, _The
        Mikado_, _Pinafore_, etc. In his earlier days
        he wrote a book of humorous poetry called _The
        Bab Ballads_. Many of these still please
        readers who like a little nonsense now and then
        of a supremely ridiculous type. "The Yarn of
        the Nancy Bell" is a splendid take-off on
        "travelers' tales," and is not likely to
        deceive anyone. However, Gilbert said that when
        he sent the poem to _Punch_, the editor made
        objection to its extremely cannibalistic
        nature!


THE YARN OF THE NANCY BELL

WILLIAM S. GILBERT

        'Twas on the shores that round our coast
          From Deal to Ramsgate span,
        That I found alone on a piece of stone
          An elderly naval man.

        His hair was weedy, his beard was long,
          And weedy and long was he,
        And I heard this wight on the shore recite,
          In a singular minor key:

        "Oh, I am a cook and a captain bold,
          And the mate of the Nancy brig,
        And a bo'sun tight, and a midshipmite,
          And the crew of the captain's gig."

        And he shook his fists and he tore his hair,
          Till I really felt afraid,
        For I couldn't help thinking the man had been drinking,
          And so I simply said:

        "Oh, elderly man, it's little I know
          Of the duties of men of the sea,
        And I'll eat my hand if I understand
          However you can be

        "At once a cook, and a captain bold,
          And the mate of the Nancy brig,
        And a bo'sun tight, and a midshipmite,
          And the crew of the captain's gig."

        Then he gave a hitch to his trousers, which
          Is a trick all seamen larn,
        And having got rid of a thumping quid,
          He spun this painful yarn:

        "'Twas in the good ship Nancy Bell
          That we sailed to the Indian Sea,
        And there on a reef we come to grief,
          Which has often occurred to me.

        "And pretty nigh all the crew was drowned
          (There was seventy-seven o' soul),
        And only ten of the Nancy's men
          Said 'Here!' to the muster-roll.

        "There was me and the cook and the captain bold,
          And the mate of the Nancy brig,
        And the bo'sun tight, and a midshipmite,
          And the crew of the captain's gig.

        "For a month we'd neither wittles nor drink,
          Till a-hungry we did feel,
        So we drawed a lot, and accordin' shot
          The captain for our meal.

        "The next lot fell to the Nancy's mate,
          And a delicate dish he made;
        Then our appetite with the midshipmite
          We seven survivors stayed.

        "And then we murdered the bo'sun tight,
          And he much resembled pig;
        Then we wittled free, did the cook and me,
          On the crew of the captain's gig.

        "Then only the cook and me was left,
          And the delicate question, 'Which
        Of us two goes to the kettle?' arose,
          And we argued it out as sich.

        "For I loved that cook as a brother, I did,
          And the cook he worshipped me;
        But we'd both be blowed if we'd either be stowed
          In the other chap's hold, you see.

        "'I'll be eat if you dines off me,' says Tom;
          'Yes, that,' says I, 'you'll be,'--
        'I'm boiled if I die, my friend,' quoth I;
          And 'Exactly so,' quoth he.

        "Says he, 'Dear James, to murder me
          Were a foolish thing to do;
        For don't you see that you can't cook me,
          While I can--and will--cook _you_!'

        "So he boils the water, and takes the salt
          And the pepper in portions true
        (Which he never forgot), and some chopped shalot,
          And some sage and parsley, too.

        "'Come here,' says he, with a proper pride,
          Which his smiling features tell,
        ''T will soothing be if I let you see
          How extremely nice you'll smell.'

        "And he stirred it round and round and round
          And he sniffed at the foaming froth;
        When I ups with his heels and smothers his squeals
          In the scum of the boiling broth.

        "And I eat that cook in a week or less,
          And--as I eating be
        The last of his chops, why, I almost drops,
          For a wessel in sight I see!

               *       *       *       *       *

        "'And I never larf, and never smile,
          And I never lark nor play,
        But sit and croak, and a single joke
          I have--which is to say:

        "'Oh, I am a cook and a captain bold,
          And the mate of the Nancy brig,
        And a bo'sun tight, and a midshipmite,
          And the crew of the captain's gig!'"



375

        John T. Trowbridge (1827-1916) is one of the
        important figures in modern literature for
        young folks. He wrote a popular series of books
        for them beginning with _Cudjo's Cave_, and
        many poems, the most famous of which are "The
        Vagabonds" and the one given below.
        Trowbridge's autobiography will interest
        children with its story of a literary life
        devoted to the problems of their entertainment.
        "Darius Green and His Flying Machine" first
        appeared in _Our Young Folks_ in 1867. It is to
        be read for its fun--fun of dialect, fun of
        character, and fun of incident. If it has any
        lesson, it must be that dreamers may come to
        grief unless they have some plain practical
        common sense to balance their enthusiasm!


DARIUS GREEN AND HIS FLYING MACHINE

JOHN TOWNSEND TROWBRIDGE

        If ever there lived a Yankee lad,
        Wise or otherwise, good or bad,
        Who, seeing the birds fly, didn't jump
        With flapping arms from stake or stump,
        Or, spreading the tail of his coat for a sail,
        Take a soaring leap from post or rail,
        And wonder why he couldn't fly,
        And flap and flutter and wish and try,--
        If ever you knew a country dunce
        Who didn't try that as often as once,
        All I can say is, that's a sign
        He never would do for a hero of mine.

        An aspiring genius was D. Green;
        The son of a farmer,--age fourteen;
        His body was long and lank and lean,--
        Just right for flying, as will be seen;
        He had two eyes as bright as a bean,
        And a freckled nose that grew between,
        A little awry;--for I must mention
        That he had riveted his attention
        Upon his wonderful invention,
        Twisting his tongue as he twisted the strings,
        And working his face as he worked the wings,
        And with every turn of gimlet and screw
        Turning and screwing his mouth round too,
        Till his nose seemed bent to catch the scent,
        Around some corner, of new-baked pies,
        And his wrinkled cheek and his squinting eyes
        Grew puckered into a queer grimace,
        That made him look very droll in the face,
          And also very wise.
        And wise he must have been, to do more
        Than ever a genius did before,
        Excepting Daedalus of yore
        And his son Icarus, who wore
        Upon their backs those wings of wax
        He had read of in the old almanacs.
        Darius was clearly of the opinion,
        That the air was also man's dominion,
        And that with paddle or fin or pinion,
        We soon or late should navigate
        The azure as now we sail the sea.
        The thing looks simple enough to me;
              And, if you doubt it,
        Hear how Darius reasoned about it:
        "The birds can fly, an' why can't I?
        Must we give in," says he with a grin,
        "'T the bluebird an' phoebe are smarter'n we be?
        Jest fold our hands, an' see the swaller
        An' blackbird an' catbird beat us holler?
        Does the leetle chatterin', sassy wren,
        No bigger'n my thumb, know more than men?
        Jest show me that! er prove 't bat
        Hez got more brains than's in my hat,
        An' I'll back down, an' not till then!"
        He argued further: "Ner I can't see
        What's the use o' wings to a bumble-bee,
        Fer to git a livin' with, more'n to me;--
        Ain't my business importanter'n his'n is?
        That Icarus was a silly cuss,--
        Him an' his daddy Daedalus;
        They might 'a' knowed wings made o' wax
        Wouldn't stan' sun-heat an' hard whacks:
        I'll make mine o' luther, er suthin' er other."

        And he said to himself, as he tinkered and planned:
        "But I ain't goin' to show my hand
        To nummies that never can understand
        The fust idee that's big an' grand.
        They'd 'a' laft an' made fun
        O' Creation itself afore it was done!"
        So he kept his secret from all the rest,
        Safely buttoned within his vest;
        And in the loft above the shed
        Himself he locks, with thimble and thread
        And wax and hammer and buckles and screws,
        And all such things as geniuses use;--
        Two bats for patterns, curious fellows!
        A charcoal-pot and a pair of bellows;
        An old hoop-skirt or two, as well as
        Some wire, and several old umbrellas;
        A carriage-cover, for tail and wings;
        A piece of harness; and straps and strings;
        And a big strong box, in which he locks
        These and a hundred other things.

        His grinning brothers, Reuben and Burke
        And Nathan and Jotham and Solomon, lurk
        Around the corner to see him work,--
        Sitting cross-legged, like a Turk,
        Drawing the waxed-end through with a jerk,
        And boring the holes with a comical quirk
        Of his wise old head, and a knowing smirk.
        But vainly they mounted each other's backs,
        And poked through knot-holes and pried through cracks;
        With wood from the pile and straw from the stacks
        He plugged the knot-holes and calked the cracks;
        And a bucket of water, which one would think
        He had brought up into the loft to drink
        When he chanced to be dry,
        Stood always nigh, for Darius was sly!
        And, whenever at work he happened to spy,
        At chink or crevice a blinking eye,
        He let a dipper of water fly:
        "Take that! an', ef ever ye git a peep,
        Guess ye'll ketch a weasel asleep!"
        And he sings as he locks his big strong box;
        "The weasel's head is small an' trim,
        An' he is leetle an' long an' slim,
        An' quick of motion an' nimble of limb,
        An', ef yeou'll be advised by me,
        Keep wide awake when ye're ketching him!"

               So day after day
        He stitched and tinkered and hammered away,
               Till at last 'twas done,--
        The greatest invention under the sun.
        "An' now," says Darius, "hooray fer some fun!"

        'Twas the Fourth of July, and the weather was dry,
        And not a cloud was on all the sky,
        Save a few light fleeces, which here and there,
              Half mist, half air,
        Like foam on the ocean went floating by,
        Just as lovely a morning as ever was seen
        For a nice little trip in a flying-machine.

        Thought cunning Darius, "Now I shan't go
        Along 'ith the fellers to see the show:
        I'll say I've got sich a terrible cough!
        An' then, when the folks have all gone off,
        I'll hev full swing fer to try the thing,
        An' practyse a little on the wing."

        "Ain't goin' to see the celebration?"
        Says brother Nate. "No; botheration!
        I've got sich a cold--a toothache--I--
        My gracious! feel's though I should fly!"

        Said Jotham, "Sho! guess ye better go."
              But Darius said, "No!
        Shouldn't wonder 'f yeou might see me, though,
        'Long 'bout noon, ef I git red
        O' this jumpin', thumpin' pain in my head."
        For all the while to himself he said,--
              "I tell ye what!
        I'll fly a few times around the lot,
        To see how 't seems; then soon's I've got
        The hang o' the thing, ez likely's not,
        I'll astonish the nation, an' all creation,
        By flying over the celebration!
        Over their heads I'll sail like an eagle;
        I'll balance myself on my wings like a sea-gull;
        I'll dance on the chimbleys; I'll stan' on the steeple;
        I'll flop up to winders an' scare the people!
        I'll light on the libbe'ty-pole, an' crow;
        An' I'll say to the gawpin' fools below,
        'What world's this here that I've come near?'
        Fer I'll make 'em b'lieve I'm a chap f'm the moon;
        An' I'll try a race 'ith their ol' balloon!"

              He crept from his bed;
        And, seeing the others were gone, he said,
        "I'm a-gittin' over the cold 'n my head."
              And away he sped,
        To open the wonderful box in the shed.

        His brothers had walked but a little way,
        When Jotham to Nathan chanced to say,
        "What on airth is he up to, hey?"
        "Don'o',--the's suthin' er other to pay,
        Er he wouldn't 'a' stayed to hum to-day."
        Says Burke, "His toothache's all'n his eye!
        He never'd miss a Fo'th-o'-July,
        Ef he hadn't got some machine to try."
        Then Sol, the little one, spoke: "By darn!
        Le's hurry back, an' hide'n the barn,
        An' pay him fer tellin' us that yarn!"

        "Agreed!" Through the orchard they creep back,
        Along by the fences, behind the stack,
        And one by one, through a hole in the wall,
        In under the dusty barn they crawl,
        Dressed in their Sunday garments all;
        And a very astonishing sight was that,
        When each in his cobwebbed coat and hat
        Came up through the floor like an ancient rat.
        And there they hid; and Reuben slid
        The fastenings back, and the door undid.
              "Keep dark," said he,
        "While I squint an' see what the' is to see."

        As knights of old put on their mail,--
        From head to foot in an iron suit,
        Iron jacket and iron boot,
        Iron breeches, and on the head
        No hat, but an iron pot instead,
        And under the chin the bail,--
        (I believe they call the thing a helm,--)
        And, thus accoutred, they took the field,
        Sallying forth to overwhelm
        The dragons and pagans that plagued the realm;
        So this modern knight prepared for flight,
        Put on his wings and strapped them tight--
        Jointed and jaunty, strong and light,--
        Buckled them fast to shoulder and hip,--
        Ten feet they measured from tip to tip!
        And a helm he had, but that he wore,
        Not on his head, like those of yore,
              But more like the helm of a ship.

        "Hush!" Reuben said, "he's up in the shed!
        He's opened the winder,--I see his head!
        He stretches it out, an' pokes it about
        Lookin' to see 'f the coast is clear,
              An' nobody near;--
        Guess he don'o' who's hid in here!
        He's riggin' a spring-board over the sill!
        Stop laffin', Solomon! Burke, keep still!
        He's climbin' out now--Of all the things!
        What's he got on? I vum, it's wings!
        An' that t'other thing? I vum, it's a tail!
        And there he sets like a hawk on a rail!
        Steppin' careful, he travels the length
        Of his spring-board, and teeters to try its strength,
        Now he stretches his wings, like a monstrous bat;
        Peeks over his shoulder, this way an' that,
        Fer to see 'f the's anyone passin' by;
        But the's o'ny a ca'f an' a goslin' nigh.
        They turn up at him a wonderin' eye,
        To see--The dragon! he's goin' to fly!
        Away he goes! Jimminy! what a jump!
        Flop--flop--an' plump to the ground with a thump!
        Flutt'rin' an' flound'rin', all'n a lump!"

        As a demon is hurled by an angel's spear,
        Heels over head, to his proper sphere,--
        Heels over head, and head over heels,
        Dizzily down the abyss he wheels,--
        So fell Darius. Upon his crown,
        In the midst of the barnyard, he came down,
        In a wonderful whirl of tangled strings,
        Broken braces and broken springs,
        Broken tail and broken wings,
        Shooting stars, and various things,--
        Barnyard litter of straw and chaff,
        And much that wasn't so sweet by half.
        Away with a bellow flew the calf,
        And what was that? Did the gosling laugh?
        'Tis a merry roar from the old barn-door,
        And he hears the voice of Jotham crying;
        "Say, D'rius! how de yeou like flyin'?"

        Slowly, ruefully, where he lay,
        Darius just turned and looked that way,
        As he stanched his sorrowful nose with his cuff,
        "Wal, I like flyin' well enough,"
        He said, "but the' ain't sich a thunderin' sight
        O' fun in't when ye come to light."

        I just have room for the MORAL here:
        And this is the moral,--Stick to your sphere;
        Or, if you insist, as you have the right,
        On spreading your wings for a loftier flight,
        The moral is,--Take care how you light.



376

        The poem of "Beth Gelert" (Grave of Gelert) is
        really a verse version of an old folk story
        that has localized itself in many places over
        the world. In Wales they can show you where
        Gelert is buried, which illustrates how such a
        favorite story takes hold of the popular mind.
        The poem by William Robert Spencer (1769-1834)
        has so much of the spirit of the old ballads
        which it imitates that it was believed at first
        to be a genuine example of one.


BETH GELERT

WILLIAM ROBERT SPENCER

        The spearmen heard the bugle sound,
          And cheerly smiled the morn;
        And many a brach, and many a hound,
          Obeyed Llewellyn's horn.

        And still he blew a louder blast,
          And gave a lustier cheer,
        "Come, Gelert, come, wert never last
          Llewellyn's horn to hear.

        "Oh, where does faithful Gelert roam.
          The flow'r of all his race,
        So true, so brave,--a lamb at home,
          A lion in the chase?"

        'Twas only at Llewellyn's board
          The faithful Gelert fed;
        He watched, he served, he cheered his lord,
          And sentineled his bed.

        In sooth he was a peerless hound,
          The gift of royal John;
        But now no Gelert could be found,
          And all the chase rode on.

        And now, as o'er the rocks and dells
          The gallant chidings rise,
        All Snowdon's craggy chaos yells
          The many-mingled cries!

        That day Llewellyn little loved
          The chase of hart and hare;
        And scant and small the booty proved,
          For Gelert was not there.

        Unpleased Llewellyn homeward hied,
          When, near the portal seat,
        His truant Gelert he espied,
          Bounding his lord to greet.

        But, when he gained his castle door,
          Aghast the chieftain stood;
        The hound all o'er was smeared with gore;
          His lips, his fangs, ran blood.

        Llewellyn gazed with fierce surprise;
          Unused such looks to meet,
        His favorite checked his joyful guise,
          And crouched, and licked his feet.

        Onward, in haste, Llewellyn passed,
          And on went Gelert too;
        And still, where'er his eyes he cast,
          Fresh blood-gouts shocked his view.

        O'erturned his infant's bed he found,
          The blood-stained covert rent;
        And all around the walls and ground
          With recent blood besprent.

        He called his child,--no voice replied--
          He searched with terror wild;
        Blood, blood he found on every side,
          But nowhere found his child.

        "Hell-hound! my child's by thee devoured,"
          The frantic father cried;
        And to the hilt his vengeful sword
          He plunged in Gelert's side.

        His suppliant looks, as prone he fell,
          No pity could impart;
        But still his Gelert's dying yell
          Passed heavy o'er his heart.

        Aroused by Gelert's dying yell,
          Some slumberer wakened nigh:
        What words the parent's joy could tell,
          To hear his infant's cry!

        Concealed beneath a tumbled heap
          His hurried search had missed,
        All glowing from his rosy sleep,
          His cherub boy he kissed.

        Nor scathe had he, nor harm, nor dread,
          But, the same couch beneath,
        Lay a gaunt wolf, all torn and dead,
          Tremendous still in death.

        Ah! what was then Llewellyn's pain!
          For now the truth was clear;
        His gallant hound the wolf had slain
          To save Llewellyn's heir:

        Vain, vain was all Llewellyn's woe;
          "Best of thy kind, adieu!
        The frantic blow which laid thee low
          This heart shall ever rue."

        And now a gallant tomb they raise,
          With costly sculpture decked;
        And marbles storied with his praise
          Poor Gelert's bones protect.

        There, never could the spearman pass,
          Or forester, unmoved;
        There, oft the tear-besprinkled grass
          Llewellyn's sorrow proved.

        And there he hung his horn and spear,
          And there, as evening fell,
        In fancy's ear he oft would hear
          Poor Gelert's dying yell.

        And, till great Snowdon's rocks grow old,
          And cease the storm to brave,
        The consecrated spot shall hold
          The name of "Gelert's Grave."



377

        This old ballad is one of the best of the
        humorous type. Many old stories turn upon some
        such riddling series of questions, generally
        three in number, to which unexpected answers
        come from an unexpected quarter. Of course the
        questions are intended to be unanswerable. As a
        matter of fact they are, but a clever person
        may discover a riddling answer to a riddling
        question. King John bows, not to a master in
        knowledge, but to a master in cleverness.


KING JOHN AND THE ABBOT OF CANTERBURY

        An ancient story I'll tell you anon
        Of a notable prince, that was called King John;
        And he ruled England with maine and with might,
        For he did great wrong and maintein'd little right.

        And I'll tell you a story, a story so merrye,
        Concerning the Abbot of Canterburye;
        How for his house-keeping and high renowne,
        They rode poste for him to fair London towne.

        An hundred men, the king did heare say,
        The abbot kept in his house every day;
        And fifty golde chaynes, without any doubt,
        In velvet coates waited the abbot about.

        "How now, father abbot, I heare it of thee,
        Thou keepest a farre better house than mee,
        And for thy house-keeping and high renowne,
        I fear thou work'st treason against my crown."

        "My liege," quo' the abbot, "I would it were knowne,
        I never spend nothing but what is my owne;
        And I trust your grace will do me no deere
        For spending of my owne true-gotten geere."

        "Yes, yes, father abbot, thy fault it is highe,
        And now for the same thou needest must dye;
        For except thou canst answer me questions three,
        Thy head shall be smitten from thy bodie.

        "And first," quo' the king, "when I'm in this stead,
        With my crown of golde so faire on my head,
        Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
        Thou must tell me to one penny what I am worthe.

        "Secondlye tell me, without any doubt,
        How soone I may ride the whole worlde about.
        And at the third question thou must not shrinke,
        But tell me here truly what I do thinke."

        "O, these are hard questions for my shallow witt,
        Nor I cannot answer your grace as yet;
        But if you will give me but three weekes space,
        I'll do my endeavour to answer your grace."

        "Now three weekes space to thee will I give,
        And that is the longest thou hast to live;
        For if thou dost not answer my questions three,
        Thy lands and thy living are forfeit to mee."

        Away rode the abbot all sad at that word,
        And he rode to Cambridge, and Oxenford;
        But never a doctor there was so wise,
        That could with his learning an answer devise.

        Then home rode the abbot of comfort so cold,
        And he mett his shephard a-going to fold:
        "How now, my lord abbot, you are welcome home;
        What newes do you bring us from good King John?"

        "Sad newes, sad newes, shephard, I must give;
        That I have but three days more to live:
        For if I do not answer him questions three,
        My head will be smitten from my bodie.

        "The first is to tell him there in that stead,
        With his crowne of golde so faire on his head,
        Among all his liege-men so noble of birthe,
        To within one penny of what he is worthe.

        "The seconde, to tell him without any doubt,
        How soone he may ride this whole worlde about:
        And at the third question I must not shrinke,
        But tell him there truly what he does thinke."

        "Now cheare up, sire abbot, did you never hear yet
        That a fool he may learn a wise man witt?
        Lend me horse, and serving-men, and your apparel,
        And I'll ride to London to answere your quarrel.

        "Nay, frowne not, if it hath bin told unto mee,
        I am like your lordship, as ever may bee;
        And if you will but lend me your gowne,
        There is none shall knowe us at fair London towne."

        "Now horses and serving-men thou shalt have,
        With sumptuous array most gallant and brave;
        With crozier, and miter, and rochet, and cope,
        Fit to appeare 'fore our fader the pope."

        "Now welcome, sire abbot," the king he did say,
        "'Tis well thou'rt come back to keepe thy day:
        For and if thou canst answer my questions three,
        Thy life and thy living both saved shall bee.

        "And, first, when thou see'st me here in this stead,
        With my crown of golde so fair on my head,
        Among all my liege-men so noble of birthe,
        Tell me to one penny what I am worthe."

        "For thirty pence our Saviour was sold
        Among the false Jewes, as I have bin told:
        And twenty-nine is the worth of thee,
        For I thinke, thou art one penny worser than Hee."

        The king he laugh'd, and swore by St. Bittel,
        "I did not think I had been worth so littel!
        --Now secondly, tell me, without any doubt,
        How soone I may ride this whole world about."

        "You must rise with the sun, and ride with the same,
        Until the next morning he riseth againe;
        And then your grace need not make any doubt,
        But in twenty-four hours you'll ride it about."

        The king he laugh'd, and swore by St. Jone,
        "I did not think it could be done so soone!
        --Now from the third question you must not shrinke,
        But tell me here truly what I do thinke."

        "Yes, that shall I do and make your grace merry:
        You thinke I'm the Abbot of Canterburye;
        But I'm his poor shephard, as plain you may see,
        That am come to beg pardon for him and for mee."

        The king he laughed, and swore by the masse,
        "I'll make thee lord abbot this day in his place!"
        "Now nay, my liege, be not in such speede,
        For alacke I can neither write, ne reade."

        "Four nobles a weeke, then, I will give thee,
        For this merry jest thou hast showne unto me;
        And tell the old abbot, when thou comest home,
        Thou hast brought him a pardon from good King John."




SECTION VIII

REALISTIC STORIES




BIBLIOGRAPHY


ARRANGED CHRONOLOGICALLY AS A BASIS FOR TRACING THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
REALISTIC STORY FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

        Most of the authors in the following list wrote
        other books of a realistic nature, in some
        cases greater books than the one mentioned. The
        book named is usually the first important one
        in this field by its author and has, therefore,
        unusual historical value.

  1765. Goldsmith, Oliver, _The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes_.
  1783-1789. Day, Thomas, _The History of Sandford and Merton_.
  1792-1796. Aikin, Dr. John, and Barbauld, Mrs. L. E., _Evenings
            at Home_.
  [?]-1795. More, Hannah, _The Shepherd of Salisbury Plain_.
  1796-1800. Edgeworth, Maria, _The Parent's Assistant, or Stories
            for Children_.
  1808. Lamb, Mary and Charles, _Mrs. Leicester's School_.
  1818. Sherwood, Mrs. M. M., _The History of the Fairchild Family_.
  1840. Dana, Richard Henry, _Two Years Before the Mast_.
  1841. Martineau, Harriet, _The Crofton Boys_.
  1856. Yonge, Charlotte M., _The Daisy Chain_.
  1857. Hughes, Thomas, _Tom Brown's School Days_.
  1863. Whitney, Mrs. A. D. T., _Faith Gartney's Girlhood_.
  1864. Trowbridge, J. T., _Cudjo's Cave_.
  1865. Dodge, Mary Mapes, _Hans Brinker, or the Silver Skates_.
  1867. Kaler, James Otis, _Toby Tyler, or Ten Weeks with a
            Circus_.
  1868. Alcott, Louisa May, _Little Women_.
  1868. Hale, Edward Everett, _The Man without a Country_.
  1871. Eggleston, Edward, _The Hoosier Schoolmaster_.
  1876. Twain, Mark, _Adventures of Tom Sawyer_.
  1878. Jackson, Helen Hunt, _Nelly's Silver Mine_.
  1879. Ewing, Juliana Horatia, _Jackanapes_.
  1882. Hale, Lucretia P., _Peterkin Papers_.
  1883. Stevenson, Robert Louis, _Treasure Island_.
  1887. Wiggin, Kate Douglas, _The Birds' Christmas Carol_.
  1890. Jewett, Sarah Orne, _Betty Leicester_.
  1895. Bennett, John, _Master Skylark_.
  1897. Kipling, Rudyard, _Captains Courageous_.
  1899. Garland, Hamlin, _Boy Life on the Prairie_.
  1906. Stein, Evaleen, _Gabriel and the Hour-Book_.
  1908. Montgomery, L. M., _Anne of Green Gables_.
  1912. Masefield, John, _Jim Davis_.
  1917. Crownfield, Gertrude, _The Little Taylor of the Winding Way_.
  1920. Latham, Harold S., _Jimmy Quigg, Office Boy_.



SECTION VIII. REALISTIC STORIES

INTRODUCTORY


_Origin._ The history of realistic stories for children may well begin
with the interest in juvenile education awakened by the great French
teacher and author Rousseau (1712-1778). He taught that formal methods
should be discarded in juvenile education and that children should be
taught to know the things about them. The new method of education is
illustrated, probably unintentionally, in _The Renowned History of
Little Goody Two-Shoes_, the first selection in this section. Rousseau
directly influenced the thought of such writers as Thomas Day, Maria
Edgeworth, Dr. Aiken, and Mrs. Barbauld. The stories produced by these
authors in the last quarter of the eighteenth century are among the
first written primarily for the purpose of entertaining children. To
these writers we are indebted for the creation of types of children's
literature that modern authors have developed into the fascinating
stories of child life, the thrilling stories of adventure, and the
interesting accounts of nature that now abound in libraries and book
stores.

_The didactic period._ When we read these first stories written for the
entertainment of children, we can hardly fail to observe that each one
presents a lesson, either moral or practical. The didactic purpose is so
prominent that the term "Didactic Period" may be applied to the period
from 1765 (the publication of _Goody Two-Shoes_) to 1825, or even later.
The small amount of writing for children before this period was
practically all for the purpose of moral or religious instruction; hence
it was but natural for these first writers of juvenile entertainment
stories to feel it their duty to present moral and practical lessons. It
would be a mistake, however, to assume that these quaint old stories
would not be interesting to children today, for they deal with
fundamental truths, which are new and interesting to children of all
ages.

In addition to the writers already mentioned, and represented by
selections in the following pages, there were several others whose books
are yet accessible and now and then read for their historical interest
if not for any intrinsic literary value they may possess. One of these
was Mrs. Sarah K. Trimmer (1741-1810), who, associated with the early
days of the Sunday-school movement, wrote many books full of the
overwrought piety which was supposed to be necessary for children of
that earlier time. One of her books, _The History of the Robins_, stands
out from the mass for its strong appeal of simple incident, and is still
widely popular with very young readers. Hannah More (1745-1833) occupied
a prominent place in the thought of her day as a teacher of religious
and social ideas among the poorer classes. Her _Repository Tracts_, many
of them in the form of stories, were devoted to making the poor
contented with their lot through the consolations of a pious life. "The
Shepherd of Salisbury Plain" was the most famous of these story-tracts,
and there are still many people living whose childhood was fed upon this
and like stories. Mrs. Sherwood's _History of the Fairchild Family_ has
never been out of print since the date of its first publication (1818),
and in recent years has had two or three sumptuous revivals at the hands
of editors and publishers. The almost innumerable books of Jacob Abbott
and S. G. Goodrich ("Peter Parley") in America belong to this didactic
movement. They were, however, more devoted to the process of instilling
a knowledge of all the wonders of this great world round about us, and
were considerably less pietistic than their English neighbors. _The
Rollo Books_ (24 vols.) are typical of this school.

_The modern period._ Charles Lamb apparently was one of the first to get
the modern thought that literature for children should be just as
artistic, just as dignified in its presentation of truth, and just as
worthy of literary recognition, as literature for adults. In the hundred
years since Lamb advanced his theory, students have gradually come to
recognize the fact that good literature for children is also good
literature for adults because art is art, whatever its form. In this
connection, Lamb's feeling about the necessity for making children's
books more vital found expression in a famous and much-quoted passage in
a letter to Coleridge:

        "_Goody Two-Shoes_ is almost out of print. Mrs.
        Barbauld's stuff has banished all the old
        classics of the nursery; and the shopman at
        Newbery's hardly deigned to reach them off an
        old exploded corner of a shelf, when Mary asked
        for them. Mrs. B.'s and Mrs. Trimmer's nonsense
        lay in piles about. Knowledge insignificant and
        vapid as Mrs. Barbauld's books convey, it seems
        must come to a child in the _shape of
        knowledge_, and his empty noodle must be turned
        with conceit of his own powers when he has
        learnt that a horse is an animal, and Billy is
        better than a horse, and such like; instead of
        that beautiful interest in wild tales, which
        made the child a man, while all the while he
        suspected himself to be no bigger than a child.
        Science has succeeded to poetry no less in the
        little walks of children than with men. Is
        there no possibility of averting this sore
        evil? Think what you would have been now, if,
        instead of being fed with tales and old wives'
        fables in childhood, you had been crammed with
        geography and natural history!"

The danger Lamb saw was averted. The bibliography on a preceding page
indicates that about the middle of the nineteenth century many writers
of first-rate literary ability began to write for young people. Among
the number were Harriet Martineau, Captain Marryat, Charlotte M. Yonge,
Thomas Hughes, and others. As we pass toward the end of that century and
the beginning of the twentieth, the great names associated with juvenile
classics are very noticeable, and with Miss Alcott, Mrs. Ewing, "Mark
Twain," Stevenson, Kipling, Masefield, and a kindred host, childhood has
come into its own.


SUGGESTIONS FOR READING

        For tracing the stages in the development of
        writing for children consult the books named in
        the General Bibliography (p. 17, II,
        "Historical Development.")



378

        Among those authors of the past whom the
        present still regards affectionately, Oliver
        Goldsmith (1728-1774) holds a high place. At
        least five of his works--a novel, a poem, a
        play, a book of essays, a nursery story--rank
        as classics. He had many faults; he was vain,
        improvident almost beyond belief, certainly
        dissipated throughout a part of his life. But
        with all these faults he had the saving grace
        of humor, a kind heart that led him to share
        even his last penny with one in need, a genius
        for friendships that united him with such men
        as Burke and Johnson and Reynolds. Always "hard
        up," he wrote much as a publisher's "hack" in
        order merely to live. It was in this capacity
        that he probably wrote the famous story that
        follows--a story that stands at the beginning
        of the long and constantly broadening current
        of modern literature for children. While it has
        generally been attributed to Goldsmith, no
        positive evidence of his authorship has been
        discovered. It was published at a time when he
        was in the employ of John Newbery, the London
        publisher, who issued many books for children.
        We know that Goldsmith helped with the _Mother
        Goose's Melody_ and other projects of Newbery,
        and there are many reasons for supposing that
        the general attribution of _Goody Two-Shoes_ to
        him may be correct. Charles Welsh, who edited
        the best recent edition for schools, says it
        "will always deserve a place among the classics
        of childhood for its literary merit, the purity
        and loftiness of its tone, and its sound sense,
        while the whimsical, confidential, affectionate
        style which the author employs, makes it
        attractive even to children who have long since
        passed the spelling-book stage." The version
        that follows has been shortened by the omission
        of passages that have less importance for the
        modern child than they may have had for that of
        the eighteenth century. The story is thus
        rendered more compact, and contains nothing to
        draw attention away from the fine qualities
        mentioned above. The quaint phrasing of the
        title, in itself one of the proofs of
        Goldsmith's authorship, furnishes a good
        comment on the meaning of the story: "The
        history of little Goody Two-Shoes/otherwise
        called Mrs. Margery Two-Shoes/the means by
        which she acquired her learning and wisdom, and
        in consequence thereof her estate; set forth at
        large for the benefit of those/

        Who from a state of Rags and Care,
        And having Shoes but half a Pair;
        Their Fortune and their fame would fix,
        And gallop in a Coach and Six."

        [For the benefit of those who may overlook the
        point, it may be explained that "Mrs." was
        formerly used as a term of dignified courtesy
        applied to both married and unmarried women.]


THE RENOWNED HISTORY OF LITTLE GOODY TWO-SHOES

ASCRIBED TO OLIVER GOLDSMITH

All the world must allow that Two-Shoes was not her real name. No; her
father's name was Meanwell, and he was for many years a considerable
farmer in the parish where Margery was born; but by the misfortunes
which he met with in business, and the wicked persecutions of Sir
Timothy Gripe, and an overgrown farmer called Graspall, he was
effectually ruined. These men turned the farmer, his wife, Little
Margery, and her brother out of doors, without any of the necessaries of
life to support them.

Care and discontent shortened the days of Little Margery's father. He
was seized with a violent fever, and died miserably. Margery's poor
mother survived the loss of her husband but a few days, and died of a
broken heart, leaving Margery and her little brother to the wide world.
It would have excited your pity and done your heart good to have seen
how fond these two little ones were of each other, and how, hand in
hand, they trotted about.

They were both very ragged, and Tommy had no shoes, and Margery had but
one. They had nothing, poor things, to support them but what they picked
from the hedges or got from the poor people, and they lay every night in
a barn. Their relatives took no notice of them; no, they were rich, and
ashamed to own such a poor little ragged girl as Margery and such a
dirty little curl-pated boy as Tommy. But such wicked folks, who love
nothing but money and are proud and despise the poor, never come to any
good in the end, as we shall see by and by.

Mr. Smith was a very worthy clergyman who lived in the parish where
Little Margery and Tommy were born; and having a relative come to see
him, he sent for these children. The gentleman ordered Little Margery a
new pair of shoes, gave Mr. Smith some money to buy her clothes, and
said he would take Tommy and make him a little sailor.

The parting between these two little children was very affecting. Tommy
cried, and Margery cried, and they kissed each other an hundred times.
At last Tommy wiped off her tears with the end of his jacket, and bid
her cry no more, for he would come to her again when he returned from
sea.

As soon as Little Margery got up the next morning, which was very early,
she ran all round the village, crying for her brother; and after some
time returned greatly distressed. However, at this instant, the
shoemaker came in with the new shoes, for which she had been measured by
the gentleman's order.

Nothing could have supported Little Margery under the affliction she was
in for the loss of her brother but the pleasure she took in her two
shoes. She ran out to Mrs. Smith as soon as they were put on, and,
stroking down her ragged apron, cried out, "Two shoes, mamma, see, two
shoes!"

And she so behaved to all the people she met, and by that means obtained
the name of Goody Two-Shoes, though her playmates called her Old Goody
Two-Shoes.

Little Margery was very happy in being with Mr. and Mrs. Smith, who were
very charitable and good to her, and had agreed to breed her up with
their family. But at last they were obliged to send her away, for the
people who had ruined her father commanded them to do this, and could at
any time have ruined them.

Little Margery saw how good and how wise Mr. Smith was, and concluded
that this was owing to his great learning; therefore she wanted, of all
things, to learn to read. For this purpose she used to meet the little
boys and girls as they came from school, borrow their books, and sit
down and read till they returned. By this means she soon got more
learning than any of her playmates, and laid the following scheme for
instructing those who were more ignorant than herself. She found that
only the following letters were required to spell all the words in the
world; but as some of these letters are large and some small, she with
her knife cut out of several pieces of wood ten sets of each of these:

        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z

And six sets of these:

        A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

And having got an old spelling-book, she made her companions set up all
the words they wanted to spell, and after that she taught them to
compose sentences. You know what a sentence is, my dear. _I will be
good_, is a sentence; and is made up, as you see, of several words.

Every morning she used to go round to teach the children, with these
rattletraps in a basket. I once went her rounds with her. It was about
seven o'clock in the morning when we set out on this important business,
and the first house we came to was Farmer Wilson's. Here Margery
stopped, and ran up to the door, tap, tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

"Only little Goody Two-Shoes," answered Margery, "come to teach Billy."

"Oh! little Goody," said Mrs. Wilson, with pleasure in her face, "I am
glad to see you. Billy wants you sadly, for he has learned all his
lesson."

Then out came the little boy. "How do, Doody Two-Shoes," said he, not
able to speak plain. Yet this little boy had learned all his letters;
for she threw down this alphabet mixed together thus:

        b d f h k m o q s u w y z a c e g i l n p r t v x j

and he picked them up, called them by their right names, and put them
all in order thus:

        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z.

The next place we came to was Farmer Simpson's. "Bow, bow, bow," said
the dog at the door.

"Sirrah," said his mistress, "why do you bark at Little Two-Shoes? Come
in, Madge; here, Sally wants you sadly; she has learned all her lesson."

Then out came the little one.

"So, Madge!" says she.

"So, Sally!" answered the other. "Have you learned your lesson?"

"Yes, that's what I have," replied the little one in the country manner;
and immediately taking the letters she set up these syllables:

        ba be bi bo bu,     ca ce ci co cu,
        da de di do du,     fa fe fi fo fu,

and gave them their exact sounds as she composed them.

After this, Little Two-Shoes taught her to spell words of one syllable,
and she soon set up pear, plum, top, ball, pin, puss, dog, hog, fawn,
buck, doe, lamb, sheep, ram, cow, bull, cock, hen, and many more.

The next place we came to was Gaffer Cook's cottage. Here a number of
poor children were met to learn. They all came round Little Margery at
once; and, having pulled out her letters, she asked the little boy next
her what he had for dinner. He answered, "Bread." (The poor children in
many places live very hard.) "Well, then," said she, "set the first
letter."

He put up the letter _B_, to which the next added _r_, and the next _e_,
the next _a_, the next _d_ and it stood thus, "_Bread_".

"And what had you, Polly Comb, for your dinner?" "Apple-pie," answered
the little girl: upon which the next in turn set up a great _A_, the two
next a _p_ each, and so on until the two words _Apple_ and _pie_ were
united and stood thus, "_Apple-pie_."

The next had Potatoes, the next Beef and Turnips, which were spelt, with
many others, until the game of spelling was finished. She then set them
another task, and we went on.

The next place we came to was Farmer Thompson's, where there were a
great many little ones waiting for her.

"So, little Mrs. Goody Two-Shoes," said one of them. "Where have you
been so long?"

"I have been teaching," says she, "longer than I intended, and am afraid
I am come too soon for you now."

"No, but indeed you are not," replied the other, "for I have got my
lesson, and so has Sally Dawson, and so has Harry Wilson, and so have we
all"; and they capered about as if they were overjoyed to see her.

"Why, then," says she, "you are all very good, and God Almighty will
love you; so let us begin our lesson."

They all huddled round her, and though at the other place they were
employed about words and syllables, here we had people of much greater
understanding, who dealt only in sentences.

_The Lord have mercy upon me, and grant I may always be good, and say my
prayers, and love the Lord my God with all my heart, and with all my
soul, and with all my strength; and honor government and all good men in
authority._

Little Margery then set them to compose the following:


LESSON FOR THE CONDUCT OF LIFE

        He that will thrive
        Must rise by five.

        He that hath thriv'n
        May lie till seven.

        Truth may be blamed,
        But cannot be shamed.

        Tell me with whom you go,
        And I'll tell what you do.

        A friend in your need
        Is a friend indeed.

        They ne'er can be wise
        Who good counsel despise.

As we were returning home, we saw a gentleman, who was very ill, sitting
under a shady tree at the corner of his rookery. Though ill, he began to
joke with Little Margery, and said laughing, "So, Goody Two-Shoes! They
tell me you are a cunning little baggage; pray, can you tell me what I
shall do to get well?"

"Yes," said she, "go to bed when your rooks do and get up with them in
the morning; earn, as they do, every day what you eat, and eat and drink
no more than you earn, and you will get health and keep it."

The gentleman, laughing, gave Margery sixpence, and told her she was a
sensible hussy.

Mrs. Williams, who kept a college for instructing little gentlemen and
ladies in the science of A, B, C, was at this time very old and infirm,
and wanted to decline that important trust. This being told to Sir
William Dove, who lived in the parish, he sent for Mrs. Williams, and
desired she would examine Little Two-Shoes and see whether she was
qualified for the office.

This was done, and Mrs. Williams made the following report in her favor;
namely, that Little Margery was the best scholar, and had the best head
and the best heart of any one she had examined. All the country had a
great opinion of Mrs. Williams, and her words gave them also a great
opinion of Mrs. Margery, for so we must now call her.

No sooner was Mrs. Margery settled in this office than she laid every
possible scheme to promote the welfare and happiness of all her
neighbors, and especially of the little ones, in whom she took great
delight; and all those whose parents could not afford to pay for their
education, she taught for nothing but the pleasure she had in their
company; for you are to observe that they were very good, or were soon
made so by her good management.

The school where she taught was that which was before kept by Mrs.
Williams. The room was large, and as she knew that nature intended
children should be always in action, she placed her different letters,
or alphabets, all round the school, so that every one was obliged to get
up to fetch a letter or spell a word when it came to his turn; which not
only kept them in health but fixed the letters and points firmly in
their minds.

She had the following assistants to help her, and I will tell you how
she came by them. One day as she was going through the next village she
met with some wicked boys who had got a young raven, which they were
going to throw at; she wanted to get the poor creature out of their
cruel hands, and therefore gave them a penny for him, and brought him
home. She called his name Ralph, and a fine bird he was.

Some days after she had met with the raven, as she was walking in the
fields she saw some naughty boys who had taken a pigeon and tied a
string to its leg, in order to let it fly and draw it back again when
they pleased; and by this means they tortured the poor animal with the
hopes of liberty and repeated disappointment. This pigeon she also
bought. He was a very pretty fellow, and she called him Tom.

Some time after this a poor lamb had lost its dam, and the farmer being
about to kill it, she bought it of him and brought it home with her to
play with the children and teach them when to go to bed: for it was a
rule with the wise men of that age (and a very good one, let me tell
you) to

_Rise with the lark and lie down with the lamb._

This lamb she called Will, and a pretty fellow he was.

Soon after this a present was made to Mrs. Margery of a little dog,
Jumper, and a pretty dog he was. Jumper, Jumper, Jumper! He was always
in good humor and playing and jumping about, and therefore he was called
Jumper. The place assigned for Jumper was that of keeping the door, so
that he may be called the porter of the college, for he would let nobody
go out or any one come in without the leave of his mistress.

But one day a dreadful accident happened in the school. It was on a
Thursday morning, I very well remember, when the children having learned
their lessons soon, she had given them leave to play, and they were all
running about the school and diverting themselves with the birds and the
lamb. At this time the dog, all of a sudden, laid hold of his mistress's
apron and endeavored to pull her out of the school. She was at first
surprised; however, she followed him to see what he intended.

No sooner had he led her into the garden than he ran back and pulled out
one of the children in the same manner; upon which she ordered them all
to leave the school immediately; and they had not been out five minutes
before the top of the house fell in. What a miraculous deliverance was
here! How gracious! How good was God Almighty, to save all these
children from destruction, and to make use of such an instrument as a
little sagacious animal to accomplish His divine will! I should have
observed that as soon as they were all in the garden, the dog came
leaping round them to express his joy, and when the house had fallen,
laid himself down quietly by his mistress.

Some of the neighbors, who saw the school fall and who were in great
pain for Margery and the little ones, soon spread the news through the
village, and all the parents, terrified for their children, came
crowding in abundance; they had, however, the satisfaction to find them
all safe, and upon their knees, with their mistress, giving God thanks
for their happy deliverance.

You are not to wonder, my dear reader, that this little dog should have
