narrowly escaped being eaten by the crocodile. During the weeks that
followed the prince amused himself as best he could, though he counted
the minutes to the arrival of the princess, and when she did come, he at
once prepared to start for the court. That very night, however, while he
was asleep, the princess noticed something strange in one of the corners
of the room. It was a dark patch, and seemed, as she looked, to grow
longer and longer, and to be moving slowly towards the cushions on
which the prince was lying. She shrank in terror, but, slight as was the
noise, the thing heard it, and raised its head to listen. Then she saw
it was the long flat head of a serpent, and the recollection of the
prophecy rushed into her mind. Without waking her husband, she glided
out of bed, and taking up a heavy bowl of milk which stood on a table,
laid it on the floor in the path of the serpent--for she knew that no
serpent in the world can resist milk. She held her breath as the snake
drew near, and watched it throw up its head again as if it was smelling
something nice, while its forky tongue darted out greedily. At length
its eyes fell upon the milk, and in an instant it was lapping it so fast
that it was a wonder the creature did not choke, for it never took
its head from the bowl as long as a drop was left in it. After that it
dropped on the ground and slept heavily. This was what the princess had
been waiting for, and catching up her husband's sword, she severed the
snake's head from its body.

The morning after this adventure the prince and princess set out for the
king's palace, but found when they reached it, that he was already dead.
They gave him a magnificent burial, and then the prince had to examine
the new laws which had been made in his absence, and do a great deal of
business besides, till he grew quite ill from fatigue, and was obliged
to go away to one of his palaces on the banks of the river, in order to
rest. Here he soon got better, and began to hunt, and to shoot wild duck
with his bow; and wherever he went, his dog, now grown very old, went
with him.

One morning the prince and his dog were out as usual, and in chasing
their game they drew near the bank of the river. The prince was running
at full speed after his dog when he almost fell over something that
looked like a log of wood, which was lying in his path. To his surprise
a voice spoke to him, and he saw that the thing which he had taken for a
branch was really a crocodile.

'You cannot escape from me,' it was saying, when he had gathered his
senses again. 'I am your fate, and wherever you go, and whatever you do,
you will always find me before you. There is only one means of shaking
off my power. If you can dig a pit in the dry sand which will remain
full of water, my spell will be broken. If not death will come to you
speedily. I give you this one chance. Now go.'

The young man walked sadly away, and when he reached the palace he
shut himself into his room, and for the rest of the day refused to see
anyone, not even his wife. At sunset, however, as no sound could be
heard through the door, the princess grew quite frightened, and made
such a noise that the prince was forced to draw back the bolt and let
her come in. 'How pale you look,' she cried, 'has anything hurt you?
Tell me, I pray you, what is the matter, for perhaps I can help!'

So the prince told her the whole story, and of the impossible task given
him by the crocodile.

'How can a sand hole remain full of water?' asked he. 'Of course, it
will all run through. The crocodile called it a "chance"; but he might
as well have dragged me into the river at once. He said truly that I
cannot escape him.'

'Oh, if that is all,' cried the princess, 'I can set you free myself,
for my fairy godmother taught me to know the use of plants and in the
desert not far from here there grows a little four-leaved herb which
will keep the water in the pit for a whole year. I will go in search of
it at dawn, and you can begin to dig the hole as soon as you like.

To comfort her husband, the princess had spoken lightly and gaily; but
she knew very well she had no light task before her. Still, she was
full of courage and energy, and determined that, one way or another, her
husband should be saved.

It was still starlight when she left the palace on a snow-white donkey,
and rode away from the river straight to the west. For some time she
could see nothing before her but a flat waste of sand, which became
hotter and hotter as the sun rose higher and higher. Then a dreadful
thirst seized her and the donkey, but there was no stream to quench it,
and if there had been she would hardly have had time to stop, for
she still had far to go, and must be back before evening, or else
the crocodile might declare that the prince had not fulfilled his
conditions. So she spoke cheering words to her donkey, who brayed in
reply, and the two pushed steadily on.

Oh! how glad they both were when they caught sight of a tall rock in the
distance. They forgot that they were thirsty, and that the sun was hot;
and the ground seemed to fly under their feet, till the donkey stopped
of its own accord in the cool shadow. But though the donkey might rest
the princess could not, for the plant, as she knew, grew on the very top
of the rock, and a wide chasm ran round the foot of it. Luckily she had
brought a rope with her, and making a noose at one end, she flung it
across with all her might. The first time it slid back slowly into the
ditch, and she had to draw it up, and throw it again, but at length the
noose caught on something, the princess could not see what, and had to
trust her whole weight to this little bridge, which might snap and let
her fall deep down among the rocks. And in that case her death was as
certain as that of the prince.

But nothing so dreadful happened. The princess got safely to the other
side, and then became the worst part of her task. As fast as she put
her foot on a ledge of the rock the stone broke away from under her, and
left her in the same place as before. Meanwhile the hours were passing,
and it was nearly noon.

The heart of the poor princess was filled with despair, but she would
not give up the struggle. She looked round till she saw a small stone
above her which seemed rather stronger than the rest, and by only
poising her foot lightly on those that lay between, she managed by a
great effort to reach it. In this way, with torn and bleeding hands, she
gained the top; but here such a violent wind was blowing that she
was almost blinded with dust, and was obliged to throw herself on the
ground, and feel about after the precious herb.

For a few terrible moments she thought that the rock was bare, and that
her journey had been to no purpose. Feel where she would, there was
nothing but grit and stones, when, suddenly, her fingers touched
something soft in a crevice. It was a plant, that was clear; but was it
the right one? See she could not, for the wind was blowing more fiercely
than ever, so she lay where she was and counted the leaves. One, two,
three--yes! yes! there were four! And plucking a leaf she held it safe
in her hand while she turned, almost stunned by the wind, to go down the
rock.

When once she was safely over the side all became still in a moment, and
she slid down the rock so fast that it was only a wonder that she did
not land in the chasm. However, by good luck, she stopped quite close
to her rope bridge and was soon across it. The donkey brayed joyfully at
the sight of her, and set off home at his best speed, never seeming to
know that the earth under his feet was nearly as hot as the sun above
him.

On the bank of the great river he halted, and the princess rushed up to
where the prince was standing by the pit he had digged in the dry sand,
with a huge water pot beside it. A little way off the crocodile lay
blinking in the sun, with his sharp teeth and whity-yellow jaws wide
open.

At a signal from the princess the prince poured the water in the hole,
and the moment it reached the brim the princess flung in the four-leaved
plant. Would the charm work, or would the water trickle away slowly
through the sand, and the prince fall a victim to that horrible monster?
For half an hour they stood with their eyes rooted to the spot, but the
hole remained as full as at the beginning, with the little green leaf
floating on the top. Then the prince turned with a shout of triumph, and
the crocodile sulkily plunged into the river.

The prince had escape for ever the second of his three fates!

He stood there looking after the crocodile, and rejoicing that he was
free, when he was startled by a wild duck which flew past them, seeking
shelter among the rushes that bordered the edge of the stream. In
another instant his dog dashed by in hot pursuit, and knocked heavily
against his master's legs. The prince staggered, lost his balance and
fell backwards into the river, where the mud and the rushes caught him
and held him fast. He shrieked for help to his wife, who came running;
and luckily brought her rope with her. The poor old dog was drowned, but
the prince was pulled to shore. 'My wife,' he said, 'has been stronger
than my fate.'

[Adapted from Les Contes Populaires de l'Egypte Ancienne.]




The Fox and the Lapp



Once upon a time a fox lay peeping out of his hole, watching the road
that ran by at a little distance, and hoping to see something that might
amuse him, for he was feeling very dull and rather cross. For a long
while he watched in vain; everything seemed asleep, and not even a
bird stirred overhead. The fox grew crosser than ever, and he was just
turning away in disgust from his place when he heard the sound of feet
coming over the snow. He crouched eagerly down at the edge of the road
and said to himself: 'I wonder what would happen if I were to pretend to
be dead! This is a man driving a reindeer sledge, I know the tinkling
of the harness. And at any rate I shall have an adventure, and that is
always something!'

So he stretched himself out by the side of the road, carefully choosing
a spot where the driver could not help seeing him, yet where the
reindeer would not tread on him; and all fell out just as he had
expected. The sledge-driver pulled up sharply, as his eyes lighted on
the beautiful animal lying stiffly beside him, and jumping out he threw
the fox into the bottom of the sledge, where the goods he was carrying
were bound tightly together by ropes. The fox did not move a muscle
though his bones were sore from the fall, and the driver got back to his
seat again and drove on merrily.

But before they had gone very far, the fox, who was near the edge,
contrived to slip over, and when the Laplander saw him stretched out on
the snow he pulled up his reindeer and put the fox into one of the other
sledges that was fastened behind, for it was market-day at the nearest
town, and the man had much to sell.

They drove on a little further, when some noise in the forest made the
man turn his head, just in time to see the fox fall with a heavy thump
on to the frozen snow. 'That beast is bewitched!' he said to himself,
and then he threw the fox into the last sledge of all, which had a cargo
of fishes. This was exactly what the cunning creature wanted, and he
wriggled gently to the front and bit the cord which tied the sledge
to the one before it so that it remained standing in the middle of the
road.

Now there were so many sledges that the Lapp did not notice for a long
while that one was missing; indeed, he would have entered the town
without knowing if snow had not suddenly begun to fall. Then he got down
to secure more firmly the cloths that kept his goods dry, and going to
the end of the long row, discovered that the sledge containing the fish
and the fox was missing. He quickly unharnessed one of his reindeer and
rode back along the way he had come, to find the sledge standing safe in
the middle of the road; but as the fox had bitten off the cord close to
the noose there was no means of moving it away.

The fox meanwhile was enjoying himself mightily. As soon as he had
loosened the sledge, he had taken his favourite fish from among the
piles neatly arranged for sale, and had trotted off to the forest with
it in his mouth. By-and-by he met a bear, who stopped and said: 'Where
did you find that fish, Mr. Fox?'

'Oh, not far off,' answered he; 'I just stuck my tail in the stream
close by the place where the elves dwell, and the fish hung on to it of
itself.'

'Dear me,' snarled the bear, who was hungry and not in a good temper,
'if the fish hung on to your tail, I suppose he will hang on to mine.'

'Yes, certainly, grandfather,' replied the fox, 'if you have patience to
suffer what I suffered.'

'Of course I can,' replied the bear, 'what nonsense you talk! Show me
the way.'

So the fox led him to the bank of a stream, which, being in a warm
place, had only lightly frozen in places, and was at this moment
glittering in the spring sunshine.

'The elves bathe here,' he said, 'and if you put in your tail the fish
will catch hold of it. But it is no use being in a hurry, or you will
spoil everything.'

Then he trotted off, but only went out of sight of the bear, who stood
still on the bank with his tail deep in the water. Soon the sun set and
it grew very cold and the ice formed rapidly, and the bear's tail was
fixed as tight as if a vice had held it; and when the fox saw that
everything had happened just as he had planned it, he called out loudly:

'Be quick, good people, and come with your bows and spears. A bear has
been fishing in your brook!'

And in a moment the whole place was full of little creatures each one
with a tiny bow and a spear hardly big enough for a baby; but both
arrows and spears could sting, as the bear knew very well, and in his
fright he gave such a tug to his tail that it broke short off, and he
rolled away into the forest as fast as his legs could carry him. At this
sight the fox held his sides for laughing, and then scampered away in
another direction. By-and-by he came to a fir tree, and crept into a
hole under the root. After that he did something very strange.

Taking one of his hind feet between his two front paws, he said softly:

'What would you do, my foot, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would run so quickly that he should not catch you.'

'What would you do, mine ear, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would listen so hard that I should hear all his plans.'

'What would you do, my nose, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would smell so sharply that I should know from afar that he was
coming.'

'What would you do, my tail, if someone was to betray me?'

'I would steer you so straight a course that you would soon be beyond
his reach. Let us be off; I feel as if danger was near.'

But the fox was comfortable where he was, and did not hurry himself to
take his tail's advice. And before very long he found he was too late,
for the bear had come round by another path, and guessing where his
enemy was began to scratch at the roots of the tree. The fox made
himself as small as he could, but a scrap of his tail peeped out, and
the bear seized it and held it tight. Then the fox dug his claws into
the ground, but he was not strong enough to pull against the bear, and
slowly he was dragged forth and his body flung over the bear's neck. In
this manner they set out down the road, the fox's tail being always in
the bear's mouth.

After they had gone some way, they passed a tree-stump, on which a
bright coloured woodpecker was tapping.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds such gay
colours,' sighed the fox.

'What are you saying, old fellow?' asked the bear.

'I? Oh, I was saying nothing,' answered the fox drearily. 'Just carry me
to your cave and eat me up as quick as you can.'

The bear was silent, and thought of his supper; and the two continued
their journey till they reached another tree with a woodpecker tapping
on it.

'Ah! those were better times when I used to paint all the birds such gay
colours,' said the fox again to himself.

'Couldn't you paint me too?' asked the bear suddenly.

But the fox shook his head; for he was always acting, even if no one was
there to see him do it.

'You bear pain so badly,' he replied, in a thoughtful voice, 'and
you are impatient besides, and could never put up with all that is
necessary. Why, you would first have to dig a pit, and then twist ropes
of willow, and drive in posts and fill the hole with pitch, and, last of
all, set it on fire. Oh, no; you would never be able to do all that.'

'It does not matter a straw how hard the work is,' answered the bear
eagerly, 'I will do it every bit.' And as he spoke he began tearing up
the earth so fast that soon a deep pit was ready, deep enough to hold
him.

'That is all right,' said the fox at last, 'I see I was mistaken in you.
Now sit here, and I will bind you.' So the bear sat down on the edge
of the pit, and the fox sprang on his back, which he crossed with the
willow ropes, and then set fire to the pitch. It burnt up in an instant,
and caught the bands of willow and the bear's rough hair; but he did not
stir, for he thought that the fox was rubbing the bright colours into
his skin, and that he would soon be as beautiful as a whole meadow of
flowers. But when the fire grew hotter still he moved uneasily from one
foot to the other, saying, imploringly: 'It is getting rather warm, old
man.' But all the answer he got was: 'I thought you would never be able
to suffer pain like those little birds.'

The bear did not like being told that he was not as brave as a bird,
so he set his teeth and resolved to endure anything sooner than speak
again; but by this time the last willow band had burned through, and
with a push the fox sent his victim tumbling into the grass, and ran
off to hide himself in the forest. After a while he stole cautiously and
found, as he expected, nothing left but a few charred bones. These he
picked up and put in a bag, which he slung over his back.
