
"Yes, but I should value more money that I had made myself."

Above five o'clock on Monday afternoon Mr. Pettigrew and Rodney reached
Burton. It was a small village about four miles from the nearest railway
station. An old fashioned Concord stage connected Burton with the
railway. The driver was on the platform looking out for passengers when
Jefferson Pettigrew stepped out of the car.

"How are you, Hector?" said the miner, in an off hand way.

"Why, bless my soul if it isn't Jeff!" exclaimed the driver, who had
been an old schoolmate of Mr. Pettigrew's.

"I reckon it is," said the miner, his face lighting up with the
satisfaction he felt at seeing a home face.

"Why, you ain't changed a mite, Jeff. You look just as you did when you
went away. How long have you been gone?"

"Four years!"

"Made a fortune? But you don't look like it. That's the same suit you
wore when you went away, isn't it?"

Mr. Pettigrew laughed.

"Well no, it isn't the same, but it's one of the same kind."

"I thought maybe you'd come home in a dress suit."

"It isn't so easy to make a fortune, Hector."

"But you have made something, ain't you?"

"Oh, yes, when I went away I hadn't a cent except what I borrowed. Now
I've got five hundred dollars."

"That ain't much."

"No, but it's better than nothing. How much more have you got, Hector?"

"Well, you see I married last year. I haven't had a chance to lay by."

"So you see I did as well as if I had stayed at home."

"Are you going to stay home now?"

"For a little while. I may go back to Montana after a bit."

"Is it a good place to make money?"

"I made five hundred dollars."

"Thats only a little more than a hundred dollars a year. Frank Dobson
has saved as much as that and he's stayed right here in Burton."

"I'm glad of that," said Pettigrew heartily. "Frank is a rousing good
fellow. If it hadn't been for him I couldn't have gone to Montana."

"It doesn't seem to have done you much good, as I can see."

"Oh, well, I am satisfied. Let me introduce my friend, Mr. Rodney Ropes
of New York."

"Glad to meet you," said Hector with a jerk of the head.

"Rodney, won't you sit inside? I want to sit outide with Hector."

"All right, Mr. Pettigrew."

"Who is that boy?" asked Hector with characteristic Yankee curiosity, as
he seized the lines and started the horses.

"A rich young fellow from New York. I got acquainted with him there."

"Rich is he?" Jefferson Pettigrew nodded.

"How rich do you think?"

"Shouldn't wonder if he might be worth a hundred thousand."

"You don't say! Why, he beat Squire Sheldon."

"Oh, yes, Squire Sheldon wouldn't be considered rich in New York."

"How did he get his money?"

"His father left him a fortune."

"Is that so? I wish my father had left me a fortune."

"He did, didn't he?"

"Yes, he did! When his estate was settled I got seventy five dollars, if
you call that a fortune. But I say, what brings the boy to Burton?"

"His friendship for me, I expect. Besides he may invest in a place."

"There's the old Morse place for sale. Do you think he'd buy that?"

"It wouldn't be nice enough for him. I don't know any place that would
be good enough except the squire's."

"The squire wouldn't sell."

"Oh, well, I don't know as Rodney would care to locate in Burton."

"You're in luck to get such a friend. Say, do you think he would lend
you a hundred dollars if you were hard up?"

"I know he would. By the way, Hector, is there any news? How is my
uncle?"

"I think the old man is worrying on account of his mortgage."

"Who holds it?"

"The squire. They do say he is goin' to foreclose. That'll be bad for
the old man. It'll nigh about break his heart I expect."

"Can't uncle raise the money to pay him?"

"Who is there round here who has got any money except the squire?"

"That's so."

"Where are you goin' to stop, Jeff?"

"I guess I'll stop at the tavern tonight, but I'll go over and call on
uncle this evening."



CHAPTER XXV.


JEFFERSON PETTIGREW'S HOME.


News spreads fast in a country village. Scarcely an hour had passed
when it was generally known that Jefferson Pettigrew had come home from
Montana with a few hundred dollars in money, bringing with him a rich
boy who could buy out all Burton. At least that is the way the report
ran.

When the two new arrivals had finished supper and come out on the hotel
veranda there were a dozen of Jefferson Pettigrew's friends ready to
welcome him.

"How are you, Jefferson, old boy?" said one and another.

"Pretty well, thank you. It seems good to be home."

"I hear you've brought back some money."

"Yes, a few hundred dollars."

"That's better than nothing. I reckon you'll stay home now."

"I can't afford it, boys."

"Are ye goin' back to Montany?"

"Yes. I know the country, and I can make a middlin' good livin' there."

"I say, is that boy thats with you as rich as they say?"

"I don't know what they say."

"They say he's worth a million."

"Oh no, not so much as that. He's pretty well fixed."

"Hasn't he got a father livin'?"

"No, it's his father that left the money."

"How did you happen to get in with him?"

"Oh, we met promiscuous. He took a sort of fancy to me, and that's the
way of it."

"Do you expect to keep him with you?"

"He talks of goin' back to Montana with me. I'll be sort of guardian to
him."

"You're in luck, Jeff."

"Yes, I'm in luck to have pleasant company. Maybe we'll join together
and buy a mine."

"Would you mind introducin' him?"

"Not at all," and thus Rodney became acquainted with quite a number
of the Burton young men. He was amused to see with what deference they
treated him, but preserved a sober face and treated all cordially, so
that he made a favorable impression on those he met.

Among those who made it in their way to call on the two travelers was
Lemuel Sheldon, the rich man of the village.

"How do you do, Jefferson?" he said condescendingly.

"Very well, sir."

"You have been quite a traveler."

"Yes, sir; I have been to the far West."

"And met with some success, I am told."

"Yes, sir; I raised money enough to get home."

"I hear you brought home a few hundred dollars."

"Yes, sir."

"Oh, well," said the squire patronizingly, "that's good beginning."

"It must seem very little to a rich man like you, squire."

"Oh, no!" said the squire patronizingly. "You are a young man. I
shouldn't wonder if by the time you get as old as I am you might be
worth five thousand dollars."

"I hope so," answered Mr. Pettigrew demurely.

"By the way, you have brought a young man with you, I am told."

"Yes."

"I should like to make his acquaintance. He is rich, is he not?"

"I wish I was as rich."

"You don't say so! About how much do you estimate he is worth?"

"I don't think it amounts to quite as much as a quarter of a million.
Still, you know it is not always easy to tell how much a person is
worth."

"He is certainly a VERY fortunate young man," said the squire,
impressed. "What is his name?"

"Rodney Ropes."

"The name sounds aristocratic. I shall be glad to know him."

"Rodney," said Mr. Pettigrew. "I want to introduce you to Squire
Sheldon, our richest and most prominent citizen."

"I am glad to meet you, Squire Sheldon," said Rodney, offering his hand.

"I quite reciprocate the feeling, Mr. Ropes, but Mr. Pettigrew should
not call me a rich man. I am worth something, to be sure."

"I should say you were, squire," said Jefferson. "Rodney, he is as rich
as you are."

"Oh no," returned the squire, modestly, "not as rich as that. Indeed, I
hardly know how much I am worth. As Mr. Pettigrew very justly observed
it is not easy to gauge a man's possessions. But there is one difference
between us. You, Mr. Ropes, I take it, are not over eighteen."

"Only sixteen, sir."

"And yet you are wealthy. I am rising fifty. When you come to my age you
will be worth much more."

"Perhaps I may have lost all I now possess," said Rodney. "Within a year
I have lost fifty thousand dollars."

"You don't say so."

"Yes; it was through a man who had charge of my property. I think now I
shall manage my money matters myself."

"Doubtless you are right. That was certainly a heavy loss. I shouldn't
like to lose so much. I suppose, however, you had something left?"

"Oh yes," answered Rodney in an indifferent tone.

"He must be rich to make so little account of fifty thousand dollars,"
thought the squire.

"How long do you propose to stay in town, Mr. Pettigrew?" he asked.

"I can't tell, sir, but I don't think I can spare more than three or
four days."

"May I hope that you and Mr. Ropes will take supper with me tomorrow
evening?"

"Say the next day and we'll come. Tomorrow I must go to my uncle's."

"Oh very well!"

Squire Sheldon privately resolved to pump Rodney as to the investment of
his property. He was curious to learn first how much the boy was worth,
for if there was anything that the squire worshiped it was wealth. He
was glad to find that Mr. Pettigrew had only brought home five hundred
dollars, as it was not enough to lift the mortgage on his uncle's farm.

After they were left alone Jefferson Pettigrew turned to Rodney and
said, "Do you mind my leaving you a short time and calling at my
uncle's?"

"Not at all, Mr. Pettigrew. I can pass my time very well."

Jefferson Pettigrew directed his steps to an old fashioned farmhouse
about half a mile from the village. In the rear the roof sloped down so
that the eaves were only five feet from the ground. The house was large
though the rooms were few in number.

In the sitting room sat an old man and his wife, who was nearly as
old. It was not a picture of cheerful old age, for each looked sad.
The sadness of old age is pathetic for there is an absence of hope,
and courage, such as younger people are apt to feel even when they are
weighed down by trouble.

Cyrus Hooper was seventy one, his wife two years younger. During the
greater part of their lives they had been well to do, if not prosperous,
but now their money was gone, and there was a mortgage on the old home
