                          Aunt Raby's side.

  "Why don't you sit down, child? You have done nothing but fidget,
                   fidget for the last half-hour."

                    "I want to go out, Aunt Raby."

       "To go out? Sakes! what for? And on such a night, too!"

                      "I want to see Mr. Hayes."

"Prissie, I think you have got a bee in your bonnet. You'll be lost in
                             this mist."

"No, I won't. I missed Mr. Hayes to-day when he called, and I must see
 him before I go back to St. Benet's. I have a question or two to ask
him, and I know every step of the way. Let me go, auntie, please, do!"

 "You always were a wilful girl, Priscilla, and I think that college
has made you more obstinate than ever. I suppose the half-mannish ways
 of all those girls tell upon you. There, if you must go-- do. I'm in
no mood for arguing. I'll have a bit of a sleep while you are out: the
              muggy weather always makes me so drowsy."

   Aunt Raby uttered a very weary yawn and turned her face from the
  light. Priscilla stepped into the hall, put on her waterproof and
oldest hat and went out. She knew her way well to the little vicarage,
   built of gray stone and lying something like a small, daring fly
against the brow of the hill. The little house looked as if any storm
must detach it from its resting-place, but to-night there was no wind,
              only clinging mist and damp and thick fog.

Priscilla mounted the rough road which led to the vicarage, opened the
 white gate, walked up the gravel path and entered the little porch.
  Her knock was answered by the vicar himself. He drew her into the
 house with an affectionate word of welcome, and soon she was sitting
           by his study fire, with hat and jacket removed.

 In the vicar's eyes Priscilla was not at all a plain girl. He liked
  the rugged power which her face displayed; he admired the sensible
lines of her mouth, and he prophesied great things from that brow, so
  calm, so broad, so full. Mr. Hayes had but a small respect for the
  roses and lilies of mere beauty. Mind was always more to him than
 matter. Some of the girls at St. Benet's, who thought very little of
 poor Priscilla, would have felt no small surprise had they known the
     high regard and even admiration this good man felt for her.

"I am glad you have called, Prissie," he said. "I was disappointed in
not seeing you to-day. Well, my dear, do as well in the coming term as
            you did in the past. You have my best wishes."

                      "Thank you," said Prissie.

    "You are happy in your new life, are you not, my dear child?"

 "I am interested," said Priscilla in a low voice. Her eyes rested on
 her shabby dress as she spoke. She laid one hand over the other. She
  seemed to be weighing her words. "I am interested; sometimes I am
absorbed. My new life fills my heart; it crowds into all my thoughts.
    I have no room for Aunt Raby-- no room for my little sisters.
 Everything is new to me-- everything fresh and broad. There are some
 trials, of course, and some unpleasantness; but, oh, the difference
 between here and there! Here it is so narrow, there one cannot help
              getting enlightenment, daily and hourly."

 "Yes," said Mr. Hayes when Priscilla paused, "I expected you to say
something of this kind. I knew you could not but feel the immense, the
 immeasurable change. But why do you speak in that complaining voice,
                             Priscilla?"

                  Prissies' eyes were raised to his.

"Because Aunt Raby is ill, and it is wicked of me to forget her. It is
              mean and cowardly. I hate myself for it."

    Mr. Hayes looked puzzled for a moment. Then his face cleared.

   "My dear Prissie," he said, "I always knew there were depths of
morbidness in you, but I did not suppose that you would sound them so
  quickly. If you are to grow up to be a wise and useful and helpful
 woman by and by, you must check this intense self-examination. Your
  feelings are the natural feelings of a girl who has entered upon a
 very charming life. You are meant to lead that life for the present;
you are meant to do your duty in it. Don't worry, my dear. Go back to
  St. Benet's, and study well, and learn much, and gather plenty of
 experience for the future. If you fret about what cannot be helped,
    you will weaken your intellect and tire your heart. After all,
 Prissie, though you give much thought to St. Benet's, and though its
 ways are delightful to you, your love is still with the old friends,
                             is it not?"

"Even there I have failed," said Priscilla sadly. "There is a girl at
St. Benet's who has a strange power over me. I love her. I have a very
  great love for her. She is not a happy girl, she is not a perfect
 girl, but I would do anything-- anything in the wide world for her."

               "And you would do anything for us, too?"

                           "Oh, yes, yes."

  "And, though you don't think it, your love for us is stronger than
   your love for her. There is a freshness about the new love which
fascinates you, but the old is the stronger. Keep both loves, my dear:
both are of value. Now I must go out to visit poor Peters, who is ill,
so I can see you home. Is there anything more you want to say to me?"

             "Oh, yes, Mr. Hayes, Aunt Raby is very ill."

                          "She is, Prissie."

                         "Does she know it?"

                                "Yes."

           "Ought I to be away from her now-- is it right"

 "My dear, do you want to break her heart? She worked so hard to get
 this time at college for you. No, Prissie, don't get that idea into
   your head. Aunt Raby is most anxious that you should have every
advantage. She knows-- she and I both know-- that she cannot live more
 than a year or two longer, and her greatest hope is that you may be
  able to support your little sisters when she is gone. No, Prissie,
  whatever happens, you must on no account give up your life at St.
                              Benet's."

   "Then please let me say something else. I must not go on with my
                              classics."

"My dear child, you are managing to crush me with all kinds of queer,
                   disappointing sayings to-night."

 "Am I? But I mean what I say now. I love Greek better than anything
  almost in the world. But I know enough of it already for the mere
purposes of rudimentary teaching. My German is faulty-- my French not
                          what it might he."

 "Come, come, my dear; Peters is waiting to settle for the night. Can
             we not talk on our way down to the cottage?"

    Aunt Raby was fast asleep when Priscilla re-entered the little
  sitting-room. The girl knelt down by the slight, old figure, and,
  stooping, pressed a light kiss on the forehead. Light as it was it
                          awoke the sleeper.

   "You are there still, child?" said Aunt Raby. "I dreamt you were
                                away."

            "Would you like me to stay with you, auntie?"

"No, my dear; you help me upstairs and I'll get into bed. You ought to
 be in your own bed, too, Prissie. Young creatures ought never to sit
        up late, and you have a journey before you to-morrow."

"Yes, but would you like me not to take the journey? I am strong, and
 could do all the work, and you might rest not only at night, but in
          the day. You might rest always, if I stayed here."

     Aunt Raby was wide awake now, and her eyes were very bright.

          "Do you mean what you say, Priscilla?" she asked.

   "Yes, I do. You have the first right to me. If you want me, I'll
                                stay."

 "You'll give up that outlandish Greek, and all that babel of foreign
tongues, and your fine friends, and your grand college, and you hopes
    of being a famous woman by and by? Do you mean this, Prissie,
                             seriously?"

                        "Yes, if you want me."

             "And you say I have the first claim on you?"

                               "I do."

   "Then you're wrong; I haven't the first claim on you." Aunt Raby
 tumbled off the sofa and managed to stand on her trembling old legs.

   "Give me your arm, child," she said; "and-- and give me a kiss,
 Prissie. You're a good girl and worthy of your poor father. He was a
 bookworm, and you are another. But he was an excellent man, and you
 resemble him. I'm glad I took you home and did my best for you. I'll
  tell him about you when I get to heaven. He'll be right pleased, I
 know. My sakes, child! I don't want the little bit of earth's rest.
  I'm going to have a better sort than that. And you think I've the
first claim on you? A poor old body like me. There, help me up to bed,
                              my dear."

  Aunt Raby did not say any more as the two scrambled up the narrow
stairs in silence. When they got into the little bedroom, however, she
    put her arms round Priscilla's neck and gave her quite a hug.

  "Thank you for offering yourself to me, my love," she said, "but I
 wouldn't have you on any terms whatever. Go and learn all you can at
your fine college, Prissie. It's the fashion of the day for the young
  folk to learn a lot, and there's no going against the times. In my
young life sewing was the great thing. Now it's Latin and Greek. Don't
 you forget that I taught you to sew, Prissie, and always put a back
    stitch when you're running a seam; it keeps the stuff together
                     wonderfully. Now go to bed."

  CHAPTER XXIV

 TWO EXTREMES

"HAVE you heard the news?" said Rosalind Merton. She skipped into Miss
Day's room as she spoke.

"No; what?" asked that untidy person, turning round and dropping a lot
of ribbon which she was converting into bows. "What's your news, Rose?
Out with it. I expect it's a case of 'great cry and little wool.'
However, if you want a plain opinion from me----"

"I don't ask for your opinion, Annie. I'm quite accustomed to the
scornful way in which you have received all my words lately. I need
not tell you what I have heard at all, unless you wish to hear it."

"But, of course, I wish to hear it, Rosie; you know that as well as I
do. Now sit down and make yourself at home; there's a dear."

Rose allowed herself to be mollified.

"Well," she said, sinking back into Miss Day's most comfortable chair,
"the feud between a certain small person and a certain great person
grows apace."

Miss Day's small eyes began to dance.

"You know I am interested in that subject," she said. She flopped down
on the floor by Rosalind Merton's side. "Go on, my love," she
murmured; "describe the development of the enmity."

"Little things show the way the wind is blowing," pursued Rose. "I was
coming along the corridor just now, and I met the angelic and
unworldly Priscilla. Her eyelids were red as if she had been crying.
She passed me without a word."

"Well?"

"That's all."

"Rose, you really are too provoking. I thought you had something very
fine to tell."

"The feud grows," pursued Rose. "I know it by many signs. Prissie is
not half so often with Maggie as she used to be. Maggie means to get
out of this friendship, but she is too proud not to do it gradually.
There is not a more jealous girl in this college than Maggie, but
neither is there a prouder. Do you suppose that anything under the sun
would allow her to show her feelings because that little upstart dared
to raise her eyes to Maggie's adorable beau, Mr. Hammond? But oh, she
feels it; she feels it down in her secret soul. She hates Prissie; she
hates this beautiful, handsome lover of hers for being civil to so
commonplace a person. She is only waiting for a decent pretext to drop
Prissie altogether. I wish with all my heart I could give her one."

As she spoke Rosalind shaded her eyes with her hand; her face looked
full of sweet and thoughtful contemplation.

"Get your charming Prissie to flirt a little bit more," said Miss Day
with her harsh laugh.

"I don't know that I can. I must not carry that brilliant idea to
extremities, or I shall be found out."

"Well, what are you going to do?"

"I don't know. Bide my time."

Miss Day gave a listless sort of yawn.

"Let's talk of something else," she said impatiently. "What are you
going to wear at the Elliot-Smith's party next week, Rose?"

"I have got a new white dress," said Rose in that voice of strong
animation and interest which the mere mention of dress always arouses
in certain people.

"Have you? What a lot of dresses you get!"

"Indeed, you are mistaken, Annie. I have the greatest difficulty in
managing my wardrobe at all."

"Why is that? I thought your people not only belonged to the county,
but were as rich as Jews."

"We are county people, of course," said Rose in her most affected
manner, "but county people need not invariably be rich. The fact is my
father has had some losses lately, and mother says she must be
careful. I wanted a great many things, and she said she simply could
not give them. Oh, if only that spiteful Miss Oliphant had not
prevented my getting the sealskin jacket, and if she had not raised
the price of Polly's pink coral!"

"Don't begin that old story again, Rose. When all is said and done,
you have got the lovely coral. By the way, it will come in beautifully
for the Elliot-Smith's party. You'll wear it, of course?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"What do you mean? Of course you'll wear it."

"I don't know. The fact is I have not paid the whole price for it
yet."

"Haven't you really? You said you'd bring the money when you returned
this term."

"Of course I thought I could, but I was absolutely afraid to tell
mother what a lot the coral cost; and as she was so woefully short of
funds, I had just to come away without the money. I never for a moment
supposed I should have such ill luck."

