worthy of her. No one so much as breathed the thought of negotiations
with the enemy, not even a soldier was recalled from the army of Spain.
Quintus Fabius Maximus was chosen dictator, and he with two newly raised
legions marched to Ariminum and assumed the command of the army there,
raised by the reinforcements he brought with him to fifty thousand men.

Stringent orders were issued to the inhabitants of the districts through
which Hannibal would march on his way to Rome to destroy their crops,
drive off their cattle, and take refuge in the fortified towns.
Servilius was appointed to the command of the Roman fleet, and ordered
to oppose the Carthaginians at sea. The army of Fabius was now greatly
superior to that of Hannibal, but was inferior in cavalry. He had,
moreover, the advantage of being in a friendly country, and of being
provisioned by the people through whose country he moved, while Hannibal
was obliged to scatter his army greatly to obtain provisions.

Fabius moved his army until within six miles of that of Hannibal,
and then took up his position upon the hills, contenting himself with
watching from a distance the movements of the Carthaginians. Hannibal
marched unmolested through some of the richest provinces of Italy till
he descended into the plain of Campania. He obtained large quantities of
rich booty, but the inhabitants in all cases held aloof from him, their
belief in the star of Rome being still unshaken in spite of the reverses
which had befallen her.

Fabius followed at a safe distance, avoiding every attempt of Hannibal
to bring on a battle.

The Roman soldiers fretted with rage and indignation at seeing the
enemy, so inferior in strength to themselves, wasting and plundering
the country at their will. Minucius, the master of horse and second in
command, a fiery officer, sympathized to the full with the anger of the
soldiers, and continually urged upon Fabius to march the army to the
assault, but Fabius was immovable. The terrible defeats which Hannibal
had inflicted upon two Roman armies showed him how vast would be the
danger of engaging such an opponent unless at some great advantage.

Such advantage he thought he saw when Hannibal descended into the
plain of Campania. This plain was inclosed on the south by the river
Vulturnus, which could be passed only at the bridge at Casilinum,
defended by the Roman garrison at that town, while on its other sides
it was surrounded by an unbroken barrier of steep and wooded hills, the
passes of which were strongly guarded by the Romans.

After seeing that every road over the hills was strongly held by his
troops, Fabius sat down with his army on the mountains, whence he could
watch the doings of Hannibal's force on the plains. He himself was amply
supplied with provisions from the country in his rear, and he awaited
patiently the time when Hannibal, having exhausted all the resources
of the Campania, would be forced by starvation to attack the Romans in
their almost impregnable position in the passes.

Hannibal was perfectly aware of the difficulties of his position. Had
he been free and unencumbered by baggage he might have led his army
directly across the wooded mountains, avoiding the passes guarded by
the Romans, but with his enormous trail of baggage this was impossible
unless he abandoned all the rich plunder which the army had collected.
Of the two outlets from the plain, by the Appian and Latin roads which
led to Rome, neither could be safely attempted, for the Roman army would
have followed in his rear, and attacked him while endeavouring to force
the passages in the mountains.

The same objection applied to his crossing the Vulturnus. The only
bridge was strongly held by the Romans, and the river was far too deep
and rapid for a passage to be attempted elsewhere with the great Roman
army close at hand. The mountain range between the Vulturnus and Cades
was difficult in the extreme, as the passes were few and very strongly
guarded, but it was here that Hannibal resolved to make the attempt to
lead his army from the difficult position in which it was placed. He
waited quietly in the plain until the supplies of food were beginning to
run low, and then prepared for his enterprise.

An immense number of cattle were among the plunder. Two thousand of the
stoutest of these were selected, torches were fastened to their horns,
and shortly before midnight the light troops drove the oxen to the
hills, avoiding the position of the passes guarded by the enemy. The
torches were then lighted, and the light troops drove the oxen straight
up the hill. The animals, maddened by fear, rushed tumultuously forward,
scattering in all directions on the hillside, but, continually urged by
the troops behind them, mounting towards the summits of the hills.

The Roman defenders of the passes, seeing this great number of lights
moving upwards, supposed that Hannibal had abandoned all his baggage,
and was leading his army straight across the hills. This idea was
confirmed by the light troops, on gaining the crest of the hills,
commencing an attack upon the Romans posted below them in the pass
through which Hannibal intended to move. The Roman troops thereupon
quitted the pass, and scaled the heights to interrupt or harass the
retreating foe.

As soon as Hannibal saw the lights moving on the top of the hills
he commenced his march. The African infantry led the way; they were
followed by the cavalry; then came the baggage and booty, and the rear
was covered by the Spaniards and Gauls. The defile was found deserted by
its defenders, and the army marched through unopposed. Meanwhile Fabius
with his main army had remained inactive. The Roman general had seen
with astonishment the numerous lights making their way up the mountain
side, but he feared that this was some device on the part of Hannibal
to entrap him into an ambush, as he had entrapped Flaminius on Lake
Trasimene. He therefore held his army in readiness for whatever might
occur until morning broke.

Then he saw that he had been outwitted. The rear of the Carthaginian
army was just entering the defile, and in a short time Fabius saw the
Gauls and Spaniards scaling the heights to the assistance of their
comrades, who were maintaining an unequal fight with the Romans.
The latter were soon driven with slaughter into the plain, and the
Carthaginian troops descended into the defile and followed their
retreating army. Hannibal now came down into the fertile country of
Apulia, and determined to winter there. He took by storm the town of
Geronium, where he stored his supplies and placed his sick in shelter,
while his army occupied an intrenched camp which he formed outside the
town.



CHAPTER XVI: IN THE DUNGEONS OF CARTHAGE


Fabius, after the escape of Hannibal from the trap in which he believed
he had caught him, followed him into Apulia, and encamped on high ground
in his neighbourhood intending to continue the same waiting tactics.
He was, however, soon afterwards recalled to Rome to consult with the
senate on matters connected with the army. He left Minucius in command,
with strict orders that he should on no account suffer himself to be
enticed into a battle. Minucius moved forward to within five miles of
Geronium, and then encamped upon a spur of the hills.

Hannibal, aware that Fabius had left, hoped to be able to tempt the
impatient Minucius to an action. He accordingly drew nearer to the
Romans and encamped upon a hill three miles from their position.

Another hill lay about halfway between the two armies. Hannibal occupied
this during the night with two thousand of his light troops, but
next day Minucius attacked the position, drove off its defenders, and
encamped there with his whole army. For some days Hannibal kept his
force united in his intrenchments, feeling sure that Minucius would
attack him. The latter, however, strictly obeyed the orders of Fabius
and remained inactive.

It was all important to the Carthaginians to collect an ample supply of
food before winter set in, and Hannibal, finding that the Romans would
not attack him, was compelled to resume foraging expeditions. Two-thirds
of the army were despatched in various directions in strong bodies,
while the rest remained to guard the intrenchment.

This was the opportunity for which Minucius had been waiting. He at once
despatched the whole of his cavalry to attack the foraging parties,
and with his infantry he advanced to the attack of the weakly defended
Carthaginian camp. For a time Hannibal had the greatest difficulty in
resisting the assault of the Romans; but at last a body of four thousand
of the foragers, who had beaten off the Roman cavalry and made their way
into Geronium, came out to his support, and the Romans retired.

Hannibal, seeing the energy which Minucius had displayed, fell back to
his old camp near Geronium, and Minucius at once occupied the position
which he had vacated. The partial success of Minucius enabled the party
in Rome who had long been discontented with the waiting tactics of
Fabius to make a fresh attack upon his policy, and Minucius was now
raised to an equal rank with Fabius.

Minucius, elated with his elevation, proposed to Fabius either that
they should command the whole army on alternate days, or each should
permanently command one-half. Fabius chose the latter alternative, for
he felt certain that the impetuosity of his colleague would sooner or
later get him into trouble with such an adversary as Hannibal, and
that it was better to risk the destruction of half the army than of the
whole.

Minucius withdrew the troops allotted to him, and encamped in the plains
at a distance of a mile and a half from Fabius. Hannibal resolved at
once to take advantage of the change, and to tempt the Romans to attack
him by occupying a hill which lay about halfway between the camp of
Minucius and Geronium.

The plain which surrounded the hill was level and destitute of wood, but
Hannibal on a careful examination found that there were several hollows
in which troops could be concealed, and in these during the night he
posted five thousand infantry and five hundred cavalry. The position
occupied by them was such that they would be able to take the Romans in
flank and rear should they advance against the hill. Having made these
dispositions he sent forward a body of light troops in the morning
to occupy the hill. Minucius immediately despatched his light troops,
supported by cavalry, to drive them from it. Hannibal reinforced his
Carthaginians by small bodies of troops, and the fight was obstinately
maintained until Minucius, whose blood was now up, marched towards the
hill with his legions in order of battle.

Hannibal on his side advanced with the remains of his troops, and the
battle became fierce and general, until Hannibal gave the signal to
his troops in ambush, who rushed out and charged the Romans in rear and
flank. Their destruction would have been as complete and terrible as
that which had befallen the army of Sempronius at the Trebia, had not
Fabius moved forward with his troops to save the broken legions of
Minucius.

Fabius now offered battle, but Hannibal, well content with the heavy
blow which he had struck, and the great loss which he had inflicted upon
the command of Minucius, fell back to his camp. Minucius acknowledged
that Fabius had saved his army from total destruction, and at once
resigned his command into his hands, and reverted to his former position
under him. Both armies then went into winter quarters.

Malchus had not been present at the fighting near Geronium. Two days
after Hannibal broke through the Roman positions round the plains of
Campania he intrusted Malchus with an important commission. Commanding
the bodyguard of the general, and being closely related to him, Malchus
was greatly in Hannibal's confidence, and was indeed on the same footing
with Mago, Hannibal's brother, and two or three other of his most
trusted generals. Gathered in the general's tent on the previous
evening, these had agreed with their leader that final success could not
be looked for in their enterprise unless reinforcements were received
from Carthage.

It was now a year since they had emerged from the Alps on to the plains
of Northern Italy. They had annihilated two Roman armies, had marched
almost unopposed through some of the richest provinces of Italy, and yet
they were no nearer the great object of their enterprise than they were
when they crossed the Alps.

Some of the Cisalpine Gauls had joined them, but even in the plains
north of the Apennines the majority of the tribes had remained firm to
their alliance with the Romans, while south of that range of mountains
the inhabitants had in every case shown themselves bitterly hostile.
Everywhere on the approach of the Carthaginians they had retired
to their walled towns, which Hannibal had neither the time nor the
necessary machines to besiege.

Although Rome had lost two armies she had already equipped and placed in
the field a third force superior in number to that of the Carthaginians;
her army in Spain had not been drawn upon; her legion north of the
Apennines was operating against the revolted tribes; other legions were
in course of being raised and equipped, and Rome would take the field
in the spring with an army greatly superior in strength to that of
Carthage. Victorious as Hannibal had been in battle, the army which had
struggled through the Alps had in the year which had elapsed, greatly
diminished in numbers. Trebia and Trasimene had both lessened their
strength, but their losses had been much heavier in the terrible
march across the Apennines in the spring, and by fevers subsequently
contracted from the pestiferous malaria of the marshes in the summer.
In point of numbers the gaps had been filled up by the contingents
furnished by their Gaulish allies. But the loss of all the elephants,
of a great number of the cavalry, and of the Carthaginian troops, who
formed the backbone of the army, was not to be replaced.

"Malchus," Hannibal said, "you know what we were speaking of
yesterday evening. It is absolutely necessary that we should receive
reinforcements. If Carthage aids me I regard victory as certain. Two
or three campaigns like the last would alike break down the strength of
Rome, and will detach her allies from her.

"The Latins and the other Italian tribes, when they find that Rome is
powerless to protect them, that their flocks and herds, their crops and
possessions are at our mercy, will at length become weary of supporting
her cause, and will cast in their lot with us; but if the strife is to
be continued, Carthage must make an effort--must rouse herself from the
lethargy in which she appears to be sunk. It is impossible for me to
leave the army, nor can I well spare Mago. The cavalry are devoted to
him, and losing him would be like losing my right hand; yet it is clear
that someone must go to Carthage who can speak in my name, and can
represent the true situation here.

"Will you undertake the mission? It is one of great danger. In the first
place you will have to make your way by sea to Greece, and thence take
ship for Carthage. When you arrive there you will be bitterly opposed by
Hanno and his faction, who are now all powerful, and it may be that your
mission may cost you your life; for not only do these men hate me and
all connected with me, but, like most demagogues, they place their
own selfish aims and ends, the advantage of their own faction, and the
furtherance of their own schemes far above the general welfare of the
state, the loss of all the colonies of Carthage, and the destruction
of her imperial power. The loss of national prestige and honour are to
these men as nothing in comparison with the question whether they can
retain their places and emoluments as rulers of Carthage.

"Rome is divided as we are, her patricians and plebeians are ever
bitterly opposed to each other; but at present patriotism rises above
party, and both sink their disputes when the national cause is at
stake. The time will doubtless come--that is, unless we cut her course
short--that as Rome increases in wealth and in luxury she will suffer
from the like evils that are destroying Carthage. Party exigencies will
rise above patriotic considerations, and Rome will fall to pieces unless
she finds some man strong and vigourous enough to grasp the whole power
of the state, to silence the chattering of the politicians, and to rule
her with a rod of iron. But I am wandering from my subject. Will you
undertake this mission?"

"I will," Malchus replied firmly, "if you think me worthy of it. I
have no eloquence as a speaker, and know nothing of the arts of the
politician."

"There will be plenty of our friends there who will be able to harangue
the multitude," Hannibal replied. "It is your presence there as the
representative of the army, as my kinsman, and as the son of the general
who did such good service to the state that will profit our cause.

"It is your mission to tell Carthage that now is her time or never; that
Rome already totters from the blows I have struck her, and that another
blow only is requisite to stretch her in the dust. A mighty effort is
needed to overthrow once for all our great rival.

"Sacrifices will be needed, and great ones, to obtain the object, but
Rome once fallen the future of Carthage is secure. What is needed is
that Carthage should obtain and keep the command of the sea for two
years, that at least twenty-five thousand men should be sent over in the
spring, and as many in the spring following. With such reinforcements I
will undertake to destroy absolutely the power of Rome. Tomorrow I will
furnish you with letters to our friends at home, giving full details as
to the course they should pursue and particulars of our needs.

"A party of horse shall accompany you to the coast, with a score of men
used to navigation. There you will seize a ship and sail for Corinth,
whence you will have no difficulty in obtaining passage to Carthage."

After nightfall the next day Malchus started, taking Nessus with him as
his attendant and companion. The party travelled all night, and in the
morning the long line of the sea was visible from the summits of the
hills they were crossing. They waited for some hours to rest and refresh
their horses, and then, continuing their journey, came down in the
afternoon upon a little port at the mouth of the river Biferno. So
unexpected was their approach that the inhabitants had not time to shut
their gates, and the troops entered the town without resistance, the
people all flying to their houses.

Malchus at once proclaimed that the Carthaginians came as friends, and
would, if, unmolested, injure no one; but if any armed attempt was made
against them they would sack and destroy the town. Two or three vessels
were lying in the port; Malchus took possession of the largest, and,
putting his party of seamen on board her, ordered the crew to sail
for Corinth. The horsemen were to remain in the town until the vessel
returned, when, with the party on board her, they would at once rejoin
Hannibal.

The wind was favourable, and the next morning the mountains of Greece
were in sight, and in the afternoon they entered the port of Corinth.
The anchor was dropped at a short distance from the shore, the small
boat was lowered, and Malchus, accompanied by Nessus, was rowed ashore
by two of his own men. These then returned on board the ship, which at
once weighed anchor and set sail on her return.

Corinth was a large and busy port, and the arrival and departure of
the little vessel from Italy passed altogether unnoticed, and without
attracting any particular attention Malchus and his companion made their
way along the wharves. The trade of Corinth was large and flourishing,
and the scene reminded Malchus of that with which he was so familiar
in Carthage. Ships of many nationalities were ranged along the quays.
Galleys from Tyre and Cyprus, from Syria and Egypt, from Carthage and
Italy, were all assembled in this neutral port.

Corinth was, like Carthage, essentially a trading community; and while
the power and glory of the rival cities of the Peloponnesus were rapidly
failing Corinth was rising in rank, and was now the first city of
Greece. Malchus had no difficulty in finding a Carthaginian trading
ship. He was amply supplied with money, and soon struck a bargain that
the captain should, without waiting to take in further cargo, at once
sail for Carthage.

The captain was much surprised at the appearance in Corinth of a young
Carthaginian evidently of high rank, but he was too well satisfied at
the bargain he had made to ask any questions. An hour later the mooring
ropes were cast off, and the vessel, spreading her sails, started on her
voyage. The weather was warm and pleasant, and Malchus, stretched on a
couch spread on the poop, greatly enjoyed the rest and quiet, after the
long months which had been spent in almost incessant activity. Upon the
following day Nessus approached him.

"My lord Malchus," he said, "there are some on board the ship who know
you. I have overheard the men talking together, and it seems that one
of them recognized you as having been in the habit of going out with a
fisherman who lived next door to him at Carthage."

"It matters not," Malchus said indifferently; "I have no particular
motive in concealing my name, though it would have been as well that
I should be able to meet my friends in Carthage and consult with them
before my arrival there was generally known. However, before I leave the
ship I can distribute some money among the crew, and tell them that for
certain reasons of state I do not wish them to mention on shore that I
have been a passenger."

Had Malchus been aware that the ship in which he had taken passage was
one of the great fleet of traders owned by Hanno, he would have regarded
the discovery of his personality by the sailors in a more serious light;
as it was, he thought no more of the matter. No change in the manner
of the captain showed that he was aware of the name and rank of his
passenger, and Malchus, as he watched the wide expanse of sea, broken
only by a few distant sails, was too intent upon the mission with which
he was charged to give the matter another moment's thought.

The wind fell light and it was not until the evening of the eighth day
after leaving Corinth that Carthage, with the citadel of Byrsa rising
above it, could be distinguished. The ship was moving but slowly through
the water, and the captain said that unless a change took place they
would not make port until late the next morning. Malchus retired to his
couch feeling sorry that the period of rest and tranquillity was at an
end, and that he was now about to embark in a difficult struggle, which,
though he felt its importance, was altogether alien to his taste and
disposition.

He had not even the satisfaction that he should see his mother and
sister, for news had come a short time before he sailed that their
