
One of these men, however, was Jo Candy, and he would not go at all. No
promises could tempt him, nor could threats move him. He said he must
remain at home to harvest his crop of jackson-balls, lemon-drops,
bonbons and chocolate-creams. Also he had large fields of crackerjack
and buttered pop corn to be mowed and threshed, and he was determined
not to disappoint the children of Oogaboo by going away to conquer the
world and so let the candy crop spoil.

Finding Jo Candy so obstinate, Queen Ann let him have his own way and
continued her journey to the house of the eighteenth and last man in
Oogaboo, who was a young fellow named Jo Files. This Files had twelve
trees which bore steel files of various sorts; but also he had nine
book-trees, on which grew a choice selection of story-books. In case
you have never seen books growing upon trees, I will explain that those
in Jo Files' orchard were enclosed in broad green husks which, when
fully ripe, turned to a deep red color. Then the books were picked and
husked and were ready to read. If they were picked too soon, the
stories were found to be confused and uninteresting and the spelling
bad. However, if allowed to ripen perfectly, the stories were fine
reading and the spelling and grammar excellent.

Files freely gave his books to all who wanted them, but the people of
Oogaboo cared little for books and so he had to read most of them
himself, before they spoiled. For, as you probably know, as soon as the
books were read the words disappeared and the leaves withered and
faded--which is the worst fault of all books which grow upon trees.

When Queen Ann spoke to this young man Files, who was both intelligent
and ambitious, he said he thought it would be great fun to conquer the
world. But he called her attention to the fact that he was far superior
to the other men of her army. Therefore, he would not be one of her
Generals or Colonels or Majors or Captains, but claimed the honor of
being sole Private.

Ann did not like this idea at all.

"I hate to have a Private Soldier in my army," she said; "they're so
common. I am told that Princess Ozma once had a private soldier, but
she made him her Captain-General, which is good evidence that the
private was unnecessary."

"Ozma's army doesn't fight," returned Files; "but your army must fight
like fury in order to conquer the world. I have read in my books that
it is always the private soldiers who do the fighting, for no officer
is ever brave enough to face the foe. Also, it stands to reason that
your officers must have some one to command and to issue their orders
to; therefore I'll be the one. I long to slash and slay the enemy and
become a hero. Then, when we return to Oogaboo, I'll take all the
marbles away from the children and melt them up and make a marble
statue of myself for all to look upon and admire."

Ann was much pleased with Private Files. He seemed indeed to be such a
warrior as she needed in her enterprise, and her hopes of success took
a sudden bound when Files told her he knew where a gun-tree grew and
would go there at once and pick the ripest and biggest musket the tree
bore.




Chapter Two

Out of Oogaboo


Three days later the Grand Army of Oogaboo assembled in the square in
front of the royal palace. The sixteen officers were attired in
gorgeous uniforms and carried sharp, glittering swords. The Private had
picked his gun and, although it was not a very big weapon, Files tried
to look fierce and succeeded so well that all his commanding officers
were secretly afraid of him.

The women were there, protesting that Queen Ann Soforth had no right to
take their husbands and fathers from them; but Ann commanded them to
keep silent, and that was the hardest order to obey they had ever
received.

The Queen appeared before her Army dressed in an imposing uniform of
green, covered with gold braid. She wore a green soldier-cap with a
purple plume in it and looked so royal and dignified that everyone in
Oogaboo except the Army was glad she was going. The Army was sorry she
was not going alone.

"Form ranks!" she cried in her shrill voice.

Salye leaned out of the palace window and laughed.

"I believe your Army can run better than it can fight," she observed.

"Of course," replied General Bunn, proudly. "We're not looking for
trouble, you know, but for plunder. The more plunder and the less
fighting we get, the better we shall like our work."

"For my part," said Files, "I prefer war and carnage to anything. The
only way to become a hero is to conquer, and the story-books all say
that the easiest way to conquer is to fight."

"That's the idea, my brave man!" agreed Ann. "To fight is to conquer
and to conquer is to secure plunder and to secure plunder is to become
a hero. With such noble determination to back me, the world is mine!
Good-bye, Salye. When we return we shall be rich and famous. Come,
Generals; let us march."

At this the Generals straightened up and threw out their chests. Then
they swung their glittering swords in rapid circles and cried to the
Colonels:

"For-ward March!"

Then the Colonels shouted to the Majors: "For-ward March!" and the
Majors yelled to the Captains: "For-ward March!" and the Captains
screamed to the Private:

"For-ward March!"

So Files shouldered his gun and began to march, and all the officers
followed after him. Queen Ann came last of all, rejoicing in her noble
army and wondering why she had not decided long ago to conquer the
world.

In this order the procession marched out of Oogaboo and took the narrow
mountain pass which led into the lovely Fairyland of Oz.




Chapter Three

Magic Mystifies the Marchers


Princess Ozma was all unaware that the Army of Oogaboo, led by their
ambitious Queen, was determined to conquer her Kingdom. The beautiful
girl Ruler of Oz was busy with the welfare of her subjects and had no
time to think of Ann Soforth and her disloyal plans. But there was one
who constantly guarded the peace and happiness of the Land of Oz and
this was the Official Sorceress of the Kingdom, Glinda the Good.

In her magnificent castle, which stands far north of the Emerald City
where Ozma holds her court, Glinda owns a wonderful magic Record Book,
in which is printed every event that takes place anywhere, just as soon
as it happens.

The smallest things and the biggest things are all recorded in this
book. If a child stamps its foot in anger, Glinda reads about it; if a
city burns down, Glinda finds the fact noted in her book.

The Sorceress always reads her Record Book every day, and so it was she
knew that Ann Soforth, Queen of Oogaboo, had foolishly assembled an
army of sixteen officers and one private soldier, with which she
intended to invade and conquer the Land of Oz.

There was no danger but that Ozma, supported by the magic arts of
Glinda the Good and the powerful Wizard of Oz--both her firm
friends--could easily defeat a far more imposing army than Ann's; but
it would be a shame to have the peace of Oz interrupted by any sort of
quarreling or fighting. So Glinda did not even mention the matter to
Ozma, or to anyone else. She merely went into a great chamber of her
castle, known as the Magic Room, where she performed a magical ceremony
which caused the mountain pass that led from Oogaboo to make several
turns and twists. The result was that when Ann and her army came to the
end of the pass they were not in the Land of Oz at all, but in an
adjoining territory that was quite distinct from Ozma's domain and
separated from Oz by an invisible barrier.

As the Oogaboo people emerged into this country, the pass they had
traversed disappeared behind them and it was not likely they would ever
find their way back into the valley of Oogaboo. They were greatly
puzzled, indeed, by their surroundings and did not know which way to
go. None of them had ever visited Oz, so it took them some time to
discover they were not in Oz at all, but in an unknown country.

"Never mind," said Ann, trying to conceal her disappointment; "we have
started out to conquer the world, and here is part of it. In time, as
we pursue our victorious journey, we will doubtless come to Oz; but,
until we get there, we may as well conquer whatever land we find
ourselves in."

"Have we conquered this place, Your Majesty?" anxiously inquired Major
Cake.

"Most certainly," said Ann. "We have met no people, as yet, but when we
do, we will inform them that they are our slaves."

"And afterward we will plunder them of all their possessions," added
General Apple.

"They may not possess anything," objected Private Files; "but I hope
they will fight us, just the same. A peaceful conquest wouldn't be any
fun at all."

"Don't worry," said the Queen. "We can fight, whether our foes do or
not; and perhaps we would find it more comfortable to have the enemy
surrender promptly."

It was a barren country and not very pleasant to travel in. Moreover,
there was little for them to eat, and as the officers became hungry
they became fretful. Many would have deserted had they been able to
find their way home, but as the Oogaboo people were now hopelessly lost
in a strange country they considered it more safe to keep together than
to separate.

Queen Ann's temper, never very agreeable, became sharp and irritable as
she and her army tramped over the rocky roads without encountering
either people or plunder. She scolded her officers until they became
surly, and a few of them were disloyal enough to ask her to hold her
tongue. Others began to reproach her for leading them into difficulties
and in the space of three unhappy days every man was mourning for his
orchard in the pretty valley of Oogaboo.

Files, however, proved a different sort. The more difficulties he
encountered the more cheerful he became, and the sighs of the officers
were answered by the merry whistle of the Private. His pleasant
disposition did much to encourage Queen Ann and before long she
consulted the Private Soldier more often than she did his superiors.

It was on the third day of their pilgrimage that they encountered their
first adventure. Toward evening the sky was suddenly darkened and Major
Nails exclaimed:

"A fog is coming toward us."

"I do not think it is a fog," replied Files, looking with interest at
the approaching cloud. "It seems to me more like the breath of a Rak."

"What is a Rak?" asked Ann, looking about fearfully.

"A terrible beast with a horrible appetite," answered the soldier,
growing a little paler than usual. "I have never seen a Rak, to be
sure, but I have read of them in the story-books that grew in my
orchard, and if this is indeed one of those fearful monsters, we are
not likely to conquer the world."

Hearing this, the officers became quite worried and gathered closer
about their soldier.

"What is the thing like?" asked one.

"The only picture of a Rak that I ever saw in a book was rather
blurred," said Files, "because the book was not quite ripe when it was
picked. But the creature can fly in the air and run like a deer and
swim like a fish. Inside its body is a glowing furnace of fire, and the
Rak breathes in air and breathes out smoke, which darkens the sky for
miles around, wherever it goes. It is bigger than a hundred men and
feeds on any living thing."

The officers now began to groan and to tremble, but Files tried to
cheer them, saying:

"It may not be a Rak, after all, that we see approaching us, and you
must not forget that we people of Oogaboo, which is part of the
fairyland of Oz, cannot be killed."

"Nevertheless," said Captain Buttons, "if the Rak catches us, and chews
us up into small pieces, and swallows us--what will happen then?"

"Then each small piece will still be alive," declared Files.

"I cannot see how that would help us," wailed Colonel Banjo. "A
hamburger steak is a hamburger steak, whether it is alive or not!"

"I tell you, this may not be a Rak," persisted Files. "We will know,
when the cloud gets nearer, whether it is the breath of a Rak or not.
If it has no smell at all, it is probably a fog; but if it has an odor
of salt and pepper, it is a Rak and we must prepare for a desperate
fight."

They all eyed the dark cloud fearfully. Before long it reached the
frightened group and began to envelop them. Every nose sniffed the
cloud--and every one detected in it the odor of salt and pepper.

"The Rak!" shouted Private Files, and with a howl of despair the
sixteen officers fell to the ground, writhing and moaning in anguish.
Queen Ann sat down upon a rock and faced the cloud more bravely,
although her heart was beating fast. As for Files, he calmly loaded his
gun and stood ready to fight the foe, as a soldier should.

They were now in absolute darkness, for the cloud which covered the sky
and the setting sun was black as ink. Then through the gloom appeared
two round, glowing balls of red, and Files at once decided these must
be the monster's eyes.

He raised his gun, took aim and fired.

There were several bullets in the gun, all gathered from an excellent
bullet-tree in Oogaboo, and they were big and hard. They flew toward
the monster and struck it, and with a wild, weird cry the Rak came
fluttering down and its huge body fell plump upon the forms of the
sixteen officers, who thereupon screamed louder than before.

"Badness me!" moaned the Rak. "See what you've done with that dangerous
gun of yours!"

"I can't see," replied Files, "for the cloud formed by your breath
darkens my sight!"

"Don't tell me it was an accident," continued the Rak, reproachfully,
as it still flapped its wings in a helpless manner. "Don't claim you
didn't know the gun was loaded, I beg of you!"

"I don't intend to," replied Files. "Did the bullets hurt you very
badly?"

"One has broken my jaw, so that I can't open my mouth. You will notice
that my voice sounds rather harsh and husky, because I have to talk
with my teeth set close together. Another bullet broke my left wing, so
that I can't fly; and still another broke my right leg, so that I can't
walk. It was the most careless shot I ever heard of!"

"Can't you manage to lift your body off from my commanding officers?"
inquired Files. "From their cries I'm afraid your great weight is
crushing them."

"I hope it is," growled the Rak. "I want to crush them, if possible,
for I have a bad disposition. If only I could open my mouth, I'd eat
all of you, although my appetite is poorly this warm weather."

With this the Rak began to roll its immense body sidewise, so as to
crush the officers more easily; but in doing this it rolled completely
off from them and the entire sixteen scrambled to their feet and made
off as fast as they could run.

Private Files could not see them go but he knew from the sound of their
voices that they had escaped, so he ceased to worry about them.

"Pardon me if I now bid you good-bye," he said to the Rak. "The parting
is caused by our desire to continue our journey. If you die, do not
blame me, for I was obliged to shoot you as a matter of
self-protection."

