
"Yes; he is to be discharged as he can not walk well, and the surgeon
says he will always limp. He owes you a grudge, and I am glad that he
is going away, for he is a dangerous man. But the sun is setting, Mr.
Edward, and supper will soon be on the table; you had better go back to
the house."

Edward bade Oswald farewell, and returned to the intendant's, and found
that Oswald was correct, as supper was being placed on the table.

Soon after supper, Phoebe and the men-servants were summoned, and
prayers offered up by the intendant, after which Patience and Clara
retired. Edward remained in conversation with the intendant for about
an hour, and then was conducted by him to his room, which had already
been shown to him by Patience.

Edward did not sleep much that night. The novelty of his situation--the
novelty of his prospects, and his speculations thereon, kept him awake
till near morning: he was, however, up in good time, and having
assisted at the morning prayers, and afterward eaten a most substantial
breakfast, he took his leave of the intendant and the two girls, and
set off on his return to the cottage, having renewed his promise of
coming on the following Monday to take up his abode with them. Billy
was fresh, and cantered gayly along, so that Edward was back early in
the afternoon, and once more welcomed by his household. He stated to
Humphrey all that had occurred, and Humphrey was much pleased at Edward
having accepted the offer of the intendant. Alice and Edith did not
quite so much approve of it, and a few tears were shed at the idea of
Edward leaving the cottage. The next day, Edward and Humphrey set off
for Lymington, with Billy in the cart.

"Do you know, Edward," said Humphrey, "what I am going to try and
purchase? I will tell you: as many kids as I can, or goats and kids, I
don't care which."

"Why, have you not stock enough already? You will this year have four
cows in milk, and you have two cow calves bringing up."

"That is very true; but I do not intend to have goats for their milk,
but simply for eating in lieu of mutton. Sheep I can not manage, but
goats, with a little hay in winter, will do well, and will find
themselves in the forest all the year round. I won't kill any of the
females for the first year or two, and after that I expect we shall
have a flock sufficient to meet any demand upon it."

"It is not a bad idea, Humphrey; they will always come home if you have
hay for them during the winter."

"Yes, and a large shed for them to lie in when the snow is on the
ground."

"Now I recollect, when we used to go to Lymington, I saw a great many
goats, and I have no doubt that they are to be purchased. I will soon
ascertain that for you, from the landlord of the hostelry," replied
Edward. "We will drive there first, as I must ask him to recommend me
to a tailor."

On their arrival at Lymington, they went straight to the hostelry, and
found the landlord at home. He recommended a tailor to Edward, who sent
for him to the inn, and was measured by him for a plain suit of dark
cloth. Edward and Humphrey then went out, as Edward had to procure
boots, and many other articles of dress, to correspond with the one
which he was about to assume.

"I am most puzzled about a hat, Humphrey," said Edward: "I hate those
steeple-crowned hats worn by the Roundheads; yet the hat and feather is
not proper for a secretary."

"I would advise you to submit to wear the steeple-crowned hats,
nevertheless," said Humphrey. "Your dress, as I consider, is a sort of
disgrace to a Cavalier born, and the heir of Arnwood; why not,
therefore, take its hat as well? As secretary to the intendant, you
should dress like him; if not, you may occasion remarks, especially
when you travel on his concerns."

"You are right, Humphrey, I must not do things by halves; and unless I
wear the hat, I might be suspected."

"I doubt if the intendant wears it for any other reason," said Humphrey.

"At all events, I will not go to the height of the fashion," replied
Edward, laughing. "Some of the hats are not quite so tall as the
others."

"Here is the shop for the hat and for the sword-belt."

Edward chose a hat and a plain sword-belt, paid for them, and desired
the man to carry them to the hostelry.

While all these purchases on the part of Edward, and many others by
Humphrey, such as nails, saws, tools, and various articles which Alice
required for the household, were gathered together, the landlord had
sent out to inquire for the goats, and found out at what price they
were to be procured. Humphrey left Edward to put away these in the
cart, while he went out a second time to see the goats; he made an
agreement with the man who had them for sale, for a male and three
females with two kids each at their sides, and ten more female kids
which had just been weaned. The man engaged to drive them from
Lymington as far as the road went into the forest, on the following
day, when Humphrey would meet them, pay him his money, and drive them
to the cottage, which would be only three miles from the place agreed
upon. Having settled that satisfactorily, he returned to Edward, who
was all ready, and they went back home.

"We have dipped somewhat into the bag to-day, Edward," said Humphrey,
"but the money is well spent."

"I think so, Humphrey; but I have no doubt that I shall be able to
replace the money very soon, as the intendant will pay me for my
services. The tailor has promised the clothes on Saturday without fail,
so that you or I must go for them."

"I will go, Edward; my sisters will wish you to stay with them now, as
you are so soon to leave them; and I will take Pablo with me, that he
may know his way to the town; and I will show him where to buy things,
in case he goes there by himself."

"It appears to me to have been a most fortunate thing, your having
caught Pablo as you did, Humphrey, for I do not well know how I could
have left you, if you had not."

"At all events, I can do much better without you than I should have
done," replied Humphrey; "although I think now that I could get on by
myself; but still, Edward, you know we can not tell what a day may
bring forth, and I might fall sick, or something happen which might
prevent my attending to any thing; and then, without you or Pablo,
every thing might have gone to rack and ruin. Certainly, when we think
how we were left, by the death of old Jacob, to our own resources, we
have much to thank God for, in having got on so well."

"I agree with you, and also that it has pleased Heaven to grant us all
such good health. However, I shall be close at hand if you want me, and
Oswald will always call and see how you get on."

"I hope you will manage that he calls once a-week."

"I will if I can, Humphrey, for I shall be just as anxious as you are
to know if all goes on well. Indeed, I shall insist upon coming over to
you once a-fortnight; and I hardly think the intendant will refuse
me--indeed, I am sure that he will not."

"So am I," replied Humphrey. "I am certain that he wishes us all well,
and has, in a measure, taken us under his protection; but, Edward,
recollect, I shall never kill any venison after this, and so you may
tell the intendant."

"I will, and that will be an excuse for him to send some over, if he
pleases. Indeed, as I know I shall be permitted to go out with Oswald,
it will be hard if a stray buck does not find its way to the cottage."

Thus did they continue talking over matters till they arrived at the
cottage. Alice came out to them, saying to Humphrey,

"Well, Humphrey, have you brought my geese and ducks?"

Humphrey had forgotten them, but he replied, "You must wait till I go
to Lymington again on Saturday, Alice, and then I hope to bring them
with me. As it is, look how poor Billy is loaded. Where's Pablo?"

"In the garden. He has been working there all day, and Edith is with
him."

"Well, then, we will unload the cart, while you get us something to
eat, Alice, for we are not a little hungry. I can tell you."

"I have some rabbit-stew on the fire, Humphrey, all ready for you, and
you will find it very good."

"Nothing I like better, my dear girl. Pablo won't thank me for bringing
this home," continued Humphrey, taking the long saw out of the cart;
"he will have to go to the bottom of the pit again, as soon as the pit
is made."

The cart was soon unloaded, Billy taken out and turned out to feed, and
then they went in to the supper.

Humphrey was off the next morning, with Pablo, at an early hour, to
meet the farmer of whom he had purchased the goats and kids. He found
them punctual to the time, at the place agreed upon; and being
satisfied with the lot, paid the farmer his money, and drove them home
through the forest.

"Goat very good, kid better; always eat kid in Spain," said Pablo.

"Were you born in Spain, Pablo?"

"Not sure, but I think so. First recollect myself in that country."

"Do you recollect your father?"

"No; never see him."

"Did your mother never talk about him?"

"Call her mother, but think no mother at all. Custom with Gitanas."

"Why did you call her mother?"

"'Cause she feed me when little, beat me when I get big."

"All mothers do that. What made you come to England?"

"I don't know, but I hear people say, plenty of money in
England--plenty to eat--plenty to drink; bring plenty money back to
Spain."

"How long have you been in England?"

"One, two, three year; yes, three year and a bit."

"Which did you like best--England or Spain?"

"When with my people, like Spain best; warm sun--warm night. England,
little sun, cold night, much rain, snow, and air always cold; but now I
live with you, have warm bed, plenty victuals, like England best."

"But when you were with the gipsies, they stole every thing, did they
not?"

"Not steal every thing," replied Pablo, laughing; "sometimes take and
no pay when nobody there; farmer look very sharp--have big dog."

"Did you ever go out to steal?"

"Make me go out. Not bring back something, beat me very hard; suppose
farmer catch me, beat hard too; nothing but beat, beat, beat."

"Then they obliged you to steal?"

"Suppose bring nothing home, first beat, and then not have to eat for
one, two, three days. How you like that, Master Humphrey? I think you
steal, after no victuals for three days!"

"I should hope not," replied Humphrey, "although I have never been so
severely punished: and I hope, Pablo, you will never steal any more."

"Why steal any more?" replied Pablo. "I not like to steal, but because
hungry I steal. Now, I never hungry, always have plenty to eat; no one
beat me now; sleep warm all night. Why I steal, then? No, Master
Humphrey, I never steal more, 'cause I have no reason why, and 'cause
Missy Alice and Edith tell me how the good God up there say must not
steal."

"I am glad to hear you give that as a reason, Pablo," replied Humphrey,
"as it proves that my sisters have not been teaching you in vain."

"Like to hear Missy Alice talk; she talk grave. Missy Edith talk too,
but she laugh very much; very fond Missy Edith, very happy little girl;
jump about just like one of these kids we drive home; always merry.
Hah! see cottage now; soon get home, Massa Humphrey. Missy Edith like
see kids very much. Where we put them?"




CHAPTER XIX.


"We will put them into the yard for the present. I mean that Holdfast
shall take charge of them by-and-by. I will soon teach him."

"Yes, he take charge of coat, or any thing I tell him; why not take
charge of goats. Clever dog, Holdfast. Massa Humphrey, you think Massa
Edward take away both his dogs, Smoker and Watch? I say better not take
puppy. Take Smoker, and leave puppy."

"I agree with you, Pablo. We ought to have two dogs here. I will speak
to my brother. Now run forward and open the gate of the yard, and throw
them some hay, Pablo, while I go and call my sisters."

The flock of goats were much admired, and the next morning were driven
out into the forest to feed, attended by Pablo and Holdfast. When it
was dinner time, Pablo drove the flock near to the cottage, telling the
dog to mind them. The sensible animal remained at once with the goats
until Pablo's return from dinner; and it may be as well to observe
here, that in a few days the dog took charge of them altogether,
driving them home to the yard every evening; and as soon as the goats
were put into the yard, the dog had his supper; and the dog took care,
therefore, not to be too late. To return to our narrative.

On Saturday, Humphrey and Pablo went to Lymington, to bring home
Edward's clothes, and Humphrey made Pablo acquainted with all that he
wanted to know, in case it might be necessary to send Pablo there alone.

Edward remained with his sisters, as he was to leave them on the Monday.

Sunday was passed as usual; they read the service at old Armitage's
grave, and afterward they walked in the forest; for Sunday was the only
day on which Alice could find time to leave her duties in the cottage.
They were not more grave than usual at the idea of Edward's leaving
them; but they kept up their spirits, as they were aware that it was
for the advantage of all.

On Monday morning, Edward, to please his sisters, put on his new
clothes, and put his forester's dress in the bundle with his linen.
Alice and Edith thought he looked very well in them, and said that it
reminded them of the days of Arnwood. The fact was, that Edward
appeared as he was--a gentleman born; that could not well be concealed
under a forester's dress, and in his present attire it was undeniable.
After breakfast, Billy was harnessed and brought to the cottage-door.
Edward's linen was put in the cart, and as he had agreed with Humphrey,
he took only Smoker with him, leaving the puppy at the cottage. Pablo
went with him, to bring back the cart. Edward kissed his sisters, who
wept at the idea of his leaving them, and, shaking hands with Humphrey,
he set off to cross the forest.

"Who would ever have believed this?" thought Edward, as he drove across
the forest, "that I should put myself under the roof and under the
protection of a Roundhead--one in outward appearance, and in the
opinion of the world at least, if he is not so altogether in opinions.
There is surely some spell upon me, and I almost feel as if I were a
traitor to my principles. Why I know not, I feel a regard for that man,
and a confidence in him. And why should I not? He knows my principles,
my feelings against his party, and he respects them. Surely he can not
wish to gain me over to his party; that were indeed ridiculous--a young
forester--a youth unknown. No, he would gain nothing by that, for I am
nobody. It must be from goodwill, and no other feeling. I have obliged
him in the service I rendered his daughter, and he is grateful."
Perhaps, had Edward put the question to himself, "Should I have been on
such friendly terms with the intendant--should I have accepted his
offer, if there had been no Patience Heatherstone?" he might then have
discovered what was the "spell upon him" which had rendered him so
tractable; but of that he had no idea. He only felt that his situation
would be rendered more comfortable by the society of an amiable and
handsome girl, and he inquired no further.

His revery was broken by Pablo, who appeared tired of holding his
tongue, and said, "Massa Edward, you not like leave home--you think
very much. Why you go there?"

"I certainly do not like to leave home, Pablo, for I am very fond of my
brother and sisters; but we can not always do as we wish in this world,
and it is for their sakes, more than from my own inclinations, that I
have done so."

"Can't see what good you do Missy Alice and Missy Edith 'cause you go
away. How it possible do good, and not with them? Suppose bad accident,
and you away, how you do good? Suppose bad accident, and you at
cottage, then you do good. I think, Massa Edward, you very foolish."

Edward laughed at this blunt observation of Pablo's, and replied, "It
is very true, Pablo, that I can not watch over my sisters, and protect
them in person, when I am away; but there are reasons why I should go,
nevertheless, and I may be more useful to them by going than by
remaining with them. If I did not think so, I would not leave them.
They know nobody, and have no friends in the world. Suppose anything
was to happen to me--suppose both Humphrey and I were to die--for you
know that we never know how soon that event may take place--who would
there be to protect my poor sisters, and what would become of them? Is
it not, therefore, wise that I should procure friends for them, in case
of accident, who would look after them and protect them? and it is my
hope, that by leaving them now, I shall make powerful and kind friends
for them. Do you understand me?"

"Yes, I see now; you think more than me, Massa Edward. I say just now,
you foolish; I say now, Pablo great fool."

"Besides, Pablo, recollect that I never would have left them as long as
there was only Humphrey and I to look after them, because an accident
might have happened to one of us; but when you came to live with us,
and I found what a good, clever boy you were, and that you were fond of
us all, I then said, 'Now I can leave my sisters, for Pablo shall take
my place, and assist Humphrey to do what is required, and to take care
of them.' Am I not right, Pablo?"

"Yes, Massa Edward," replied Pablo, taking hold of Edward's wrist, "you
quite right. Pablo does love Missy Alice, Missy Edith, Massa Humphrey,
and you, Massa Edward; he love you all very much indeed; he love you so
much that he die for you! Can do no more."

"That is what I really thought of you, Pablo, and yet I am glad to hear
it from your own mouth. If you had not come to live with us, and not
proved so faithful, I could not have left to benefit my sisters; but
you have induced me to leave, and they have to thank you if I am able
to be of any service to them."

"Well, Massa Edward, you go; never mind us, we make plenty of work; do
every thing all the same as you."

"I think you will, Pablo, and that is the reason why I have agreed to
go away. But, Pablo, Billy is growing old, and you will want some more
ponies."

"Yes, Massa Edward; Massa Humphrey talk to me about ponies last night,
and say plenty in the forest. Ask me if I think us able catch them. I
say yes, catch one, two, twenty, suppose want them."

"Ah! how will you do that, Pablo?"

"Massa Edward, you tell Massa Humphrey no possible, so I no tell you
how," replied Pablo, laughing. "Some day you come and see us, see five
ponies in the stable. Massa Humphrey and I, we talk about, find out
how; you see."

"Well, then, I shall ask no more questions, Pablo; and when I see the
ponies in the stable, then I'll believe it, and not before."

"Suppose you want big horse for ride, catch big horse, Massa Edward,
you see. Massa Humphrey very clever, he catch cow."

"Catch gipsy," said Edward.

"Yes," said Pablo, laughing, "catch cow, catch gipsy, and by-and-by
catch horse."

When Edward arrived at the intendant's house, he was very kindly
received by the intendant and the two girls. Having deposited his
wardrobe in his bedroom, he went out to Oswald and put Smoker in the
kennel, and on his return found Pablo sitting on the carpet in the
sitting-room, talking to Patience and Clara, and they all three
appeared much amused. When Pablo and Billy had both had something to
eat, the cart was filled with pots of flowers, and several, other
little things as presents from Patience Heatherstone, and Pablo set off
on his return.

"Well, Edward, you do look like a--" said Clara, stopping.

"Like a secretary, I hope," added Edward.

"Well, you don't look like a forester; does he, Patience?" continued
Clara.

"You must not judge of people by their clothes, Clara."

"Nor do I," replied Clara. "Those clothes would not look well upon
Oswald, or the other men, for they would not suit them; but they do
suit you: don't they, Patience?"

Patience Heatherstone, however, did not make any answer to this second
