
Deserted by her father, the poor girl sat down under a fir-tree at the
edge of the forest and began to weep silently. Suddenly she heard a
faint sound: it was King Frost springing from tree to tree, and cracking
his fingers as he went. At length he reached the fir-tree beneath which
she was sitting, and with a crisp crackling sound he alighted beside
her, and looked at her lovely face.

'Well, maiden,' he snapped out, 'do you know who I am? I am King Frost,
king of the red-noses.'

'All hail to you, great King!' answered the girl, in a gentle, trembling
voice. 'Have you come to take me?'

'Are you warm, maiden?' he replied.

'Quite warm, King Frost,' she answered, though she shivered as she
spoke.

Then King Frost stooped down, and bent over the girl, and the crackling
sound grew louder, and the air seemed to be full of knives and darts;
and again he asked:

'Maiden, are you warm? Are you warm, you beautiful girl?'

And though her breath was almost frozen on her lips, she whispered
gently, 'Quite warm, King Frost.'

Then King Frost gnashed his teeth, and cracked his fingers, and his eyes
sparkled, and the crackling, crisp sound was louder than ever, and for
the last time he asked her:

'Maiden, are you still warm? Are you still warm, little love?'

And the poor girl was so stiff and numb that she could just gasp, 'Still
warm, O King!'

Now her gentle, courteous words and her uncomplaining ways touched
King Frost, and he had pity on her, and he wrapped her up in furs, and
covered her with blankets, and he fetched a great box, in which were
beautiful jewels and a rich robe embroidered in gold and silver. And she
put it on, and looked more lovely than ever, and King Frost stepped with
her into his sledge, with six white horses.

In the meantime the wicked step-mother was waiting at home for news of
the girl's death, and preparing pancakes for the funeral feast. And she
said to her husband: 'Old man, you had better go out into the fields and
find your daughter's body and bury her.' Just as the old man was leaving
the house the little dog under the table began to bark, saying:

     'YOUR daughter shall live to be your delight;
      HER daughter shall die this very night.'

'Hold your tongue, you foolish beast!' scolded the woman. 'There's a
pancake for you, but you must say:

     "HER daughter shall have much silver and gold;
      HIS daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold."'

But the doggie ate up the pancake and barked, saying:

     'His daughter shall wear a crown on her head;
      Her daughter shall die unwooed, unwed.'


Then the old woman tried to coax the doggie with more pancakes and
to terrify it with blows, but he barked on, always repeating the same
words. And suddenly the door creaked and flew open, and a great heavy
chest was pushed in, and behind it came the step-daughter, radiant and
beautiful, in a dress all glittering with silver and gold. For a moment
the step-mother's eyes were dazzled. Then she called to her husband:
'Old man, yoke the horses at once into the sledge, and take my daughter
to the same field and leave her on the same spot exactly; 'and so the
old man took the girl and left her beneath the same tree where he had
parted from his daughter. In a few minutes King Frost came past, and,
looking at the girl, he said:

'Are you warm, maiden?'

'What a blind old fool you must be to ask such a question!' she answered
angrily. 'Can't you see that my hands and feet are nearly frozen?'

Then King Frost sprang to and fro in front of her, questioning her, and
getting only rude, rough words in reply, till at last he got very angry,
and cracked his fingers, and gnashed his teeth, and froze her to death.

But in the hut her mother was waiting for her return, and as she grew
impatient she said to her husband: 'Get out the horses, old man, to go
and fetch her home; but see that you are careful not to upset the sledge
and lose the chest.'

But the doggie beneath the table began to bark, saying:

     'Your daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold,
      And shall never have a chest full of gold.'

'Don't tell such wicked lies!' scolded the woman. 'There's a cake for
you; now say:

     "HER daughter shall marry a mighty King."

At that moment the door flew open, and she rushed out to meet her
daughter, and as she took her frozen body in her arms she too was
chilled to death.




THE DEATH OF THE SUN-HERO (27)

(27) From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

Many, many thousand years ago there lived a mighty King whom heaven had
blessed with a clever and beautiful son. When he was only ten years old
the boy was cleverer than all the King's counsellors put together, and
when he was twenty he was the greatest hero in the whole kingdom. His
father could not make enough of his son, and always had him clothed in
golden garments which shone and sparkled like the sun; and his mother
gave him a white horse, which never slept, and which flew like the
wind. All the people in the land loved him dearly, and called him the
Sun-Hero, for they did not think his like existed under the sun. Now
it happened one night that both his parents had the same extraordinary
dream. They dreamt that a girl all dressed in red had come to them and
said: 'If you wish that your son should really become the Sun-Hero in
deed and not only in name, let him go out into the world and search for
the Tree of the Sun, and when he has found it, let him pluck a golden
apple from it and bring it home.'

When the King and Queen had each related their dreams to the other,
they were much amazed that they should both have dreamt exactly the same
about their son, and the King said to his wife, 'This is clearly a sign
from heaven that we should send our son out into the world in order that
he may come home the great Sun-Hero, as the Red Girl said, not only in
name but in deed.'

The Queen consented with many tears, and the King at once bade his son
set forth in search of the Tree of the Sun, from which he was to pluck
a golden apple. The Prince was delighted at the prospect, and set out on
his travels that very day.

For a long time he wandered all through the world, and it was not till
the ninety-ninth day after he started that he found an old man who
was able to tell him where the Tree of the Sun grew. He followed his
directions, and rode on his way, and after another ninety-nine days
he arrived at a golden castle, which stood in the middle of a vast
wilderness. He knocked at the door, which was opened noiselessly and by
invisible hands. Finding no one about, the Prince rode on, and came to
a great meadow, where the Sun-Tree grew. When he reached the tree he put
out his hand to pick a golden apple; but all of a sudden the tree grew
higher, so that he could not reach its fruit. Then he heard some one
behind him laughing. Turning round, he saw the girl in red walking
towards him, who addressed him in these words:

'Do you really imagine, brave son of the earth, that you can pluck an
apple so easily from the Tree of the Sun? Before you can do that, you
have a difficult task before you. You must guard the tree for nine days
and nine nights from the ravages of two wild black wolves, who will try
to harm it. Do you think you can undertake this?'

'Yes,' answered the Sun-Hero, 'I will guard the Tree of the Sun nine
days and nine nights.'

Then the girl continued: 'Remember, though, if you do not succeed the
Sun will kill you. Now begin your watch.'

With these words the Red Girl went back into the golden castle. She had
hardly left him when the two black wolves appeared: but the Sun-Hero
beat them off with his sword, and they retired, only, however, to
reappear in a very short time. The Sun-Hero chased them away once more,
but he had hardly sat down to rest when the two black wolves were on
the scene again. This went on for seven days and nights, when the white
horse, who had never done such a thing before, turned to the Sun-Hero
and said in a human voice: 'Listen to what I am going to say. A Fairy
gave me to your mother in order that I might be of service to you; so
let me tell you, that if you go to sleep and let the wolves harm the
tree, the Sun will surely kill you. The Fairy, foreseeing this, put
everyone in the world under a spell, which prevents their obeying the
Sun's command to take your life. But all the same, she has forgotten
one person, who will certainly kill you if you fall asleep and let the
wolves damage the tree. So watch and keep the wolves away.'

Then the Sun-Hero strove with all his might and kept the black wolves
at bay, and conquered his desire to sleep; but on the eighth night his
strength failed him, and he fell fast asleep. When he awoke a woman in
black stood beside him, who said: 'You have fulfilled your task very
badly, for you have let the two black wolves damage the Tree of the Sun.
I am the mother of the Sun, and I command you to ride away from here at
once, and I pronounce sentence of death upon you, for you proudly let
yourself be called the Sun-Hero without having done anything to deserve
the name.'

The youth mounted his horse sadly, and rode home. The people all
thronged round him on his return, anxious to hear his adventures, but
he told them nothing, and only to his mother did he confide what had
befallen him. But the old Queen laughed, and said to her son: 'Don't
worry, my child; you see, the Fairy has protected you so far, and the
Sun has found no one to kill you. So cheer up and be happy.'

After a time the Prince forgot all about his adventure, and married a
beautiful Princess, with whom he lived very happily for some time. But
one day when he was out hunting he felt very thirsty, and coming to a
stream he stooped down to drink from it, and this caused his death, for
a crab came swimming up, and with its claws tore out his tongue. He was
carried home in a dying condition, and as he lay on his death-bed
the black woman appeared and said: 'So the Sun has, after all, found
someone, who was not under the Fairy's spell, who has caused your death.
And a similar fate will overtake everyone under the Sun who wrongfully
assumes a title to which he has no right.'




THE WITCH (28)

(28) From the Russian.

Once upon a time there was a peasant whose wife died, leaving him with
two children--twins--a boy and a girl. For some years the poor man
lived on alone with the children, caring for them as best he could; but
everything in the house seemed to go wrong without a woman to look after
it, and at last he made up his mind to marry again, feeling that a
wife would bring peace and order to his household and take care of his
motherless children. So he married, and in the following years several
children were born to him; but peace and order did not come to the
household. For the step-mother was very cruel to the twins, and beat
them, and half-starved them, and constantly drove them out of the house;
for her one idea was to get them out of the way. All day she thought
of nothing but how she should get rid of them; and at last an evil idea
came into her head, and she determined to send them out into the great
gloomy wood where a wicked witch lived. And so one morning she spoke to
them, saying:

'You have been such good children that I am going to send you to visit
my granny, who lives in a dear little hut in the wood. You will have to
wait upon her and serve her, but you will be well rewarded, for she will
give you the best of everything.'

So the children left the house together; and the little sister, who was
very wise for her years, said to the brother:

'We will first go and see our own dear grandmother, and tell her where
our step-mother is sending us.'

And when the grandmother heard where they were going, she cried and
said:

'You poor motherless children! How I pity you; and yet I can do nothing
to help you! Your step-mother is not sending you to her granny, but to
a wicked witch who lives in that great gloomy wood. Now listen to me,
children. You must be civil and kind to everyone, and never say a cross
word to anyone, and never touch a crumb belonging to anyone else. Who
knows if, after all, help may not be sent to you?'

And she gave her grandchildren a bottle of milk and a piece of ham and
a loaf of bread, and they set out for the great gloomy wood. When they
reached it they saw in front of them, in the thickest of the trees, a
queer little hut, and when they looked into it, there lay the witch,
with her head on the threshold of the door, with one foot in one corner
and the other in the other corner, and her knees cocked up, almost
touching the ceiling.

'Who's there?' she snarled, in an awful voice, when she saw the
children.

And they answered civilly, though they were so terrified that they hid
behind one another, and said:

'Good-morning, granny; our step-mother has sent us to wait upon you, and
serve you.'

'See that you do it well, then,' growled the witch. 'If I am pleased
with you, I'll reward you; but if I am not, I'll put you in a pan and
fry you in the oven--that's what I'll do with you, my pretty dears! You
have been gently reared, but you'll find my work hard enough. See if you
don't.'

And, so saying, she set the girl down to spin yarn, and she gave the boy
a sieve in which to carry water from the well, and she herself went
out into the wood. Now, as the girl was sitting at her distaff, weeping
bitterly because she could not spin, she heard the sound of hundreds
of little feet, and from every hole and corner in the hut mice came
pattering along the floor, squeaking and saying:

          'Little girl, why are your eyes so red?
          If you want help, then give us some bread.'

And the girl gave them the bread that her grandmother had given her.
Then the mice told her that the witch had a cat, and the cat was very
fond of ham; if she would give the cat her ham, it would show her the
way out of the wood, and in the meantime they would spin the yarn for
her. So the girl set out to look for the cat, and, as she was hunting
about, she met her brother, in great trouble because he could not carry
water from the well in a sieve, as it came pouring out as fast as he
put it in. And as she was trying to comfort him they heard a rustling of
wings, and a flight of wrens alighted on the ground beside them. And the
wrens said:

          'Give us some crumbs, then you need not grieve.

          For you'll find that water will stay in the sieve.'

Then the twins crumbled their bread on the ground, and the wrens pecked
it, and chirruped and chirped. And when they had eaten the last crumb
they told the boy to fill up the holes of the sieve with clay, and then
to draw water from the well. So he did what they said, and carried the
sieve full of water into the hut without spilling a drop. When they
entered the hut the cat was curled up on the floor. So they stroked her,
and fed her with ham, and said to her:

'Pussy, grey pussy, tell us how we are to get away from the witch?'

Then the cat thanked them for the ham, and gave them a
pocket-handkerchief and a comb, and told them that when the witch
pursued them, as she certainly would, all they had to do was to throw
the handkerchief on the ground and run as fast as they could. As soon as
the handkerchief touched the ground a deep, broad river would spring up,
which would hinder the witch's progress. If she managed to get across
it, they must throw the comb behind them and run for their lives, for
where the comb fell a dense forest would start up, which would delay the
witch so long that they would be able to get safely away.

The cat had scarcely finished speaking when the witch returned to see if
the children had fulfilled their tasks.

'Well, you have done well enough for to-day,' she grumbled; 'but
to-morrow you'll have something more difficult to do, and if you don't
do it well, you pampered brats, straight into the oven you go.'

Half-dead with fright, and trembling in every limb, the poor children
lay down to sleep on a heap of straw in the corner of the hut; but they
dared not close their eyes, and scarcely ventured to breathe. In the
morning the witch gave the girl two pieces of linen to weave before
night, and the boy a pile of wood to cut into chips. Then the witch left
them to their tasks, and went out into the wood. As soon as she had
gone out of sight the children took the comb and the handkerchief, and,
taking one another by the hand, they started and ran, and ran, and ran.
And first they met the watch-dog, who was going to leap on them and tear
them to pieces; but they threw the remains of their bread to him, and
he ate them and wagged his tail. Then they were hindered by the
birch-trees, whose branches almost put their eyes out. But the little
sister tied the twigs together with a piece of ribbon, and they got past
safely, and, after running through the wood, came out on to the open
fields.

In the meantime in the hut the cat was busy weaving the linen and
tangling the threads as it wove. And the witch returned to see how the
children were getting on; and she crept up to the window, and whispered:

'Are you weaving, my little dear?'

'Yes, granny, I am weaving,' answered the cat.

When the witch saw that the children had escaped her, she was furious,
and, hitting the cat with a porringer, she said: 'Why did you let the
children leave the hut? Why did you not scratch their eyes out?'

But the cat curled up its tail and put its back up, and answered: 'I
have served you all these years and you never even threw me a bone, but
the dear children gave me their own piece of ham.'

Then the witch was furious with the watch-dog and with the birch-trees,
because they had let the children pass. But the dog answered:

'I have served you all these years and you never gave me so much as a
hard crust, but the dear children gave me their own loaf of bread.'

And the birch rustled its leaves, and said: 'I have served you longer
than I can say, and you never tied a bit of twine even round my
branches; and the dear children bound them up with their brightest
ribbons.'

So the witch saw there was no help to be got from her old servants, and
that the best thing she could do was to mount on her broom and set off
in pursuit of the children. And as the children ran they heard the sound
of the broom sweeping the ground close behind them, so instantly they
threw the handkerchief down over their shoulder, and in a moment a deep,
broad river flowed behind them.

When the witch came up to it, it took her a long time before she found a
place which she could ford over on her broom-stick; but at last she got
across, and continued the chase faster than before. And as the children
ran they heard a sound, and the little sister put her ear to the ground,
and heard the broom sweeping the earth close behind them; so, quick as
thought, she threw the comb down on the ground, and in an instant,
as the cat had said, a dense forest sprung up, in which the roots and
branches were so closely intertwined, that it was impossible to force a
way through it. So when the witch came up to it on her broom she found
that there was nothing for it but to turn round and go back to her hut.

But the twins ran straight on till they reached their own home. Then
