their cigarettes and talking in low whispers. Mrs. Hardy was in her
room; Ethel kept her company, Maud dividing her time between them
and the top of the tower, where Mr. Hardy, Fitzgerald, and the boys
were assembled in the intervals between going their rounds.

At about ten o'clock there was a sharp bark from one of the dogs
fastened up by the fold, followed up by a general barking of all
the dogs on the establishment.

"There they are," Mr. Hardy said. "Charley, bring the mastiffs
inside, and order them, and the retrievers too, to be quiet. We do
not want any noise up here, to tell the Indians that we are on the
watch. Now, Fitzgerald, you go to the sentries behind the house,
and I will go to those in front, to tell them to fall back at
once."

This mission was, however, unnecessary, for the eight peons all
arrived in a minute or two, having fled from their posts at the
first barking of the dogs, and without obeying their orders to send
round to each other to give notice of their retreat.

Mr. Hardy was very angry with them, but they were in such abject
fear of the Indians that they paid little heed to their master's
words, but went and huddled themselves together upon the straw in
the sitting-room, remaining there without movement until all was
over. Terence was now recalled from the gate, which had been his
post.

"Did you hear anything, Terence?"

"Sure, your honor, and I thought I heard a dull sound like a lot of
horses galloping in the distance. I should say that there were a
great many of them. It seemed to get a little louder, and then it
stopped."

"That was before the dogs began to bark, Terence?"

"About five minutes before, your honor."

"Yes. I have no doubt that they all dismounted to make the attack
on foot. How quiet everything is!"

The general barking of the dogs had now ceased: sometimes one or
another gave a suspicious yelping bark, but between these no sound
whatever was audible. The door was now closed and barred; candles
were lighted and placed in every room, thick cloths having been
hung up before the loopholes in the shutters, to prevent a ray of
light from escaping; and the windows themselves were opened. Mr.
Fitzgerald, the boys, and Maud took their station on the tower, Mr.
Hardy remaining with his wife and Ethel, while Terence and Lopez
kept watch in the other apartments. The arrangements for the
defense were that Mr. Fitzgerald, Lopez, and Terence should defend
the lower part of the house. There were in all six double-barreled
guns--two to each of them; and three of the peons more courageous
than the others offered to load the guns as they were discharged.

Mr. Hardy and the boys had their place on the tower, from which
they commanded the whole garden. They had the long rifle, the
carbines, and four revolvers. Mrs. Hardy and the girls took their
place in the upper room of the tower, where there was a light.
Their rifles were ready in case of necessity, but their principal
duty was to load the spare chambers of the carbines and pistols as
fast as they were emptied, the agreement being that the girls
should go up by turns to take the loaded ones and bring down the
empties. Sarah's place was her kitchen, where she could hear all
that was going on below, and she was to call up the ladder in case
aid was required. And so, all being in readiness, they calmly
awaited the attack.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE INDIAN ATTACK.


For nearly half an hour the occupants of the tower remained without
hearing the smallest sound. Then there was a slight jarring noise.

"They are getting over the fence," Mr. Hardy whispered. "Go down
now every one to his station. Keep the dogs quiet, and mind, let no
one fire until I give the signal."

Over and over again the clinking noise was repeated. Cautious as
the Indians were, it was impossible even for them to get over that
strange and difficult obstacle without touching the wires with
their arms. Occasionally Mr. Hardy and the boys fancied that they
could see dark objects stealing toward the house through the gloom;
otherwise all was still.

"Boys," Mr. Hardy said, "I have changed my mind. There will be
numbers at the doors and windows, whom we cannot get at from here.
Steal quietly downstairs, and take your position each at a window.
Then, when the signal is given, fire both your revolvers. Don't
throw away a shot. Darken all the rooms except the kitchen. You
will see better to take aim through the loopholes; it will be quite
light outside. When you have emptied your revolvers, come straight
up here, leaving them for the girls to load as you pass."

Without a word the boys slipped away. Mr. Hardy then placed on a
round shelf nailed to the flagstaff, at about eight feet from the
ground, a blue-light, fitting into a socket on the shelf. The shelf
was made just so large that it threw a shadow over the top of the
tower, so that those standing there were in comparative darkness,
while everything around was in bright light. There, with a match in
his hand to light the blue-light, he awaited the signal.

It was a long time coming--so long that the pause grew painful, and
every one in the house longed for the bursting of the coming storm.
At last it came. A wild, long, savage yell from hundreds of throats
rose on the still night air, and, confident as they were in their
position, there was not one of the garrison but felt his blood grow
cold at the appalling ferocity of the cry. Simultaneously there was
a tremendous rush at the doors and windows, which tried the
strength of frame and bar. Then, as they stood firm, came a rain of
blows with hatchet and tomahawk.

Then came a momentary pause of astonishment. The weapons, instead
of splintering the wood, merely made deep dents, or glided off
harmlessly. Then the blows redoubled, and then a bright light
suddenly lit up the whole scene. As it did so, from every loophole
a stream of fire poured out, repeated again and again. The guns,
heavily loaded with buckshot, told with terrible effect upon the
crowded mass of Indians around the windows, and the discharge of
the four barrels from each of the three windows of the room at the
back of the house, by Fitzgerald, Lopez, and Terence, for awhile
cleared the assailants from that quarter. After the first yell of
astonishment and rage, a perfect quiet succeeded to the din which
had raged there, broken only by the ring of the ramrods, as the
three men and their assistants hastily reloaded their guns, and
then hurried to the front of the house, where their presence was
urgently required.

Knowing the tremendous rush there would be at the door, Charley and
Hubert had posted themselves at its two loopholes, leaving the
windows to take care of themselves for the present. The first rush
was so tremendous that the door trembled on its posts, massive as
it was; and the boys, thinking that it would come in, threw the
weight of their bodies against it. Then with the failure of the
first rush came the storm of blows; and the boys stood with their
pistols leveled through the holes, waiting for the light which was
to enable them to see their foes.

As it came they fired together, and two Indians fell. Again and
again they fired, until not an Indian remained standing opposite
the fatal door. Then each took a window, for there was one at each
side of the door, and these they held, rushing occasionally into
the rooms on either side to check the assailants there.

In this fight Sarah had certainly the honor of first blood. She was
a courageous woman, and was determined to do her best in defense of
the house. As an appropriate weapon, she had placed the end of the
spit in the fire, and at the moment of the attack it was white-hot.
Seeing the shutter bend with the pressure of the Indians against
it, she seized the spit, and plunged it through the loophole with
all her force. A fearful yell followed, which rose even above the
tremendous din around.

There was a lull so profound after the discharge of the last
barrels of the boys' revolvers as to be almost startling. Running
upstairs, they fitted fresh chambers to their weapons, left the
empty ones with their sisters, and joined their father.

"That's right, boys; the attack is beaten off for the present. Now
take your carbines. There is a band of Indians down by the animals.
I heard their war-whoops when the others began, but the light
hardly reaches so far. Now look out, I am going to send up a rocket
over them. The cows are the most important; so, Charley, you direct
all your shots at any party there. Hubert, divide yours among the
rest."

In another moment the rocket flew up into the air, and as the
bright light burst out a group of Indians could be seen at the
gateway of each of the enclosures. As the brilliant light broke
over them they scattered with a cry of astonishment. Before the
light faded the twelve barrels had been fired among them.

As the rocket burst Mr. Hardy had gazed eagerly over the country,
and fancied that he could see a dark mass at a distance of half a
mile. This he guessed to be the Indians' horses.

By this time the blue-light was burning low, and Mr. Hardy,
stretching his hand up, lit another at its blaze, and planted the
fresh one down upon it. As he did so a whizzing of numerous arrows
showed that they were watched. One went through his coat,
fortunately without touching him; another went right through his
arm; and a third laid Charley's cheek open from the lip to the ear.

"Keep your heads below the wall, boys," their father shouted. "Are
you hurt, Charley?"

"Not seriously, papa, but it hurts awfully;" and Charley stamped
with rage and pain.

"What has become of the Indians round the house?" Hubert asked.
"They are making no fresh attack."

"No," Mr. Hardy said; "they have had enough of it. They are only
wondering how they are to get away. You see the fence is exposed
all round to our fire, for the trees don't go within twenty yards
of it. They are neither in front nor behind the house, for it is
pretty open in both directions, and we should see them. They are
not at this side of the house, so they must be standing close to
the wall between the windows, and must be crowded among the trees
and shrubs at the other end. There is no window there, so they are
safe as long as they stay quiet."

"No, papa," Hubert said eagerly; "don't you remember we left two
loopholes in each room, when we built it, on purpose, only putting
in pieces of wood and filling up the cracks with clay to keep out
the wind?"

"Of course we did, Hubert. I remember all about it now. Run down
and tell them to be ready to pull the wood out and to fire through
when they hear the next rocket go off. I am going to send another
light rocket over in the direction where I saw the horses; and
directly I get the line I will send off cracker-rocket after
cracker-rocket as quickly as I can at them. What with the fire from
below among them, and the fright they will get when they see the
horses attacked, they are sure to make a rush for it."

In a minute Hubert came back with the word that the men below were
ready. In a moment a rocket soared far away to behind the house;
and just as its light broke over the plains another one swept over
in the direction of a dark mass of animals, seen plainly enough in
the distance.

A cry of dismay burst from the Indians, rising in yet wilder alarm
as three shots were fired from the wall of the house into their
crowded mass. Again and again was the discharge repeated, and with
a yell of dismay a wild rush was made for the fence. Then the boys
with their carbines, and Mr. Hardy with the revolvers, opened upon
them, every shot telling in the dense mass who struggled to
surmount the fatal railings.

Frenzied with the danger, dozens attempted to climb them, and,
strong as were the wires and posts, there was a cracking sound, and
the whole side fell. In another minute, of the struggling mass
there remained only some twenty motionless forms. Three or four
more rockets were sent off in the direction where the horses had
been seen, and then another signal rocket, whose light enabled them
to see that the black mass was broken up, and that the whole plain
was covered with scattered figures of men and animals, all flying
at the top of their speed.

"Thank God, it is all over, and we are safe!" Mr. Hardy said
solemnly. "Never again will an Indian attack be made upon Mount
Pleasant. It is all over now, my dear," he said to Mrs. Hardy as he
went down the stairs; "they are off all over the country, and it
will take them hours to get their horses together again. Two of us
have got scratched with arrows, but no real harm is done. Charley's
is only a flesh wound. Don't be frightened," he added quickly, as
Mrs. Hardy turned pale and the girls gave a cry at the appearance
of Charley's face, which was certainly alarming. "A little warm
water and a bandage will put it all right."

"Do you think it will leave a scar?" Charley asked rather
dolorously.

"Well, Charley, I should not be surprised if it does; but it won't
spoil your beauty long, your whiskers will cover it: besides, a
scar won in honorable conflict is always admired by ladies, you
know. Now let us go downstairs; my arm, too, wants bandaging, for
it is beginning to smart amazingly; and I am sure we all must want
something to eat."

The supper was eaten hurriedly, and then all but Terence, who, as a
measure of precaution, was stationed as watchman on the tower, were
glad to lie down for a few hours' sleep. At daybreak they were up
and moving.

Mr. Hardy requested that neither his wife nor daughters should go
outside the house until the dead Indians were removed and buried,
as the sight could not but be a most shocking one. Two of the peons
were ordered to put in the oxen and bring up two carts, and the
rest of the men set about the unpleasant duty of examining and
collecting the slain.

These were even more numerous than Mr. Hardy had anticipated, and
showed how thickly they must have been clustered round the door and
windows. The guns had been loaded with buckshot; two bullets he
dropped down each barrel in addition; and the discharge of these
had been most destructive, more especially those fired through the
loopholes at the end of the house. There no less than sixteen
bodies were found, while around the door and windows were thirteen
others. All these were dead. The guns, having been discharged
through loopholes breast-high, had taken effect upon the head and
body.

At the fence were fourteen. Of these twelve were dead, another
still breathed, but was evidently dying, while one had only a
broken leg. Unquestionably several others had been wounded, but had
managed to make off. The bullets of revolvers, unless striking a
mortal point, disable a wounded man much less than the balls of
heavier caliber. It was evidently useless to remove the Indian who
was dying; all that could be done for him was to give him a little
water, and to place a bundle of grass so as to raise his head. Half
an hour later he was dead. The other wounded man was carried
carefully down to one of the sheds, where a bed of hay was prepared
for him. Two more wounded men were found down by the cattle
enclosures, and these also Mr. Hardy considered likely to recover.
They were taken up and laid by their comrade. Three dead bodies
were found here. These were all taken in the bullock carts to a
spot distant nearly half a mile from the house.

Here, by the united labor of the peons, a large grave was dug, six
feet wide, as much deep, and twelve yards long. In this they were
laid side by side, two deep; the earth was filled in, and the turf
replaced. At Hubert's suggestion, two young palm trees were taken
out of the garden and placed one at each end, and a wire fence was
erected all round, to keep off the animals.

It was a sad task; and although they had been killed in an attack
in which, had they been victorious, they would have shown no mercy,
still Mr. Hardy and his sons were deeply grieved at having caused
the destruction of so many lives.

It was late in the afternoon before all was done, and the party
returned to the house with lightened hearts, that the painful task
was finished. Here things had nearly resumed their ordinary aspect.
Terence had washed away the stains of blood; and save that many of
the young trees had been broken down, and that one side of the
fence was leveled, no one would have imagined that a sanguinary
contest had taken place there so lately.
