
"You see, child,"--he grasped her fingers and held them closely,--"it's
just this way: the gentleman wants to do me a favour; that is, to help
Polly with her music."

"Does he?" cried Phronsie, and she laughed in delight. "Oh, Grandpapa,
how nice! And Polly will be so happy."

"But I cannot possibly accept it," groaned old Mr. King; "don't you
see, child, after treating him so? Why, how could I? The idea is too
monstrous!" He set off now at such a brisk pace down the room that
Phronsie had hard work to keep up with him. But he clung to her hand.

"Won't that make the gentleman sorry?" panted Phronsie, trotting along
by his side.

"Eh--oh, what?" exclaimed old Mr. King, coming to a dead stop suddenly.
"What's that you say, Phronsie?"

"Won't the gentleman feel sorry?" repeated Phronsie, pushing back the
waves of yellow hair that had fallen over her face, to look up at him.
"And won't he feel badly then, Grandpapa?"

"Eh--oh, perhaps," assented Mr. King, slowly, and passing a troubled
hand across his brow. "Well, now, Phronsie, you come and sit in my lap
again, and we'll talk it over, and you tell me what I ought to do."

So the two got into the big chair again, and Phronsie folded her hands
in her lap.

"Now begin," said old Mr. King.

"I should make the gentleman happy, Grandpapa," said Phronsie,
decidedly.

"You would--no matter what you had to do to bring it about?" asked
Grandpapa, with a keen pair of eyes on her face. "Eh? think now,
Phronsie."

"I should make the gentleman happy," repeated Phronsie, and she bobbed
her head decidedly. "I really should, Grandpapa."

"Then the best way is to have it over with as soon as possible," said
old Mr. King; "so come on, child, and you can see that the business is
done up in good shape." He gathered her little fingers up in his hand,
and setting her once more on the floor, they passed out of the
apartment.

The door of the private parlour belonging to Mr. King's rooms was flung
wide open, and into the gloomy interior, for Mother Fisher and Jasper
were still inconsolable, marched old Mr. King. He was arm in arm, so
far as the two could at once compass the doorway, with Herr Bauricke;
while Phronsie ducked and scuttled in as she could, for the big German,
with ever so many honorary degrees to his name, held her hand fast.

Old Mr. King continued his march up to Mother Fisher. "Allow me to
introduce Herr Bauricke, Professor and Doctor of Music, of world-wide
distinction," he said, bowing his courtly old head.

And then Mother Fisher, self-controlled as she had always been,
astonished him by turning to her husband to supply the answering word.

"Glad to see you!" exclaimed the little doctor, bubbling over with
happiness, and wringing the long fingers extended. "My wife is overcome
with delight," which the big German understood very well; and he smiled
his knowledge of it, as he looked into her black eyes. "She is like to
mein Frau," he thought, having no higher praise. And then he turned
quickly to Polly and Jasper.




XXI

ON THE RIGI-KULM


For all that grand old Rigi's summit claimed them, it was some time
before Mr. King's party left the little parlour. Herr Bauricke surely
didn't want to until he had gotten it settled just what he did mean
about Polly's music. That she showed great promise, that some faults in
the way she had been taught were there, but it was by no means too late
to mend them, that she had spirit and expression and love for the art.

"Ah, dat is eet, after all." Herr Bauricke clasped his long fingers and
beamed at her, and then swept the entire party. "Lofe, ah, how one must
lofe eet! Eef not, shame, shame!" His countenance darkened frightfully,
and he fairly glared at them, as he unclasped his hands and swung one
over his head, while his black beard vibrated with each word.

"Goodness me!" exclaimed Tom Selwyn, "it takes a musical man to sling
around. I say, Jasper, I'd like to do a bit of boxing or cricketing
with him." But Jasper didn't hear or see anything but Herr Bauricke and
Polly; and, indeed, the whole room was given up to the "musical man"
and his words.

At last Polly drew a long breath; Grandpapa was taking her hand. "Let
us all go out and explore a bit," and off they went, the entire party.
And the "musical man," as Tom still continued to call him in private,
proved to be as expert in the use of his feet as his fingers, for he
led them here, there, and everywhere that promised the least chance of
a good view.

But Polly saw only the glorious future when, on the morrow, Herr
Bauricke would really show her on the piano how best to study and to
work! And the rosy glow of sunset wasn't one-half as bright as all her
dreams.

"Polly," said Phronsie, pulling her hand gently, as she peered up into
her face, "are you looking at it?"

"What, Pet? Oh, yes," said Polly, starting out of her revery with a
little laugh, "you mean the sunset?"

"Yes," said Phronsie, "I do mean that. Are you looking at it, Polly?
Because if you are not looking, I wish you would, Polly."

"Well, I suppose I am looking at it, Phronsie," said Polly, with
another little laugh, "but perhaps not in just the right way, for you
see, Phronsie, I can't seem to see anything but just the splendid thing
that is coming to-morrow. Oh, Phronsie Pepper, just think of that."

"I know," said Phronsie, with a little gurgle of delight at Polly's
happiness, "and I am so glad, Polly."

"Of course you are," declared Polly, warmly, "just as glad as can be,
Phronsie," and she threw her arm around her. "And now I'm going to look
at the sunset in the right way, I hope. Isn't it beautiful, child?"

"Polly," declared Phronsie, suddenly wriggling away from Polly's arm,
to stand in front of her with a beaming face, "I think it's just as
beautiful as it can be up top here. I can see right in between that red
cloud and that little pink teenty one. And I wish I could just go in,
Polly."

"Wouldn't it be nice?" echoed Polly, enthusiastically.

"What?" asked Adela, hurrying up from a point of rocks below, where she
had been sketching.

"Oh, to go in between those clouds there and see it all," said Polly.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Adela, "I shouldn't like it. I'd much rather stay
down here, and sketch it."

"We could go sailing off, oh, ever so far," said Polly, swinging her
arms to suit the action to the words. "And you'd be stuck to your rock
here, Adela; while, Phronsie, you and I would sit on the edge of a
cloud, and let our feet hang over; and oh, Adela, you could sketch us
then as we went sailing by."

"How that would look!" exclaimed Adela, with such a face that Polly
burst out into a merry laugh, and Phronsie, joining with her little
crow of delight and clapping her hands at the idea of such fun, brought
pretty much the whole party around them.

"What's up?" cried Tom to Jasper, on the way to the girls with some
fear, for he didn't dare even yet to talk much to Polly. As for Adela,
he let her severely alone.

"Don't know," said Jasper, "but we'll soon find out," and they did, by
Phronsie's flying away from Polly and skipping down over the rocks to
meet them.

"Oh, Jasper, Polly's telling how we would sail on that beautiful
cloud," announced Phronsie, her yellow hair flying from her face as she
sped along, heedless of her steps.

"Take care or you'll fall," warned Jasper. "See, your mother is looking
worried." And, truth to tell, Mrs. Fisher, on a point of rocks a little
way off with the others, was getting a bit alarmed as she saw the
progress of her baby.

"I'll take care," said Phronsie, sobering down at thought of Mamsie's
being troubled, and beginning to pick her way carefully. And Jasper
gathered up her fingers in his, thinking of the time when she toiled up
and down the long stairway, when she first came to what was now her
home, blessed thought! and Polly and he sat down at the foot to watch
her.

"And so Polly and you are going to try sailing on that cloud there,"
said Jasper, squinting up at the brilliant sky.

"We aren't really going, Jasper," said Phronsie, shaking her head,
soberly, "because you see we can't. But Polly's pretending it all; and
we're to sit on the edge and swing our feet. And Adela is going to make
a picture of us."

"Whew!" whistled Jasper. "And I say, Polly,"--for now they had
scrambled up to the two girls,--"isn't there room for us on that cloud
too?" While Tom kicked pebbles, and wished he knew how to talk to girls.

"Perhaps," said Polly, gaily. "Oh, I suppose that those who couldn't
get on our cloud could take the next one."

"I'd rather have your cloud, Polly," said Jasper.

"And Grandpapa must come too," cried Phronsie, in alarm at the very
thought of his being left out. "I want him on our cloud, Polly."

"Yes, and Mamsie and Papa-Doctor," finished Polly, ready for any
nonsense, she was just bubbling over so with joy at thought of the
morrow and what it would bring. "Well, it is good the cloud is big,"
squinting up at the radiant sky.

"And, Tom, you are coming on that cloud-boat."

Jasper pulled him forward with a merry laugh, giving him a clap on the
back at the same time.

"Eh--oh, I can't--no, thank you," stammered Tom, thus suddenly brought
into notice. "Excuse me," just as if the invitation had been a _bona
fide_ one.

Polly never smiled, but Adela giggled right out. Tom's face flushed,
and he rushed off furiously, determined never to chance it again
whereby he'd be mortified before girls--not he!

All the gay time was flown, and the red and pink and purple clouds
looked down upon a sorry, uncomfortable little group. Jasper spoke
first. "I must go after him," and he dashed down the rocks.

"O dear me, I couldn't help it," said Adela, twisting uncomfortably,
"it was so silly in him to take it all in earnest."

"He didn't really think we meant it," said Polly, her brown eyes very
grave. Would Jasper really persuade him to forget that laugh? "But he
is shy, and he said the first thing that came into his head."

"Boys haven't any right to be shy," said Adela, fussing with her little
sketching block and pencil, "they are so big and strong."

"Why did Tom run away so fast?" asked Phronsie, only half comprehending.

"Never mind, child," said Polly, with a reassuring pat on her head.

"And isn't Jasper coming back?" asked Phronsie, in great distress.

"Yes, oh, I guess so," said Polly. "Well, there, the pretty glow has
all faded; see, Phronsie," pointing up to the leaden clouds that no one
who had failed to see a few moments before could have imagined alive
with colour. "Now we ought to run over to the others, for they'll be
going back to the hotel."

"It's all gone," said Phronsie, sadly, looking up at the darkening sky.
"Polly, where has the pretty red and pink gone to?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Polly, thinking only of Tom, and what a hard
time Jasper must be having with him. "Take care, Phronsie, don't look
up now--you'll fall! There, take my hand; now come on."

"O dear me, I didn't mean to laugh," Adela was saying to herself as she
fell back in the zig-zag path down the rocks. "I wish I
hadn't--I'll--I'll--" What she meant to do wasn't very clear in her
mind; what she did do, was to run up to her grandmother's and her room,
and toss her sketch-book on the table, and herself on the bed, for a
good hearty cry.

Polly found her there, when they couldn't find her anywhere else, with
much searching and running about. Little old Mrs. Gray was worrying
dreadfully, so afraid she had been blown from the rocks; for the wind
had now risen, and all the travellers were seeking the shelter and
warmth of the hotel corridor and parlours.

"Oh, Adela, how _could_ you?" Polly was going to say. And then she
thought that would be the very worst thing in all the world, for
Adela's shoulders were shaking, and it would only make her cry worse.
And besides, Polly remembered how she had sometimes given way in just
this fashion, and how much worse she would have been, had it not been
for a wise, good mother. So she ran out in the hall. "I must tell her
grandmother," she said to herself.

"Have you found her?" asked Jasper, looking up from the foot of the
staircase.

"Yes," said Polly, "I have."

"All right." And Jasper vanished, and Polly went slowly back, wishing
she could be downstairs with all the dear people, instead of trying to
comfort this dismal girl. The next moment she was kneeling down by the
side of the bed, and trying to get hold of one of Adela's hands. But
Adela bounced over to the farther side, and she cried out angrily,
"It's all very well for you to say so, because you didn't do it. And
everybody likes you. O dear me--tee--hee--boo--hoo!"

"But I've often done things just as bad," confessed Polly, "and, Adela,
I've cried like this, too. But Mamsie--oh, Adela! she made me see it
was wrong; so I had to stop it, you know."

"How is it wrong?" asked Adela, rolling over, and taking the
handkerchief away from one eye enough to see Polly Pepper's face. "I
can cry, I guess, if I want to, without asking anybody."

"Oh, no, you can't," said Polly, decidedly. "I mean no one can."

"Why not, pray tell?" said Adela, sniffing very hard. "My eyes are my
own, and I shall cry, too, whenever I want to."

"Well, I can't just tell you exactly why you can't cry when you want
to," said Polly, afraid she wasn't going to say the right word, "but
Mamsie could if she were here. I'll go and call her, Adela." And Polly
sprang to her feet. "She'll come, I know."

"Oh, no--no," cried Adela, in mortal alarm. "I don't want her--I mean
I'd rather have you. You're a girl; and a woman talking at me scares
me."

"Then you mustn't cry if I stay," said Polly, stopping short, and
seeing her advantage, "for I surely shall go, Adela," she added firmly,
"unless you stop crying."

"O dear me." Adela squirmed all over the bed. "I can't stop--I've
always cried as much as I wanted to. O dear me--boo-hoo-hoo! I
mean--I'll stop, don't go--" sopping up her wet face with a nervous
hand. "See, Pol-_ly_!" for Polly had slipped out of the room. Adela
flew off from the bed. "Polly--Polly, Pol-_ly_!" she called, in a
piteous little tone.

Polly, halfway down the stairs, looked back. "Oh, you are up," she
said, with a smile. "Now that's fine; come." And she held out her hand.

"Mercy me, and O my!" cried Adela. "I can't go looking like this; why,
I'm a perfect sight, I know, Polly Pepper! and my nose feels all bunged
out of shape and as big!"

"Never mind," said Polly, as reassuringly, "just dash some water over
it, and it'll be all right. I'll wait here for you."

So Polly stood on her stair while Adela, bemoaning all the way that she
didn't look fit to be seen, and that she was a perfect sight, and she
couldn't go down among them all, stumbled back into her room. And
pretty soon Polly heard a big splash. "O dear me--oh, what shall I do?"

"What _is_ the matter?" cried Polly, deserting her stair, to run in and
up to the washstand.

"Just see what I've done," exclaimed Adela, holding out one arm. It was
dripping wet, and the water was running off in a stream and down to
meet a small puddle where the splash had struck on the floor.

"The pitcher slipped--O dear me--ugh--" cried Adela, wriggling all over.

"Stand still," said Polly, "do, Adela, till I wipe your sleeve dry."
And she got the towel and began to sop and to pat Adela's arm.

"It never'll feel dry, it's perfectly awful--ugh--Polly Pepper,"
declared Adela, twisting away from Polly's fingers; "it's just like a
wet snake--ugh--O dear me! and it gives me the creeps."

"You'll have to put on another waist, I do think," said Polly, hanging
up the towel, aghast to find herself growing angry at all this delay,
