are always at daggers drawn. Therefore, methinks more unlikely things
have happened than that; if France gives aid to the earl, the English
may strike in for Ghent."

"I trust not," one of the burghers said, earnestly, "for Sluys might
well be the landing point for an English expedition, and then the first
brunt of the war would fall upon us."

"I say not that there is much chance of such a thing," Van Voorden
said; "I was but mentioning the complication that might arise if Ghent
is able to prolong the struggle."

On the following morning the party started from Sluys. They made a good
show, for Van Voorden had the evening before engaged two mounted men,
well-armed, to ride with the young knights as men-at-arms. Behind the
merchant and his party came the two maids and the four retainers who
had accompanied them from England. These carried swords and daggers,
but no defensive armour. Behind were the two English men-at-arms and
the two freshly taken on, all wearing breast-and back-pieces and steel
caps. They tarried but a day or two at Bruges, Van Voorden finding that
among the burgesses the trade animosity against Ghent overpowered any
feeling of patriotism, and moreover it was felt that the success of
that town would give such encouragement to the democracy elsewhere that
every city would become the scene of riot and civil strife.

They learnt that, unless they fell in with one of the parties that was
stationed to prevent strong forces of foragers issuing from Ghent to
drive in cattle, they would find no difficulty in entering the town,
for the citizens had shown themselves such stout fighters, that the
earl, believing that the city must fall by famine, had drawn off the
greater portion of his army. Travelling by easy stages, the party
approached the town on the second evening. Soon after they started that
morning they came upon a body of the troops of the Earl of Flanders.
The officer in command rode up to the merchant and asked him for his
name and his object in going to Ghent, and also who were the two
knights with him. As soon as Van Voorden mentioned his name, and said
that he had for many years been established in London, the officer at
once recognized it.

"I am well acquainted with your name as one of the foremost among our
countrymen at King Richard's Court, and that you have several times
acted as our representative when complaints have been made of injury to
Flemish traders by English adventurers, but I must still ask, what do
you propose doing at Ghent?"

"I am over here for a time with my wife and daughter, and am paying
visits to friends and business correspondents in the various towns, and
it may be that if these troubles come to an end I may retire from
business altogether and settle down here. These knights have done me a
signal service, having saved the lives of myself and daughter during
the riots in London; therefore I have asked of them the courtesy to
ride with me through Flanders. Having a desire to visit foreign
countries, they accepted my invitation."

"Adieu, then, Master Van Voorden. I know that you are a man of
influence among the merchants, and trust that you will do your best to
persuade the stiff-necked burghers of Ghent to submit themselves to
their lord."

"Methinks, from what I hear," the merchant replied, "that if it
depended upon the burgesses and traders there would be a speedy end to
these troubles, but they are overborne by the demagogues of the
craftsmen."

"That is true enough," the officer replied. "Numbers of the richer
burgesses have long since left Ghent, and many have established
themselves in trade in other cities where there was better chance of
doing their business in peace and quiet."

The party now rode on, and without further interruption arrived at
Ghent. They put up for the night at a hostelry, but in the morning the
merchant had no difficulty in hiring the use of a house for a month,
for many of the better class houses were standing empty. Then he called
on several of the leading burgesses, some of whom were known to him
personally, and had long and earnest talk with them upon the situation.

Late in the afternoon he sent a letter to Philip Van Artevelde, saying
that he had just arrived from England, and would be glad to have a
private parley with him. An answer was received from Van Artevelde
saying that he would call that evening upon him, as it would be more
easy to have quiet speech together there than if he visited him at his
official residence. At eight o'clock Van Artevelde arrived. He was
wrapped in a cloak, and gave no name, simply saying to the retainer who
opened the door that he was there by appointment with his master. Van
Voorden received him alone. They had met on two or three occasions
previously, and saluted each other cordially.

"I think it best that we should meet quietly," the merchant said, as
they shook hands. "I know the Ghentois, how greedily they swallow every
rumour, how they magnify the smallest things, and how they rage if
their desires are not gratified, and give themselves wholly up to the
demagogues. 'Tis for that reason that I think it well that you have
come to see me privately.

"I have no official mission to you, but I am charged by King Richard,
or rather by his council--when they heard that I was coming over here
on my private affairs--to find out in the first place how things really
stand here; and secondly, to learn your own opinion and thoughts on the
matters in hand."

By this time they had seated themselves by the fire.

"The position is grievous enough in that we are straitened for food,"
was the reply; "indeed, although we have of late been fortunate in
obtaining supplies, the pressure cannot be borne. Of one thing you may
be sure, Ghent will not tamely be starved out. If we cannot obtain fair
terms, every man will arm himself and sally out, and, it need be, we
will sweep the whole country clear of its flocks and herds, and bring
in such stores as we want from all quarters, carrying our arms to the
gates of Brussels and Malines in one direction, to Lisle in another,
and to Ypres and Dixmuide south of the Lys. Earl though he be, Louis
cannot bar every road to us, nor forever keep up a force sufficient to
withstand us. Already the feudal lords have kept their levies under
arms far beyond the time they have a right to require them, but this
cannot go on. War costs us no more than peace, and whenever we will we
can march with 20,000 men in any direction that may please us. As to
defending ourselves against assault, I have no fear whatever. Thus,
then, so long as Ghent chooses she can maintain the war." He put an
emphasis on the last words.

"That means, I take it," the merchant said, "as long as the people are
willing to go on fasting."

"That is so. There is a sore pinch; food is distributed gratuitously;
for, as all trade is stopped, there is little work to be had. So long
as they could live in idleness, obtain enough food, and a small sum
paid daily, there were no signs of discontent; and there is still
plenty of money in the coffers, for the goods and estates of many who
have fled, and who are known to be favourable to the earl, have been
confiscated, but money cannot provide food. Thus, it seems to me that,
save for the lack of food, matters could go on as at present. But if
fair terms cannot be obtained, the people will demand to be led against
their enemy. We shall lead them, but what will come after that I cannot
say.

"As you doubtless know, I am here by no choice of my own. I had naught
to do with the rising of Ghent, or what has been done hitherto, but
when Lyon died and the leaders who succeeded him were killed, they sent
to me to be their governor. For a time I refused, but I was overborne.
I was living quietly and peaceably on my estates, with no love for
strife; but it was pointed out that I alone could unite the factions,
that many of the better classes of citizens, who held aloof from the
demagogues of the streets, would feel confidence in me, that my name
would carry weight, and that other cities might make alliance with me
when they would have naught to say to butchers and skinners and such
like, and that possibly the earl would be more likely to grant terms to
me than to those whom he considers as the rabble. I took up the
position reluctantly, but, having taken it up, I shall not lay it down.
Like enough it will cost me my life, as it cost the life of Jacob Van
Artevelde before me, but it may be that aid will come from some
unexpected quarter."

"That is the next point. Do you look for aid from France?"

"France is never to be relied upon," Artevelde replied, gloomily. "The
Valois has, of course, made us vague promises, but all he cares for is
that the war should go on, so that, if he and Burgundy come to blows,
Flanders can give no aid to the duke. I have no hope in that quarter.
Of late, however, Burgundy and Berry have prevailed in his councils,
and we hear that he has decided to join the duke against us. We have
sent, as doubtless you know, to the King of England, to ask him to ally
himself with us."

"'Tis concerning that matter he has charged me. It was known when I
left England that Burgundy had promised his aid to the earl, but naught
was known of France joining in. The king is well disposed towards you,
but his council hold that, so long as Ghent stands alone, England can
make no alliance with her, for she would have to fight, not only
Burgundy and France, but the rest of Flanders. But if Ghent makes
herself master of Flanders, England will gladly ally herself with you,
and will send troops and money."

"'Tis reasonable," Artevelde said, "and we will bestir ourselves. I
myself have done all that is possible to obtain peace, and in three
days I am going, with twelve of the principal citizens, to Bruges,
where the earl arrived yesterday. We shall offer to submit ourselves to
his mercy if he will have pity on the city. If he demands the entire
mastership we shall fight in earnest. If he will content himself with
taking our lives, we are ready to give them for the sake of the city.
We know that we have a strong body of friends in every town, and should
it come to blows, methinks it is not improbable that all Flanders will
join, and if we are supported by England, we may well hope to withstand
both France and Burgundy."

"I have two young English knights with me, Van Artevelde; they are
young, but have already shown themselves capable of deeds of the
greatest bravery. During the late riots in London they defended my
house against a mob many hundreds strong, and so gave time for myself,
my wife, and daughter to gain a place of hiding; they did many other
brave feats, and so distinguished themselves that, though very young,
the king has knighted them. I invited them to accompany me hither, in
order that they might see service, and I would fain commend them
greatly to you. The fact that they are English knights would be of
advantage to you, seeing that it will, in the eyes of the people, be
taken as a proof that the sympathy of England is with us, and should
there be fighting, or any occasion for the use of brave men, you can
rely upon them to do their utmost."

"I will gladly accept their services, Van Voorden, and, as you say, the
people will certainly draw a good augury from their presence."

The merchant left the room, and returned in a minute with the two young
knights.

"These are the gentlemen of whom I have spoken to you, Van Artevelde,"
he said, "Sir Edgar Ormskirk and Sir Albert De Courcy, both very
valiant gentlemen, and high in the esteem of King Richard."

"I greet you gladly, sir knights," Van Artevelde said, "both for your
own sakes and for that of Mynheer Van Voorden, my worthy friend, who
has presented you, and right glad shall I be if you will aid us in this
sore strait into which we have fallen."

"I fear that our aid will not be of much avail to you, sir," Edgar
said, "but such service as we can render we will right willingly give.
I shall be glad to see service for the first time under one bearing the
name of the great man who lost his life because he was so firm an ally
of England."

"At present, gentlemen, things have not come to a crisis here, and for
a few days I must ask your patience; by that time we shall know how
matters are to go. If it be war, gladly, indeed, will I have you ride
with me in the field."

Two days later Philip Van Artevelde rode away with the twelve citizens,
who, like himself, went to offer their lives for the sake of the city.
The scene was an affecting one, and crowds of haggard men and
half-starved women filled the streets. Most of them were in tears, and
all prayed aloud that Heaven would soften the earl's heart and suffer
them to come back unharmed to the city. Three days later they returned.
As they rode through the streets all could see that their news was bad,
and that they had returned because the earl had refused to accept them
as sacrifices for the rest. An enormous crowd gathered in front of the
town-hall, and in a few minutes Van Artevelde and his companions
appeared on the balcony.

There was a dead hush among the multitude. They felt that life or death
hung on his words. He told them that the count had refused altogether
to accept twelve lives as ransom for the city, and that he would give
no terms save that he would become its master and would execute all
such as were found to have taken part in the rebellion against him.

A despairing moan rose from the square below.

"Fellow citizens," Van Artevelde went on, "there is now but one of two
things for us to do. The one is to shut our gates, retire to our
houses, and there die either by famine or by such other means as each
may choose. The other way is, that every man capable of bearing arms
shall muster, that we shall march to Bruges, and there either perish
under the lances of his knights, or conquer and drive him headlong from
the land. Which choose ye, my friends?"

A mighty shout arose: "We will fight!"

"You have chosen well," Van Artevelde said. "Have we not before now
defeated forces of men-at-arms superior in numbers to ourselves? Are we
less brave than our fathers? Shall we not fight as stoutly when we know
that we leave famishing wives and children behind who look to us to
bring them back food? Return to your homes! A double ration of bread
shall be served out from the magazines to all. Two hours before
daybreak we will muster in our companies, and an hour later start for
Bruges."

Among those who shouted loudest, "We will fight!" were the two young
knights. They had, as soon as it was known that Van Artevelde and his
party had entered the town, gone with Van Voorden to the house of a
friend of his in the great square. They heard with indignation the
refusal of the Earl of Flanders to accept the noble sacrifice offered
by the twelve burgesses, who had followed the example of the Governor
of Calais and its leading citizens in offering their lives as a
sacrifice for the rest. They had met, however, with a less generous
foe, whose terms would, if accepted, have placed the life and property
of every citizen of Ghent at his mercy. What that was likely to be had
been shown at Ypres. Now the young knights felt indeed that the cause
was a righteous one, and that they could draw their swords for Ghent
with the conviction that by so doing they were fighting to save its
people from massacre.

"By heavens!" Van Voorden exclaimed, "were I but younger I too would go
out with the Ghentois to battle. I care but little myself as to the
rights of the quarrel, though methinks that Ghent is right in resisting
the oppressive taxes which, contrary to their franchise, the earl has
laid on the city. But that is nothing. One has but to look upon the
faces of the crowd to feel one's blood boil at the strait to which
their lord, instead of fighting them boldly, has, like a coward,
reduced them by famine. But now when I hear that he has refused the
prayer for mercy, refused to stay his vengeance, or to content himself
with the heads of the noblest of the citizens offered to him, but
instead would deluge the streets with blood, I would march with them as
to a crusade. I will presently see Van Artevelde if but for a moment,
tell him that you will ride with him, and ask where you shall take your
station."

Late that evening Van Voorden returned. "I have been present at the
council," he said. "The gates will not be open to-morrow, but on
Thursday five thousand men will set out early."

"But five thousand is a small number," Edgar said, "to march against
Bruges, a city as large as this, and having there the earl, and no
doubt a strong body of his own troops."

"That is true; but most of the men are so weakened that it is thought
that it will be best to take but a small number of the strongest and
most capable. They will carry with them the three hundred hand guns.
What little provision there is must be divided; half will go with those
who march, the other half will be kept for those here to sustain life
until news comes how matters have fared in the field."

"But with only five thousand men, without machines for the siege, they
can never hope to storm the walls of Bruges. It would be a feat that as
many veteran soldiers might well hesitate to undertake."

"They have no thought of doing so. It has been agreed that this would
be impossible, but the force will camp near the city, and seeing the
smallness of their number, the people of Bruges will surely sally out
and attack them. Then they will do their best for victory, and if they
beat the enemy our men will follow on their rear hotly and enter the
city."

"'Tis a bold plan," Edgar said; "but at least there seems some hope of
success, which no other plan, methinks, could give. At any rate we two
will do our best, and being well fed and well armed may hope to be able
to cut our way out of the _melee_ if all should be lost. We fight for
honour and from good-will. But this is not a case in which we would die
rather than turn bridle, as it would be were we fighting under the
banner of England and the command of the king."

"Quite so, Edgar; I agree with you entirely," the merchant said. "You
have not come to this country to die in the defence of Ghent. You came
hither to do, if occasion offers, some knightly deeds, and feeling pity
for the starving people here you offer them knightly aid, and will
fight for them as long as there is a chance that fighting may avail
them, but beyond that it would be folly indeed to go; and when you see
the day hopelessly lost, you and your men-at-arms may well try to make
your way out of the crowd of combatants, and to ride whither you will.
I say not to return here, for that would indeed be an act of folly,
since Ghent will have to surrender at once, and without conditions, as
soon as the news comes that the battle is lost. Therefore your best
plan would be to ride for Sluys, and there take ship again. As for me,
I shall wait until news comes and then ride for Liege, and remain there
with friends quietly until we see what the upshot of the affair is
likely to be."

During the day preparations were made for the expedition. Five thousand
of those best able to carry arms were chosen, but the store of
provisions was so small that there were but five cartloads of biscuit
and two tuns of wine for those who went, and a like quantity for the
sustenance of those who stayed. The young knights were to ride in the
train of Van Artevelde himself. In the morning the merchant had asked
them what colours they would wear, for, so far, they had not provided
themselves with scarves.

"You should have scarves, and knightly plumes also," he said, "and, if
you carry lances, pennons; but as you say that you shall fight with
sword, that matter can stand over. Tell me what colours you choose, and
I will see that you have them."

Albert answered that he should carry his father's colours, namely, a
red sash, and red and blue plumes. Edgar replied that he had never
thought about it, but that he would choose white and red plumes, and a
scarf of the same colour. These the merchant purchased in the
afternoon, and his wife and daughter fastened the plumes in their
helmets. At the appointed hour in the morning they clad themselves in
full armour, and when they went down they found the merchant's wife and
daughter were already afoot, and these fastened the scarves over their
shoulders. On going down to the courtyard they found, to their
surprise, that their two horses both carried armour on the chest, body,
and head.

"It is right that you should go to battle in knightly fashion," the
merchant said, "and I have provided you with what is necessary. Indeed,
that is no more than is due. I brought you out here, and involved you
in this business, and 'tis but right that I should see that you are
protected as far as may be from harm."

The reins were supplemented by steel chains, so that the riders should
not be left powerless were the leather cut by a sweeping blow. When
they mounted, the merchant himself went with them to the spot where Van
Artevelde's following were to assemble. The two men-at-arms, in high
spirits at the thought of a fight, rode behind them, together with the
two Van Voorden had engaged at Sluys, both of whom were able to speak a
certain amount of English.

"If you are unhorsed, comrade," one of them said to Hal Carter, "and in
an extremity, remember that the cry for mercy is '_Misericorde_.'"

"By my faith," Hal replied, "'tis little likely that they will get that
cry from me; as long as I can fight I will fight, when I can fight no
longer they can slay me. Still, it is as well that I should know the
word, as I should not like to kill any poor wretch who asks for
quarter."
