either by desertion or death, and the escape could thus be made under
the very eye of the watchman.

Very frequently Cyril went into a church when he saw the door open.
Here very small congregations would be gathered, for there was a fear
on the part of all of meeting with strangers, for these might,
unknown to themselves, be already stricken with the pest, and all
public meetings of any kind were, for this reason, strictly
forbidden. One day, he was passing a church that had hitherto been
always closed, its incumbent being one of those who had fled at the
outbreak of the Plague. Upon entering he saw a larger congregation
than usual, some twenty or thirty people being present.

The minister had just mounted the pulpit, and was beginning his
address as Cyril entered. The latter was struck with his appearance.
He was a man of some thirty years of age, with a strangely earnest
face. His voice was deep, but soft and flexible, and in the stillness
of the almost empty church its lowest tones seemed to come with
impressive power, and Cyril thought that he had never heard such
preaching before. The very text seemed strange at such a time:
_"Rejoice ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."_ From most of
the discourses he had heard Cyril had gone out depressed rather than
inspirited. They had been pitched in one tone. The terrible scourge
that raged round them was held up as a punishment sent by the wrath
of God upon a sinful people, and the congregation were warned to
prepare themselves for the fate, that might at any moment be theirs,
by repentance and humiliation. The preacher to whom Cyril was now
listening spoke in an altogether different strain.

"You are all soldiers of Christ," he said, "and now is an opportunity
given to you to show that you are worthy soldiers. When the troops of
a worldly monarch go into battle they do so with head erect, with
proud and resolute bearing, with flashing eye, and with high courage,
determined to bear aloft his banner and to crown it with victory,
even though it cost them their lives. Such is the mien that soldiers
of Christ should bear in the mortal strife now raging round us. Let
them show the same fearlessness of death, the same high courage, the
same unlimited confidence in their Leader. What matter if they die in
His service? He has told them what their work should be. He has
bidden them visit the sick and comfort the sorrowing. What if there
be danger in the work? Did He shrink from the Cross which was to end
His work of love, and is it for His followers to do so? 'Though you
go down into the pit,' He has said, 'I am there also'; and with His
companionship one must be craven indeed to tremble. This is a noble
opportunity for holding high the banner of Christ. There is work to
be done for all, and as the work is done, men should see by the calm
courage, the cheerfulness, and the patience of those that do it, that
they know that they are doing His work, and that they are content to
leave the issue, whatever it be, in His hands."

Such was the tone in which, for half an hour, he spoke. When he had
finished he offered up a prayer, gave the blessing, and then came
down from the pulpit and spoke to several of the congregation. He was
evidently personally known to most of them. One by one, after a few
words, they left the church. Cyril remained to the last.

"I am willing to work, sir," he said, as the preacher came up, "but,
so far, no work has come in my way."

"Have you father or mother, or any dependent on you?"

"No one, sir."

"Then come along with me; I lodge close by. I have eaten nothing
to-day, and must keep up my strength, and I have a long round of
calls to make."

"This is the first time I have seen the church open," Cyril said, as
they went out.

"It is not my church, sir, nor do I belong to the Church of England;
I am an Independent. But as many of the pastors have fled and left
their sheep untended, so have we--for there are others besides myself
who have done so--taken possession of their empty pulpits, none
gainsaying us, and are doing what good we can. You have been in the
war, I see," he went on, glancing at Cyril's arm, which was carried
in a sling.

"Yes; I was at the battle of Lowestoft, and having been wounded
there, came to London to stay in a friend's house till I was cured.
He and his family have left, but I am living with a trusty foreman
who is in charge of the house. I have a great desire to be useful. I
myself have little fear of the Plague."

"That is the best of all preservatives from its ravages, although not
a sure one; for many doctors who have laboured fearlessly have yet
died. Have you thought of any way of being useful?"

"No, sir; that is what is troubling me. As you see, I have but the
use of one arm, and I have not got back my full strength by a long
way."

"Everyone can be useful if he chooses," the minister said. "There is
need everywhere among this stricken, frightened, helpless people, of
men of calm courage and cool heads. Nine out of ten are so scared out
of their senses, when once the Plague enters the houses, as to be
well-nigh useless, and yet the law hinders those who would help if
they could. I am compelled to labour, not among those who are sick,
but among those who are well. When one enters a house with the red
cross on the door, he may leave it no more until he is either borne
out to the dead-cart, or the Plague has wholly disappeared within it,
and a month has elapsed. The sole exception are the doctors; they are
no more exempt from spreading the infection than other men, but as
they must do their work so far as they can they have free passage;
and yet, so few is their number and so heavy already their losses,
that not one in a hundred of those that are smitten can have their
aid. Here is one coming now, one of the best--Dr. Hodges. If you are
indeed willing so to risk your life, I will speak to him. But I know
not your name?"

"My name is Cyril Shenstone."

The clergyman looked at him suddenly, and would have spoken, but the
doctor was now close to them.

"Ah! Mr. Wallace," he said, "I am glad to see you, and to know that,
so far, you have not taken the disease, although constantly going
into the worst neighbourhoods."

"Like yourself, Dr. Hodges, I have no fear of it."

"I do not say I have no fear," the doctor replied. "I do my duty so
far as I can, but I do not doubt that, sooner or later, I shall catch
the malady, as many of us have done already. I take such precautions
as I can, but the distemper seems to baffle all precautions. My only
grief is that our skill avails so little. So far we have found
nothing that seems to be of any real use. Perhaps if we could attack
it in the earlier stages we might be more successful. The strange
nature of the disease, and the way in which it does its work
well-nigh to the end, before the patient is himself aware of it, puts
it out of our power to combat it. In many cases I am not sent for
until the patient is at the point of death, and by the time I reach
his door I am met with the news that he is dead. But I must be
going."

"One moment, Dr. Hodges. This young gentleman has been expressing to
me his desire to be of use. I know nothing of him save that he was
one of my congregation this morning, but, as he fears not the Plague,
and is moved by a desire to help his fellows in distress, I take it
that he is a good youth. He was wounded in the battle of Lowestoft,
and, being as ready to encounter the Plague as he was the Dutch,
would now fight in the cause of humanity. Would you take him as an
assistant? I doubt if he knows anything of medicine, but I think he
is one that would see your orders carried out. He has no relations or
friends, and therefore considers himself free to venture his life."

The doctor looked earnestly at Cyril and then raised his hat.

"Young sir," he said, "since you are willing so to venture your life,
I will gladly accept your help. There are few enough clear heads in
this city, God knows. As for the nurses, they are Jezebels. They have
the choice of starving or nursing, and they nurse; but they neglect
their patients, they rob them, and there is little doubt that in many
cases they murder them, so that at the end of their first nursing
they may have enough money to live on without going to another house.
But I am pressed for time. Here is my card. Call on me this evening
at six, and we will talk further on the matter."

Shaking hands with the minister he hurried away.

"Come as far as my lodgings," Mr. Wallace said to Cyril, "and stay
with me while I eat my meal. 'Tis a diversion to one's mind to turn
for a moment from the one topic that all men are speaking of.

"Your name is Shenstone. I come from Norfolk. There was a family of
that name formerly had estates near my native place. One Sir Aubrey
Shenstone was at its head--a brave gentleman. I well remember seeing
him when I was a boy, but he took the side of the King against the
Parliament, and, as we heard, passed over with Charles to France when
his cause was lost. I have not heard of him since."

"Sir Aubrey was my father," Cyril said quietly; "he died a year ago.
I am his only son."

"And therefore Sir Cyril," the minister said, "though you did not so
name yourself."

"It was needless," Cyril said. "I have no estates to support my
title, and though it is true that, when at sea with Prince Rupert, I
was called Sir Cyril, it was because the Prince had known my father,
and knew that I, at his death, inherited the title, though I
inherited nothing else."

They now reached the door of Mr. Wallace's lodging, and went up to
his room on the first floor.

"Neglect no precaution," the minister said. "No one should throw away
his life. I myself, although not a smoker, nor accustomed to take
snuff, use it now, and would, as the doctors advise, chew a piece of
tobacco, but 'tis too nasty, and when I tried it, I was so ill that I
thought even the risk of the Plague preferable. But I carry camphor
in my pockets, and when I return from preaching among people of whom
some may well have the infection, I bathe my face and hands with
vinegar, and, pouring some on to a hot iron, fill the room with its
vapour. My life is useful, I hope, and I would fain keep it, as long
as it is the Lord's will, to work in His service. As a rule, I take
wine and bread before I go out in the morning, though to-day I was
pressed for time, and neglected it. I should advise you always to do
so. I am convinced that a full man has less chance of catching the
infection than a fasting one, and that it is the weakness many men
suffer from their fears, and from their loss of appetite from grief,
that causes them to take it so easily. When the fever was so bad in
St. Giles's, I heard that in many instances, where whole families
were carried away, the nurses shut up with them were untouched with
the infection, and I believe that this was because they had become
hardened to the work, and ate and drank heartily, and troubled not
themselves at all at the grief of those around them. They say that
many of these harpies have grown, wealthy, loading themselves with
everything valuable they could lay hands on in the houses of those
they attended."

After the meal, in which he insisted upon Cyril joining him, was
concluded, Mr. Wallace uttered a short prayer that Cyril might safely
pass through the work he had undertaken.

"I trust," he said, "that you will come here frequently? I generally
have a few friends here of an evening. We try to be cheerful, and to
strengthen each other, and I am sure we all have comfort at these
meetings."

"Thank you, I will come sometimes, sir; but as a rule I must return
home, for my friend, John Wilkes, would sorely miss my company, and
is so good and faithful a fellow that I would not seem to desert him
on any account."

"Do as you think right, lad, but remember there will always be a
welcome for you here when you choose to come."

John Wilkes was dismayed when he heard of Cyril's intention.

"Well, Master Cyril," he said, after smoking his pipe in silence for
some time, "it is not for me to hinder you in what you have made up
your mind to do. I don't say that if I wasn't on duty here that I
mightn't go and do what I could for these poor creatures. But I don't
know. It is one thing to face a deadly fever like this Plague if it
comes on board your own ship, for there is no getting out of it; and
as you have got to face it, why, says I, do it as a man; but as for
going out of your way to put yourself in the middle of it, that is
going a bit beyond me."

"Well, John, you didn't think it foolish when I went as a Volunteer
to fight the Dutch. It was just the same thing, you know."

"I suppose it was," John said reluctantly, after a pause. "But then,
you see, you were fighting for your country."

"Well, but in the present case I shall be fighting for my countrymen
and countrywomen, John. It is awful to think of the misery that
people are suffering, and it seems to me that, having nothing else to
do here, it is specially my duty to put my hand to the work of
helping as far as I can. The risk may, at present, be greater than it
would be if I stayed at home, but if the Plague spreads--and it looks
as if all the City would presently be affected--all will have to run
the risk of contagion. There are thousands of women now who
voluntarily enter the houses as nurses for a small rate of pay. Even
robbers, they say, will enter and ransack the houses of the dead in
search of plunder. It will be a shame indeed then if one should
shrink from doing so when possibly one might do good."

"I will say nothing more against it, Master Cyril. Still, I do not
see exactly what you are going to do; with one arm you could scarce
hold down a raving man."

"I am not going to be a nurse, certainly, John," Cyril said, with a
laugh. "I expect that the doctor wants certain cases watched. Either
he may doubt the nurses, or he may want to see how some particular
drug works. Nothing, so far, seems of use, but that may be partly
because the doctors are all so busy that they cannot watch the
patients and see, from hour to hour, how medicines act."

"When I was in the Levant, and the pest was bad there," John Wilkes
said, "I heard that the Turks, when seized with the distemper,
sometimes wrapped themselves up in a great number of clothes, so that
they sweated heavily, and that this seemed, in some cases, to draw
off the fever, and so the patient recovered."

"That seems a sensible sort of treatment, John, and worth trying with
this Plague."

On calling on Dr. Hodges that afternoon, Cyril found that he had
rightly guessed the nature of the work that the doctor wished him to
perform.

"I can never rely upon the nurses," he said. "I give instructions
with medicines, but in most cases I am sure that the instructions are
never carried out. The relations and friends are too frightened to
think or act calmly, too full of grief for the sick, and anxiety for
those who have not yet taken the illness, to watch the changes in the
patient. As to the nurses, they are often drunk the whole time they
are in the house. Sometimes they fear to go near the sick man or
woman; sometimes, undoubtedly, they hasten death. In most cases it
matters little, for we are generally called in too late to be of any
service. The poor people view us almost as enemies; they hide their
malady from us in every way. Half our time, too, is wasted uselessly,
for many are there who frighten themselves into the belief that they
are ill, and send for us in all haste. So far, we feel that we are
working altogether in the dark; none of us can see that any sort of
drug avails even in the slightest degree when the malady has once got
a hold. One in twenty cases may live, but why we know not. Still the
fact that some do live shows that the illness is not necessarily
mortal, and that, could the right remedy befound, we might yet
overcome it. The first thing, however, is to try to prevent its
spread. Here we have ten or more people shut up in a house with one
sick person. It is a terrible necessity, for it is a sentence of
death to many, if not to all. We give the nurses instructions to
fumigate the room by evaporating vinegar upon hot irons, by burning
spices and drugs, by sprinkling perfumes. So far, I cannot see that
these measures have been of any service, but I cannot say how
thoroughly they have been carried out, and I sorely need an assistant
to see that the system is fairly tried. It is not necessary that he
should be a doctor, but he must have influence and power over those
in the house. He must be calm and firm, and he must be regarded by
the people as a doctor. If you will undertake this, you must put on a
wig, for you know that that is looked upon as a necessary part of a
doctor's outfit by people in general. I shall introduce you as my
assistant, and say that you are to be obeyed as implicitly as if I
myself were present. There is another reason why you must pass as a
doctor, for you would otherwise be a prisoner and unable to pass in
and out. You had best wear a black suit. I will lend you one of my
canes and a snuff-box, and should advise you to take snuff, even if
it is not your habit, for I believe that it is good against
infection, and one of the experiments I wish to try is as to what its
result may be if burnt freely in the house. Are you ready to
undertake this work?"

"Quite ready, sir."

"Then come round here at eight in the morning. I shall have heard by
that hour from the examiners of this parish of any fresh case they
have found. They begin their rounds at five o'clock."

The next day Cyril presented himself at the doctor's, dressed in
black, with white ruffles to his shirt, and a flowing wig he had
purchased the night before.

"Here are the cane and snuff-box," Dr. Hodges said. "Now you will
pass muster very well as my assistant. Let us be off at once; for I
have a long list of cases."

Cyril remained outside while Dr. Hodges went into three or four
houses. Presently he came down to the door, and said to him,--

"This is a case where things are favourable for a first trial. It is
a boy who is taken ill, and the parents, though in deep grief, seem
to have some sense left."

He turned to the watchman, who had already been placed at the door.
The man, who evidently knew him, had saluted respectfully when he
entered the house.

"This gentleman is my assistant," he said, "and you will allow him to
pass in and out just as you would myself. He is going to take this
case entirely in hand, and you will regard him as being in charge
here."

He then re-entered the house with Cyril, and led him to the room
where the parents of the boy, and two elder sisters, were assembled.

"This is my assistant," he said, "and he has consented to take entire
charge of the case, though I myself shall look in and consult with
him every morning. In the first place, your son must be taken to the
top storey of the house. You say that you are ready to nurse him
yourselves, and do not wish that a paid nurse should be had in. I
commend your determination, for the nurses are, for the most part,
worse than useless, and carry the infection all over the house. But
only one of you must go into the room, and whoever goes in must stay
there. It is madness for all to be going in and out and exposing
themselves to the infection when no good can be done. When this is
the case, one or other is sure to take the malady, and then it
spreads to all. Which of you will undertake the duty?"

All four at once offered themselves, and there was an earnest contest
between them for the dangerous post. Dr. Hodges listened for a minute
or two, and then decided upon the elder of the two sisters--a quiet,
resolute-looking girl with a healthy face.

"This young lady shall be nurse," he said. "I feel that I can have
confidence in her. She looks healthy and strong, and would, methinks,
best resist the malady, should she take it. I am leaving my assistant
here for a time to see to the fumigation of the house. You will
please see that his orders are carried out in every respect. I have
every hope that if this is done the Plague will not spread further;
but much must depend upon yourselves. Do not give way to grief, but
encourage each other, and go about with calm minds. I see," he said,
pointing to a Bible on the table, "that you know where to go for
comfort and strength. The first thing is to carry the boy up to the
room that we chose for him."

"I will do that," the father said.

"He had better be left in the blankets in which he is lying. Cover
him completely over with them, for, above all, it is necessary that
you should not inhale his breath. You had better take the head and
your daughter the feet. But first see that the room upstairs is
prepared."

In a few minutes the lad was transferred to the upper room, the
doctor warning the others not to enter that from which he had been
carried until it had been fumigated and sprinkled with vinegar.

"Now," he said to the girl who was to remain with the patient, "keep
the window wide open; as there is no fireplace, keep a brazier of
charcoal burning near the window. Keep the door shut, and open it
only when you have need for something. Give him a portion of this
medicine every half hour. Do not lean over him--remember that his
breath is a fatal poison. Put a pinch of these powdered spices into
the fire every few minutes. Pour this perfume over your handkerchief,
and put it over your mouth and nose whenever you approach the bed. He
is in a stupor now, poor lad, and I fear that his chance of recovery
is very slight; but you must remember that your own life is of value
to your parents, and that it behoves you to do all in your power to
preserve it, and that if you take the contagion it may spread through
the house. We shall hang a sheet, soaked in vinegar, outside the
door."

"We could not have a better case for a trial," he said, as he went
downstairs and joined Cyril, whom he had bidden wait below. "The
people are all calm and sensible, and if we succeed not here, there
is small chance of our succeeding elsewhere."

The doctor then gave detailed orders as to fumigating the house, and
left. Cyril saw at once that a brazier of charcoal was lighted and
carried upstairs, and he called to the girl to come out and fetch it
in. As soon as she had done so the sheet was hung over the door. Then
he took another brazier, placed it in the room from which the boy had
been carried, laid several lumps of sulphur upon it, and then left
the room. All the doors of the other rooms were then thrown open, and
a quantity of tobacco, spices, and herbs, were burnt on a red-hot
iron at the foot of the stairs, until the house was filled with a
dense smoke. Half an hour later all the windows were opened.




CHAPTER XVI

FATHER AND SON


The process of fumigation had well-nigh suffocated the wife and
daughter of the trader, but, as soon as the smoke cleared away, Cyril
set them all to work to carry up articles of furniture to another
bedroom on the top floor.

"When your daughter is released from nursing, madam," he said, "she
must at once come into this room, and remain there secluded for a few
days. Therefore, it will be well to make it as comfortable as
possible for her. Her food must be taken up and put outside the door,
so that she can take it in there without any of you going near her."

The occupation was a useful one, as it distracted the thoughts of
those engaged in it from the sick room.

Cyril did not enter there. He had told the girl to call him should
there be any necessity, but said,--

"Do not call me unless absolutely needful, if, for instance, he
becomes violent, in which case we must fasten the sheets across him
so as to restrain him. But it is of no use your remaining shut up
there if I go in and out of the room to carry the infection to the
others."

"You have hurt your arm, doctor?" the mother said, when the
arrangements were all made, and they had returned to the room below.

"Yes," he said; "I met with an accident, and must, for a short time,
keep my arm in a sling."

"You look young, sir, to be running these fearful perils."

"I am young," Cyril said, "and have not yet completed all my studies;
but Dr. Hodges judged that I was sufficiently advanced to be able to
be of service to him, not so much in prescribing as by seeing that
his orders were carried out."

Every half hour he went upstairs, and inquired, through the door, as
to the state of the boy.

Late in the afternoon he heard the girl crying bitterly within. He
knocked, and she cried out,--

"He is dead, sir; he has just expired."

"Then you must think of yourself and the others," he said. "The small
packet I placed on the chair contains sulphur. Close the window, then
place the packet on the fire, and leave the room at once and go into
the next room, which is all ready for you. There, I pray you,
undress, and sponge yourself with vinegar, then make your clothes
into a bundle and put them outside the door. There will be a bowl of
hot broth in readiness for you there; drink that, and then go to bed
at once, and keep the blankets over you and try to sleep."

He went part of the way downstairs, and, in a minute or two, heard a
door open and shut, then another door shut. Knowing that the order
had been carried out, he went downstairs.
