have more than once begged him off a beating, and methinks he will do
anything for me. He is as full of cunning as an ape, and, I warrant me,
would act his part marvellously. My father will be glad enough to get him
out of the forge for a while, and when I tell him that it is in your
service he will make no difficulty about it. He is fifteen years old, but
so small for his age that he would pass for three years younger than he
is."

"I think it is a very good plan, Osgod. You had best see your father in the
morning, and if he consents to your having the boy, bring him down to the
river-bank behind the abbey, where I will be awaiting you, and can there
talk to him without observation. You are sure that he can be trusted to
keep silence regarding what I tell him?"

"He can be trusted, my lord. In the first place he will enjoy playing his
part, and in the second he will know well enough that I should nearly flay
him alive with my stirrup-leather if he were to fail me, and that his life
in the forge would be worse than ever."

The next morning Wulf strolled down to the river-bank after breaking his
fast, and it was not long before Osgod joined him with the boy.

"Have you told him what he is required for, Osgod?" Wulf asked, as the boy,
doffing his cap, stood before him with an air of extreme humility.

"I am not good at the telling of tales, as you know, my lord, and I thought
it better that you should tell him just as much or as little as you chose."

"You don't like your work at the forge, Ulf?" for that Wulf had learned was
the boy's name.

"I think that I like it better than it likes me," the boy replied. "When I
get to do the fine work I shall like it, but at present it is 'fetch this
tool, Ulf, or file that iron, or blow those bellows,' and if I do but smile
I get a cuff."

"No, no, Ulf," Osgod said. "Of course, at present you are but a beginner,
and at your age I too had to fetch and carry and be at the bidding of all
the men; and it is not for smiling that you get cuffed, but for playing
tricks and being away for hours when you are sent on a message to the next
street, and doing your errands wrongly. My father tells me you will be a
good workman some day. You will never be strong enough to wield a heavy
hammer or to forge a battle-axe, but he says your fingers are quick and
nimble, and that you will some day be able to do fine work such as clumsy
hands could not compass. But that is not to the point now."

"You will be glad to be out of the forge for a bit, Ulf?" Wulf asked.

"That should I, but not always."

"It will not be for very long. I want a watch set upon a Norman in order to
know where he goes, and whom he meets, and what he purposes. Osgod tells me
that he thinks you could play the part rarely, and that you would be
willing for his sake to do our bidding."

The boy looked up into Osgod's face with an expression of earnest
affection.

"I would do anything for him," he said, "even if I were to be cut to
pieces."

"Osgod is as much interested in the matter as I am, Ulf; and as he has
assured me that you are to be trusted, I will tell you more as to the man,
and my object in setting you to watch him."

"You can trust me, my lord," the boy said earnestly. "I will do your
bidding whatever it is."

"You know, Ulf, that the Duke of Normandy desires the crown of England?"

"So I have heard men say, my lord."

"Were King Harold out of the way, his chances of obtaining it would be
improved."

The boy nodded.

"I am sure that the duke himself would take no hand in bringing about
Harold's death, but there are many of his people who might think that they
would obtain a great reward were they to do so."

The boy nodded again.

"The man I wish you to watch is Walter Fitz-Urse, who is in the train of
the bishop. I have no particular reason for suspecting him, beyond the fact
that he has but just come over here, and this is scarcely a time a Norman
would come to London; though as the bishop is a relation and patron of his
he may have come merely to visit him. Still he has, as he thinks, a cause
for enmity against the king. He is needy, and, as I know, somewhat
unscrupulous. All this is little enough against a man; still it seems to me
that his coming bodes danger to the king, and this being so I desire that
he shall be watched, in order that I may find out what is his real object
in coming over here. I want you to post yourself near the gate of the
bishop's palace, and whenever he comes out to follow him save when he is in
the train of the bishop--most of all if he sallies out alone or after dark.

"It will not do for you to be always dressed as an apprentice. Osgod will
procure for you such clothes as you may require for disguises. One day you
can be sitting there as a beggar asking alms, another as a girl from one of
the villages with eggs or fowls. You understand that you will have to
follow him, to mark where he goes in, and especially, should he be joined
by anybody when out, to endeavour to overhear something of what they say to
each other. Even a few words might suffice to show me whether my suspicions
are true or not. Do you think you can do that? Osgod tells me that you are
good at playing a part."

"I will do it, my lord, and that right gladly. It is a business after my
own heart, and I will warrant that those who see me one day will not know
me when they see me the next."

"Osgod will go with you now, and will stay near the bishop's palace until
the man you are to watch comes out, and will point him out to you. In a day
or two I may be going away with the king; when we return you will tell us
what you have found out. Till we go, Osgod will meet you here each morning
as the abbey bell rings out the hour of seven. You can tell him anything
that you have learned, and then he will give you such further instructions
as may seem needful; and remember you must be cautious, for Walter
Fitz-Urse would not hesitate to use his dagger on you did he come upon you
eaves-dropping."

"I will give him leave to do so if he catches me," the boy said.

"Very well, then; Osgod will go with you to buy such clothes as may be
necessary, and remember that you will be well rewarded for your work."

"I want no reward," the boy said, almost indignantly. "I am an apprentice,
and as my master has bid me do whatever Osgod commands, he has a right to
my services. But this is nothing. There is not one in London who would not
do aught in his power for Harold, and who would scorn to take pay for
it. As this is a matter in which his very life may be concerned, though I
am but a boy, and a small one at that, there is nought that I would not do,
even to the giving of my life, to spoil these Norman plots."

Osgod was about to chide the boy angrily for this freedom of speech, but
Wulf checked him.

"You are right, lad; and I am sorry I spoke of a reward. I myself would
have answered the same at your age, and would have died for Harold then as
I would now. I should have bethought me that the feelings of Englishmen,
gentle or simple, are the same towards the king, and I crave your pardon
for treating your loyal service as a thing to be paid for with money."

The boy's eyes filled with tears; he dropped on one knee, and seizing
Wulf's hand placed it to his lips, and then without a word sped away,
halting a hundred yards off till Osgod should join him.

"You have made a good choice," Wulf said; "the boy is wholly trustworthy,
and unless his face belies him he is as shrewd as he is faithful. My only
fear in the matter is, that he may be over rash in his desire to carry out
the trust we have given him. Warn him against that, and tell him that
should he be discovered and killed it would upset all our plans."




CHAPTER XV.


A MEETING BY THE RIVER.

During the three days that elapsed between Ulf's being set upon the track
of Walter Fitz-Urse and the departure of the king for the North, the boy
had no news to report to Osgod. The young Norman had not left the bishop's
palace alone. He had accompanied the prelate several times when he went
abroad, and had gone out with some of his countrymen who still held office
at the court. In one or other of the disguises Wulf had suggested, the boy
had hung about the gate of the bishop's palace until late in the evening,
but Walter Fitz-Urse had not come out after dark. On the day before
starting, Wulf was with Osgod when the latter met the boy at the
rendezvous.

After he heard Ulf's report Wulf said: "As we leave to-morrow this is the
last report you will have to make to us. So far it would seem that there is
nothing whatever to give grounds for suspicion, and if, after a few days,
you find that the Norman still remains quietly at the bishop's, there will
be no occasion for you to continue your watch until the time is approaching
for the king's return."

"Yes, my lord. But I cannot say surely that he does not go out of an
evening."

"Why, I thought you said that he certainly had not done so?"

"No, my lord; I said only that I had not seen him. He has certainly not
gone out through the great gates in his Norman dress, but that it seems to
me shows very little. As the bishop's guest he would pass out there, but
there is another entrance behind that he might use did he wish to go out
unobserved. Even at the main entrance I cannot tell but that, beneath the
cowl and frock of one of the many monks who pass in and out, Walter
Fitz-Urse may not be hidden. He would scarce go about such a business as we
suspect in his dress as a Norman noble, which is viewed with little favour
here in London, and would draw attention towards him, but would assume, as
I do, some disguise in which he could go about unremarked--it might be that
of a monk, it might be that of a lay servitor of the palace."

"You are right, Ulf; I had not thought of that. That is indeed a
difficulty, and one that I do not see how you can get over. Are you sure
that he has not passed out by the main gate?"

"I have marked his walk and carriage closely, my lord. He steps along with
a long stride, and unless he be a better mummer than I judge him to be, I
should know him whether in a monk's gown or a servitor's cloak. It is no
easy thing to change a knight's stride into the shuffle of a sandalled
monk, or the noiseless step of a well-trained servitor in a bishop's
palace."

"You are a shrewd lad indeed, Ulf," Wulf said warmly; "and I feel that you
will fathom this matter if there be aught at the bottom. But, as you say,
you cannot watch more than one place."

"The other entrance is not altogether unwatched, my lord. The first day
you gave me my orders I went to one of my cronies, who has shared with me
in many an expedition when our master deemed that we were soundly asleep.
Without, as you may be sure, giving any reason, I told him that I had come
to believe that the Norman I pointed out to him was in the habit of going
out in disguise, and that I was mightily curious to find whither he went
and why, and therefore wanted him to watch, at the entrance behind the
palace. I bade him mark the walk of the persons that went out, and their
height, for the Norman is tall, and to follow any who might come out of
lofty stature, and with a walk and carriage that seemed to accord ill with
his appearance. So each evening, as soon as his house was closed and the
lights extinguished, he has slipped out, as he knows how, and has watched
till ten o'clock at the gate. It seemed to me that that would be late
enough, and indeed the doors are closed at that hour."

"You have done well, Ulf; but has not the boy questioned you as to your
reasons for thus setting a watch on the Norman?"

"I have told him nought beyond what I have said, my lord. He may guess
shrewdly enough that I should not myself take so much trouble in the matter
unless I had more reason than I have given; but we are closely banded
together, and just as I should do, without asking the reasons, any such
action did he propose it to me, so he carried out my wishes. I cannot feel
as sure as if I had watched him myself that Fitz-Urse has not passed out in
disguise unnoticed, but I have a strong belief that it is so. At any rate,
my lord, you can go away with the assurance that all that is possible shall
be done by us, and that even if he pass out once or twice undiscovered
there is good hope that we shall at last detect him."

After again commending the boy, Wulf returned to the palace with Osgod.

"I feel half ashamed of having entertained a suspicion of Fitz-Urse on such
slight grounds, Osgod."

"I think you have done quite right, my lord. You know how the fellow gave a
false report to the bishop of that quarrel with you. At any rate, should
nothing come of it, no harm will have been done. As to the boys, so far
from regarding it as a trouble, I feel sure that they view it as an
exciting pleasure, and are as keenly anxious to detect the Norman going out
in a disguise as you yourself can be. When they get tired of it they will
give it up."

Ulf, at any rate, was determined not to relax his watch during the absence
of the king. The more he thought of it the more certain he felt that if
Walter Fitz-Urse went out on any private business after nightfall he would
use one or other of the entrances at the rear of the palace, and
accordingly next day he arranged that one friend should watch the front
entrance of an evening, while he himself took post behind. As soon as it
was dark he lay down by the wall close to the entrance at which the
servitors generally passed in and out. The moon was up but was still young,
and the back of the palace lay in deep shadow; a projecting buttress
screened him to a great extent from view, while by peeping round the corner
he could watch those who came out and see them as they passed from the
shadow of the building into the comparatively light space beyond.

Many came in and out. The evening was bitterly cold, and his teeth
chattered as he lay, cautiously putting his head beyond the edge of the
stonework every time he heard any one leaving the palace. The heavy bell
had just struck eight, when a man wrapt up in a cloak passed out. He
differed in no respect from many of those who had preceded him, save that
he was somewhat taller. The hood of the cloak was drawn over his head. Ulf
raised himself to his knees and gazed after the figure. The man was walking
more slowly than the others had done, for most of them had hurried along as
if in haste to get their errands finished and to be in shelter again from
the keen wind.

"If that is Fitz-Urse, he is walking so as to avoid the appearance of haste
in case anyone should be looking after him," Ulf muttered to himself. "At
any rate I will follow him, he is more like the Norman than anyone I have
yet seen, though he carries his head forwarder and his shoulders more
rounded." As he watched him, the boy saw that as he increased the distance
from the palace the man quickened his pace, and when he came into the
moonlight was stepping rapidly along.

"That is my man," Ulf exclaimed. "He knows well enough that no one is
likely to be standing at the door, and thinks he need no longer walk
cautiously." Feeling sure that even if the man looked back he would not be
able to see him in the shadow, he started forward at a run, paused before
he reached the edge of the moonlight, and then, as soon as the figure
entered a lane between some houses, ran forward at the top of his speed.
The man was but a hundred yards in front of him when Ulf came to the
entrance of the lane. Just as he turned into it the man stopped and looked
round, and Ulf threw himself down by the side of a wall.

"That settles it," he said to himself. "No one who had not a fear of being
followed would turn and look round on such a night as this."

Ulf was barefooted, for although he generally wore soft shoes which were
almost as noiseless as the naked foot, he was dressed in rags, and a foot
covering of any sort would have been out of place. Always keeping in the
shade, having his eyes fixed on the man he was pursuing, and holding
himself in readiness to leap into a doorway or throw himself down should he
see him turn his head, he lessened the distance until he was within some
fifty yards of the other. The man took several turns, and at last entered a
long street leading down to the river. As soon as Ulf saw him enter it he
darted off at full speed, turned down another lane, and then, when he got
beyond the houses, and on to the broken ground that lay between them and
the river, ran until he was nearly facing the end of the street which he
had seen the man enter, and then threw himself down.

He had scarcely done so when he saw the figure issue from the street and
strike across the open ground towards the water. Crawling along on his
stomach Ulf followed him, until he halted on the bank. The man looked up and
down the river, stamped his foot impatiently, and then began to walk to and
fro. Presently he stopped and appeared to be listening; Ulf did the same,
and soon heard the distant splash of oars. They came nearer and nearer. Ulf
could not see the boat, for it was close under the bank, which was some
twenty yards away from him, but presently when the boat seemed almost
abreast of him the man on the bank said, "Where do you come from?"

"From fishing in deep water," a voice replied.

"That is right, come ashore."

The words were spoken by both in a language Ulf could not understand, and
he muttered a Saxon oath. The thought that any conversation Fitz-Urse might
have with a Norman would naturally be in that tongue had never once
occurred to him. Three men mounted the bank. One shook hands with
Fitz-Urse, the others had doffed their caps and stood listening bareheaded
to the conversation between their superiors. It was long and animated. At
first the stranger stamped his foot and seemed disappointed at the news
Fitz-Urse gave him, then as the latter continued to speak he seemed more
satisfied.

For fully half an hour they talked, then the men got into the boat and
rowed away, and Fitz-Urse turned and walked back to the palace.

Ulf did not follow him. The meeting for which Fitz-Urse had come out had
taken place, he would be sure to go straight back to the palace. Ulf lay
there for some time fairly crying with vexation. He had done something, he
had discovered that Fitz-Urse was indeed engaged in some undertaking that
had to be conducted with the greatest secrecy; but this was little to what
he would have learned had he understood the language. His only consolation
was that both Wulf and Osgod had likewise forgotten the probability that
the conversations he was charged to overhear might be in Norman.

Had Wulf still been in London he could have gone to him for fresh
instructions, but he had started at daybreak, and the king's party would
assuredly ride fast. There was no time to be lost. These men had a boat,
and probably came from a ship in the port. Were there really a conspiracy
against the king they might sail north and land in the Humber, though it
seemed more probable that they would wait for his return, for on his
journey he would be surrounded by his housecarls, and there would be far
less chance of finding him alone and unguarded than in London. Had it been
their intention to sail at once for the North, Walter Fitz-Urse would
probably have rowed away with them without returning to the palace. At any
rate it was too important a matter for him to trust to his own judgment,
and he determined to take counsel with his master.

He had not been near the forge since he had begun the search, and was
supposed to have gone down to stay with his family, who lived near Reading.
He had hidden away his apprentice dress beneath some stones in a field half
a mile from Westminster, and he presented himself in this at the forge in
the morning.

"You are back sooner than I expected, Ulf," Ulred said as he entered. "I
did not look for you for another week to come. Is all well at home?"

"All is well, master; but I have a message to deliver to you concerning
some business."

The armourer saw that his apprentice wished to speak to him in private. He
knew nothing of the reason for which Osgod had asked him to release the boy
from his work at the forge for a time, but had quite understood that the
wish to pay a visit to his family was but a cloak, and that the boy was to
be employed in some service for Wulf. Guessing, therefore, that the message
was one that should be delivered in private, he bade the boy follow him
from the forge and took him into the room above.

"What is it you would say to me, Ulf? Mind, I wish to hear nothing about
any private matter in which you may be engaged either by Wulf or Osgod.
They are both away and may not return for a month or more. I judged the
matter was a private one, as Osgod said nought of it to me."

"The matter is a private one, master, but as they are away I would fain
take your counsel on it."

The armourer shook his head decidedly. "I can listen to nought about it,
boy. It can be no business of mine, and unless he has given you license to
speak I would not on any account meddle with the affairs of the young
thane, who is a good lord to my son."

"That he has not done, sir; but I pray you to hear me," he added urgently
as the armourer was turning to leave the room. "It is a matter that may
touch the safety of our lord the king."

The armourer stopped. "Art well assured of what you say, Ulf?"

"For myself I can say nothing, master, but the young thane told me that he
had fears that some attempt or other might be made from the other side of
the sea against the king's life, and that although he had no strong
grounds, he thought that Walter Fitz-Urse, who had just returned here,
might be concerned in it, he having reasons for enmity against the king.
Therefore he appointed me to watch him."

He then related the scene he had witnessed on the river bank the evening
before.

"It is a strange story indeed, Ulf, and whatever it may mean, this meeting
can have been for no good purpose. The secrecy with which it was conducted
is enough to prove it. It is indeed unfortunate that you did not understand
what was said, for much may depend upon it. Well, this is a grave affair,
and I must think it over, Ulf. You have done well in telling me. Has any
plan occurred to you?"

"I thought that you might accompany me, master."

"That would I willingly, but though I have picked up enough of their tongue
to enable me to do business with the Normans at the king's court when they
come in to buy a dagger or to have a piece of armour repaired, I could not
follow their talk one with another. We must obtain someone who can speak
their language well, and who can be trusted to be discreet and silent. Why,
were it but whispered abroad that some Normans are plotting against the
life of the king, there would be so angry a stir that every Norman in the
land might be hunted down and slain. Do not go down to the forge, I will
tell my wife to give you some food, and you had best then go up to the
attic and sleep. You will have to be afoot again to-night, and it were well
that you kept altogether away from the others, so as to avoid inconvenient
questions. I will come up to you when I have thought the matter over."

