but if I had not got into a passion, and had gone straight to Bill's, or
to Abijah, or to Mr. Porson, which would have been best of all, to
have stopped the night, all this would not have come upon me; but I let
myself get into a blind passion and stopped in it for hours, and I am
being punished for it."

"It was natural that you should get in a passion," Charlie said stoutly.
"I think any one would have got in a passion."

"I don't think you would, Charlie," Ned said, smiling.

"No," Charlie replied; "but then you see that is not my way. I should
have cried all night; but then I am not a great, strong fellow like you,
and it would not be so hard to be knocked about."

"It's no use making excuses, Charlie. I know I ought not to have given
way to my temper like that. Now, Lucy dear, as you are feeling better,
you must sit up and talk to me. How is mother?"

"Mother is in bed," Lucy said. "She's always in bed now; the house is
dreadful, Ned, without you, and they say you are not to come back yet,"
and the tears came very near to overflowing again.

"Ah! well, I hope I shall be back before long, Lucy."

"I hope so," Lucy said; "but you know you will soon be going away again
to be a soldier."

"I shall not go away again now, Lucy," Ned said quietly. "When I come
back it will be for good."

"Oh! that will be nice," Lucy said joyously, "just as it used to be,
with no one to be cross and scold about everything."

"Hush! little woman, don't talk about that. He had his faults, dear, as
we all have, but he had a great deal to worry him, and perhaps we did
not make allowances enough for him, and I do think he was really fond of
you, Lucy, and when people are dead we should never speak ill of them."

"I don't want to," Lucy said, "and I didn't want him to be fond of me
when he wasn't fond of you and Charlie or mother. It seems to me he
wasn't fond of mother, and yet she does nothing but cry; I can't make
that out, can you?"

Ned did not answer; his mother's infatuation for Mr. Mulready had always
been a puzzle to him, and he could at present think of no reply which
would be satisfactory to Lucy.

A constable now came in and said that there were other visitors waiting
to see Ned. He then withdrew, leaving the lad to say goodby to his
brother and sister alone. Ned kept up a brave countenance, and strove
to make the parting as easy as possible for the others, but both were
crying bitterly as they went out.

Ned's next visitors were Dr. Green and Mr. Porson.

"We have only a minute or two, my boy," Mr. Porson said, "for the gig is
at the door. The chief constable is going to drive you to York himself.
You will go halfway and sleep on the road tonight. It is very good of
him, as in that way no one will suspect that you are any but a pair of
ordinary travelers. Keep up your spirits, my boy. We have sent to London
for a detective from Bow Street to try and ferret out something of this
mysterious business; and even if we do not succeed, I have every faith
that it will come right in the end. And now goodby, my boy, I shall see
you in a fortnight, for of course I shall come over to York to the trial
to give evidence as to character."

"And so shall I, Ned, my patients must get on without me for a day or
two," the doctor said. "Mr. Wakefield is waiting to see you. He has
something to tell you which may help to cheer you. He says it is of no
legal value, but it seems to me important."




CHAPTER XV: NOT GUILTY


As soon as Mr. Porson and the doctor had left him Mr. Wakefield
appeared.

"Well, Sankey, I hope you are not downcast at the magistrates' decision.
It was a certainty that they would have to commit you, as we could not
prove a satisfactory alibi. Never mind, I don't think any jury will find
against you on the evidence they have got, especially in the face of
those threatening letters and the fact that several men in Mulready's
position have been murdered by the Luddites."

"It won't be much consolation to me, sir, to be acquitted if it can't be
proved to the satisfaction of every one that I am innocent."

"Tut, tut! my boy; the first thing to do is to get you out of the hands
of the law. After that we shall have time to look about us and see if we
can lay our hands on the right man. A curious thing has happened today
while I was in court. A little boy left a letter for me at my office
here; it is an ill-written scrawl, as you see, but certainly important."

Ned took the paper, on which was written in a scrawling hand:

"Sir, Maister Sankey be innocent of the murder of Foxey. I doan't want
to put my neck in a noose, but if so be as they finds him guilty in
coort and be a-going to hang him, I shall come forward and say as how I
did it. I bean't agoing to let him be hung for this job. A loife for a
loife, saes oi; so tell him to keep up his heart."

There was no signature to the paper.

Ned looked up with delight in his face.

"But won't the letter clear me, Mr. Wakefield? It shows that it was not
me, but some one else who did it."

"No, Sankey, pray do not cherish any false hopes on that ground. The
letter is valueless in a legal way. To you and to your friends it may be
a satisfaction; but it can have no effect on the court. There is nothing
to prove that it is genuine. It may have been written by any friend of
yours with a view of obtaining your acquittal. Of course we shall put it
in at the trial, but it cannot be accepted as legal evidence in any way.
Still a thing of that sort may have an effect upon some of the jury."

Ned looked again at the letter, and a shade came over his face now that
he looked at it carefully. He recognized in a moment Bill's handwriting.
He had himself instructed him by setting him copies at the time he was
laid up with the broken leg, and Bill had stuck to it so far that he was
able to read and write in a rough way.

Ned's first impulse was to tell Mr. Wakefield who had written the note,
but he thought that it might get Bill into a scrape. It was evidently
written by his friend, solely to create an impression in his favor, and
he wondered that such an idea should have entered Bill's head, which was
by no means an imaginative one. As to the young fellow having killed Mr.
Mulready it did not even occur to Ned for a moment.

As, seated by the side of the chief constable, he drove along that
afternoon, Ned turned it over anxiously in his mind whether it would be
honest to allow this letter to be produced in court, knowing that it
was only the device of a friend, Finally he decided to let matters take
their course.

"I am innocent," he said to himself, "and what I have got to live for is
to clear myself from this charge. Mr. Wakefield said this letter would
not be of value one way or the other, and if I were to say Bill wrote it
he might insist upon Bill's being arrested, and he might find it just as
hard to prove his innocence as I do."

The assizes were to come on in three weeks. Ned was treated with more
consideration than was generally the case with prisoners in those days,
when the jails were terribly mismanaged; but Mr. Simmonds had written
to the governor of the prison asking that every indulgence that could be
granted should be shown to Ned, and Mr. Porson had also, before the
lad left Marsden, insisted on his accepting a sum of money which would
enable him to purchase such food and comforts as were permitted to be
bought by prisoners, able to pay for them, awaiting their trial.

Thus Ned obtained the boon of a separate cell, he was allowed to have
books and writing materials, and to have his meals in from outside the
prison.

The days, however, passed but slowly, and Ned was heartily glad when the
time for the assizes was at hand and his suspense was to come to an end.
His case came on for trial on the second day of the sessions. On the
previous evening he received a visit from Mr. Wakefield, who told him
that Mr. Porson, Dr. Green and Charlie had come over in the coach with
him.

"You will be glad to hear that your mother will not be called," the
lawyer said. "The prosecution, I suppose, thought that it would have
a bad effect to call upon a mother to give evidence against her son;
besides, she could prove no more than your brother will be able to do.
If they had called her, Green would have given her a certificate that
she was confined to her bed and could not possibly attend. However I am
glad they did not call her, for the absence of a witness called against
the prisoner, but supposed to be favorable to him, always counts against
him."

"And you have no clue as who did it, Mr. Wakefield?"

"Not a shadow," the lawyer replied. "We have had a man down from town
ever since you have been away, but we have done no good. He went up to
Varley and tried to get into the confidence of the croppers, but somehow
they suspected him to be a spy sent down to inquire into the Luddite
business, and he had a pretty narrow escape of his life. He was terribly
knocked about before he could get out of the public house, and they
chased him all the way down into Marsden. Luckily he was a pretty good
runner, and had the advantage of having lighter shoes on than they had,
or they would have killed him to a certainty. No, my lad, we can prove
nothing; we simply take the ground that you didn't do it; that he was a
threatened man and unpopular with his hands; and there is not a shadow
of proof against you except the fact that he had ill treated you just
before."

"And that I was known to bear him ill will," Ned said sadly.

"Yes, of course that's unfortunate," the lawyer said uneasily. "Of
course they will make a point of that, but that proves nothing. Most
boys of your age do object to a stepfather. Of course we shall put it
to the jury that there is nothing uncommon about that. Oh! no, I do not
think they have a strong case; and Mr. Grant, who is our leader, and who
is considered the best man on the circuit, is convinced we shall get a
verdict."

"But what do people think at Marsden, Mr. Wakefield? Do people generally
think I am guilty?"

"Pooh! pooh!" Mr. Wakefield said hastily. "What does it matter what
people think? Most people are fools. The question we have to concern
ourselves with is what do the jury think, or at any rate with what they
think is proved, and Mr. Grant says he does not believe any jury could
find you guilty upon the evidence. He will work them up. I know he is a
wonderful fellow for working up."

Mr. Grant's experience of juries turned out to be well founded. Ned, as
he stood pale, but firm and composed in the dock, felt that his case was
well nigh desperate when he heard the speech for the prosecution: his
long and notorious ill will against the deceased, "one of the most
genial and popular gentlemen in that part of the great county of
Yorkshire," was dwelt upon. Evidence would be brought to show that even
on the occasion of his mother's marriage the happiness of the
ceremonial was marred by the scowls and menacing appearance of this most
unfortunate and ill conditioned lad; how some time after the marriage
this young fellow had violently assaulted his stepfather, and had used
words in the hearing of the servants which could only be interpreted as
a threat upon his life. This indeed, was not the first time that this
boy had been placed in the dock as a prisoner. Upon a former occasion
he had been charged with assaulting and threatening the life of his
schoolmaster, and although upon that occasion he had escaped the
consequences of his conduct by what must now be considered as the ill
timed leniency of the magistrates, yet the facts were undoubted and
undenied.

Then the counsel proceeded to narrate the circumstances of the evening
up to the point when Mr. Mulready left the house.

"Beyond that point, gentlemen of the jury," the counsel said, "nothing
certain is known. The rest must be mere conjecture; and yet it is not
hard to imagine the facts. The prisoner was aware that the deceased had
gone to the mill, which is situated a mile and a half from the town. You
will be told the words which the prisoner used: 'It will be my turn next
time, and when it comes I will kill you, you brute.'

"With these words on his lips, with this thought in his heart, he
started for the mill. What plan he intended to adopt, what form of
vengeance he intended to take, it matters not, but assuredly it was with
thoughts of vengeance in his heart that he followed that dark and lonely
road to the mill. Once there he would have hung about waiting for his
victim to issue forth. It may be that he had picked up a heavy stone,
may be that he had an open knife in his hand; but while he was waiting,
probably his foot struck against a coil of rope, which, as you will
hear, had been carelessly thrown out a few minutes before.

"Then doubtless the idea of a surer method of vengeance than that of
which he had before thought came into his mind. A piece of the rope was
hastily cut off, and with this the prisoner stole quietly off until he
reached the spot where two gates facing each other on opposite sides of
the lane afforded a suitable hold for the rope. Whether after fastening
it across the road he remained at the spot to watch the catastrophe
which he had brought about, or whether he hurried away into the darkness
secure of his vengeance we cannot tell, nor does it matter. You will
understand, gentlemen, that we are not in a position to prove these
details of the tragedy. I am telling you the theory of the prosecution
as to how it happened. Murders are not generally done in open day with
plenty of trustworthy witnesses looking on. It is seldom that the act of
slaying is witnessed by human eye. The evidence must therefore to some
extent be circumstantial. The prosecution can only lay before juries the
antecedent circumstances, show ill will and animus, and lead the jury
step by step up to the point when the murderer and the victim meet in
some spot at some time when none but the all seeing eye of God is upon
them. This case is, as you see, no exception to the general rule.

"I have shown you that between the prisoner and the deceased there was
what may be termed a long standing feud, which came to a climax two or
three hours before this murder. Up to that fatal evening I think I shall
show you that the prisoner was wholly in fault, and that the deceased
acted with great good temper and self command under a long series of
provocations; but upon this evening his temper appears to have failed,
and I will admit frankly that he seems to have committed a very
outrageous and brutal assault upon the prisoner. Still, gentlemen, such
an assault is no justification of the crime which took place. Unhappily
it supplies the cause, but it does not supply an excuse for the crime.

"Your duty in the case will be simple. You will have to say whether
or not the murder of William Mulready is accounted for upon the theory
which I have laid down to you and on no other. Should you entertain no
doubt upon the subject it will be your duty to bring in a verdict of
guilty; if you do not feel absolutely certain you will of course give
the prisoner the benefit of the doubt."

The evidence called added nothing to what was known at the first
examination. The two servants testified to the fact of the unpleasant
relations which had from the first existed between the deceased and the
prisoner, and detailed what they knew of the quarrel. Charlie's evidence
was the most damaging, as he had to state the threat which Ned had
uttered before he went out.

The counsel for the defense asked but few questions in cross
examination. He elicited from the servants, however, the fact that Mr.
Mulready at home was a very different person from Mr. Mulready as
known by people in general. They acknowledged that he was by no means a
pleasant master, that he was irritable and fault finding, and that his
temper was trying in the extreme, He only asked one or two questions of
Charlie.

"You did not find your stepfather a very pleasant man to deal with, did
you?"

"Not at all pleasant," Charlie replied heartily.

"Always snapping and snarling and finding fault, wasn't he?"

"Yes, sir, always."

"Now about this threat of which we have heard so much on the part of
your brother, did it impress you much? Were you frightened at it? Did
you think that your brother intended to kill your stepfather?"

"No, sir, I am sure he didn't; he just said it in a passion. He had been
knocked about until he could hardly stand, and he just said the first
thing that came into his head, like fellows do."

"You don't think that he went out with any deliberate idea of killing
your stepfather?"

"No, sir; I am sure he only went out to walk about till he got over his
passion, just as he had done before."

"It was his way, was it, when anything put him out very much, to go and
walk about till he got cool again?"

"Yes, sir."

For the defense Mr. Simmonds was called, and produced the threatening
letters which Mr. Mulready had laid before him. He stated that that
gentleman was much alarmed, and had asked that a military force should
be called into the town, and that he himself and his colleague had
considered the danger so serious that they had applied for and obtained
military protection.

Luke Marner and several of the hands at the mill testified to the
extreme unpopularity of their employer among his men, and said that they
should never have been surprised any morning at hearing that he had been
killed.

Dr. Green and Mr. Porson testified very strongly in favor of Ned's
character. This was all the evidence produced. Mr. Grant then addressed
the jury, urging that beyond the fact of this unfortunate quarrel, in
which the deceased appeared to have been entirely to blame and to have
behaved with extreme brutality, there was nothing whatever to associate
the prisoner with the crime. The young gentleman before them, as they
had heard from the testimony of gentlemen of the highest respectability,
bore an excellent character. That he had faults in temper he admitted,
such faults being the result of the lad having been brought up among
Indian servants; but Dr. Green and Mr. Porson had both told them that
he had made the greatest efforts to master his temper, and that they
believed that no ordinary provocation could arouse him. But after all
what did what they had heard amount to? simply this, the lad's mother
had been married a second time to a man who bore the outward reputation
of being a pleasant, jovial man, a leading character among his townsmen,
a popular fellow in the circle in which he moved.

