
2. Have faith, and thy faith shall sustain thee;
     Permit not suspicion and care
   With invisible bonds to enchain thee,
     But bear what God gives thee to bear.
   By His Spirit supported and gladdened,
     Be ne'er by forebodings deterred;
   But think how oft hearts have been saddened
     By fears of what never occurred!

3. Let to-morrow take care of to-morrow;
     Short and dark as our life may appear,
   We may make it still darker by sorrow,
     Still shorter by folly and fear;
   Half our troubles are half our invention,
     And often from blessings conferred,
   Have we shrunk in the wild apprehension
     Of evils that never occurred!

QUESTIONS.--1. What is said of imaginary evils? 2. How may we be
supported under trials? 3. What tends to shorten life? 4. Whence proceed
half our troubles? 5. What rule for doubling the _r_ and _d_ in such
words as _occurred_, _saddened_, &c.? See SANDERS' NEW SPELLER, page
168, Rule II.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXV.

   WASTE, desolate region.
   PRO CEED', come forth.
   CHASM, gap; opening.
   COILS, folds; convolutions.
   MAN I FEST, plain; evident.
   PRE SERV' ER, protector.
   AL LE' GI ANCE, duty; loyalty.
   RAY, make bright; adorn.
   EX PAND, swell; dilate.
   FA' THER LAND, native land.
   GUER DON, reward; recompense.
   PROF' FER, offer; tender.
   PIT' E OUS, mournful; sorrowful.
   IM PET' U OUS LY, furiously.

   AT TRACT', (AT, _to_; TRACT, _draw_;) draw to; allure.

   IN  VEST', (IN, _to_; VEST, _clothe_;) clothe in or with;
   inclose; surround.

   PRO TEST, (PRO, _before_; TEST, _witness_;) witness before;
   openly declare.

[Headnote 1: PY THON is the name of a large serpent, fabled to have been
slain by the god Apollo.]


SIR WALTER AND THE LION.

A. WALCHNER.

1. Sir Walter of Thurn, over the Syrian waste,
     Rides away with a flowing rein;
   But he hears a groan that checks his haste,
     As if death were in the strain.
         He spurs his steed
         Whence the sounds proceed;
     And there, from a rocky chasm, arise
     Fierce cries of pain, that assail the skies;
         And his horse uprears
         In excess of fears,
     As the glance of a lion attracts his eyes.

2. Fierce struggling there in the monster folds
     Of a serpent that round him twines;
   Sir Walter a moment the scene beholds,
     Then to save the beast inclines.
         His good sword stout
         From its sheath leaps out,
     When down it falls on the Python's [Headnote 1] crest,
     And cleaves the coils that the lion invest;
         And the noble beast,
         From its thrall released,
     Shows grateful joy most manifest.

3. He shakes his mane, and bends his form,
     And licks his preserver's hand,
   As if he yields allegiance warm
     To his supreme command.
         Like the faithful hound
         To be constant found,
     And follow his steps for evermore;
     And thus he follows, on sea and shore,
         In the battle's tide,
         He stands by his side,
     Or with him rests when the strife is o'er.

4. In Palestine Sir Walter is known,--
     Long years attest his fame;
   And many brave deeds he there hath done,
     That ray with glory his name;
         But his heart doth expand
         For the fatherland,
     And he fain its pleasant scenes would see,
     With his friendly lion for company;
         But with fearful breast,
         The sailors protest,
     As they glanced at the beast and his majesty.

5. Rich guerdon he proffers, and golden store;
     But though the prize were great,
   The sailors hurry away from the shore
     As if from the doom of fate.
         The poor beast moans
         In piteous tones,
     Then darts impetuously o'er the sands,--
     Then looks to the ship, and mournfully stands;
     Then plunges into the gloomy wave,
     The perils of the depths to brave.
     Already he nears the flying bark,
     Already his roar of grief they hark;
     But his strength is spent, and the sea is strong,
     And he may not the fearful struggle prolong.
     His dying glances are fondly cast
     Along the track where the loved one passed;
         Then sinks to his grave
         Beneath the wave,
     And the night and the ocean behold him the last.

QUESTIONS.--1. What did Sir Walter discover as he was riding over the
Syrian waste? 2. What did he do? 3. What did the lion do, after being
released? 4. Did the sailors allow the lion to go on board the ship? 5.
What did the lion then do? 6. What became of him?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXVI.

   VAL' IANT, strong; courageous,
   INC LI NA' TION, desire; tendency.
   RE PLEN' ISH ED, filled up.
   DIS SEV' ER, part; sunder.
   SHIV' ER, dash to pieces.
   EC STAT' IC, rapturous.
   CON CLU' SION, result.
   CON CEP' TION, thought; idea.
   DEF' ER ENCE, respect.
   PHYS I CAL, material.
   AR' RANT, mere; vile.
   TIME'-BAN DI ED, time-lost.
   DE VEL' OP ED, brought out.
   CON STEL LA' TIONS, clusters of stars.
   DE SIGN ED, planned.
   COM BIN' ED, united.

   UNINTERRUPTED,   (UN,  _not_;  INTER,  _in  between_;  RUPTED,
   _broken_;) not broken in between; unbroken.

It is sometimes desirable to have each member of the class read a piece
complete in itself. To answer this end, the following collection of
brief, though beautiful productions, have been brought together all
under one head.


CHOICE EXTRACTS.


I.

WHAT REALLY BENEFITS US.

It is not what we earn, but what we save, that makes us rich. It is not
what we eat, but what we digest, that makes us strong. It is not what we
read, but what we remember, that makes us learned. It is not what we
intend, but what we do, that makes us useful. It is not a few faint
wishes, but a life-long struggle, that makes us valiant.


II.

GOD'S LOVE.

  There's not a flower that decks the vale,
    There's not a beam that lights the mountain,
  There's not a shrub that scents the gale,
    There's not a wind that stirs the fountain,
  There's not a hue that paints the rose,
    There's not a leaf around us lying,
  But in its use or beauty shows
    God's love to us, and love undying!


III.

LIFE-WORK.

To acquire a thorough knowledge of our own hearts and characters, to
restrain every irregular inclination, to subdue every rebellious
passion, to purify the motives of our conduct, to form ourselves to that
temperance which no pleasure can seduce, to that meekness which no
provocation can ruffle, to that patience which no affliction can
overwhelm, and that integrity which no interest can shake; _this is the
task which is assigned to us_,--a task which can not be performed
without the utmost diligence and care.


IV.

HUMILITY.

  The brightest stars are burning suns;
  The deepest water stillest runs;
  The laden bee the lowest flies;
  The richest mine the deepest lies;
  The stalk that's most replenished,
  Doth bow the most its modest head.
  Thus, deep Humility we find
  The mark of every master-mind;
  The highest-gifted lowliest bends,
  And merit meekest condescends,
  And shuns the fame that fools adore,--
  That puff that bids a feather soar.


V.

BENEFITS OF ADVERSITY.

A smooth sea never made a skillful mariner. Neither do uninterrupted
prosperity and success qualify man for usefulness or happiness. The
storms of adversity, like the storms of the ocean, rouse the faculties
and excite the invention, prudence, skill, and fortitude of the voyager.


VI.

OUR MOUNTAIN HOMES.

MRS. S.R.A. BARNES.

  Why turn we to our mountain homes
    With more than filial feeling?
  'Tis _here_ that Freedom's altars rise,
    And Freedom's sons are kneeling!
  Why sigh we not for softer climes?
    Why cling to that which bore us?
  _'Tis here we tread on Freedom's soil,_
    _With Freedom's sunshine o'er us!_


VII.

MAKE A BEGINNING.

If you do not begin, you will never come to the end. The first weed
pulled up in the garden, the first seed set in the ground, the first
dollar put in the savings-bank, and the first mile traveled on a
journey, are all important things; they make a _beginning_, and thereby
give a hope, a promise, a pledge, an assurance that you are in earnest
in what you have undertaken. How many a poor, idle, erring, hesitating
outcast is now creeping his way through the world, who might have held
up his head and prospered, if, instead of putting off his resolutions of
amendment and industry, he had only made a beginning!


VIII.

INFLUENCE.

GEORGE W. BUNGAY.

1. Drop follows drop, and swells
     With rain the sweeping river;
   Word follows word, and tells
     A truth that lives forever.

2. Flake follows flake, like sprites
     Whose wings the winds dissever;
   Thought follows thought, and lights
     The realm of mind forever.

3. Beam follows beam to cheer,
     The cloud a bolt might shiver;
   Throb follows throb, and fear
     Gives place to joy forever.

4. The drop, the flake, the beam,
     Teach us a lesson ever;
   The word, the thought, the dream
     Impress the soul forever.


IX.

PLEASURE IN ACQUIRING KNOWLEDGE.

CAROLINE F. ORNE.

1. Note the ecstatic joy of the student, who has labored long over a
problem or proposition, but finally comes to a logical conclusion; who
has struggled with the misty darkness of his own mind, for a clear view
of some difficult subject, until the clouds, one after another, have
dispersed, and he beholds, with his mental vision, in bright and
glorious light, the conception for which he labored. Think you he would
exchange his joys for the pleasures of sense'? It is of a higher and
more ennobling character, and not to be bartered for paltry wealth.

2. What dignity and self-respect invest the man of thought! His very
looks bespeak of mind. He is approached with deference, as a being of
higher order in the scale of intelligence,--as one who has a right to
command and be obeyed. For what moves mind, but mind? A strong
intellect, coming in contact with one of less energy, will as naturally
move it, as superior physical strength will overcome the weaker.


X.

WHAT IS FAME?

MOTHERWELL.

  What is glory`? What is fame`?
  The echo of a long-lost name`;
  A breath`, an idle hour's brief talk`;
  The shadow of an arrant naught`;
  A flower that blossoms for a day`,
    Dying next morrow';
  A stream that hurries on its way,
    Singing of sorrow';
  A fortune that to lose were gain`;
  A word of praise, perchance of blame`;
  The wreck of a time-bandied name`--
  _Ay` this is glory`! this is fame`!_


XI.

CULTIVATED INTELLECT.

Ah! well do we all know the worth of intelligence, the power of
knowledge, and the beauty and glory of wisdom. It is _educated manhood_
that wakes up the sleeping soil, covers the earth with good, that
gathers in the golden harvest, that clothes the naked, that feeds the
hungry. It is the _cultivated mind_ that applies the strength of the ox
and the fleetness of the horse; that bridges the river, that turns to
use the flying winds, that makes the lightning its swift messenger, that
makes beautiful palaces of dull clay, that rouses the dead ore to active
life, that covers the sea with ships, and the land with mighty engines
of wealth. It is the _developed intellect_ that flies through the upper
air, that mingles with the stars, that follows the moon in her course,
that overtakes the constellations in their orbits, that weighs the sun,
that measures the distance to the polar star. It is the _enlightened
soul_ that worships God.


XII.

GOD'S WORKS ATTEST HIS GREATNESS.

MRS. OPIE.

1. There's not a leaf within the bower;
     There's not a bird upon the tree;
   There's not a dew-drop on the flower,
     But bears the impress, Lord, of Thee.

2. Thy hand the varied leaf designed,
     And gave the bird its thrilling tone;
   Thy power the dewdrop's tints combined,
     Till like the diamond's blaze they shone.

3. Yes, dewdrops, leaves, and buds, and all
     The smallest, like the greatest things,--
   The sea's vast space, the earth's wide ball,
     Alike proclaim Thee King of kings.

4. But man alone to bounteous Heaven,
     Thanksgiving's conscious strains can raise;
   To favored man alone 'tis given
     To join the angelic choir in praise!

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXVII.

   MO NOT' O NOUS, dull; uniform.
   HAR POON', barbed spear.
   AG' I TA TED, disturbed.
   RE VER' BER ATES, rebounds; re-echoes.
   WRITHES, twists, or or turns in agony.
   CON TOR' TIONS, twistings; writhings.
   VE LOC' I TY, swiftness.
   IG NITES', takes fire.
   FRIC' TION, rubbing together.
   COILS, winds into a ring.
   PRO JECT' ED, thrown out or forward.
   VO CIF' ER A TED, shouted.
   IN FU' RI A TED, enraged.
   UN RE LENT' ING, unfeeling.
   CON VUL' SIONS, violent spasms.
   REN COUN' TER, fight; conflict.


CAPTURE OF THE WHALE.

1. Let the reader suppose himself on the deck of a South-seaman,
cruising in the North Pacific ocean. He may be musing over some past
event, the ship may be sailing gently along over the smooth ocean, every
thing around solemnly still, with the sun pouring its intense rays with
dazzling brightness. Suddenly the monotonous quietude is broken by an
animated voice from the masthead, exclaiming, _"There he spouts!"_

2. The captain starts on deck in an instant, and inquires _"Where
away?"_ but, perhaps, the next moment every one aloft and on deck, can
perceive an enormous whale lying about a quarter of a mile from the
ship, on the surface of the sea, having just come up to breathe,--his
large "hump" projecting three feet out of the water. At the end of every
ten seconds, the spout is seen rushing from the fore part of his
enormous head, followed by the cry of every one on board, who join in
the chorus of _"There again!"_ keeping time with the duration of the
spout.

3. But, while they have been looking, a few seconds have expired. They
rush into the boats, which are directly lowered to receive them; and in
two minutes from the time of first observing the whale, three or four
boats are down, and are darting through the water with their utmost
speed toward their intended victim, perhaps accompanied with a song from
the headsman, who urges the quick and powerful plying of the oar, with
the common whaling chant of

  "Away, my boys, away, my boys, 'tis time for us to go."

4. But, while they are rushing along, the whale is breathing; they have
yet, perhaps, some distance to pull before they can get a chance of
striking him with the harpoon. His "spoutings are nearly out," he is
about to descend, or he hears the boats approaching. The few sailors
left on board, and who are anxiously watching the whale and the gradual
approach of the boats, exclaim, _"Ah, he is going down!"_ Yet he spouts
again, but slowly, the water is seen agitated around him; the spectators
on board with breathless anxiety think they perceive him rising in
preparation for his descent. _"He will be lost!"_ they exclaim; for the
boats are not yet near enough to strike him, and the men are still
bending their oars in each boat with all their strength, to claim the
honor of the first blow with the harpoon.

5. The bow-boat has the advantage of being the nearest to the whale; the
others, for fear of disturbing the unconscious monster, are now ordered
to drop astern. One more spout is seen slowly curling forth,--it is his
last; but the boat shoots rapidly alongside of the gigantic creature.
_"Peak your oars!"_ exclaims the mate, and directly they flourish in the
air; the glistening harpoon is seen above the head of the harpooner. In
an instant it is darted with unerring force and aim, and is buried
deeply in the side of the huge animal. It is "socket up;" that is, it is
buried in his flesh up to the socket which admits the handle or pole of
the harpoon.

6. A cheer from those in the boats, and from the seamen on board,
reverberates along the still deep at the same moment. The sea, which a
moment before was unruffled, now becomes lashed into foam by the immense
strength of the wounded whale, which, with its vast tail, strikes in all
directions at his enemies. Now his enormous head rises high into the
air, then his flukes are seen lashing everywhere, his huge body writhes
in violent contortions from the agony the harpoon has inflicted. The
water all around him is a mass of foam, and the sounds of the blows from
his tail on the surface of the sea, can be heard for miles!

7. _"Stern all!"_ cries the headsman; but the whale suddenly disappears;
he has "sounded;" the line is running through the groove at the head of
the boat, with lightning-like velocity; it smokes; it ignites from the
heat produced by the friction; but the headsman, cool and collected,
pours water upon it as it passes. But an oar is now held up in their
boat; it signifies that their line is rapidly running out; two hundred
fathoms are nearly exhausted; up flies one of the other boats, and
"bends on" another line, just in time to save that which was nearly
lost.

8. But still the monster descends; he is seeking to rid himself of his
enemies by descending deeply into the dark and unknown depths of the
vast ocean. Two more lines are exhausted,--he is _six hundred fathoms
deep! "Stand ready to bend on!"_ cries the mate to the fourth boat; (for
sometimes they take the whole four lines away with them,--_eight hundred
fathoms!!_) but, it is not required, he is rising. _"Haul in the
slack!"_ observes the headsman, while the boat-steerer coils it again
carefully into the tubs as it is drawn up.

9. The whale is now seen approaching the surface; the gurgling and
bubbling water which rises, proclaims that he is near; his nose starts
from the sea; the rushing spout is projected high and suddenly, from his
agitation. The slack of the line is now coiled in the tubs, and those in
the fast boat, haul themselves gently toward the whale. The boat-steerer
places the headsman close to the fin of the trembling animal, who
immediately buries his long lance in the vitals of the leviathan, while,
at the same moment, those in one of the other boats, dart another
harpoon into his opposite side. Then, _"Stern all!"_ is again
vociferated, and the boats shoot rapidly away from the danger.

10. Mad with the agony which he endures from these fresh attacks, the
infuriated "sea monster" rolls over and over, and coils an amazing
length of line around him. He rears his enormous head, and, with
wide-expanded jaws, snaps at every thing around him. He rushes at the
boats with his head,--they are propelled before him with vast swiftness,
and sometimes utterly destroyed.

11. He is lanced again,--and his pain appears more than he can bear. He
throws himself, in his agony, completely out of his element; the boats
are violently jerked, by which one of the lines is snapped asunder; at
the same time the other boat is upset, and its crew are swimming for
their lives. The whale is now free! he passes along the surface with
remarkable swiftness, "going head out;" but the two boats that have not
yet "fastened," and are fresh and free, now give chase.

12. The whale becomes exhausted from the blood which flows from his deep
and dangerous wounds, and the two hundred fathoms of line belonging to
the overturned boat, which he is dragging after him through the water,
checks him in his course; his pursuers again overtake him, and another
harpoon is darted and buried deeply in his flesh.

13. The fatal lance is, at length, given; the blood gushes from the
nostrils of the unfortunate animal in a thick, black stream, which
stains the clear blue water of the ocean to a considerable distance
around the scene of the affray. The immense creature may now again
endeavor to "sound," to escape from his unrelenting pursuers; but he is
powerless. He soon rises to the surface, and passes slowly along until
the death-pang seizes him, when his appearance is awful in the extreme.

14. Suffering from suffocation, or from the stoppage of some important
organ, the whole strength of his enormous frame is set in motion, for a
few seconds, when his convulsions throw him into a hundred different
contortions of the most violent description, by which the sea is beaten
into foam, and boats are sometimes crushed to atoms, with their crews.

15. But this violent action being soon over, the now unconscious animal
passes rapidly along, describing in his rapid course the segment of a
circle; this is his "flurry," which ends in his sudden dissolution. The
mighty rencounter is finished. The gigantic animal rolls over on his
side, and floats an inanimate mass on the surface of the crystal
deep,--a victim to the tyranny and selfishness, as well as a wonderful
proof of the _great power of the mind of man_.

QUESTIONS.--1. How are whales generally discovered? 2. Why do they come
to the surface of the water? 3. How far do they sometimes descend in the
ocean? 4. Describe the manner in which they are captured.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXVIII.

   A'ER O NAUT, one who sails in the air.
   RE DOUB LED, repeated.
   MAG NIF I CENT, grand; splendid.
   EL' E VA TED, raised; excited.
   GON' DO LA, small boat.
   BE GIRT', surrounded.
   RO TA RY, turning; revolving.
   IN TEN' SI TY, extreme degree.
   A' ER OS TAT, air-balloon.
