"It was very kind of her to ask us," continued Bessie, "and I for one
shall be delighted to go. I have not the least doubt that in a big house
of that sort they have 'Household Encyclopaedia,' and I want to look up
the article on magnetic iron ore."

"Oh, what in the world for?" cried Alice.

"I am interested in magnets, and--but there, Alice why should I worry
you with the sort of things that delight me. I am going, and that is all
right. You will be sure to come too; won't you Alice?"

"Yes, I must manage it somehow; and as Gwin has asked Kitty Malone it
won't make it quite so difficult. I know mother would not let me leave
Kitty this afternoon, for it is, from the money point of view, a great
thing for us her coming. Her people are quite well off, although they
are Irish. They live in an old castle on the coast of Donegal, and Kitty
has never been out of the country in which she was born. They are paying
mother very well to receive her, and mother is ever so pleased. Of
course it's horrid for me for she will be my companion morning, noon,
and night; we are even to sleep in the same room. It was that that made
me late for school this morning, and got me that horrid, horrid mark for
unpunctuality."

"But why? I don't understand," said Bessie.

"Well, you see, I put it off until the last minute. I know it was all my
fault; but I would not empty the cupboard in the corner of the room,
although mother told me to do so at intervals for the past week. Well,
mother came in this morning and found it choke full--you know the sort
of thing, full to bursting, so that the door wouldn't shut--and she said
that I should empty it before I went to school. I told her I should be
late, and mother said it was a just punishment for me. Didn't I bless
Kitty Malone! But of course I set to work, and I scrambled out the
things somehow. Of course I am in hot water, and father is so terribly
particular; but I will try and come. Yes, I'll try and come, and I'll
bring Kitty."

"Very well; if you are going we may as well go together," said Bessie.
"Gwin never mentioned the hour she had tea; but I suppose if we are at
Harley Grove by five o'clock it will do."

"Yes, I should think so," said Alice in a dubious voice. "It is a pity
she did not mention the hour. There she is still hobnobbing with Elma.
I'll just run across the quadrangle and ask her."

Alice left her companion, obtained the necessary information from Gwin,
and came back again. "She says if we are with her sharp at five it will
do quite well, and we are to stay until nine o'clock, then we can all go
home together."

"Delicious!" said Bessie. "I love being out late. I hope there will be a
moon, and that there won't be many clouds in the sky, for I want to
examine the position of some of the planets. Did I tell you, Alice, that
Uncle John has a telescope through which I can see the asteroids?"

"What on earth are they?" cried Alice, yawning as she spoke.

"Oh, the very small planets."

"Then, my dear, I hope you will see them. But really, Bessie, I can't
run round nature as you do--your intellect is quite overpowering; one
moment you want to get up information with regard to magnetic iron ore,
and the next you confound me with some awful observation about
asteroids. Good-by, Bessie; good-by. I shall be late for dinner, and
then no chance of going to the fair Gwin's this afternoon."

"Well, if you do go, call for me," shouted Bessie after her; "I'll wait
for you until half-past four, then I'll start off by myself."

"Yes, yes, I'll come if I can, and bring Kitty also if I can."

"Be sure you don't fail. I'll look out for you."

Alice put wings to her feet and set off running down the dusty road, and
Bessie more soberly returned home.




CHAPTER II.

THE BLARNEY STONE.


Alice's home was nearly half a mile from the school. It was a big,
commonplace suburban house standing at a corner. It had a small garden
in front and a larger one at the back; but neither at front nor back
were the gardens tidily kept. They were downtrodden by the constant
pressure of many feet, and were further ornamented at intervals by sheds
and kennels, for Fred and Philip Denvers were devoted to all sorts of
pets; there was also a rabbit-run at one end, and a little railed-off
place where Mrs. Denvers tried to keep fowls.

Alice at intervals had sighed for a tennis lawn; but whenever she dared
to mention the idea she was hooted by her big brothers, who did not want
the garden to be made in the least bit, as they expressed it,
ornamental.

"But tennis isn't ornamental!" said Alice.

"Beastly game," remarked Fred. "Only meant for girls; just to give them
an opportunity of hobnobbing together, and talking gossip, and making up
mischief."

"You talk in the most ridiculous, unfair way," said Alice in
indignation; but she did not dare to mention the subject of the tennis
court again, and the boys still continued to build fresh sheds and
introduce new animals.

On this occasion, as Alice walked up to the house, she was met by Fred,
who ran out to meet her in some excitement.

"I say, Alice," he cried, "she's come, and she is a rum 'un!"

"Who has come?" asked Alice; "not--not Kitty Malone?"

"No one else, at your service, Kitty Malone, ohone!" cried Fred. "And
oh! isn't she Irish! You come along and see her. I never saw anything
like her before."

"Why, Fred, I didn't think you cared for girls."

"Nor do I as a rule, but this one--oh! I say she is a jolly sort. Why
she's been down in the kitchen and up in the attics--she knows every one
in the house already; and do you know what she is doing now--sitting in
the drawing-room with the window wide open, grinning down at you, and
she has got Pointer in her arms. You know Pointer, dirty old
fellow!--well, she caught him up the moment she came in, and insisted on
bringing him upstairs, and he has taken to her as if he had known her
ever since he was a puppy. Mean of him, isn't it; but I declare I don't
blame him. Oh! there you are, Kitty Malone." Fred raised his laughing
face to encounter another as laughing, a face at that moment grinning
from ear to ear.

"Are you Alice?" called a voice. "Are you the one I am to sleep with?
Just say, call out loud; don't mind if you shout, because I'm accustomed
to that sort of thing."

"Is this Kitty Malone?" thought Alice. She liked frank, jolly girls;
but she was not quite prepared for Kitty.

She entered the house, flung down her bag of books, and ran upstairs to
the drawing-room. The next moment she found herself in the firm embrace
of a girl a little taller than herself, a slim, very pretty, very
untidy, very overdressed girl.

"Here I am and welcome to yourself," said Kitty. "I was so vexed you
were not here to greet me; but bless you, my dear, I'm quite
comfortable. No, I'm not a bit tired--you haven't asked me, by the way,
but I suppose you mean to. I had a spiffin' journey. Sick! not I. I'm
never seasick, and I enjoyed the train. I made friends with such a dear
old gentleman and with two boys. I nearly kissed the boys when I was
leaving them, but I didn't quite. Is that you, Fred? Come along in now
and let us be jolly together. Why, Alice, how stiff you are; you have
not opened your lips yet."

"I have not had an opportunity," answered Alice. "You do talk such a
lot, Kitty."

"Do I? I expect we all do in Old Ireland. Bless her! she's a dear old
country, and I'm as sorry as anybody to say good-by to her. But, all the
same, I am glad to see England (poky, stiff sort of place it seems). Say
now, Alice, do you like my dress? It was made in Dublin; it's the height
of the fashion I am told."

"It's very showy," said Alice.

"Do you think so? Well, you are plainly dressed; nothing but that brown
merino. And--my dear, I thought they were always dressed up to the nines
near London. This place is near London, isn't it?"

"Yes, a few miles off. Oh, of course your dress is very nice; but now I
must get ready for dinner."

"Oh! and ain't I peckish?" said Kitty, clapping her hands and winking
broadly at Fred.

Alice turned to leave the room.

"We may as well go together," said Kitty, following her and slipping her
hand through her arm. "Do you know," she said, "when I first came to the
house I could scarcely breathe. Why, it's nothing but a nutshell. I
never saw such a deeny dawn of a place in the whole course of my life.
How many of you live here?"

"Father and mother, and the two boys and I," answered Alice.

"And you are the only girl?"

"Yes."

"Now come to the window and let me have a good squint at you." As Kitty
spoke she dragged Alice forward, put her facing the light, and stood
herself with her back to it. She began to make a careful scrutiny,
calling out her remarks aloud: "Eyes passable, forehead so-so, mouth
pretty well, complexion not bad for England, hair--"

"Oh, I say, Kitty, I can't quite stand this," said Alice. "Are those
your manners in Ireland? What a wild country it must be!"

"Dear, darling, jolly old place!" said Kitty, dancing up and down.

"And you really give me to understand that people make remarks on one
another in that sort of fashion?" said Alice, darting away from her
companion and pouring some water into a basin to wash her hands.

"Well, yes, love, they do when they like, and they don't when they
don't like. We are free and easy folk, I can tell you, and we have a gay
time. I'll tell you all about father and the old castle, and the dogs,
and the cows, and the cats, and the rabbits, and the mice when we have a
spare moment. That brother of yours, Fred, is not half a bad old chap;
and I saw a nice, curly-headed little gossoon coming in just now with
his books under his arm. What's his name?"

"Oh, you mean Philip. Yes, he's the youngest; he's well enough if you
don't spoil him, Kitty."

"I won't spoil him, bless his heart," said Kitty; "but of course I'll
make friends with him. I couldn't live without boys. There are two at
home, Pat and Laurence; and, oh! I shall miss Laurie, dear old chap! I
must not think of him." Kitty's face underwent a swift change, the
brightness went out of it just as if a heavy cloud had swept away the
sun; the big, very handsome dark-blue eyes, so dark as to be almost
black, grew full of sudden tears; the exquisitely curved lips trembled;
she turned her head aside and looked out of the window.

At that moment it seemed to Alice that she saw beneath Kitty's wild,
eccentric manners a heart of gold. She only caught a glimpse of it, for
the next moment the girl was chatting away in the most light, frivolous,
extraordinary style. The dinner-bell sounded through the house, and the
pair went down to dinner.

"I'd like to sit near you, please, Mr. Denvers," said Kitty.

Philip's place was always near his father; this had been a custom ever
since he had been a baby. Kitty now ensconced herself in the little
boy's chair.

"Am I taking anybody's seat?" she asked, looking up.

"Only mine," said Phil.

"Never mind, little gossoon; you shall have it to-morrow. I want to sit
near Mr. Denvers because I expect he can tell me a good many things I
don't understand."

"You must allow me to eat my dinner, Miss Malone. You see I have a good
deal of carving to do, and besides I am a busy man," said Mr. Denvers in
a good-humored voice, for it was difficult to resist the roguish glances
of Kitty's eyes, and the sort of affectionate way in which she cuddled
up to her host's side.

"Oh, I won't talk _over_ much," she said, glancing with her flashing
eyes round at the entire party. "But you see I am quite a stranger; and,
oh my! the place does seem lonely. You are all so stiff, I cannot quite
understand it. Is it the English fashion, please, Mr. Denvers?"

"Well, you see," answered Mrs. Denvers from the other end of the table,
"we don't know you yet."

"But I am sure all the same we shall be very good friends," said Mr.
Denvers. "May I give you a glass of wine?"

"Wine! Bless you, I'm a teetotaller," said Kitty. "Why, it isn't habits
of intoxication you'll be putting into me. I never take anything but
water, or milk when I can get it; and it isn't Miss Malone you're going
to call me is it, for if it is I tell you frankly that I'll die
entirely. I must be Kitty from this moment, or Kitty Malone, or anything
of that sort, but Kitty something it must be. Now, is it settled fair
and square, Kitty shall I be? Here's my hand on my heart; I'll die if
I'm called Miss Malone!"

Fred burst into roars of laughter.

"I say," he cried, "what an extraordinary girl you are!"

"Well, and so are you an extraordinary boy," said Kitty. "Oh, dear me, I
am hungry! Do you mind handing me over the potatoes? Why, you don't mean
to say you peel 'em. I never heard of such a thing! Why don't you have
them in their jackets?"

"Potatoes are generally mashed or peeled or something of that sort in
England," said Mr. Denvers. "I see, Kitty--" he added.

"Ah! bless you now for calling me that! What is it you want to say, dear
Mr. Denvers?"

"I see we shall have a good deal to teach you," he said, and then he too
burst into a fit of laughter, and so the merry, somewhat rollicking meal
proceeded.

Alice alone would not succumb to the fascinations of the Irish maiden.
She sat holding herself somewhat stiff, feeling a good deal disgusted,
wondering what Bessie Challoner would say, what Gwin Harley would think,
anticipating in advance Elma's sneers.

Kitty, however, subjugated Mr. and Mrs. Denvers and the two boys
completely. As to Pointer, he would not leave her side; as her long,
white, taper fingers touched the top of his grizzled head, he looked at
her with eyes of unutterable love.

"What have you done to the dog?" said Fred at last. He felt almost
afraid, in his great admiration of the bewitching stranger.

"Only given him a taste of blarney," was the reply. "Tell me now, Fred,
were you ever in Ireland?"

"No," answered Fred.

"Ah! I thought as much. If you had been, and if you had kissed the
Blarney Stone, why then, it's nothing could withstand you."

"What is the Blarney Stone?" asked Fred.

"Don't you know that much? Why you are an ignoramus out and out. Well,
I'll tell you. It's a stone on Blarney Castle, set low down in the wall,
five or six feet from the top; and to kiss it, why that is no easy
matter, for you have to be held by your heels and let hang over the
wall; and if you can get some one to hold you tight--very tight,
mind--you slide down and you reach the stone and you kiss it, and from
that moment--oh glory! but you carry everything before you. There's not
a man, a woman, nor a child, no, nor a beastie either, that can resist
you. You bewitch 'em."

"I have no doubt, Kitty, you kissed the stone," said Mr. Denvers.

"Why then, it's yes, sir," she answered raising her big eyes and then
dropping them again with an inimitable expression.

"What a queer little girl you are!" he said. "You are very amusing; but
I think we must tame you a bit."

"You won't do that, sir. They call me the wild Irish girl at home, and
the wild Irish girl I'll be to the end of the chapter. If it's schooling
I want, why, I'll have it, but taming, no thank you."

Kitty jumped from her seat and began to dance a sort of improvised Irish
jig about the room.

"Do you know the jig?" she said, dancing up to Fred as she spoke.

"No," he answered; "are you trying it on now?"

"Yes; jump up, my hearty, and I'll teach you in a twinkling. Here, watch
me; point your toes so, turn round--pirouette as we call it. Now, then,
put your hand on your hip, courtesy to me, and come back again. That's
how it's done. Oh, Fred, I'll soon have you as beautiful a broth of a
boy as if you were born in Old Ireland."

"Fred, my son, it is time for you to go back to college," said his
father. "Kitty, we are very pleased to have you here, and you are a very
amusing girl; but you know life is not all play."

Kitty pulled a long face. Fred darted a laughing glance at her, and ran
off. Kitty and Alice at last found themselves alone.
