
The whole room was in confusion and hubbub, during which Wright sat
stock still, quietly enduring without bowing to the storm.

Only one boy sympathised with him, but he did so deeply--poor little
penitent Vernon. He felt his position hard because Wright had alluded so
prominently to him, and he knew how much he must be misconstrued, but he
had his brother's spirit, and would not shrink. Amid the tumult he got
up in his seat, and they heard his pleasant, childish voice saying
boldly, "I hope Wright won't tell; but he's the best fellow in the room,
and cribbing _is_ a shame, as he says."

What notice would have been taken of this speech is doubtful, for at the
critical moment Mr. Gordon reappeared, and the whispered cave caused
instantaneous quiet.

Poor Wright awaited with some dread the end of school; and many an angry
kick and blow he got, though he disarmed malice by the spirit and
heroism with which he endured them. The news of his impudence spread
like wildfire, and not five boys in the school approved of what he had
done, while most of them were furious at his ill-judged threat of
informing Mr. Gordon. There was a general agreement to thrash him after
roll-call that afternoon.

Eric had lately taken a violent dislike to Wright, though he had been
fond of him in better days. He used to denounce him as a disagreeable
and pragmatical little muff, and was as loud as any of them in
condemning his announced determination to "sneak." Had he known that
Wright had acted under Montagu's well-meant, though rather mistaken
advice, he might have abstained from having anything more to do with the
matter, but now he promised to kick Wright himself after the four
o'clock bell.

Four o'clock came; the names were called; the master left the room.
Wright, who perfectly knew what was threatened, stood there pale but
fearless. His indifferent look was an additional annoyance to Eric, who
walked up to him carelessly, and boxing his ears, though without hurting
him, said contemptuously, "Conceited little sneak."

Montagu had been told of the intended kicking, and had determined even
single-handed to prevent it. He did _not_, however, expect that Eric
would have taken part in it, and was therefore unprepared. The color
rushed into his cheeks; he went up, took Wright quietly by the hand, and
said with firm determination, "No one in the school shall touch
Wright again."

"What? no one! just hark to that," said Graham; "I suppose he thinks
himself cock of the school."

Eric quite misunderstood Montagu's proceedings; he took it for a public
challenge. All the Rowlandites were round, and to yield would have
looked like cowardice. Above all, his evil genius Wildney was by, and
said, "How very nice! another dictation lesson!"

A threatening circle had formed round Montagu, but his closed lips, and
flushing brow, and dilated nostrils, betrayed a spirit which made them
waver, and he quietly repeated, "No one shall touch you, Wright."

"They _will_, though," said Eric instantly; "_I_ will, for one, and I
should like to see you prevent me." And so saying he gave Wright another
slight blow.

Montagu dropped Wright's hand and said slowly, "Eric Williams, I have
taken one unexpected blow from you without a word, and bear the marks of
it yet. It is time to show that it was _not_ through cowardice that I
did not return it. Will you fight?"

The answer was not prompt by any means, though every one in the school
knew that Eric was not afraid. So sure was he of this, that, for the
sake of "auld lang syne," he would probably have declined to fight with
Montagu had he been left to his own impulses.

"I have been in the wrong, Montagu, more than once," he answered,
falteringly, "and we have been friends--"

But it was the object of many of the worst boys that the two should
fight--not only that they might see the fun, but that Montagu's
authority, which stood in their way, might be flung aside. So Brooking
whispered in an audible voice--

"Faith! he's showing the white feather."

"You're a liar!" flung in Eric; and turning to Montagu, he said--"There!
I'll fight you this moment."

Instantly they had stripped off their coats and prepared for action. A
ring of excited boys crowded round them. Fellows of sixteen, like
Montagu and Eric, rarely fight, because their battles have usually been
decided in their earlier school-days; and it was also but seldom that
two boys so strong, active, and prominent, took this method of settling
their differences.

The fight began, and at first the popular favor was entirely on the side
of Eric, while Montagu found few or none to back him. But he fought with
a fire and courage which soon won applause; and as Eric, on the other
hand, was random and spiritless, the cry was soon pretty fairly divided
between them.

After a sharp round they paused for breath, and Owen, who had been a
silent and disgusted spectator of such a combat between boys of such
high standing, said with much, feeling--

"This is not a very creditable affair, Montagu."

"It is necessary," was Montagu's laconic reply.

Among other boys who had left the room before the fracas had taken
place, was Vernon Williams, who shrank away to avoid the pain of seeing
his new friend Wright bullied and tormented. But curiosity soon took him
back, and he came in just as the second round began. At first he only
saw a crowd of boys in the middle of the room, but jumping on a desk he
had a full view of what was going on.

There was a tremendous hubbub of voices, and Eric, now thoroughly roused
by the remarks he overheard, and especially by Wildney's whisper that
"he was letting himself be licked," was exerting himself with more vigor
and effect. It was anything but a noble sight; the faces of the
combatants were streaked with blood and sweat, and as the miserable gang
of lower school-boys backed them on with eager shouts of--"Now Eric, now
Eric," "Now Montagu, go it, sixth, form," etc., both of them fought
under a sense of deep disgrace, increased by the recollections which
they shared in common.

All this Vernon marked in a moment, and, filled with pain and vexation,
his said in a voice which, though low, could be heard amid all the
uproar, "Oh Eric, Eric, fighting with Montagu!" There was reproach and
sorrow in the tone, which touched more than one boy there, for Vernon,
spite of the recent change in him, could not but continue a favorite.

"Shut up there, you little donkey," shouted one or two, looking back at
him for a moment.

But Eric heard the words, and knew that it was his brother's voice. The
thought rushed on him how degraded his whole position was, and how
different it might have been. He felt that he was utterly in the wrong,
and Montagu altogether in the right; and from that moment his blows once
more grew feeble and ill-directed. When they again stopped to take rest,
the general shout for Montagu showed that he was considered to have the
best of it.

"I'm getting so tired of this," muttered Eric, during the pause.

"Why, you're fighting like a regular muff," said Graham; "you'll have to
acknowledge yourself thrashed in a minute."

"That I'll _never_ do," he said, once more firing up.

Just as the third round began, Duncan came striding in, for Owen, who
had left the room, told him what was going on. He had always been a
leading fellow, and quite recently his influence had several times been
exerted in the right direction, and he was very much looked up to by all
the boys alike, good or bad. He determined, for the credit of the sixth,
that the fight should not go on, and bursting into the ring, with his
strong shoulders he hurled on each side the boys who stood in his way,
and struck down the lifted arms of the fighters.

"You _shan't_ fight," he said, doggedly, thrusting himself between them;
"so there's an end of it. If you do, you'll both have to fight
me first."

"Shame!" said several of the boys, and the cry was caught up by Bull and
others.

"Shame, is it?" said Duncan, and his lip curled with scorn. "There's
only one way to argue with, you fellows. Bull, if you, or any other boy,
repeat that word, I'll thrash him. Here, Monty, come away from this
disgraceful scene."

"I'm sick enough of it," said Montagu, "and am ready to stop if Williams
is,--provided no one touches Wright."

"I'm sick of it too," said Eric sullenly.

"Then you two shall shake hands," said Duncan.

For one instant--an instant which he regretted till the end of his
life--Montagu drew himself up and hesitated. He had been deeply wronged,
deeply provoked, and no one could blame him for the momentary feeling:
but Eric had observed the gesture, and his passionate pride took the
alarm. "It's come to this, then," he thought; "Montagu doesn't think me
good enough to be shaken hands with."

"Pish!" he said aloud, in a tone of sarcasm; "it may be an awful honor
to shake hands with such an immaculate person as Montagu, but I'm not
proud on the subject;" and he turned away.

Montagu's hesitation was but momentary, and without a particle of anger
or indignation he sorrowfully held out his hand. It was too late; that
moment had done the mischief, and it was now Eric's turn coldly
to withdraw.

"You don't think me worthy of your friendship, and what's the good of
grasping hands if we don't do it with cordial hearts?"

Montagu's lip trembled, but he said nothing, and quietly putting on his
coat, waved back the throng of boys with a proud sweep of his arm, and
left the room with Duncan.

"Come along, Wright," he said.

"Nay, leave him," said Eric with a touch of remorse. "Much as you think
me beneath you, I have honor enough to see that no one hurts him."

The group of boys gradually dispersed, but one or two remained with
Eric, although he was excessively wearied by their observations.

"You didn't fight half like yourself," said Wildney.

"Can't you tell why? I had the wrong side to fight for." And getting up
abruptly, he left the room, to be alone in his study, and bathe his
swollen and aching face.

In a few minutes Vernon joined him, and at the mere sight of him Eric
burst into tears of shame. That evening with Vernon in the study, after
the dinner at the Jolly Herring, had revived all his really warm
affection for his little brother; and as he could no longer conceal the
line he took in the school, they had been often together since then; and
Eric's moral obliquity was not so great as to prevent him from feeling
deep joy at the change for the better in Vernon's character.

"Verny, Verny," he said, as the boy came up and affectionately took his
hand, "it was you who lost me that fight."

"Oh, but, Eric, you were fighting with Montagu."

"Don't you remember the days, Eric," he continued, "when we were
home-boarders, and how kind Monty used to be to me even then, and how
mother liked him, and thought him quite your truest friend, except
poor Russell?"

"I do, indeed. I didn't think then that it would come to this."

"I've always been _so_ sorry," said Vernon, "that I joined the fellows
in playing him tricks. I can't think how I came to do it, except that
I've done such lots of bad things here. But he's forgiven and forgotten
that long ago, and is very kind to me now."

It was true; but Eric didn't know that half the kindness which Montagu
showed to his brother was shown solely for _his_ sake.

"Do you know, I've thought of a plan for making you two friends again?
I've written to Aunt Trevor to ask him to Fairholm with us next
holidays."

"Oh, have you? Good Verny! Yes; _there_ we might be friends. Perhaps
there," he added, half to himself, "I might be more like what I was in
better days."

"But it's a long time to look forward to. Easter hasn't come yet," said
Vernon.

So the two young boys proposed; but God had disposed it otherwise.



CHAPTER VII

THE PIGEONS

     "Et motae ad Lunam trepidabis arundinis umbram."

     Juv. X. 21.

"How awfully dull it is, Charlie," said Eric, a few weeks before Easter,
as he sat with Wildney in his study one holiday afternoon.

"Yes; too late for football, too early for cricket." And Wildney
stretched himself and yawned.

"I suppose this is what they call ennui," said Eric again, after a
pause. "What is to be done, Sunbeam?"

"You _shan't_ call me that, so there's an end of it," said Wildney,
hitting him on the arm.

"By the bye, Eric, you remind me to-morrow's my birth-day, and I've got
a parcel coming this afternoon full of grub from home. Let's go and see
if it's come."

"Capital! We will."

So Eric and Wildney started off to the coach-office, where they found
the hamper, and ordered it to be brought at once to the school, and
carried up to Eric's study.

On opening it they found it rich in dainties, among which were a pair of
fowls and a large plum-cake.

"Hurrah!" said Wildney, "you were talking of nothing to do; I vote we
have a carouse to-morrow."

"Very well; only let's have it _before_ prayers, because we were so
nearly caught last time."

"Ay, and let it be in one of the class-rooms, Eric; not up here, lest
we have another incursion of the 'Rosebuds.' I shall have to cut
preparation, but that don't matter, It's Harley's night, and old Stupid
will never twig."

"Well, whom shall we ask?" said Eric.

"Old Llewellyn for one," said Wildney. "We havn't seen him for an age,
and he's getting too lazy even for a bit of fun."

"Good; and Graham," suggested Eric. He and Wildney regarded their
possessions so much as common property, that he hadn't the least
delicacy in mentioning the boys whom he wanted to invite.

"Yes; Graham's a jolly bird; and Bull?"

"I've no objection; and Pietrie?"

"Well; and your brother Vernon?"

"No!" said Eric, emphatically. "At any rate I won't lead _him_ into
mischief any more."

"Attlay, then; and what do you say to Brooking?"

"No, again," said Eric; "he's a blackguard."

"I wonder you haven't mentioned Duncan," said Wildney.

"Duncan! why, my dear child, you might as well ask Owen, or even old
Rose, at once. Bless you, Charlie, he's a great deal too correct to
come now."

"Well; we've got six already, that's quite enough."

"Yes; but two fowls isn't enough for six hungry boys."

"No, it isn't," said Wildney. He thought a little, and then, clapping
his hands, danced about and said, "Are you game for a _regular_
lark, Eric?"

"Yes; anything to make it less dull. I declare I've very nearly been
taking to work again to fill up the time."

Eric often talked now of work in this slighting way partly as an excuse
for the low places in form to which he was gradually sinking. Everybody
knew that had he properly exerted his abilities he was capable of
beating almost any boy; so, to quiet his conscience, he professed to
ridicule diligence as an unboyish piece of muffishness, and was never
slow to sneer at the "grinders," as he contemptuously called all those
who laid themselves out to win school distinctions.

"Ha, ha!" said Wildney, "that's rather good! No, Eric, it's too late for
you to turn 'grinder' now. I might as well think of doing it myself, and
I've never been higher than five from lag in my form yet."

"Haven't you? But what's the regular lark you hinted at?"

"Why, we'll go and seize the Gordonites' _pigeons_, and make another
dish of them."

"Seize the Gordonites' pigeons! Why, when do you mean?"

"To-night."

Eric gave a long whistle. "But wouldn't it be st--t--?"

"Stealing?" said Wildney, with a loud laugh. "Pooh! '_convey_ the wise
call it.'"

But Eric still looked serious. "Why, my dear old boy," continued
Wildney, "the Gordonites'll be the first to laugh at the trick when we
tell them of it next morning, as of course we will do. There, now, don't
look grumpy. I shall cut away and arrange it with. Graham, and tell you
the whole dodge ready prepared to-night at bed-time."

After lights were put out, Wildney came up to the study according to
promise, and threw out hints about the proposed plan. He didn't tell it
plainly, because Duncan was there, but Duncan caught enough to guess
