
"But don't you think you might be able to bear it just for a week,
Poppy? If I loved you always and always all the rest of my life, do
you think you could bear it just for one little week longer? I'd be
sure to let you have the money back again then, dear Poppy."

Poppy gazed hard at the child, who was sitting upright on her sofa,
with her cheeks flushed and her eyes shining, and a fitful quiver
about her pretty lips.

"What does it all mean?" thought practical Poppy; "it's more than
common worries ails the little dear. I'm sure I'd bear Sarah to my
dying day to help her, the sweet lamb! I wonder, now, has she lost
some of Miss Primrose's money. I know they're short enough of means,
the darling ladies, and maybe the child has mislaid some of their
money, and is frightened to tell. Dear me, I shouldn't think Miss
Primrose would be hard on any one, least of all on a sweet little lamb
like that; but there's never no saying, and the child looks pitiful.
Well, I'm not the one to deny her."

"Miss Daisy," said Poppy, aloud, "I have got exactly fifteen shillings
in my purse, and that's the price of a third single to Rosebury, and
no more. It's true enough I meant to go down there to-night, and never
to see Aunt Flint again, but it's true also that she'd give her eyes
to have me back, and was crying like anything when I said good-bye to
her. 'Sarah,' she says, 'it's you that's ongrateful, and you'll find
it out, but if you comes back again you shall be forgiven, Sarah,' she
says. So I can go back for a week, Miss Daisy, and if you have lost
fifteen shillings, why, I can lend it to you, dearie."

"Oh, Poppy, you are a darling!" said little Daisy. "Oh, Poppy, how can
I ever, ever thank you? Yes, I have--lost--fifteen shillings. You
shall have it back again, Poppy, and Poppy, I will always love you,
and always remember that you were the best of good fairies to me, and
that you took me out of the power of a terrible ogre."

"All right, Miss Daisy," said Poppy, returning the child's embrace;
"here's the fifteen shilling, and welcome. Only I never would have
called sweet Miss Primrose an ogre, Miss Daisy."




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE JOURNEY.


Poppy went away presently, and the moment she was gone Daisy began to
make some hasty little preparations.

"I'll take the Pink with me," she said to herself. "I'll empty all the
things out of my little work-basket, and my darling Pink can sleep in
it quite snugly, and she'll be great company to me, for I cannot help
feeling very shaky, and I do start so when I see any one the least
like Mr. Dove in the distance. I mustn't think about being frightened
now--this is the least I could do, and if I'm terrified all over I
must go through with it."

Then Daisy wrote a tiny note--a little note on half a sheet of
paper--which she tore out of her copy-book. It was blotted with tears
and almost illegible. This was what she said:--

"Primrose, darling, I and the Pink, we have gone away for a little
bit. Your money is lost, Primrose, and I cannot look you in the face
until I get it back again. Don't be a bit frightened about me--I and
the Pink will come back when we have got the money.

     "Your loving little
     "DAISY."

This note was left open on the table to greet Primrose when she came
in, and then Daisy buttoned on her little jacket, and put on her
strongest pair of boots, and the neat little hat which Primrose had
trimmed for her the week before, and popping the Pink into her
work-basket, she stole softly downstairs and out of the house without
old Bridget, who was busily engaged in the back kitchen, hearing her.

The poor little maid got into the street just when the shades of
evening were beginning to fall. She had the Pink in her basket, and
fifteen shillings clasped tightly inside one of her gloves. Fifteen
shillings paid for a third single to Rosebury, and she was going to
Rosebury--so far her plans were definite enough; beyond this broad
fact, however, all was chaos.

Daisy knew very little more about London than she had known nine
months before, when first she and her sisters arrived in the great
city. She had gone out much less than the other two, and she had never
gone alone. Whenever she had walked abroad she had gone with a
companion.

Now her only companion was the Pink, and the poor little heart felt
very lonely, and the little feet trembled as they walked along the
pavement.

She had been so terrified about Poppy finding out what she really
wanted to do with the fifteen shillings that she had been afraid to
ask her any questions about Rosebury. She had not an idea from what
railway station she was to go, and she feared, as she walked through
the streets, that she might have to walk many miles.

At first she walked very rapidly, for she was anxious to get out of
Mr. Dove's neighborhood, and she also thought it just possible that
she might meet Primrose or Jasmine returning home. Besides the fifteen
shillings which were to pay for her ticket she had threepence of her
own in her pocket. When she had walked about half an hour, and thought
that she had gone a long way, and felt quite sure that she could not
be very far from the railway station which led to Rosebury, the Pink
awoke, and twisting and turning in her narrow basket began to mew
loudly.

"Oh, poor Kitty Pink," said Daisy, "she must be wanting her supper,
poor dear little kitty! I'm not at all hungry myself, but I think I
ought to buy a penno'th of milk for my kitty. I'll just go into that
shop over there--I see that they sell bread and milk. Perhaps they'll
give me some bread and milk for kitty for a penny, and oh, perhaps
they will know if I am near the right railway station for Rosebury."

Summoning up all her courage, for Daisy was naturally a timid child,
she ventured into the shop, and having asked for some bread and milk
for her cat, which was given with a little stare of amusement by a
good-natured looking woman, she put her important question in a very
faltering voice.

"Rosebury, my little dear?" said the shopwoman; "no, I never heard of
the place. Is it anywhere near London, love?"

"No," said Daisy; "it's miles and miles away from London. I know the
county it's in--it's in Devonshire and a third single costs fifteen
shillings, and I have got fifteen shillings in my glove. Now, perhaps,
you'll know where it is."

"In Devonshire?" repeated the woman. "And a third single costs fifteen
shillings? Surely, miss, you are not going all that long way by
yourself?"

"Yes," said Daisy, in a dignified little tone. "I'm obliged to go.
Thank you very much for Pussy's milk. How much am I to pay? Oh, a
penny? Thank you. Good evening."

The Pink was once more shut down into her basket, and Daisy hurried
out of the shop. The good-natured woman stared after her, and felt
half inclined to call her back; but, like many another, she reflected
that it was no affair of hers. The child went on to the end of the
long street, and then stood at a corner where several omnibuses came
up. A conductor, seeing her wistful little face, jumped down from his
stand, and asked her if she wanted to go anywhere.

"To Rosebury, in Devonshire," said poor little Daisy. "It's fifteen
shillings a single third."

The man smiled at the anxious little face.

"You want to get to Devonshire, missy," he said. "Then I expect
Waterloo's your line, and this here 'bus of mine goes there. Jump in,
missy, and I'll put you down at the right place."

"I've only got two pennies," said Daisy, "Will two pennies pay for a
drive to Waterloo for me and kitty?"

The man smiled, and said he thought he might manage to take her to
Waterloo for that sum.




CHAPTER XL.

A BITTER DISAPPOINTMENT.


There are little girls of ten years old who in the present day are
possessed of a large amount of self-possession. Some of these little
maids are, in their own way, quite womanly--they can ask their way
without faltering, and they can even walk about alone in a great world
like London without losing themselves.

But to this class of self-possessed little girls Daisy Mainwaring did
not belong. She had a charming, babyish little face, and was something
of the baby still in the confiding and wistful way in which she leaned
on others for support. Daisy was, perhaps, in all particulars younger
than her years. When at last, after inconceivable difficulties--after
being jostled about by an indifferent crowd, and pushed rudely against
by more than one stupid, blundering porter--she did find her way to
the right ticket-office, and did secure her single third to Rosebury,
and then get a very small allowance of room in a crowded third-class
carriage her heart was beating so loudly that she almost wondered it
did not burst. The great train, however, moved out of the terminus,
and Daisy felt herself whirling away through the night, and then she
became conscious of a little sensation of thankfulness. Surely the
worst of her journey was over now; surely she and the Pink would be
received very kindly and very lovingly by Mrs. Ellsworthy; surely Mrs.
Ellsworthy would listen with full credence to the little tale Daisy
would make up about an ogre having stolen away her money, and would
hasten to fill the poor empty little purse from her own abundant
stores. Daisy thought such happy and hopeful thoughts as she was
commencing her weary journey, and then she clasped the basket which
contained the Pink tightly in her little arms, and presently, from
sheer weariness, dropped asleep. When the little head bobbed forward
two or three times a good-natured neighbor put her arm round the
child, and after a little even took her into her arms, where Daisy,
after many hours of deep slumber, awoke. The night train to Rosebury
went very slowly, stopping at every little wayside station, and
sometimes seeming to the exasperated passengers scarcely to move at
all; but all these weary hours Daisy slumbered peacefully, and when
she awoke the sun was shining brightly, and a new day had begun.

"Well, my dear, you have had a hearty sleep," said the good-natured
woman; "and where are you bound, if I may make so bold as to ask,
little miss?"

"I am going to Rosebury," said Daisy. "Oh! how kind of you to let me
sleep in your arms. I've had quite a nice nap, and I'm not so very
tired. Thank you very much for being so very good to me. Are we near
Rosebury now, please?"

"In half an hour you'll get there, dear. Now I must say good-bye, for
this is my station. Good-bye, missy, and a safe journey to you."

"I'm so sorry you are going away," said Daisy, and she raised her
little lips to kiss her friend.

"God bless you, love," said the nice, pleasant-faced woman, and then
she got out of the carriage, nodding her head to Daisy as she walked
away.

The loneliness which had more or less been soothed or kept in abeyance
by this good woman's company now returned very strongly, and Daisy had
to feel a certain empty little purse which she held in her pocket to
keep up her resolution. She did not seem so certain about Mrs.
Ellsworthy being nice and kind as she was the night before. The
third-class carriage in which she had travelled was now nearly empty,
and when she at last arrived at Rosebury she was the only passenger to
alight. She gave up her ticket and walked out of the station, a
forlorn and unnoticed little personage. It was still very early in the
morning, not quite six o'clock, and there were very few people about,
and the whole place had a strange, deserted, and unhomelike feeling.
Could this be the Rosebury where Daisy was born, where she had been so
petted and loved? She did not like its aspect in the cold grey morning
light. There was a little drizzling mist falling, and it chilled her
and made her shiver.

"I know I've been very, very selfish," she kept murmuring to herself.
"I oughtn't to have minded the dungeon. I ought not to have been so
terrified at the ogre. I'm afraid God is angry with me for being so
dreadfully selfish, and for letting the ogre take Primrose's money. I
always did think the sun shone at Rosebury, but perhaps even the sun
won't get up because he is angry with me."

Daisy knew her way down the familiar and straggling village street,
but there were one or two different roads to Shortlands, and she
became puzzled which to take, and what with the drizzling rain, and
her own great fatigue of body, soon really lost her way.

An early laborer going to work was the first person she met. She asked
him eagerly if she was on the right road; but he answered her so
gruffly that she instantly thought he must be a relation of Mr. Dove's
and ran, crying and trembling, away from him. The next person she came
across was a little boy of about her own age, and he was kind, and
took her hand, and put her once more in the right direction, so that,
foot-sore and weary, the poor little traveller did reach the
lodge-gates of Shortlands about nine o'clock.

But here the bitterest of her disappointments awaited her, for the
woman who attended to the gates said, in a cold and unsympathizing
voice, that the family were now in London, and there was no use
whatever in little miss troubling herself to go up to the house. No
use at all, the woman repeated, for she could not tell when the family
would return, probably not for several weeks. Daisy did not ask any
more questions, but turned away from the inhospitable gates with a
queer sinking in her heart, and a great dizziness before her eyes. She
had come all this weary, weary way for nothing. She had taken dear
Poppy's last money for nothing. Oh, now there was no doubt at all that
God was very angry with her, and that she had been both wicked and
selfish. She had still twopence in her pocket--for the good-natured
omnibus conductor had paid her fare himself. She would go to the
nearest cottage and ask for some milk for the Pink, and then she
wondered--poor, little, lonely, unhappy child--how long it would take
her to die.




CHAPTER XLI.

MRS. DREDGE TO THE RESCUE.


High tea at Penelope Mansion was an institution. Mrs. Flint said in
confidence to her boarders that she preferred high tea to late dinner.
She said that late dinner savored too distinctly of the mannish
element for her to tolerate. It reminded her, she said, of clerks
returning home dead-beat after a day's hard toil; it reminded her of
sordid labor, and of all kinds of unpleasant things; whereas high tea
was in itself womanly, and was in all respects suited to the gentle
appetites of ladies who were living genteelly on their means. Mrs.
Flint's boarders were as a rule impressed by her words, and high tea
was, in short, a recognized institution of the establishment.

On the evening of the day when poor little Daisy had disappeared from
her Palace Beautiful Mrs. Flint's boarders were enjoying their genteel
repast in the cool shades of her parlor. They had shrimps for tea, and
eggs, and buttered toast, and a small glass dish of sardines, to say
nothing of a few little dishes of different preserves. Mrs. Dredge,
who was considered by the other ladies to have an appetite the reverse
of refined, had, in addition to these slight refreshments, a mutton
chop. This she was eating with appetite and relish, while Miss Slowcum
languidly tapped her egg, and remarked as she did so that it was
hollow, but not more so than life. Mrs. Mortlock, since the
commencement of her affliction, always sat by Mrs. Flint's side, and
when she imagined that her companions were making use of their sight
to some purpose she invariably requested Mrs. Flint to describe to her
what was going on. On this particular evening the whole party were
much excited and impressed by the unexpected return of Poppy, alias
Sarah.

"It took me all of a heap!" said Mrs. Flint; "I really thought the
girl was saucy, and had gone--but never a bit of it. If you'll believe
me, ladies, she came in as humble as you please, and quite willing to
go back to her work in a quiet spirit. 'Sarah,' I said to her in the
morning, 'you'll rue this day,' and she did rue it, and to some
purpose, or she wouldn't have returned so sharp in the evening. She's
a good girl, taking her all in all, is Sarah, and being my own niece,
of course I put up with a few things from her which I would not take
from a stranger."

"She spoke pretty sharp this morning about you, Mrs. Flint, to my
continual reader," said Mrs. Mortlock; "I wouldn't take no airs, if I
was you, from Sarah Maria. Miss Slowcum, I'll trouble you for the
pepper, please. Seeing that I'm afflicted, and cannot now use my
eyesight, I think there might be a little consideration in the small
matter of pepper shown to me, but feel as I will I can find it in no
way handy. Thank you, Miss Slowcum; sorry to trouble you, I'm sure."

"She grows more snappish each day," whispered Miss Slowcum to Mrs.
Dredge; but just then the attention of all the good ladies was
diverted by a ringing peal at the hall door-bell, followed by eager
voices in the hall, and then by the entrance of Poppy, alias Sarah,
who broke in upon the quiet of high tea with a red and startled face.

"An awful trouble has happened," she began, breathlessly. "Oh, ladies,
you'll pardon me, but this is no time for standing on ceremony, when
my own darling little lady, Miss Daisy Mainwaring, has gone and left
her sheltering home."

"Good gracious! my continual reader's little sister!" exclaimed Mrs.
Mortlock. "Left her home! you must be mistaken, Sarah Jane."

"No, ma'am, it's a most sorrowful fact," said poor Poppy, who looked
terribly dejected, and nearly sobbed as she spoke; "the other two dear
young ladies has come for me, and I must go back with them. I'm
sorry, Aunt Flint, to part again so soon, but this is unexpected, and
my duty lies with my young ladies."

"Your duty lies with your aunt, miss," here exclaimed the exasperated
Mrs. Flint. "Sarah, I was taking your part, but your airs are now past
standing. Ladies three, I feel convinced that this story is all a
make-up. I don't believe for a moment the child has gone away. It's a
make-up of Sarah's, who is turning into a most wicked girl."

"I don't believe it," here exclaimed Miss Slowcum. "Sarah Bertha has
spoken the truth, I feel convinced. I had a warning dream last night.
I dreamt of white horses, and that always signifies very great
trouble. It's my belief that the poor dear innocent little child has
been murdered!"

"Murdered!" almost screamed Mrs. Mortlock. "Miss Slowcum, I'll thank
you to come and take the seat next me, my dear, and tell me all your
reasons in full for making this most startling remark. My dear, I
don't object to holding your hand while you're pouring forth the tale
of woe. How and where, Miss Slowcum, did the child meet her death?"

Meanwhile, during this wrangling and fierce disputing, Mrs. Dredge,
more kind-hearted than the others, had left the room. She had gone
into the hall, where Primrose and Jasmine stood side by side. She had
listened to their bewildered and agitated little story, and then
asking them to sit down and wait for her, she had returned to the
parlor.
