smite him hard."

"Then lead the way," said Obed. "It's better to be too soon than too
late."

Without another word Potter turned his horse toward the south. He was
tall and rawboned, his face burned well by the sun, but he had an
angularity and he bore himself with a certain stiffness that did not
belong to the "Texans" of Southern birth. Ned did not doubt that he
would be most formidable in combat.

After riding at least two hours without anyone speaking a word, Potter
said:

"We will meet the remainder of our friends and comrades about nightfall.
We will not exceed fifty, and more probably we shall be scarcely so many
as that, but with the strength of a just cause in our arms it is likely
that we shall be enough."

"When we charged at Gonzales they stayed for but one look at our faces,"
said the Ring Tailed Panther. "Then they ran so fast that they were
rippin' an' tearin' up the prairie for the next twenty-four hours."

"I have heard of that," said Potter with a grave smile. "The grass so
far from growing scarcely bent under their feet. Still, the Mexicans at
times will fight with the greatest courage."

Here Urrea spoke.

"My friends," he said, "I must now leave you. I have an uncle and
cousins on the San Antonio River, not far above Goliad. Like myself they
are devoted adherents of the Texan cause, and it is more than likely
that they will suffer terribly at the hands of some raiding party from
Goliad, if they are not warned in time. I have tried to steel my heart
and go straight with you to Goliad, but I cannot forget those who are so
dear to me. However, it is highly probable that I can give them the
warning to flee, and yet rejoin you in time for the attack."

"We hate to lose a good man, when there's rippin' an' tearin' ahead of
us," said the Ring Tailed Panther.

"But if people of his blood are in such great danger he must even go,"
said Potter.

Urrea's face was drawn with lines of mental pain. His expressive eyes
showed great doubt and anguish. Ned felt very sorry for him.

"It is a most cruel quandary," said Urrea. "I would go with you, and yet
I would stay. Texas and her cause have my love, but to us of Mexican
blood the family also is very, very dear."

His voice faltered and Latin tears stood in his eyes.

"Go," said Obed. "You must save your kin, and perhaps, as you hope, you
can rejoin us in time."

"Farewell," said Urrea, "but you will see me again soon."

He spurred his horse, a powerful animal, and went ahead at a gallop.
Soon he disappeared over the swells of the prairie.

"I hate to see him go," growled the Ring Tailed Panther. "Mexicans are
uncertain even when they are on your side. But he's a big strong fellow,
an' he'd be handy in the fight for which we're lookin'."

But he kept Ned's sympathy.

"He must save his people," said the boy.

Obed and Potter said nothing. At twilight they found the other men
waiting for them in a thicket of mesquite, and the total, including the
four, was only forty. But with Texan daring and courage they made
straight for Goliad, and Ned did not doubt that they would have a fight.
Life was now moving fast for him, and it was crowded with incident.

The troop in loose formation rode swiftly, but the hoofs of their horses
made little sound on the prairie. The southern moon rode low, and the
night was clear. They crossed two or three creeks, and also went through
narrow belts of forest, but they never halted or hesitated. Potter and
several others knew the way well, and night was the same as day to
them.

At midnight Ned saw a wide but shallow stream, much like the Guadalupe.
Trees and reeds lined its banks. Potter informed him that this was the
San Antonio River, and that they were now below the town of Goliad,
where they meant to attack the Mexican force.

"And if Providence favors us," said Potter, "we shall smite them quick
and hard."

"Providence favors those who hit first and hard," said Obed, mixing
various quotations.

The men forded the river, and, after a brief stop began to move
cautiously through thickets of mesquite and chaparral toward the town,
the lights of which they could not yet see. At one point the mesquite
became so thick that Ned, Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther dismounted,
in order to pick their way and led their horses.

Ned, who was in advance, heard a noise, as of something moving in the
thicket. At first he thought it was a deer, but the sounds ceased
suddenly, as if whatever made them were trying to seek safety in
concealment rather than flight. Ned's experience had already made him
skillful and daring. The warrior's instinct, born in him, was developing
rapidly, and flinging his bridle to Obed he asked him to hold it for a
moment.

Before the surprised man could ask why, Ned left him with the reins in
his hand, cocked his rifle and crept through the mesquite toward the
point whence the sounds had come. He saw a stooping shadow, and then a
man sprang up. Quick as a flash Ned covered him with his rifle.

"Surrender!" he cried.

"Gladly," cried the man, throwing up his hands and laughing in a
hysterical way. "I yield because you must be a Texan. That cannot be the
voice of any Mexican."

Obed and the others came forward and the man strode toward them. He was
tall, but gaunt and worn, until he was not much more than a skeleton.
His clothing, mere rags, hung loosely on a figure that was now much too
narrow for them. Two bloodshot eyes burned in dark caverns.

"Thank God," he cried, "you are Texans, all of you!"

"Why, it's Ben Milam," said Potter. "We thought you were a prisoner at
Monterey in Mexico."

"I was," replied Milam, one of the Texan leaders, "but I escaped and
obtained a horse. I have ridden nearly seven hundred miles day and
night. My horse dropped dead down there in the chaparral and I've been
here, trying to take a look at Goliad, uncertain about going in, because
I do not know whether it is held by Texans or Mexicans."

"It is held by Mexicans at present," replied Potter, solemnly. "But I
think that within an hour or two it will be held by Texans."

"If it ain't there'll be some mighty roarin' an' rippin' an' tearin',"
said the Ring Tailed Panther.

"Give me a bite to eat and something to drink," said Milam; "and I'll
help you turn Goliad from a Mexican into a Texan town."

Exhausted and nearly starved, he showed, nevertheless, the dauntless
spirit of the Texans. Food and drink were given to him and the little
party moved toward the town. Presently they saw one or two lights. Far
off a dog howled, but it was only at the moon. He had not scented them.
By and by the ground grew so rough and the bushes so thick that all
dismounted and tethered their horses. Then they crept into the very edge
of the town, still unseen and unheard. Potter pointed to a large
building.

"That," he said, "is the headquarters of Colonel Sandoval, the
commandant, and if you look closely you will see a sentinel walking up
and down before the door."

"We will make a rush for that house," said the leader of the Texans,
"and call upon the sentinel to yield."

They slipped from the cover and ran toward the house, shouting to the
Mexican on guard to surrender. But he fired at them point blank,
although his bullet missed, and a shot from one of the Texans slew him.
The next moment they were thundering at the door of the house, in which
were Sandoval and the larger part of his garrison. The door held fast,
and shots were fired at them from the windows.

Some of the Texans ran to the neighboring houses, obtained axes and
smashed in the door. Then they poured in, every man striving to be
first, and most of the Mexicans fled through the back doors or the
windows, escaping in the darkness into the mesquite and chaparral.
Sandoval himself, half dressed, was taken by the Ring Tailed Panther and
Obed. He made many threats, but Obed replied:

"You have chosen war and the Texans are giving it to you as best they
can. Our bullets fall on all Mexicans, whether just or unjust."

Sandoval said no more, but finished his interrupted toilet. It was clear
to Ned, watching his face, that the Mexican colonel considered all the
Texans doomed, despite their success of the moment. Sandoval was still
in his quarters. His arms had been taken away but he suffered no ill
treatment. Despite the rapid flight of the Mexican soldiers twenty-five
or thirty had been taken and they were held outside. The Texans not
knowing what to do with them decided to release them later on parole.

Ned was about to leave Sandoval's room when he met at the door a young
man, perspiring, wild of eye and bearing all the other signs of haste
and excitement. It was Francisco Urrea.

"I am too late!" he cried. "Alas! Alas! I would have had a share in this
glorious combat! I should like to have taken Sandoval with my own hand!
I have cause to hate that man!"

Sandoval was sitting on the edge of his bed, and the eyes of the two
Mexicans flashed anger at each other, Urrea went up, and shook his hand
in the face of Sandoval. Sandoval shook his in the face of Urrea. Wrath
was equal between them. Fierce words were exchanged with such swiftness
that Ned could not understand them. He judged that the young Mexican
must have some deep cause for hatred of Sandoval. But the Ring Tailed
Panther interfered. He did not like this trait of abusing a fallen foe
which he considered typically Mexican.

"Come away, Don Francisco," he said. "The rippin' an' tearin' are over
an' we can do our roarin' outside!"

He took Urrea by the arm and led him away. Ned preceded them. Outside he
met Obed who was in the highest spirits.

"We've done more than capture Mexicans," he said. "It never rains but it
turns into a storm. We've gone through the Mexican barracks and we've
made a big haul here. Let's take a look."

Ned went with him, and, when he saw, he too exulted. Goliad had been
made a place of supply by the Mexicans, and, stored there, the Texans
had taken a vast quantity of ammunition, rounds of powder and lead to
the scores of thousands, five hundred rifles and three fine cannon. Some
of the Texans joined hands in a wild Indian dance, when they saw their
spoils, and the eyes of Ned and Obed glistened.

"Unto the righteous shall be given," said Obed. "We've done far better
to-night than we hoped. We'll need these in the advance on Cos and San
Antonio."

"They will be of the greatest service," said Urrea who joined them at
that moment. "How I envy you your glory!"

"What happened to you, Don Francisco?" asked Obed.

"I carried the warning to my uncle and his family," replied Urrea. "I
was just in time. Guerrillas of Cos came an hour later, and burned the
house to the ground. They destroyed everything, the stables and barns,
and they even killed the horses and the cattle. Ah, what a ruin! I rode
back by there on my way to Goliad."

The young Mexican pressed his hands over his eyes and Ned thrilled with
sympathy.

"What became of your uncle and his family?" asked the boy.

"They rode north for San Felipe de Austin. They will be safe but they
lose all."

"Never mind," said Obed, "we'll make the Mexicans pay it back, when we
drive 'em out of Texas. I don't believe that any good patriot will
suffer."

"Nevertheless," said Urrea, "my uncle is willing to lose and endure for
the cause."

Ned slept half through the morning in one of the little adobe houses,
and at noon he, Obed, the Ring Tailed Panther and others rode toward San
Antonio. They slept that night in a pecan grove, and the next day
continued their journey, meeting in the morning a Texan who informed
them that Cos with a formidable force was in San Antonio. He also
confirmed the information that the Texans were gathering from all points
for the attack upon this, the greatest Mexican fortress in all Texas.
Mr. Austin was commander-in-chief of the forces, but he wished to yield
the place to Houston who would not take it.

Late in the afternoon they saw horsemen and rode toward them boldly. The
group was sixty or eighty in number and they stopped for the smaller
body to approach. Ned's keen eyes recognized them first, and he uttered
a cry of joy.

"There's Mr. Bowie," he said, "and there are Smith and Karnes, too! They
are all on their way to San Antonio."

He took off his hat and waved it joyously. Smith and Karnes did the same
and Bowie smiled gravely as the boy rode up.

"Well, Ned," he said, "we meet again and I judge that we ride on the
same errand."

"We do. To San Antonio."

"An' there'll be the biggest fight that was ever seen in Texas," said
the Ring Tailed Panther, who knew Bowie well. "If Mexicans an' Texans
want to get to roarin' an' rippin' they'll have the chance."

"They will, Panther," said Bowie, still smiling gravely. Then he looked
inquiringly at Urrea.

"This is Don Francisco Urrea," said Obed. "He was born in Texas, and he
is with us heart and soul. By a hard ride he saved his uncle and family
from slaughter by the guerrillas of Cos, and he reached Goliad just a
few minutes too late to take part in the capture of the Mexican force."

"Some of the Mexicans born in Texas are with us," said Bowie, "and
before we are through at San Antonio, Don Francisco, you will have a
good chance to prove your loyalty to Texas."

"I shall prove it," said Urrea vehemently.

"The place for the gathering of our troops is on Salado Creek near San
Antonio," said Bowie, "and I think that we shall find both Mr. Austin
and General Houston there."

Bowie was extremely anxious to be at a conference with the leaders, and
taking Ned, Obed, the Ring Tailed Panther and a few others he rode
ahead. Ned suggested that Urrea go too, but Bowie did not seem anxious
about him, and he was left behind.

"Maybe he would not be extremely eager to fire upon people of his own
blood if we should happen to meet the Mexican lancers," said Bowie. "I
don't like to put a man to such a test before I have to do it."

Urrea showed disappointment, but, after some remonstrance, he submitted
with a fair grace.

"I'll see you again before San Antonio," he said to Ned.

Ned shook his hand, and galloped away with the little troop, which all
told numbered only sixteen. Bowie kept them at a rapid pace until
sundown and far after. Ned saw that the man was full of care, and he too
appreciated the importance of the situation. Events were coming to a
crisis and very soon the Texans and the army of Cos would stand face to
face.

They slept on the open prairie, and were in the saddle again before
dawn. Bowie now curved a little to the North. They were coming into
country over which Mexicans rode, and he did not wish a clash. But the
Ring Tailed Panther was not sanguine about a free passage, nor did he
seem to care.

"It's likely that the Mexican bands are out ridin'," he said. "Cos ain't
no fool, an' he'll be on the lookout for us. There's more timber as you
come toward San Antonio, an' there'll be a lot of chances for ambushes."

"I believe you are hoping for one," said Ned.

The Ring Tailed Panther did not answer, but he looked upon this young
friend of his of whom he thought so much, and his dark face parted in
one of the broadest smiles that Ned had ever seen.

"I ain't runnin' away from the chance of it," he replied.

They saw a little later a belt of timber to their right. Ned's
experience told him that it masked the bed of a creek, probably flowing
to the San Antonio River, and he noticed, although they were at some
distance, that the trees seemed to be of unusually fine growth. This
fact first attracted his attention, but he lost sight of it when he saw
a glint of unusually bright light among the trunks. He looked more
closely. Here again experience was of value. It was the peculiar kind of
light that he had seen before, when a ray from the sun struck squarely
on the steel head of a lance.

"Look!" he said to Obed and Bowie.

They looked, and Bowie instantly halted his men. The face of the Ring
Tailed Panther suddenly lighted up. He too had good eyes, and he said in
tones of satisfaction:

"Figures are movin' among the trees, an' they are those of mounted men
with lances. Texans don't carry lances an' I think we shall be attacked
by a Mexican force within a few minutes, Colonel Bowie."

"It is altogether probable," replied Bowie. "See, they are coming from
the wood, and they number at least sixty."

"Nearer seventy, I think," said Obed.

"Whether sixty or seventy, they are not too many for us to handle," said
Bowie.

The Mexicans had seen the little group of Texans and they were coming
fast. The wind brought their shouts and they brandished their long
lances. Ned observed with admiration how cool Bowie and all the men
remained.

"Ride up in a line," said Bowie. "Here, Ned, bring your horse by me and
all of you face the Mexicans. Loosen your pistols, and when I give the
word to fire let 'em have it with your rifles."

They were on the crest of one of the swells and the sixteen horses stood
in a row so straight that a line stretched across their front would have
touched the head of every one. They were trained horses, too, and the
riders dropped the reins on their necks, while they held their rifles
ready.

It was hard for Ned to keep his nerves steady, but Obed was on one side
of him and Bowie on the other, while the Ring Tailed Panther was just
beyond Obed. Pride as well as necessity kept him motionless and taut
like the others.

Doubtless the Mexicans would have turned, had it not been for the
smallness of the force opposed to them, but they came on rapidly in a
long line, still shouting and brandishing their weapons. Ned saw the
flaming eyes of the horses, and he marked the foam upon their jaws. For
what was Bowie waiting! Nearer they came, and the beat of the hoofs
thundered in his ears. It seemed that the flashing steel of the lances
was at his throat. He had already raised his rifle and was taking aim at
the man in front of him, all his nerves now taut for the conflict.

"Fire!" cried Bowie, and sixteen rifles were discharged as one.

Not a bullet went astray. The Mexican line was split asunder, and horses
and men went down in a mass. A few, horses and men, rose, and ran across
the plain. But the wings of the Mexican force closed in, and continued
the charge, expecting victory, now that the rifles were empty. But they
forgot the pistols. Ned snatched his from the holster, and fired
directly into the evil face of a lancer who was about to crash into him.
The Mexican fell to the ground and his horse, swerving to one side,
galloped on.

The pistols cracked all around Ned, and then, the Mexicans, sheering
off, fled as rapidly as they had charged. But they left several behind
who would never charge again.

"All right, Ned?" said the cheery voice of Obed.

"Not hurt at all," replied the boy. But as he spoke he gazed down at the
face of the man who had tried to crash into him, and he shuddered. He
