"It will be all right in our boat on the river," said Paul.

"I think I shall go with you as far as your boat," said Lieutenant Bernal.

"You're welcome. Come on," said Henry, confident of his friendship.

The five and the lieutenant walked swiftly toward the Mississippi.




CHAPTER XV

BEFORE BERNARDO GALVEZ


It took only a few minutes to reach the banks of the stream, and they saw
at once that an event was occurring. New Orleans could rejoice, if she
choose, in honor of an important arrival.

A fleet of a dozen large boats swung from the middle of the stream and
made for the levee. In the boats were men in uniform.

"I have an impression, though my impressions are often wrong and my memory
always weak, that yonder cavalier who sits haughtily in the boat as if he
were sole proprietor of the Mississippi, is your good friend, Don
Francisco Alvarez," said Lieutenant Bernal in his mincing way.

They had all recognized Alvarez, and they expected quick trouble. As it
was bound to come they had no objection to its coming at once. The boat of
Alvarez made the landing and as he sprang out he was followed by Braxton
Wyatt, also in the uniform of a Spanish officer. The eyes of the Captain
instantly caught sight of "The Galleon," then of the five, and then of
Lieutenant Diego Bernal standing near the Americans.

"Men," he cried to some of his soldiers who had landed. "Seize this boat
at once! It is my property, taken from me by these American thieves!"

The soldiers moved to obey, but the little Catalan, Lieutenant Diego
Bernal stepped forward. Never was he more mincing, and it is likely that
he never felt more satisfaction than he did now at the role that he was
about to play.

"Gently! Gently! my good captain," he said. "I am a port officer and boats
cannot be seized at will in His Most Catholic Majesty's city of New
Orleans."

His manner stung Alvarez, who replied hotly:

"I repeat, it is my boat! It was stolen from me by these thieves from
Kaintock!"

"But that must be proved," and the lieutenant's voice was very soft and
silky. "The law is still administered in the City of New Orleans. And let
me assure you, my good captain, that the matter of the boat is a trifle.
What really concerns is your delay in coming to New Orleans with your
American captives, whom you held at your place of Beaulieu. His
Excellency, the Governor General, Don Bernardo Galvez, is very much afraid
that you have involved Spain in serious difficulties with a friendly
people."

Alvarez looked fiercely at Bernal. How much did this man know? But the
little lieutenant merely stroked his mustache, and his face was
expressionless.

"If explanations are due," said Alvarez, "I shall make them to Don
Bernardo."

"Very good! very good!" murmured the lieutenant. "I am quite sure that
Don Bernardo will be greatly pleased."

Alvarez turned angrily, gave some orders to his men, and then stalked away
followed by Wyatt and two others. The renegade had never spoken a word,
but he and the five had exchanged some threatening glances.

Alvarez and Bernal had spoken in Spanish, but Henry and the others
surmised the import of their words. They knew, too, by the manner of
Alvarez that the little triumph had been with Bernal.

"He wanted the boat, did he not?" said Henry.

"Yes," replied the lieutenant, "but you can sleep in it to-night. I warn
you, however, to see Bernardo Galvez in the morning as soon as you can.
After all, you are Americans and foreigners, while Alvarez is a Spaniard
and one of us. You will have much to overcome."

They perceived the truth of his suggestion and thanked him. He gave them a
friendly good night and went away. The five went on board "The Galleon"
and prepared for sleep, having dismissed their watchman with ample pay.

As the boat was securely tied there was no need to keep a watch and all
prepared for the night. But they did not go to sleep yet, although they
did not talk, every one being occupied with his own thoughts.

Paul sat at the stern of the boat leaning against the side, and his eyes
were on New Orleans, where he saw the formless shapes of buildings and
twinkling lights here and there. The city, in a way, attracted him and,
in another way, it repelled him. It interested him, but he had no desire
to live there. It was a port, a gate, as it were, opening into the vast
old world, to which belonged the centuries, and of which he had read and
thought so much, but the single taste of it turned Paul's heart with a
stronger affection than ever toward the New World to which he belonged.
The great forests of the north seemed clean and fresh to him as they had
seemed to Jim. There, at least, a man could know who were his friends and
who were his enemies.

He saw boats passing on the turbid, brown current of the Mississippi and
he heard snatches of strange, foreign songs. The night had fully come and
heavy darkness hung over land and water, but New Orleans did not sleep.
The smugglers, the adventurers, the former galley slaves, the riff-raff of
Europe, and the mixed bloods of the West Indies were abroad in pursuit of
either business or pleasure, each equally favored by the dusk.

Shif'less Sol and Long Jim were already asleep, but Paul was restless and
slumber would not come. Henry, too, was wakeful, and Paul at last
suggested that they walk in the city. Henry accepted, and with a word to
Tom Ross they sprang ashore.

New Orleans was even more interesting to them by night than by day, as it
had now a peculiarly uncanny look added to its other qualities. The night
was close, heavy, and warm, and the brown current of the river showed but
dismally through it. Lights were still moving on the Mississippi, but the
boats that bore them were invisible. From the side of the river pleasant
odors came to their nostrils, the clean, sweet scents of vast, undefiled
woods and prairies, the flavor of a wind blowing over wild flowers, but
from the side of the city the smells were as variegated and repellent as
ever.

Nevertheless the two youths turned into the city, lit faintly by the
flaring oil lanterns, and walked along through one street and another
seeing what they could see. The night life was active and much of it was
sodden. Oaths played a great part in the talk they heard and intoxication
was a prevalent note. Sounds of strife, either without or within, arose
now and then, but Henry and Paul, wishing to keep clear of all trouble,
never stayed to see the result. They more than suspected that knives shone
too often in these orgies.

They stopped a few moments by the old church in front of the Place
d'Armes. The church was flanked on one side by a low brick building, very
white with roof of red and yellow tiles, while to the left of the church
stood a villa-like house half hidden among the trees. They admired the
effect of the moonlight on the tiles, and then, passing through the wooden
fence that enclosed it, they entered the deserted Place d'Armes.

"I can breathe better here," said Henry. "I know that I shall never be
fond of towns."

But the imaginative Paul shuddered.

"Look," he said, "the gallows!"

He pointed to the huge gallows that stood in the Place d'Armes, ready for
frequent use. The moonlight had now grown dim. In its wavering beams the
gallows rose to immense proportions and seemed also to take on the
semblance of life. It reached out its long wooden arm as if to grasp Paul
and with another shudder he turned his back to it.

The two continued down one side of the Place d'Armes in the shade of
magnolias and cypresses that drooped over the wooden fence. As they passed
they heard the sound of a shot.

"Somebody in the city fighting with a rifle or pistol instead of a knife,"
said Paul.

But Henry stood motionless and silent for a moment or two. He had
distinctly felt the rush of air on his face as a bullet passed by. He was
seeking to see whence the shot had come and he thought he caught a glimpse
of a figure among the cypresses.

"No, Paul," he exclaimed, "that shot was aimed at me!"

He sprang over the wooden fence and was followed by Paul. They searched
diligently among the trees but found nothing. Then they looked at each
other, and each read the same opinion in the other's eyes.

"It was either Braxton Wyatt or somebody else in the service of Alvarez,"
said Henry.

"Yes," said Paul, nodding assent, "and I think that 'The Galleon' is a
much safer place for us at night than the City of New Orleans."

"That is true," said Henry, "and it is not worth while for us to make a
complaint about being shot at. We cannot prove anything, and New Orleans
is too turbulent a place to pay attention to a stray rifle or pistol shot
at night."

They were back at the boat in a few minutes. Shif'less Sol and Long Jim
still slept soundly, but Tom Ross was awake. They told him briefly what
had occurred, and Tom shook his head sagely.

"Better stay on the boat ez long ez we kin keep it," he said. "Ez fur me,
I'd rather be shot at by Injuns in the woods uv Kentucky than be hevin'
white men drawin' beads on me here in a town. It looks more nateral. Uv
course it wuz Braxton Wyatt or some other tool uv that wicked Spaniard,
Alvarez."

Early the next morning the five, after hiring the same watchman to care
again for their boat, went to the house of the Governor General, the
large, low building at the corner of Toulouse Street and Rue de la Levee.
Early as they were they were not the first to arrive.

A tall man, neatly dressed in a fine brown suit with fine, snow-white,
puffed linen, silver-buckled shoes, and hair, tied in a powdered queue,
stood on the veranda. He had a frank, open face, and the rive knew at once
that he was an American. Had not his appearance proclaimed his
nationality, his speech would have done it for him.

"Good morning," he exclaimed, cheerily, "you are the gentlemen from
Kentucky who arrived yesterday? Yes, you must be! All New Orleans has
heard of the feat of strength and dexterity, performed by one of you last
night in Monsieur Gilibert's Inn of Henri Quatre! And he who did it could
be none other than you, my friend!"

He looked fixedly and admiringly at Henry, and the youth blushed under his
tan.

"It was merely done to stop an annoyance," he said. "I did not mean to
make any display."

The prepossessing stranger laughed.

"Doubtless," he said, "but you have received a great advertisement,
nevertheless. Some rumor concerning the cause of your visit has also
spread in New Orleans, and for this reason I am here to meet you at the
door of the Governor General."

The five looked at him inquiringly. He smiled, and they liked him better
than ever.

"I don't mean to make a mystery of anything," he said. "My name is
Pollock, Oliver Pollock."

"Ah," exclaimed Paul, his face alight, "you are the head of the company of
Philadelphia, New York and Boston merchants that is sending arms from New
Orleans up the Mississippi and Ohio to Pittsburg, where they are landed
and taken across the country for the use of our hard-pressed brethren in
the east!"

The shrewd merchant's eyes twinkled.

"I see, my young friend," he said to Paul, "that you are alert, even if
you have just come out of the wilderness. Yes, I am that man, and I am
proud to be the head of such a company. I tell you, too, that you have
come at the right time. The English, as you know, are forbidden for the
present to trade at New Orleans, while we are unrestricted. But England
is powerful, far more powerful than Spain, and she is pushing hard for
the privilege. If she gets it we shall he hit in a vital spot. Moreover,
an exceedingly strong faction here, one with great influence, is striving
continually to help England and to crush us."

"Alvarez!" exclaimed Henry and Paul together.

"Yes, Alvarez! We must not underrate his strength and cunning, but if he
is engaged in plotting, in actual treason, or what is very near it, your
coming may help us to prove it and thus strengthen the hand of Bernardo
Galvez, who is our friend."

"There is no doubt of the fact!" said Henry earnestly. "He is planning to
make himself Governor General in place of Galvez!"

"Ah, but to prove it! to prove it! You are strangers and foreigners, and
Alvarez is before you here. No, don't blame yourselves, you could not help
it. But he is the commander of the Spanish forces in Northern Louisiana.
He came, summoned urgently on the King's business, and he gained access to
Bernardo Galvez last night. Oh, he's a shrewd man, and a cunning one, and
we know not what plausible tale he may have poured out to the Governor
General. But come, the sentinel here wishes to know our business and I
shall go in with you, if I may."

"Of course," said Henry. "We thank you for your aid."

They saw in a moment how valuable this help could be as Mr. Pollock spoke
rapidly in Spanish to one of the sentinels, who seemed impressed, and who
quickly disappeared within the house. They spent some anxious minutes in
waiting, but the sentinel returned in a few minutes with word that they
would be received.

"That is good," said Mr. Pollock to the five. "It is well to strike before
the blow of Alvarez sinks in too deeply."

They entered an ante-chamber furnished with a splendor that the
Kentuckians had never seen before. There were pictures and the arms of
Spain upon the walls, and rich heavy rugs upon the floor. The sentinel
said something in Spanish to Mr. Pollock and the merchant laughed.

"He makes the polite request," said Mr. Pollock, "that you leave your
rifles here. Ah, you see that the fame of the Kentucky rifle has already
reached New Orleans. They will be perfectly safe, I assure you."

The five leaned their rifles in a row against the wall, long,
slender-barreled weapons, which were destined to make one day an
unparalleled record before this very city of New Orleans.

A wide door was thrown open and an attendant dressed in gorgeous Spanish
livery announced their names as they entered a large room furnished with
as great a degree of state as could be reproduced at that time in New
Orleans. An armed soldier stood on either side of the door, and, at the
far end of the room, sitting in a great chair on a slightly raised
platform, was a handsome, youngish man in the uniform of a Spanish
colonel. He had a strong, open countenance, and the five knew that it was
Bernardo Galvez, the Governor General of Louisiana. The favorable
impression of him that they had received from reports was confirmed by his
appearance.

Bernardo Galvez rose with punctilious courtesy and saluted Oliver Pollock,
who introduced in turn the five, to every one of whom the Governor General
gave a bow and a friendly word. Like all others in New Orleans who had
seen them, he bestowed an admiring look upon their size, their
straightness, and above all, the extraordinary air of independence and
resolution that characterized every one of them, indicated, not by the
words they said or the things they did, but by an atmosphere they created,
something that cannot be described. They had never been in such a room
before, one containing so much of the splendor of old Europe, but they
were not awed in the least by it, and Bernardo Galvez knew it.

Oliver Pollock, the shrewd merchant and patriot, man of affairs, and judge
of his kind, observed them closely and, observing, he felt a great thrill
of satisfaction. The five, boys though two of them were, had felt the vast
importance of their mission and, now that they had come, he too, felt it.
It was a most critical and delicate moment for the struggling young
nation. He knew much of Francisco Alvarez, and he surmised more.

"I have heard of you," said the Governor General to the five, and his
tones became judicial and severe, as became the ruler of a million square
miles of fertile territory belonging to His Most Catholic Majesty, the
King of Spain. "You are the subject of formal complaint made by the
captain of our forces in the North, Don Francisco Alvarez."

It was now Paul, the scholar, youth of imagination, and future statesman,
who responded and it seemed fitting to all that he should do so.

"Will Your Excellency state the complaint against us?" he asked in a grave
and manly way.

"I will leave it to Don Francisco to state it," replied Bernardo Galvez.
"I expected that you would be here this morning, so I have chosen to
confront you with him. Each side shall tell its story."

This seemed fair, and the five, who had been waved to seats by a great
window with Mr. Pollock, made no protest. There they sat in silence for a
few minutes, while the Governor General dictated to a secretary who sat at
a little table by his side and who wrote with a goose-quill.

The wide door was at length thrown open again, and the usher announced Don
Francisco and his aide, Senor Braxton Wyatt. The five were amazed and
indignant at the assurance of the renegade, but they said nothing.

Alvarez walked into the room, cool, dignified, and austere, but his manner
was not calculated to ruffle his superior officer. It seemed rather to
indicate a confidence that the Governor General would punish as was
fitting the impertinence of the intruders from Kaintock. He bestowed only
a single glance upon them, as if his victory over such insignificant
opponents were already assured. The blood slowly rose to the faces of
