absolutely certain as he was of the Virgin Islands, and he told him
to land at villages as he passed along, and bring fishermen off
acquainted with the waters in their locality.

"Dat am de safest way for sure, sar," Dominique said. "Dis chile
know de coast bery well, can pilot ship into town of San Domingo or
any oder port that ships go to, but he could not say for certain
where all de rocks and shoals are along places where de ships neber
go in."

Three days later the Osprey, after sailing along the northern
shore, arrived at Porto Rico and, passing through the Mona channel
between that island and San Domingo, dropped anchor in the port of
the capital. Dominique went ashore with Pedro, and spent some hours
in boarding coasting craft and questioning negroes whether they had
seen the brigantine. Several of them had noticed her. She had been
cruising off the coast, and had put in at the mouth of the Nieve,
and at Jaquemel on the south coast of Hayti. They heard of her,
too, in the deep bay at the west of the island between Capes Dame
Marie and La Move. Some had seen her sailing one way, some another;
she had evidently been, as Frank had expected, cruising about.

Pedro put down the dates of the times at which she had been seen,
but negroes are very vague as to time, and beyond the fact that
some had seen her about a week before, while in other cases it was
nearer a fortnight, he could ascertain nothing with certainty. So
far as he could learn, she had only put into three ports, although
the coasters he boarded came from some twenty different localities.

"I fancy that it is as I expected," Frank said. "They have one
regular headquarters to which they return frequently. It may be
some very secluded spot. It may be up one of these small rivers
marked on the chart--there are a score of them between Cape la Move
and here. She does not seem to have been seen as far east as this.
Of course, she has not put in here, because there are some eight or
ten foreign ships here now. Every one of these twenty rivers has
plenty of water for vessels of her draught for some miles up. I
fancy our best chance will be to meet her cruising."

"The worst of that would be, Major," George Lechmere said, "that
she would know us, and if she sails as well as she used to do, we
should not catch her before night came on--if she had seven or
eight miles' start--especially if we both had the wind aft."

"That is just what I am afraid of. I have no doubt that we could
beat her easily working to windward in her present rig, but I am by
no means certain that she could not run away from us if we were
both free; and if she once recognised us there is no saying where
she might go to after she had shaken us off. Certainly she would
not stay in these waters.

"The question is, how can we disguise ourselves? If we took down
our mizzen and dirtied the rest of our sails, it would not be much
of a disguise. Nothing but a yacht carries anything like as big a
mainsail as ours, and our big jib and foresail, and the straight
bowsprit would tell the tale. Of course, we could fasten some
wooden battens along her side, and stretch canvas over them, and
paint it black, and so raise her side three feet, but even then the
narrowness of her hull, seen end on as it would be, in comparison
to the height of the mast and spread of canvas, would strike
Carthew at once."

"We could follow his example, sir, and make her into a brig. I dare
say we could get it done in a week."

"That might spoil her sailing, and as soon as he found that we were
in chase of him, he would at once suspect that something was wrong.
That would, of all things, be the worst, especially if he
found--which would be just as likely as not--that he had the legs
of us.

"I believe the most certain way of all would be to search for her
in the boats. If we were to paint the gig black, so that it would
not attract attention, give a coating of grey paint to the oars,
and hire a black crew, we could coast along and stop at every
village, and search every bay, and row far enough up each river to
find some village or hut where we could learn whether the Phantom
has been in the habit of going up there. It would take some time,
of course, but it might be a good deal of time saved in the long
run. We could do a great deal of sailing. The gig stands well up to
canvas when the crew are sitting in the bottom, and we could fit
her out with a native rig.

"From here to Cape La Move, following the indentations, must be
somewhere between five and six hundred miles, perhaps more than
that. The breeze is regular, and with a sail we ought to make from
forty to fifty miles a day--say forty--so that in three weeks we
should thoroughly have searched the coast, even allowing for
putting in three or four times a day to make inquiries. The yacht
must follow, keeping a few miles astern. At any rate she must not
pass us.

"At night when she anchors she must have two head lights, one at
the crosstrees and one at the topmast head. I shall be on the
lookout for her, and we will take some blue lights and some red
lights with us. Every night I will burn a blue light, say at nine
o'clock. A man in the crosstrees will make it out twenty miles
away, and that will tell them where I am, and that I don't want
them. If I burn a red light it will be a signal for the yacht to
come and pick me up."

"Then you will go in the boat yourself, Major?"

"Yes, I must be doing something. I shall take Pedro with me, and
perhaps Dominique. We can get another pilot here. Dominique is a
shrewd fellow, and can get more out of the negroes than Pedro can.
Certainly, that will be the best plan, and will avoid the necessity
of spoiling the yacht's speed, which may be of vital importance to
us at a critical moment.

"Call Dominique down. I will send him ashore at once with Pedro, to
get hold of a good pilot and four good negro boatmen, and a native
sail. I think that is all we want."



Chapter 15.

As soon as the dinghy, with Dominique and Pedro, had left the side
of the yacht; the captain, by Frank's orders, set four men to work
to paint the gig black, while others gave a coat of dull lead
colour to the varnished oars. The order was received with much
surprise by the men, who audibly expressed their regret at seeing
their brightly varnished boat and oars thus disfigured.

After about three hours on shore, the dinghy returned loaded with
fruit and vegetables, which Pedro had purchased, and a native mast
and sail. The former was at once cut so as to step in the gig. The
sail was hoisted, and was then taken in hand by one of the crew,
who was a fair sailmaker, to be altered so as to stand flatter.
Half an hour later the new pilot and four powerful negroes came
alongside in a shore boat.

It was now late in the afternoon, so the start was postponed until
the next morning. A few other arrangements were made as to
signalling, and it was settled that if Frank showed a red light, a
rocket should be sent up from the yacht, to show that the signal
had been observed, and that they were getting up sail. They were to
keep their lights up, so that Frank could make them out as they
came up, and put off to meet them.

George Lechmere saw to the preparations for victualling the gig.
Two large hampers of fresh provisions were placed on board, and two
four-and-a-half gallon kegs of water. A bundle of rugs was placed
in the stern sheets, and the boat's flagstaff was fixed in its
place in the stern. The yard of the sail was at night to be lashed
from the mast to the staff at a height of four feet above the
gunwale, and across this the sail was to be thrown to act as a
tent. A kettle, frying pan, plates, knives and forks were put in
forward, and a box of signal lights under the seat aft. Canisters
of tea, sugar, coffee, and all necessaries had been stowed away in
the hamper, together with a plentiful supply of tobacco; and a bag
of twenty-eight pounds of flour, wrapped up in tarpaulin, was
placed under one of the thwarts.

As soon as it was daylight, anchor was got up, and when the yacht
had sailed for seven or eight miles to the west, the gig was
lowered, and the four black boatmen took their places in her. Frank
took the rudder lines, and Dominique sat near him. The sail was
then hoisted, and as the wind was light, the boatmen got out their
oars and shot ahead of the Osprey, directing their course obliquely
towards the shore.

It was not necessary to land at the coast villages here, as it was
morally certain that the Phantom had not touched anywhere within
twenty or thirty miles of San Domingo, and she would hardly have
entered any of the narrow rivers at night. Nevertheless, they did
not pass any of these without rowing up them. When some native huts
were reached, Dominique closely questioned the negroes.

The pilot had, by this time, been informed of the cause of their
search for the Phantom, which had, until they left San Domingo,
been a profound mystery to him. Frank, however, being now fully
convinced both of the negro's trustworthiness, and of his readiness
to do all in his power to assist, thought it as well to confide in
him, and when they were together in the boat, informed him that the
brigantine they were searching for had carried off a young lady and
her maid from England.

"That man must be a rascal," the negro said, angrily. "What do he
want dat lady for, sar? He love her bery much?"

"No, Dominique, what he loves is her fortune. She is rich. He has
gambled away a fine property, and wants her money to set him on his
legs again."

"Bery bad fellow dat," the pilot said, shaking his head earnestly.
"Ought to be hung, dat chap. Dominique do all he can to help you,
sar. Do more now for you and dat young lady. We find him for suah.
You tink there will be any fighting, sar?"

"I think it likely that he will show fight when we come up with
him, but you see I have a very strong crew, and I have arms for
them all."

"Dat good. Me wonder often why you have so many men. Nothing for
half of dem to do. Now me understand. Well, sar, if there be any
fighting, you see me fight. You gib me cutlass; me fight like
debil."

"Thank you, Dominique," Frank said, warmly, though with some
difficulty repressing a smile. "I shall count on you if we have to
use force. As far as I am concerned, I own that I should prefer
that they did resist, for I should like nothing better than to
stand face to face with that villain, each of us armed with a
cutlass."

"If he know you here, he go up river, get plenty of black men fight
for him. Black fellow bery foolish. Give him little present he
fight."

"I had not thought of that, Dominique. Yes, if he has made some
creek his headquarters he might, as you say, get the people to take
his side by giving them presents; that is, if he knew that we were
here. However, at present he cannot dream that we are after him,
and if we can but come upon him unawares we shall make short work
of him."

No news whatever was obtained of the schooner until the headland of
La Catarina was passed, but at the large village of Azua they
learned that she had anchored for a night in the bay five days
before. She had been seen to sail out, and certainly had not turned
into the river Niova.

Touching at every village and exploring every inlet, Frank
continued his course until, after rounding the bold promontory of
La Beata, he reached the bay at the head of which stands Jaquemel.

Every two or three days they had communicated with the Osprey and
slept on board her, leaving her at anchor with her sails down until
they had gone some ten miles in advance. She had at times been
obliged to keep at some distance from the shore, owing to the
dangers from rocks and shoals. The pilot on board would have taken
her through, but Frank was unwilling to encounter any risk, unless
absolutely necessary.

At Jaquemel he learnt that the schooner had put in there a
fortnight before, but neither there nor at any point after leaving
Azua had she been seen since that time. She had sailed west.

The next night, after looking in at Bainette, some twenty miles
beyond Jaquemel, Frank rejoined the Osprey.

The gig was hoisted up, and they sailed round the point of Gravois,
the coast intervening being so rocky and dangerous that, although
there was a passage through the shoals to the town of St. Louis,
Frank felt certain that the schooner would not be in there. The
coast from here to Cape Dame Marie was high and precipitous, with
no indentations where a ship could lie concealed, and the voyage
was continued in the yacht as far as this cape. They were now at
the entrance of the great bay of Hayti.

"I take it as pretty certain," Frank said, as he, George Lechmere,
the skipper, and Dominique bent over the chart; "that the schooner
is somewhere in this bay. She has certainly not made her
headquarters anywhere along the south coast. In the first place,
she has seldom been seen, and in the second we have examined it
thoroughly. Therefore I take it that she is somewhere here, unless,
of course, she has sailed for Cuba. But I don't see why she should
have done that. The coast there is a good deal more dangerous than
that of San Domingo. He could not want a better place for cruising
about than this bay. You see, it is about ninety miles across the
mouth, and over a hundred to Port au Prince, with indentations and
harbours all round, and with the island of Genarve, some forty
miles long, to run behind in the centre. He could get everything he
wants at Port au Prince, or at Petit Gouve, which looks a
good-sized place.

"I should say, in the first place, that we could not do better than
run down at night to the island of Genarve, and anchor close under
it. From there we shall see him if he comes out of Port au Prince,
or Petit Gouve, whichever side he may take; and by getting on to an
elevated spot have a view of pretty nearly the whole bay. Looking
at it at present, the two most likely spots for him to make his
headquarters are in that very sheltered inlet behind the point of
Halle on the north side, or in the equally sheltered bay and inlet
under the Bec de Marsouin on the south. From Genarve we ought to be
able to see him coming out of either of them. It is not above
five-and-twenty miles from the island to the Bec de Marsouin, and
forty to the point of Halle. We might not see him come out from
there, but we should soon make him out if he were coming down from
Port au Prince."

It was agreed that this was the best plan to adopt. It might lead
to their sighting the schooner in a day or two, while to row round
the bay and search every inlet in it would take them a fortnight.
From Genarve, too, a forty-mile sail in the gig would take them
into Port au Prince, which the brigantine might possibly have made
its headquarters. Accordingly, after waiting until nightfall, they
got up sail, and anchored at six in the morning in a small bay in
the island of Genarve. Here they would not be likely to attract the
notice of any ship passing up to Port au Prince, unless, which was
very unlikely, one came along close to the shore.

As soon as the anchor was dropped, both boats rowed to shore.
Frank, George Lechmere, Pedro, and four sailors, with a basket of
provisions, started at once for the highest point in the island,
some four miles distant. Dominique went along the shore with two
sailors, to make inquiries at any villages they came to.

On reaching the top of the hill, Frank saw that, as he had
expected, it commanded an extensive view over the bay on each side
of the island, which was but some six miles across. A village could
be seen on the northern shore, some three miles distant; and to
this Pedro, with one of the sailors, was at once despatched. Both
parties rejoined Frank soon after midday. The schooner had been
noticed passing the island several times, but much more often on
the southern side than on the northern. The negroes on that side
were all agreed that she generally kept on the southern side of the
passage, and that more than once she had been seen coming from the
south shore, and passing the western point of the island on her way
north.

"That looks as if she came from Petit Gouve, or the bay of
Mitaquane, or that under the Bec de Marsouin," Frank said.

"Dat is it, sar," Dominique agreed. "If she want to go north side
of bay from Port au Prince, she would have gone either side of
island. I expect she lie under de Bec. Fine, safe place dat, no
town there, plenty of wood all round, and villages where she get
fruit and vegetables; sure to be little stream where she can get
water."

The watch was maintained until sunset, but, although a powerful
telescope had been brought up, no vessel at all corresponding to
the appearance of the brigantine was made out.

At six o'clock the next morning Frank was again at the lookout, and
scarcely had he turned his telescope to the south shore than he saw
the brigantine come out from behind the Bec de Marsouin and head
towards the west. The wind was blowing from that quarter, and after
a few minutes' deliberation, Frank told the men to follow him, and
dashed down the hill. In half an hour he reached the shore opposite
the yacht, and at his shout the dinghy, which was lying at her
stern, at once rowed ashore.

"Get up the anchor, captain, and make sail. I have seen her. She
has just come out from the Bec, and is making west. As the wind is
against her, it seems to me that he would never choose that
direction to cruise in unless he was starting for Cuba, and I dare
not let the opportunity slip. If he once gets clear away we may
have months of work before we find him again, and as the wind now
is, I am sure that we can overhaul him long before he can make
Cuba. Indeed, as we lie, we are nearer to that coast than he is,
and can certainly cut him off."

In five minutes the Osprey was under way, with all sail set. The
wind was nearly due west, and as Cuba lay to the north of that
point, she had an advantage that quite counter-balanced that gained
by the start the Phantom had obtained. In two hours the lookout at
the head of the mast shouted down that he could perceive the
brigantine's topsail.

"She is sailing in towards the land on that side," he said. "She
has evidently made a tack out, and is now on the starboard tack
again."

"It will be a long leg and a short one with her, sir," the skipper
said. "I think that if we were in her place we could just manage to
lay our course along the coast, but with those square yards of
hers, she cannot go as close to the wind as we can. As it is, we
can lay our course to cut her off."

"It would be rather a close pinch to do so before she gets to the
head of the bay," Frank said.

"Yes, sir, and I don't suppose that we shall overhaul her before
that, but we certainly shan't be far behind her by the time she
gets there. I think that we shall cut her off if the wind holds as
it does now. At any rate, if she should get there first, we should
certainly lie between her and Cuba, and she will have either to run
back, or to round the cape, or to run east or south. I wish the
wind would freshen; but I fancy that it is more likely to die away.
Still, she is walking along well at present."

Even Frank, anxious as he was, could not but feel satisfied as he
looked at the water glancing past her side. She was heeling well
over, and the rustle of water at her bow could be heard where they
were standing near the tiller. Andrews, the best helmsman on board
the yacht, held the tiller rope, and Perry was standing beside him.

From time to time Frank went up to the crosstrees.

"We are drawing in upon her fast," he said, "but she is travelling
well, too; much better than I should have thought she would have
done with that rig. I think she has got a better wind than we have.
She has only made one short tack in for the last two hours."

The captain's prognostication as to the wind was verified, and to
Frank's intense annoyance it gradually died away, and headed them
so much that they could no longer lie their course.

"What shall we do, sir? Shall we hold across to the south shore and
work along by it, as the schooner is doing, or shall we go about at
once?"

"Go about at once, Hawkins. You see we can see her topsails from
the deck; and of course she can see ours. I don't suppose she has
paid any attention to us yet, and if we stand away on the other
tack we shall soon drop her altogether; while if we hold on she
will, when we reach that shore, be three or four miles behind us.
Of course, she will have a full view of us."

They sailed on the port tack for an hour and then came round again.
The brigantine could no longer be seen from the deck, and could
only just be made out from the crosstrees.

"I think on this tack," the skipper said, as he stood by the
compass after she had gone round, "we shall make the point, and I
think that we shall make it ahead of her."

"I think so too, Hawkins. What pace is she going now?"

"Not much more than four knots, sir."
