hay in the sunshine under the blue sky, and with the birds singing
sweetly in the neighbouring trees and bushes, than to be shut up in a
dismal school-room, learning lessons all day long, and continually
scolded by old Mr. Toil. But, in the midst of these thoughts, while he
was stopping to peep over the stone wall, he started back and caught
hold of his companion's hand.

"Quick, quick!" cried he. "Let us run away, or he will catch us!"

"Who will catch us?" asked the stranger.

"Mr. Toil, the old schoolmaster!" answered Daffydowndilly. "Don't you
see him amongst the haymakers?"

And Daffydowndilly pointed to an elderly man, who seemed to be the owner
of the field, and the employer of the men at work there. He had stripped
off his coat and waistcoat, and was busily at work in his shirt sleeves.
The drops of sweat stood upon his brow; but he gave himself not a
moment's rest, and kept crying out to the haymakers to make hay while
the sun shone. Now, strange to say, the figure and features of this old
farmer were precisely the same as those of old Mr. Toil, who, at that
very moment, must have been just entering his school-room.

"Don't be afraid," said the stranger. "This is not Mr. Toil, the
schoolmaster, but a brother of his, who was bred a farmer; and the
people say he is the more disagreeable man of the two. However, he won't
trouble you unless you become a labourer on the farm."

Little Daffydowndilly believed what his companion said, but he was very
glad, nevertheless, when they were out of sight of the old farmer, who
bore such a singular resemblance to Mr. Toil. The two travellers had
gone but little farther, when they came to a spot where some carpenters
were erecting a house. Daffydowndilly begged his companion to stop a
moment; for it was a very pretty sight to see how neatly the carpenters
did their work, with their broad-axes and saws, and planes, and hammers,
shaping out the doors, and putting in the window-sashes, and nailing on
the clap-boards; and he could not help thinking that he should like to
take a broad-axe, a saw, a plane, and a hammer, and build a little house
for himself. And then, when he should have a house of his own, old Mr.
Toil would never dare to molest him.

But, just while he was delighting himself with this idea, little
Daffydowndilly beheld something that made him catch hold of his
companion's hand, all in a fright.

"Make haste. Quick, quick!" cried he. "There he is again!" "Who?" asked
the stranger, very quietly.

"Old Mr. Toil," said Daffydowndilly, trembling.

"There! he that is overseeing the carpenters. 'Tis my old schoolmaster,
as sure as I'm alive!"

The stranger cast his eyes where Daffydowndilly pointed his finger; and
he saw an elderly man, with a carpenter's rule and compass in his hand.
This person went to and fro about the unfinished house, measuring pieces
of timber and marking out the work that was to be done, and continually
exhorting the other carpenters to be diligent. And wherever he turned
his hard and wrinkled visage, the men seemed to feel that they had a
task-master over them, and sawed, and hammered, and planed, as if for
dear life.

"Oh, no! this is not Mr. Toil, the schoolmaster," said the stranger. "It
is another brother of his, who follows the trade of carpenter."

"I am very glad to hear it," quoth Daffydowndilly; "but if you please,
sir, I should like to get out of his way as soon as possible."

Then they went on a little farther, and soon heard the sound of a drum
and fife. Daffydowndilly pricked up his ears at this, and besought his
companion to hurry forward, that they might not miss seeing the
soldiers. Accordingly they made what haste they could, and soon met a
company of soldiers gaily dressed, with beautiful feathers in their
caps, and bright muskets on their shoulders. In front marched two
drummers and two fifers, beating on their drums and making such lively
music that little Daffydowndilly would gladly have followed them to the
end of the world. And if he was only a soldier, then, he said to
himself, old Mr. Toil would never venture to look him in the face.

"Quick step! Forward march!" shouted a gruff voice.

Little Daffydowndilly started, in great dismay; for this voice which had
spoken to the soldiers sounded precisely the same as that which he had
heard every day in Mr. Toil's school-room, out of Mr. Toil's own mouth.
And, turning his eyes to the captain of the company, what should he see
but the very image of old Mr. Toil himself, with a smart cap and feather
on his head, a pair of gold epaulets on his shoulders, a laced coat on
his back, a purple sash round his waist, and a long sword, instead of a
birch rod, in his hand. And though he held his head so high, and
strutted like a turkey-cock, still he looked quite as ugly and
disagreeable as when he was hearing lessons in the school-room.

"This is certainly old Mr. Toil," said Daffydowndilly, in a trembling
voice. "Let us run away for fear he should make us enlist in his
company!"

"You are mistaken again, my little friend," replied the stranger, very
composedly. "This is not Mr. Toil, the schoolmaster, but a brother of
his, who has served in the army all his life. People say he's a terribly
severe fellow; but you and I need not be afraid of him."

"Well, well," said little Daffydowndilly, "but if you please, sir, I
don't want to see the soldiers any more."

So the child and the stranger resumed their journey; and, by and by,
they came to a house by the road-side, where a number of people were
making merry. Young men and rosy-cheeked girls, with smiles on their
faces, were dancing to the sound of a fiddle. It was the pleasantest
sight that Daffydowndilly had yet met with, and it comforted him for all
his disappointments.

"Oh, let us stop here," cried he to his companion; "for Mr. Toil will
never dare to show his face where there is a fiddler, and where people
are dancing and making merry. We shall be quite safe here!"

But these last words died away upon Daffydowndilly's tongue; for,
happening to cast his eyes on the fiddler, whom should he behold again
but the likeness of Mr. Toil, holding a fiddle-bow instead of a birch
rod, and flourishing it with as much ease and dexterity as if he had
been a fiddler all his life! He had somewhat the air of a Frenchman, but
still looked exactly like the old schoolmaster; and Daffydowndilly even
fancied that he nodded and winked at him, and made signs for him to join
in the dance.

"Oh, dear me!" whispered he, turning pale, "it seems as if there was
nobody but Mr. Toil in the world. Who could have thought of his playing
on a fiddle!"

"This is not your old schoolmaster," observed the stranger, "but another
brother of his, who was bred in France, where he learned the profession
of a fiddler. He is ashamed of his family, and generally calls himself
Monsieur le Plaisir; but his real name is Toil, and those who have known
him best think him still more disagreeable than his brothers."

"Oh, take me back!--take me back!" cried poor little Daffydowndilly,
bursting into tears. "If there is nothing but Toil all the world over, I
may just as well go back to the school-house!"

"Yonder it is,--there is the school-house!" said the stranger, for
though he and Daffydowndilly had taken a great many steps, they had
travelled in a circle instead of a straight line. "Come; we will go back
to school together."

There was something in his companion's voice that little Daffydowndilly
now remembered, and it is strange that he had not remembered it sooner.
Looking up into his face, behold! there again was the likeness of old
Mr. Toil; so that the poor child had been in company with Toil all day,
even while he was doing his best to run away from him. Some people, to
whom I have told little Daffydowndilly's story, are of the opinion that
old Mr. Toil was a magician, and possessed the power of multiplying
himself into as many shapes as he saw fit.

Be this as it may, little Daffydowndilly had learned a good lesson, and
from that time forward was diligent at his task, because he knew that
diligence is not a whit more toilsome than sport or idleness. And when
he became better acquainted with Mr. Toil, he began to think that his
ways were not so very disagreeable, and that the old schoolmaster's
smile of approbation made his face almost as pleasant as even that of
Daffydowndilly's mother.

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE




THE SANDPIPER


    Across the narrow beach we flit,
      One little sandpiper and I;
    And fast I gather, bit by bit,
      The scattered driftwood bleached and dry.
    The wild waves reach their hands for it,
      The wild wind raves, the tide runs high,
    As up and down the beach we flit,--
      One little sandpiper and I.

    Above our heads the sullen clouds
      Scud black and swift across the sky:
    Like silent ghosts in misty shrouds
      Stand out the white lighthouses high.
    Almost as far as eye can reach
      I see the close-reefed vessels fly,
    As fast we flit along the beach,--
      One little sandpiper and I.

    I watch him as he skims along,
      Uttering his sweet and mournful cry;
    He starts not at my fitful song,
      Or flash of fluttering drapery;
    He has no thought of any wrong,
      He scans me with a fearless eye.
    Stanch friends are we, well-tried and strong,
      The little sandpiper and I.

    Comrade, where wilt thou be to-night
      When the loosed storm breaks furiously?
    My driftwood-fire will burn so bright!
      To what warm shelter canst thou fly?
    I do not fear for thee, though wroth
      The tempest rushes through the sky:
    For are we not God's children both,
      Thou, little sandpiper, and I?

CELIA THAXTER




FROM "THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT"


Blessed are the poor in spirit: for their's is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are
the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do
hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed
are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in
heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they
shall be called the children of God.

Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths.
But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's
throne: nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem;
for it is the city of the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy
head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and
hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more
than others? do not even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even
as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

ST. MATTHEW, V.




THE LEGEND OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER


    For many a year Saint Christopher
      Served God in many a land;
    And master painters drew his face,
      With loving heart and hand,
    On altar fronts and churches' walls;
      And peasants used to say,--
    To look on good Saint Christopher
      Brought luck for all the day.

    For many a year, in lowly hut,
      The giant dwelt content
    Upon the bank, and back and forth
      Across the stream he went;
    And on his giant shoulders bore
      All travellers who came,
    By night, by day, or rich or poor,
      All in King Jesus' name.

    But much he doubted if the King
      His work would note or know,
    And often with a weary heart
      He waded to and fro.
    One night, as wrapped in sleep he lay,
      He sudden heard a call,--
    "O Christopher, come, carry me!"
      He sprang, looked out, but all

    Was dark and silent on the shore,
      "It must be that I dreamed,"
    He said, and laid him down again;
      But instantly there seemed
    Again the feeble, distant cry,--
      "Oh, come and carry me!"
    Again he sprang and looked: again
      No living thing could see.

    The third time came the plaintive voice,
      Like infant's, soft and weak;
    With lantern strode the giant forth,
      More carefully to seek.
    Down on the bank a little child
      He found,--a piteous sight,--
    Who weeping, earnestly implored
      To cross that very night.

    With gruff good will he picked him up,
      And on his neck to ride
    He tossed him, as men play with babes,
      And plunged into the tide.
    But as the water closed around
      His knees, the infant's weight
    Grew heavier, and heavier,
      Until it was so great

    The giant scarce could stand upright,
      His staff shook in his hand,
    His mighty knees bent under him,
      He barely reached the land.
    And, staggering, set the infant down,
      And turned to scan his face;
    When, lo! he saw a halo bright
      Which lit up all the place.

    Then Christopher fell down, afraid
      At marvel of the thing,
    And dreamed not that it was the face
      Of Jesus Christ, his King.
    Until the infant spoke, and said:
      "O Christopher, behold!
    I am the Lord whom thou hast served,
      Rise up, be glad and bold!

    "For I have seen and noted well,
      Thy works of charity;
    And that thou art my servant good
      A token thou shalt see.
    Plant firmly here upon this bank
      Thy stalwart staff of pine,
    And it shall blossom and bear fruit,
      This very hour, in sign."
