both hurtful to his well-doing and future peace of mind; but unassisted
by prayerful efforts on Louis' part, they could go no further than this;
and as he had not strength of mind to shake off his evil companions, he
soon fell back into much of his idle, giddy habits, and was classed with
some of the worst boys by those of the upper school who had formerly so
unwisely flattered and spoiled him. Oh, had they known how often his sad,
restless, though at times reckless mind, yearned for a little kindness
from them, that he might feel that every chance of retrieving their
esteem had not gone! Once, after standing some time by Hamilton, he
ventured to ask if he were still offended with him. Hamilton coldly
disclaimed any idea of offence, and declining all discussion on the
matter, hinted that Louis' conduct was too disreputable to be noticed.
Louis turned from him with a proud resolve never to speak to Hamilton
again. Hamilton's conscience smote him when he saw him a short time
after in company with Casson and Harris, whispering and laughing in a
corner, at no good, assuredly; but though he inwardly felt that he had
forced Louis, in some measure, to take refuge with these boys, he was
too proud to stoop from his throne of dignity to save him.

That day, when the boys returned from their walk, they entered at the
back of the playground from a lane, on the opposite side of which lay
some fields belonging to Dr. Wilkinson, and close on the edge of the
field nearest to the ditch bounding the lane, were some out-houses,
consisting of a cow-house, stables, and barn. As the lane was public
property, the boys were forbidden to wander beyond the boundary of
their playground, which on this side was a high wall, a wooden door
shutting out all communication with any thing beyond. Notwithstanding
the prohibition regarding this lane, there were now and then excursions
over the wall in the direction of the cottage of an old woman, who kept
a small day-school, and sold bull's-eyes and gingerbread, with other
dainties of a doubtful description, and who was, more than all, willing,
for "a consideration," to perform any hazardous errand for the young
gentlemen. Other sallies of a still more doubtful character occasionally
took place, and Dr. Wilkinson felt sure that his orchard had been robbed
more than once, though by what hands he did not always discover. On this
day the boys had just entered from the lane, and, as the ushers had not
been careful in seeing the door closed, it stood open for some time,
while several of the boys availed themselves of the crowd of their
school-fellows near it to slip out on their various errands to old
Mary Simmons. Louis had been collecting mineralogical specimens during
his walk, all of which he had consigned to the depths of a large green
baize bag which he carried with him. He stopped a few minutes near
the gate to talk about his treasures to Clifton, who had been walking
with him, but the concourse becoming rather greater than Clifton found
convenient, he presently moved away, and Louis was following him, his
bag in one hand and two unpromising-looking stones in the other, when
Casson arrested him with,

"I say, Louis, what a famous bag--lend it us a minute. I'm going to
old mother Simmons's; it would hold half her shop."

"There are stones in it," said Louis, drawing back.

Casson verbally execrated the stones, and, declaring it was of no
consequence, snatched the bag out of Louis' hand and ran away.

Rather startled by this abrupt manner of proceeding, Louis followed
Casson to the verge of the lane, and waited there till he came back.

"I haven't eaten your bag, you see, but I can't spare it till we get in."

"But are the stones there?" said Louis.

"To be sure; what do you suppose I've done with them? What a famous
receptacle! I say, Louis, did you ever see the inside of the stable
over the way?"

"No--I am not very fond of stables."

"But I suspect there's something worth seeing there," said Casson;
and he proceeded to tell Louis, under a promise of the strictest
secrecy, in a manner so exceedingly vulgar and improper that I do
not choose to write it, that he believed that the doctor kept his
winter apples in the loft of that stable, and concluded by hinting
that some of them meant to find them out and help themselves. "We
used to do it regularly at old Stennett's, where I went before,
Louis," he continued. "It's such fun: you must lend us your green
bag, and come with us."

"Oh! Casson, how can you think such a thing of me!" exclaimed Louis,
shrinking back.

The exclamation was so loud that Casson laid his hand upon his mouth
with a muttered angry ejaculation.

"One would think I had spoken of breaking open a house," said Casson.

"It's stealing," said Louis, in a tone of anger.

"Nonsense."

"I tell you, Casson, it is--don't talk to me any more about it--I
wish I had never known you!"

Casson burst out laughing. "What a ninny you are!" he exclaimed.
"You are as easily frightened as a bird with a pop-gun. And now,
I suppose, you will go with this nice little story to some good
friend and make something interesting and romantic out of nothing."

"Is it _really_ nonsense?" said Louis, after a pause. "Tell me,
Casson, truly, did you mean nothing just now?"

"Nothing, upon honor," said the unprincipled boy. "I wanted to see
you horrified."

Louis looked doubtfully at him. "Well, please give me my bag."

"What a hurry you are in!--you must wait till I've unloaded."

Louis followed him to the school-room, but, Casson's crowded desk not
holding all the contents of the bag, he was obliged, notwithstanding his
anxiety, to wait for his property for a day or two, at the expiration of
which time it was returned to him, and borrowed the next day for another
expedition to Mary Simmons.




CHAPTER XX.

  "Open rebuke is better than secret love."


It now wanted little more than three weeks to the holidays.
Sticks for notching were in great request, and "days" cut in
paper were fastened to the testers of the several beds, to mark
more securely the weary time that must elapse before the joyful
breaking-up. Reginald and Louis had jointly decorated theirs
with an elegant drawing of Dashwood Priory, with a coach and
four in the distance, which drawing would remain uninjured till
even the last of the twenty-eight strips of paper had been detached,
when the owners tore the remainder for excess of joy. The subjects
for examination had already been given out, and those who had any
interest at stake had already commissioned Maister Dunn for candles,
and begun to rise early and sit late, or as late us was allowed, at
their various studies. It was with some little dismay that Louis
looked down the long list of subjects for the examination of his
class, for he felt that, though (thanks to Hamilton at first,
and latterly some degree of perseverance on his own part) he had
made some progress during the half-year: his friend Clifton's
indefatigable industry had placed him so far first, that it
would be almost impossible to hope for any advantage.

Hamilton was now busily engaged in the composition of a prize poem
in Latin, besides the many other things with which (to use his own
expression) he found it necessary "to cram himself"; for, however
easy, comparatively, he had found his post the preceding half-year,
he had now competitors sufficiently emulous and talented in Norman
and Frank Digby--the latter of whom had shown a moderate degree of
diligence during the half-year, and now, exerting to the utmost the
great powers with which he was gifted, bid fair, if not to distance
all his rivals, at least to claim the lion's share of the honors
held out.

As Hamilton scarcely allowed himself time to run once round the
playground in the day, it cannot be supposed that even had he
condescended to notice Louis he would have found much time to
attend to him. More than once, however, he looked rather anxiously
down the long table where Louis now sat (Reginald having insisted
on his leaving the school-room and his companions to their fate),
and, apparently satisfied that he was doing something, resumed his
own work. Louis' mind was more than ever occupied now--every moment
was taken up with lessons of one kind or another. The first waking
thoughts, which were formerly, at least, a consciousness of the
presence of his Maker, were now so mixed up with Latin verses,
English translations, French plays, ancient and modern history,
that a very short time sufficed for his cold prayer--and then
poured in the whole flood of daily business, only checked by as
cold a semblance of a petition at night. The former half-year the
case, though similar in many respects, differed in the greatest
essential. Louis was not less diligent than now, but he was more
prayerful; he had not more time, but he used it better; he did not
leave his religion for a few minutes at night and morning, and forget
it for the rest of the day; he did not shut up his Bible, and scarcely
look at it from Sunday to Sunday. He who waits closely upon his God
is sure to be enabled to serve him in the beauty of holiness: and
those who thought at all about Louis could not but be struck with
the wide difference between the gentle, humble, happy-looking boy,
who bore so meekly what was unkindly done and spoken, and the equally
industrious, but fevered, restless, anxious, and now rather irritable
being, who toiled on day after day almost beyond his strength.

The first day of the examination, Charles Clifton and Louis were
walking together, between school-hours, settling the order in which
their labors were to be undertaken. As they turned the corner of
the playground, near the kitchen, they encountered Harris, Casson,
and Churchill, who, with Sally Simmons and her basket of apples,
blocked up a narrow passage between the side of the house and the
kitchen-garden wall.

"Aint they beauties, Louis?" said Churchill, at the sight. The mention
of apples sufficiently disturbed Louis in the present company, and he
made a violent effort to get past Harris, who was, however, so much
engaged in choosing an apple from the basket, that he did not move
an inch. Finding it useless at present to attempt the pass, Louis was
turning back, when Sally offered the basket to him, with "Mathter Louis,
you mutht hide it; I donnoh what mathter would thay."

"There are plenty more where they came from, Sally," said Casson.

"Here'th a nithe one, thir," said Sally, looking in Louis' alarmed
face, and pointing to one of the apples.

"They are not yours to give, Sally," said Louis, stepping back against
the wall. "Harris, Casson, Churchill, don't take them--it's dishonest."

Sally protested in great dismay, that it was only one or two, and
Dr. Wilkinson wouldn't mind.

"You know he would, Sally, or why did you say I was to hide it?"
said Louis.

"Do you mean to tell him you have given away any?" asked Clifton.

"Not she; she knows better--don't you, Sally?" said Casson.

"You are not to be trusted," said Clifton.

"Mathter Louis, you won't be going and making mithchief?" said the girl.

"If he does," ejaculated Harris, "I'll--"

What he would do Louis never heard, for he had by this time freed himself
from the basket and run away, followed more leisurely by Clifton.

"I am sure," he said, when Clifton rejoined him, "that Sally Simmons
ought not to be employed here; she is always doing forbidden things
for the boys."

"If you know of any thing wrong in her, why don't you tell Dr. Wilkinson?"
said Charles.

"The next thing I know of, I shall. But I should get the boys into such
a scrape," said Louis.

"If they are bad boys they deserve it," replied Clifton; "my father
says, if we conceal evil, when we may remove it by mentioning it, we
make ourselves partners in it."

"The boys would call me a sneak if I did," said Louis.

Charles looked at Louis in simple wonderment. "That wouldn't hinder
you from doing what is right, would it? What does it matter what such
fellows as those think or say?"

"Yes, but I shouldn't like to get them into a scrape," repeated Louis,
uneasily.

"Why don't you tell your friend Hamilton of it, and ask his advice?"

"Oh, Clifton! surely you know that Hamilton won't speak to me."

"No, I didn't," said Clifton, in a tone of surprise. "Why not? he used
to be so fond of you."

"He's offended now," replied Louis, looking down.

"He doesn't like me, I know," said Charles; "but he used to be so very
fond of you."

"_Used_--that's long ago," said Louis, with a suppressed sigh.

"Well, but," remarked Clifton, without showing the least curiosity
to discover the cause of Louis' quarrel with Hamilton, "if you can't
consult him, ask your brother."

"I know very well what Reginald would do; he wouldn't think it right
to tell of them, or of her either."

"Then, Louis, make up your own mind."

"It's not so easily done," replied Louis; "oh, Charlie, I wish I were
like you!"

"Oh, why?" said Charles, gravely; "you have a great many more friends,
and are much better liked than I am. I have no friend but you--not that
I care at all about it, but I should think you would."

"Yes; but I wish I _could_ make up my mind. I am not half so happy
as you are, for I cannot make up my mind to do a thing because it is
right. You only think about that and do it at once; and because I have
so many friends, and even care about pleasing those I do not like, I am
always getting into scrapes, and always doing wrong. I think there never
was anybody so bad as I am. I wish papa hadn't sent me to school."

"I like you very much," said Clifton; "and I am sure you have done me
good--on Sunday, at least."

"Ah, it is much easier to know and talk of what is right than to do it,"
replied Louis, sighing very deeply. "Oh, _domum, dulce domum!_ But there
is Reginald, and I must go and ask him a question."

       *       *       *       *       *

For several days after this occurrence, Louis was too busy, and too much
with his brother, to see much of his evil advisers; and very pleased in
having, as he imagined, thus got rid of them. The examination was going
on in earnest; Louis had now nearly regained his old place, and was, on
the whole, favorably reported of: but Clifton was not to be overcome.
Thoroughly prepared, and thoroughly understanding all he had learned,
he kept the first place undaunted by any difficulty, and apparently
unexcited by the crisis; at least, Louis remarked to Reginald, that
Clifton was so cool, he didn't seem to care whether he won or not.
He had a little more color than usual, and the only beauty his face
possessed--his intelligent eyes--wore perhaps a keener and more anxious
expression, but this was not noticed by a casual observer; nor was
the violent palpitation of the heart, when the chances ran so closely
between him and the next, at the close of a two days' struggle for the
mathematical prize. There were few that congratulated him on his almost
unparalleled success; but few that did not respect his ability and
steadiness. Never once, from the first day he came to school, had he
on any occasion incurred the displeasure of his masters; and yet no
one cared for him, for he had lived only for himself.

But to return to Louis. The mathematical contest was finished, and there
was a little lull before the second class would be again called on, and
Louis determined to spend this little interval of leisure in giving a
finishing scrutiny of the history likely to be in demand. Full of his
purposes, he burst into the class-room, where only Hamilton and Reginald
were, the former writing very fast, and the latter looking carefully
over an English essay he had just finished. Louis flew to the shelves
and ransacked them in vain: almost every book he wanted was gone.
At length, in despair, he asked Reginald if he knew who had Rollin's
History. Reginald absently replied in the negative, as he noted down
something in the page he was reading.

"The books are always gone," said Louis, pettishly. "I suppose Charlie
has it. He had it yesterday--he might as well let me have it to-day."

"Trevannion has it, I think," said Reginald.

"You may have mine," said Hamilton.

Louis stood still; he wanted the book very much, but was too proud
to accept the offer.

"It is in my room," continued Hamilton, without looking up.

"Thank you, I don't want _yours_," replied Louis, proudly, walking
out of the room.

As he entered the school-room he confronted Dr. Wilkinson, who, having
given orders for a brisk walk, was inquiring for Hamilton. Louis had
scarcely taken his hand from the lock when Hamilton abruptly opened it
and came quickly out of the room.

"You are the person I want," said the doctor, laying his hand on his
arm. "Hamilton, I want you to come out with me this bright day."

"To-day, sir?" said Hamilton, whose countenance expressed any thing
but delight at the proposition.

"And why put off till to-morrow what may be done to-day so well?"
said the doctor, smiling. "I suppose you have hopes of the weather
making a walk impracticable to-morrow: but I must have you all out,
or some of you will be laid up before you go home."

His eye fell upon Clifton, who was sitting with his elbows on a desk
close by, his fingers pushed through his hair, wholly absorbed in
"_Gibbon's Decline and Fall_." Dr. Wilkinson addressed him twice,
but, producing no impression, he removed one of the props of his
head, and turned his face towards himself.

"What are you doing there?"

"History, sir," said the boy, getting up mechanically, and looking
very much as if he were not pleased at the interruption.

"I hear your name is very high in the list to-day."

"Yes, sir," replied Charles, gravely; and, as the doctor released him,
he settled down precisely in the same attitude, without showing the
least satisfaction at the notice he had received.

Hamilton turned away with an impatient gesture.

"Are you going immediately, sir?" he said. "Can you spare me a
few minutes?"

"I shall be at the garden-gate in a quarter of an hour from this time,"
replied the doctor.

"I will not fail, sir," said Hamilton; and, crossing the room in
immense strides, he flew up stairs, and returned almost immediately
with a large volume under his arm. He made some inquiries of
Trevannion's whereabouts, and, learning that he was in the playground,
went in search of him. He very soon found him, walking briskly
up and down with Norman, making extracts from an old book in his
hand, and questioning his friend alternately. Hamilton and he had
scarcely exchanged a word since their quarrel, and it was with some
surprise that he saw Hamilton present himself, and still more, when
a request was made that he would exchange books.
