policemen would be found, and as in the pursuit they should
probably pass near other stations, their numbers would swell as
they went. When this was settled, the party sat down to the meal.

"How did you come upon them, Shillito?" Caister asked.

"I had been spending the day with the Wilkinsons. I did not start
to ride home till it was rather late, and I was riding fast when,
about a quarter of a mile before I got to my place, I rode right
into the middle of a lot of men on horseback. They evidently hadn't
heard me coming, and were as much surprised as I was.

"There was a general shout of 'Bail up!' and I saw at once what
sort of gentry they were. However, I didn't stop, but in the
confusion dashed through.

"A few shots were fired at me. I suppose they were too surprised to
aim straight. Then they started off after me. I knew it was no use
making for home, for there was only one man there; so I swept round
and made for your place. My horse is a good one, you know, and I
gained on them all except one man, who must have been capitally
mounted, for he gradually crept up to me. He wasn't twenty yards
behind me when he shouted:

"'Stop, or I fire!'

"I pulled straight up and, as he came up to me, let fly at him. He
tumbled off his horse, and I galloped off till I got here."

"What has become of your horse, I wonder?"

"I gave him a cut with my whip, as I jumped off. He cantered away.
Of course they may have caught him, but I don't think it's likely."

"You will find him somewhere about at daylight, I expect. I will
ride Caister's spare horse, now."

For Jim, with one of the hands, had gone out to fetch in the two
horses from the spot where they had been turned loose.



Chapter 14: An Unexpected Meeting.


As soon as it was light the party were assembled and started, Jim
leading the way, at a swinging pace which kept the horses going at
a hand canter. The marks were, for a time, perfectly easy to
follow. Five miles on the tracks led to a shepherd's hut. At their
call, the man came out.

"You had a visit from bush rangers last night?"

"What if I did?" the man replied gruffly. "I can't help where the
bush rangers pay their visits. Yes, they came in here and said they
wanted some supper; and you may guess I did not keep them waiting
long, for they were not in a particularly good temper. From what
they said, three of their men had been killed."

This was already known to the party, as Jim had found three bodies
at a short distance from the house. Two of these had evidently been
carried there from the back window, where they had been killed in
trying to effect the entry. The other had been shot when
approaching to fire the house.

"The captain of the gang was terrible put out, and was a-cussing
and swearing as to what he would do to those as did it. I wouldn't
be in their shoes, if they were to fall into his hands."

"They didn't say anything which would give you an idea as to the
direction they were taking?"

"Not they," the man replied. "You don't suppose they would be such
fools as that and, if they had, you don't suppose as I should be
such a fool to split on 'em. Not likely. I ain't no desire to wake
up, one night, and find the door fastened outside and the thatch on
fire."

"We may as well ride on," Reuben said. "We shall learn nothing
here. The fellow is a ticket-of-leave man, and as likely as not in
league with these scoundrels.

"I wonder what they came here for," he added, as they started
again.

"I tell you, sah," Jim said. "Dat fellow has driven his herd ober
their trail--all stamped out--no saying where they hab gone to."

"We must follow the herd, then," Reuben said. "If we look sharp, we
ought to be able to see the traces where they left them."

Jim shook his head.

"No find," he said decidedly. "Plenty places where de ground am
berry hard, and horse feet no show. Dey choose some place like dat
and turn off; perhaps put rug under horses' feet, so as to make no
mark. Me sarch, sah. Jim look him eyes very hard, but tink no
find."

And so, to their great disappointment, it turned out. They followed
the tracks of the herd three miles, until they came upon them,
quietly grazing; but nowhere could they see any trace of a party of
horsemen turning off. All the party were greatly vexed at the ill
success of their expedition; for all had hoped that they were, at
last, going to overtake the gang who had done such mischief in the
colony.

Reuben was especially disgusted. He had, only the day before,
received a letter from his chief acknowledging the receipt of his
report describing the pursuit of the blacks, and congratulating him
warmly upon his success. The letter ended:

"If you can but give as good an account of the bush rangers, we
shall be indeed grateful to you. As it is, you have more than
justified my selection of you for the post."

Leaving two constables as guards, at Dick Caister's station, in
case, as was probable enough, the bush rangers should return to
take revenge for the repulse they had experienced there, Reuben
rode back to his headquarters, from which he had now been absent
some time. The evening after his return, he called Jim into his
room.

"Jim," he said, "I want your advice as to the best way of finding
out where these bush rangers are quartered. How do you think we had
better set about it? Would it be of any use, do you think, for you
to go among the natives and try and find out? There is no doubt
they know, for they have often acted with the bush rangers. Do you
think you could pass among them?"

"No, sah," Jim said at once. "Me no speak deir way. Me understand
black fellow, me talk dar language, but not same way. They find out
difference directly and kill me. De wild black fellows hate those
who hab lived wid de white men. We hate dem just de same way. We
say dem bad black fellow, dey say we no good."

"But those rascally trackers who led us wrong, that day of the
fight, they were friendly with them."

"Yes, sah, but dey not so very long away from the bush, and always
keep friends wid the others. Meet dem and talk to dem, and tell dem
dey set the white men on wrong tracks."

"Well, Jim, but could not you do the same?"

"No good, sah. Me brought up among de whites, eber since me little
boy. Dey not believe me if I go and say dat to dem. Jim ready to
get killed, if de captain want him; but no good at all him getting
killed in dat way."

"I don't want you to get killed in any way, Jim, and if that's your
opinion about it, we will give up the plan at once. Can you think
of any other way?"

"Me tink a lot about him. Me know de captain want very much to
catch dose fellows, but Jim no see how dat can be done, for sure.
But de best plan me can see is for Jim to go out by himself, and
search de country outside white man's bounds. If he find de track
of horses, he follow dem up. Me know about de way dey ride off
after dey be killing people at de stations. If Jim look, and look,
and look berry sharp he find dar track for sure; and once he find
dem, he follow dem up. Must be water, for sure, where dey live. Dat
good guide to begin with.

"But captain must not hurry; Jim may be long time before he find
dem, dar no saying how long. Captain wish Jim to go?"

"Well, Jim, I don't want you to go; that is to say, I should miss
you very much; but if you could find out the haunts of these
scoundrels, you would be doing me a very great service, as well as
the people of all the stations."

"Jim no care about oder people," the black said. "He care for de
captain, and will go out and try and find tracks."

"Be careful, Jim, and don't get into trouble with them. If you were
to fall into their hands, and they were to find out you were
connected with the police, they would shoot you like a dog."

"Dey won't find out. White man not understand. Black fellow all one
to him. You hab no fear for Jim. Who look after hoss, while Jim
away?"

"I shall appoint one of the policemen as my orderly, Jim, and he
will look after him."

Jim made a contemptuous gesture, to signify that he had little
confidence in the power of any white man to look after Tartar. For
the rest of the evening Jim was occupied in cooking, and in the
morning he was gone.

A week later, Reuben was among the outlying stations again. He had
heard nothing of the bush rangers, and no fresh attacks had been
made by them, since that upon Dick Caister's station.

One evening, just as he had gone up to bed, he was roused by a
sharp knocking at the door of the house in which he was stopping.
The settlers had grown cautious now, and an upper window was
opened, and Reuben heard the questions, "Who is there?" and "What
is it?"

"Is Captain Whitney here?"

"Yes, do you want him?"

"Yes, I want to see him directly."

In a minute, Reuben had opened the door.

"I am Captain Whitney," he said. "What is it?"

"I am glad I have found you, sir. They told me at the next station
you were here yesterday, but they did not know whether you were
here now.

"Well, sir, I am shepherding some twenty miles away; and this
afternoon, just as I had got back to my hut, in runs a black
fellow. It is a lonely spot, and I reached for my gun, thinking
there was more of them, when he said:

"'No shoot, me friend. Me sarve Captain Whitney of de police. You
know him?'

"I said I had heard your name.

"'You know where he is?' the black asked.

"I said I did not know for certain; but that when my mate went in
for grub, two days before, he had heard say that you had been along
there that morning.

"The black said: 'Good. You run and find him.'

"'Thank you,' says I. 'What for?'

"'I find out about the bush rangers,' he said. 'You go and tell
captain dat, tomorrow morning before de day begins, dey attack the
station of Donald's.'

"'Are you quite sure?' says I.

"'Quite sure,' says the black. 'Me heard dem say so.'

"So as I hates the bush rangers like poison, I saddles up and rides
into the station; and when I had told the boss, he said I better
ride and find you, if I could. You would be at one of the stations
this way. I stopped at three of them, and at the last they told me
you was here."

"Thank you greatly, my good fellow. Donald's! I don't know the
name. Where do they live?"

"They have only been here a couple of months," Reuben's host, who
was standing beside him, replied. "They bought that station of
Anderson's. He was a chicken-hearted young fellow, and sold out
because of the bush rangers. There is a man, his wife, and her
sister, I believe. I fancy they have got a pretty fair capital.
They took Anderson's stock, and have been buying a lot more. That's
why the bush rangers are going to attack them."

"I thought," Reuben said, "that Anderson's was not one of the most
exposed stations."

"No, that was what everyone told him, before he sold it."

"How far would you say it was from here?"

"Thirty-five miles," the settler said. "It's ten miles from
Barker's, and I reckon that's twenty-five from here."

"Well, of course I shall ride at once; as there are women there, it
makes the case all the more urgent. I have got my orderly, and
there are two more men at the station, this side of Barker's."

"I will go, of course," Reuben's host said, "and will bring two men
with me.

"You had best stop here for the night," he added, turning to the
shepherd. "You have ridden pretty well thirty miles already, and
that at the end of your day's work."

"Not I," the man replied. "Jim Walsh is not going to be lying in
bed, with the thought of two women in the hands of them murderous
bush rangers. You might lend me a fresh horse, if you have got one.
If not, I must try and pick one up at one of the stations, as we go
along."

"I have plenty of horses in the yard," the settler said.

"Well, let us be off as soon as possible," Reuben put in. "It's
past twelve o'clock now, and we have thirty-five miles to ride, and
to stop at two or three places, so we haven't a minute to lose."

In a few minutes the horses were saddled, and the six men dashed
off at full gallop. At three stations, which they passed on the way
to Barker's, they picked up seven more. There was but little delay
as, the instant the news was told, the men hurried up, saddled
their horses, and rode after the party, who pushed straight on when
they had told their story. At Barker's they were joined by Barker
himself, and two men. Two constables had also been picked up on the
way.

The others overtook them here, and the party now numbered twenty
men. There was a pause to allow all to come up, and to give the
horses breathing time, for they had traversed twenty-five miles at
a rapid pace, with scarce a halt.

Mrs. Barker herself prepared a meal, to which, while the horses got
their breath, their riders did justice. Then they mounted again,
and rode for Donald's.

"It all depends," Reuben said, "as to our being there in time,
whether the man keeps a careful watch. If he does they may not
attack till the doors are opened, and then make a sudden rush and
catch them unawares. If, when they arrive there, they find the
whole house is asleep, they may burst in at once."

"I think they will be careful," Mr. Barker said. "I know Donald is
very anxious; and no wonder, with two women with him, both young
and pretty--quite out of the way, indeed. In fact, he told me the
first day I rode over, he had no idea of the unsettled state of the
district, and wouldn't have taken the place if he had, not even if
Anderson had given it as a gift; and he wrote down at once to some
agent, and told him to sell the place again, for whatever he can
get for it; but I expect there will be some trouble in finding a
purchaser. The district here has had a bad name for some time and,
if Donald had not arrived fresh from England, he must have heard of
it.

"Listen! I thought I heard the sound of firing."

There was a momentary pause, but no one could hear anything.
Nevertheless, they went on at redoubled speed. They were now within
three miles of the station.

Suddenly, on coming over a crest, a faint light was seen ahead. It
increased rapidly, and a tongue of flame leapt up.

"Come on, lads!" Reuben exclaimed. "The scoundrels are at their
work."

At a hard gallop they crossed the intervening ground, until they
were within half a mile of the station, from which a broad sheet of
flame was leaping up. Then Reuben drew rein, for he had outridden
the rest of his party, and it was important that all should ride
together.

"Now," he said, when they were gathered; "let us keep in a close
body.

"If they ride off as we arrive there, do you, Jones and Wilkins,
stop at the station and see if you can render any help. If not,
follow us at once.

"Let the rest keep on with me, straight after the bush rangers.
There is already a faint light in the east. In half an hour it will
be broad day so, even if they have got a start, we shall be able to
follow them. Now, come on."

At the head of his party, Reuben rode at full speed down to the
station. As he neared it he saw, to his satisfaction, that the
flames arose from some of the outbuildings, and that the house
itself was still intact; but as no firing had been heard, he hoped
that it still resisted.

There was a shrill whistle, when the party approached within a
hundred yards. Men were seen to dash out of the house, and to leap
upon their horses.

With a shout, Reuben rode down. He did not pause for a moment, but
dashed past the house in the direction in which the bush rangers
had fled. They were, he knew, but a hundred yards ahead; but it was
not light enough for him to see them, especially after riding
through the glare of the fire. The sound of the horses' feet,
however, afforded an indication; but as there was no saying in
which direction they might turn, he was forced to halt, every two
or three minutes, to listen.

To his mortification he found that, each time, the sound was
getting more indistinct; for the speed at which they had travelled
had taken so much out of the horses, that they were unable to
compete with the fresher animals ridden by the bush rangers, who
were all well mounted, many of the best horses in the district
having been stolen by them. At last the sound could be heard no
longer, and Reuben was reluctantly obliged to give the order to
halt; for he feared he might override the trail.

"It is no use," he said, as he reined in his horse. "They will know
as well as we do that they are out of hearing now, and might turn
off anywhere. It is terribly annoying. We are too late to save the
station, and the bush rangers have escaped.

"However, we will take up their trail as soon as it is daylight.
Indeed, I am expecting every moment to be joined by Jim, who is
sure to be somewhere near, and can perhaps guide us direct to their
hiding place."
