"Lieutenant Seymour is very welcome to Fairview Hall, though I trust it
be not the compelling necessity of a wound which makes him seek our
hospitality again," she said, faintly smiling.

"Oh, madam," said Seymour, softly, yet in utter desperation as to how to
begin, "unfortunately it is not to be cured of wounds, but to inflict
them that this time I am come.  I--I am sorry--that I have to tell you
that--I--" he continued with great hesitation.

"You are a bearer of ill tidings, I perceive," she continued gravely.
"Speak your message, sir.  Whatever it may be, I trust the God I serve to
give me strength to bear it.  Is it--is it--Hilary?" she went on, with
just a suggestion of a break in her even, carefully modulated tones.

"Yes, dear madam.  He--he--"

"Stop!  I had almost forgotten my duty.  Tell me first of the armies of
my king.  The king first of all with our house, you know."

Poor Seymour! he must overwhelm her with bad news in every field of her
affection.  For a moment he almost wished the results had been the other
way.  The perspiration stood out upon his forehead in spite of the
coldness, and he felt he would rather charge a battery than face this
terrible old woman who put the armies of a king--and such a king
too--before the fate of her only son!  And yet he knew that what he had
to tell her would break down even her iron will, and reaching the
mother's heart beating warm within her in spite of her assumed coldness
and self-repression, would probably give her a death-blow.  He felt
literally like a murderer before her, but he had to answer.  Talbot's own
letter, General Washington's command, and the promptings of his own
affection had made him an actor in this pathetic drama.  He had no choice
but to proceed.  The truth must be told.  Nerving himself to the
inevitable, he replied to her question,--

"The armies of the king have been defeated and forced to retire.  General
Washington has outmanoeuvred and outfought them; they are now shut up in
New York again.  The Jerseys are free, and we have taken upward of two
thousand prisoners, and many are killed and wounded among them,--on both
sides, in truth," he added.

"The worst news first," she replied.  "One knows not why these things are
so.  It seems the God of Justice slumbers when subjects rebel against
their rightful kings!  But I have faith, sir.  The right will win in the
end--must win."

"So be it," he said, accepting the implied challenge, but adding nothing
further.  He would wait to be questioned now, and this strange woman
should have the story in the way that pleased her best.  As for her she
could not trust herself to speak.  Never before had her trembling body,
her beating heart escaped from the domination of her resolute will.
Never before had her mobile lips refused to formulate the commands of her
active brain.  She fought her battle out in silence, and finally turned
toward him once more.

"There was something else you said, I think.  My--my son?"  Her voice
sank to a whisper; in spite of herself one hand went to her heart.  Ah,
mother, mother, this was indeed thy king!  "Is--is he wounded?--My God,
sir!  Not dead?"

His open hand which he had extended to her held two little objects.  What
were they?  The bright sunlight was reflected from one of them, the
locket she had given him.  There was a dark discoloration on one side of
it which she had never seen before.  The other was his Prayer Book.  O
God--prayer!  Was there then a God, that such things could happen?  Where
was He that day?  She had given that book to him when he was yet a child.
"Dead,"--she whispered,--"dead," shrinking back and staring at him.

"Would God I had died in his place, dear madam!" he said with infinite
pity.

"How--how was it?" she went on, dry-eyed, in agony, moistening her
cracking lips.

"Fighting like a hero over the body of General Mercer at Princeton.  His
men retreated and left them--"

"The rebel cowards," she interrupted.

"Nay, not cowards, but perhaps less brave than he.  The British charged
with their bayonets; our men had not that weapon, they fell back."

"Were you there, sir?"

"Surely not!  Should I be here now if I had been there then, madam?" he
replied proudly.

"True, true! you at least are a gentleman.  Forgive the question."

"General Mercer and some of his officers sprang at the line.  I had it
from his own lips.  Some one cut the general down; Hilary interposed, and
enabled him to rise to his feet; they were attacked, fought bravely
until--until--they died."

Stricken to the death at least, but determined to die as the rest had
died, fighting, she drew herself up resolutely, and lifted her hand to
that pitiless heaven above her.  "So--be--it--unto--all--the--enemies--"
When had he heard her say that before, he wondered in horror.  She
stopped, her face went whiter before him, the light went out of it.

"Oh, my son, my son--O God, my son, my son--Oh, give him back, my son--my
son!"  She reeled and fell against him, moaning and beating the air with
her little feeble hands.  The break had come at last; she was no longer a
Talbot, but a woman.  With infinite pity and infinite care he half led,
half carried her into the house, and then, after being bidden not to
summon assistance, he sank down on his knees by her side, where she lay
on the sofa in the parlor, crushed, broken, feeble, helpless, old.  With
many interruptions he told her the sad story.  He laid the long dark lock
of hair he had cut from her son's head in her hand.  There was a letter
from George Washington which he read to her, in which, after many tender
words of consolation, he spoke of Talbot as "one who would have done
honor to any country."  He told her of that military funeral, the kind
words of Cornwallis, the guard of honor, the soldiers of the king, and
then he put Talbot's own letter to him before her, and she must be told
of the loss of the frigate.  Kate dead too, and Colonel Wilton.  Alas,
poor friends!  But all her plans and hopes were gone; what mattered
it--what mattered anything now!

"Oh, what a load must those unrighteous men bear before God who have
inaugurated this wicked war!" she cried; but no echo of her reproach was
heard in the houses of Parliament in London, or whispered in the
antechamber of the king, to whom, assuredly, they belonged.

And by and by he left her.  It wrung his heart so to do, but the call of
duty was stronger than her need.  His ship was ready, or would be in a
short time, and he had snatched a few days from his pressing work to
fulfil this task.  His presence was absolutely necessary on the vessel,
and he must go.  Saying nay to her piteous plea that he should stay, and
most reluctantly refusing her proffers of hospitality, after leaving with
her the letters and the pictures, he left the room.  But in the doorway
he looked back at her.  The tears had come at last.  Moved by a sudden
impulse, he ran back and knelt down by her, and took her old face between
his hands and kissed her.

"Good-by, dear madam," he whispered; "would it had been I!"

She laid her thin hands upon his head.

"Good-by," she whispered; "God bless you.  Oh, my boy--my boy!"  She
turned her face to the wall in bitterness, and so he fled.

On the brow of the hill one could see, if he were keen-eyed, the Wilton
place.  There was the boat-house.  There she had said she loved him.  He
struck spurs to his horse and galloped madly away.  Was there nothing but
grief and sorrow, then, under the sun?

The lawyer and the doctor and the minister were with Madam Talbot all
that day, but it was little they could do.  She added a codicil to her
will with the lawyer, submissively took the medicine the doctor left her,
and listened quietly to the prayers of the priest.  In the morning they
found her whiter, stiller, calmer than ever.  She had gone to meet her
son in that new country where none rebel against the King!




BOOK IV

A DEATH GRAPPLE ON THE DEEP



CHAPTER XXX

_A Sailor's Opinion of the Land_

It was a delightful morning in February.  The Continental ship
Randolph, a tight little thirty-two-gun frigate, the first to get to
sea of those ordered by Congress in 1775, was just leaving the
beautiful harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, by way of the main ship
channel, on her maiden cruise, under the command of Captain John
Seymour Seymour, late first lieutenant of the Ranger.  This was the
second departure she had taken from that port.  Forced by severe
damages, incurred in an encounter with a heavy gale shortly after
leaving Philadelphia, to put into that harbor for needed repairs to the
new and unsettled vessel, she had put to sea again after a short
interval, and in one week had taken six valuable prizes, one of them,
an armed vessel of twenty guns, after a short action.  After this brief
and brilliant excursion she had put back to Charleston to dispose of
her prizes, re-collect her prize crews, and land her prisoners.

There was another motive, however, for the sudden return.  From one of
the prizes it had been learned that the English thirty-two-gun frigate
Carrysford, the twenty-gun sloop Perseus, the sixteen-gun sloop
Hinchinbrook, with several privateers, had been cruising off the coast
together, and the commander of the Randolph was most anxious to get the
help of some of the South Carolina State cruisers to go in search of
the British ships.  The indefatigable Governor Rutledge, when the news
had been communicated to him, had worked assiduously to provide the
State ships, and the young captain of the Randolph speedily found
himself at the head of a little fleet of war vessels outward bound.

The departure of the squadron, the Randolph in the lead, the rest
following, and all under full sail, made a pretty picture to the
enthusiastic Carolinians, who watched them from the islands and
fortifications in the harbor, and from a number of small boats which
accompanied the war ships a short distance on their voyage.  Besides
Seymour's own vessel, there were the eighteen-gun ship General
Moultrie, the two sixteen-gun ships Notre Dame and Polly, and the
fourteen-gun brig Fair American; the last commanded by a certain
master, Philip Wilton.  They made officers of very young men in those
days, and mere boys often occupied positions of trust and
responsibility apparently far beyond their years,--even Seymour
himself, though now a commodore or flag officer by courtesy, was very
young for the position; and Governor Rutledge, moved by a warm
friendship of long standing for old Colonel Wilton, and upon Seymour's
own urgent recommendation, had intrusted the smallest vessel to young
Captain Philip.  We shall see how he showed himself worthy of the trust
reposed in him in spite of his tender years.

All of these ships were converted merchantmen, hastily fitted out,
poorly adapted for any warlike purpose, and, with the exception of the
Fair American, exceedingly slow and unwieldy; but the heart of the
young commander filled with pride as he surveyed the little squadron,
which followed in his wake, looking handsome enough under full sail.
It was a great trust and responsibility reposed in his skill and
experience; doubtless it was the only fleet the country had assembled,
or could assemble, at that time; the ships were certainly not as he
would have desired them, but they were the best that could be got
together; and manned and officered by devoted men, they could at least
fight ships of their own size when the time came, and he trusted to be
able to give a good account of the enemy, should they be so fortunate
as to fall in with them.  As for his own vessel, as his practised and
critical eye surveyed the graceful proportions of the new and
well-appointed ship, Seymour felt entirely satisfied with her.  He
regarded with pleasant appreciation the decks white as constant
holy-stoning could make them, the long rows of grim black guns
thrusting out their formidable muzzles on either side, and the lofty
spars covered with clouds of new and snowy canvas.  Everything was as
neat and trim, and as ready, as ardor, experience, and ability, coupled
with a generous expenditure from his own purse, could make them.  He
was satisfied with his officers and crew too.  Seymour's reputation,
his recent association with Paul Jones, the romantic story of his last
successful cruise, the esteem in which he was held by Washington, and
his own charming personality had conspired to render him a great
favorite, and he had had the pick of Philadelphia's hardy seamen and
gallant officers ere he sailed away.  The three hundred and odd seamen
and marines who comprised the crew were as fit and capable a body of
men as ever trod the deck of a ship.  Constant exercise and careful
instruction, and drill and target practice, had made them exceedingly
able in all the necessary manoeuvres, and in the handling of the guns.

Forward on the forecastle old Bentley was planted, surrounded by such
of the older and more experienced petty officers and men as he
permitted to associate with him on terms of more or less familiarity.
Not only the position he occupied, that of boatswain of the frigate,
gave him a vast importance with the men, but his age and experience,
his long association with the captain, as well as some almost
incredible tales of his familiar companionship with certain men of
awe-inspiring name and great renown, with various mighty feats of arms
in recent campaigns, vaguely current, conduced to make him the monarch
of the forecastle, and the arbiter of the various discussions and
arguments among the men, who rarely ventured to dispute the dictum of
their oracle.

"Well, here we are pointing out again, thank the Lord!" he said to his
particular friend and crony among the crew, the carpenter, Richard
Spicer, a battered old shell-back, like himself.  "There is only one
place from which I like to see the land, Richard!"

"And where is that, bosun?"

"Over the stern, as now, mate, when we 're going free with a fair wind,
and leaving it fast behind.  I feel safer then.  A time since and I
felt as if I never wanted to see it again from any place.  To think of
me, a decent God-fearing, seafaring man, at my time of life, turning
soldier!"  It is not in the power of written language to express the
peculiar intonation of contempt which the old man laid upon that
inoffensive word, "soldier."  No one venturing to interrupt him, after
staring at his particular aversion for a few moments, he went on more
mildly, and in a reflective tone,--

"Not but what I have seen some decent soldiers--a few.  There was old
Blodgett, and young Mr. Talbot, ay, and General Washington too!  Now
there 's a man for you, ship-mates.  Lord, what a sailorman he would
have made!  They tell me he had a midshipman's warrant offered him when
he was a lad once, and actually refused it--refused it! preferred to be
a soldier, and what a chance he lost!  Might have been an admiral by
now!"

"I 've heard tell as how 't was his mother that prevented him from
goin' to sea--when he was ready an' willin' an' waitin' to get aboard,"
returned one of the men.

"May be, may be.  The result's the same.  You never can tell what
women, and 'specially mothers, will do.  They 're necessary, of course,
leastways it's generally believed we all had 'em, though I remember
none myself, nor Captain Seymour neither, and he 's a pretty good sort
of a man--let alone me--but they've no place aboard ship.  Now look
what this one did,--spoiled a man that had the makin's of a first-class
sailor in him, and turned him into a soldier!"

"But where would we be in this country of ours now, bosun, if it were
not for the soldiers?  No, no, don't be too hard on this man, Captain
Washington; he 's done his duty, and is doing it very well, too, so I
'm told, accordin' to your own account, matey," replied the old
carpenter; "and soldiers is good too--in their places, that is, of
course," he went on deprecatingly.  "There are two kinds of men, as I
take it, William, to do the fightin' in this world, sailormen and
soldiermen; each has a place, a station to fill, and something to do,
and one can't do t' other's work.  Look at that there blasted marine,
aft there in the gangway, for instance; he's a good man, I make no
manner o' doubt, and he has got his place on this barkey, even if he is
only a kind of a soldier and no sailorman at all."

"Now I asks you, Chips, what particular good are soldiers, anyway,
leaving marines out of the question, for they do live on ships," said
the old sailorman.  "What can they do that we can't?  They can fight,
and fight hard--I 've seen 'em, but so can we," he continued, extending
his brawny arm; "and they can march, too,--I've seen their bloody
footmarks in the snow; but there were sailormen there that kept right
alongside of 'em and did all that they could do.  Oh, I forgot one
thing--they can ride horses, that's one thing I could never learn at
all!  You 'd ought to seen me on one of the land-lubberly brutes.  A
horse has no place on shipboard, no more than a woman, and I 've no use
for either of 'em.  But if this country would spend all its money
buying ships, and man 'em with real first-class sailormen, why, d'ye
see, King George's men could never land on our shores at all.  We 'd
keep 'em off, and then there'd be no use for the soldiers; they could
all go a-farming.  No, give me ships every time, they always win.  I
know what I am talking about; I have been on the shore for a month at a
time until I thought I would turn into mud itself.  No, 't is not even
a fit place to be buried in; 'earth to earth' won't do for me when I
die; I just want to be dropped overboard--there."

"There is one time ships didn't win," said the carpenter, persisting in
the argument, and pointing aft to the low mounds of sand backed by the
rudely interlaced palmetto logs, behind which the gallant Moultrie had
fought Barker's fleet six months before, until the ships had been
driven off in defeat.

"Those were British ships, man," said the old sailor, with contempt.
"I meant Americans, of course; it makes all the difference in the
world.  But as for land--I hate it.  It's only good to grow vegetables,
and soft tack, and fresh water, and tar, and timber, and breed children
to make sailormen out of--why, it's a sort of a cook's galley, a
kitchen they call it there, for the sea at best!  Give me the sight of
blue water, and let me have the solid feel of the deck beneath my feet;
no unsteady earth for me!"
