  course, which is more or less revealed by the air-bubbles of its
  atmospheric engine, as to cause it to hit the enemy ten or twelve feet
  below her waterline.  What the effect of this new war-monster shall be
  is at present in the womb of futurity.  I hope sincerely that the
  world may suffer no greater loss from it than its cost.

  "By the way, I must not forget to tell you that I have grown at least
  an inch since I saw you last, in consequence of having been mistaken
  for the captain of the _Thunderer_!  That the mistake was made by a
  pretty, innocent, sweet, ignorant young girl, with intensely blue
  eyes, does not abate my vanity one jot.  That such a mistake should be
  made by _anybody_ was complimentary.  It happened thus:--I was seated
  alone in the captain's cabin, writing for the _Evergreen Isle_, when a
  party of ladies and gentlemen passed the door and looked in.  They
  were being shown over the ship.  `That,' said the blue-jacket who
  conducted them, `is the captain's cabin.'  `And is that,' whispered
  blue-eyes, in the sweetest of voices, `the captain?'  My heart
  stopped!  U. Biquitous the captain of the _Thunderer_!  I felt
  indignant when blue-jacket replied, with a contemptuous growl--`No,
  miss, 'taint.'  They passed on, but I could not rest.  I rose and
  followed blue-eyes about the ship like a loving dog, at a respectful
  distance.  I tried to find out her name, but failed--her address, but
  failed again.  Then they left, and she vanished from my sight--for
  ever.

  "But enough of this.  Adieu, my dear Jeffry, till we meet.--Yours
  affectionately, U.B.

  "P.S.--I mentioned you to the captain as a friend of mine, and an
  enthusiastic torpedoist.  Be sure you call on him if you should ever
  find yourself in the neighbourhood of the mighty _Thunderer_."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

DESCRIBES A STIRRING FIGHT.

It was late when I folded this letter, about the surprising effects of
which I have yet to speak.

Having been very much overwrought in the hospitals that day, I flung
myself on my bed and fell into a sound sleep, having previously
cautioned my assistant, who occupied a couch opposite mine, not to
disturb me except in a case of necessity.

It could not have been long afterwards when I was awakened by him
violently, and told that a telegram had just arrived summoning me home!
I sprang up and read it anxiously.  There was no explanation.  The
telegram was simple but urgent.  My mother, my sister, Nicholas,
illness, death, disaster of some sort, filled my mind as I huddled on my
clothes and made hurried preparations to obey the summons.  Of course no
inquiries could be made.  The telegram was peremptory.  I crushed a few
things into a portmanteau, and, obtaining permission, left the hospital
without a moment's delay.

The distance to the coast was considerable, but I had ample means, and
found no difficulties in the way.  It is always so in this life--at
least in regard to ordinary things--when one possesses unlimited means.

Now I must pause at this point, and beg the reader to bear with me while
I relate a few things that may appear at first sight overdrawn.  Let
judgment be suspended until all has been told.

There was no difficulty whatever, I repeat, in reaching Varna.  From
thence to Constantinople was merely a matter of a few hours' in an
ordinary steamer.  My personal acquaintance with several European
ambassadors enabled me to pass the lines and travel in the enemy's
country without obstruction or delay.  My position as occasional
war-correspondent of the _Scottish Bawbee_ would have procured me
interviews with many celebrities, but anxiety prevented my taking
advantage of this.

In process of time I arrived at Besika Bay, and here I found the British
fleet at anchor.  Of course I had been aware of its presence there, and
felt some pleasure in contemplating a visit to some of the ships, in
several of which I had friends.  It was with great surprise that I found
the _Thunderer_ among the war-ships assembled in the Bay.  I had never
heard of her having left England, though I had been told that her
sister-ship the _Devastation_ was at Besika.

Remembering the injunction of my friend Biquitous, I went on board the
_Thunderer_, and was hospitably received by the captain.  He had only
time, however, to shake hands and beg me to make myself at home.  There
was obviously something of importance about to happen, for great
activity prevailed among officers and men.  It seemed to my untutored
eye as if they were getting up steam and preparing for some sort of
expedition.  The captain did not invite me to accompany them;
nevertheless I went.  It was not long before the object of the
expedition was revealed.  A monster Russian ironclad, it was said, lay
somewhere "outside."  We were sent to observe her.  In the evening we
sighted her.  There was another Russian war-ship--a frigate--close to
her.  The ironclad was similar to ourselves: a long low hull--a couple
of turrets with a central "flying" structure or "hurricane-deck."  We
made straight towards her.  The bugle sounded and the crew was called to
quarters.

"My dear sir," said I to the captain, "has war been declared between
England and Russia?"

The captain made no reply.  On repeating the question anxiously he
merely said--

"Never mind!"

I was surprised, almost hurt, and greatly perplexed, for the captain was
noted for politeness and urbanity, but of course I retired at once.

Next moment I saw a puff of smoke burst from the side of the Russian
ironclad, and a shot leaped towards us.  Its size was such that we could
trace it from the muzzle of the gun.  Describing, as I thought (for
strange is the power of thought), a rather high trajectory, it passed
over us and plunged into the sea with a swish that sent hundreds of tons
of water like an inverted cascade into the air.  A gush of indignation
filled my breast.  That the warship of a nation with which we were at
peace should fire at us without provocation was more than I could
endure.

"Are you going to stand _that_, captain?"  I asked, with an
uncontrollable gush of indignation at the Russian's audacity.

The captain gave one sardonic laugh, and a shrug of his shoulders, but
vouchsafed no reply.

Hearing one of the officers give some order about Whitehead torpedoes, I
ran to the room where these monsters were kept.  I was just in time to
see one lifted on to a species of carriage and wheeled to the side of
the ship.  Here a powerful air-pump was set to work, and the torpedo's
lungs were filled almost to the bursting point.  Its deadly head--
brought from the magazine--was at the same time attached to its body.
Another instant and a port was thrown open in the _Thunderer's_ side,
through which the Whitehead was launched.  It went with a sluggish
plunge into the sea.  While it was in the act of passing out a trigger
was touched which set the pneumatic engines agoing.  The
screw-propelling tail twirled, and the monster, descending ten feet
below the surface, sped on its mission.  I rushed on deck.  The
air-bubbles showed me that the engine of destruction had been aimed at
the Russian frigate.  In a few seconds it had closed with it.  I could
see that there was terrible consternation on board.  Next moment a
fountain of foam shot from the deep and partially obscured the frigate.
I saw men leaping overboard and spars falling for a few moments, then
the frigate lurched heavily to port and went head foremost to the
bottom.

I stood gazing in a species of horrified abstraction, from which I was
recalled by some of our men running to the side of the vessel.  They
were about to lower the steam-launch.  It was to be sent out as a
torpedo-boat, and young Firebrand, whom I now observed for the first
time, took command.

Just then a torpedo-boat was seen to quit the side of the Russian.  We
were ready for her.  Our largest Gatling gun had been hoisted to that
platform on our mast which is styled the "top."

When within range this weapon commenced firing.  It was absolutely
horrible.  One man turned a handle at the breech, another kept supplying
the self-acting cartridge-box.  As the handle was turned the cartridges
dropped into their places and exploded.  Six or nine tubes, I forget
which, were thus made to rain bullets without intermission.  They fell
on the screen of the advancing torpedo-boat like hail, but quite
harmlessly.  Then I heard a voice within the fore-turret give a command
which sounded like "Extreme depression."  It was quickly followed by
"Fire!" and the _Thunderer_ quivered from keel to truck under the mighty
explosion.  The great 38-ton gun had been splendidly served, for the
monster ball hit the boat amidships and crushed the bow under water, at
the same instant the stern leaped into the air, and she went down with a
dive like a Greenland whale.

Hearty cheers burst from the men in the "top."  These were echoed with a
muffled sound from the men shut up in the armoured hull below--for it
must be remembered that not a soul had been visible all this time on the
_Thunderer_ except the men in the "top" and those who had been sent to
lower the steam-launch.

Apparently rendered savage by this event, the Russians let fly a volley
from their four great-guns, but without serious result.  They had been
admirably pointed, however, for the two outer shots hit our turrets,
deeply indented them, and glanced off, while the inner shots went slap
through the flying structure as if it had been made of pasteboard,
leaving clean-cut holes, which, of course, only made the place more
airy.

Night had now fallen.  The danger of attack by torpedo-boats having been
recognised, both ironclads had let down their crinolines.  But the
captain of the _Thunderer_ had resolved on a--a--what shall I call it?--
a "dodge," which would probably deceive the enemy.  He had an electric
light on board.  Every one knows nowadays that this is an intense light,
which, being thrown on a given point, illuminates it with a glare equal,
almost, to that of day.  After dark the captain shot this light from his
mast-head straight at the enemy, and in the full glare of it our
steam-launch or torpedo-boat was sent out!

I was amazed beyond measure.  Forgetting myself for a moment, I
exclaimed, "Captain, you are mad!"

As might have been expected, the captain made no reply.

The steam-launch carried two torpedoes, each containing 100 pounds of
powder.

"Be careful to sheer off quickly after exploding," said the captain to
Firebrand quietly.

Firebrand replied, "Yes, sir," respectfully, but I heard him distinctly
add, in a low tone, to himself, "I'll run slap into her and blow her to
atoms as well as myself.  _Somebody_ must fail in every action.  It's a
forlorn hope at sea, that's all.--Full steam!" he added aloud to the
engineer.

As the boat rushed away in the blaze of the electric light, the
captain's _ruse_ suddenly dawned on my mind.  The Russian at once saw
the boat, and, with naturally nervous haste, knowing the terrible nature
of such boats, made preparations to thwart her.  Close in the wake of
the boat the _Thunderer_ followed with the intent to run the Russian
down with her ram, which is a tremendous iron beak projecting, below
water, from her bow.  The "dodge" was to dazzle the enemy with the
electric light, and, while her attention was concentrated on the
torpedo-boat, to "ram" her!

"Steady!" said Firebrand, in a deep voice.

Something else was replied by somebody in a deeper voice.

The boat ploughed on its way like a furious hornet.

"Fire!" shouted the Russians.

Instantly, from turret, bulwark, and mast-head leaped livid flames of
fire, and the sea was torn up by bullets, while fearful spouts were here
and there raised by shots from the heavy guns.  Everything was
concentrated on the torpedo-boat.  It was obvious that the dazzling
light at the mast-head of the _Thunderer_ had blinded her adversary as
to her own movements.

"Let drive!"

I heard the order of the Russian captain as distinctly as if I had been
on board his own ship, and was somewhat surprised at its being given in
slang English.

The result was a rain of musketry, which rattled on the iron armour of
the launch's protecting screen as the sticks rattle on a kettle-drum.

"Ready!" said Firebrand, with suppressed intensity.

As the boat drew near the Russian small shot was tearing up the sea like
a wintry storm.  The order having been given, the torpedo-spars were
lowered, so that each torpedo sank ten feet under water.

"Fire!" yelled Firebrand.

Electricity was applied, both torpedoes exploded, and the launch sheered
off gallantly in cataracts of foam.

At the same moment the Russians observed us not ten yards distant,
coming stem on at full speed.  Her turret guns were concentrated and
fired; so were ours.  The crash was indescribably hideous, yet it was as
nothing compared with that which followed a few seconds later.  Our ram,
entering the Russian fairly amidships, cut her almost in two.  We backed
out instantly, intending to repeat the operation.  Well was it for us
that we did so.  We had just backed a few hundred yards astern, and
given the order to go ahead full steam, when the Russian's magazine
exploded.  Our charge had somehow fired it.  Instantly there was a
crashing roar as if heaven and earth had met in chaotic conflict.  The
air was darkened with bursting clouds of blackest smoke, in the midst of
which beams, guns, pistons, boilers, armour-plates, human limbs and
heads were seen hurling about like the debris of a wrecked universe.
Much of this came down upon our iron deck.  The clatter was appalling.
It was a supreme moment!  I was standing on the flying structure beside
one of the officers.  "Glorious!" he muttered, while a pleasant smile
played upon his lips.  Just then I chanced to look up, and saw one of
the Russian fore-turret 85-ton guns falling towards me.  It knocked me
off the flying structure, and I fell with an agonising yell on the deck
below.

"Hallo!" exclaimed a familiar voice, as a man stooped to raise me.

I looked up.  It was my hospital-assistant.  I had fallen out of bed!

"You seem to have had a night of it, sir--cheering and shouting to such
an extent that I thought of awaking you once or twice, but refrained
because of your strict orders to the contrary.  Not hurt, I hope?"

"So, then," I said, with a sigh of intense relief, as I proceeded to
dress, "the whole affair has been--A DREAM!"

"Ah!" thought I, on passing through the hospital for the last time
before quitting it, and gazing sadly on the ghastly rows of sick and
wounded, "well were it for this unfortunate world if war and all its
horrors were but the phantasmagoria of a similar dream."



CHAPTER TWENTY.

TREATS OF WAR AND SOME OF ITS "GLORIOUS" RESULTS.

In process of time I reached the front, and chanced to arrive on the
field of action at a somewhat critical moment.

Many skirmishes, and some of the more important actions of the war, had
been fought by that time--as I already knew too well from the hosts of
wounded men who had passed through my hands at Sistova; and now it was
my fate to witness another phase of the dreadful "game."

Everywhere as I traversed the land there was evidence of fierce combats
and of wanton destruction of property; burning villages, fields of
produce trodden in the earth, etcetera.  Still further on I encountered
long trains of wagons bearing supplies and ammunition to the front.  As
we advanced these were met by bullock-trains bearing wounded men to the
rear.  The weather had been bad.  The road was almost knee-deep in mud
and so cut up by traffic that pools occurred here and there, into which
wagons and horses and bullocks stumbled and were got out with the
greatest difficulty.  The furious lashing of exhausted and struggling
cattle was mingled with the curses and cries of brutal drivers, and the
heartrending groans of wounded soldiers, who, lying, in many cases with
undressed wounds, on the hard, springless, and jolting vehicles,
suffered excruciating agony.  Many of these, unable to endure their
sufferings, died, and thus the living and the dead were in some cases
jolted slowly along together.  The road on each side was lined with dead
animals and men--the latter lying in a state of apparent _rest_, which
called forth envious looks from the dying.

But a still sadder spectacle met my eye when, from another road which
joined this one, there came a stream of peasantry, old men, women, and
children, on foot and in country carts of all kinds, flying from the
raging warriors who desolated their villages, and seeking, they knew not
where--anywhere--for refuge.  Too often they sought in vain.  Many of
these people had been wounded--even the women and little ones--with
bullet, sword, and spear.  Some carried a few of their most cherished
household articles along with them.  Others were only too glad to have
got away with life.  Here an old man, who looked as if he had been a
