
_Given_ it!  Poor Denham! he did not know that, up to that period, he
had never _given_ away a single farthing of his wealth in the true
spirit of liberality--although he had given much in the name of charity.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

DARK DEEDS ARE DONE UPON THE SEA--TOMMY BOGEY IN GREAT DANGER.

"Well, Bluenose, hoo d'ye find yerself to-day?" inquired Supple Rodger
one fine morning, as the Captain sauntered slowly along the beach in
front of his hut, with his hands deep in the pockets of his pilot-coat.

"Thankee, I amongst the middlings.  How's yerself?"

"I like myself," said Rodgers; "how's old Jeph?"

"Rather or'nary; but I dessay he'll come all square after a day or two
in dock," answered the Captain; "I left him shored up in bed with
bolsters."

"So Tommy's slipped his cable, I'm told?" said Rodgers interrogatively.

"Ay, he's off, an' no mistake.  I thought he was jokin', for I heard him
talk o' goin' after Bax some time past, but nothin' more come of it till
yesterday, when he comes to me and bids me good day, and then off like a
galley after a French smuggler.  It's o' no use tryin' to catch him.
That boy'll make his way and have his will somehow, whether we let him
or no.  Ay, ay," said Bluenose, lighting his pipe with a heavy sigh,
"Tommy Bogey's gone for good."

That was the last that was heard of poor Tommy for many a long day on
the beach of Deal.  But as there is no good reason why the readers
should be kept in the dark regarding his movements, we shall follow him
on the rugged path he had selected, and leave the men of Deal to wonder
for a time, and talk, and then forget him.

Having waited as long as his patience could hold out, and no letter
having come from Bax, Tommy at last prepared to carry out his plan.  By
dint of hard labour among the boats at any odd jobs that people would
give him, and running messages, and making himself generally useful to
the numerous strangers who visited that fine and interesting part of the
coast, he had scraped together a few pounds.  By persevering study at
nights he had acquired a fair knowledge of figures and a smattering of
navigation.  Thus equipped in mind and purse he went off to seek his
fortune.

His intention was in the first place to go to London and visit the
"Three Jolly Tars," where, he doubted not, every possible and
conceivable sort of information in regard to shipping could be obtained.

There chanced at the time to be a certain small collier lying in the
downs, awaiting a fair wind to carry her into the port of London.  This
collier (a schooner) was named the "Butterfly," perhaps because the
owner had a hazy idea that there was some resemblance between an insect
flitting about from flower to flower and a vessel sailing from port to
port!  Black as a chimney from keelson to truck, she was as like to a
butterfly as a lady's hand is to a monkey's paw.

The skipper of the "Butterfly" was a friend of Bluenose, and knew Tommy.
He at once agreed to give him a passage to London, and never thought of
asking questions.

Soon after the boy went aboard the wind changed to the south-west; the
"Butterfly" spread her black wings, bore away to the nor'ard, and
doubled the North Foreland, where she was becalmed, and left to drift
with the tide just as night was closing in.

"I'm tired, Jager" (this was the skipper's name); "I'll go below and
take a snooze," said Tommy, "for I've lots o' work before me to-morrow."

So Tommy went below and fell asleep.  The three men who formed the crew
of this dingy craft lay down on the deck, the night being fine, and also
fell asleep, Jager being at the helm.

Now Jager was one of those careless, easy-going, reckless seamen, who,
by their folly, ignorance, and intemperance are constantly bringing
themselves to the verge of destruction.

He sat near the tiller gazing up at the stars dreamily for some time;
then he looked round the horizon, then glanced at the compass and up at
the sails, which hung idly from the yards, after which he began to
mutter to himself in low grumbling tones--

"Goin' to blow from the nor'ard.  Ay, allers blows the way I don't want
it to.  Driftin' to the southward too.  If this lasts we'll drift on the
Sands.  Comfr'able to think on, that is.  Come, Jager, don't you go for
to git into the blues.  Keep up yer sperits, old boy!"

Acting on his own suggestion, the skipper rose and went below to a
private locker, in which he kept a supply of rum,--his favourite
beverage.  He passed Tommy Bogey on the way.  Observing, that the boy
was sleeping soundly, he stopped in front of him and gazed long into his
face with that particularly stupid expression which is common to men who
are always more or less tipsy.

"Sleep away, my lad, it'll do ye good."

Accompanying this piece of unnecessary advice with a sagacious nod of
the head, the skipper staggered on and possessed himself of a
case-bottle about three-quarters full of rum, with which he returned to
the deck and began to drink.

While he was thus employed, a breeze sprang up from the north-east.

"Ease off the sheets there, you lubbers!" shouted the drunken man, as he
seized the tiller and looked at the compass.  "What! sleeping again,
Bunks?  I'll rouse ye, _I_ will."

With that, in a burst of anger, he rushed forward and gave one of the
sleepers a severe kick in the ribs.  Bunks rose sulkily, and with a
terrible imprecation advised the skipper "not to try that again"; to
which the skipper retorted, that if his orders were not obeyed more
sharply, he would not only try it again, but he would "chuck him
overboard besides."

Having applied a rope's-end to the shoulders of one of the other
sleepers, he repeated his orders to ease off the sheets, as the wind was
fair, and staggered back to his place at the helm.

"Why, I do believe it is a sou'-wester," he muttered to himself,
attempting in vain to read the compass.

It was in reality north-east, but Jager's intellects were muddled; he
made it out to be south-west and steered accordingly, almost straight
before it.  The three men who formed the crew of the little vessel were
so angry at the treatment they had received, that they neither cared nor
knew how the ship's head lay.  A thick mist came down about the same
time, and veiled the lights which would otherwise have soon revealed the
fact that the skipper had made a mistake.

"Why, wot on airth ails the compass?" muttered Jager, bending forward
intently to gaze at the instrument, which, to his eye, seemed to point
in all directions at once; "come, I'll have another pull at the b-bottle
to steady me."

He grasped the bottle to carry out this intention, but in doing so
thrust the helm down inadvertently.  The schooner came up to the wind at
once, and as the wind had freshened to a stiff breeze and a great deal
of canvas was set, she heeled violently over to starboard.  The skipper
was pitched into the lee scuppers, and the case-bottle of rum was
shivered to atoms before he had time to taste a drop.

"Mind your helm!" roared Bunks, savagely.  "D'ye want to send us to the
bottom?"

The man sprang to the helm, and accompanied his remark with several
fierce oaths, which need not be repeated, but which had the effect of
rousing Jager's anger to such a pitch, that he jumped up and hit the
sailor a heavy blow on the face.

"I'll stop your swearin', I will," he cried, preparing to repeat the
blow, but the man stepped aside and walked forward, leaving his
commander alone on the quarter-deck.

Bunks, who was a small but active man, was a favourite with the other
two men who constituted the crew of the "Butterfly," and both of whom
were strong-limbed fellows.  Their anger at seeing him treated thus
savagely knew no bounds.  They had long been at deadly feud with Jager.
One of them, especially (a tall, dark, big-whiskered man named Job), had
more than once said to his comrades that he would be the death of the
skipper yet.  Bunks usually shook his head when he heard these threats,
and said, "It wouldn't pay, unless he wanted to dance a hornpipe on
nothing," which was a delicate reference to being hung.

When the two men saw Bunks come forward with blood streaming from his
mouth, they looked at each other and swore a tremendous oath.

"Will ye lend a hand, Jim?" sputtered Job between his clenched teeth.

Jim nodded.

"No, no," cried Bunks, interposing, but the two men dashed him aside and
rushed aft.

Their purpose, whatever it might have been, was arrested for a moment by
Bunks suddenly shouting at the top of his lungs--

"Light on the starboard bow!"

"That's a lie," said Jager, savagely; "use yer eyes, you land-lubber."

"We're running straight on the North Foreland," cried Job, who, with his
companion, suddenly stopped and gazed round them out ahead in alarm.

"The North Foreland, you fool," cried the skipper roughly, "who ever saw
the North Foreland light on the starboard bow, with the ship's head due
north?"

"I don't believe 'er head _is_ due north," said Job, stepping up to the
binnacle, just as Tommy Bogey, aroused by the sudden lurch of the vessel
and the angry voices, came on deck.

"Out o' the way," cried Jager roughly, hitting Job such a blow on the
head that he sent him reeling against the lee bulwarks.

The man, on recovering himself, uttered a fierce yell, and rushing on
the skipper, seized him by the throat with his left hand, and drove his
right fist into his face with all his force.

Jager, although a powerful man, and, when sober, more than a match for
his antagonist, was overborne and driven with great violence against the
binnacle, which, being of inferior quality and ill secured, like
everything else in the miserable vessel, gave way under his weight, and
the compass was dashed to pieces on the deck.

Jim ran to assist his comrade, and Bunks attempted to interfere.
Fortunately, Tommy Bogey's presence of mind did not forsake him.  He
seized the tiller while the men were fighting furiously, and steered
away from the light, feeling sure that, whatever it might be, the wisest
thing to be done was to steer clear of it.

He had not got the schooner quite before the wind when a squall struck
her, and laid her almost on her beam-ends.  The lurch of the vessel sent
the struggling men against the taffrail with great violence.  The
skipper's back was almost broken by the shock, for his body met the side
of the vessel, and the other two were thrown upon him.  Job took
advantage of his opportunity: seizing Jager by the leg, he suddenly
lifted him over the iron rail, and hurled him into the sea.  There was
one wild shriek and a heavy plunge, and the miserable man sank to rise
no more.

It is impossible to describe the horror of the poor boy at the helm when
he witnessed this cold-blooded murder.  Bold though he was, and
accustomed to face danger and witness death in some of its most
appalling forms, he could not withstand the shock of such a scene of
violence perpetrated amid the darkness and danger of a stormy night at
sea.  His first impulse was to run below, and get out of sight of the
men who had done so foul a deed; but reflecting that they might, in
their passion, toss him into the sea also if he were to show his horror,
he restrained himself, and stood calmly at his post.

"Come, out o' the way, younker," cried Job, seizing the helm.

Tommy shrank from the man, as if he feared the contamination of his
touch.

"You young whelp, what are ye affeared on? eh!"

He aimed a blow at Tommy, which the latter smartly avoided.

"Murderer!" cried the boy, rousing himself suddenly, "you shall swing
for this yet."

"Shall I? eh!  Here, Jim, catch hold o' the tiller."

Jim obeyed, and Job sprang towards Tommy, but the latter, who was lithe
and active as a kitten, leaped aside and avoided him.  For five minutes
the furious man rushed wildly about the deck in pursuit of the boy,
calling on Bunks to intercept him, but Bunks would not stir hand or
foot, and Jim could not quit the helm, for the wind had increased to a
gale; and as there was too much sail set, the schooner was flying before
it with masts, ropes, and beams creaking under the strain.

"Do your worst," cried Tommy, during a brief pause, "you'll never catch
me.  I defy you, and will denounce you the moment we got into port."

"Will you? then you'll never get into port alive," yelled Job, as he
leaped down the companion, and returned almost instantly, with one of
the skipper's pistols.

He levelled it and fired, but the unsteady motion of the vessel caused
him to miss his aim.  He was about to descend for another pistol, when
the attention of all on board was attracted by a loud roar of surf.

"Breakers ahead!" roared Bunks.

This new danger--the most terrible, with perhaps the exception of fire,
to which a seaman can be exposed--caused all hands to forget the past in
the more awful present.  The helm was put down, the schooner flew up
into the wind, and sheered close past a mass of leaping, roaring foam,
the sight of which would have caused the stoutest heart to quail.

"Keep her close hauled," shouted Job, who stood on the heel of the
bowsprit looking out ahead.

"D'ye think it's the North Foreland?" asked Bunks, who stood beside him.

"I s'pose it is," said Job, "but how it comes to be on our lee bow, with
the wind as it is, beats me out and out.  Anyhow, I'll keep her well off
the land,--mayhap run for the coast of Norway.  They're not so partikler
about inquiries there, I'm told."

"I'll tell ye what it is, Bunks," said Tommy, who had gone forward and
overheard the last observation, but could not bring himself to speak to
Job, "you may depend on it we're out of our course; as sure as you stand
there the breakers we have just passed are the north end of the Goodwin
Sands.  If we carry on as we're going now, and escape the sands, we'll
find ourselves on the coast o' France, or far down the Channel in the
morning."

"Thank'ee for nothin'," said Job, with a sneer; "next time ye've got to
give an opinion wait till it's axed for, an' keep well out o' the reach
o' my arm, if ye don't want to keep company with the skipper."

Tommy made no reply to this.  He did not even look as if he had heard
it; but, addressing himself to Bunks, repeated his warning.

Bunks was disposed to attach some weight to it at first, but as the
compass was destroyed he had no means of ascertaining the truth of what
was said, and as Job laughed all advice to scorn, and had taken command
of the vessel, he quietly gave in.

They soon passed the breakers, and went away with the lee-gunwale
dipping in the water right down the Channel.  Feeling relieved from
immediate danger, the murderer once more attempted to catch Tommy, but
without success.  He then went below, and soon after came on deck with
such a flushed face and wild unsteady gaze, that it was evident to his
companions he had been at the spirit locker.  Jim was inclined to rebel
now, but he felt that Job was more than a match for him and Bunks.
Besides, he was the best seaman of the three.

"Don't 'ee think we'd better close-reef the tops'l?" said Bunks, as Job
came on deck; "if you'll take the helm, Jim and me will lay out on the
yard."

There was truly occasion for anxiety.  During the last hour the gale had
increased, and the masts were almost torn out of the little vessel, as
she drove before it.  To turn her side to the wind would have insured
her being thrown on her beam-ends.  Heavy seas were constantly breaking
over the stern, and falling with such weight on the deck that Tommy
expected to see them stove in and the vessel swamped.  In other
circumstances the boy would have been first to suggest reefing the
sails, and first to set the example, but he felt that his life depended
that night (under God) on his watchfulness and care.

"Reef tops'l!" cried Job, looking fiercely at Bunks, "no, we shan't;
there's one reef in't, an' that's enough."  Bunks shuddered, for he saw
by the glare of the murderer's eyes that the evil deed, coupled with his
deep potations, had driven him mad.

"P'raps it is," said Bunks, in a submissive voice; "but it may be as
well to close reef, 'cause the weather don't seem like to git better."

Job turned with a wild laugh to Tommy:

