knew too well meant something like a decree of Fate.

"Oh, father!" remonstrated Hafrydda--and Dromas loved her for the
remonstrance--"not even if he is cured?"

"Well, of course, if he is cured, my child, that alters the case.  But
how am I to know that he is cured?--who is to judge?  Our court doctor
knows as much about it as a sucking pig--perhaps less!"

"Perhaps the Hebrew knows," suggested Hafrydda--and Dromas loved her for
the suggestion!

"Ah, to be sure!  I forgot the Hebrew.  You may call at his hut in
passing and take him with you, if he has come home yet.  He's an amiable
old man, and may consent to go.  If not--make him.  Away! and cease to
worry me.  That's the way to get rid of business, my queen; isn't it?"

"Certainly--it is one way," answered the queen, turning to the two
commanders.  "Go, and my blessing go with you!"

"Success attend you!" murmured the princess, glancing timidly at
Dromas--and as Dromas gazed upon her fair face, and golden curls, and
modest mien, he felt that he loved her for herself!

Success did not, however, attend them at first, for on reaching the
Hebrew's hut they found it empty, and no amount of shouting availed to
call Beniah from the "vasty deep" of the chasm, or the dark recesses of
the secret chamber.

Pursuing their way, therefore, the small army was soon lost to view in
the forest.

CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

CROSS PURPOSES AND COMPLICATIONS.

We turn now to another scene in the wild-woods, not far distant from the
Hot Swamp.

It is a thickly-wooded hollow on the eastern slopes of the high ridge
that bounds one side of the valley of the Springs.  Sturdy oaks, tall
poplars, lordly elms and beeches, cast a deep shade over the spot which
was rendered almost impenetrable by dense underwood.  Even in brightest
sunshine light entered it with difficulty, and in gloomy weather a sort
of twilight constantly prevailed, while at night the place became the
very abode of thick darkness.

In this retreat was assembled, one gloomy afternoon, a large body of
armed men, not connected with the searching parties which had been
ransacking the region in the vain duplex search which we have tried to
describe.  It was a war-party under the command of Addedomar the
outlaw--if we may thus characterise a man in a land where there was
little or no law of any kind, save that of might.

It was a strong band, numbering nearly four hundred warriors, all of
whom were animated with the supposed-to-be noble desire to commit theft
on a very large scale.  It is true, they called it "conquest," which
word in those days, as in modern times even among civilised people,
meant killing many of the natives of a place and taking possession of
their lands.  Then--as now--this was sometimes styled "right of
conquest," and many people thought then, as some think even now, that by
putting this word "right" before "conquest" they made it all right! and
had somehow succeeded in abrogating the laws, "Thou shalt not steal,"
and "Do to others as thou wouldest have others do to thee," laws which
were written by God in the human understanding long before Moses
descended with the decalogue from Sinai.

However, as we have said, there was little or no law in the land of old
Albion at the time of which we write, so that we can scarcely wonder at
the aspirations of the band under Addedomar--aspirations which were to
the full as strong--perhaps even as noble--as those of Alexander the
Great or the first Napoleon.

It had been ascertained by some stray hunter of Addedomar's party that
considerable bands of men were ranging the valley of the Springs and its
neighbourhood in search of something or some one, and that they went
about usually in small detached parties.  The stray hunter, with an eye,
doubtless, to his personal interest, conveyed the news to the robber
chief, who, having made secret and extensive preparations, happened at
the time to be on his way to raid the territories of King Hudibras,
intending to take the town of Gunrig as a piece of by-play in passing.

Here, however, was an opportunity of striking a splendid blow without
travelling so far.  By keeping his force united, and sending a number of
scouts in advance, he could attack and overwhelm the scattered
detachments in succession.  He, therefore, in the meantime, abandoned
his original plan, and turned aside to the neighbourhood of the Hot
Swamp.  There he remained in the sequestered hollow, which has been
described, awaiting the return of his scouts.  There was no difficulty
in feeding an army in those days, for the forests of Albion abounded
with game, and the silent bow, unlike the noisy fire-arm, could be used
effectively without betraying the presence of the hunter.

The eyes of Addedomar opened wider and wider as his scouts dropped in
one by one, and his heart beat high with glee and hope at the news they
brought, for it opened up a speedy conquest in detail of more foes than
he had counted on meeting with, and left the prospect of his afterwards
carrying into execution his original plan.

The first scout brought the intelligence that it was not the men of King
Hudibras who were in the neighbourhood, but those of Gadarn, the great
chief of the far north, who had come there with an armed force in search
of his daughter--she having gone lost, stolen, or strayed in the
wilderness.

"Is the band a large one?" demanded Addedomar.

"It is; but not so large as ours, and it is weakened every day by being
sent into the woods in different directions and in three detachments."

"Excellent!  Ha! we will join Gadarn in this search, not only for his
daughter, but for himself, and we will double the number of his
detachments when we meet them, by slicing each man in two."

A loud laugh greeted this pleasantry, for robbers were easily tickled in
those days.

"I also discovered," continued the scout, "that there is search being
made at the same time for some boy or lad, who seems to have
disappeared, or run away, or been caught by robbers."

Again there was a laugh at the idea that there were other robbers about
besides themselves, but the chief checked them.

"Did you find out anything else about this lad?" he asked.

"Only that he seemed from his dress to be a hunter."

Addedomar frowned and looked at the ground for some moments in
meditation.

"I'm convinced," he said at last, "that this lad is none other than the
girl who escaped in the hunting dress of my young brother, just the day
before I returned to camp.  Mother was not as careful as she might have
been at that time, and lost me a pretty wife.  Good!  Things are turning
out well to-day.  We will rout Gadarn, find his daughter and this
so-called lad, and then I shall have two wives instead of one."

The robber chief had just come to this satisfactory conclusion, when
another scout arrived.

"How now, varlet?  Do you bring good news?"

"That depends on what you consider good," answered the scout, panting.
"I have just learned that a large body of King Hudibras' men--about two
hundred, I believe--is on its way to the Swamp to search for his son
Bladud--"

"What! the giant whom we have heard tell of--who gave Gunrig such a
drubbing?"

"The same.  It seems that he has been smitten with leprosy, has been
banished from court, and has taken up his abode somewhere near the
Swamp."

"But if he has been banished, why do they send out to search for him, I
wonder?" said the robber chief.

"It is said," returned the scout, "that a friend of Bladud from the far
East wants to find him."

"Good!  This is rare good luck.  We, too, will search for Bladud and
slay him.  It is not every day that a man has the chance to kill a giant
with leprosy, and a king's son into the bargain."

"I also learned," continued the scout, "that some lady of the court has
fled, and the army is to search of her too."

"What! more women?  Why, it seems as if these woods here must be
swarming with them.  I should not wonder, too, if it was Hudibras' own
daughter that has run away.  Not unlikely, for the king is well known to
be a tyrannical old fellow.  H'm! we will search for her also.  If we
find them all, I shall have more than enough of wives--the king's
daughter, and Gadarn's daughter, and this run-away-lad, whoever she may
be!  Learned you anything more?"

"Nothing more, except that Gadarn intends to make an early start
to-morrow morning."

"It is well.  We, also, will make an early--an even earlier--start
to-morrow morning.  To your food, now, my men, and then--to rest!"

While the robber chief was thus conversing with his scouts, two men were
advancing through the forest, one of whom was destined to interfere with
the plans which were so well conceived by Addedomar.  These were our
friends Arkal and Maikar.

Filled with a sort of wild romance, which neither the waves of the sea
nor the dangers of the land could abate, these two shipmates marched
through the woods all unconscious, of course, of the important part they
were destined to play in that era of the world's history.  The two
sailors were alone, having obtained leave to range right and left in
advance of the column to which they were attached, for the purpose of
hunting.

"We are not much to boast of in the way of shooting," remarked Arkal;
"but the troops don't know that, and good luck may prevent them finding
it out."

"Just so," returned Maikar, "good luck may also bring us within
arrow-shot of a wolf.  I have set my heart on taking home a wolf-skin to
that little woman with the black eyes that I've spoken to you about
sometimes."

"Quite right, young man," said the captain, in an approving tone.
"Nothing pleases folk so much as to find that they have been remembered
by you when far away.  Moreover, I think you stand a good chance, for I
saw two wolves the other day when I was rambling about, but they were
out of range."

Chance or luck--whichever it was--did not bring a wolf within range that
day, but it brought what was more important and dangerous--namely, a
large brown bear.  The animal was seated under a willow tree, with its
head on one side as if in meditation, when the men came upon it.  An
intervening cliff had prevented the bear from hearing the footsteps of
the men, and both parties, being taken by surprise, stared at each other
for a moment in silence.

No word was spoken, but next instant the bear ran at them, and stood up
on its hind legs, according to bear-nature, to attack.  At the same
moment both men discharged arrows at it with all their force.  One arrow
stuck in the animal's throat, the other in his chest.  But bears are
proverbially hard to kill, and no vital part had been reached.  Dropping
their bows, the men turned and made for the nearest trees.  They
separated in doing so, and the bear lost a moment or two in making up
its mind which to follow.  Fortunately it decided in favour of Maikar.
Had it followed Arkal, it would have caught him, for the captain, not
being as agile as might be wished, missed his first spring up his tree,
and slid back to the bottom.

Maikar, on the other hand, went up like a squirrel.  Now, the little
seaman had been told that some kinds of bears can climb while others
cannot.  Remembering the fact, he glanced anxiously down, as he went up.
To his horror he saw that this bear could climb! and that his only
chance would be to climb so high, that the branches which would bear his
weight would not support the bear.  It was a forlorn hope, but he
resolved to try it.

Arkal, in the meantime, had recovered breath and self-possession.
Seeing the danger of his comrade, he boldly dropped to the ground,
picked up his bow, ran under the other tree, and sent an arrow deep into
the bear's flank.  With a savage growl, the animal looked round, saw the
captain getting ready a second arrow, and immediately began to descend.
This rather disconcerted Arkal, who discharged his arrow hastily and
missed.

Dropping his bow a second time he ran for dear life to his own tree and
scrambled up.  But he need not have been in such haste, for although
some bears can ascend trees easily, they are clumsy and slow in
descending.  Consequently the captain was high up before his enemy began
to climb.  That was of little advantage, however, for in a few moments
the bear would have been up with him, had not Maikar, moved by the
consideration no doubt, that one good turn deserves another, dropped
quickly to the ground, picked up his bow and repeated the captain's
operation, with even more telling effect, for his arrow made the bear so
furious, that he turned round to bite it.  In doing so he lost his hold,
and fell to the ground with such a thud, that he drove the arrow further
into him, and a vicious squeal out of him.

At this point little Maikar resolved to vary the plan of action.  He
stood his ground manfully, and, when the bear arose with a somewhat
confused expression, he planted another arrow up to the feathers in its
chest.  Still the creature was unsubdued.  It made a rush, but the
sailor sprang lightly behind a tree, getting ready an arrow as he did
so.  When the animal rushed at him again, it received the shaft deep in
the left shoulder, so that, with blood pouring from its many wounds, it
stumbled and fell at its next rush.

Seeing how things were going, you may be sure that Arkal did not remain
an idle spectator.  He dropped again from the outer end of the bough he
had reached, and when the bear rose once more to its feet, it found a
foe on either side of it.

"Don't shoot together," panted Maikar, for all this violent action was
beginning to tell on him.  "Do you shoot first."

This was said while the bear was in a state of indecision.

The captain obeyed and put another arrow in its neck.  The bear turned
savagely on him, thus exposing its side to Maikar, who took swift
advantage of the chance, and, sending an arrow straight to its heart,
turned it over dead!

It must be remarked here, that all this shooting was done at such close
range that, although the two seamen were, as we have said, rather poor
shots, they had little difficulty in hitting so large an object.

"Now, then, out with your knife and off with the claws for the little
woman at home with the black eyes," said Arkal, wiping the perspiration
from his brow, "and be quick about it, so as to have it done before the
troops come up."

The little man was not long in accomplishing the job, and he had just
put the claws in his pouch, and was standing up to wipe his knife, when
the captain suddenly grasped his arm and drew him behind the trunk of a
tree, from which point of vantage he cautiously gazed with an anxious
expression and a dark frown.

CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

ENEMIES, FRIENDS, SCOUTS, SKIRMISHES, AND COUNCILS OF WAR.

Arkal's attention had been arrested by the figure of a man who suddenly
appeared from behind a cliff not four hundred yards distant from the
scene of their recent exploit.  The stealthy manner in which the man
moved among the bushes, and the earnest gaze which he directed from time
to time in one particular direction, showed clearly that he was watching
the movements of something--it might be a deer or an enemy.

"Evidently he has not seen us," whispered Maikar.

"Clear enough that, for he is not looking this way," returned Arkal.
"He presents his back to us in a careless way, which he would hardly do
if he knew that two crack bowmen were a hundred yards astern of him."

"Shall I shoot him?" whispered Maikar, preparing his weapons.

"He may be a friend," returned the captain.  "But, see! yonder comes
what interests him so much.  Look!"

He pointed to a distant ridge, over the brow of which the head of
Gunrig's column of men was just appearing.

"He is a scout!" exclaimed Maikar.

"Ay, and you may be sure that an enemy is not far off ahead of our
column--unless, perchance, he may be the scout of some tribe friendly to
the king.  Hold your hand, Maikar.  You are ever too ready to fight.
Listen, now; yonder is a convenient hollow where I may get into the
thick wood unseen by this scout, and run back to warn our friends.
Ahead, yonder, is a narrow pass which leads, no doubt, into the next
valley.  Run you, as fast as your legs can wag, get through that pass,
and see what you can see.  In the nature of things the scout is almost
sure to return through it, if he intends to carry the news of our
approach to his people, who are probably there.  You must hide and do
the best you can to prevent him from doing this--either by killing him
or knocking him down.  Be off, we have no time to lose."

"But how if he should be a friend?" asked Maikar with a smile.  "How am
I to find out?"

Arkal paused and was perplexed.

"You must just exercise your wisdom," he replied.  "If the fellow has an
ill-looking countenance, kill him.  If he looks a sensible sort of man,
stretch him out somehow.  I would offer to go instead of you, being more
of a match for him, but I could not match his legs or yours, so it might
well chance that he would reach the pass before me."

