house.  They cared but little about the rivalry between Parrett's, and
the schoolhouse, and were therefore free to exult as Willoughbites pure
and simple, bestowing, of course, a special cheer on their own man,
Riddell, who, though not having performed prodigies, had yet done honest
work for his eleven, and at any rate made one smart catch.

"I tell you what," said Fairbairn, who along with Coates and Porter had
escaped from the violent applause of the schoolhouse and sought refuge
that evening in the captain's study--"I tell you what, I'm getting
perfectly sick of this everlasting schoolhouse against Parrett
business."

"So am I," said Porter.  "As if they need go into the sulks because our
fellows did better than they did!"

"They've brought it on themselves, anyhow," said Coates, "and it may do
them good to have to sing small for once."

"I'm afraid if it had been the other way our fellows would have been
just as much cut up as theirs are," said Fairbairn.  "Upon my word I
half envy you, Riddell, old man, being a Welcher."

Riddell smiled.

"Our fellows certainly consider themselves free to abuse or cheer all
round, without the least partiality.  Listen to them now."

And certainly the hubbub that was going on was a trifle outrageous, even
for Welchers.

Indeed it was so outrageous that Riddell was obliged to ask his visitors
to excuse him for a moment while he went and quieted them.

As he opened the door of the preparation-room, where the house was
assembled, a louder cheer than ever arose in his honour; and then those
who waited in the study heard a general lull in the noise, which
continued in subdued animation after he had left the scene and returned
to his friends.

This casual illustration of the captain's influence in his new house was
quite a revelation to the three schoolhouse monitors.

"Why, what do you do to them to shut them up like that?" asked Coates,
with something like envy in his tones.  "It takes half an hour's bawling
to stop a row like that in our house, and a licking or two into the
bargain; doesn't it, you fellows?"

Riddell laughed.

"They are cricket-mad at present," said he, "and I suppose they're
afraid of having their match against Parrett's stopped."

It was a modest way, no doubt, of accounting for their obedience to his
authority; but whatever the reason might be, it was certain the captain
had no further occasion to interfere that evening.

"There's one comfort about this match," said Fairbairn, after a pause,
"we probably shall not hear any more of that wretched boat-race now."

Whatever induced him to start this most unfortunate topic at this time
of all others?

Riddell, who amid all the excitement of the match had contrived
partially to forget the burden that lay on his spirit, started
uncomfortably at the words, and his face changed to one of undisguised
trouble.  The others could hardly help noticing it.

"No, we're never likely to get at the bottom of it," said Porter; "so
the sooner it drops the better."

"It's very odd, all the same," said Fairbairn, "that there's not been a
single hint as to who did it.  I wonder if, perhaps, we were wrong in
taking for granted it was more than an accident."

This last question was addressed to Riddell, who replied, nervously and
uneasily, "No, that is, yes.  It can't have been.  I'm sure it wasn't an
accident."

His three friends looked perplexed by his sudden confusion and change of
manner, and Porter had the presence of mind to change the subject.

"I hear there's a jolly row on between Silk and Gilks," said he.  "No
one knows exactly why."

"I heard it was a bet," said Coates.

"At any rate they've had a split," said Porter.

"They never did much good while they were in partnership," said Coates.
"Young Wyndham got rather drawn in by them, I heard."

"Rather!" said Fairbairn.  "He was precious near going to the dogs
altogether if old Riddell here hadn't pulled him up."

Riddell seemed to lack spirit to join in the conversation, which
continued without him.

"Yes, the young 'un cuts them dead now," said Porter, "but he's a bit
afraid of them still, I fancy."

"I suppose they could let out upon him about some scrape or other," said
Coates, "and that's what gives them a pull."

"Anyhow, it's a good job he has pulled up," said Fairbairn, "for he's
not a bad youngster.  He's got into the second-eleven just lately, and
is tremendously proud of it.  He's vowed he'll get old Wyndham to come
down and umpire in the match with Templeton second-eleven next month."

All this talk was anything but pleasant for poor Riddell.  Little did
the speakers dream of the connection between the boat-race and young
Wyndham; in fact, the latter topic, as he knew quite well, had been
started on purpose to get over the awkwardness which his own confusion
about the former had caused.

But to Riddell, with that knife burning in his pocket, it was all one
prolonged torture, so that he was heartily glad when at length his
friends rose to depart.

He excused himself from walking across the quadrangle with them, and
said good-night in a spiritless way, very different from the cheery
manner in which he had welcomed them an hour ago.

"I never saw such a rum fellow as Riddell," said Coates, as the three
strolled over.  "Did you see how cut up he got when something was said
about the boat-race?"

"He's a little cracked on that subject," said Fairbairn.  "I do believe,
until the culprit is found out, he considers himself responsible for the
whole affair."

"Well, to judge by his looks he might have been the culprit himself,"
said Porter, laughing.  "Hullo, here's young Wyndham."

"Where are you off to?" asked Fairbairn, with due monitorial solemnity,
of that flighty youth; "don't you know it's nearly eight?"

"Oh, do you mind my going across to Riddell's?" asked the boy; "he'll
think I've cut him if I don't show up.  I've not been to his room for
half a week."

"It's a curious thing he has survived it so long," said Fairbairn,
laughing.  "Mind you are back by 8:30, though, for I'll have lock-up
punctual to-night, while there's so much row going on."

"Thanks, Fairbairn," said Wyndham.  "I say, what a stunning score our
house knocked up in the second innings.  Why, we--"

"Cut off," cried Fairbairn, "and tell Riddell all about it.  Come on,
you fellows."

Wyndham hurried on full of the prospect of a talk over the match with
Riddell.

Just at the door of Welch's, however, he met Silk.

The two had scarcely met since the day of the election, when Wyndham, to
spite Riddell, had joined himself to this bad friend, and yielded to his
persuasion to go down, against leave, to Shellport.

"Oh, young 'un," said Silk, in friendly tones, "you turned up?  I'd
almost given you up for good."

"I'm going to Riddell's," said Wyndham, determined for once to stand by
his colours and have nothing more to do with this tempter.

Silk's face fell, as it always did when Riddell's name was mentioned.
He had imagined the boy was coming to see him, and it did not please him
to find himself mistaken.

"Are you?" said he.  "Come along to my study first, though; I want to
speak to you."

"I can't come, thank you," said Wyndham.

"Can't!  Why ever not?" exclaimed Silk.

"I don't want to come, that's why," said Wyndham, doggedly, and
attempting to move past.

But this by no means suited Silk.

"Suppose I tell you you _must_ come," demanded he, stepping in front of
the boy with a menacing air.

"Please let me go by," repeated Wyndham, making another attempt.

"Not till you tell me what you mean by saying you won't do as I tell
you."

"I mean that I'm not going to your study," said young Wyndham.

"Oh, very well," said Silk, standing back to let him pass.

There was something in his tone and manner as he said the words which
made Wyndham uneasy.  He had made up his mind at all costs he would
break with Silk; yet now he could not help remembering he was at the
fellow's mercy.

So, instead of going on, he stood where he was, and said, rather less
defiantly, "Can't you say what you've got to say here?"

"Oh, of course.  I can easily tell the whole school of your--"

"Oh, hush, please!" cried the boy in alarm; "you promised you wouldn't
tell any one.  I'll come to your study."

Silk, with a triumphant sneer, turned and led the way, followed by his
chafing victim, who devoutly wished he had never thought of coming to
see Riddell at all.

When they were in the study, Silk turned and said, "All I want to say
is, that, I don't choose for you to be going such a lot to Riddell.  I
don't like him, and you'd better keep away."

"Why?" faltered Wyndham.  "It doesn't do you any harm."

"How do I know you don't blab all my secrets to him, eh?"

"Oh, I wouldn't do it for anything.  I promised you and Gilks."

"Bah! what's the use of that?  You go and tell him everything you do
yourself, and of course he knows it means us as well as you."

"No, he doesn't--really.  I've never said a word to him about--about
Beamish's."

"It's a good job you haven't; and you'd better not, I can tell you."

"I won't," said the boy.

"I don't choose to have my concerns talked about to anybody," said Silk,
"I suppose it was he put you up to cutting me."

"No--that is," said Wyndham, "yes, he did advise me not to be so much
with Gilks and you."

"He did?" exclaimed Silk, in a rage.  "I thought so; and you--"

Fortunately at this moment Tucker and one or two other of the noisy
Welchers broke into the room; and in the diversion so created Wyndham
was thankful to slip away.

This, then, was the end of his good resolutions and the hopes they had
fostered!  He was as much in the power of this bad friend as ever--nay,
more, for had he not that very evening been forced to renew the one
promise which kept him from confiding everything to Riddell?

He proceeded dejectedly to the captain's study, his cricket enthusiasm
strangely damped, and the load of his old short-comings heavy upon him.

Riddell, who was pacing the room moodily, stopped in a half-startled way
as his visitor entered.

"Do you want me?" he said.

"No," said Wyndham.  "I only just came across to see you, because I
thought you'd wonder what had become of me."

"Yes," said Riddell, trying to compose himself, "with all this cricket
practice there's not been much chance of seeing one another."

"No," replied Wyndham, whom the very mention of cricket was enough to
excite.  "I say, wasn't it an awfully fine licking we gave them?  Our
fellows are crowing like anything, and, you know, if it hadn't been for
your catch it might have been a much more narrow affair."

"Ah, well! it's all over now," said Riddell; "so I suppose you'll come
and see me oftener?"

"I hope so.  Of course, there's the second-eleven practices still going
on for the Templeton match, but I'll turn up here all the same."

Riddell took a turn or two in silence.  What was he to do?  A word from
him, he felt, could ruin this boy before all Willoughby, and possibly
disgrace him for life.

He, Riddell, as captain of the school, seemed to have a clear duty in
the matter.  Had the culprit been any _one else_--had it been Silk, for
instance, or Gilks--would he have hung back?  He knew he would not,
painful as the task would be.  The honour of the school was in question,
and he had no right to palter with that.

Yet how could he deal thus with young Wyndham?--his friend's brother,
the fellow he cared for most in Willoughby, over whose struggles he had
watched so anxiously, and for whom, now, better resolves and honest
ambitions were opening up so cheery a prospect.  How could he do it?

Was there no chance that after all he might be mistaken?  Alas! that
cruel knife and the memory of that evening crushed out the hope.  What
could he do?  To do nothing would be simply adding his own crime to that
of another.  If only the boy would confess voluntarily!  Could that have
possibly been the object which brought him there that evening?  The last
time they had talked together, even in the midst of his contrition, he
had been strangely reserved about something in the past.  Might not this
be the very secret he had now come to confide?

"How have you been getting on the last week?" he asked, gravely.  "Have
you been able to keep pretty straight?"

"Yes, I hope so," said Wyndham.  "You see, this cricket doesn't give a
fellow much chance of going wrong."

"No; but of course one needs to do more than merely not go wrong," said
the captain.

"What do you mean?"

"I suppose when any of us _has_ done wrong we ought to try to make up
for it somehow."

"Oh, yes, of course," said Wyndham, feeling a little uncomfortable.
"The worst of it is, you can't always do that except by keeping right in
future."

"Supposing you had owed some fellow a sovereign last term, you would
consider that all you had to do was not to owe him any more this term?"
said Riddell.

"No; of course not!  I'd have to pay him, I know," said Wyndham.

"Well, what I mean," said the captain, "is that--that--why, the fact is,
Wyndham," said he, "I'm afraid you have still some old scores you ought
to clear up."

Wyndham looked hard at the captain, and coloured.

"I see what you mean," he said, in a low voice.  "I know you're right.
I wish I could do it."

"You wish!" exclaimed Riddell.  "Wishing will not do it."

Wyndham looked hard at him once more, and answered, in agitated tones.

"I say, Riddell.  Do you know about it, then?"

"I think I do."

At that moment a bell began to sound across the quadrangle.

"That's lock-up; I must go!" exclaimed Wyndham, wildly.  "For goodness'
sake, don't tell any one, Riddell!  Oh what a fool I have been!"

And next moment he was gone.

Riddell continued to pace the room, half stupefied with bewilderment and
misery.

"For goodness' sake, don't tell any one!"  The cry rang in his ears till
it drove him nearly mad.

Poor Wyndham!  What must his state of mind be?  What must it have been
all this time, with that miserable secret lurking there and poisoning
his whole life?  And yet the chance had been given him, and he had clung
to the secret still, and in the face of discovery had no other cry than
this, "For goodness' sake, don't tell any one!"

That evening, so jubilant all over Willoughby, was one of the most
wretched Riddell ever spent.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

AN EXPLOSION OF "SKYROCKETS."

Parson, Bosher, King, and the other Parrett's juniors were in bad
spirits.  It was not so much the Rockshire match that was preying on the
brotherhood, grievous as that blow had been.  Nor were they at the
present suffering under any particular infliction, or smarting under any
special sense of injustice.  Their healths and digestions were all
tolerably good, and the mutual friendship in which they had been wont to
rejoice showed no signs of immediate dissolution.

The fact was, they didn't know exactly what was the matter with
themselves.  They could not pretend that it was remorse for the little
amount of work they had done during the term, for they stoutly denied
that they had done little.  On the contrary, they insisted that they
were being crammed to a shameful extent.

Nor was their conscience reproaching them for their past transgressions.
Of course, they could not help admitting that they had occasionally got
into rows lately, but, as every one knew, it was never _their_ fault.
It had always been owing to some accident or piece of bad luck, and it
was quite enough to get punished for it, without being expected to
reproach themselves for it.

No.  When they came to think of it they didn't see that they had
anything to reproach themselves with.  On the whole, they were more to
be pitied than blamed.  They invariably meant well, but they never got
any credit for their good intentions, while they were everlastingly
getting into trouble on account of their ill-luck!

The fact of the matter was, these virtuous young gentlemen were
suffering from that most painful of maladies--dulness.

They had nothing to do--that is, they had nothing to do but work and
play cricket.  The latter was all very well, but even cricket, when it
means three practices a day presided over by a strict senior, gets to be
a little wearisome.

As for the work--they groaned as they thought of it.  It hadn't been so
bad at the beginning of the term, when Bosher's crib to the Caesar and
Wakefield's key to Colenso's arithmetic had lent them their genial aid.
But ever since Mr Parrett, in the vindictiveness of his heart, had
suddenly started Eutropius in the place of Caesar, and Todhunter in the
place of Colenso, life had barely been worth living.

It was this last grievance which was the special topic of discussion at
an informal tea-party held, about a week after the Rockshire match, in
Parson's study.

The company solaced their wounded feelings with unlimited bloater-paste
and red-currant jam, and under the soothing influence of these
condiments, aided by the watery contents of Parson's teapot, their
sorrows found relief in words.

"I bet anything he pitched on Eutropius," said Parson, with his cup to
his lips, "because he knows nobody ever wrote a crib to him."

"I don't suppose any one could make him out enough," said King.  "It's
awful rot."

"Yes, and Ashley says it's awfully bad Latin."

Parson laughed satirically.

"Jolly lot they care what sort of Latin it is as long as they can do us
over it."

"I believe," said Bosher, "Gilks has a key to Todhunter."

"He has?  Young Telson had better collar it, then," said King, whose
opinions on the laws of property as regarded cribs were lax.

"Bah!  What's the use of bothering?" cried Parson, pouring himself out
his eighth cup of tea.  "If he pulls me up for not doing the beastly
things I shall tell him they're too hard, straight out."

"Tell him it's jolly gross conduct," cried a voice at the door, followed
immediately by Telson, who, contrary to all rules, had slipped across to
pay a friendly visit.

He was welcomed with the usual rejoicing, and duly installed at the
festive board.

"It's all right if I am caught," said he.  "Gilks sent me a message to
Wibberly, and I just dropped in here on the way.  I say, who's going to
lick, you or Welch's?"

"Welch's!" exclaimed the company, in general contempt.  "It's like their
cheek to challenge us.  We mean to give them a lesson."

"Mind you do," said Telson, "or it'll be jolly rough on Parrett's.  No
end of a poor show you made at the Rockshire."

"Look here, Telson," said Parson, gravely, "suppose we don't talk about
that.  We were just wondering if Gilks had got a key to Todhunter
somewhere."

Telson laughed.

"Wonder if he hadn't!  He's got more cribs than school books, I think."

"I say," said King, most persuasively, "could you collar it, do you
think, old man!"

"Eh?  No," said Telson; "I draw the line at that sort of thing, you
know."

"Well, then," said King, evidently in a state of desperate mental
agitation, "could you ever find out the answer for Number 13 in Exercise
8, and let me know it in the morning?  I'd be awfully obliged."

Telson said he would see, whereat King was most profuse in his
gratitude, and Telson received several other commissions of a similar
nature.

These little matters of business being satisfactorily settled, the
company proceeded to the discussion of more general topics.

"Fearful slow term this," said Parson, with a yawn.

"Yes," said Telson, spreading a piece of bread with about a quarter-of-
an-inch layer of jam; "we're somehow done out of everything this term."

"Yes.  We can't go out on the river; we can't go into town; we can't go
and have a lark in Welch's; you can't come over to see us--"

"No; that's a howling shame!" said Telson.

"We can't do anything, in fact," continued Parson (now at cup Number 9).
"Why, we haven't had a spree for weeks."

"You seemed to think my diary was a spree," said Bosher, meekly.

There was a general laugh at this.

"By the way, have you got it here?"

"No fear!  I'll take good care you don't see it again, you cads!"

"Eh?  By the way, that reminds me we never paid Bosher out for being a
Radical, you fellows," said Parson.

"Oh, no--oh, yes, you did!" cried Bosher.  "I apologise, you fellows.
I'll let you see the diary, you know, some day.  Really, I'm not a
Radical."

Fortunately for Bosher, the political excitement at Willoughby had quite
worn away, so that no one now felt it his duty to execute the sentence
of the law upon him and, after being made to apologise on his knees to
each of the company in turn, he was solemnly let off.

"You see," said Parson, returning to the point, "we've been up before
Parrett twice this term; that's the mischief.  We might have chanced a
spree of some sort, only if we get pulled up again he may expel us."

There was some force in this argument, and it was generally agreed it
would be better for Willoughby that the risk of a calamity like this
should not be incurred.

"Fact is," said Telson, cutting another slice of bread, "Willoughby's
going to the dogs as hard as it can.  The seniors in our house are down
on you if you do anything.  I even got pulled up the other day for
having a duel with young Payne with elastics.  Awful spree it was!  We
gave one another six yards, and six shots each.  I got on to his face
four times, and once on his ear, and he only hit me twice.  One of mine
was right in his eye, and there was a shindy made, and I got sixty lines
from Fairbairn."

"What a frightful shame!" cried the company.  "Yes," said King; "and
it's just as bad here.  The new monitors pull you up for everything.
You can't even chuck boots about in the passage but they are down on
you.  It was bad enough when Game and that lot were monitors, but ever
since they've been turned out and the new chaps stuck in it's worse."

"And they say it's just as bad in Welch's," said Wakefield.  "You know,"
said Parson, profoundly, pouring himself out a fresh cup--"you know, if
Riddell and Bloomfield ever took it into their heads to pull together,
we'd have an awful time of it."

The bare possibility of such a calamity was enough to sober even the
wildest spirit present.

