guide, he now felt as if he had lost a friend.  When his mind was
capable of connected thought he dwelt on the unfortunate man's kindly,
modest, and bold disposition, and especially on the incidents of the
previous night, when they two had lain side by side like brothers on
their hard couch.

At last he rose, and, with a feeling of dead weight crushing his spirit
began to think of continuing his descent.  He felt that, although there
was no hope of rescuing life, still no time should be lost in rousing
the guides of Chamouni and recovering, if possible, the remains.

Other thoughts now came upon him with a rush.  He was still high up
among the great cliffs, and alone!  The vale of Chamouni was still far
distant, and he was bewildered as to his route, for, in whatever
direction he turned, nothing met his eye save wildly-riven glaciers or
jagged cliffs and peaks.  He stood in the midst of a scene of savage
grandeur, which corresponded somewhat with his feelings.

His knowledge of ice-craft, if we may use the expression, was by that
time considerable, but he felt that it was not sufficient for the work
that lay before him; besides, what knowledge he possessed could not make
up for the want of a companion and a rope, while, to add to his
distress, weakness, resulting partly from hunger, began to tell on him.

Perhaps it was well that such thoughts interfered with those that
unmanned him, for they served to rouse his spirit and nerve him to
exertion.  Feeling that his life, under God, depended on the wisdom,
vigour, and promptitude of his actions during the next few hours, he
raised his eyes upward for a moment, and, perhaps for the first time in
his life, asked help and guidance of his Creator, with the feeling
strong upon him that help and guidance were sorely needed.

Almost at the commencement of his descent an event occurred which taught
him the necessity of extreme caution.  This was the slipping of his axe.
He had left the fatal crevasse only a few hundred yards behind him,
when he came to a fracture in the ice that rendered it impossible to
advance in that direction any longer; he therefore turned aside, but was
met by a snow slope which terminated in another yawning crevasse.  While
standing on the top of this, endeavouring to make up his mind as to the
best route to be followed, he chanced to swing his axe carelessly and
let it fall.  Instantly it turned over the edge, and shot like an arrow
down the slope.  He was ice-man enough to know that the loss of his axe
in such circumstances was equivalent to the signing of his death-warrant
and his face flushed with the gush of feeling that resulted from the
accident.  Fortunately, the head of the weapon caught on a lamp of ice
just at the edge of the crevasse, and the handle hung over it.
Something akin to desperation now took possession of the youth.  The
slope _was_ far too steep to slide down.  Not having his axe, it was
impossible to cut the necessary steps.  In any case it was excessively
dangerous, for, although the snow was not new, it lay on such an incline
that the least weight on it might set it in motion, in which case
inevitable death would have been the result.  The case was too critical
to admit of delay or thought.  At all hazards the axe must be recovered.
He therefore lay down with his face to the slope, and began to kick
foot-holds with the toe of his boots.  It was exceedingly slow and
laborious work, for he dared not to kick with all his force, lest he
should lose his balance, and, indeed, he only retained it by thrusting
both arms firmly into the upper holes and fixing one foot deep in a
lower hole, while with the other he cautiously kicked each new step in
succession.  At last, after toiling steadily thus for two hours, he
regained his axe.

The grip with which he seized the handle, and the tender feeling with
which he afterwards laid it on his shoulder, created in him a new idea
as to the strange affection with which man can be brought to regard
inanimate objects, and the fervency with which he condemned his former
flippancy, and vowed never more to go out on the high Alps alone, formed
a striking commentary on the adage, "Experience teaches fools!"

For some time after this Lewis advanced with both speed and caution.  At
each point of vantage that he reached he made a rapid and careful survey
of all the ground before him, decided on the exact route which he should
take, as far as the eye could range, and then refused every temptation
to deviate from it save when insurmountable obstacles presented
themselves in the shape of unbridged crevasses or sheer ice-precipices.
Such obstacles were painfully numerous, but by indomitable perseverance,
and sometimes by a desperate venture, he overcame them.

Once he got involved in a succession of crevasses which ran into each
other, so that he found himself at last walking on the edge of a wedge
of ice not a foot broad, with unfathomable abysses on either side.  The
wedge terminated at last in a thin edge with a deep crevasse beyond.  He
was about to retrace his steps--for the tenth time in that place--when
it struck him that if he could only reach the other side of the crevasse
on his right, he might gain a level patch of ice that appeared to
communicate with the sounder part of the glacier beyond.  He paused and
drew his breath.  It was not much of a leap.  In ordinary circumstances
he could have bounded over it like a chamois, but he was weak now from
hunger and fatigue; besides which, the wedge on which he stood was
rotten, and might yield to his bound, while the opposite edge seemed
insecure and might fail him, like the mass that had proved fatal to Le
Croix.

He felt the venture to be desperate, but the way before him was yet very
long, and the day was declining.  Screwing up his courage he sprang
over, and a powerful shudder shook his frame when he alighted safe on
the other side.

Farther down the glacier he came to a level stretch, and began to walk
with greater speed, neglecting for a little the precaution of driving
the end of his axe-handle into the snow in front at each step.  The
result was, that he stepped suddenly on the snow that concealed a narrow
crevasse.  It sank at once, sending something like a galvanic shock
through his frame.  The shock effected what his tired muscles might have
failed to accomplish.  It caused him to fling himself backward with
cat-like agility, and thus he escaped narrowly.  It is needless to say
that thereafter he proceeded with a degree of care and caution that
might have done credit even to a trained mountaineer.

At last Lewis found it necessary to quit the glacier and scale the
mountains by way of a pass which led into the gorge from which he hoped
to reach the vale of Chamouni.  He was in great perplexity here, for,
the aspect of the country being unfamiliar to his eye, he feared that he
must have lost his way.  Nothing but decision, however, and prompt
action could serve him now.  To have vacillated or retraced part of his
steps, would have involved his spending a second night among the icy
solitudes without shelter; and this he felt, fatigued and fasting as he
was, would have been quite beyond his powers of endurance.  He therefore
crossed the bergschrund, or crevasse between the glacier and the cliffs,
on a snow-bridge, faced the mountain-side once more, and, toiling
upwards, reached the summit of the pass a little before sunset.
Fortunately the weather continued fine, and the country below appeared
much less rugged than that over which he had passed, but he had not yet
got clear of difficulties.  Just below him lay the longest ice-slope, or
couloir, he had hitherto encountered.  The snow had been completely
swept off its surface, and it bore evidence of being the channel down
which rushed the boulders and obelisks of ice that strewed the plain
below.  To reach that plain by any other route would have involved a
circuit of unknown extent.  The risk was great but the danger of delay
was greater.  He swung the heavy axe round his head, and began at once
the tedious process of cutting steps.  Being an apt scholar, he had
profited well from the lessons taught by Le Croix and others.  Quick,
yet measured and firm, was each stroke.  A forced calmness rested on his
face, for, while the ice-blocks above, apparently nodding to their fall,
warned him to make haste, the fear of slipping a foot, or losing
balance, compelled him to be very cautious.  In such a case, a rope
round the waist and a friend above would have been of inestimable value.

When about two-thirds of the way down, the exhausted youth was forced to
stop for a few seconds to rest.  Just then several pieces of ice, the
size of a man's head, rushed down the couloir and dashed close past him.
They served to show the usual direction of an avalanche.  Fearing they
were the prelude to something worse, he quickly cut his way to the side
of the couloir.  He was not a moment too soon.  Glancing up in alarm, he
saw the foundations of one of the largest ice-masses give way.  The top
bent over slowly at first, then fell forward with a crash and broke into
smaller fragments, which dashed like lightning down the slope, leaping
from side to side, and carrying huge rocks and masses of _debris_ to the
plain with horrible din.

Poor Lewis felt his spirit and his body shrink.  He had, however, chosen
his position well.  Nothing save a cloud of dust and snow reached him,
but the part of the slope down which he had passed was swept clean as
with the besom of destruction.  It was an awful ordeal for one so young
and inexperienced, for the risk had to be encountered again.  "The
sooner the better," thought he, and immediately swayed aloft his axe
again, lifting, as he did so, his heart to his Maker for the second time
that day.  A few minutes more, and he stood at the foot of the couloir.

Without a moment's pause he hurried on, and finally reached the lower
slopes of the mountains.  Here, to his inexpressible joy and
thankfulness, he fell in with a sheep-track, and, following it up, was
soon on the high-road of the valley.  But it was not till far on in the
night that he reached Chamouni, scarce able to drag himself along.

He went straight to the Bureau of Guides, where a profound sensation was
created by the sad tidings which he brought.  Antoine Grennon happened
to be there, and to him Lewis told his sad tale, at the same time
eagerly suggesting that an immediate search should be made for the body,
and offering to go back at once to guide them to the scene of the
accident.  Antoine looked earnestly in the youth's face.

"Ah, Monsieur," he said, shaking his head, "you are not fit to guide any
one to-night.  Besides, I know the place well.  If poor Le Croix has
fallen into that crevasse, he is now past all human aid."

"But why not start at once?" said Lewis, anxiously, "if there is but the
merest vestige of a chance--"

"There is no chance, Monsieur, if your description is correct; besides,
no man could find the spot in a dark night.  But rest assured that we
will not fail to do our duty to our comrade.  A party will start off
within an hour, proceed as far as is possible during the night, and, at
the first gleam of day, we will push up the mountains.  We need no one
to guide us, but you need rest.  Go, in the morning you may be able to
follow us."

We need scarcely say that the search was unavailing.  The body of the
unfortunate hunter was never recovered.  In all probability it still
lies entombed in the ice of the great glacier.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A MYSTERY CLEARED UP.

"Is Nita unwell, Emma?" asked Lewis early one morning, not long after
the sad event narrated in the last chapter.

"I think not.  She is merely depressed, as we all are, by the melancholy
death of poor Le Croix."

"I can well believe it," returned Lewis.  "Nevertheless, it seems to me
that her careworn expression and deep despondency cannot be accounted
for by that event."

"You know that her father left last week very suddenly," said Emma.
"Perhaps there may be domestic affairs that weigh heavily on her.  I
know not, for she never refers to her family or kindred.  The only time
I ventured to do so she appeared unhappy, and quickly changed the
subject."

The cousins were sauntering near their hotel and observed Dr Lawrence
hurry from the front door.

"Hallo!  Lawrence," called out Lewis.

"Ah! the very man I want," exclaimed the Doctor, hastening to join them,
"do you know that Miss Horetzki is ill?"

"How strange that we should just this moment have referred to her
looking ill!  Not seriously ill, I trust," said Emma, with a troubled
look in her sympathetic eyes.

"I hope not, but her case puzzles me more than any that I have yet met
with.  I fancy it may be the result of an overstrained nervous system,
but there appears no present cause for that.  She evidently possesses a
vigorous constitution, and every one here is kind to her--her father
particularly so.  Even if she were in love, which she doesn't seem to be
(a faint twinkle in the Doctor's eye here), that would not account for
her condition."

"I can't help thinking," observed Lewis, with a troubled look, "that her
father is somehow the cause of her careworn looks.  No doubt he is very
kind to her in public, but may there not be a very different state of
things behind the scenes?"

"I think not.  The Count's temper is gentle, and his sentiments are
good.  If he were irascible there might be something behind the scenes,
for when restraint is removed and temper gets headway, good principles
may check but cannot always prevent unkindness.  Now, Emma, I have
sought you and Lewis to ask for counsel.  I do not say that Nita is
seriously ill, but she is ill enough to cause those who love her--as I
know you do--some anxiety.  It is very evident to me, from what she
says, that she eagerly desires her father to be with her, and yet when I
suggest that he should be sent for, she nervously declines to entertain
the proposal.  If this strange state of mind is allowed to go on, it
will aggravate the feverish attack from which she now suffers.  I wish,
therefore, to send for the Count without letting her know.  Do you think
this a wise step?"

"Undoubtedly; but why ask such a question of me?" said Emma, with a look
of surprise.

"First, because you are Nita's friend--not perhaps, a friend of long
standing, but, if I mistake not, a very loving one; and, secondly, as
well as chiefly, because I want you to find out from her where her
father is at present, and let me know."

"There is something disagreeably underhand in such a proceeding,"
objected Emma.

"You know that a doctor is, or ought to be, considered a sort of pope,"
returned Lawrence.  "I absolve you from all guilt by assuring you that
there is urgent need for pursuing the course I suggest."

"Well, I will at all events do what I can to help you," said Emma.
"Shall I find her in her own room?"

"Yes, in bed, attended, with Mrs Stoutley's permission, by Susan Quick.
Get rid of the maid before entering on the subject."

In a few minutes Emma returned to the Doctor, who still walked up and
down in earnest conversation with Lewis.  She had succeeded, she said,
in persuading Nita to let her father be sent for, and the place to which
he had gone for a few days was Saxon, in the Rhone valley.  The Count's
address had also been obtained, but Nita had stipulated that the
messenger should on no account disturb her father by entering the house,
but should send for him and wait outside.

"Strange prohibition!" exclaimed Lawrence.  "However, we must send off a
messenger without delay."

"Stay," said Lewis, detaining his friend; "there seems to be delicacy as
well as mystery connected with this matter, you must therefore allow me
to be the messenger."

Lawrence had no objection to the proposal, and in less than an hour
Lewis, guided by Antoine Grennon, was on the road to Martigny by way of
the celebrated pass of the Tete-Noire.

The guide was one of Nature's gentlemen.  Although low in the social
scale, and trained in a rugged school, he possessed that innate
refinement of sentiment and feeling--a gift of God sometimes transmitted
through a gentle mother--which makes a true gentleman.  Among men of the
upper ranks this refinement of soul may be counterfeited by the
superficial polish of manners; among those who stand lower in the social
scale it cannot be counterfeited at all, but still less can it be
concealed.  As broadcloth can neither make nor mar a true gentleman, so
fustian cannot hide one.  If Antoine Grennon had been bred "at Court,"
and arrayed in sumptuous apparel, he could not have been more
considerate than he was of the feelings and wishes of others, or more
gentle, yet manly, in his demeanour.

If, on an excursion, you wished to proceed in a certain direction,
Antoine never suggested that you should go in another, unless there were
insurmountable difficulties in the way.  If you chanced to grow weary,
you could not have asked Antoine to carry your top-coat, because he
would have observed your condition and anticipated your wishes.  If you
had been inclined to talk he would have chatted away by the hour on
every subject that came within the range of his knowledge, and if you
had taken him beyond his depth, he would have listened by the hour with
profound respect, obviously pleased, and attempting to understand you.
Yet he would not have "bored" you.  He possessed great tact.  He would
have allowed you to lead the conversation, and when you ceased to do so
he would have stopped.  He never looked sulky or displeased.  He never
said unkind things, though he often said and did kind ones, and, with
all that, was as independent in his opinions as the whistling wind among
his native glaciers.  In fact he was a prince among guides, and a
pre-eminently unselfish man.

Heigho! if all the world--you and I, reader, included--bore a stronger
resemblance to Antoine Grennon, we should have happy times of it.  Well,
well, don't let us sigh despairingly because of our inability to come up
to the mark.  It is some comfort that there are not a few such men about
us to look up to as exemplars.  We know several such, both men and
women, among our own friends.  Let's be thankful for them.  It does us
good to think of them!

From what we have said, the reader will not be surprised to hear that,
after the first words of morning salutation, Lewis Stoutley walked
smartly along the high road leading up the valley of Chamouni in perfect
silence, with Antoine trudging like a mute by his side.

Lewis was too busy with his thoughts to speak at first.  Nita's illness,
and the mystery connected somehow with the Count, afforded food not only
for meditation, but anxiety, and it was not until the town lay far
behind them that he looked at his guide, and said:--

"The route over the Tete-Noire is very grand, I am told?"

"Very grand, Monsieur--magnificent!"

"You are well acquainted with it, doubtless?"

"Yes; I have passed over it hundreds of times.  Does Monsieur intend to
make a divergence to the Col de Balme?"

"No; I have urgent business on hand, and must push on to catch the
railway.  Would the divergence you speak of take up much time?  Is the
Col de Balme worth going out of one's way to see?"

"It is well worthy of a visit," said the guide, replying to the last
query first, "as you can there have a completely uninterrupted view--one
of the very finest views of Mont Blanc, and all its surroundings.  The
time required for the divergence is little more than two hours; with
Monsieur's walking powers perhaps not so much; besides, there is plenty
of time, as we shall reach Martigny much too soon for the train."
