at The Follies, with dear mother, of course, to take care of us."

Just at that moment there came a whoop and a spring, and Hughie, his red
face redder than ever, his freckles more marked, his carroty hair
sticking up all over his head, and his light-blue eyes wearing a most
mischievous expression, entered the little arbor and sat down at one
side of Irene.

"I say," he remarked, "I want to ask you a direct question."

"What is that?" she said, moving slightly away from him.

He edged a little nearer.

"Is it true that you gave sister Emily horrid live things that curled
themselves up into so-called pills, and she swallowed them and nearly
died afterward? Is it true--tell me?"

"It's quite true," said Irene, all the dancing wickedness coming to the
front at once, and her eyes blazing with anger.

"Then you are a really wicked girl. You might have been had up by the
police and put into prison."

"And what if I had, you wicked boy--for you are about the wickedest and
rudest boy I have ever come across? Much do I care! I wanted her to go,
and I thought that would be a good way to get rid of her."

"Oh, that's all right!" said Hugh. "I'll just go and tell Agnes. I'll
tell her that you'll do things of that sort to her, that you are a sort
of witch, and will show your true colors before long. Now, what is the
matter?"

"You sha'n't tell her. You daren't!" said Irene.

She caught both his hands as though in a vise. He was amazed at their
strength, also at the beautiful, extraordinary passion of her face.
Rosamund started up to interfere.

"Come, children," she said, "don't quarrel. Hughie, you do extremely
wrong to speak in that tone to Irene. Come and have a walk with me. You
know I am going away to-morrow, and I wouldn't have asked Irene to
invite you both to this beautiful house, and to give you such a splendid
holiday, if I hadn't thought you were going to be quite good. Ah! here
comes Agnes."

Agnes was seen flying across the lawn. She was wearing a pretty white
dress, and her whole dainty little figure, with her light hair flying
wildly behind her, made her a most charming little picture. She dashed
up to Irene, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her passionately.

"Oh," she said, "it seemed hours while I was away from you! I was with
Emily, and Emily says that perhaps I had better not eat plums--at least
not more than one or two."

"Then I'll pick out the ripest in the basket for you," said Irene, her
voice trembling.

"You take care there are no--no live things"----

"Hush, Hughie! Come with me," said Rosamund; and she pulled the
reluctant boy out of the summer-house.

"Now, Hughie," she said when she had got him quite by herself, "I want
to know, in the first instance, exactly how old you are."

"I was fourteen my last birthday," he said, drawing himself up to his
full height.

"You suppose yourself to be a good bit of a man, don't you?"

"Well, I'm not far from being a man, am I, Rosamund? You don't mind my
calling you Rosamund, do you?"

"You may call me anything in the world you please."

"Well, I'll call you Rosamund, because all the rest of the people here
do; but by-and-by perhaps I shall be behind a counter, and you will come
in and ask for stationery--I want particularly to go into a stationer's
shop--or any other article you fancy, and I'll have to say, 'Yes, miss.'
That is, unless you're married. You'll be much too grand to notice me in
those days, won't you, Rosamund?"

Rosamund turned and looked calmly at him.

"Hugh," she said, "I'll never be too grand to take notice of you if you
turn out the sort of boy I expect you to be."

"And what is that?" he asked, touched and astonished at her words.

"Well, now, I want you to undertake a rather difficult office."

"Oh, I say, and these are holidays!" grumbled the boy.

"Nevertheless, even in holidays a true boy, who means to be a true man,
will act according to the best of his abilities; and what I want you to
do now is to help and not hinder me with regard to Irene."

"That horrid, spiteful, handsome little witch?" said the boy.

"You admit that she is handsome?"

"I should rather think so. I never saw such eyes or such a face. But
she's a horrid little thing for all that. Last night I was in the
pantry, and James told me a lot of things about her; how she used to get
wasps to sting him, and how she frightened away such a lot of servants
from the place with leeches and toads, and all sorts of horrors. He said
he didn't believe she was a girl at all, but that she was a sort of
half-witch; and she is having that effect now upon our dear little
Agnes, for Agnes doesn't care a bit for any one but her. She likes to
spend all her time with her. She even insists on sleeping in her bed at
night, and poor old Emily never gets a sight of Agnes, nor do I; and if
it weren't for you I don't know where we'd be."

"Well, I'm leaving to-morrow," said Rosamund; "and it is just because I
am leaving--and I am forced to go--that I intend to put a trust in you.
I intend to tell you all about Irene--there is no other way to manage a
boy like you; but I intend to tell you in such a way that you must give
me your word of honor you will never repeat what I say."

"You have a queer way of talking," replied the lad, "and you do look
wonderfully handsome, and unlike any other girl I ever saw. Little Aggie
is a poor sort, you know. She is very sweet and pretty, and gentle and
easily influenced."

"She is a dear little soul," said Rosamund, "and I don't wonder that you
and your sister love her so much."

"Of course we love her; that is just what I say to Em. Of course we
love her, and I don't think it is right of Emily to spend all her time
crying. Her eyes are as red as anything. I never saw anything like it;
and whenever she talks to me it is to say something of the way Agnes has
forsaken her; and Agnes is quite unsuspicious."

"That is just it, and I want her to be unsuspicious. You must be kind to
poor Frosty--forgive me, we always call her Frosty; but at the same time
she must exercise the wonderful and healing influence she possesses over
Irene."

"What do you mean by that?"

"You see, Irene is a very fine character"----

Hugh whistled.

"A fine character!" he said. "What about the toad in the bread-pan? What
about the horrid live things she made poor dear Emily swallow? If Em had
died, she'd have been had up for murder."

"It was a cruel and wicked thing to do; but I am sure she would never do
it now--that is, unless you goaded her to it. You are in the mood to
torment her to do wrong things. It is exceedingly wicked of you, and I
tell you plainly I don't know what I shall do if all my hard work of the
whole summer will be overthrown, unless you make me a solemn promise
before I leave."

"Well, it is good of you to trust me," said Hughie, softening in spite
of himself, for such a bold, handsome, independent girl as Rosamund had
never addressed him in such a way before; and, like all lads, he was
susceptible to a girl's influence.

"I am at a horrid common school," he grumbled. "All the fellows there
say horrid common things; but it is the best that poor old Em can
afford, and I ought to be content. Some day I'll be a tradesman--not a
gentleman. But now Aggie and I are both staying here with gentry of the
first class in every way, and you say you'll be my friend even if I am a
tradesman?"

"My hand on it," said Rosamund suddenly; and she held out her little
white hand, which the boy grasped heartily.

"Now then," she continued, "I am going to tell you my story."

She did tell it, very simply, describing her influence from the very
first over Irene, and contriving to put Irene's character into
altogether a new light to the boy.

"There is the making of a splendid woman in her," she said; "but if you
taunt her now you will undo all the good that I have done. Instead of
doing this, suppose you take my place when I am away, and help Frosty
not to be jealous, and help Irene and Agnes to enjoy themselves. Just
show Irene that you are not a scrap afraid of her; but at the same time
do not rouse her passions. Will you do this, and for my sake? If so, I
do really believe all will be well."

Hughie was amazed at his own sensations.

"I declare," he said, "you'd turn any fellow into a brick. If there were
more girls like you in the world I shouldn't be surprised if there were
a lot of good men too; and the world could be oiled on all its hinges,
so to speak, so that it wouldn't creak and jump and fret one at every
turn as it seems to have an unpleasant habit of doing at the present
moment."

"Will you promise, Hughie? I think you are the sort of boy who would
keep your word at any and all times."

Hughie mumbled something that Rosamund took for a promise. In truth, he
could not raise his eyes to her face, for they were full of tears, which
he was ashamed to show.

"I wish you'd let me go away all by myself for a minute. I'll come back
before lunch," he said. "You make a fellow feel like a gentleman, and
that's the truth of it."

Then he dashed out of sight among the flowers.

Rosamund's last day at The Follies was spent in trying to soothe all
parties. She tried to make Miss Frost rather less miserable. Hughie kept
a good deal out of sight. Irene was so absorbed with Agnes--her new toy,
as the servants called the little girl--that she did not even remember
that Rosamund was to leave on the following day.

But when the next morning came, and she saw the carriage arrive at the
door, and perceived Rosamund's trunks being put on the roof, she
suddenly woke to the fact that the strong influence of her life during
the last couple of months had come to a complete end; that Rosamund, the
strong, the vivacious, the daring, the noble, was leaving her. All in a
minute even little Agnes seemed distasteful to the excited girl. She
flew up to Rosamund's side and flung her arms round her neck.

"Oh, you are going! You are going, and what is to become of me without
you?"

Rosamund drew her into a little room leading out of the hall.

"Just one word, Irene," she said. "I know you are very fond of Agnes,
and you are behaving splendidly to her; but you will think of Miss Frost
and of Hughie. You will write to me once or twice a week, and afterward,
you know, it is settled that you and I are both to meet at the
Merrimans', where we are to spend one term together."

"Oh, dear, how am I to endure that?"

"You will endure it when I give you a piece of news. It is arranged that
little Agnes comes also, and"----

"Oh, have you settled that, you darling?"

"Partly. And Miss Frost comes, too, as they want another governess; and
your dear mother, who needs change, will spend the time with one of her
sisters in Scotland. Now you know exactly what is before you, and I must
be off. I trust you, Irene. You won't disappoint me? If I thought you
could, I don't really know what would become of me."




CHAPTER XXI.

A REAL ROUSING FRIGHT.


Wonderful to relate, the holidays passed smoothly enough. Hughie was the
sort of boy to be touched by Rosamund's words. No one had before
appealed to him just in Rosamund's way. He found, too, considerable
pleasure and interest on his own account at The Follies, for Lady Jane
was singularly kind to him, and gave him a pony to ride, and he was
permitted the rare indulgence of going with the gamekeeper into the
woods to take his first lesson in partridge-shooting; but this came
later on.

Meanwhile Miss Frost made a great effort to recover her self-control;
but such an agony of jealousy had taken possession of the poor lady that
she could scarcely bear to be in the society either of her pupil or her
little sister. Irene exercised more and more influence over Agnes, and
for a long time that influence was altogether for good. When the child
asked simple questions Irene replied simply. She felt ashamed of her own
want of knowledge on many particulars. She went regularly to church
twice every Sunday because little Agnes thought that no living person
could do otherwise. She did not at all want to go, and she trembled as
much as ever when the choir sang, and when the place became hushed and
people called themselves "miserable sinners," and looked so unconcerned
and so well-dressed. But for the sake of Agnes she restrained herself,
for Agnes' little, pale, calm face appeared not to think at all about
the matter.

Nevertheless, it was scarcely possible that such a cloudless state of
things could continue. As to Hughie, he and Irene were more or less
neutral, neither speaking much to the other. They were both absolutely
different, but both were absolutely without fear.

There came a day, however, when Irene took it into her wild little head
that Hughie needed a lesson to be taught him.

"I know by his looks," she thought, "that he hates my loving Agnes so
much."

Accordingly, she made up her mind to administer a lesson, and to make it
as stiff a piece of terrorism as she could devise.

"He thinks he knows a great deal; but I'll teach him!" thought the girl.

Some of her old wicked spirit had come back to her. She had no longer
any lessons to employ her time; she had no longer Rosamund's wholesome
influence--Rosamund who was in Switzerland, and whose letters,
delightful as they were, could not take the place of her constant
presence.

The day was a sultry one toward the end of August. Miss Frost, pale and
dejected, was seated in one of the arbors. She was doing some
needlework, and little Agnes was sitting on a low stool at her sister's
feet. Miss Frost looked up when Irene suddenly entered.

"I wonder," she said, "if you and Agnes would go to town for me after
lunch? Mother says you may have the pony-trap and drive in. I want you
to get"----

She produced a list of all sorts of materials, including a new doll for
Agnes.

"I want Agnes to have a doll, and a cradle to put it in at night, and
she shall make the clothes for it. Between you and me, we can show her
how. Would you like it, Agnes darling?"

"Oh, shouldn't I just love it!" said little Agnes. "Fancy my being your
baby, and then having a baby of my own! Oh, it seems altogether too
beautiful! Isn't she sweet, Emily?"

Miss Frost looked with her nervous eyes at her pupil. Irene's own bright
eyes looked back in reply. They were full of dancing mischief.

"Mothery will give you some money to buy the necessary things," she
said. "I have spoken to her about it; indeed, she is going with you, and
lunch is to be a quarter of an hour earlier."

"But would you--would you," said Miss Frost, who was trembling all over
with delight at the thought of having her beloved little sister all to
herself for a whole afternoon--"wouldn't you like to keep Agnes? I would
buy the things for her."

She felt herself very noble as she made this remark.

"No," said Irene, shaking her head. "No; I want Agnes to choose her own
doll. You can have a boy-dolly or a girl-dolly," she said, "just as you
please. There is a beautiful shop at Dartford, in the High Street, where
you can buy everything you want. It is called Millar's. You know all
about it, don't you, Frosty? Now, there is the luncheon-bell."

The luncheon-bell sounded. Miss Frost, little Agnes, Irene, and the rest
of the party all assembled in the cool dining-room.

Soon after lunch, Lady Jane, Agnes, and Miss Frost started for Dartford,
and Irene turned and faced Hughie.

"Hughie," she said, "would you like to come for a row on the lake with
me?"

"If you wish," he replied.

He had kept his promise to Rosamund so far. He had made no further
inquiries with regard to Irene. He had tried, as he expressed it, to
wash his hands of her. He did not like her. He felt that he never could
like her. There was something to him repugnant about her. He had a kind
of uncanny feeling that she was a sort of changeling; that she could do
extraordinary, defiant, and marvelous things. Now, as she looked full up
at him, trying to steady her face, and trying to look as like an
ordinary girl as possible, he endeavored to conceal a queer sort of fear
which stole suddenly over his heart. He remembered the old stories; the
servants who shrank from her, the wild creatures that seemed to be her
constant companions, and the tricks she was capable of playing on any
one.

"I will go with you, of course," he said. "Do you want me to row?"

"No; I want you to sit in the stern and steer. Will you come? Just wait
a minute. I'll be ready in no time."

She flew upstairs, and came down in the obnoxious red dress, which she
had not worn for such a long time. It made a queer change in her, giving
her a more elf-like appearance than usual.

