"Boy," said Mr Auberly, "will you be so good as to walk behind me?"

"Oh, _cer'nly_, sir," said Willie, with a profound bow, as he fell to
the rear.

They walked on in silence until they came to the vicinity of the
Monument, when Mr Auberly turned round and asked Willie which way they
were to go now.

"Right back again," said Willie.

"How, boy; what do you mean?"

"We've overshot the mark about half a mile, sir.  But, please, I thought
you must be wishin' to go somewhere else first, as you led the way."

"Lead the way, _now_, boy," said Mr Auberly, with a stern look.

Willie obeyed, and in a few minutes they were groping in the dark
regions underground which Mr Cattley and his family inhabited.  With
some difficulty they found the door, and stood in the presence of "the
fairy."

Thin though the fairy had been when Willie saw her last, she might have
been called fat compared with the condition in which they now found her.
She appeared like a mere shadow, with a delicate skin thrown over it.
A bad transparency would have been more substantial in appearance.  She
lay alone on her lonely pallet with a farthing candle beside her, which
cast a light sufficient only to make darkness visible.  Being near the
poor invalid, it caused her large dark eyes to glitter in an awful
manner.

Willie at once forgot his companion, and running up to the fairy, seized
her hand, and asked her how she did.

"Pretty well, Willie.  It's kind of you to come and see me so often."

"Not a bit, Ziza; you know I like it; besides, I've only come to-day to
show a gentleman the way."

He pointed to Mr Auberly, who had stopped short in the doorway, but who
now advanced and sat down beside the invalid, and put to her several
formal questions in a very stately and stiff manner, with a great
assumption of patronage.  But it was evident that he was not accustomed
to the duty of visiting the sick, and, like little boys and girls when
they sit down to write a letter, was very much at a loss what to say!
He began by asking the fairy about her complaint, and exhausted every
point that entered into his imagination in reference to that.  Then he
questioned her as to her circumstances; after which he told her that he
had been sent to see her by his daughter Louisa, who was herself very
ill, owing to the effects of a fire in his own house.

At this point the child became interested, and came to his relief by
asking a great many eager and earnest questions about Loo.  She knew
about the fire in Beverly Square and its incidents, Willie having often
related them to her during his visits; and she knew Mr Auberly by name,
and was interested in him, but his frigid manner had repelled her, until
he spoke of Loo having sent him to see her.

"Oh, I've been so sorry about Miss Loo, sir," said Ziza, raising her
large eyes full in Mr Auberly's face; "I've heard of her, you know,
from Willie, and when I've been lying all alone here for hours and hours
together, I have wondered how she spent her time, and if there were kind
people about her to keep up her spirits.  It's so strange that she and I
should have been both hurt by a fire, an' both of us so different every
way.  I _do_ hope she'll get better, sir."

Mr Auberly became suddenly much interested in the fairy, for just as
"love begets love," so does interest beget interest.  His feelings
having been roused, his tongue was loosed, and forthwith he enjoyed a
delightful conversation with the intelligent child; not that there was
any remarkable change as to the matter of what was spoken, but there was
a vast change in the manner of speaking it.

Willie also chimed in now and then, and volunteered his opinions in a
way that would have called forth a sharp rebuke from his patron half an
hour before; but he was permitted to speak, even encouraged, now, for
Mr Auberly was being tickled pleasantly; he was having his feelings and
affections roused in a way that he had never thought of or tried before;
he was gathering golden experiences that he had never stooped to touch
before, although the mine had been under his feet all his life, and his
path had been strewn with neglected nuggets from the cradle--fortunately
not, as yet, to the grave!  Ziza's Bible lay on the counterpane close to
her wasted little hand.  While she was talking of Loo, with deep
sympathy beaming out of her eyes and trembling in her tones, Mr Auberly
laid his hand inadvertently on it.  She observed the action, and said--

"Are you going to read and pray with me, sir?"

Mr Auberly was taken very much aback indeed by this question.

"Well--no," said he, "that is--if--fact, I have not brought my
prayer-book with me; but--but--I will read to you if you wish it."

Sympathy was gone now; the fairy felt that, and, not clearly
understanding why, wondered at it.  She thanked her visitor, however,
and shut her eyes, while Mr Auberly opened the Bible and cleared his
voice.  His confusion was only momentary; still the idea that he could
be confused at all by two mere children in such a wretched cellar so
nettled the worthy man, that he not only recovered his self-possession,
but read a chapter with all the solemn dignity of tone and manner that
he would have assumed had he been officiating in Saint Paul's or
Westminster Abbey.  This was such a successful essay, and overawed his
little congregation so terribly, that for a moment he thought of
concluding with the benediction; but, being uncertain whether he could
go correctly through it, he wisely refrained.

Thereafter he rose, and bade the fairy good-night.

"Your father does not return till late, I suppose?" he said, while he
held her hand.

"No; it is morning generally before he gets away.  The pantomimes are
hurting him, I fear, for he's not so active as he once was, and he says
he feels the falls very bad."

"Poor man!  It's very sad; but I suppose it's the usual way with that
class of men.  Well, goodnight again."

"Good-night, sir!" responded the fairy, with a bright smile, "and thank
you very much for your visit.  Good-night, Willie."

Willie said good-night in such a sulky tone, and followed Mr Auberly to
the door with such a reckless swagger, that the fairy gazed after him in
unutterable surprise.  After shutting the door with a bang, he suddenly
opened it again, and said in a loud voice--

"I say, I'll get my wages day arter to-morrow.  I'll bring you a couple
o' bobs then.  It's all I can afford just now, for cigars are dear.  If
you're hard up for wittles in the meantime, just grin and bear it;
you'll not die, you know, you'll only get thinner.  I _have_ heard that
a bit o' boiled shoe-leather ain't a bad thing to keep one easy till
relief comes."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Mr Auberly in the distance, and bustling back as
lie spoke; "I quite forgot; how stupid of me!  I was directed by my
daughter to give you this."

He took a ten-pound note from his purse, and put it into the fairy's
hand.

"This is from Louisa," he continued, "and I may add that it is the
savings from her pocket-money.  I did not wish the dear child to part
with it, and said I would give it to you from myself; but she was so
urgent, and seemed so distressed when I refused my consent, that I gave
in; so you have to thank my daughter, not me."

Mr Auberly smiled and nodded as he turned to go, and there was really
very little grimness in the smile on this occasion--very little indeed!
Willie also nodded with great violence and frequency; he likewise winked
with one eye, and otherwise sought to indicate that there were within
him sundry deep and not easily expressed thoughts and feelings, which
were, upon the whole, of a satisfactory nature.

As for the fairy, she never once smiled or thanked Mr Auberly, but
simply stared at him with her lustrous eyes open to their very widest,
and she continued to stare at the door, as though she saw him through
it, for some time after they were gone.  Then she turned suddenly to the
wall, thanked God, and burst into tears--glad tears, such as only those
can weep who have unexpectedly found relief when their extremity was
greatest.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A CHANGE IN FORTUNE.

There is nothing more surprising in regard to sublunary matters than the
way in which unexpected events arise out of what may be called
unintentional causes.

When David Boone and his friend Gorman planned the insurance and
destruction of the toy shop and its contents, they no more expected that
the very first steps towards that end would result in the conversion of
a poor into a flourishing business, than they expected that the
expression of a wish would convert Poorthing Lane into Beverly Square;
yet so it was.

Poor David was rendered so desperate by his straits, and so anxious to
escape from the crime into which his friend sought to plunge him, that
he meditated suicide; but, lacking the courage to accomplish this, he
relieved his feelings by carrying out the details of his business and
the preliminary steps of his plan, with the wild and reckless energy of
a maniac.  The more he thought of the meshes which Gorman had cast
around him, the more did he regard escape impossible.  He therefore
sought relief in action.  He not only talked to his neighbours (as per
agreement) about his rapidly increasing business, but he made purchases
on a scale more extensive than he had ever before contemplated, even in
his dreams.  Being convinced that ruin, sooner or later, was his doom,
he indulged in the most extravagant excesses, with much of the feeling
which prompts some seamen, when the ship is sinking, to break into the
spirit room and spend the short remnant of life in jollity.  He
experienced a sort of savage delight in ordering right and left from
wholesale dealers in town and country, and even went so far as to write
to Germany for toys, using the name of a well-known London house which
had hitherto (and justly) believed him to be an honest man.  The result
of this was that Poorthing Lane was besieged for some time by railway
vans, and waggons so huge that apparently an inch more added to their
bulk would have rendered their passage impossible.  Great deal boxes
were constantly being unpacked in front of Mr Boone's door, much to the
annoyance of Miss Tippet, who could not imagine how it happened that her
sedate and slow-going landlord had got such a sudden increase of
business.  Little did she think, poor lady, that this was the fuel with
which it was intended to roast her alive!

Some of the smaller accounts for goods thus purchased Boone paid at once
with the money furnished to him by Gorman, and thus got credit for being
a capitalist.  Others he deferred payment of until a more convenient
season.

His friend Gorman, who would not have bent the joint of his little
finger to have saved him from destruction, was so anxious to get up a
good appearance, for the sake of getting the insurance effected
advantageously, that he did his best to carry out his part of the plan,
and, being a man of energy who in the paths of virtue might have risen
to a high position among men, he succeeded beyond his expectation.
Crowds of purchasers were sent by him to the shop of "the celebrated
toy-man."  Some were mere decoy-ducks, who came and went (for a
consideration) pretty frequently, and only "priced" the goods.  Others
were genuine purchasers, and between the two they created so much
traffic in the toy-shop, that the multitude--so difficult to move by
mere suasion, but so prone to follow blindly in the wake of a senseless
rush, when once the rush takes place--began to move in the direction of
the toyshop, and shortly before Christmas the demand for toys was so
great, that Boone had to engage two assistants to carry on the business,
and even the lane itself began to feel the benefit of the sudden
increase of traffic.

All this was patent to the eyes of David Boone, but he was so
overwhelmed with a sense of the guilt he was about to incur, and the
deception he was even then practising, that he regarded the whole affair
as a hollow bubble, which would soon burst and leave nothing behind.
Even the rapid increase of the credit-balance in his bank-book did not
affect his opinion, for he was not much of a financier, and, knowing
that his transactions were founded on deception, he looked on the
balance as being deceptive also.

Not so thought Gorman.  That wily individual perceived, to his
amazement, that things were taking a turn which had never been
contemplated, so he silently looked on and wondered, and chuckled and
resolved to abide his time.

As prosperity flowed in upon him, David Boone became more insane--for
his condition of mind was little, if at all, short of temporary
insanity--and his proceedings became more eccentric than ever.  Among
other things, he became suddenly smitten with a desire to advertise, and
immediately in the columns of the tapers appeared advertisements to the
effect that "The Celebrated Toy Emporium" was to be found in Poorthing
Lane.  Finding that this increased his business considerably, he hit
upon a plan of advertising which has been practised rather extensively
of late years in London.  He sent out an army of boys with pots of
whitewash and brushes, with directions to print in rough but large
legible letters the words, "Who's Boone?" on all the blank walls of the
metropolis, and in the papers he answered the question by having printed
under the same title, "Why, the manager of the Toy Emporium, to be sure,
in Poorthing Lane."  He also advertised specially that he had in stock,
"an assortment of 500 golden-haired dolls from Germany, full-dressed,
half-dressed, and naked."

This last was irresistible.  Thousands of young hearts beat high at the
mere thought of such numbers--"with _golden_ hair too!" and dozens of
mammas, and papas too, visited Poorthing Lane in consequence.

In course of time David Boone's eyes began to open to the fact that he
was rapidly making a fortune.

It was after the bustle of the Christmas season was over that he made
this discovery.  One of his new assistants, a young man named Lyall, was
the means of opening his employer's eyes to the truth.  Lyall was a
clever accountant, and had been much surprised from the first that Boone
kept no regular system of books.  At the end of the year he suggested
that it would be well to take stock and find out the state of the
business.  Boone agreed.  Lyall went to work, and in a short time the
result of his labours showed, that after all debts were paid, there
would remain a satisfactory credit-balance at the bank.

On the evening of the day on which this marvellous fact was impressed on
Boone's mind, Gorman called, and found his friend rubbing his hands, and
smiling benignantly in the back room.

"You seem jolly," said Gorman, sitting down, as usual, by the fire, and
pulling out, as usual, the short pipe.  "Business gittin' on well?"

"It is," said Boone, standing with his back to the fire, and swaying
himself gently to and fro; "things don't look so bad.  I can pay you the
arrears of rent now."

"Oh, can you?" said Gorman.  "Ah!"

"Yes, and I'm in a position to pay you fifty pounds of the debt I owe
you besides," said Boone.

"And a bill at three months for the balance?" inquired Gorman.

No, he could not venture to do that exactly, but he hoped to pay a
further instalment before the end of three months.

"Humph!  How much may the profits be?"

Boone could not say precisely, not having had all his accounts squared,
but he believed they were considerable.

"I'll be bound they are," said Gorman with a growl; "you won't want to
set things alight now, I daresay."

"Well, I think it'll be as well to wait a bit, and let us make hay while
this sunshine goes on."

"Let _you_ make hay, you mean?"

"Oh, as to that, the most of it will go to your stack for some time to
come, Gorman."

"H'm! and what about the insurance?"

"Well, you know," observed Boone, "it's of no use paying the premium for
nothing.  As we don't mean to set the place alight, you know."

"Ay, but the life insurance, I mean," said Gorman.

Boone laughed, and observed that he thought it best not to die just at
that particular time, whereupon Gorman laughed, too, and said he was
about right, and that it would be as well to delay both events in the
meantime; after saying which, he took his leave in better humour than
usual, for Gorman was what men of his own stamp termed a "deep file."
He saw into futurity--so he thought--a considerable way farther than
most men, and in the future of his own imagination he saw such a
pleasant picture that his amiable spirit was quite cheered by it.  He
saw David Boone making money so fast, that his goods might be insured at
a much larger amount; he saw him getting into fresh difficulties, of
course, because such a business, on such a foundation, could not go on
prosperously except under the most able management, and, even though it
did prosper in spite of improbabilities, he foresaw that there was an
amiable gentleman, much like himself, who would induce Boone to traffic
beyond his means, and when money was wanted, the same kind gentleman (he
saw that quite clearly) would come forward generously with a loan, for
which he would only ask Boone to make over to him in security his two
policies of insurance--fire and life; after which--well, we need not go
on revealing the future as it appeared to Gorman's mental vision;
suffice it to say, that he saw upon the whole a prospect which gave him
great satisfaction.

There were one or two things which he did not see, however, and which
might have modified his feelings considerably if he had seen them.  Of
these we shall say nothing at present.

As for David Boone; his heart rejoiced, for he, too, had visions of the
future which charmed him.  He saw his debt to Gorman paid, and himself
set free from the power of that amiable friend.  He saw a toyshop change
its locality and its aspect.  He saw it transplanted into Regent Street,
with plate-glass windows, in which were displayed objects of marvellous
ingenuity and transcendent beauty.  One window especially exhibiting,
not a crowd, but, a very nation of wax-dolls with blue eyes and golden
hair!  He saw, moreover, a very little old woman, lying in a bed, in an
elegant and comfortable apartment, with a Bible beside her, and a
contented smile on her face.  This old lady resembled his own mother so
strongly, that all other prospects of the future faded from his view,
and in the fulness of his heart and his success, he resolved then and
