rally.

Then, with a ridiculous conclusion, the Professor bowed his thanks;
and after several recalls the curtain fell, but not quickly enough to
conceal Mercury, wildly waving his liberated legs, Hebe dropping her
teapot, Bacchus taking a lovely roll on his barrel, and Mrs Juno rapping
the impertinent Owlsdark on the head with Jove's ruler.

While the audience filed out to supper in the hall, the stage was a
scene of dire confusion as gods and goddesses, farmers and barons,
maids and carpenters, congratulated one another on the success of their
labours. Assuming various costumes, actors and actresses soon joined
their guests, to sip bounteous draughts of praise with their coffee, and
cool their modest blushes with ice-cream. Mrs Meg was a proud and happy
woman when Miss Cameron came to her as she sat by Josie, with Demi
serving both, and said, so cordially that it was impossible to doubt the
sincerity of her welcome words:

'Mrs Brooke, I no longer wonder where your children get their talent.
I make my compliments to the Baron and next summer you must let me have
little "Dolly" as a pupil when we are at the beach.'

One can easily imagine how this offer was received, as well as the
friendly commendation bestowed by the same kind critic on the work of
Beaumont and Fletcher, who hastened to explain that this trifle was only
an attempt to make nature and art go hand in hand, with little help from
fine writing or imposing scenery. Everybody was in the happiest mood,
especially 'little Dolly', who danced like a will-o'-the-wisp with
light-footed Mercury and Apollo as he promenaded with the Marquise on
his arm, who seemed to have left her coquetry in the green room with her
rouge.

When all was over, Mrs Juno said to Jove, to whose arm she clung as they
trudged home along the snowy paths: 'Fritz dear, Christmas is a good
time for new resolutions, and I've made one never to be impatient or
fretful with my beloved husband again. I know I am, though you won't own
it; but Laurie's fun had some truth in it, and I felt hit in a tender
spot. Henceforth I am a model wife, else I don't deserve the dearest,
best man ever born'; and being in a dramatic mood, Mrs Juno tenderly
embraced her excellent Jove in the moonlight, to the great amusement of
sundry lingerers behind them.

So all three plays might be considered successes, and that merry
Christmas night a memorable one in the March family; for Demi got an
unspoken question answered, Josie's fondest wish was granted, and,
thanks to Professor Owlsdark's jest, Mrs Jo made Professor Bhaer's busy
life quite a bed of roses by the keeping of her resolution. A few days
later she had her reward for this burst of virtue in Dan's letter, which
set her fears at rest and made her very happy, though she was unable to
tell him so, because he sent her no address.



Chapter 15. WAITING

'My wife, I have bad news for thee,' said Professor Bhaer, coming in one
day early in January.

'Please tell it at once. I can't bear to wait, Fritz,' cried Mrs Jo,
dropping her work and standing up as if to take the shot bravely.

'But we must wait and hope, heart's-dearest. Come and let us bear it
together. Emil's ship is lost, and as yet no news of him.'

It was well Mr Bhaer had taken his wife into his strong arms, for she
looked ready to drop, but bore up after a moment, and sitting by her
good man, heard all that there was to tell. Tidings had been sent to the
shipowners at Hamburg by some of the survivors, and telegraphed at once
by Franz to his uncle. As one boat-load was safe, there was hope that
others might also escape, though the gale had sent two to the bottom.
A swift-sailing steamer had brought these scanty news, and happier ones
might come at any hour; but kind Franz had not added that the sailors
reported the captain's boat as undoubtedly wrecked by the falling mast,
since the smoke hid its escape, and the gale soon drove all far asunder.
But this sad rumour reached Plumfield in time; and deep was the mourning
for the happyhearted Commodore, never to come singing home again. Mrs
Jo refused to believe it, stoutly insisting that Emil would outlive
any storm and yet turn up safe and gay. It was well she clung to this
hopeful view, for poor Mr Bhaer was much afflicted by the loss of his
boy, because his sister's sons had been his so long he scarcely knew a
different love for his very own. Now was a chance for Mrs Juno to keep
her word; and she did, speaking cheerily of Emil, even when hope waxed
faint and her heart was heavy. If anything could comfort the Bhaers for
the loss of one boy, it would have been the affection and sorrow shown
by all the rest. Franz kept the cable busy with his varying messages,
Nat sent loving letters from Leipzig, and Tom harassed the shipping
agents for news. Even busy Jack wrote them with unusual warmth; Dolly
and George came often, bearing the loveliest flowers and the
daintiest bon-bons to cheer Mrs Bhaer and sweeten Josie's grief; while
good-hearted Ned travelled all the way from Chicago to press their hands
and say, with a tear in his eye: 'I was so anxious to hear all about the
dear old boy, I couldn't keep away.'

'That's right comfortable, and shows me that if I didn't teach my boys
anything else, I did give them the brotherly love that will make them
stand by one another all their lives,' said Mrs Jo, when he had gone.

Rob answered reams of sympathizing letters, which showed how many
friends they had; and the kindly praises of the lost man would have
made Emil a hero and a saint, had they all been true. The elders bore
it quietly, having learned submission in life's hard school; but the
younger people rebelled; some hoped against hope and kept up, others
despaired at once, and little Josie, Emil's pet cousin and playmate, was
so broken-hearted nothing could comfort her. Nan dosed in vain, Daisy's
cheerful words went by like the wind, and Bess's devices to amuse her
all failed utterly. To cry in mother's arms and talk about the wreck,
which haunted her even in her sleep, was all she cared to do; and Mrs
Meg was getting anxious when Miss Cameron sent Josie a kind note bidding
her learn bravely her first lesson in real tragedy, and be like the
self-sacrificing heroines she loved to act. That did the little girl
good, and she made an effort in which Teddy and Octoo helped her much;
for the boy was deeply impressed by this sudden eclipse of the firefly
whose light and life all missed when they were gone, and lured her out
every day for long drives behind the black mare, who shook her silvery
bells till they made such merry music Josie could not help listening to
it, and whisked her over the snowy roads at a pace which set the blood
dancing in her veins and sent her home strengthened and comforted by
sunshine, fresh air, and congenial society--three aids young sufferers
seldom can resist.

As Emil was helping nurse Captain Hardy, safe and well, aboard the ship,
all this sorrow would seem wasted; but it was not, for it drew many
hearts more closely together by a common grief, taught some patience,
some sympathy, some regret for faults that lie heavy on the conscience
when the one sinned against is gone, and all of them the solemn lesson
to be ready when the summons comes. A hush lay over Plumfield for weeks,
and the studious faces on the hill reflected the sadness of those in the
valley. Sacred music sounded from Parnassus to comfort all who heard;
the brown cottage was beseiged with gifts for the little mourner, and
Emil's flag hung at half-mast on the roof where he last sat with Mrs Jo.

So the weeks went heavily by till suddenly, like a thunderbolt out of a
clear sky, came the news, 'All safe, letters on the way.' Then up went
the flag, out rang the college bells, bang went Teddy's long-unused
cannon, and a chorus of happy voices cried 'Thank God', as people went
about, laughing, crying, and embracing one another in a rapture of
delight. By and by the longed-for letters came, and all the story of the
wreck was told; briefly by Emil, eloquently by Mrs Hardy, gratefully by
the captain, while Mary added a few tender words that went straight to
their hearts and seemed the sweetest of all. Never were letters so read,
passed round, admired, and cried over as these; for Mrs Jo carried them
in her pocket when Mr Bhaer did not have them in his, and both took a
look at them when they said their prayers at night. Now the Professor
was heard humming like a big bee again as he went to his classes, and
the lines smoothed out of Mother Bhaer's forehead, while she wrote this
real story to anxious friends and let her romances wait. Now messages
of congratulation flowed in, and beaming faces showed everywhere. Rob
amazed his parents by producing a poem which was remarkably good for one
of his years, and Demi set it to music that it might be sung when the
sailor boy returned. Teddy stood on his head literally, and tore about
the neighbourhood on Octoo, like a second Paul Revere--only his tidings
were good. But best of all, little Josie lifted up her head as the
snowdrops did, and began to bloom again, growing tall and quiet, with
the shadow of past sorrow to tone down her former vivacity and show
that she had learned a lesson in trying to act well her part on the real
stage, where all have to take their share in the great drama of life.

Now another sort of waiting began; for the travellers were on their way
to Hamburg, and would stay there awhile before coming home, as Uncle
Hermann owned the Brenda, and the captain must report to him. Emil must
remain to Franz's wedding, deferred till now because of the season of
mourning, so happily ended. These plans were doubly welcome and pleasant
after the troublous times which went before, and no spring ever seemed
so beautiful as this one; for, as Teddy put it:

    'Now is the winter of our discontent
     Made glorious by these sons of Bhaer!'

Franz and Emil being regarded in the light of elder brothers by the real
'sons of Bhaer'.

There was great scrubbing and dusting among the matrons as they set
their houses in order not only for Class Day, but to receive the bride
and groom, who were to come to them for the honeymoon trip. Great plans
were made, gifts prepared, and much joy felt at the prospect of seeing
Franz again; though Emil, who was to accompany them, would be the
greater hero. Little did the dear souls dream what a surprise was in
store for them, as they innocently laid their plans and wished all the
boys could be there to welcome home their eldest and their Casablanca.

While they wait and work so happily, let us see how our other absent
boys are faring as they too wait and work and hope for better days. Nat
was toiling steadily along the path he had wisely chosen, though it was
by no means strewn with flowers--quite thorny was it, in fact, and hard
to travel, after the taste of ease and pleasure he had got when nibbling
at forbidden fruit. But his crop of wild oats was a light one, and he
resolutely reaped what he had sowed, finding some good wheat among
the tares. He taught by day; he fiddled night after night in the dingy
little theatre, and he studied so diligently that his master was well
pleased, and kept him in mind as one to whom preferment was due, if any
chance occurred. Gay friends forgot him; but the old ones stood fast,
and cheered him up when Heimweh and weariness made him sad. As spring
came on things mended--expenses grew less, work pleasanter, and life
more bearable than when wintry storms beat on his thinly clad back, and
frost pinched the toes that patiently trudged in old boots. No debts
burdened him; the year of absence was nearly over; and if he chose to
stay, Herr Bergmann had hopes for him that would bring independence for
a time at least. So he walked under the lindens with a lighter heart,
and in the May evenings went about the city with a band of strolling
students, making music before houses where he used to sit as guest. No
one recognized him in the darkness, though old friends often listened
to the band; and once Minna threw him money, which he humbly received as
part of his penance, being morbid on the subject of his sins.

His reward came sooner than he expected, and was greater than he
deserved, he thought, though his heart leaped with joy when his master
one day informed him that he was chosen, with several other of his most
promising pupils, to join the musical society which was to take part in
the great festival in London the next July. Here was not only honour for
the violinist but happiness for the man, as it brought him nearer home,
and would open a chance of further promotion and profit in his chosen
profession.

'Make thyself useful to Bachmeister there in London with thy English,
and if all goes well with him, he will be glad to take thee to America,
whither he goes in the early autumn for winter concerts. Thou hast done
well these last months, and I have hopes of thee.'

As the great Bergmann seldom praised his pupils, these words filled
Nat's soul with pride and joy, and he worked yet more diligently than
before to fulfil his master's prophecy. He thought the trip to England
happiness enough, but found room for more when, early in June, Franz
and Emil paid him a flying visit, bringing all sorts of good news, kind
wishes, and comfortable gifts for the lonely fellow, who could have
fallen on their necks and cried like a girl at seeing his old mates
again. How glad he was to be found in his little room busy at his proper
work, not living like an idle gentleman on borrowed money! How proud
he was to tell his plans, assure them that he had no debts, and receive
their praises for his improvement in music, their respect for his
economy and steadfastness in well-doing! How relieved when, having
honestly confessed his shortcomings, they only laughed, and owned that
they also had known like experiences, and were the wiser for them. He
was to go to the wedding late in June, and join his comrades in London.
As best man, he could not refuse the new suit Franz insisted on ordering
for him; and a cheque from home about that time made him feel like a
millionaire--and a happy one; for this was accompanied by such kind
letters full of delight in his success, he felt that he had earned it,
and waited for his joyful holiday with the impatience of a boy.

Dan meantime was also counting the weeks till August, when he would
be free. But neither marriage-bells nor festival music awaited him; no
friends would greet him as he left the prison; no hopeful prospect lay
before him; no happy home-going was to be his. Yet his success was far
greater than Nat's, though only God and one good man saw it. It was
a hard-won battle; but he would never have to fight so terrible a
one again; for though enemies would still assail from within and from
without, he had found the little guide-book that Christian carried in
his bosom, and Love, Penitence, and Prayer, the three sweet sisters, had
given him the armour which would keep him safe. He had not learned to
wear it yet, and chafed against it, though he felt its value, thanks to
the faithful friend who had stood by him all that bitter year.

Soon he was to be free again, worn and scarred in the fray, but out
among men in the blessed sun and air. When he thought of it Dan felt as
if he could not wait, but must burst that narrow cell and fly away,
as the caddis-worms he used to watch by the brookside shed their stony
coffins, to climb the ferns and soar into the sky. Night after night he
lulled himself to sleep with planning how, when he had seen Mary Mason
according to his promise, he would steer straight for his old friends,
the Indians, and in the wilderness hide his disgrace and heal his
wounds. Working to save the many would atone for the sin of killing
one, he thought; and the old free life would keep him safe from the
temptations that beset him in cities.

'By and by, when I'm all right again, and have something to tell that
I'm not ashamed of, I'll go home,' he said, with a quicker beat of the
impetuous heart that longed to be there so intensely, he found it as
hard to curb as one of his unbroken horses on the plains. 'Not yet. I
must get over this first. They'd see and smell and feel the prison taint
on me, if I went now, and I couldn't look them in the face and hide
the truth. I can't lose Ted's love, Mother Bhaer's confidence, and the
respect of the girls, for they did respect my strength, anyway; but now
they wouldn't touch me.' And poor Dan looked with a shudder at the brown
fist he clenched involuntarily as he remembered what it had done since
a certain little white hand had laid in it confidingly. 'I'll make 'em
proud of me yet; and no one shall ever know of this awful year. I can
wipe it out, and I will, so help me God!' And the clenched hand was held
up as if to take a solemn oath that this lost year should yet be made
good, if resolution and repentance could work the miracle.



Chapter 16. IN THE TENNIS-COURT

Athletic sports were in high favour at Plumfield; and the river where
the old punt used to wabble about with a cargo of small boys, or echo to
the shrill screams of little girls trying to get lilies, now was
alive with boats of all kinds, from the slender wherry to the trim
pleasure-craft, gay with cushions, awnings, and fluttering pennons.
Everyone rowed, and the girls as well as the youths had their races, and
developed their muscles in the most scientific manner. The large, level
meadow near the old willow was now the college playground, and here
baseball battles raged with fury, varied by football, leaping, and
kindred sports fitted to split the fingers, break the ribs, and strain
the backs of the too ambitious participants. The gentler pastimes of the
damsels were at a safe distance from this Champ de Mars; croquet mallets
clicked under the elms that fringed the field, rackets rose and fell
energetically in several tennis-courts, and gates of different heights
were handy to practise the graceful bound by which every girl expected
to save her life some day when the mad bull, which was always coming but
never seemed to arrive, should be bellowing at her heels.

One of these tennis grounds was called 'Jo's Court', and here the little
lady ruled like a queen; for she was fond of the game, and being bent on
developing her small self to the highest degree of perfection, she was
to be found at every leisure moment with some victim hard at it. On a
certain pleasant Saturday afternoon she had been playing with Bess and
beating her; for, though more graceful, the Princess was less active
than her cousin, and cultivated her roses by quieter methods.

'Oh dear! you are tired, and every blessed boy is at that stupid
baseball match. 'What shall I do?' sighed Josie, pushing back the great
red hat she wore, and gazing sadly round her for more worlds to conquer.

'I'll play presently, when I'm a little cooler. But it is dull work for
me, as I never win,' answered Bess, fanning herself with a large leaf.

Josie was about to sit down beside her on the rustic seat and wait, when
her quick eye saw afar off two manly forms arrayed in white flannel;
their blue legs seemed bearing them towards the battle going on in the
distance; but they never reached the fray; for with a cry of joy,
Jo raced away to meet them, bent on securing this heaven-sent
reinforcement. Both paused as she came flying up, and both raised their
hats; but oh, the difference there was in the salutes! The stout youth
pulled his off lazily and put it on again at once, as if glad to get the
duty over; the slender being, with the crimson tie, lifted his with a
graceful bend, and held it aloft while he accosted the rosy, breathless
maid, thus permitting her to see his raven locks smoothly parted, with
one little curl upon the brow. Dolly prided himself upon that bow, and
practised it before his glass, but did not bestow it upon all alike,
regarding it as a work of art, fit only for the fairest and most
favoured of his female admirers; for he was a pretty youth, and fancied
himself an Adonis.

Eager Josie evidently did not appreciate the honour he did her, for with
a nod she begged them both to 'come along and play tennis, not go and
get all hot and dirty with the boys'. These two adjectives won the day;
for Stuffy was already warmer than he liked to be, and Dolly had on
a new suit which he desired to keep immaculate as long as possible,
conscious that it was very becoming.

'Charmed to oblige,' answered the polite one, with another bend.

'You play, I'll rest,' added the fat boy, yearning for repose and gentle
converse with the Princess in the cooling shade.

'Well, you can comfort Bess, for I've beaten her all to bits and she
needs amusing. I know you've got something nice in your pocket, George;
give her some, and 'Dolphus can have her racket. Now then, fly round';
and driving her prey before her, Josie returned in triumph to the court.

Casting himself ponderously upon the bench, which creaked under his
weight, Stuffy--as we will continue to call him, though no one
