
"When he does, mademoiselle, I will have some broth and a glass of
good burgundy ready for him," Elise said.

"Thank you; but please call me Marie in future. There are no
mesdemoiselles in France now, and I shall call you Elise instead
of Madame. And Harry, would you mind telling the girls that I will
meet them to-morrow instead of this evening. I long to see them, oh
so, so much; but I should not like to leave him for a moment now.
I fear so that his memory might go again if he were to wake and
miss me."

"I was going to propose it myself, Marie," Harry said. "It is
all-important to avoid any agitation now. To-morrow, I hope, it
will be safer, and the doctor will give him a sleeping-draught, so
that he shall not wake while you are away. But, Marie, remember it
will be a farewell visit, for I dare not let them stay  more than
another day.  They may be denounced again at any hour, for the man
who wrote to Robespierre, if he finds that nothing comes of it,
may go to the local committee, and they will not lose an hour, you
may be sure."

"I must see them this evening, then," Marie said hurriedly. "The doctor
will be here, you say, soon. Victor must have his sleeping-draught
this afternoon instead of to-morrow. They must go at once.  I
should never forgive myself if, by putting off our parting for
twenty-four hours, I caused them to fall into  the hands of these
wretches; so please hurry on all the arrangements so that they may
leave the first thing to-morrow morning."

"It will be best," Harry said, "if you will do it, Marie. I own
that I am in a fever of apprehension. I will go there at once to
tell them that all must be in readiness by to-night. They will be
glad indeed to hear that your presence has done such wonders for
Victor.  They will be able to leave you with a better heart if
they feel that your stay here is likely to bring health to him and
happiness to both of you."

"A week since," Marie said, "it did not seem to me that I could
ever be happy again; but though everything is still very dark, the
clouds seem lifting."

The girls were greatly rejoiced when they heard the good news that
Victor had recognized Marie, and that Harry had now hopes that he
would do well.

"And now we must talk about ourselves," Harry said. "We must not
lose another hour. Now, Louise, you must take part in our council.
We have everything to settle, and only a few hours to do it in. I
should like, if possible, that we should not come back here this
evening after you have once left the house. The man who denounced
you will expect that something would be done to-day, and when he
sees that nothing has come of his letter he may go this evening
to the local committee, and they would send men at once to arrest
you. No doubt he only wrote to Robespierre first, thinking he would
get credit and perhaps a post of some sort for his vigilance in the
cause. But if Louise thinks that it cannot possibly be managed, I
will write a letter at once to him in Robespierre's name, saying
that his letter has been noted and your movements will be closely
watched, and thanking him for his zeal in the public service."

"No, I think we are ready," Jeanne said. "Of course we have
been talking it over for weeks, and agreed it was better to be in
readiness whenever you told us it was time to go. Louise will tell
you all about it."

"The disguises are all ready, Monsieur Sandwith; and yesterday
when you said that my dear mademoiselle could not go with them,
I settled, if you do not see any objection, to go with the dear
children."

"I should be very glad," Harry said eagerly, for although he had
seen no other way out of it, the difficulties and inconveniences
of a journey alone with Jeanne and Virginie had been continually
on his mind. The idea of taking the old woman with them had never
occurred to him, but now he hailed it as a most welcome solution
of the difficulty.

"That will be a thousand times better in every way, for with you
with us it would excite far less remark than three young people
travelling alone. But I fear, Louise, that the hardships we may
have to undergo will be great."

"It matters little," the old woman said. "I nursed their mother,
and have for years lived on her bounty; and gladly now will I
give what little remains to me of life in the service of her dear
children. I know that everything is turned topsy-turvy in our poor
country at present, but as long as I have life in my body I will
not let my dear mistress's children be, for weeks perhaps, wandering
about with only a young gentleman to protect them, and Mademoiselle
Jeanne almost a woman too."

"Yes, it is better in every way," Harry said. "I felt that it would
be a strange position, but it seemed that it could not be helped;
however, your offer gets us out of the embarrassment. So your
disguises are ready?"

"Yes, monsieur," Louise said; "I have a boy's suit for Mademoiselle
Virginie. She did not like it at first, but I thought that if
mademoiselle went with you it would be strange to have three girls
journeying under the charge of one young man."

"I think it a very good plan, Louise, but you must get out of the
way of calling me monsieur or else it will slip out before people.
Now what I propose is, that when we get fairly away we shall buy a
horse and cart, for with you with us we can go forward more boldly
than if we were alone.

"You will be grandmother, and we shall be travelling from a farm
near Etampes to visit your daughter, who is married to a farmer near
Nantes. That will be a likely story now, and we can always make a
detour to avoid towns. It will be dark when you go out this evening,
so you can take three bundles of clothes with you. The only thing
is about to-night. The weather is bitterly cold, and it is out of
the question that you should stop out all night, and yet we could
not ask for a lodging close to Paris.

"Oh, I see now! The best plan will be for you all to sleep to-night
at Jacques'. The good people will manage  somehow; then we can
start early in the morning. Yes, and in that way it will not be
necessary for Marie to go out and leave Victor."

"That will certainly be the best way," Louise said. "I have been
wondering ever since you said we must start this evening, what
would become of us to-night. When we once get fairly away from
Paris it will be easier, for the country people are kind-hearted,
and I think we shall always be able to get shelter for the night;
but just outside Paris it would be different. Then where shall we
meet this evening?"

"I will be at the end of the street," Harry said. "It is quite
dark by five, so do you start a quarter of an hour later; hide your
bundles under your cloaks, for if that fellow is on the look-out he
might follow you if he thought you were leaving. Draw your blinds
up when you leave, Louise, so that the room will look as usual,
and then it may be some time before anyone suspects that you have
left; and if I were you I would mention to some of your neighbours
this afternoon that you have had a letter from your friends in
Burgundy, and are going away soon with your nieces to stay with
them for a while. You had better pay your rent for three months
in advance, and tell your landlord the same thing; saying that you
may go suddenly anytime, as a compere who is in Paris, and is also
going back, is going to take charge of you on the journey, and that
he may call for you at any time. Thus when he finds that you have
left, your absence will be accounted for; not that it makes much
difference, for I hope that when you have seen the girls safely to
England you will make your home with them there."

"Yes, I shall never come back here," the old woman said, "never,
even if I could. Paris is hateful to me now, and I have no reason
for ever wanting to come back."

"In that case," Harry said smiling, "we may as well save the three
months' rent."

"Oh, how I long to be in England," Virginie exclaimed, "and to see
dear Ernest and Jules again! How anxious they must be about us, not
having heard of us all this long time! How shall we know where to
find them?"

"You forget, Virginie," Jeanne said, "it was arranged they should
go to Harry's father when they got to England, and he will know
where they are living; there is sure to be no mistake about that,
is there, Harry?"

"None at all," Harry said. "You may rely upon it that directly you
get to my father you will hear where your brothers are. And now I
will go and tell Marie that there is no occasion for Victor to take
a sleeping draught."

Marie was delighted when she heard that she was going to have her
sisters with her for the whole evening and night, and Elise busied
herself with preparations for the accommodation of her guests.
Harry then went back to his attic, made his clothes into a bundle,
and took up the bag of money from its hiding-place under a board
and placed it in his pocket.

He had, since he had been with Robespierre, gradually changed the
silver for gold in order to make it more convenient to carry, and
it was now of comparatively little weight, although he had drawn
but slightly upon it, except for the payment of the bribe promised
to the warder. His pistols were also hidden under his blouse.

He went down stairs and waited the return of Robespierre.

"Citizen," he said when he entered, "circumstances have occurred
which render it necessary for me to travel down to Nantes to escort
a young girl, a boy, and an old woman to that town; they cannot
travel alone in such times as these, and they have a claim upon me
which I cannot ignore."

"Surely, friend Sandwith," Robespierre said, "the affairs of France
are of more importance than private matters like these."

"Assuredly they are, citizen; but I cannot flatter myself that
the affairs of France will be in any way injured by my temporary
absence.  My duty in this matter is clear to me, and I can only
regret that my temporary absence may put you to some inconvenience.
But I have a double favour to ask you: the one is to spare me for
a time; the second, that you will give me papers  recommending
me, and those travelling with me, to the authorities of the towns
through which we shall pass. In these times, when the enemies of
the state are travelling throughout France seeking to corrupt the
minds of the people, it is necessary to have papers showing that
one is a good citizen."

"But I have no authority," Robespierre said. "I am neither a minister
nor a ruler."

"You are not a minister, citizen, but you are assuredly a ruler. It
is to you men look more than to any other. Danton is too headstrong
and violent. You alone combine fearlessness in the cause of France
with that wisdom and moderation which are, above all things,
necessary in guiding the state through its dangers."

Robespierre's vanity was so inordinate that he accepted the compliment
as his due, though he waved his hand with an air of deprecation.

"Therefore, citizen," Harry went on, "a letter from you would be
more powerful than an order from another."

"But these persons who travel with you, citizen--how am I to be
sure they are not enemies of France?"

"France is not to be shaken," Harry said, smiling, "by the efforts
of an old woman of seventy and a young boy and girl; but I can
assure you that they are no enemies of France, but simple inoffensive
people who have been frightened by the commotion in Paris, and long
to return to the country life to which they are accustomed. Come,
citizen, you refused the first boon which I asked you, and, methinks,
cannot hesitate at granting one who has deserved well of you this
slight favour."

"You are right," Robespierre said. "I cannot refuse you, even if
the persons who accompany you belong to the class of suspects, of
which, mind, I know nothing, though I may have my suspicions. I
have not forgotten, you know, that you asked for the life of the
daughter of the ci-devant Marquis de St. Caux; and for aught I know
these children may be of the same breed. But I will not ask you.
Did I know it, not even the obligation I am under to you would you
induce me to do what you ask; for although as children they can
do no harm, they might do so were they allowed to grow up hating
France. All children of suspects are, as you know, ordered to be
placed in the state schools, in order that  they may there learn
to love the people of France and to grow up worthy citizens. Now,
how shall I word it?" he said, taking up a pen; and Harry dictated:

"I hereby recommend Citizen Henri Sandwith, age 19, who has been
acting as my confidential secretary, to all public authorities,
together with Citoyenne Moulin and her two grandchildren, with whom
he is travelling."

To this Robespierre signed his name and handed the paper to Harry.

"How long will you be before you return?" he asked.

"I cannot say exactly," Harry replied; "as after I have seen them
to their destination I may stop with them for a few weeks."

Robespierre nodded and held out his hand.

"I shall be glad to have you with me again, for I have conceived
a strong friendship for you, and think none the worse of you for
your showing your gratitude to the family in whom you are interested."

Harry then went into the kitchen, where Robespierre's sister was
preparing the next meal, and said good-bye to her.

She had taken a fancy to her brother's young secretary, and expressed
a hope that his absence would be but a short one, telling him that
Robespierre had said only the day before how much work he had saved
him, and that he was determined to push his fortunes to the utmost.

Having thus paved the way for an appeal to Robespierre should he
find himself in difficulties on the road, Harry proceeded to Jacques'
house and waited there until it was time to go up to meet Louise
and the girls.

Victor did not wake until the afternoon. The doctor had called
as usual, but had not roused him. He had been told what had taken
place, and had held out hope to Marie that Victor's improvement
would be permanent, and that he would now make steady progress
towards recovery.

At the appointed hour Harry was at his post to meet the party.  They
came along within a few minutes of the time named, but instead of
stopping to greet him they walked straight on, Jeanne saying as
she passed him:

"I think we are followed."

Harry at once drew back and allowed them to go fifty yards on before
he moved after them. As there were many people about, it was some
little time before he could verify Jeanne's suspicions; then he
noticed that a man, walking a short distance ahead of him, followed
each turning that the others took.

Harry waited until they were in a quiet street, and then quickened
his pace until he was close behind the man. Then he drew one of
his pistols, and, springing forward, struck him a heavy blow on
the head with its butt. He fell forward on his face without a cry;
and Harry, satisfied that he had stunned him, ran on and overtook
the others, and, turning down the first street they came to, was
assured that they were safe from pursuit.

"We had noticed a man lounging against the house opposite all the
afternoon," Jeanne said, "and came to the conclusion that he must
be watching us; so we looked out for him when we came out, and
noticed that as soon as we went on he began to walk that way too.
So I told Louise to walk straight on without stopping when we came
up to you. I was sure you would manage somehow to get rid of him."

Harry laughed.

"I fancy he will spend to-morrow in bed instead of lounging about.
Perhaps it will teach him to mind his own business in future and to
leave other people alone. I am very glad that he did follow you;
for I felt that I owed him one, and was sorry to leave Paris without
paying my debt. Now I think we are pretty well square."

The meeting between the sisters was indeed a happy one. They fell
on each other's necks, and for some time scarce a word was spoken;
then they stood a little apart and had a long look at each other.

"You are changed, Marie dear," Jeanne said; "you look pale, but
you look, too, softer and prettier than you used to."

"All my airs and graces have been rubbed off," Marie said with a
slight smile. "I have learned so much, Jeanne, and have been where
noble blood has been the reverse of a recommendation. You are changed
too--the six months have altered you. Your gouvernante would not
call you a wild girl now. You are quite a woman.

"We have suffered too, Marie," Jeanne said as tears came to her eyes
at the thought of the changes and losses of the last few months.
"We have thought of you night and day; but Louise has been very good
to us, and as for Harry, we owe  everything to him. He has always
been so hopeful and strong, and has cheered us up with promises
that he would bring you to us some day."

Marie smiled.

"You are right, Jeanne. I used to laugh a little, you know, at your
belief in your hero, and little thought that the time would come
when I should trust him as implicitly as you do. You have a right
