foolish tricks, and see that you break a whole lot of his windows, and
do all other damage that you can. My father will then get very angry,
and as the king must answer for what his fool does he will sentence him,
even although he has paid his debt, either to answer three questions or
to lose his life. The first question my father will ask will be, "Where
is my daughter?" Then you shall step forward and answer "She is at the
bottom of the sea." He will then ask you whether you can recognise her,
and to this you will answer "Yes." Then he will bring forward a whole
troop of women, and cause them to pass before you, in order that you may
pick out the one that you take for his daughter. You will not be able
to recognise me at all, and therefore I will catch hold of you as I go
past, so that you can notice it, and you must then make haste to catch
me and hold me fast. You have then answered his first question. His next
question will be, "Where is my heart?" You shall then step forward again
and answer, "It is in a fish." "Do you know that fish?" he will say,
and you will again answer "Yes." He will then cause all kinds of fish
to come before you, and you shall choose between them. I shall take good
care to keep by your side, and when the right fish comes I will give you
a little push, and with that you will seize the fish and cut it up. Then
all will be over with the troll; he will ask no more questions, and we
shall be free to wed.'

When the youth had got all these directions as to what he had to do when
he got ashore again the next thing was to remember the words which the
troll said when he changed him from a human being to an animal; but
these he had forgotten, and the girl did not know them either. He went
about all day in despair, and thought and thought, but he could not
remember what they sounded like. During the night he could not sleep,
until towards morning he fell into a slumber, and all at once it flashed
upon him what the troll used to say. He made haste to repeat the words,
and at the same moment he became a fish again and slipped out into the
sea. Immediately after this he was called upon, and swam through the sea
up the river to where the troll stood on the bank and restored him to
human shape with the same words as before.

'Well, how do you like to be a fish?' asked the troll.

It was what he had liked best of all, said the youth, and that was no
lie, as everybody can guess.

The troll then showed him the three bushels of money which he had earned
during the past year; they stood beside the other three, and all the six
now belonged to him.

'Perhaps you will serve me for another year yet,' said the troll, 'and
you will get six bushels of money for it; that makes twelve in all, and
that is a pretty penny.'

'No,' said the youth; he thought he had done enough, and was anxious to
go to some other place to serve, and learn other people's ways; but he
would, perhaps, come back to the troll some other time.

The troll said that he would always be welcome; he had served him
faithfully for the three years they had agreed upon, and he could make
no objections to his leaving now.

The youth then got his six bushels of money, and with these he betook
himself straight to the kingdom which his sweetheart had told him of.
He got his money buried in a lonely spot close to the king's palace, and
then went in there and asked to be taken into service. He obtained his
request, and was taken on as stableman, to tend the king's horses.

Some time passed, and he noticed how the king always went about
sorrowing and grieving, and was never glad or happy. One day the king
came into the stable, where there was no one present except the youth,
who said straight out to him that, with his majesty's permission, he
wished to ask him why he was so sorrowful.

'It's of no use speaking about that,' said the king; 'you cannot help
me, at any rate.'

'You don't know about that,' said the youth; ' I know well enough what
it is that lies so heavy on your mind, and I know also of a plan to get
the money paid.'

This was quite another case, and the king had more talk with the
stableman, who said that he could easily lend the king the six bushels
of money, but would only do it on condition that he should be allowed to
accompany the king when he went to pay the debt, and that he should
then be dressed like the king's court fool, and run before him. He would
cause some trouble, for which the king would be severely spoken to, but
he would answer for it that no harm would befall him.

The king gladly agreed to all that the youth proposed, and it was now
high time for them to set out.

When they came to the troll's dwelling it was no longer in the bank, but
on the top of this there stood a large castle which the youth had never
seen before. The troll could, in fact, make it visible or invisible,
just as he pleased, and, knowing as much as he did of the troll's magic
arts, the youth was not at all surprised at this.

When they came near to this castle, which looked as if it was of pure
glass, the youth ran on in front as the king's fool. Heran sometimes
facing forwards, sometimes backwards, stood sometimes on his head, and
sometimes on his feet, and he dashed in pieces so many of the troll's
big glass windows and doors that it was something awful to see, and
overturned everything he could, and made a fearful disturbance.

The troll came rushing out, and was so angry and furious, and abused the
king with all his might for bringing such a wretched fool with him, as
he was sure that he could not pay the least bit of all the damage that
had been done when he could not even pay off his old debt.

The fool, however, spoke up, and said that he could do so quite easily,
and the king then came forward with the six bushels of money which the
youth had lent him. They were measured and found to be correct. This the
troll had not reckoned on, but he could make no objection against it.
The old debt was honestly paid, and the king got his bond back again.

But there still remained all the damage that had been done that day, and
the king had nothing with which to pay for this. The troll, therefore,
sentenced the king, either to answer three questions that he would put
to him, or have his head taken off, as was agreed on in the old bond.

There was nothing else to be done than to try to answer the troll's
riddles. The fool then stationed himself just by the king's side while
the troll came forward with his questions. He first asked, 'Where is my
daughter?'

The fool spoke up and said, 'She is at the bottom of the sea.'

'How do you know that?' said the troll.

'The little fish saw it,' said the fool.

'Would you know her?' said the troll.

'Yes, bring her forward,' said the fool.

The troll made a whole crowd of women go past them, one after the other,
but all these were nothing but shadows and deceptions. Amongst the very
last was the troll's real daughter, who pinched the fool as she went
past him to make him aware of her presence. He thereupon caught her
round the waist and held her fast, and the troll had to admit that his
first riddle was solved.

Then the troll asked again: 'Where is my heart?'

'It is in a fish,' said the fool.

'Would you know that fish?' said the troll.

'Yes, bring it forward,' said the fool.

Then all the fishes came swimming past them, and meanwhile the troll's
daughter stood just by the youth's side. When at last the right fish
came swimming along she gave him a nudge, and he seized it at once,
drove his knife into it, and split it up, took the heart out of it, and
cut it through the middle.

At the same moment the troll fell dead and turned into pieces of flint.
With that a,ll the bonds that the troll had bound were broken; all the
wild beasts and birds which he had caught and hid under the ground were
free now, and dispersed themselves in the woods and in the air.

The youth and his sweetheart entered the castle, which was now theirs,
and held their wedding; and all the kings roundabout, who had been
in the troll's debt, and were now out of it, came to the wedding, and
saluted the youth as their emperor, and he ruled over them all, and kept
peace between them, and lived in his castle with his beautiful empress
in great joy and magnificence. And if they have not died since they are
living there to this day.




Esben and the Witch

From the Danish.


There was once a man who had twelve sons: the eleven eldest were both
big and strong, but the twelfth, whose name was Esben, was only a
little fellow. The eleven eldest went out with their father to field and
forest, but Esben preferred to stay at home with his mother, and so he
was never reckoned at all by the rest, but was a sort of outcast among
them.

When the eleven had grown up to be men they decided to go out into the
world to try their fortune, and they plagued their father to give them
what they required for the journey. The father was not much in favour
of this, for he was now old and weak, and could not well spare them from
helping him with his work, but in the long run he had to give in. Each
one of the eleven got a fine white horse and money for the journey, and
so they said farewell to their father and their home, and rode away.

As for Esben, no one had ever thought about him; his brothers had not
even said farewell to him.

After the eleven were gone Esben went to his father and said, 'Father,
give me also a horse and money; I should also like to see round about me
in the world.'

'You are a little fool,' said his father. 'If I could have let you go,
and kept your eleven brothers at home, it would have been better for me
in my old age.'

'Well, you will soon be rid of me at any rate,' said Esben.

As he could get no other horse, he went into the forest, broke off a
branch, stripped the bark off it, so that it became still whiter than
his brothers' horses, and, mounted on this. rode off after his eleven
brothers.

The brothers rode on the whole day, and towards evening they came to
a great forest, which they entered. Far within the wood they came to a
little house, and knocked at the door. There came an old, ugly, bearded
hag, and opened it, and they asked her whether all of them could get
quarters for the night.

'Yes,' said the old, bearded hag, 'you shall all have quarters for the
night, and, in addition, each of you shall have one of my daughters.'

The eleven brothers thought that they had come to very hospitable
people. They were well attended to, and when they went to bed, each of
them got one of the hag's daughters.

Esben had been coming along behind them, and had followed the same way,
and had also found the same house in the forest. He slipped into this,
without either the witch or her daughters noticing him, and hid himself
under one of the beds. A little before midnight he crept quietly out
and wakened his brothers. He told these to change night-caps with the
witch's daughters. The brothers saw no reason for this, but, to get rid
of Esben's persistence, they made the exchange, and slept soundly again.

When midnight came Esben heard the old witch come creeping along. She
had a broad-bladed axe in her hand, and went over all the eleven beds.
It was so dark that she could not see a hand's breadth before her, but
she felt her way, and hacked the heads off all the sleepers who had the
men's night-caps on--and these were her own daughters. As soon as she
had gone her way Esben wakened his brothers, and they hastily took their
horses and rode off from the witch's house, glad that they had escaped
so well. They quite forgot to thank Esben for what he had done for them.

When they had ridden onwards for some time they reached a king's palace,
and inquired there whether they could be taken into service. Quite
easily, they were told, if they would be stablemen, otherwise the king
had no use for them. They were quite ready for this, and got the task of
looking after all the king's horses.

Long after them came Esben riding on his stick, and he also wanted to
get a place in the palace, but no one had any use for him, and he was
told that he could just go back the way he had come. However, he stayed
there and occupied himself as best he could. He got his food, but
nothing more, and by night he lay just where he could.

At this time there was in the palace a knight who was called Sir Red. He
was very well liked by the king, but hated by everyone else, for he was
wicked both in will and deed. This Sir Red became angry with the eleven
brothers, because they would not always stand at attention for him, so
he determined to avenge himself on them.

One day, therefore, he went to the king, and said that the eleven
brothers who had come to the palace a little while ago, and served as
stablemen, could do a great deal more than they pretended. One day he
had heard them say that if they liked they could get for the king a
wonderful dove which had a feather of gold and a feather of silver time
about. But they would not procure it unless they were threatened with
death.

The king then had the eleven brothers called before him, and said to
them, 'You have said that you can get me a dove which has feathers of
gold and silver time about.'

All the eleven assured him that they had never said anything of the
kind, and they did not believe that such a dove existed in the whole
world.

'Take your own mind of it,' said the king; 'but if you don't get that
dove within three days you shall lose your heads, the whole lot of you.'

With that the king let them go, and there was great grief among them;
some wept and others lamented.

At that moment Esben came along, and, seeing their sorrowful looks, said
to them, 'Hello, what's the matter with you?'

'What good would it do to tell you, you little fool? You can't help us.'

'Oh, you don't know that,' answered Esben. 'I have helped you before.'

In the end they told him how unreasonable the king was, and how he had
ordered them to get for him a dove with feathers of gold and silver time
about.

'Give me a bag of peas' said Esben, 'and I shall see what I can do for
you.'

Esben got his bag of peas; then he took his white stick, and said,

     Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Straightway the stick carried him across the river and straight into the
old witch's courtyard. Esben had noticed that she had such a dove; so
when he arrived in the courtyard he shook the peas out of the bag, and
the dove came fluttering down to pick them up. Esben caught it at once,
put it into the bag, and hurried off before the witch caught sight of
him; but the next moment she came running, and shouted after him, ' I
Hey is that you, Esben.?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Is it you that has taken my dove?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Was it you that made me kill my eleven daughters?'

'Ye--e--s!'

'Are you coming back again?'

'That may be,' said Esben.

'Then you'll catch it,' shouted the witch.

The stick carried Esben with the dove back to the king's palace, and his
brothers were greatly delighted. The king thanked them many times for
the dove, and gave them in return both silver and gold. At this Sir Red
became still more embittered, and again thought of how to avenge himself
on the brothers.

One day he went to the king and told him that the dove was by no means
the best thing that the brothers could get for him; for one day he had
heard them talking quietly among themselves, and they had said that they
could procure a boar whose bristles were of gold and silver time about.

The king again summoned the brothers before him, and asked whether it
was true that they had said that they could get for him a boar whose
bristles were of gold and silver time about.

'No,' said the brothers; they had never said nor thought such a thing,
and they did not believe that there was such a boar in the whole world.

'You must get me that boar within three days,' said the king, 'or it
will cost you your heads.'

With that they had to go. This was still worse than before, they
thought. Where could they get such a marvellous boar? They all went
about hanging their heads; but when only one day remained of the three
Esben came along. When he saw his brothers' sorrowful looks he cried,
'Hallo, what's the matter now?'

'Oh, what's the use of telling you?' said his brothers. 'You can't help
us, at any rate.'

'Ah, you don't know that,' said Esben; 'I've helped you before.'

In the end they told him how Sir Red had stirred up the king against
them, so that he had ordered them to get for him a boar with bristles of
gold and silver time about.

'That's all right,' said Esben; 'give me a sack of malt, and it is not
quite impossible that I may be able to help you.'

Esben got his sack of malt; then he took his little white stick, set
himself upon it, and said,

     Fly quick, my little stick, Carry me across the stream.

Off went the stick with him, and very soon he was again in the witch's
courtyard. There he emptied out the malt, and next moment came the boar,
which had every second bristle of gold and of silver. Esben at once put
it into his sack and hurried off before the witch should catch sight of
him; but the next moment she came running, and shouted after him, 'Hey!
is that you, Esben?'
