"Look at Polly's cheeks!" cried Amy.

"You've been a white little minx so long," said Alexia, putting a fond
arm around Polly; "I went home and cried every day, after I would steal
around the back way to see how Phronsie was"--

"Won't Phronsie be downstairs soon?" asked Amy.

"I don't know," said Polly. "Papa-Doctor is going to be dreadfully
careful of her, that she doesn't get up too soon."

"Say, Polly," cried another girl, "don't you have to take a lot of
pills and stuff, now that Dr. Fisher is your father?"

Polly threw back her head and laughed merrily. It sounded so strangely
to her to hear the sound echoing through the room so long silent, that
she stopped suddenly.

"Oh, girls! I can't hardly believe even yet that Phronsie is almost
well," she cried.

"Well, you'd better," advised Alexia philosophically, "because she is,
you know. Do laugh again, Polly; it's good to hear you."

"I can't help it," said Polly, "Cathie asked such a funny question."

"Cathie's generally a goose," said Alexia coolly.

"Thank you," said Cathie, a tall girl, with such light hair and sallow
face that she looked ten years older than her fourteen summers. "I
sometimes know quite as much as a few other people of my acquaintance,"
she said pointedly.

"I didn't say but that you did," said Alexia composedly. "I said you
were generally a goose. And so you are. Why, everybody knows that,
Cath."

"Come, come, girls, don't fight," said Polly. "How can you when
Phronsie is getting better? Alexia didn't mean anything, Cathie."

"Yes, she did," declared Cathie with a pout; "she's always meaning
something. She's the hatefullest thing I ever saw!"

"Nonsense!" said Polly, with a gay little laugh. "She says perfectly
dreadful things to me, and so I do to her, but we don't either of us
mind them."

"Well, those are in fun," said Cathie; "that's a very different
matter"--

"So you must make these in fun," said Polly. "I would if I were you."
But she drew away from Alexia's arm.

"Polly, don't be an idiot and fight with me," whispered Alexia in her
ear.

"Go away," said Polly, shaking her off.

"Polly, Polly, I'll say anything if you won't look like that. See here,
Cathie, let's make up," and she ran over, seized the tall girl by the
waist and spun her around till she begged to stop.

"Is that your way of making up?" cried Cathie, when she had the breath
to speak.

"Yes; it is as good as any other way. It spins the nonsense out of you.
There!" with a last pat on the thin shoulder, she left her, and ran
back to Polly.

"It's all done," she cried. "I'm at peace with the whole world. Now
don't look like an ogre any longer."

"Phronsie's actually hungry now all the time," confided Polly in a
glow, "and we can't get enough to satisfy her."

"Good--good!" cried the girls.

"I'm going to send her some of my orange jelly," declared Alexia. "I'll
make it just as soon as I go home. Do you think she will like it,
Polly?" she asked anxiously.

"Yes, I do believe she will," said Polly, "because she loves oranges
so."

"Well, I shan't make any old orange jelly," cried Cathie, her nose in
the air. "Faugh! it's insipid enough!"

"But 'tisn't when it's made the way Alexia makes it," said Polly,
viewing in alarm the widening of the breach between the two. "I've
eaten some of hers, and it's too splendid for anything."

"I don't know anything about hers, but all orange jelly I have tasted
is just horrid. I hate it! I'm going to make almond macaroons. They're
lovely, Polly."

"Oh! don't, Cathie," begged Polly in distress.

"Why not, pray tell," whirling on one set of toes. "You needn't be
afraid they won't be good. I've made them thousands of times."

"But she couldn't eat them," said Polly. "Just think, almond macaroons!
Why, Papa-Doctor would"--

"Now I know the doctor makes you take perfectly terrible things, and
won't let you eat anything. And macaroons are the only things I can
make. It's a shame!" and down sat Cathie in despair on an ottoman.

"What's the matter?" Dr. Fisher put his head in at the doorway, his
spectacled eyes sending a swift glance of inquiry around.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Cathie in a fright, jumping up and clutching the
arm of the girl next to her. "Don't let Polly tell him what I
said--don't."

"Polly won't tell," said the girl, with a superb air; "don't you know
any better, Cathie Harrison, you goose, you!"

To be called a goose by two persons in the course of an hour was too
much for Cathie's endurance, and flinging off the girl's arm, she cried
out passionately, "I won't stay; I'm going home!" and rushed out the
door.

Dr. Fisher turned from a deliberate look at the girl's white cheeks, as
she ran past, to the flushed ones before him.

"I'm very sorry that anything unpleasant has happened. I dropped in to
tell you of a little surprise, but I see it's no time now."

"Oh, Papa-Doctor!" cried Polly, flying up to him from the center of the
group, "it was nothing--only"--

"A girl's quarrel is not a slight thing, Polly," said little Dr. Fisher
gravely, "and one of your friends has gone away very unhappy."

"Oh! I know it," said Polly, "and I'm so sorry."

"We can't any of us help it," said Alexia quickly. "Cathie Harrison has
the temper of a gorilla--so there, Dr. Fisher."

Dr. Fisher set his spectacles straight, and looked at Alexia, but he
did not even smile, as she hoped he would do. "I can't help it," she
said, tracing the pattern of the carpet with the toe of her boot, "she
makes us all so uncomfortable, oh! you can't think. And I wish she'd
stay home forever."

Still no answer from the doctor. He didn't act as if he heard, but
bowing gravely, he withdrew his head and shut the door.

"O dear, dear!" cried Alexia, when they had all looked at each other a
breathing space. "Why didn't he speak? I'd much rather he'd scold like
everything than to look like that. Polly, why don't you say something?"

"Because there isn't anything to say." Polly got no further, and turned
away, suspiciously near to tears. Was this the first meeting with the
girls to which she had looked forward so long?

"To think of that Cathie Harrison making such a breeze," cried Alexia
angrily; "a girl who's just come among us, as it were, and we only let
her in our set because Miss Salisbury asked us to make things pleasant
for her. If it had been any one else who raised such a fuss!"

Meantime Dr. Fisher strode out to the west porch, intending to walk
down to his office, and buttoning up his coat as he went along. As he
turned the angle in the drive, he came suddenly upon a girl who had
thrown herself down on a rustic seat under a tree, and whose shoulders
were shaking so violently that he knew she was sobbing, though he heard
no sound.

"Don't cry," said the little doctor, "and what's the matter?" all in
the same breath, and sitting down beside her.

Cathie looked up with a gasp, and then crushed her handkerchief over
her eyes. "Those girls in there are perfectly horrid." "Softly,
softly," said Dr. Fisher.

"I can't--help it. No matter what I say, they call me names, and I'm
tired of it. O dear, dear!"

"Now see here," said the doctor, getting up on his feet and drawing a
long breath. "I'm on my way to my office; suppose you walk along with
me a bit and tell me all about it."

Cathie opened her mouth, intending to say, "Oh! I can't"--instead, she
found herself silent, and not knowing how, she was presently pacing
down the drive by the doctor's side.

"Polly Pepper!" exclaimed Alexia, as a turn in the drive brought the
two figures in view of the music-room windows, "did you ever see such a
sight in your life? Cathie is walking off with Dr. Fisher! There isn't
anything her tongue won't say!"

"Did you tell Polly?" cried Jasper, a half-hour later, putting his head
into Dr. Fisher's office. "Oh! beg pardon; I didn't know you were busy,
sir."

"Come in," said the doctor, folding up some powders methodically. "No,
I didn't tell Polly."

"Oh!" said Jasper, in a disappointed tone.

"I hadn't a fair chance"--

"But she ought to know it just as soon as it's talked of," said Jasper,
fidgeting at a case of little vials on the table. "Oh! beg pardon
again. I'm afraid I've smashed that chap," as one rolled off to the
floor. "I'm no end sorry," picking up the bits ruefully.

"I have several like it," said the doctor kindly, and settling another
powder in its little paper.

"There were a lot of girls with Polly when I looked in upon her on my
way out. But we'll catch a chance to tell her soon, my boy."

"Oh! I suppose so. A lot of giggling creatures. How Polly can stand
their chatter, I don't see," cried Jasper impatiently.

"They've been shut off from Polly for some time, you know," said Dr.
Fisher quietly. "We must remember that."

"Polly doesn't like some of them a bit better than I do," said Jasper
explosively, "only she puts up with their nonsense."

"It's rather a difficult matter to pick and choose girls who are in the
same classes," said the doctor, "and Polly sees that."

"Don't I know it?" exclaimed Jasper, in an astonished tone. "Dear me,
Dr. Fisher, I've watched Polly for years now. And she's always done
so." He stopped whirling the articles on the office table, and bestowed
a half-offended look on the little physician.

"Softly, softly, Jasper," said Dr. Fisher composedly. "Of course you've
used your eyes. Now don't spoil things by saying anything, but let
Polly 'go her own gait,' I beg of you." Then he turned to his powders
once more.

"She will, anyway," declared Jasper. "Whatever she makes up her mind to
do, Polly does that very thing."

"Not a bad characteristic," laughed the doctor.

"I should say not."

"Now when I come up home for dinner, you and I will find Polly, and
tell her the good news. If she's with a lot of those silly girls,
I'll--I'll tear her off this time." Dr. Fisher glared so fiercely as he
declared this determination that Jasper laughed outright.

"I thought no one was to disturb Polly's good intentions in that line,"
he cried.

"Well, there's an end to all things, and patience ceases to be a virtue
sometimes."

"So I've thought a good many times, but I've borne it like a man."
Jasper drew himself up, and laughed again at the doctor's face.

"Oh! you go along," cried Dr. Fisher, his eyes twinkling. "I'll meet
you just before dinner."

"All right," as Jasper rushed off.

Dr. Fisher jumped to his feet, pushing aside the litter of powder
papers, and bottles, and ran his fingers through the shock of gray hair
standing straight on his head.

"Yes, yes," he muttered, walking to the window, "it will be a good
thing for Polly, now I tell you, Adoniram." He always preferred to
address himself by his first name; then he was sure of a listener. "A
vastly good thing. It's quite time that some of the intimacies with
these silly creatures are broken up a bit, while the child gains
immensely in other ways." He rubbed his palms gleefully. "Oh!
good-morning, good-morning!"

A patient walking in, looked up at the jolly little doctor. "I wish I
could laugh like that," he ejaculated, his long face working in the
unusual effort to achieve a smile.

"You would if you had a gay crowd of children such as I have," cried
the little doctor proudly. "Why, man, that's better than all my doses."

"But I haven't the children," said the patient sourly, and sitting down
with a sigh.

"I pity you, then," said Dr. Fisher, with the air of having been a
family man for years. "Well, besides owning the Peppers, I'm going off
with them to"--there he stopped, for before he knew it, the secret was
well-nigh out.




XIX

PHRONSIE IS WELL AGAIN


But Polly was not to be told yet. When Papa Fisher walked in to dinner,
the merry party around the oak table were waiting over the ices and
coffee for his appearance.

"Oh, Papa Fisher!" cried Polly in dismay, turning from one of Alexia's
sallies, and dropping her spoon. "Now you're all tired out--too bad!"

Mother Fisher flushed up, and set her lips closely together. Ben looked
disapproval across the board, and Polly knew that the wrong thing had
been said.

"Oh! I didn't mean--of course you must take care of the sick people,"
she said impulsively.

"Yes, I must," said Dr. Fisher wearily, and pushing up the shock of
gray hair to a stiffer brush over his brow. "That's what I set out to
do, I believe."

"But that's no reason why you should tire yourself to death, and break
down the first year," said Mr. King, eyeing him sharply. "Zounds, man,
that isn't what I brought you up from the country for."

