
"It's a very favourite lark with these 'xtr'or'nary critters," replied
Bill, giving a turn to the quid of tobacco that invariably bulged out his
left cheek.  "Ye see, Ralph, them fellows take to the water as soon
a'most as they can walk, an' long before they can do that anything
respectably, so that they are as much at home in the sea as on the land.
Well, ye see, I 'spose they found swimmin' for miles out to sea, and
divin' fathoms deep, wasn't exciting enough, so they invented this game
o' the surf.  Each man and boy, as you see, has got a short board or
plank, with which he swims out for a mile or more to sea, and then,
gettin' on the top o' yon thundering breaker, they come to shore on the
top of it, yellin' and screechin' like fiends.  It's a marvel to me that
they're not dashed to shivers on the coral reef, for sure an' sartin am I
that if any o' us tried it, we wouldn't be worth the fluke of a broken
anchor after the wave fell.  But there they go!"

As he spoke, several hundreds of the natives, amongst whom we were now
standing, uttered a loud yell, rushed down the beach, plunged into the
surf, and were carried off by the seething foam of the retreating wave.

At the point where we stood, the encircling coral reef joined the shore,
so that the magnificent breakers, which a recent stiff breeze had
rendered larger than usual, fell in thunder at the feet of the multitudes
who lined the beach.  For some time the swimmers continued to strike out
to sea, breasting over the swell like hundreds of black seals.  Then they
all turned, and, watching an approaching billow, mounted its white crest,
and, each laying his breast on the short flat board, came rolling towards
the shore, careering on the summit of the mighty wave, while they and the
onlookers shouted and yelled with excitement.  Just as the monster wave
curled in solemn majesty to fling its bulky length upon the beach, most
of the swimmers slid back into the trough behind; others, slipping off
their boards, seized them in their hands, and, plunging through the
watery waste, swam out to repeat the amusement; but a few, who seemed to
me the most reckless, continued their career until they were launched
upon the beach, and enveloped in the churning foam and spray.  One of
these last came in on the crest of the wave most manfully, and landed
with a violent bound almost on the spot where Bill and I stood.  I saw by
his peculiar head-dress that he was the chief whom the tribe entertained
as their guest.  The sea-water had removed nearly all the paint with
which his face had been covered; and, as he rose panting to his feet, I
recognised, to my surprise, the features of Tararo, my old friend of the
Coral Island!

Tararo at the same moment recognised me, and, advancing quickly, took me
round the neck and rubbed noses; which had the effect of transferring a
good deal of the moist paint from his nose to mine.  Then, recollecting
that this was not the white man's mode of salutation, he grasped me by
the hand and shook it violently.

"Hallo, Ralph!" cried Bill, in surprise, "that chap seems to have taken a
sudden fancy to you, or he must be an old acquaintance."

"Right, Bill," I replied, "he is indeed an old acquaintance;" and I
explained in a few words that he was the chief whose party Jack and
Peterkin and I had helped to save.

Tararo having thrown away his surf-board, entered into an animated
conversation with Bill, pointing frequently during the course of it to
me; whereby I concluded he must be telling him about the memorable
battle, and the part we had taken in it.  When he paused, I begged of
Bill to ask him about the woman Avatea, for I had some hope that she
might have come with Tararo on this visit.  "And ask him," said I, "who
she is, for I am persuaded she is of a different race from the
Feejeeans."  On the mention of her name the chief frowned darkly, and
seemed to speak with much anger.

"You're right, Ralph," said Bill, when the chief had ceased to talk;
"she's not a Feejee girl, but a Samoan.  How she ever came to this place
the chief does not very clearly explain, but he says she was taken in
war, and that he got her three years ago, an' kept her as his daughter
ever since.  Lucky for her, poor girl, else she'd have been roasted and
eaten like the rest."

"But why does Tararo frown and look so angry?" said I.

"Because the girl's somewhat obstinate, like most o' the sex, an' won't
marry the man he wants her to.  It seems that a chief of some other
island came on a visit to Tararo and took a fancy to her, but she
wouldn't have him on no account, bein' already in love, and engaged to a
young chief whom Tararo hates, and she kicked up a desperate shindy; so,
as he was going on a war expedition in his canoe, he left her to think
about it, sayin' he'd be back in six months or so, when he hoped she
wouldn't be so obstropolous.  This happened just a week ago; an' Tararo
says that if she's not ready to go, when the chief returns, as his bride,
she'll be sent to him as a _long pig_."

"As a long pig!" I exclaimed in surprise; "why what does he mean by
that?"

"He means somethin' very unpleasant," answered Bill with a frown.  "You
see these blackguards eat men an' women just as readily as they eat pigs;
and, as baked pigs and baked men are very like each other in appearance,
they call men _long_ pigs.  If Avatea goes to this fellow as a long pig,
it's all up with her, poor thing."

"Is she on the island now?" I asked eagerly.

"No, she's at Tararo's island."

"And where does it lie?"

"About fifty or sixty miles to the south'ard o' this," returned Bill;
"but I--"

At this moment we were startled by the cry of "Mao! mao!--a shark! a
shark!" which was immediately followed by a shriek that rang clear and
fearfully loud above the tumult of cries that arose from the savages in
the water and on the land.  We turned hastily towards the direction
whence the cry came, and had just time to observe the glaring eye-balls
of one of the swimmers as he tossed his arms in the air.  Next instant he
was pulled under the waves.  A canoe was instantly launched, and the hand
of the drowning man was caught, but only half of his body was dragged
from the maw of the monster, which followed the canoe until the water
became so shallow that it could scarcely swim.  The crest of the next
billow was tinged with red as it rolled towards the shore.

In most countries of the world this would have made a deep impression on
the spectators, but the only effect it had upon these islanders was to
make them hurry with all speed out of the sea, lest a similar fate should
befall some of the others; but, so utterly reckless were they of human
life, that it did not for a moment suspend the progress of their
amusements.  It is true the surf-swimming ended for that time somewhat
abruptly, but they immediately proceeded with other games.  Bill told me
that sharks do not often attack the surf-swimmers, being frightened away
by the immense numbers of men and boys in the water, and by the shouting
and splashing that they make.  "But," said he, "such a thing as you have
seen just now don't frighten them much.  They'll be at it again to-morrow
or next day, just as if there wasn't a single shark between Feejee and
Nova Zembla."

After this the natives had a series of wrestling and boxing matches; and
being men of immense size and muscle, they did a good deal of injury to
each other, especially in boxing, in which not only the lower orders, but
several of the chiefs and priests engaged.  Each bout was very quickly
terminated, for they did not pretend to a scientific knowledge of the
art, and wasted no time in sparring, but hit straight out at each other's
heads, and their blows were delivered with great force.  Frequently one
of the combatants was knocked down with a single blow; and one gigantic
fellow hit his adversary so severely that he drove the skin entirely off
his forehead.  This feat was hailed with immense applause by the
spectators.

During these exhibitions, which were very painful to me, though I confess
I could not refrain from beholding them, I was struck with the beauty of
many of the figures and designs that were tattooed on the persons of the
chiefs and principal men.  One figure, that seemed to me very elegant,
was that of a palm-tree tattooed on the back of a man's leg, the roots
rising, as it were, from under his heel, the stem ascending the tendon of
the ankle, and the graceful head branching out upon the calf.  I
afterwards learned that this process of tattooing is very painful, and
takes long to do, commencing at the age of ten, and being continued at
intervals up to the age of thirty.  It is done by means of an instrument
made of bone, with a number of sharp teeth with which the skin is
punctured.  Into these punctures a preparation made from the kernel of
the candle-nut, mixed with cocoa-nut oil, is rubbed, and the mark thus
made is indelible.  The operation is performed by a class of men whose
profession it is, and they tattoo as much at a time, as the person on
whom they are operating can bear; which is not much, the pain and
inflammation caused by tattooing being very great, sometimes causing
death.  Some of the chiefs were tattooed with an ornamental stripe down
the legs, which gave them the appearance of being clad in tights.  Others
had marks round the ankles and insteps, which looked like tight-fitting
and elegant boots.  Their faces were also tattooed, and their breasts
were very profusely marked with every imaginable species of
device,--muskets, dogs, birds, pigs, clubs, and canoes, intermingled with
lozenges, squares, circles, and other arbitrary figures.

The women were not tattooed so much as the men, having only a few marks
on their feet and arms.  But I must say, however objectionable this
strange practice may be, it nevertheless had this good effect, that it
took away very much from their appearance of nakedness.

Next day, while we were returning from the woods to our schooner, we
observed Romata rushing about in the neighbourhood of his house,
apparently mad with passion.

"Ah!" said Bill to me, "there he's at his old tricks again.  That's his
way when he gets drink.  The natives make a sort of drink o' their own,
and it makes him bad enough; but when he gets brandy he's like a wild
tiger.  The captain, I suppose, has given him a bottle, as usual, to keep
him in good humour.  After drinkin' he usually goes to sleep, and the
people know it well and keep out of his way, for fear they should waken
him.  Even the babies are taken out of ear-shot; for, when he's waked up,
he rushes out just as you see him now, and spears or clubs the first
person he meets."

It seemed at the present time, however, that no deadly weapon had been in
his way, for the infuriated chief was raging about without one.  Suddenly
he caught sight of an unfortunate man who was trying to conceal himself
behind a tree.  Rushing towards him, Romata struck him a terrible blow on
the head, which knocked out the poor man's eye and also dislocated the
chief's finger.  The wretched creature offered no resistance; he did not
even attempt to parry the blow.  Indeed, from what Bill said, I found
that he might consider himself lucky in having escaped with his life,
which would certainly have been forfeited had the chief been possessed of
a club at the time.

"Have these wretched creatures no law among themselves," said I, "which
can restrain such wickedness?"

"None," replied Bill.  "The chief's word is law.  He might kill and eat a
dozen of his own subjects any day for nothing more than his own pleasure,
and nobody would take the least notice of it."

This ferocious deed took place within sight of our party as we wended our
way to the beach, but I could not observe any other expression on the
faces of the men than that of total indifference or contempt.  It seemed
to me a very awful thing that it should be possible for men to come to
such hardness of heart and callousness to the sight of bloodshed and
violence; but, indeed, I began to find that such constant exposure to
scenes of blood was having a slight effect upon myself, and I shuddered
when I came to think that I, too, was becoming callous.

I thought upon this subject much that night while I walked up and down
the deck during my hours of watch; and I came to the conclusion that if
I, who hated, abhorred, and detested such bloody deeds as I had witnessed
within the last few weeks, could so soon come to be less sensitive about
them, how little wonder that these poor ignorant savages, who were born
and bred in familiarity therewith, should think nothing of them at all,
and should hold human life in so very slight esteem.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Mischief brewing--My blood is made to run cold--Evil consultations and
wicked resolves--Bloody Bill attempts to do good and fails--The
attack--Wholesale murder--The flight--The escape.

Next morning I awoke with a feverish brow and a feeling of deep
depression at my heart; and the more I thought on my unhappy fate, the
more wretched and miserable did I feel.

I was surrounded on all sides by human beings of the most dreadful
character, to whom the shedding of blood was mere pastime.  On shore were
the natives, whose practices were so horrible that I could not think of
them without shuddering.  On board were none but pirates of the blackest
dye, who, although not cannibals, were foul murderers, and more
blameworthy even than the savages, inasmuch as they knew better.  Even
Bill, with whom I had, under the strange circumstances of my lot, formed
a kind of intimacy, was so fierce in his nature as to have acquired the
title of "Bloody" from his vile companions.  I felt very much cast down
the more I considered the subject and the impossibility of delivery, as
it seemed to me, at least for a long time to come.  At last, in my
feeling of utter helplessness, I prayed fervently to the Almighty that he
would deliver me out of my miserable condition; and when I had done so I
felt some degree of comfort.

When the captain came on deck, before the hour at which the men usually
started for the woods, I begged of him to permit me to remain aboard that
day, as I did not feel well; but he looked at me angrily, and ordered me,
in a surly tone, to get ready to go on shore as usual.  The fact was that
the captain had been out of humour for some time past.  Romata and he had
had some differences, and high words had passed between them, during
which the chief had threatened to send a fleet of his war-canoes, with a
thousand men, to break up and burn the schooner; whereupon the captain
smiled sarcastically, and going up to the chief gazed sternly in his
face, while he said, "I have only to raise my little finger just now, and
my big gun will blow your whole village to atoms in five minutes!"
Although the chief was a bold man, he quailed before the pirate's glance
and threat, and made no reply; but a bad feeling had been raised and old
sores had been opened.

I had, therefore, to go with the wood-cutters that day.  Before starting,
however, the captain called me into the cabin, and said,--

"Here, Ralph, I've got a mission for you, lad.  That blackguard Romata is
in the dumps, and nothing will mollify him but a gift; so do you go up to
his house and give him these whales' teeth, with my compliments.  Take
with you one of the men who can speak the language."

I looked at the gift in some surprise, for it consisted of six white
whales' teeth, and two of the same dyed bright red, which seemed to me
very paltry things.  However, I did not dare to hesitate or ask any
questions; so, gathering them up, I left the cabin and was soon on my way
to the chief's house, accompanied by Bill.  On expressing my surprise at
the gift, he said,--

"They're paltry enough to you or me, Ralph, but they're considered of
great value by them chaps.  They're a sort o' cash among them.  The red
ones are the most prized, one of them bein' equal to twenty o' the white
ones.  I suppose the only reason for their bein' valuable is that there
ain't many of them, and they're hard to be got."

On arriving at the house we found Romata sitting on a mat, in the midst
of a number of large bales of native cloth and other articles, which had
been brought to him as presents from time to time by inferior chiefs.  He
received us rather haughtily, but on Bill explaining the nature of our
errand he became very condescending, and his eyes glistened with
satisfaction when he received the whales' teeth, although he laid them
aside with an assumption of kingly indifference.

"Go," said he, with a wave of the hand,--"go, tell your captain that he
may cut wood to-day, but not to-morrow.  He must come ashore,--I want to
have a palaver with him."

As we left the house to return to the woods, Bill shook his head:

"There's mischief brewin' in that black rascal's head.  I know him of
old.  But what comes here?"

As he spoke, we heard the sound of laughter and shouting in the wood, and
presently there issued from it a band of savages, in the midst of whom
were a number of men bearing burdens on their shoulders.  At first I
thought that these burdens were poles with something rolled round them,
the end of each pole resting on a man's shoulder.  But on a nearer
approach I saw that they were human beings, tied hand and foot, and so
lashed to the poles that they could not move.  I counted twenty of them
as they passed.

"More murder!" said Bill, in a voice that sounded between a hoarse laugh
and a groan.

"Surely they are not going to murder them?" said I, looking anxiously
into Bill's face.

"I don't know, Ralph," replied Bill, "what they're goin' to do with them;
but I fear they mean no good when they tie fellows up in that way."

As we continued our way towards the wood-cutters, I observed that Bill
looked anxiously over his shoulder, in the direction where the procession
had disappeared.  At last he stopped, and turning abruptly on his heel,
said,--

"I tell ye what it is, Ralph, I must be at the bottom o' that affair.  Let
us follow these black scoundrels and see what they're goin' to do."

I must say I had no wish to pry further into their bloody practices; but
Bill seemed bent on it, so I turned and went.  We passed rapidly through
the bush, being guided in the right direction by the shouts of the
savages.  Suddenly there was a dead silence, which continued for some
time, while Bill and I involuntarily quickened our pace until we were
running at the top of our speed across the narrow neck of land previously
mentioned.  As we reached the verge of the wood, we discovered the
savages surrounding the large war-canoe, which they were apparently on
the point of launching.  Suddenly the multitude put their united strength
