to cook some rice, and they rubbed the stick to make a fire, and when
the fire was kindled they cooked the rice and ate it. Then they began
their climb.

Suddenly, when they had almost reached the top, a slave who was on in
front cried:

'Master! Master!' And the boy pushed on to where the slave stood, and
the slave said:

'Cast your eyes down to the foot of the mountain.' And the boy looked,
and his soul told him it was the Nunda.

And he crept down with his spear in his hand, and then he stopped and
gazed below him.

'This MUST be the real Nunda,' thought he. 'My mother told me its ears
were small, and this one's are small. She told me it was broad and not
long, and this is broad and not long. She told me it had spots like a
civet-cat, and this has spots like a civet-cat.'

Then he left the Nunda lying asleep at the foot of the mountain, and
went back to his slaves.

'We will feast to-day,' he said; 'make cakes of batter, and bring
water,' and they ate and drank. And when they had finished he bade them
hide the rest of the food in the thicket, that if they slew the Nunda
they might return and eat and sleep before going back to the town. And
the slaves did as he bade them.

It was now afternoon, and the lad said: 'It is time we went after the
Nunda.' And they went till they reached the bottom and came to a great
forest which lay between them and the Nunda.

Here the lad stopped, and ordered every slave that wore two cloths to
cast one away and tuck up the other between his legs. 'For,' said he,
'the wood is not a little one. Perhaps we may be caught by the thorns,
or perhaps we may have to run before the Nunda, and the cloth might bind
our legs, and cause us to fall before it.'

And they answered, 'Good, master,' and did as he bade them. Then they
crawled on their hands and knees to where the Nunda lay asleep.

Noiselessly they crept along till they were quite close to it; then, at
a sign from the boy, they threw their spears. The Nunda did not stir:
the spears had done their work, but a great fear seized them all, and
they ran away and climbed the mountain.

The sun was setting when they reached the top, and glad they were to
take out the fruit and the cakes and the water which they had hidden
away, and sit down and rest themselves. And after they had eaten and
were filled, they lay down and slept till morning.

When the dawn broke they rose up and cooked more rice, and drank more
water. After that they walked all round the back of the mountain to the
place where they had left the Nunda, and they saw it stretched out where
they had found it, stiff and dead. And they took it up and carried it
back to the town, singing as they went, 'He has killed the Nunda, the
eater of people.'

And when his father heard the news, and that his son was come, and was
bringing the Nunda with him, he felt that the man did not dwell on the
earth whose joy was greater than his. And the people bowed down to the
boy and gave him presents, and loved him, because he had delivered them
from the bondage of fear, and had slain the Nunda.

(Adapted from Swahili Tales.)




THE STORY OF HASSEBU

Once upon a time there lived a poor woman who had only one child, and
he was a little boy called Hassebu. When he ceased to be a baby, and
his mother thought it was time for him to learn to read, she sent him
to school. And, after he had done with school, he was put into a shop
to learn how to make clothes, and did not learn; and he was put to do
silversmith's work, and did not learn; and whatsoever he was taught, he
did not learn it. His mother never wished him to do anything he did not
like, so she said: 'Well, stay at home, my son.' And he stayed at home,
eating and sleeping.

One day the boy said to his mother: 'What was my father's business?'

'He was a very learned doctor,' answered she.

'Where, then, are his books?' asked Hassebu.

'Many days have passed, and I have thought nothing of them. But look
inside and see if they are there.' So Hassebu looked, and saw they were
eaten by insects, all but one book, which he took away and read.

He was sitting at home one morning poring over the medicine book, when
some neighbours came by and said to his mother: 'Give us this boy, that
we may go together to cut wood.' For wood-cutting was their trade, and
they loaded several donkeys with the wood, and sold it in the town.

And his mother answered, 'Very well; to-morrow I will buy him a donkey,
and you can all go together.'

So the donkey was bought, and the neighbours came, and they worked hard
all day, and in the evening they brought the wood back into the town,
and sold it for a good sum of money. And for six days they went and did
the like, but on the seventh it rained, and the wood-cutters ran and
hid in the rocks, all but Hassebu, who did not mind wetting, and stayed
where he was.

While he was sitting in the place where the wood-cutters had left him,
he took up a stone that lay near him, and idly dropped it on the ground.
It rang with a hollow sound, and he called to his companions, and said,
'Come here and listen; the ground seems hollow!'

'Knock again!' cried they. And he knocked and listened.

'Let us dig,' said the boy. And they dug, and found a large pit like a
well, filled with honey up to the brim.

'This is better than firewood,' said they; 'it will bring us more money.
And as you have found it, Hassebu, it is you who must go inside and dip
out the honey and give to us, and we will take it to the town and sell
it, and will divide the money with you.'

The following day each man brought every bowl and vessel he could find
at home, and Hassebu filled them all with honey. And this he did every
day for three months.

At the end of that time the honey was very nearly finished, and there
was only a little left, quite at the bottom, and that was very deep
down, so deep that it seemed as if it must be right in the middle of the
earth. Seeing this, the men said to Hassebu, 'We will put a rope under
your arms, and let you down, so that you may scrape up all the honey
that is left, and when you have done we will lower the rope again, and
you shall make it fast, and we will draw you up.'

'Very well,' answered the boy, and he went down, and he scraped and
scraped till there was not so much honey left as would cover the point
of a needle. 'Now I am ready!' he cried; but they consulted together and
said, 'Let us leave him there inside the pit, and take his share of the
money, and we will tell his mother, "Your son was caught by a lion and
carried off into the forest, and we tried to follow him, but could not."'

Then they arose and went into the town and told his mother as they had
agreed, and she wept much and made her mourning for many months. And
when the men were dividing the money, one said, 'Let us send a little to
our friend's mother,' and they sent some to her; and every day one took
her rice, and one oil; one took her meat, and one took her cloth, every
day.

It did not take long for Hassebu to find out that his companions had
left him to die in the pit, but he had a brave heart, and hoped that
he might be able to find a way out for himself. So he at once began to
explore the pit and found it ran back a long way underground. And by
night he slept, and by day he took a little of the honey he had gathered
and ate it; and so many days passed by.

One morning, while he was sitting on a rock having his breakfast, a
large scorpion dropped down at his feet, and he took a stone and killed
it, fearing it would sting him. Then suddenly the thought darted into
his head, 'This scorpion must have come from somewhere! Perhaps there is
a hole. I will go and look for it,' and he felt all round the walls of
the pit till he found a very little hole in the roof of the pit, with
a tiny glimmer of light at the far end of it. Then his heart felt glad,
and he took out his knife and dug and dug, till the little hole became
a big one, and he could wriggle himself through. And when he had got
outside, he saw a large open space in front of him, and a path leading
out of it.

He went along the path, on and on, till he reached a large house, with a
golden door standing open. Inside was a great hall, and in the middle
of the hall a throne set with precious stones and a sofa spread with
the softest cushions. And he went in and lay down on it, and fell fast
asleep, for he had wandered far.

By-and-by there was a sound of people coming through the courtyard, and
the measured tramp of soldiers. This was the King of the Snakes coming
in state to his palace.

They entered the hall, but all stopped in surprise at finding a man
lying on the king's own bed. The soldiers wished to kill him at once,
but the king said, 'Leave him alone, put me on a chair,' and the
soldiers who were carrying him knelt on the floor, and he slid from
their shoulders on to a chair. When he was comfortably seated, he turned
to his soldiers, and bade them wake the stranger gently. And they woke
him, and he sat up and saw many snakes all round him, and one of them
very beautiful, decked in royal robes.

'Who are you?' asked Hassebu.

'I am the King of the Snakes,' was the reply, 'and this is my palace.
And will you tell me who you are, and where you come from?'

'My name is Hassebu, but whence I come I know not, nor whither I go.'

'Then stay for a little with me,' said the king, and he bade his
soldiers bring water from the spring and fruits from the forest, and to
set them before the guest.

For some days Hassebu rested and feasted in the palace of the King
of the Snakes, and then he began to long for his mother and his own
country. So he said to the King of the Snakes, 'Send me home, I pray.'

But the King of the Snakes answered, 'When you go home, you will do me
evil!'

'I will do you no evil,' replied Hassebu; 'send me home, I pray.'

But the king said, 'I know it. If I send you home, you will come back,
and kill me. I dare not do it.' But Hassebu begged so hard that at last
the king said, 'Swear that when you get home you will not go to bathe
where many people are gathered.' And Hassebu swore, and the king ordered
his soldiers to take Hassebu in sight of his native city. Then he went
straight to his mother's house, and the heart of his mother was glad.

Now the Sultan of the city was very ill, and all the wise men said that
the only thing to cure him was the flesh of the King of the Snakes, and
that the only man who could get it was a man with a strange mark on his
chest. So the Vizir had set people to watch at the public baths, to see
if such a man came there.

For three days Hassebu remembered his promise to the King of the Snakes,
and did not go near the baths; then came a morning so hot he could
hardly breathe, and he forgot all about it.

The moment he had slipped off his robe he was taken before the Vizir,
who said to him, 'Lead us to the place where the King of the Snakes
lives.'

'I do not know it!' answered he, but the Vizir did not believe him, and
had him bound and beaten till his back was all torn.

Then Hassebu cried, 'Loose me, that I may take you.'

They went together a long, long way, till they reached the palace of the
King of the Snakes.

And Hassebu said to the King: 'It was not I: look at my back and you
will see how they drove me to it.'

'Who has beaten you like this?' asked the King.

'It was the Vizir,' replied Hassebu.

'Then I am already dead,' said the King sadly, 'but you must carry me
there yourself.'

So Hassebu carried him. And on the way the King said, 'When I arrive, I
shall be killed, and my flesh will be cooked. But take some of the water
that I am boiled in, and put it in a bottle and lay it on one side. The
Vizir will tell you to drink it, but be careful not to do so. Then
take some more of the water, and drink it, and you will become a great
physician, and the third supply you will give to the Sultan. And when
the Vizir comes to you and asks, "Did you drink what I gave you?" you
must answer, "I did, and this is for you," and he will drink it and die!
and your soul will rest.'

And they went their way into the town, and all happened as the King of
the Snakes had said.

And the Sultan loved Hassebu, who became a great physician, and cured
many sick people. But he was always sorry for the poor King of the
Snakes.

(Adapted from Swahili Tales,)




THE MAIDEN WITH THE WOODEN HELMET

In a little village in the country of Japan there lived long, long ago a
man and his wife. For many years they were happy and prosperous, but bad
times came, and at last nothing was left them but their daughter, who
was as beautiful as the morning. The neighbours were very kind, and
would have done anything they could to help their poor friends, but the
old couple felt that since everything had changed they would rather go
elsewhere, so one day they set off to bury themselves in the country,
taking their daughter with them.

Now the mother and daughter had plenty to do in keeping the house clean
and looking after the garden, but the man would sit for hours together
gazing straight in front of him, and thinking of the riches that once
were his. Each day he grew more and more wretched, till at length he
took to his bed and never got up again.

His wife and daughter wept bitterly for his loss, and it was many months
before they could take pleasure in anything. Then one morning the mother
suddenly looked at the girl, and found that she had grown still more
lovely than before. Once her heart would have been glad at the sight,
but now that they two were alone in the world she feared some harm might
come of it. So, like a good mother, she tried to teach her daughter all
she knew, and to bring her up to be always busy, so that she would never
have time to think about herself. And the girl was a good girl, and
listened to all her mother's lessons, and so the years passed away.

At last one wet spring the mother caught cold, and though in the
beginning she did not pay much attention to it, she gradually grew more
and more ill, and knew that she had not long to live. Then she called
her daughter and told her that very soon she would be alone in the
world; that she must take care of herself, as there would be no one to
take care of her. And because it was more difficult for beautiful women
to pass unheeded than for others, she bade her fetch a wooden helmet out
of the next room, and put it on her head, and pull it low down over her
brows, so that nearly the whole of her face should lie in its shadow.
The girl did as she was bid, and her beauty was so hidden beneath the
wooden cap, which covered up all her hair, that she might have gone
through any crowd, and no one would have looked twice at her. And when
she saw this the heart of the mother was at rest, and she lay back in
her bed and died.

The girl wept for many days, but by-and-by she felt that, being alone in
the world, she must go and get work, for she had only herself to depend
upon. There was none to be got by staying where she was, so she made her
clothes into a bundle, and walked over the hills till she reached the
house of the man who owned the fields in that part of the country. And
she took service with him and laboured for him early and late, and every
night when she went to bed she was at peace, for she had not forgotten
one thing that she had promised her mother; and, however hot the sun
might be, she always kept the wooden helmet on her head, and the people
gave her the nickname of Hatschihime.

In spite, however, of all her care the fame of her beauty spread abroad:
many of the impudent young men that are always to be found in the world
stole softly up behind her while she was at work, and tried to lift off
the wooden helmet. But the girl would have nothing to say to them, and
only bade them be off; then they began to talk to her, but she never
answered them, and went on with what she was doing, though her wages
were low and food not very plentiful. Still she could manage to live,
and that was enough.

One day her master happened to pass through the field where she was
working, and was struck by her industry and stopped to watch her. After
a while he put one or two questions to her, and then led her into his
house, and told her that henceforward her only duty should be to tend
his sick wife. From this time the girl felt as if all her troubles were
ended, but the worst of them was yet to come.

Not very long after Hatschihime had become maid to the sick woman, the
eldest son of the house returned home from Kioto, where he had been
studying all sorts of things. He was tired of the splendours of the town
and its pleasures, and was glad enough to be back in the green country,
among the peach-blossoms and sweet flowers. Strolling about in the early
morning, he caught sight of the girl with the odd wooden helmet on her
head, and immediately he went to his mother to ask who she was, and
where she came from, and why she wore that strange thing over her face.

His mother answered that it was a whim, and nobody could persuade her
to lay it aside; whereat the young man laughed, but kept his thoughts to
himself.

One hot day, however, he happened to be going towards home when he
caught sight of his mother's waiting maid kneeling by a little stream
that flowed through the garden, splashing some water over her face.
The helmet was pushed on one side, and as the youth stood watching
from behind a tree he had a glimpse of the girl's great beauty; and he
determined that no one else should be his wife. But when he told his
family of his resolve to marry her they were very angry, and made up
all sorts of wicked stories about her. However, they might have spared
themselves the trouble, as he knew it was only idle talk. 'I have merely
to remain firm,' thought he, 'and they will have to give in.' It was
such a good match for the girl that it never occurred to anyone that she
would refuse the young man, but so it was. It would not be right, she
felt, to make a quarrel in the house, and though in secret she wept
bitterly, for a long while, nothing would make her change her mind. At
length one night her mother appeared to her in a dream, and bade her
marry the young man. So the next time he asked her--as he did nearly
every day--to his surprise and joy she consented. The parents then saw
they had better make the best of a bad business, and set about
making the grand preparations suitable to the occasion. Of course the
neighbours said a great many ill-natured things about the wooden helmet,
but the bridegroom was too happy to care, and only laughed at them.

When everything was ready for the feast, and the bride was dressed in
the most beautiful embroidered dress to be found in Japan, the maids
took hold of the helmet to lift it off her head, so that they might do
her hair in the latest fashion. But the helmet would not come, and
the harder they pulled, the faster it seemed to be, till the poor girl
yelled with pain. Hearing her cries the bridegroom ran in and soothed
her, and declared that she should be married in the helmet, as she could
not be married without. Then the ceremonies began, and the bridal pair
sat together, and the cup of wine was brought them, out of which they
had to drink. And when they had drunk it all, and the cup was empty, a
wonderful thing happened. The helmet suddenly burst with a loud noise,
