
Mr. Hardy stopped on the way to examine the wounded men. He had
acquired a slight knowledge of rough surgery in his early life upon
the prairies, and he discovered the bullet at a short distance
under the skin in the broken leg. Making signs to the man that he
was going to do him good, and calling in Fitzgerald and Lopez to
hold the Indian if necessary, he took out his knife, cut down to
the bullet, and with some trouble succeeded in extracting it. The
Indian never flinched or groaned, although the pain must have been
very great while the operation was being performed. Mr. Hardy then
carefully bandaged the limb, and directed that cold water should be
poured over it from time to time, to allay the inflammation.
Another of the Indians had his ankle-joint broken: this was also
carefully bandaged. The third had a bullet wound near the hip, and
with this Mr. Hardy could do nothing. His recovery or death would
depend entirely upon nature.

It may here be mentioned at once that all three of the Indians
eventually recovered, although two of them were slightly lamed for
life. All that care and attention could do for them was done; and
when they were in a fit condition to travel their horses and a
supply of provisions were given to them. The Indians had maintained
during the whole time the stolid apathy of their race. They had
expressed no thanks for the kindness bestowed upon them. Only when
their horses were presented to them, and bows and arrows placed in
their hands, with an intimation that they were free to go, did
their countenances change.

Up to that time it is probable that they believed that they were
only being kept to be solemnly put to death. Their faces lit up,
and without a word they sprang on to the horses' backs, and dashed
over the plains.

Ere they had gone three hundred yards they halted, and came back at
equal speed, stopping abruptly before the surprised and rather
startled group. "Good man," the eldest of them said, pointing to
Mr. Hardy. "Good," he repeated, motioning to the boys. "Good
misses," and he included Mrs. Hardy and the girls; and then the
three turned-and never slackened their speed as long as they were
in sight.

The Indians of the South American pampas and sierras are a very
inferior race to the noble-looking Comanches and Apaches of the
North American prairies. They are generally short, wiry men, with
long black hair. They have flat faces, with high cheek bones. Their
complexion is a dark copper color, and they are generally extremely
ugly.

In the course of the morning after the fight Mr. Cooper rode over
from Canterbury, and was greatly surprised to hear of the attack.
The Indians had not been seen or heard of at his estate, and he was
ignorant of anything having taken place until his arrival.

For the next few days there was quite a levee of visitors, who came
over to hear of the particulars, and to offer their congratulations.
All the outlying settlers were particularly pleased, as it was
considered certain that the Indians would not visit that neighborhood
again for some time.

Shortly afterward the government sales for the land beyond Mount
Pleasant took place. Mr. Hardy went over to Rosario to attend them,
and bought the plot of four square leagues immediately adjoining
his own, giving the same price that he had paid for Mount Pleasant.
The properties on each side of this were purchased by the two
Edwards, and by an Englishman who had lately arrived in the colony.
His name was Mercer: he was accompanied by his wife and two young
children, and his wife's brother, whose name was Parkinson. Mr.
Hardy had made their acquaintance at Rosario, and pronounced them
to be a very pleasant family. They had brought out a considerable
capital, and were coming in a week with a strong force to erect
their house. Mr. Hardy had promised them every assistance, and had
invited Mrs. Mercer to take up her abode at Mount Pleasant with her
children, until the frame house which they had brought out could be
erected--an invitation which had been gladly accepted.

There was great pleasure at the thought of another lady in the
neighborhood; and Mrs. Hardy was especially pleased for the girls'
sake, as she thought that a little female society would be of very
great advantage to them.

The plots of land next to the Mercers and Edwards were bought, the
one by three or four Germans working as a company together, the
other by Don Martinez, an enterprising young Spaniard; so that the
Hardys began to be in quite an inhabited country. It is true that
most of the houses would be six miles off; but that is close, on
the pampas. There was a talk, too, of the native overseer of the
land between Canterbury and the Jamiesons selling his ground in
plots of a mile square. This would make the country comparatively
thickly populated. Indeed, with the exception of Mr. Mercer, who
had taken up a four-league plot, the other new settlers had in no
case purchased more than a square league. The settlements would
therefore be pretty thick together.

In a few days Mrs. Mercer arrived with her children. The boys gave
up their room to her--they themselves, with Mr. Fitzgerald and four
peons, accompanying Mr. Mercer and the party he had brought with
him, to assist in erecting his house, and in putting up a strong
wire fence, similar to their own, for defense. This operation was
finished in a week; and Mrs. Mercer, to the regret of Mrs. Hardy
and the girls, then joined her husband. The house had been built
near the northeast corner of the property. It was therefore little
more than six miles distant from Mount Pleasant, and a constant
interchange of visits was arranged to take place.

Shortly afterward Mr. Hardy suggested that the time had now come
for improving the house, and laid before his assembled family his
plans for so doing, which were received with great applause.

The new portion was to stand in front of the old, and was to
consist of a wide entrance-hall, with a large dining and
drawing-room upon either side. Upon the floor above were to be four
bedrooms. The old sitting-room was to be made into the kitchen, and
was to be lighted by a skylight in the roof. The present kitchen
was to become a laundry, the windows of that and the bedroom
opposite being placed in the side walls, instead of being in front.
The new portion was to be made of properly baked bricks, and was to
be surrounded by a wide veranda. Of the present bedrooms, two were
to be used as spare rooms, one of the others being devoted to two
additional indoor servants whom it was now proposed to keep.

It was arranged that the carts should at once commence going
backward and forward to Rosario, to fetch coal for the brickmaking,
tiles, wood, etc., and that an experienced brickmaker should be
engaged, all the hands at the farm being fully occupied. It would
take a month or six weeks, it was calculated, before all would be
ready to begin building; and then Mrs. Hardy and the girls were to
start for a long promised visit to their friends the Thompsons,
near Buenos Ayres, so as to be away during the mess and confusion
of the building. An engagement was made on the following week with
two Italian women at Rosario, the one as a cook, the other as
general servant, Sarah undertaking the management of the dairy
during her mistress' absence.




CHAPTER XIV.

TERRIBLE NEWS.


Another two years passed over, bringing increased prosperity to the
Hardys. No renewal of the Indian attacks had occurred, and in
consequence an increased flow of emigration had taken place in
their neighborhood. Settlers were now established upon all the lots
for many miles upon either side of Mount Pleasant; and even beyond
the twelve miles which the estate stretched to the south the lots
had been sold. Mr. Hardy considered that all danger of the flocks
and herds being driven off had now ceased, and had therefore added
considerably to their numbers, and had determined to allow them to
increase without further sales until they had attained to the
extent of the supporting power of the immense estate.

Two hundred acres of irrigated land were under cultivation; the
dairy contained the produce of a hundred cows; and altogether Mount
Pleasant was considered one of the finest and most profitable
estancias in the province.

The house was now worthy of the estate; the inside fence had been
removed fifty yards further off, and the vegetable garden to a
greater distance, the includes space being laid out entirely as a
pleasure garden.

Beautiful tropical trees and shrubs, gorgeous patches of flowers,
and green turf surrounded the front and sides; while behind was a
luxuriant and most productive orchard.

The young Hardys had for come time given up doing any personal
labor, and were incessantly occupied in the supervision of the
estate and of the numerous hands employed: for them a long range of
adobe huts had been built at some little distance in the rear of
the enclosure.

Maud and Ethel had during this period devoted much more time to
their studies, and the time was approaching when Mrs. Hardy was to
return with them to England, in order that they might pass a year
in London under the instruction of the best masters. Maud was now
seventeen, and could fairly claim to be looked upon as a young
woman. Ethel still looked very much younger than her real age: any
one, indeed, would have guessed that there was at least three
years' difference between the sisters. In point of acquirements,
however, she was quite her equal, her much greater perseverance
more than making up for her sister's quickness.

A year previously Mr. Hardy had, at one of his visits to Buenos
Ayres, purchased a piano, saying nothing of what he had done upon
his return; and the delight of the girls and their mother, when the
instrument arrived in a bullock cart, was unbounded. From that time
the girls practiced almost incessantly; indeed, as Charley
remarked, it was as bad as living in the house with a whole
boarding-school of girls.

After this Mount Pleasant, which had always been considered as the
most hospitable and pleasant estancia in the district, became more
than ever popular, and many were the impromptu dances got up.
Sometimes there were more formal affairs, and all the ladies within
twenty miles would come in. These were more numerous than would
have been expected. The Jamiesons were doing well, and in turn
going for a visit to their native country, had brought out two
bright young Scotchwomen as their wives.

Mrs. Mercer was sure to be there, and four or five other English
ladies from nearer or more distant estancias. Some ten or twelve
native ladies, wives or daughters of native proprietors, would also
come in, and the dancing would be kept up until a very late hour.
Then the ladies would lie down for a short time, all the beds being
given up to them, and a number of shake-downs improvised; while the
gentlemen would sit and smoke for an hour or two, and then, as day
broke, go down for a bathe in the river. These parties were looked
upon by all as most enjoyable affairs; and as eatables of all sorts
were provided by the estate itself, they were a very slight
expense, and were of frequent occurrence. Only one thing Mr. Hardy
bargained for--no wines or other expensive liquors were to be
drunk. He was doing well--far, indeed, beyond his utmost
expectation--but at the same time he did not consider himself
justified in spending money upon luxuries.

Tea, therefore, and cooling drinks made from fruits, after the
custom of the country, were provided in abundance for the dancers;
but wine was not produced. With this proviso, Mr. Hardy had no
objection to his young people having their dances frequently; and
in a country where all were living in a rough way, and wine was an
unknown luxury, no one missed it. In other respects the supper
tables might have been admired at an English ball. Of substantials
there was abundance--turkeys and fowls, wild duck and other game.
The sweets were represented by trifle, creams, and blanc-manges;
while there was a superb show of fruit--apricots, peaches,
nectarines, pineapples, melons, and grapes. Among them were vases
of gorgeous flowers, most of them tropical in character, but with
them were many old English friends, of which Mr. Hardy had procured
seeds.

Their neighbors at Canterbury were still their most intimate
friends: they were shortly, however, to lose one of them. Mr.
Cooper had heard six months before of the death of his two elder
brothers in rapid succession, and he was now heir to his father's
property, which was very extensive. It had been supposed that he
would at once return to England, and he was continually talking of
doing so; but he had, under one excuse or other, put off his
departure from time to time. He was very frequently over at Mount
Pleasant and was generally a companion of the boys upon their
excursions.

"I think Cooper is almost as much here as he is at Canterbury,"
Charley said, laughing, one day.

Mrs. Hardy happened to glance at Maud, and noticed a bright flush
of color on her cheeks. She made no remark at the time, but spoke
to Mr. Hardy about it at night.

"You see, my dear," she concluded, "we are still considering Maud
as a child, but other people may look upon her as a woman."

"I am sorry for this," Mr. Hardy said after a pause, "We ought to
have foreseen the possibility of such a thing. Now that it is
mentioned, I wonder we did not do so before. Mr. Cooper has been
here so much that the thing would have certainly struck us, had we
not, as you say, looked upon Maud as a child. Against Mr. Cooper I
have nothing to say. We both like him extremely. His principles are
good, and he would, in point of money, be of course an excellent
match for our little girl. At the same time, I cannot permit
anything like an engagement. Mr. Cooper has seen no other ladies
for so long a time that it is natural enough he should fall in love
with Maud. Maud, on the other hand, has only seen the fifteen or
twenty men who came here; she knows nothing of the world and is
altogether inexperienced. They are both going to England, and may
not improbably meet people whom they may like very much better, and
may look upon this love-making in the pampas as a folly. At the end
of another two years, when Maud is nineteen, if Mr. Cooper renew
the acquaintance in England, and both parties agree, I shall of
course offer no objection, and indeed should rejoice much at a
match which would promise well for her happiness."

Mrs. Hardy thoroughly agreed with her husband, and so the matter
rested for a short time.

It was well that Mr. Hardy had been warned by his wife, for a week
after this Mr. Cooper met him alone when he was out riding, and
after some introduction, expressed to him that he had long felt
that he had loved his daughter, but had waited until she was
seventeen before expressing his wishes. He said that he had delayed
his departure for England on this account alone, and now asked
permission to pay his addresses to her, adding that he hoped that
he was not altogether indifferent to her.

Mr. Hardy heard him quietly to the end.

"I can hardly say that I am unprepared for what you say, Mr.
Cooper, although I had never thought of such a thing until two days
since. Then your long delay here, and your frequent visits to our
house, opened the eyes of Mrs. Hardy and myself. To yourself,
personally, I can entertain no objection. Still, when I remember
that you are only twenty-six, and that for the last four years you
have seen no one with whom you could possibly fall in love, with
the exception of my daughter, I can hardly think that you have had
sufficient opportunity to know your own mind. When you return to
England you will meet young ladies very much prettier and very much
more accomplished than my Maud, and you may regret the haste which
led you to form an engagement out here."

"You shake your head, as is natural that you should do; but I
repeat, you cannot at present know your own mind. If this is true
of you, it is still more true of my daughter. She is very young,
and knows nothing whatever of the world. Next month she proceeds to
England with her mother, and for the next two years she will be
engaged upon finishing her education. At the end of that time I
shall myself return to England, and we shall then enter into
society. If at that time you are still of the same way of thinking,
and choose to renew our acquaintance, I shall be very happy, in the
event of Maud accepting you, to give my consent. But I must insist
that there shall be no engagement, no love-making, no understanding
of any sort or kind, before you start. I put it to your honor as a
gentleman, that you will make no effort to meet her alone, and that
you will say nothing whatever to her, to lead her to believe that
you are in love with her. Only when you say good-by to her, you may
say that I have told you that as the next two years are to be
passed in study, to make up for past deficiencies, I do not wish
her to enter at all into society, but that at the end of that time
you hope to renew the acquaintance."

Mr. Cooper endeavored in vain to alter Mr. Hardy's determination,
and was at last obliged to give the required promise.

Mr. and Mrs. Hardy were not surprised when, two or three days after
this, Mr. Cooper rode up and said that he had come to say good-by,
