appeal made by Clara.

"Why don't you answer me, Patience?", said Clara.

"My dear Clara, it's not the custom for young maidens to make remarks
upon people's attire. Little girls like you may do so."

"Why, did you not tell Pablo that he looked well in his new clothes?"

"Yes, but Pablo is not Mr. Armitage, Clara. That is very different."

"Well, it may be, but still you might answer a question, if put to you,
Patience: and I ask again, does not Edward look much better in the
dress he has on than in the one that he has generally worn?"

"I think it a becoming dress, Clara, since you will have an answer."

"Fine feathers make fine birds, Clara," said Edward, laughing; "and so
that is all we can say about it."

Edward then changed the conversation. Soon afterward dinner was
announced, and Clara again observed to Edward,

"Why do you always call Patience Mistress Heatherstone? Ought he not to
call her Patience, sir?" said Clara, appealing to the intendant.

"That must depend upon his own feelings, my dear Clara," replied Mr.
Heatherstone. "It is my intention to wave ceremony as much as possible.
Edward Armitage has come to live with us as one of the family, and he
will find himself treated by me as one of us. I shall, therefore, in
future address him as Edward; and he has my full permission, and I may
say it is my wish, that he should be on the same familiar terms with us
all. When Edward feels inclined to address my daughter as he does you,
by her name of baptism, he will, I dare say, now that he has heard my
opinion, do so; and reserve 'Mistress Heatherstone,' for the time when
they have a quarrel."

"Then I hope he will never again address me that way," observed
Patience, "for I am under too great obligations to him to bear even the
idea of being on bad terms with him."

"Do you hear that, Edward?" said Clara.

"Yes, I do, Clara, and after such a remark you may be sure that I shall
never address her in that way again."

In a few days, Edward became quite at home. In the forenoon, Mr.
Heatherstone dictated one or two letters to him, which he wrote; and
after that his time was at his own disposal, and was chiefly passed in
the company of Patience and Clara. With the first he had now become on
the most intimate and brotherly footing; and when they addressed each
other, Patience and Edward were the only appellations made use of. Once
Mr. Heatherstone asked Edward whether he would not like to go out with
Oswald to kill a deer, which he did; but the venison was hardly yet in
season. There was a fine horse in the stable at Edward's order, and he
often rode out with Patience and Clara; indeed his time passed so
agreeably that he could hardly think it possible that a fortnight had
passed away, when he asked permission to go over to the cottage and see
his sisters. With the intendant's permission, Patience and Clara
accompanied him; and the joy of Alice and Edith was great when they
made their appearance. Oswald had, by Edward's request, gone over a day
or two before, to tell them that they were coming, that they might be
prepared; and the consequence was, that it was a holyday at the
cottage. Alice had cooked her best dinner, and Humphrey and Pablo were
at home to receive them.

"How pleasant it will be, if we are to see you and Clara whenever we
see Edward!" said Alice to Patience. "So far from being sorry that
Edward is with you, I shall be quite glad of it."

"I water the flowers every day," said Edith, "and they make the garden
look so gay."

"I will bring you plenty more in the autumn, Edith; but this is not the
right time for transplanting flowers yet," replied Patience. "And now,
Alice, you must take me to see your farm, for when I was here last I
had no time; let us come now, and show me every thing."

"But my dinner, Patience; I can not leave it, or it will be spoiled,
and that will never do. You must either go with Edith now, or wait till
after dinner, when I can get away."

"Well, then, we will stay till after dinner, Alice, and we will help
you to serve it up."

"Thank you; Pablo generally does that, for Edith can not reach down the
things. I don't know where he is."

"He went away with Edward and Humphrey I think," said Edith. "I'll
scold him when he comes back, for being out of the way."

"Never mind, Edith, I can reach the dishes," said Patience, "and you
and Clara can then take them, and the platters, and put them on the
table for Alice."

And Patience did as she proposed, and the dinner was soon afterward on
the table. There was a ham, and two boiled fowls, and a piece of salted
beef, and some roasted kid, besides potatoes and green peas; and when
it is considered that such a dinner was bet on the table by such young
people left entirely to their own exertions and industry, it must be
admitted that it did then and their farm great credit.

In the mean time, Edward and Humphrey, after the first greetings were
over, had walked out to converse, while Pablo had taken the horses into
the stable.

"Well, Humphrey how do you get on?"

"Very well," replied Humphrey. "I have just finished a very tough job.
I have dug out the saw-pit, and have sawed the slabs for the sides of
the pit, and made it quite secure. The large fir-tree that was blown
down is now at the pit, ready for sawing up into planks, and Pablo and
I are to commence to-morrow. At first we made but a bad hand of sawing
off the slabs, but before we had cut them all, we got on pretty well
Pablo don't much like it, and indeed no more do I much, it is such
mechanical work, and so tiring; but he does not complain--I do not
intend that he shall saw more than two days in a week; that will be
sufficient: we shall get on fast enough.

"You are right, Humphrey; it is an old saying, that you must not work a
willing horse to death. Pablo is very willing, but hard work he is not
accustomed to.

"Well, now you must come and look at my flock of goats, Edward, they
are not far off. I have taught Holdfast to take care of them, and he
never leaves them now, and brings them home at night. Watch always
remains with me, and is an excellent dog, and very intelligent."

"You have indeed a fine flock, Humphrey!" said Edward.

"Yes, and they are improved in appearance already since they have been
here. Alice has got her geese and ducks, and I have made a place large
enough for them to wash in, until I have time to dig them out a pond."

"I thought we had gathered more hay than you required; but with this
addition, I think you will find none to spare before the spring."

"So far from it, that I have been mowing down a great deal more,
Edward, and it is almost ready to carry away. Poor Billy has had hard
work of it, I assure you, since he came back, with one thing and
another."

"Poor fellow! but it won't last long, Humphrey," said Edward, smiling;
"the other horses will soon take his place."

"I trust they will," said Humphrey, "at all events by next spring;
before that I do not expect that they will."

"By-the-by, Humphrey, you recollect what I said to you that the robber
I shot told me just before he died."

"Yes, I do recollect it now," replied Humphrey; "but I had quite
forgotten all about it till you mentioned it now, although I wrote it
down that we might not forget it."

"Well, I have been thinking all about it, Humphrey. The robber told me
that the money was mine, taking me for another person; therefore I do
not consider it was given to me, nor do I consider that it was his to
give. I hardly know what to do about it, nor to whom the money can be
said to belong."

"Well, I think I can answer that question. The property of all
malefactors belongs to the king; and therefore this money belongs to
the king; and we may retain it for the king, or use it for his service."

"Yes, it would have belonged to the king, had the man been condemned,
and hung on the gallows as he deserved; but he was not, and therefore I
think that it does not belong to the king."

"Then it belongs to whoever finds it, and who keeps it till it is
claimed--which will never be."

"I think I must speak to the intendant about it," replied Edward; "I
should feel more comfortable."

"Then do so," replied Humphrey; "I think you are right to have no
concealments from him."

"But, Humphrey," replied Edward, laughing, "what silly fellows we are!
we do not yet know whether we shall find any thing; we must first see
if there is any thing buried there; and when we have done so, then we
will decide how to act. I shall, if it please God, be over again in a
fortnight, and in the mean time, do you find out the place, and
ascertain if what the fellow said is true."

"I will," replied Humphrey. "I will go to-morrow, with Billy and the
cart, and take a spade and pickax with me. It may be a fool's errand,
but still they say, and one would credit, for the honor of human
nature, that the words of a dying man are those of truth. We had better
go back now, for I think dinner must be ready."

Now that they had become so intimate with Patience Heatherstone--and, I
may add, so fond of her--there was no longer any restraint, and they
had a very merry dinner party; and after dinner, Patience went out with
Alice and Edith, and looked over the garden and farm. She wished very
much to ascertain if there was any thing that they required, but she
could discover but few things, and those only trifles; but she
recollected them all, and sent them to the cottage a few days
afterward. But the hour of parting arrived, for it was a long ride
back, and they could not stay any longer if they wished to get home
before dark, as Mr. Heatherstone had requested Edward that they should
do; so the horses were brought out, and wishing good-by, they set off
again--little Edith crying after them, "Come again soon! Patience, you
must come again soon!"




CHAPTER XX.


The summer had now advanced, when Oswald one day said to Edward,

"Have you heard the news, sir?"

"Nothing very particular," replied Edward; "I know that General
Cromwell is over in Ireland, and they say very successful; but I have
cared little for particulars."

"They say a great deal more, sir," replied Oswald; "they say that the
king is in Scotland, and that the Scotch have raised an army for him."

"Indeed!" replied Edward, "that is news indeed! The intendant has never
mentioned it to me."

"I dare say not, sir; for he knows your feelings, and would sorry to
part with you."

"I will certainly speak to him on the subject," said Edward, at the
"risk of his displeasure; and join the army I will, if I find what you
say is true. I should hold myself a craven to remain here while the
king is fighting for his own, and not to be at his side."

"Well, sir, I think it is true, for I heard that the Parliament had
sent over for General Cromwell to leave Ireland, and lead the troops
against the Scotch army."

"You drive me mad, Oswald! I will go to the intendant immediately!"

Edward, much excited by the intelligence, went into the room where he
usually sat with the intendant. The latter, who was at his desk, looked
up, and saw how flushed Edward was, and said very quietly,

"Edward, you are excited, I presume, from hearing the news which has
arrived?"

"Yes, sir, I am very much so; and I regret very much that I should be
the last to whom such important news is made known."

"It is, as you say, important news," replied the intendant; "but if you
will sit down, we will talk a little upon the subject."

Edward took a chair, and the intendant said,

"I have no doubt that your present feeling is to go to Scotland, and
join the army without delay."

"Such is my intention, I candidly confess, sir. It is my duty."

"Perhaps you may be persuaded to the contrary before we part," replied
the intendant. "The first duty you owe is to your family in their
present position; they depend upon you; and a false step on your part
would be their ruin. How can you leave them, and leave my employ,
without it being known for what purpose you are gone? It is impossible!
I must myself make it known, and even then it would be very injurious
to me, the very circumstance of my having one of your party in my
service. I am suspected by many already, in consequence of the part I
have taken against the murder of the late king, and also of the lords
who have since suffered. But, Edward, I did not communicate this
intelligence to you for many reasons. I knew that it would soon come to
your ears, and I thought it better that I should be more prepared to
show you that you may do yourself and me harm, and can do no good to
the king. I will now show you that I do put confidence in you; and if
you will read these letters, they will prove to you that I am correct
in what I assert."

The intendant handed three letters to Edward, by which it was evident
that all the king's friends in England were of opinion that the time
was not ripe for the attempt, and that it would be only a sacrifice to
stir in the matter; that the Scotch army raised was composed of those
who were the greatest enemies to the king, and that the best thing that
could happen for the king's interest would be that they were destroyed
by Cromwell; that it was impossible for the English adherents of
Charles to join them, and that the Scotch did not wish them so to do.

"You are no politician, Edward," said the intendant, smiling, as Edward
laid the letters down on the table. "You must admit that, in showing
you these letters, I have put the utmost confidence in you."

"You have, indeed, sir; and, thanking you for having so done, I need
hardly add that your confidence will never be betrayed."

"That I am sure of; and I trust you will now agree with me and my
friends that the best thing is to remain quiet."

"Certainly, sir, and in future I will be guided by you."

"That is all I require of you; and, after that promise, you shall hear
all the news as soon as it arrives. There are thousands who are just as
anxious to see the king on the throne again as you are, Edward--and you
now know that I am one of them; but the hour is not yet come, and we
must bide our time. Depend upon it, General Cromwell will scatter that
army like chaff. He is on his march now. After what has passed between
us this day, Edward, I shall talk unreserved to you on what is going
on."

"I thank you, sir, and I promise you faithfully, as I said before, not
only to be guided by your advice, but to be most secret in all that you
may trust me with."

"I have confidence in you, Edward Armitage; and now we will drop the
subject for the present; Patience and Clara want you to walk with them,
so good-by for the present."

Edward left the intendant, much pleased with the interview. The
intendant kept his word, and concealed nothing from Edward. All turned
out as the intendant had foretold. The Scotch army was cut to pieces by
Cromwell, and the king retreated to the Highlands; and Edward now felt
satisfied that he could do no better than be guided by the intendant in
all his future undertakings.

We must now pass over some time in a few words. Edward continued at the
intendant's, and gave great satisfaction to Mr. Heatherstone. He passed
his time very agreeably, sometimes going out to shoot deer with Oswald,
and often supplying venison to his brother and sisters at the cottage.
During the autumn, Patience very often went to the cottage, and
occasionally Mr. Heatherstone paid them a visit; but after the winter
set in, Edward came over by himself, shooting as he went; and when he
and Smoker came to the cottage, Billy always had a journey to go for
the venison left in the forest. Patience sent Alice many little things
for the use of her and Edith, and some very good books for them to
read; and Humphrey, during the evenings, read with his sisters, that
they might learn what he could teach them. Pablo also learned to read
and write. Humphrey and Pablo had worked at the saw-pit, and had sawed
out a large quantity of boards and timber for building, but the
building was put off till the spring.

The reader may recollect that Edward had proposed to Humphrey that he
should ascertain whether what the robber had stated before his death
relative to his having concealed his ill-gotten wealth under the tree
which was struck by lightning was true. About ten days afterward
Humphrey set off on this expedition. He did not take Pablo with him,
as, although he had a very good opinion of him, he agreed with Oswald
that temptation should not be put in his way. Humphrey considered that
it would be the best plan to go at once to Clara's cottage, and from
that proceed to find the oak-tree mentioned by the robber. When he
arrived at the thicket which surrounded the cottage, it occurred to him
that he would just go through it and see if it was in the state which
they had left it in; for after the intendant had been there, he had
given directions to his men to remain and bury the bodies, and then to
lock up the doors of the cottage, and bring the keys to him, which had
been done. Humphrey tied Billy and the cart to a tree, and walked
through the thicket. As he approached the cottage he heard voices; this
induced him to advance very carefully, for he had not brought his gun
with him. He crouched down as he came to the opening before the
cottage. The doors and windows were open, and there were two men
sitting outside, cleaning their guns; and in one of them Humphrey
recognized the man Corbould, who had been discharged by the intendant
as soon as his wound had been cured, and who was supposed to have gone
to London. Humphrey was too far off to hear what they said; he remained
there some time, and three more men came out of the cottage. Satisfied
with what he had seen, Humphrey cautiously retreated, and, gaining the
outside of the thicket, led away Billy and the cart over the turf, that
the noise of the wheels might not be heard.

"This bodes no good," thought Humphrey as he went along, every now and
then looking back to ascertain if the men had come out and seen him.
"That Corbould we know has vowed vengeance against Edward, and all of
us; and has, no doubt, joined those robbers--for robbers they must
be--that he may fulfill his vow. It is fortunate that I have made the
discovery and I will send over immediately to the intendant." As soon
as a clump of trees had shut out the thicket, and he had no longer any
fear of being seen by these people, Humphrey went in the direction
which the robber had mentioned, and soon afterward he perceived the oak
scathed with lightning, which stood by itself on a green spot of about
twenty acres. It had been a noble tree before it had been destroyed;
now it spread its long naked arms, covering a large space of ground,
but without the least sign of vegetation or life remaining. The trunk
was many feet in diameter, and was apparently quite sound, although the
tree was dead. Humphrey left Billy to feed on the herbage close by, and
then, from the position of the sun in the heavens, ascertained the
point at which he was to dig. First looking around him to see that he
was not overlooked, he took his spade and pick-ax out of the cart and
begun his task. There was a spot not quite so green as the rest, which
Humphrey thought likely to be the very place that he should dig at, as
probably it was not green from the soil having been removed. He
commenced at this spot, and, after a few moments' labor, his pick-ax
struck upon something hard, which, on clearing away the earth, he
discovered to be a wooden lid of a box. Satisfied that he was right,
Humphrey now worked hard, and in a few minutes he had cleared away
sufficiently to be able to lift out the box and place it on the turf.
He was about to examine it, when he perceived, at about five hundred
yards' distance, three men coming toward him. "They have discovered
me," thought Humphrey; "and I must be off as soon as I can." He ran to
Billy, who was close to him, and bringing the cart to where the box
lay, he lifted it in. As he was getting in himself, with the reins in
his hands, he perceived that the three men were running toward him as
fast as they could, and that they all had guns in their hands. They
were not more than a hundred and fifty yards from him when Humphrey set
off, putting Billy to a full trot.

The three men, observing this, called out to Humphrey to stop, or they
would fire; but Humphrey's only reply was giving a lash to Billy, which
set him off at a gallop. The men immediately fired, and the bullets
whistled past Humphrey without doing any harm. Humphrey looked round,
and finding that he had increased his distance, pulled up the pony, and
went at a more moderate pace. "You'll not catch me," thought Humphrey;
"and your guns are not loaded, so I'll tantalize you a little." He made
Billy walk, and turned round to see what the men were about; they had
arrived at where he had dug out the box, and were standing round the
hole, evidently aware that it was no use following him. "Now," thought
Humphrey as he went along at a faster pace, "those fellows will wonder
what I have been digging up. The villains little think that I know
where to find them, and they have proved what they are by firing at me.
Now, what must I do? They may follow me to the cottage, for I have no
doubt that they know where we live, and that Edward is at the
intendant's. They may come and attack us, and I dare not leave the
cottage tonight, or send Pablo away, in case they should; but I will
tomorrow morning." Humphrey considered, as he went along, all the
circumstances and probabilities, and decided that he would act as he at
first proposed to himself. In an hour he was at the cottage; and as
soon as Alice had given him his dinner--for he was later than the usual
dinner hour--he told her what had taken place.

"Where is Pablo?"

"He has been working in the garden with Edith all the day," replied
Alice.

