Then the bear ran to her barrow, threw off her bear's skin, and touched
it with the magic wand that the witch had given her. In a moment the
skin was changed into an exquisite ball dress woven out of moon-beams,
and the wheel-barrow was changed into a carriage drawn by two prancing
steeds. Stepping into the carriage the princess drove to the grand
entrance of the palace. When she entered the ball-room, in her wondrous
dress of moon-beams, she looked so lovely, so different from all the
other guests, that everyone wondered who she was, and no one could tell
where she had come from.

From the moment he saw her, the prince fell desperately in love with
her, and all the evening he would dance with no one else but the
beautiful stranger.

When the ball was over, the princess drove away in her carriage at full
speed, for she wished to get home in time to change her ball dress into
the bear's skin, and the carriage into the wheel-barrow, before anyone
discovered who she was.

The prince, putting spurs into his horse, rode after her, for he was
determined not to let her out of his sight. But suddenly a thick mist
arose and hid her from him. When he reached his home he could talk to
his mother of nothing else but the beautiful stranger with whom he had
danced so often, and with whom he was so much in love. And the bear
beneath the table smiled to itself, and muttered: 'I am the beautiful
stranger; oh, how I have taken you in!'

The next evening there was a second ball, and, as you may believe, the
prince was determined not to miss it, for he thought he would once more
see the lovely girl, and dance with her and talk to her, and make her
talk to him, for at the first ball she had never opened her lips.

And, sure enough, as the music struck up the first dance, the beautiful
stranger entered the room, looking even more radiant than the night
before, for this time her dress was woven out of the rays of the sun.
All evening the prince danced with her, but she never spoke a word.

When the ball was over he tried once more to follow her carriage, that
he might know whence she came, but suddenly a great waterspout fell from
the sky, and the blinding sheets of rain hid her from his sight.

When he reached his home he told his mother that he had again seen the
lovely girl, and that this time she had been even more beautiful than
the night before. And again the bear smiled beneath the table, and
muttered: 'I have taken him in a second time, and he has no idea that I
am the beautiful girl with whom he is so much in love.'

On the next evening, the prince returned to the palace for the third
ball. And the princess went too, and this time she had changed her
bear's skin into a dress woven out of the star-light, studded all over
with gems, and she looked so dazzling and so beautiful, that everyone
wondered at her, and said that no one so beautiful had ever been seen
before. And the prince danced with her, and, though he could not induce
her to speak, he succeeded in slipping a ring on her finger.

When the ball was over, he followed her carriage, and rode at such a
pace that for long he kept it in sight. Then suddenly a terrible wind
arose between him and the carriage, and he could not overtake it.

When he reached his home he said to his mother, 'I do not know what is
to become of me; I think I shall go mad, I am so much in love with that
girl, and I have no means of finding out who she is. I danced with her
and I gave her a ring, and yet I do not know her name, nor where I am to
find her.'

Then the bear laughed beneath the table and muttered to itself.

And the prince continued: 'I am tired to death. Order some soup to be
made for me, but I don't want that bear to meddle with it. Every time I
speak of my love the brute mutters and laughs, and seems to mock at me.
I hate the sight of the creature!'

When the soup was ready, the bear brought it to the prince; but before
handing it to him, she dropped into the plate the ring the prince had
given her the night before at the ball. The prince began to eat his soup
very slowly and languidly, for he was sad at heart, and all his thoughts
were busy, wondering how and where he could see the lovely stranger
again. Suddenly he noticed the ring at the bottom of the plate. In a
moment he recognised it, and was dumb with surprise.

Then he saw the bear standing beside him, looking at him with gentle,
beseeching eyes, and something in the eyes of the bear made him say:
'Take off that skin, some mystery is hidden beneath it.'

And the bear's skin dropped off, and the beautiful girl stood before
him, in the dress woven out of the star-light, and he saw that she was
the stranger with whom he had fallen so deeply in love. And now she
appeared to him a thousand times more beautiful than ever, and he led
her to his mother. And the princess told them her story, and how she had
been kept shut up by her father in his palace, and how she had wearied
of her imprisonment. And the prince's mother loved her, and rejoiced
that her son should have so good and beautiful a wife.

So they were married, and lived happily for many years, and reigned
wisely over their kingdom.




The Sunchild


Once there was a woman who had no children, and this made her very
unhappy. So she spoke one day to the Sunball, saying: 'Dear Sunball,
send me only a little girl now, and when she is twelve years old you may
take her back again.'

So soon after this the Sunball sent her a little girl, whom the woman
called Letiko, and watched over with great care till she was twelve
years old. Soon after that, while Letiko was away one day gathering
herbs, the Sunball came to her, and said: 'Letiko, when you go home,
tell your mother that she must bethink herself of what she promised me.'

Then Letiko went straight home, and said to her mother: 'While I was
gathering herbs a fine tall gentleman came to me and charged me to tell
you that you should remember what you promised him.'

When the woman heard that she was sore afraid, and immediately shut all
the doors and windows of the house, stopped up all the chinks and holes,
and kept Letiko hidden away, that the Sunball should not come and take
her away. But she forgot to close up the keyhole, and through it the
Sunball sent a ray into the house, which took hold of the little girl
and carried her away to him.

One day, the Sunball having sent her to the straw shed to fetch straw,
the girl sat down on the piles of straw and bemoaned herself, saying:
'As sighs this straw under my feet so sighs my heart after my mother.'

And this caused her to be so long away that the Sunball asked her, when
she came back: 'Eh, Letiko, where have you been so long?'

She answered: 'My slippers are too big, and I could not go faster.'

Then the Sunball made the slippers shorter.

Another time he sent her to fetch water, and when she came to the
spring, she sat down and lamented, saying: 'As flows the water even so
flows my heart with longing for my mother.'

Thus she again remained so long away that the Sunball asked her: 'Eh,
Letiko, why have you remained so long away?'

And she answered: 'My petticoat is too long and hinders me in walking.'

Then the Sunball cut her petticoat to make it shorter.

Another time the Sunball sent her to bring him a pair of sandals, and
as the girl carried these in her hand she began to lament, saying: 'As
creaks the leather so creaks my heart after my little mother.'

When she came home the Sunball asked her again: 'Eh, Letiko, why do you
come home so late?'

'My red hood is too wide, and falls over my eyes, therefore I could not
go fast.'

Then he made the hood narrower.

At last, however, the Sunball became aware how sad Letiko was. He sent
her a second time to bring straw, and, slipping in after her, he heard
how she lamented for her mother. Then he went home, called two foxes to
him, and said: 'Will you take Letiko home?'

'Yes, why not?'

'But what will you eat and drink if you should become hungry and thirsty
by the way?'

'We will eat her flesh and drink her blood.'

When the Sunball heard that, he said: 'You are not suited for this
affair.'

Then he sent them away, and called two hares to him, and said: 'Will you
take Letiko home to her mother?'

'Yes, why not?'

'What will you eat and drink if you should become hungry and thirsty by
the way?'

'We will eat grass and drink from streamlets.'

'Then take her, and bring her home.'

Then the hares set out, taking Letiko with them, and because it was a
long way to her home they became hungry by the way. Then they said to
the little girl: 'Climb this tree, dear Letiko, and remain there till we
have finished eating.'

So Letiko climbed the tree, and the hares went grazing.

It was not very long, however, before a lamia came under the tree and
called out: 'Letiko, Letiko, come down and see what beautiful shoes I
have on.'

'Oh! my shoes are much finer than yours.'

'Come down. I am in a hurry, for my house is not yet swept.'

'Go home and sweep it then, and come back when you are ready.'

Then the lamia went away and swept her house, and when she was ready
she came back and called out: 'Letiko, Letiko, come down and see what a
beautiful apron I have.'

'Oh! my apron is much finer than yours.'

'If you will not come down I will cut down the tree and eat you.'

'Do so, and then eat me.'

Then the lamia hewed with all her strength at the tree, but could not
cut it down. And when she saw that, she called out: 'Letiko, Letiko,
come down, for I must feed my children.'

'Go home then and feed them, and come back when you are ready.'

When the lamia was gone away, Letiko called out: 'Little hares! little
hares!'

Then said one hare to the other: 'Listen, Letiko is calling;' and they
both ran back to her as fast as they could go. Then Letiko came down
from the tree, and they went on their way.

The lamia ran as fast as she could after them, to catch them up, and
when she came to a field where people were working she asked them: 'Have
you seen anyone pass this way?'

They answered: 'We are planting beans.'

'Oh! I did not ask about that; but if anyone had passed this way.'

But the people only answered the louder: 'Are you deaf? It is beans,
beans, beans we are planting.'

When Letiko had nearly reached her home the dog knew her, and called
out, 'Bow wow! see here comes Letiko!'

And the mother said, 'Hush! thou beast of ill-omen! wilt thou make me
burst with misery?'

Next the cat on the roof saw her, and called out 'Miaouw! miaouw! see
here comes Letiko!'

And the mother said, 'Keep silence! thou beast of ill-omen! wilt thou
make me burst with misery?'

Then the cock spied, and called out: 'Cock-a-doodle-do! see here comes
Letiko!'

And the mother said again: 'Be quiet! thou bird of ill-omen! wilt thou
make me burst with misery?'

The nearer Letiko and the two hares came to the house the nearer also
came the lamia, and when the hare was about to slip in by the house door
she caught it by its little tail and tore it out.

When the hare came in the mother stood up and said to it: 'Welcome, dear
little hare; because you have brought me back Letiko I will silver your
little tail.'

And she did so; and lived ever after with her daughter in happiness and
content.




The Daughter Of Buk Ettemsuch


Once upon a time there lived a man who had seven daughters. For a long
time they dwelt quite happily at home together, then one morning the
father called them all before him and said:

'Your mother and I are going on a journey, and as we do not know how
long we may be away, you will find enough provisions in the house to
last you three years. But see you do not open the door to anyone till we
come home again.'

'Very well, dear father,' replied the girls.

For two years they never left the house or unlocked the door; but one
day, when they had washed their clothes, and were spreading them out on
the roof to dry, the girls looked down into the street where people were
walking to and fro, and across to the market, with its stalls of fresh
meat, vegetables, and other nice things.

'Come here,' cried one. 'It makes me quite hungry! Why should not
we have our share? Let one of us go to the market, and buy meat and
vegetables.'

'Oh, we mustn't do that!' said the youngest. 'You know our father
forbade us to open the door till he came home again.'

Then the eldest sister sprang at her and struck her, the second spit at
her, the third abused her, the fourth pushed her, the fifth flung her to
the ground, and the sixth tore her clothes. Then they left her lying on
the floor, and went out with a basket.

In about an hour they came back with the basket full of meat and
vegetables, which they put in a pot, and set on the fire, quite
forgetting that the house door stood wide open. The youngest sister,
however, took no part in all this, and when dinner was ready and the
table laid, she stole softly out to the entrance hall, and hid herself
behind a great cask which stood in one corner.

Now, while the other sisters were enjoying their feast, a witch passed
by, and catching sight of the open door, she walked in. She went up
to the eldest girl, and said: 'Where shall I begin on you, you fat
bolster?'

'You must begin,' answered she, 'with the hand which struck my little
sister.'

So the witch gobbled her up, and when the last scrap had disappeared,
she came to the second and asked: 'Where shall I begin on you, my fat
bolster?'

And the second answered, 'You must begin on my mouth, which spat on my
sister.'

And so on to the rest; and very soon the whole six had disappeared.
And as the witch was eating the last mouthful of the last sister, the
youngest, who had been crouching, frozen with horror, behind the barrel,
ran out through the open door into the street. Without looking behind
her, she hastened on and on, as fast as her feet would carry her, till
she saw an ogre's castle standing in front of her. In a corner near the
door she spied a large pot, and she crept softly up to it and pulled the
cover over it, and went to sleep.

By-and-by the ogre came home. 'Fee, Fo, Fum,' cried he, 'I smell the
smell of a man. What ill fate has brought him here?' And he looked
through all the rooms, and found nobody. 'Where are you?' he called. 'Do
not be afraid, I will do you no harm.'

But the girl was still silent.

'Come out, I tell you,' repeated the ogre. 'Your life is quite safe. If
you are an old man, you shall be my father. If you are a boy, you shall
be my son. If your years are as many as mine, you shall be my brother.
If you are an old woman, you shall be my mother. If you are a young one,
you shall be my daughter. If you are middle-aged, you shall be my wife.
So come out, and fear nothing.'

Then the maiden came out of her hiding-place, and stood before him.

'Fear nothing,' said the ogre again; and when he went away to hunt he
left her to look after the house. In the evening he returned, bringing
with him hares, partridges, and gazelles, for the girl's supper; for
himself he only cared for the flesh of men, which she cooked for him.
He also gave into her charge the keys of six rooms, but the key of the
seventh he kept himself.

And time passed on, and the girl and the ogre still lived together.

She called him 'Father,' and he called her 'Daughter,' and never once
did he speak roughly to her.

One day the maiden said to him, 'Father, give me the key of the upper
chamber.'

'No, my daughter,' replied the ogre. 'There is nothing there that is any
use to you.'

'But I want the key,' she repeated again.

However the ogre took no notice, and pretended not to hear. The girl
began to cry, and said to herself: 'To-night, when he thinks I am
asleep, I will watch and see where he hides it;' and after she and the
