the way. He took the first path that presented itself and followed it
at the top of his speed, often losing his way, or stumbling over some
stone, or running up against a tree, and leaving behind him without
regret the cottage which had been as little to his taste as the
character of its possessor. After some time he saw in the distance a
huge black castle which commanded a view of the whole forest. The Prince
felt certain that this must be the abode of the Oracle, and just as the
sun was setting he reached its outermost gates. The whole castle was
surrounded by a deep moat, and the drawbridge and the gates, and even
the water in the moat, were all of the same sombre hue as the walls and
towers. Upon the gate hung a huge bell, upon which was written in red
letters:

'Mortal, if thou art curious to know thy fate, strike this bell, and
submit to what shall befall thee.'

The Prince, without the smallest hesitation, snatched up a great stone,
and hammered vigorously upon the bell, which gave forth a deep and
terrible sound, the gate flew open, and closed again with a thundering
clang the moment the Prince had passed through it, while from every
tower and battlement rose a wheeling, screaming crowd of bats which
darkened the whole sky with their multitudes. Anyone but Prince Vivien
would have been terrified by such an uncanny sight, but he strode
stoutly forward till he reached the second gate, which was opened to him
by sixty black slaves covered from head to foot in long mantles.

He wished to speak to them, but soon discovered that they spoke an
utterly unknown language, and did not seem to understand a word he said.
This was a great aggravation to the Prince, who was not accustomed to
keep his ideas to himself, and he positively found himself wishing
for his old friend Patience. However, he had to follow his guides in
silence, and they led him into a magnificent hall; the floor was of
ebony, the walls of jet, and all the hangings were of black velvet, but
the Prince looked round it in vain for something to eat, and then made
signs that he was hungry. In the same manner he was respectfully given
to understand that he must wait, and after several hours the sixty
hooded and shrouded figures re-appeared, and conducted him with great
ceremony, and also very very slowly, to a banqueting hall, where they
all placed themselves at a long table. The dishes were arranged down the
centre of it, and with his usual impetuosity the Prince seized the one
that stood in front of him to draw it nearer, but soon found that it was
firmly fixed in its place. Then he looked at his solemn and lugubrious
neighbours, and saw that each one was supplied with a long hollow
reed through which he slowly sucked up his portion, and the Prince
was obliged to do the same, though he found it a frightfully tedious
process. After supper, they returned as they had come to the ebony
room, where he was compelled to look on while his companions played
interminable games of chess, and not until he was nearly dying of
weariness did they, slowly and ceremoniously as before, conduct him to
his sleeping apartment. The hope of consulting the Oracle woke him
very early the next morning, and his first demand was to be allowed
to present himself before it, but, without replying, his attendants
conducted him to a huge marble bath, very shallow at one end, and quite
deep at the other, and gave him to understand that he was to go into it.
The Prince, nothing loth, was for springing at once into deep water, but
he was gently but forcibly held back and only allowed to stand where it
was about an inch deep, and he was nearly wild with impatience when he
found that this process was to be repeated every day in spite of all he
could say or do, the water rising higher and higher by inches, so
that for sixty days he had to live in perpetual silence, ceremoniously
conducted to and fro, supping all his meals through the long reed, and
looking on at innumerable games of chess, the game of all others which
he detested most. But at last the water rose as high as his chin, and
his bath was complete. And that day the slaves in their black robes,
and each having a large bat perched upon his head, marched in slow
procession with the Prince in their midst, chanting a melancholy song,
to the iron gate that led into a kind of Temple. At the sound of their
chanting, another band of slaves appeared, and took possession of the
unhappy Vivien.

They looked to him exactly like the ones he had left, except that they
moved more slowly still, and each one held a raven upon his wrist, and
their harsh croakings re-echoed through the dismal place. Holding the
Prince by the arms, not so much to do him honour as to restrain his
impatience, they proceeded by slow degrees up the steps of the Temple,
and when they at last reached the top he thought his long waiting must
be at an end. But on the contrary, after slowly enshrouding him in a
long black robe like their own, they led him into the Temple itself,
where he was forced to witness numbers of lengthy rites and ceremonies.
By this time Vivien's active impatience had subsided into passive
weariness, his yawns were continual and scandalous, but nobody heeded
him, he stared hopelessly at the thick black curtain which hung down
straight in front of him, and could hardly believe his eyes when it
presently began to slide back, and he saw before him the Black Bird. It
was of enormous size, and was perched upon a thick bar of iron which ran
across from one side of the Temple to the other. At the sight of it all
the slaves fell upon their knees and hid their faces, and when it had
three times flapped its mighty wings it uttered distinctly in Prince
Vivien's own language the words:

'Prince, your only chance of happiness depends upon that which is most
opposed to your own nature.'

Then the curtain fell before it once more, and the Prince, after many
ceremonies, was presented with a raven which perched upon his wrist, and
was conducted slowly back to the iron gate. Here the raven left him and
he was handed over once more to the care of the first band of slaves,
while a large bat flickered down and settled upon his head of its own
accord, and so he was taken back to the marble bath, and had to go
through the whole process again, only this time he began in deep water
which receded daily inch by inch. When this was over the slaves escorted
him to the outer gate, and took leave of him with every mark of
esteem and politeness, to which it is to be feared he responded but
indifferently, since the gate was no sooner opened than he took to his
heels, and fled away with all his might, his one idea being to put as
much space as possible between himself and the dreary place into which
he had ventured so rashly, just to consult a tedious Oracle who after
all had told him nothing. He actually reflected for about five seconds
on his folly, and came to the conclusion that it might sometimes be
advisable to think before one acted.

After wandering about for several days until he was weary and hungry, he
at last succeeded in finding a way out of the forest, and soon came to
a wide and rapid river, which he followed, hoping to find some means of
crossing it, and it happened that as the sun rose the next morning he
saw something of a dazzling whiteness moored out in the middle of the
stream. Upon looking more attentively at it he found that it was one of
the prettiest little ships he had ever seen, and the boat that belonged
to it was made fast to the bank quite close to him. The Prince was
immediately seized with the most ardent desire to go on board the
ship, and shouted loudly to attract the notice of her crew, but no
one answered. So he sprang into the little boat and rowed away without
finding it at all hard work, for the boat was made all of white paper
and was as light as a rose leaf. The ship was made of white paper too,
as the Prince presently discovered when he reached it. He found not a
soul on board, but there was a very cosy little bed in the cabin, and an
ample supply of all sorts of good things to eat and drink, which he
made up his mind to enjoy until something new happened. Having been
thoroughly well brought up at the court of King Gridelin, of course
he understood the art of navigation, but when once he had started, the
current carried the vessel down at such a pace that before he knew where
he was the Prince found himself out at sea, and a wind springing up
behind him just at this moment soon drove him out of sight of land.
By this time he was somewhat alarmed, and did his best to put the ship
about and get back to the river, but wind and tide were too strong for
him, and he began to think of the number of times, from his childhood
up, that he had been warned not to meddle with water. But it was too
late now to do anything but wish vainly that he had stayed on shore, and
to grow heartily weary of the boat and the sea and everything connected
with it. These two things, however, he did most thoroughly. To put the
finishing touch to his misfortunes he presently found himself becalmed
in mid-ocean, a state of affairs which would be considered trying by the
most patient of men, so you may imagine how it affected Prince Vivien!
He even came to wishing himself back at the Castle of the Black Bird,
for there at least he saw some living beings, whereas on board the
white-paper ship he was absolutely alone, and could not imagine how he
was ever to get away from his wearisome prison. However, after a very
long time, he did see land, and his impatience to be on shore was so
great that he at once flung himself over the ship's side that he might
reach it sooner by swimming. But this was quite useless, for spring
as far as he might from the vessel, it was always under his feet again
before he reached the water, and he had to resign himself to his fate,
and wait with what patience he could muster until the winds and waves
carried the ship into a kind of natural harbour which ran far into the
land. After his long imprisonment at sea the Prince was delighted with
the sight of the great trees which grew down to the very edge of the
water, and leaping lightly on shore he speedily lost himself in the
thick forest. When he had wandered a long way he stopped to rest beside
a clear spring of water, but scarcely had he thrown himself down upon
the mossy bank when there was a great rustling in the bushes close by,
and out sprang a pretty little gazelle panting and exhausted, which fell
at his feet gasping out--

'Oh! Vivien, save me!'

The Prince in great astonishment leapt to his feet, and had just time to
draw his sword before he found himself face to face with a large green
lion which had been hotly pursuing the poor little gazelle. Prince
Vivien attacked it gallantly and a fierce combat ensued, which, however,
ended before long in the Prince's dealing his adversary a terrific blow
which felled him to the earth. As he fell the lion whistled loudly three
times with such force that the forest rang again, and the sound must
have been heard for more than two leagues round, after which having
apparently nothing more to do in the world he rolled over on his side
and died. The Prince without paying any further heed to him or to his
whistling returned to the pretty gazelle, saying:

'Well! are you satisfied now? Since you can talk, pray tell me instantly
what all this is about, and how you happen to know my name.'

'Oh, I must rest for a long time before I can talk,' she replied, 'and
beside, I very much doubt if you will have leisure to listen, for the
affair is by no means finished. In fact,' she continued in the same
languid tone, 'you had better look behind you now.'

The Prince turned sharply round and to his horror saw a huge Giant
approaching with mighty strides, crying fiercely--

'Who has made my lion whistle I should like to know?'

'I have,' replied Prince Vivien boldly, 'but I can answer for it that he
will not do it again!'

At these words the Giant began to howl and lament.

'Alas, my poor Tiny, my sweet little pet,' he cried, 'but at least I can
avenge thy death.'

Thereupon he rushed at the Prince, brandishing an immense serpent which
was coiled about his wrist. Vivien, without losing his coolness, aimed a
terrific blow at it with his sword, but no sooner did he touch the
snake than it changed into a Giant and the Giant into a snake, with
such rapidity that the Prince felt perfectly giddy, and this happened at
least half-a-dozen times, until at last with a fortunate stroke he cut
the serpent in halves, and picking up one morsel flung it with all his
force at the nose of the Giant, who fell insensible on top of the lion,
and in an instant a thick black cloud rolled up which hid them from
view, and when it cleared away they had all disappeared.

Then the Prince, without even waiting to sheathe his sword, rushed back
to the gazelle, crying:

'Now you have had plenty of time to recover your wits, and you have
nothing more to fear, so tell me who you are, and what this horrible
Giant, with his lion and his serpent, have to do with you and for pity's
sake be quick about it.'

'I will tell you with pleasure,' she answered, 'but where is the hurry?
I want you to come back with me to the Green Castle, but I don't want to
walk there, it is so far, and walking is so fatiguing.'

'Let us set out at once then,' replied the Prince severely, 'or else
really I shall have to leave you where you are. Surely a young and
active gazelle like you ought to be ashamed of not being able to walk a
few steps. The further off this castle is the faster we ought to walk,
but as you don't appear to enjoy that, I will promise that we will go
gently, and we can talk by the way.'

'It would be better still if you would carry me,' said she sweetly, 'but
as I don't like to see people giving themselves trouble, you may carry
me, and make that snail carry you.' So saying, she pointed languidly
with one tiny foot at what the Prince had taken for a block of stone,
but now he saw that it was a huge snail.

'What! I ride a snail!' cried the Prince; 'you are laughing at me, and
beside we should not get there for a year.'

'Oh! well then don't do it,' replied the gazelle, 'I am quite willing to
stay here. The grass is green, and the water clear. But if I were you I
should take the advice that was given me and ride the snail.'

So, though it did not please him at all, the Prince took the gazelle
in his arms, and mounted upon the back of the snail, which glided along
very peaceably, entirely declining to be hurried by frequent blows from
the Prince's heels. In vain did the gazelle represent to him that she
was enjoying herself very much, and that this was the easiest mode
of conveyance she had ever discovered. Prince Vivien was wild with
impatience, and thought that the Green Castle would never be reached.
However, at last, they did get there, and everyone who was in it ran to
see the Prince dismount from his singular steed.

But what was his surprise, when having at her request set the gazelle
gently down upon the steps which led up to the castle, he saw her
suddenly change into a charming Princess, and recognized in her
his pretty cousin Placida, who greeted him with her usual tranquil
sweetness. His delight knew no bounds, and he followed her eagerly up
into the castle, impatient to know what strange events had brought her
there. But after all he had to wait for the Princess's story, for the
inhabitants of the Green Lands, hearing that the Giant was dead, ran to
offer the kingdom to his vanquisher, and Prince Vivien had to listen to
various complimentary harangues, which took a great deal of time, though
he cut them as short as politeness allowed--if not shorter. But at
last he was free to rejoin Placida, who at once began the story of her
adventures.

'After you had gone away,' said she, 'they tried to make me learn how
to govern the kingdom, which wearied me to death, so that I begged and
prayed Lolotte to take me away with her, and this she presently did, but
very reluctantly. However, having been transported to her grotto upon
my favourite couch, I spent several delicious days, soothed by the
soft green light, which was like a beech wood in the spring, and by the
murmuring of bees and the tinkle of falling water. But alas! Lolotte
was forced to go away to a general assembly of the Fairies, and she came
back in great dismay, telling me that her indulgence to me had cost her
dear, for she had been severely reprimanded and ordered to hand me over
to the Fairy Mirlifiche, who was already taking charge of you, and who
had been much commended for her management of you.'

'Fine management, indeed,' interrupted the Prince, 'if it is to her I
owe all the adventures I have met with! But go on with your story, my
cousin. I can tell you all about my doings afterwards, and then you can
judge for yourself.'

'At first I was grieved to see Lolotte cry,' resumed the Princess, 'but
I soon found that grieving was very troublesome, so I thought it better
to be calm, and very soon afterwards I saw the Fairy Mirlifiche arrive,
mounted upon her great unicorn. She stopped before the grotto and bade
Lolotte bring me out to her, at which she cried worse than ever, and
kissed me a dozen times, but she dared not refuse. I was lifted up on to
the unicorn, behind Mirlifiche, who said to me--

'"Hold on tight, little girl, if you don't want to break your neck."

'And, indeed, I had to hold on with all my might, for her horrible steed
trotted so violently that it positively took my breath away. However, at
last we stopped at a large farm, and the farmer and his wife ran out as
soon as they saw the Fairy, and helped us to dismount.

'I knew that they were really a King and Queen, whom the Fairies were
punishing for their ignorance and idleness. You may imagine that I was
by this time half dead with fatigue, but Mirlifiche insisted upon my
feeding her unicorn before I did anything else. To accomplish this I had
to climb up a long ladder into the hayloft, and bring down, one after
another, twenty-four handfuls of hay. Never, never before, did I have
such a wearisome task! It makes me shudder to think of it now, and that
was not all. In the same way I had to carry the twenty-four handfuls of
hay to the stable, and then it was supper time, and I had to wait upon
all the others. After that I really thought I should be allowed to go
peaceably to my little bed, but, oh dear no! First of all I had to make
it, for it was all in confusion, and then I had to make one for
the Fairy, and tuck her in, and draw the curtains round her, beside
rendering her a dozen little services which I was not at all accustomed
to. Finally, when I was perfectly exhausted by all this toil, I was free
to go to bed myself, but as I had never before undressed myself, and
really did not know how to begin, I lay down as I was. Unfortunately,
the Fairy found this out, and just as I was falling into a sweet
slumber, she made me get up once more, but even then I managed to escape
her vigilance, and only took off my upper robe. Indeed, I may tell you
in confidence, that I always find disobedience answer very well. One is
often scolded, it is true, but then one has been saved some trouble.

'At the earliest dawn of day Mirlifiche woke me, and made me take many
journeys to the stable to bring her word how her unicorn had slept, and
how much hay he had eaten, and then to find out what time it was, and
if it was a fine day. I was so slow, and did my errands so badly, that
before she left she called the King and Queen and said to them:

'"I am much more pleased with you this year. Continue to make the best
of your farm, if you wish to get back to your kingdom, and also take
care of this little Princess for me, and teach her to be useful, that
when I come I may find her cured of her faults. If she is not--"

'Here she broke off with a significant look, and mounting my enemy the
unicorn, speedily disappeared.

'Then the King and Queen, turning to me, asked me what I could do.

'"Nothing at all, I assure you," I replied in a tone which really
ought to have convinced them, but they went on to describe various
employments, and tried to discover which of them would be most to my
taste. However, at last I persuaded them that to do nothing whatever
would be the only thing that would suit me, and that if they really
wanted to be kind to me, they would let me go to bed and to sleep,
and not tease me about doing anything. To my great joy, they not only
permitted this, but actually, when they had their own meals, the Queen
brought my portion up to me. But early the next morning she appeared at
my bedside, saying, with an apologetic air:

'"My pretty child, I am afraid you must really make up your mind to get
up to-day. I know quite well how delightful it is to be thoroughly idle,
for when my husband and I were King and Queen we did nothing at all from
morning to night, and I sincerely hope that it will not be long before
those happy days will come again for us. But at present we have not
reached them, nor have you, and you know from what the Fairy said that
perhaps worse things may happen to us if she is not obeyed. Make
haste, I beg of you, and come down to breakfast, for I have put by some
delicious cream for you."

'It was really very tiresome, but as there was no help for it I went
down!

'But the instant breakfast was over they began again their cuckoo-cry of
"What will you do?" In vain did I answer--

'"Nothing at all, if it please you, madam."

'The Queen at last gave me a spindle and about four pounds of hemp upon
a distaff, and sent me out to keep the sheep, assuring me that there
could not be a pleasanter occupation, and that I could take my ease as
much as I pleased. I was forced to set out, very unwillingly, as you may
imagine, but I had not walked far before I came to a shady bank in what
seemed to me a charming place. I stretched myself cosily upon the soft
grass, and with the bundle of hemp for a pillow slept as tranquilly as
if there were no such things as sheep in the world, while they for their
part wandered hither and thither at their own sweet will, as if there
were no such thing as a shepherdess, invading every field, and browsing
upon every kind of forbidden dainty, until the peasants, alarmed by the
havoc they were making, raised a clamour, which at last reached the
ears of the King and Queen, who ran out, and seeing the cause of the
commotion, hastily collected their flock. And, indeed, the sooner the
better, since they had to pay for all the damage they had done. As for
me I lay still and watched them run, for I was very comfortable,
and there I might be still if they had not come up, all panting and
breathless, and compelled me to get up and follow them; they also
reproached me bitterly, but I need hardly tell you that they did not
again entrust me with the flock.

'But whatever they found for me to do it was always the same thing, I
spoilt and mismanaged it all, and was so successful in provoking even
the most patient people, that one day I ran away from the farm, for I
was really afraid the Queen would be obliged to beat me. When I came to
the little river in which the King used to fish, I found the boat tied
to a tree, and stepping in I unfastened it, and floated gently down
with the current. The gliding of the boat was so soothing that I did not
trouble myself in the least when the Queen caught sight of me and ran
along the bank, crying--

'"My boat, my boat! Husband, come and catch the little Princess who is
running away with my boat!"

'The current soon carried me out of hearing of her cries, and I dreamed
to the song of the ripples and the whisper of the trees, until the boat
suddenly stopped, and I found it was stuck fast beside a fresh green
meadow, and that the sun was rising. In the distance I saw some little
houses which seemed to be built in a most singular fashion, but as I was
by this time very hungry I set out towards them, but before I had walked
many steps, I saw that the air was full of shining objects which seemed
to be fixed, and yet I could not see what they hung from.

'I went nearer, and saw a silken cord hanging down to the ground, and
pulled it just because it was so close to my hand. Instantly the whole
meadow resounded to the melodious chiming of a peal of silver bells, and
they sounded so pretty that I sat down to listen, and to watch them as
they swung shining in the sunbeams. Before they ceased to sound, came
a great flight of birds, and each one perching upon a bell added its
charming song to the concert. As they ended, I looked up and saw a tall
and stately dame advancing towards me, surrounded and followed by a vast
