smoking. Presently the Doctor returned.

"Bathurst refuses absolutely," he said. "He admits that he does not
think there would be much difficulty for him to get through, but he is
convinced that the mission would be a useless one, and that could help
have been spared it would have come to us before now."

"But in that case he would have made his escape," the Major said.

"That is just why he won't go, Major; he says that come what will he will
share the fate of the rest, and that he will not live to be pointed to
as the one man who made his escape of the garrison of Deennugghur."

"Whom can we send?" the Major said. "You are the only other man who
speaks the language well enough to pass as a native, Doctor."

"I speak it fairly, but not well enough for that; besides, I am too old
to bear the fatigue of riding night and day; and, moreover, my services
are wanted here both as a doctor and as a rifle shot."

"I will go, if you will send me, Major," Captain Forster said suddenly;
"not in disguise, but in uniform, and on my horse's back. Of course I
should run the gauntlet of their sentries. Once through, I doubt if they
have a horse that could overtake mine."

There was a general silence of surprise. Forster's reckless courage was
notorious, and he had been conspicuous for the manner in which he had
chosen the most dangerous points during the siege; and this offer to
undertake what, although a dangerous enterprise in itself, still offered
a far better chance of life than that of remaining behind, surprised
everyone. It had been noticed that, since the rejection of his plan to
sally out in a body and cut their way through the enemy, he had been
moody and silent, except only when the fire was heavy and the danger
considerable; then he laughed and joked and seemed absolutely to enjoy
the excitement; but he was the last man whom any of them would have
expected to volunteer for a service that, dangerous as it might be, had
just been refused by Bathurst on the ground that it offered a chance of
escape from the common lot.

The Major was the first to speak.

"Well, Captain Forster, as we have just agreed that our only chance
is to obtain aid from one of the stations, and as you are the only
volunteer for the service, I do not see that I can decline to accept
your offer. At which station do you think you would be most likely to
find a force that could help us?"

"I should say Lucknow, Major. If help is to be obtained anywhere, I
should say it was there."

"Yes, I think that is the most hopeful. You will start at once; I
suppose the sooner the better."

"As soon as they are fairly asleep; say twelve o'clock."

"Very well. I will go and write a dispatch for you to carry, giving an
account of the fix we are in here. How will you sally out?"

"I should think the easiest plan would be to make a gap in the sandbags
in the breach, lead the horse till fairly outside, and then mount."

"I think you had better take a spare horse with you," the Doctor said;
"it will make a difference if you are chased, if you can change from one
to the other. Bathurst told me to say whoever went could have his horse,
which is a long way the best in the station. I should fancy as good as
your own."

"I don't know," Forster said; "led horses are a nuisance; still, as you
say, it might come in useful, if it is only to loose and turn down a
side road, and so puzzle anyone who may be after you in the dark."

The Major and Forster left the roof together.

"Well, that is a rum go," Wilson said. "If it had been anyone but
Forster I should have said that he funked and was taking the opportunity
to get out of it, but everyone knows that he has any amount of pluck;
look how he charged those Sepoys single handed."

"There are two sorts of pluck, Wilson," the Doctor said dryly. "There is
the pluck that will carry a man through a desperate action and lead him
to do deeds that are the talk of an army. Forster possesses that kind of
pluck in an unusual degree. He is almost an ideal cavalryman--dashing,
reckless; riding with a smile on his lips into the thickest of the fray,
absolutely careless of life when his blood is up.

"There is another sort of courage, that which supports men under long
continued strain, and enables them, patiently and steadfastly, to face
death when they see it approaching step by step. I doubt whether Forster
possesses that passive sort of courage. He would ride up to a cannon's
mouth, but would grow impatient in a. square of infantry condemned to
remain inactive under a heavy artillery fire.

"No one has changed more since this siege began than he has. Except when
engaged under a heavy fire he has been either silent, or impatient and
short tempered, shirking conversation even with women when his turn
of duty was over. Mind, I don't say for a moment that I suspect him of
being afraid of death; when the end came he would fight as bravely
as ever, and no one could fight more bravely. But he cannot stand the
waiting; he is always pulling his mustache moodily and muttering to
himself; he is good to do but not to suffer; he would make a shockingly
bad patient in a long illness.

"Well, if any of you have letters you want to write to friends in
England I should advise you to take the opportunity; mind, I don't think
they will ever get them. Forster may get through, but I consider the
chances strongly against it. For a ride of ten miles through a country
swarming with foes I could choose no messenger I would rather trust, but
for a ride like this, that requires patience and caution and resource,
he is not the man I should select. Bathurst would have succeeded almost
certainly if he had once got out. The two men are as different as light
to dark; one possesses just the points the other fails in. I have no one
at home I want to write to, so I will undertake the watch here."



CHAPTER XVII.


The men on descending from the roof found all the ladies engaged in
writing, the Major having told them that there was a chance of their
letters being taken out. Scarce one looked up as they entered; their
thoughts at the moment were at home with those to whom they were writing
what might well be their last farewells. Stifled sobs were heard in the
quiet room; mournful letters were blurred with tears even from eyes that
had not before been dimmed since the siege began.

Isobel Hannay was the first to finish, for her letter to her mother was
but a short one. As she closed it she looked up. Captain Forster was
standing at the other side of the table with his eyes fixed on her,
and he made a slight gesture to her that he wished to speak to her. She
hesitated a moment, and then rose and quietly left the room. A moment
later he joined her outside.

"Come outside," he said, "I must speak to you;" and together they went
out through the passage into the courtyard.

"Isobel," he began, "I need not tell you that I love you; till lately
I have not known how much, but I feel now that I could not live without
you."

"Why are you going away then, Captain Forster?" she asked quietly.

"I don't want to go alone," he said; "I cannot go alone--I want you to
go with me. Your uncle would surely consent; it is the only chance of
saving your life. We all know that it is next to hopeless that a force
sufficient to rescue us can be sent; there is just a chance, but that is
all that can be said. We could be married at Allahabad. I would make for
that town instead of Lucknow if you will go with me, and I could leave
you there in safety till these troubles are over; I am going to take
another horse as well as my own, and two would be as likely to escape as
one."

"Thank you for the offer, Captain Forster," she said coldly, "but I
decline it. My place is here with my uncle and the others."

"Why is it?" he asked passionately. "If you love me, your place is
surely with me; and you do love me, Isobel, do you not? Surely I have
not been mistaken."

Isobel was silent for a moment.

"You were mistaken, Captain Forster," she said, after a pause. "You paid
me attentions such as I had heard you paid to many others, and it was
pleasant. That you were serious I did not think. I believed you were
simply flirting with me; that you meant no more by it than you had meant
before; and being forewarned, and therefore having no fear that I should
hurt myself more than you would, I entered into it in the same spirit.
Where there was so much to be anxious about, it was a pleasure and
relief. Had I met you elsewhere, and under different circumstances, I
think I should have come to love you. A girl almost without experience
and new to the world, as I am, could hardly have helped doing so,
I think. Had I thought you were in earnest I should have acted
differently; and if I have deceived you by my manner I am sorry; but
even had I loved you I would not have consented to do the thing you ask
me. You are going on duty. You are going in the hope of obtaining aid
for us. I should be simply escaping while others stay, and I should
despise myself for the action. Besides; I do not think that even in that
case my uncle would have consented to my going with you."

"I am sure that he would," Forster broke in. "He would never be mad
enough to refuse you the chance of escape from such a fate as may now
await you."

"We need not discuss the question," she said. "Even if I loved you, I
would not go with you; and I do not love you."

"They have prejudiced you against me," he said angrily.

"They warned me, and they were right in doing so. Ask yourself if they
were not. Would you see a sister of yours running the risk of breaking
her heart without warning her? Do not be angry," she went on, putting
her hand on his arm. "We have been good friends, Captain Forster, and I
like you very much. We may never meet again; it is most likely we never
shall do so. I am grateful to you for the many pleasant hours you have
given me. Let us part thus."

"Can you not give some hope that in the distance, when these troubles
are over, should we both be spared, you may--"

"No, Captain Forster, I am sure it could never be so; if we ever meet
again, we will meet as we part now--as friends. And now I can stay no
longer; they will be missing me," and, turning, she entered the house
before he could speak again.

It was some minutes before he followed her. He had not really thought
that she would go with him; perhaps he had hardly wished it, for on
such an expedition a woman would necessarily add to the difficulty and
danger; but he had thought that she would have told him that his love
was returned, and for perhaps the first time in his life he was serious
in his protestation of it.

"What does it matter?" he said at last, as he turned; "'tis ten thousand
to one against our meeting again; if we do, I can take it up where it
breaks off now. She has acknowledged that she would have liked me if she
had been sure that I was in earnest. Next time I shall be so. She was
right. I was but amusing myself with her at first, and had no more
thought of marrying her than I had of flying. But there, it is no use
talking about the future; the thing now is to get out of this trap. I
have felt like a rat in a cage with a terrier watching me for the last
month, and long to be on horseback again, with the chance of making a
fight for my life. What a fool Bathurst was to throw away the chance!"

Bathurst, his work done, had looked into the hall where the others were
gathered, and hearing that the Doctor was alone on watch had gone up to
him.

"I was just thinking, Bathurst," the Doctor said, as he joined him,
"about that fight today. It seems to me that whatever comes of this
business, you and I are not likely to be among those who go down when
the place is taken."

"How is that, Doctor? Why is our chance better than the rest? I have no
hope myself that any will be spared."

"I put my faith in the juggler, Bathurst. Has it not struck you that the
first picture you saw has come true?"

"I have never given it a thought for weeks," Bathurst said; "certainly
I have not thought of it today. Yes, now you speak of it, it has come
true. How strange! I put it aside as a clever trick--one that I could
not understand any more than I did the others, but, knowing myself,
it seemed beyond the bounds of possibility that it could come true.
Anything but that I would have believed, but, as I told you, whatever
might happen in the future, I should not be found fighting desperately
as I saw myself doing there. It is true that I did so, but it was only a
sort of a frenzy. I did not fire a shot, as Wilson may have told you.
I strove like a man in a nightmare to break the spell that seemed to
render me powerless to move, but when, for a moment, the firing ceased,
a weight seemed to fall off me, and I was seized with a sort of passion
to kill. I have no distinct remembrance of anything until it was all
over. It was still the nightmare, but one of a different kind, and I
was no more myself then than I was when I was lying helpless on the
sandbags. Still, as you say, the picture was complete; at least, if Miss
Hannay was standing up here."

"Yes, she rose to her feet in the excitement of the fight. I believe we
all did so. The picture was true in all its details as you described it
to me. And that being so, I believe that other picture, the one we saw
together, you and I and Isobel Hannay in native disguises, will also
come true."

Bathurst was silent for two or three minutes.

"It may be so, Doctor--Heaven only knows. I trust for your sake and hers
it may be so, though I care but little about myself; but that picture
wasn't a final one, and we don't know what may follow it."

"That is so, Bathurst. But I think that you and I, once fairly away in
disguise, might be trusted to make our way down the country. You see,
we have a complete confirmation of that juggler's powers. He showed me a
scene in the past--a scene which had not been in my mind for years, and
was certainly not in my thoughts at the time. He showed you a scene in
the future, which, unlikely as it appeared, has actually taken place. I
believe he will be equally right in this other picture. You have heard
that Forster is going?"

"Yes; Wilson came down and told me while I was at work. Wilson seemed
rather disgusted at his volunteering. I don't know that I am surprised
myself, for, as I told you, I knew him at school, and he had no moral
courage, though plenty of physical. Still, under the circumstances, I
should not have thought he would have gone."

"You mean because of Miss Hannay, Bathurst?"

"Yes, that is what I mean."

"That sort of thing might weigh with you or me, Bathurst, but not with
him. He has loved and ridden away many times before this, but in this
case, fortunately, I don't think he will leave an aching heart behind
him."

"You don't mean to say, Doctor, that you don't think she cares for him?"

"I have not asked her the question," the Doctor said dryly. "I dare say
she likes him; in fact, I am ready to admit that there has been what you
may call a strong case of flirtation; but when a young woman is
thrown with an uncommonly good looking man, who lays himself out to be
agreeable to her, my experience is that a flirtation generally comes
of it, especially when the young woman has no one else to make herself
agreeable to, and is, moreover, a little sore with the world in general.
I own that at one time I was rather inclined to think that out of sheer
perverseness the girl was going to make a fool of herself with that good
looking scamp, but since we have been shut up here I have felt easy in
my mind about it. And now, if you will take my rifle for ten minutes,
I will go down and get a cup of tea; I volunteered to take sentry work,
but I didn't bargain for keeping it all night without relief. By the
way, I told Forster of your offer of your horse, and I think he is going
to take it."

"He is welcome to it," Bathurst said carelessly; "it will be of no use
to me."

"Now, look here," the Doctor said shortly; "just put Miss Hannay out of
your head for the present, and attend to the business on hand. I do not
think there is much chance of their trying it on again tonight, but they
may do so, so please to keep a sharp lookout while I am below."

"I will be careful, Doctor," Bathurst said, with a laugh; but the Doctor
had so little faith in his watchfulness that as soon as he went below he
sent up Wilson to share his guard.

At twelve o'clock the sandbags were removed sufficiently to allow a
horse to pass through, and Forster's and Bathurst's animals were led
out through the breach, their feet having been muffled with blankets to
prevent their striking a stone and arousing the attention of the enemy's
sentinels. Once fairly out the mufflings were removed and Forster sprang
into his saddle.

"Goodby, Major," he said; "I hope I may be back again in eight or nine
days with a squadron of cavalry."

"Goodby, Forster; I hope it may be so. May God protect you!"

The gap in the defenses was closed the instant the horses passed
through, and the men stood in the breach of the wall listening as
Forster rode off. He went at a walk, but before he had gone fifty paces
there was a sharp challenge, followed almost instantly by a rifle shot,
then came the crack of a revolver and the rapid beat of galloping hoofs.
Loud shouts were heard, and musket shots fired in rapid succession.

"They are not likely to have hit him in the dark," the Major said, as
he climbed back over the sandbags; "but they may hit his horses, which
would be just as fatal."

Leaving two sentries--the one just outside the breach near the wall,
the other on the sandbags--the rest of the party hurried up on the
roof. Shots were still being fired, and there was a confused sound of
shouting; then a cavalry trumpet rang out sharply, and presently three
shots fired in quick succession came upon the air.

"That is the signal agreed on," the Major said: "he is safely beyond
their lines. Now it is a question of riding; some of the cavalry will be
in pursuit of him before many minutes are over."

Forster's adieus had been brief. He had busied himself up to the last
moment in looking to the saddling of the two horses, and had only gone
into the house and said goodby to the ladies just when it was time to
start. He had said a few hopeful words as to the success of the mission,
but it had evidently needed an effort for him to do so. He had no
opportunity of speaking a word apart with Isobel, and he shook her hand
silently when it came to her turn.

"I should not have given him credit for so much feeling," Mrs. Doolan
whispered to Isobel, as he went out; "he was really sorry to leave us,
and I didn't think he was a man to be sorry for anything that didn't
affect himself. I think he had absolutely the grace to feel a little
ashamed of leaving us."

"I don't think that is fair," Isobel said warmly, "when he is going away
to fetch assistance for us."

"He is deserting us as rats desert a sinking ship," Mrs. Doolan said
positively; "and I am only surprised that he has the grace to feel a
little ashamed of the action. As for caring, there is only one person in
the world he cares for--himself. I was reading 'David Copperfield'
just before we came in here, and Steerforth's character might have been
sketched from Forster. He is a man without either heart or conscience;
a man who would sacrifice everything to his own pleasures; and yet even
when one knows him to be what he is, one can hardly help liking him. I
wonder how it is, my dear, that scamps are generally more pleasant than
good men?"

"I never thought about it, Mrs. Doolan," Isobel said, roused to a smile
by the earnestness with which Mrs. Doolan propounded the problem; "and
can give no reason except that we are attracted by natures the reverse
of our own."

Mrs. Doolan laughed.

"So you think we are better than men, Isobel? I don't--not one bit. We
are cramped in our opportunities; but given equal opportunities I don't
think there would be anything to choose between us. But we mustn't stay
talking here any longer; we both go on duty in the sick ward at four
o'clock."

The enemy's batteries opened on the following morning more violently
than before. More guns had been placed in position during the night, and
a rain of missiles was poured upon the house. For the next six days the
position of the besieged became hourly worse. Several breaches had been
made in the wall, and the shots now struck the house, and the inmates
passed the greater part of their time in the basement.

The heat was terrible, and, as the firing was kept up night and
day, sleep was almost impossible. The number of the besiegers had
considerably increased, large numbers of the country people taking part
in the siege, while a regiment of Sepoys from Cawnpore had taken the
place of the detachment of the 103d Bengal Infantry, of whom, indeed,
but few now remained.

The garrison no longer held the courtyard. Several times masses of the
enemy had surged up and poured through the breaches, but a large number
of hand grenades of various sizes had been constructed by the defenders,
and the effects of these thrown down from the roof among the crowded
masses were so terrible that the natives each time fell back. The horses
had all been turned out through the breach on the day after Captain
Forster's departure, in order to save their lives. A plague of flies
was not the least of the defenders' troubles. After the repulse of the
assaults the defenders went out at night and carried the bodies of the
natives who had fallen in the courtyard beyond the wall. Nevertheless,
the odor of blood attracted such countless swarms of flies that the
ground was black with them, and they pervaded the house in legions.

The number of the defenders decreased daily. Six only were able now to
carry arms. Mr. Hunter, Captain Rintoul, and Richards had died of fever.
Farquharson had been killed by a cannon ball; two civilians had been
badly wounded; several of the children had succumbed; Amy Hunter had
been killed by a shell that passed through the sandbag protection of the
grating that gave light to the room in the basement used as a sick
ward. The other ladies were all utterly worn out with exhaustion,
sleeplessness, and anxiety. Still there had been no word spoken of
surrender. Had the men been alone they would have sallied out and
died fighting, but this would have left the women at the mercy of the
assailants.

The work at the gallery had been discontinued for some time. It had been
carried upwards until a number of roots in the earth showed that they
were near the surface, and, as they believed, under a clump of bushes
growing a hundred and fifty yards beyond the walls; but of late there
had been no talk of using this. Flight, which even at first had seemed
almost hopeless, was wholly beyond them in their present weakened
condition.

On the last of these six days Major Hannay was severely wounded. At
night the enemy's fire relaxed a little, and the ladies took advantage
of it to go up onto the terrace for air, while the men gathered for a
council round the Major's bed.

"Well, Doctor, the end is pretty near," he said; "it is clear we cannot
hold out many hours longer. We must look the matter in the face now. We
have agreed all along that when we could no longer resist we would offer
to surrender on the terms that our lives should be spared, and that we
should be given safe conduct down the country, and that if those terms
were refused we were to resist to the end, and then blow up the house
and all in it. I think the time has come for raising the white flag."

"I think so," the Doctor said: "we have done everything men could do.
I have little hope that they will grant us terms of surrender; for from
the native servants who have deserted us they must have a fair idea of
our condition. What do you think, Bathurst?"

"I think it probable there are divisions among them," he replied; "the
Talookdars may have risen against us, but I do not think they can have
the same deadly enmity the Sepoys have shown. They must be heartily sick
of this prolonged siege, and they have lost large numbers of their men.
I should say they would be willing enough to give terms, but probably
they are overruled by the Sepoys, and perhaps by orders from Nana Sahib.
I know several of them personally, and I think I could influence Por
Sing, who is certainly the most powerful of the Zemindars of this
neighborhood, and is probably looked upon as their natural leader; if
you approve of it, Major, I will go out in disguise, and endeavor to
obtain an interview with him. He is an honorable man; and if he will
give his guarantee for our safety, I would trust him. At any rate, I can
but try. If I do not return, you will know that I am dead, and that no
terms can be obtained, and can then decide when to end it all."

"It is worth the attempt anyhow," the Major said. "I say nothing about
the danger you will run, for no danger can be greater than that which
hangs over us all now."

"Very well, Major, then I will do it at once, but you must not expect me
back until tomorrow night. I can hardly hope to obtain an interview with
Por Sing tonight."

"How will you go out, Bathurst?"

"I will go down at once and break in the roof of the gallery," he said;
"we know they are close round the wall, and I could not hope to get out
through any of the breaches."

"I suppose you are quite convinced that there is no hope of relief from
Lucknow?"

"Quite convinced. I never had any real hope of it; but had there been a
force disposable, it would have started at once if Forster arrived there
with his message, and might have been here by this time."

"At any rate, we can wait no longer."

"Then we will begin at once," Bathurst said, and, taking a crowbar and
pick from the place where the tools were kept, he lighted the lamp and
went along the gallery, accompanied by the Doctor, who carried two light
bamboo ladders.

"Do you think you will succeed, Bathurst?"

"I am pretty sure of it," he said confidently. "I believe I have a
friend there."

"A friend!" the Doctor repeated in surprise.

"Yes; I am convinced that the juggler is there. Not once, but half a
dozen times during the last two nights when I have been on watch on the
terrace, I have distinctly heard the words whispered in my ear, 'Meet me
at your bungalow.' You may think I dozed off and was dreaming, but I
was as wide awake then as I am now. I cannot say that I recognized the
voice, but the words were in the dialect he speaks. At any rate, as soon
as I am out I shall make my way there, and shall wait there all night
on the chance of his coming. After what we know of the man's strange
powers, there seems nothing unreasonable to me in his being able to
impress upon my mind the fact that he wants to see me."

"I quite agree with you there, and his aid might be invaluable. You are
not the sort of man to have delusions, Bathurst, and I quite believe
what you say. I feel more hopeful now than I have done for some time."

An hour's hard work, and a hole was made through the soil, which was but
three feet thick. Bathurst climbed up the ladder and looked out.

"It is as we thought, Doctor; we are in the middle of that thicket. Now
