should consider it certain that you were dead or at Pretoria. I knew
that, as you say, it would be a terrible shock to your mothers if they
were to see your names among the missing; while it could do no harm to
anyone if I kept it back for a month, and put you down as missing the
first time after the corps were engaged. Well, you are just back in
time for a big fight, though we are not likely to take any part in it.
It is supposed to be a secret as to the precise position, but orders
have been privately circulated this morning. Dundonald with the regular
cavalry, the Natal Horse, and the South African Light Horse went on
four days ago, with one or two other colonial corps, and occupied
Springfield, and the baggage train followed them; and after occupying
the place, instead of waiting for infantry to come up, he moved on to a
river. Some of his men, with extraordinary pluck, swam across and
managed to bring the ferry-boat over under a very heavy fire. Then a
number of them crossed, scattered the Boers like chaff, and took
possession of a rough hill called Swartz Kop, and held it till support
came up. It was a capitally managed affair, and one cannot but regret
that the same care was not shown at Hlangwane. We are to go on this
afternoon, but as we are not in Dundonald's brigade I expect that our
duty will be, as it was in the last fight, to guard the baggage."

"But what will Dundonald's brigade do?"

"The general opinion is, that they will push round to Acton Homes. I am
not sure that the whole force is not going that way. It would be a
grand thing if it could be done; but I doubt whether the train could
carry enough stores, for it would be a long way round, and we should
probably have to fight two or three times at least, and it might take
us five or six days."

"Then most of the infantry have gone on already?"

"Yes, Hart's and Hildyard's brigades have marched straight from Frere.
By the way, did you hear of the Boer attack on Ladysmith on the night
of the 6th?"

"No; that was the night we were at Glencoe. On our way up we did hear
some very heavy firing. At least, we were not certain that it was
firing, and rather thought it was a distant thunder-storm."

"The firing began at two o'clock in the morning," Captain Brookfield
said, "and was so heavy that everyone turned out. It lasted four hours,
and there was no doubt that the Boers were making a determined attack.
Everyone wondered that we did not at once make a diversion. When the
day broke it could be seen that numbers of mounted Boers were hurrying
off from their camps among the hills towards Ladysmith, but it was not
until two in the afternoon that five battalions of infantry marched
down towards Colenso, and the naval guns opened in earnest on their
lines. It had the effect of bringing the Boers scurrying down again to
their trenches. Our fellows marched in open order and worked their way
nearly down to Colenso, which was more strongly garrisoned than it had
been at the time of our last attack. No doubt they had seen us
preparing to advance, and strongly reinforced the garrison. Our guns
were taken a long way down, and at six o'clock their trenches were
bombarded; then it came on to rain, and the Boers ceased to fire, and
at seven o'clock our men turned into camp. The firing in Ladysmith had
ceased some time before that."

"And what had taken place there?" Chris asked anxiously, "for I know
the place has not fallen or we should have heard of it."

"No, they beat the Boers off splendidly. However, they had hard work to
do it, for the heliograph flashed a signal at about nine o'clock in the
morning to say that they had so far beaten off the enemy, but were much
pressed. We heard the next day that this had indeed been the case.
Caesar's Camp had been taken and retaken several times--by our men at
the point of the bayonet, by the Boers, by rushing up in overwhelming
numbers. It is said that we have twelve hundred casualties, and the
Boers at least fifteen hundred, of whom a large number were bayoneted.
They say the loss fell chiefly upon the Free Staters, who were put in
the front by the Transvaal people. They fought pluckily, and several of
their commanders were among the killed. I should think that they would
hardly try it again. A native got through two days afterwards with a
despatch. We have not heard what it contained, but we fancy from what
has leaked out that our defences were very weak."

"We ought to take a lesson from the Boers," Chris said. "I saw
something of their trenches as we went up the railway valley, and they
are wonderful."

"Yes, we must do the Boers the justice to say that they are not afraid
of hard work. Ever since they first came here they have been at work
everywhere every day in the week, including Sundays. Of course, as we
are not standing on the defensive, there is no occasion for us to
construct works to the same extent; but I cannot myself understand why
we do not throw up batteries for our guns, pushing forward zigzags
every night, and advancing the batteries until we can plant all our
naval and field guns within a hundred yards of Colenso, when we should
be able to smash their entrenchments in no time, and effectually cover
an advance across the bridge or one of the drifts. When I was in the
army it was always said that the next war would be fought with the
spade as much as with the rifle, but so far we have seen nothing
whatever of the spade, except just by the guns. We were also taught
that strong positions held by steady troops armed with magazine guns
and supported by good artillery were absolutely impregnable against
direct attack. I grant that Dundee and Elandslaagte, and Belmont and
Enslin on the other side, seemed to contradict that idea, but our
experience here is all the other way; and if we keep on knocking our
heads against those hills I suppose the axiom is likely to be finally
confirmed."

"Then you don't think that we are going to fight our way into
Ladysmith, Captain Brookfield?"

"Not direct into Ladysmith. Possibly we may work our way round; but
after what we saw of the fire from their position, trench above trench,
and miles upon miles in length, my own conviction is, that allowing to
the utmost for the gallantry and devotion of our men, we shall never
win our way across those hills."

"Then we move off at two o'clock, sir?"

"Yes, fresh batches of waggons are going on, and we are to escort them,
and if we reach Springfield by to-morrow night we may think ourselves
lucky, for some of the officers who went with the first lot have come
back, and say that the roads are simply awful--there are dongas to be
passed where the waggons sink up to their axles--and that at one point
ninety oxen were fastened to a single waggon and could not pull it out
from a hole in which it was sunk, and there it would be now if one of
the Woolwich traction engines hadn't got hold of it and drawn it out.
They are doing splendid work, and if the War Office authorities can but
take a lesson to heart, the next war we go into we shall have five
hundred of them and not a single transport animal. They would cost
money, no doubt, but they would eat nothing and drink nothing; they
would only require to be oiled and cleaned occasionally to keep them in
order, and when they were wanted they would do the work without our
having to hunt the world over for transport animals. They would save
their cost in one war; there would be a thousand drivers and stokers
instead of twenty thousand camp followers; it would not matter whether
the country was burnt up dry or deep in grass, they would drag their
fuel with them; and would save the artillery horses by dragging the
guns till they were in the neighbourhood of an enemy. It might not look
so pretty or picturesque as the present system, but it would be
enormously more useful, and in the long run vastly more economical. I
should like to see Kitchener put at the War Office with authority to
sweep it out; Hercules in the Augean stable would be nothing to it."

Chris laughed at the earnestness and vehemence with which the commander
spoke.

He went on. "I am an old army man, and have been as staunch a believer
in army traditions as any man, but I tell you fairly that I am
disgusted at the amount of routine work, delay, and, if I may use the
word, priggism, that I see going on. I am not surprised that the
Colonials to a man are convinced that they would manage matters
infinitely better if they were left to themselves. They would harass
the Boers night and day, sweep their plundering parties out of the
land, make a circuit no matter how far into Zululand, and come down
behind and cut the line of railway, and blow up the bridges, and worry
them out of the colony. I don't say they would succeed, but I am sure
they would try, and I believe firmly that five thousand mounted
Colonials fighting in their own way would relieve Ladysmith and clear
Natal sooner than we with thirty thousand shall do. I am not saying
that they would succeed in a Continental war, though they would
certainly harass and bother any regular force four times their own
strength. To succeed they would require guns and a greater degree of
discipline than they have got, but such a force would be absolutely
invaluable as an assistant to a regular army. Don't repeat what I say,
Chris; there is a good deal of soreness of feeling on both sides
already, and I don't want any utterance of mine to add to it. Still, I
can assure you it has been a relief to me to let the steam off."

At the appointed hour the Maritzburg Scouts and another Colonial corps
started with a train of two hundred waggons, and with immense exertion
made eight miles before it became dark. The men were more often on foot
than in their saddles, sometimes roping their horses to the sides of
the waggons to aid the oxen, sometimes putting their shoulders to the
wheels, or working with a score of others with railway sleepers that
had been brought for the purpose, to lever the axles out of deep holes
into which the wheels had sunk.

"I don't think I ever knew what it was to be really dirty before,"
Field said, as they finally dismounted and prepared to camp. "I thought
I did know something about mud, but I can see that I did not. I feel
that I am a sort of animated pie, and could be cooked comfortably in an
oven. If we could but get a big fire and stand round it, our crust
might peel off; and I really don't see any other way. There is one
advantage in it, and that is that we shall be able to skirmish, if
necessary, across either a sandy or muddy country, without the
possibility of our being made out more than fifty yards away by the
keenest-sighted Boer. What do you propose, Captain Chris? If there were
running water near, the course would be clear. We would lie down by
turns, and be rolled over and over, and thumped with stones, and rubbed
with anything that came handy till we were in a state of comparative
cleanliness."

"Why running water?" Chris asked. "Why not a pond?"

"A pond!" Field said, contemptuously. "Why, sir, before our section
alone was washed, the water of anything short of a lake would be solid."

There was a general burst of laughter.

"Well, Field, you do us almost as much good as a wash," Peters said.
"Anyhow, we are better off than the others. We have got our tents and
our spirit-lamp, and can have our tea with some degree of comfort,
which is more than the others will be able to do. Now, as we have not
running water, I think we might as well scrape as much of this mud off
as we can."

"I would almost rather remain as we are," Field said. "Hitherto I have
felt rather proud of our appearance. As we only got our uniforms when
we came up here, and have always had our tents to sleep in, we looked a
great deal cleaner than the average. Now we shall be conspicuous for
our dirtiness."

"In spite of what Field says, I will adopt your suggestion, Peters. We
had better help the Kaffirs to get up our tents first," Chris said,
"then we can do the scraping while they are getting our supper ready.
It is very lucky that we had the water-skins filled before starting. We
should hardly taste the tea if it had been made from water from any of
these spruits."

The tents were erected, and then jack-knives were taken out; and giving
mutual aid to each other, they succeeded in removing at least the main
portion of the mud. That done, they sat down to supper. Fortunately,
the rain that had come down steadily the greater portion of the day had
now ceased, and with a tin of cocoa and milk, and some fried ham and
biscuits, they made an excellent meal. Their less fortunate comrades
brought their kettles, which were boiled for them one after another,
until all who had waited up in hopes of their turn coming had been
served. As they carried tea and their ration bread, they were able to
make a fairly comfortable meal, instead of going supperless to bed,
which they would otherwise have done, as few would have cared after
their hard work to go out into the veldt to gather soaked sticks, which
they would hardly have been able to light had they found them. A small
ration of spirits and water was given to each of the five natives, and
then the lads crept into their tents feeling that after all, things
might have been much worse.




CHAPTER XV

SPION KOP


The country immediately round Springfield was level and well
cultivated, with pretty farmhouses and orchards scattered about. Some
little distance to the west rose two hills, Swartz Kop, which had been
occupied by the mounted infantry, and Spearman's Hill, named from a
farm near its base. Here General Buller had established his
head-quarters. Spearman's Hill, which was generally called Mount Alice,
was a very important position, and here the naval guns were placed,
their fire commanding the greater portion of the hills on the other
side of the Tugela, and also Potgieter's Drift, where it was intended
the passage of the river should be made. Swartz Kop was a less
important position, though it also dominated a wide extent of country;
but as ridges on the other side covered some important points from its
fire, Mount Alice was selected as the position for the naval battery,
and also for the signallers, as from here a direct communication could
be kept up by heliograph and flash-light with one of the hills held by
the defenders of Ladysmith.

[Illustration: THE NAVAL GUNS ON MOUNT ALICE]

It was late on the 16th when the convoy which the Maritzburg Scouts
were escorting arrived at Springfield. All day they had heard the boom
of artillery and the rattle of machine-guns and musketry along the line
of hills on the other side of the Tugela and from the heights of Mount
Alice, and groaned in spirit as they laboured at their work of
assisting the waggons, that they were thus employed when hard fighting
was going on within eight miles of them.

At half-past two that day Lyttleton's brigade had moved forward along
the foot of Mount Alice to force the passage of the river at
Potgieter's drift. As soon as the Boers caught sight of them, they
could be seen galloping forward to take their places in the trenches.

A thunder-storm that burst and a torrent of rain screened the movements
of the advancing troops from view for some time, and enabled them to
near the river without having to pass through any shell fire from the
Boer batteries on the hilltops. Between Mount Alice and the river the
brigade passed across meadows and ploughed fields. They reached the
ferry, but the boat was stuck fast, and an hour was lost at this point
before a party of sailors and colonial troops accustomed to such work
came forward to the aid of the Engineers, and speedily got it into
working order. But in the meantime the Scottish Rifles and the Rifle
Brigade had moved along the banks to the drift. Although usually almost
dry, the water was now coming down it breast-deep. Two gallant fellows
went across, and when they found the line of shallow water they
returned and guided their comrades over. The rush of the water was so
great that many would have been swept away; but, joining hands, they
crossed in a line, and although this was broken several times, it was
always reformed, and not many lives were lost.

As soon as some of the troops had passed, they lined the bank until the
two battalions were over, and then advanced over some low hills,
clearing out a few Boers who occupied some advanced trenches. By six
o'clock the ferry-boat began to carry the main body across, taking over
half a company at a time; but it was not until half-past three in the
morning that the horses, waggons, the guns of the brigade, and a
howitzer battery were on the northern bank, and the whole brigade
established on a ridge a mile beyond the river.

The Maritzburg Scouts were delighted at receiving orders on the morning
after their arrival at Springfield that they were to move forward at
once and encamp close to Spearman's Farm, and to furnish orderlies for
carrying messages for the general. They started at once, and after an
hour's fast riding arrived at the point assigned to them.

Twenty men and an officer were at once sent to the farmhouse. They took
with them three tents which they had brought in the regimental waggon,
and erected these some fifty yards from the house; the rest of the
troop established their camp at a point indicated by a staff officer a
quarter of a mile away. It had been two o'clock in the morning before
the convoy had reached Springfield, and horses and men were alike tired
out; and as soon as breakfast had been prepared and eaten most of the
troopers turned in to sleep. Chris and half a dozen of his party,
however, obtained leave from Captain Brookfield to ascend Mount Alice
and see what was going on. From half-past five a tremendous fire had
been kept up on the Boer positions. The naval guns were distributing
their heavy lyddite shells among the entrenchments distant from three
to six miles, and occasionally throwing up a missile on to the summit
of the lofty hill known as Spion Kop away to the left front. Not less
steadily or effectively the howitzer battery was pounding the Boer
position.

At eight o'clock the lads reached the top of Mount Alice, and watched
with intense interest the picturesque and exciting scene. Here they
were far better able than they had been when at Chieveley to see the
general aspect of the country. On the right from Grobler's Kloof hill
after hill, separated apparently by shallow depressions, rose, and from
the higher points occasional flashes of fire burst out as the guns
tried their range against those on Mount Alice, whose heights, however,
they failed to reach. Spion Kop stood out steep and threatening, its
summit being some hundred feet higher than that of Mount Alice. They
could now see that it was not, as it had appeared from the distance, an
isolated and almost conical hill, but was, in fact, connected with
hills farther to the left by a ridge of which it was the termination.

Immediately behind it was a deep valley, and the ascent from this side
was to some extent commanded by the guns on Mount Alice and Swartz Kop.
Between Spion Kop and the river there was a flat belt of country, and
it was along this that Lord Dundonald had ridden with his brigade of
cavalry to Acton Homes, where he was still stationed. The point of
greatest interest, however, was at Trichardt's Drift, lying six miles
west of Mount Alice. From their look-out they could make out the
division under the command of Sir Charles Warren advancing to the ford.
As far as they could see, no serious opposition was being offered; they
could, however, in the intervals of silence of the guns, hear a
dropping musketry fire in that direction, and a few rounds of shot from
Warren's field-guns, but it was evident that only a small party of the
enemy could be disputing the passage.

Peters, who was intently watching what was going on through his
glasses, said: "They are at work at two points on the river. I think
they are building bridges."

The naval guns dropped a few shells among the farm buildings and
orchards facing the spot where the troops were gathered, as a hint to
the Boers that it was well within their range, and that they had best
abstain from interfering with what was going on. In an hour from the
time the troops reached the bank two bridges had been thrown across the
river, and the passage began. By ten o'clock the whole were across, the
firing soon after ceased, and Warren's troops bivouacked quietly. It
was all over for the day, and the lads returned to their camp. The next
day passed quietly, except that in the afternoon the Boer entrenchments
near Spion Kop and Brakfontein, a hill facing the position occupied by
Lyttleton's brigade, were pounded by the naval guns and howitzers. A
message was heliographed from Ladysmith that two thousand Boers were
seen moving towards Acton Homes, and as the occupation of that village
was of no value until the infantry arrived there, the cavalry were
recalled to a position where they could protect Warren's left flank
from attack.

On the 19th, Warren pushed forward a portion of his force with a view
to driving back the Boers' right and gaining the main road leading
through Dewdrop to Ladysmith, while Woodgate's brigade watched Spion
Kop. Fighting went on all day, the British forcing the enemy back step
by step. On the 20th it began early and continued the whole day. Every
inch of the ground was contested stubbornly by the Boers, but the Irish
Brigade, who were in the hottest position, pressed them back fiercely
with sudden rushes, and, had the rest of the division kept up with
their advance, might have cleared the way through the enemy's centre.
But the cannonade to which the advancing troops were exposed was
terrible. Maxims and Nordenfeldts, the heavy cannon, and the
field-pieces captured from us a month before, hurled shot and shell
incessantly among them, while the rattle of the Boer rifles was
continuous. Still, fair progress was made, and with less loss than
might have been expected in such strife. Two officers only were killed,
Captain Hensley of the Dublin Fusiliers, and Major Childe, who was a
most popular officer. He had a presentiment that he would fall, and
actually asked a friend the evening before to have a tablet placed over
his grave with the inscription, "Is it well with the child? It is well."

At three o'clock the fighting slackened, and a heavy thunderstorm
seemed to be the signal for firing to cease. Later Sir Charles Warren
summoned all the officers commanding corps, and pointed out that there
was not sufficient food remaining to allow of the wide circuit by Acton
Homes to be carried out, and gave his opinion that now they had won so
much ground, it was better to continue to advance by the shorter line
