terrible struggles in the east, the west was almost blotted out of
his mind. The Second Manassas and Antietam had great power to absorb
attention wholly upon themselves. He had wholly forgotten for the time
about Pendleton, the people whom he knew, and even his mother. Now
they returned with increased strength. His memory was flooded with
recollections of the little town, every house and face of which he knew.

And so the Confederates were coming north again with a great army.
Shiloh had been far from crushing them in the west. The letter had
been written before the Second Manassas, and that and Lee's great fight
against odds at Antietam would certainly arouse in them the wish for
like achievements. He inferred that since the armies in the east were
exhausted, the great field for action would be for a while, in the west,
and he was seized with an intense longing for that region which was his
own.

It was not coincidence, but the need for men that made Dick's wish come
true almost at once. A few hours after he received his letter Colonel
Winchester found him sitting in the lobby of the hotel in which Dick had
twice talked with the contractor. But the boy was alone this time, and
as Colonel Winchester sat down beside him he said:

"Dick, the capital has received alarming news from Kentucky. Buoyed
up by their successes in the east the Confederacy is going to make an
effort to secure that state. Bragg with a powerful force is already on
his way toward Louisville, and we fear that he has slipped away from
Buell."

"So I've heard. I found here a letter from my mother, and she told me
all the reports from that section."

"And is Mrs. Mason well? She has not been troubled by guerillas, or in
any other way?"

"Not at all. Mother's health is always good, and she has not been
molested."

"Dick, it's possible that we may see Kentucky again soon."

"Can that be true, and how is it so, sir?"

"The administration is greatly alarmed about Kentucky and the west. This
movement of Bragg's army is formidable, and it would be a great blow for
us if he took Louisville. Dispatches have been sent east for help. My
regiment and several others that really belong in the west have been
asked for, and we are to start in three days. Dick, do you know how many
men of the Winchester regiment are left? We shall be able to start with
only one hundred and five men, and when we attacked at Donelson we were
a thousand strong."

"And the end of the war, sir, seems as far off as ever."

"So it does, Dick, but we'll go, and we'll do our best. Starting from
Washington we can reach Louisville in two days by train. Bragg, no
matter what progress he may make across the state, cannot be there then.
If any big battle is to be fought we're likely to be in it."

The scanty remainder of the regiment was brought to Washington and two
days later they were in Louisville, which they found full of alarm.
The famous Southern partisan leader, John Morgan, had been roaming
everywhere over the state, capturing towns, taking prisoners and
throwing all the Union communications into confusion by means of false
dispatches.

People told with mingled amusement and apprehension of Morgan's
telegrapher, Ellsworth, who cut the wires, attached his own instrument,
and replied to the Union messages and sent answers as his general
pleased. It was said that Bragg was already approaching Munfordville
where there was a Northern fort and garrison. And it was said that Buell
on another line was endeavoring to march past Bragg and get between him
and Louisville.

But Dick found that the western states across the Ohio were responding
as usual. Hardy volunteers from the prairies and plains were pouring
into Louisville. While Dick waited there the news came that Bragg
had captured the entire Northern garrison of four thousand men at
Munfordville, the crossing of Green River, and was continuing his steady
advance.

But there was yet hope that the rapid march of Buell and the gathering
force at Louisville would cause Bragg to turn aside.

At last the welcome news came. Bragg had suddenly turned to the east,
and then Buell arrived in Louisville. With his own force, the army
already gathered there and a division sent by Grant from his station at
Corinth, in Mississippi, he was at the head of a hundred thousand men,
and Bragg could not muster more than half as many.

So rapid had been the passage of events that Dick found himself a member
of Buell's reorganized army, and ready to march, only thirteen days
after the sun set on the bloody field of Antietam, seven hundred miles
away. Bragg, they said, was at Lexington, in the heart of the state, and
the Union army was in motion to punish him for his temerity in venturing
out of the far south.

Dick felt a great elation as he rode once more over the soil of his
native state. He beheld again many of the officers whom he had seen at
Donelson, and also he spoke to General Buell, who although as taciturn
and somber as ever, remembered him.

Warner and Pennington were by his side, the colonel rode before, and the
Winchester regiment marched behind. Volunteers from Kentucky and other
states had raised it to about three hundred men, and the new lads
listened with amazement, while the unbearded veterans told them of
Shiloh, the Second Manassas and Antietam.

"Good country, this of yours, Dick," said Warner, as they rode through
the rich lands east of Louisville. "Worth saving. I'm glad the doctor
ordered me west for my health."

"He didn't order you west for your health," said Pennington. "He ordered
you west to get killed for your country."

"Well, at any rate, I'm here, and as I said, this looks like a land
worth saving."

"It's still finer when you get eastward into the Bluegrass," said Dick,
"but it isn't showing at its best. I never before saw the ground looking
so burnt and parched. They say it's the dryest summer known since the
country was settled eighty or ninety years ago."

Dick hoped that their line of march would take them near Pendleton, and
as it soon dropped southward he saw that his hope had come true. They
would pass within twenty miles of his mother's home, and at Dick's
urgent and repeated request, Colonel Winchester strained a point and
allowed him to go. He was permitted to select a horse of unusual power
and speed, and he departed just before sundown.

"Remember that you're to rejoin us to-morrow," said Colonel Winchester.
"Beware of guerillas. I hope you'll find your mother well."

"I feel sure of it, and I shall tell her how very kind and helpful
you've been to me, sir."

"Thank you, Dick."

Dick, in his haste to be off did not notice that the colonel's voice
quivered and that his face flushed as he uttered the emphatic "thank
you." A few minutes later he was riding swiftly southward over a road
that he knew well. His start was made at six o'clock and he was sure
that by ten o'clock he would be in Pendleton.

The road was deserted. This was a well-peopled country, and he saw many
houses, but nearly always the doors and shutters of the windows were
closed. The men were away, and the women and children were shutting out
the bands that robbed in the name of either army.

The night came down, and Dick still sped southward with no one appearing
to stop him. He did not know just where the Southern army lay, but he
did not believe that he would come in contact with any of its flankers.
His horse was so good and true, that earlier than he had hoped, he was
approaching Pendleton. The moon was up now, and every foot of the ground
was familiar. He crossed brooks in which he and Harry Kenton and other
boys of his age had waded--but he had never seen them so low before--and
he marked the tree in which he had shot his first squirrel.

It had not been so many months since he had been in Pendleton, and
yet it seemed years and years. Three great battles in which seventy or
eighty thousand men had fallen were enough to make anybody older.

Dick paused on the crest of a little hill and looked toward the place
where his mother's house stood. He had come just in this way in the
winter, and he looked forward to another meeting as happy. The moonlight
was very clear now and he saw no smoke rising from the chimneys, but
this was summer, and of course they would not have a fire burning at
such an hour.

He rode on a little further and paused again at the crest of another
hill. His view of Pendleton here was still better. He could see more
roofs, and walls, but he noticed that no smoke rose from any house.
Pendleton lay very still in its hollow. On the far side he saw the white
walls of Colonel Kenton's house shining in the moonlight. Something
leaped in his brain. He seemed to have been looking upon such white
walls only yesterday, white walls that stood out in a fiery haze, white
walls that he could never forget though he lived to be a hundred.

Then he remembered. The white walls were those of the Dunkard church at
Antietam, around which the blue and the gray had piled their bodies in
masses. The vast battlefield ranged past him like a moving panorama, and
then he was merely looking at Pendleton lying there below, so still.

Dick was sensitive and his affections were strong. He loved his mother
with a remarkable devotion, and his friends were for all time. Highly
imaginative, he felt a powerful stirring of the heart, at his second
return to Pendleton since his departure for the war. Yet he was chilled
somewhat by the strange silence hanging over the little town that he
loved so well. It was night, it was true, but not even a dog barked at
his coming, and there was not the faintest trail of smoke across the
sky. A brilliant moon shone, and white stars unnumbered glittered and
danced, yet they showed no movement of man in the town below.

He shook off the feeling, believing that it was merely a sensitiveness
born of time and place, and rode straight for his mother's house. Then
he dismounted, tied his horse to one of the pines, and ran up the walk
to the front door, where he knocked softly at first, and then more
loudly.

No answer came and Dick's heart sank within him like a plummet in a
pool. He went to the edge of the walk, gathered up some gravel and threw
it against a window in his mother's room on the second floor. That would
arouse her, because he knew that she slept lightly in these times, when
her son was off to the wars. But the window was not raised, and he could
hear no sound of movement in the room.

Alarmed, he went back to the front door, and he noticed that while the
door was locked the keyhole was empty. Then his mother was gone away.
The sign was almost infallible. Had any one been at home the key would
have been on the inside.

His heart grew lighter. There had been no violence. No roving band had
come there to plunder. He whistled and shouted through the keyhole,
although he did not want anyone who might possibly be passing in
the road to hear him, as this town was almost wholly Southern in its
sympathies.

There was still no answer, and leading his horse behind one of the pine
trees on the lawn, where it would not be observed, he went to the rear
of the house, and taking a stick pried open a kitchen window. He had
learned this trick when he was a young boy, and climbing lightly inside
he closed the window behind him and fastened the catch.

He knew of course every hall and room of the house, but the moment he
entered it he felt that it was deserted. The air was close and heavy,
showing that no fresh breeze had blown through it for days. It was
impossible that his mother or the faithful colored woman could have
lived there so long a time with closed doors and shuttered windows.

When he passed into the main part of his home, and touched a door
or chair, a fine dust grated slightly under his fingers. Here was
confirmation, if further confirmation was needed. Dust on chairs
and tables and sofas in the house in which his mother was present.
Impossible! Such a thing could not occur with her there. It was not the
white dust of the road or fields, but the black dust that gathers in
closed chambers.

He went up to his mother's room, and, opening one of the shutters a few
inches, let in a little light. It was in perfect order. Everything
was in its place. Upon the dresser was a little vase containing some
shrivelled flowers. The water in the vase had dried up days ago, and the
flowers had dried up with it.

In this room and in all the others everything was arranged with order
and method, as if one were going away for a long time. Dick drew a chair
near the window, that he had opened slightly, and sat down. Much of
his fear for his mother disappeared. It was obvious that she and her
faithful attendant, Juliana, had gone, probably to be out of the track
of the armies or to escape plundering bands like Skelly's.

He wondered where she had gone, whether northward or southward. There
were many places that would gladly receive her. Nearly all the people in
this part of the state were more or less related, and with them the tie
of kinship was strong. It was probable that she would go north, or east.
She might have gone to Lexington, or Winchester, or Richmond, or even in
the hills to Somerset.

Well, he could not solve it. He was deeply disappointed because he had
not found her there, but he was relieved from his first fear that the
guerillas had come. He closed and fastened the window again, and then
walked all through the house once more. His eyes had now grown so used
to the darkness that he could see everything dimly. He went into his own
room. A picture of himself that used to hang on the wall now stood on
the dresser. He knew very well why, and he knew, too, that his mother
often passed hours in that room.

Below stairs everything was neatness and in order. He went into the
parlor, of which he had stood in so much awe, when he was a little
child. The floor was covered with an imported carpet, mingled brown and
red. A great Bible lay upon a small marble-topped table in the center
of the room. Two larger tables stood against the wall. Upon them lay
volumes of the English classics, and a cluster of wax flowers under a
glass cover, that had seemed wonderful to Dick in his childhood.

But the room awed him no more, and he turned at once to the great
squares of light that faced each other from wall to wall.

A famous portrait painter had arisen at Lexington when the canebrake
was scarcely yet cleared away from the heart of Kentucky. His work
was astonishing to have come out of a country yet a wilderness, and a
century later he is ranked among the great painters. But it is said that
the best work he ever did is the pair of portraits that face each other
in the Mason home, and the other pair, the exact duplicates that face
each other in the same manner in the Kenton house.

Dick opened a shutter entirely, and the light of the white moon, white
like marble, streamed in. The sudden inpouring illuminated the room so
vividly that Dick's heart missed a beat. It seemed, for a minute, that
the two men in the portraits were stepping from the wall. Then his heart
beat steadily again and the color returned to his face. They had always
been there, those two portraits. Men had never lived more intensely than
they, and the artist, at the instant his genius was burning brightest,
had caught them in the moment of extraordinary concentration. Their
souls had looked through their eyes and his own soul looking through his
had met theirs.

Dick gazed at one and then at the other. There was his great
grandfather, Paul Cotter, a man of vision and inspiration, the greatest
scholar the west had ever produced, and there facing him was his comrade
of a long life-time, Henry Ware, the famous borderer, afterward the
great governor of the state. They had been painted in hunting suits of
deerskin, with the fringed borders and beaded moccasins, and raccoon
skin caps.

These were men, Dick's great grandfather and Harry's. An immense pride
that he was the great-grandson of one of them suddenly swelled up in his
bosom, and he was proud, too, that the descendants of the borderers, and
of the earlier borderers in the east, should show the same spirit and
stamina. No one could look upon the fields of Shiloh, and Manassas and
Antietam and say that any braver men ever lived.

He drew his chair into the middle of the room and sat and looked at them
a long time. His steady gazing and his own imaginative brain, keyed to
the point of excitement, brought back into the portraits that singular
quality of intense life. Had they moved he would not have been
surprised, and the eyes certainly looked down at him in full and ample
recognition.

What did they say? He gazed straight into the eyes of one and then
straight into the eyes of the other, and over and over again. But the
expression there was Delphic. He must choose for himself, as they had
chosen for themselves, and remembering that he was lingering, when he
should not linger, he closed and fastened the window, slipped out at the
kitchen window and returned to his horse.

He remounted in the road and rode a few paces nearer to Pendleton, which
still lay silent in the white moonlight. He had no doubt now that many
of the people had fled like his mother. Most of the houses must be
closed and shuttered like hers. That was why the town was so silent.
He would have been glad to see Dr. Russell and old Judge Kendrick and
others again, but it would have been risky to go into the center of the
place, and it would have been a breach, too, of the faith that Colonel
Winchester had put in him.

He crushed the wish and turned away. Then he saw the white walls of
Colonel Kenton's house shining upon a hill among the pines beyond the
town. He was quite sure that it would be deserted, and there was no
harm in passing it. He knew it as well as his own home. He and Harry had
played in every part of it, and it was, in truth, a second home to him.

He rode slowly along the road which led to the quiet house. Colonel
Kenton had all the instincts so strong in the Kentuckians and Virginians
of his type. A portion of his wealth had been devoted to decoration and
beauty. The white, sanded road led upward through a great park, splendid
