yet to learn how to tell a story straight from the beginning.

When he had done, and we had done, Albert's uncle said, 'Well, it
amused you; and you'll be glad to learn that it amused your friends the
Antiquities.'

'Didn't they think they were Roman?' Daisy said; 'they did in The Daisy
Chain.'

'Not in the least,' said Albert's uncle; 'but the Treasurer and
Secretary were charmed by your ingenious preparations for their
reception.'

'We didn't want them to be disappointed,' said Dora.

'They weren't,' said Albert's uncle. 'Steady on with those plums, H.O. A
little way beyond the treasure you had prepared for them they found two
specimens of REAL Roman pottery which sent every man-jack of them home
thanking his stars he had been born a happy little Antiquary child.'

'Those were our jugs,' said Alice, 'and we really HAVE sold the
Antiquities. She unfolded the tale about our getting the jugs and
burying them in the moonlight, and the mound; and the others listened
with deeply respectful interest. 'We really have done it this time,
haven't we?' she added in tones of well-deserved triumph.

But Oswald had noticed a queer look about Albert's uncle from almost the
beginning of Alice's recital; and he now had the sensation of something
being up, which has on other occasions frozen his noble blood. The
silence of Albert's uncle now froze it yet more Arcticly.

'Haven't we?' repeated Alice, unconscious of what her sensitive
brother's delicate feelings had already got hold of. 'We have done it
this time, haven't we?'

'Since you ask me thus pointedly,' answered Albert's uncle at last, 'I
cannot but confess that I think you have indeed done it. Those pots on
the top of the library cupboard ARE Roman pottery. The amphorae
which you hid in the mound are probably--I can't say for certain,
mind--priceless. They are the property of the owner of this house. You
have taken them out and buried them. The President of the Maidstone
Antiquarian Society has taken them away in his bag. Now what are you
going to do?'

Alice and I did not know what to say, or where to look. The others added
to our pained position by some ungenerous murmurs about our not being so
jolly clever as we thought ourselves.

There was a very far from pleasing silence. Then Oswald got up. He
said--

'Alice, come here a sec; I want to speak to you.'

As Albert's uncle had offered no advice, Oswald disdained to ask him for
any.

Alice got up too, and she and Oswald went into the garden, and sat down
on the bench under the quince tree, and wished they had never tried to
have a private lark of their very own with the Antiquities--'A Private
Sale', Albert's uncle called it afterwards. But regrets, as nearly
always happens, were vain. Something had to be done.

But what?

Oswald and Alice sat in silent desperateness, and the voices of the
gay and careless others came to them from the lawn, where, heartless
in their youngness, they were playing tag. I don't know how they could.
Oswald would not like to play tag when his brother and sister were in a
hole, but Oswald is an exception to some boys.

But Dicky told me afterwards he thought it was only a joke of Albert's
uncle's.

The dusk grew dusker, till you could hardly tell the quinces from the
leaves, and Alice and Oswald still sat exhausted with hard thinking, but
they could not think of anything. And it grew so dark that the moonlight
began to show.

Then Alice jumped up--just as Oswald was opening his mouth to say
the same thing--and said, 'Of course--how silly! I know. Come on in,
Oswald.' And they went on in.

Oswald was still far too proud to consult anyone else. But he just asked
carelessly if Alice and he might go into Maidstone the next day to
buy some wire-netting for a rabbit-hutch, and to see after one or two
things.

Albert's uncle said certainly. And they went by train with the bailiff
from the farm, who was going in about some sheep-dip and to buy pigs.
At any other time Oswald would not have been able to bear to leave the
bailiff without seeing the pigs bought. But now it was different. For he
and Alice had the weight on their bosoms of being thieves without having
meant it--and nothing, not even pigs, had power to charm the young but
honourable Oswald till that stain had been wiped away.

So he took Alice to the Secretary of the Maidstone Antiquities' house,
and Mr Turnbull was out, but the maid-servant kindly told us where the
President lived, and ere long the trembling feet of the unfortunate
brother and sister vibrated on the spotless gravel of Camperdown Villa.

When they asked, they were told that Mr Longchamps was at home. Then
they waited, paralysed with undescribed emotions, in a large room with
books and swords and glass bookcases with rotten-looking odds and ends
in them. Mr Longchamps was a collector. That means he stuck to anything,
no matter how ugly and silly, if only it was old.

He came in rubbing his hands, and very kind. He remembered us very well,
he said, and asked what he could do for us.

Oswald for once was dumb. He could not find words in which to own
himself the ass he had been. But Alice was less delicately moulded. She
said--

'Oh, if you please, we are most awfully sorry, and we hope you'll
forgive us, but we thought it would be such a pity for you and all the
other poor dear Antiquities to come all that way and then find nothing
Roman--so we put some pots and things in the barrow for you to find.'

'So I perceived,' said the President, stroking his white beard and
smiling most agreeably at us; 'a harmless joke, my dear! Youth's the
season for jesting. There's no harm done--pray think no more about it.
It's very honourable of you to come and apologize, I'm sure.'

His brow began to wear the furrowed, anxious look of one who would
fain be rid of his guests and get back to what he was doing before they
interrupted him.

Alice said, 'We didn't come for that. It's MUCH worse. Those were two
REAL true Roman jugs you took away; we put them there; they aren't
ours. We didn't know they were real Roman. We wanted to sell the
Antiquities--I mean Antiquaries--and we were sold ourselves.'

'This is serious,' said the gentleman. 'I suppose you'd know the--the
"jugs" if you saw them again?'

'Anywhere,' said Oswald, with the confidential rashness of one who does
not know what he is talking about.

Mr Longchamps opened the door of a little room leading out of the one we
were in, and beckoned us to follow. We found ourselves amid shelves and
shelves of pottery of all sorts; and two whole shelves--small ones--were
filled with the sort of jug we wanted.

'Well,' said the President, with a veiled menacing sort of smile, like a
wicked cardinal, 'which is it?'

Oswald said, 'I don't know.'

Alice said, 'I should know if I had it in my hand.'

The President patiently took the jugs down one after another, and Alice
tried to look inside them. And one after another she shook her head and
gave them back. At last she said, 'You didn't WASH them?'

Mr Longchamps shuddered and said 'No'.

'Then,' said Alice, 'there is something written with lead-pencil inside
both the jugs. I wish I hadn't. I would rather you didn't read it. I
didn't know it would be a nice old gentleman like you would find it.
I thought it would be the younger gentleman with the thin legs and the
narrow smile.'

'Mr Turnbull.' The President seemed to recognize the description
unerringly. 'Well, well--boys will be boys--girls, I mean. I won't be
angry. Look at all the "jugs" and see if you can find yours.'

Alice did--and the next one she looked at she said, 'This is one'--and
two jugs further on she said, 'This is the other.'

'Well,' the President said, 'these are certainly the specimens which I
obtained yesterday. If your uncle will call on me I will return them
to him. But it's a disappointment. Yes, I think you must let me look
inside.'

He did. And at the first one he said nothing. At the second he laughed.

'Well, well,' he said, 'we can't expect old heads on young shoulders.
You're not the first who went forth to shear and returned shorn. Nor, it
appears, am I. Next time you have a Sale of Antiquities, take care that
you yourself are not "sold". Good-day to you, my dear. Don't let the
incident prey on your mind,' he said to Alice. 'Bless your heart, I was
a boy once myself, unlikely as you may think it. Good-bye.'

We were in time to see the pigs bought after all.

I asked Alice what on earth it was she'd scribbled inside the beastly
jugs, and she owned that just to make the lark complete she had written
'Sucks' in one of the jugs, and 'Sold again, silly', in the other.

But we know well enough who it was that was sold. And if ever we have
any Antiquities to tea again, they shan't find so much as a Greek
waistcoat button if we can help it.

Unless it's the President, for he did not behave at all badly. For a
man of his age I think he behaved exceedingly well. Oswald can picture
a very different scene having been enacted over those rotten pots if the
President had been an otherwise sort of man.

But that picture is not pleasing, so Oswald will not distress you by
drawing it for you. You can most likely do it easily for yourself.



CHAPTER 11. THE BENEVOLENT BAR

The tramp was very dusty about the feet and legs, and his clothes were
very ragged and dirty, but he had cheerful twinkly grey eyes, and he
touched his cap to the girls when he spoke to us, though a little as
though he would rather not.

We were on the top of the big wall of the Roman ruin in the Three Tree
pasture. We had just concluded a severe siege with bows and arrows--the
ones that were given us to make up for the pistol that was confiscated
after the sad but not sinful occasion when it shot a fox.

To avoid accidents that you would be sorry for afterwards, Oswald, in
his thoughtfulness, had decreed that everyone was to wear wire masks.

Luckily there were plenty of these, because a man who lived in the Moat
House once went to Rome, where they throw hundreds and thousands at
each other in play, and call it a Comfit Battle or Battaglia di Confetti
(that's real Italian). And he wanted to get up that sort of thing among
the village people--but they were too beastly slack, so he chucked it.

And in the attic were the wire masks he brought home with him from Rome,
which people wear to prevent the nasty comfits getting in their mouths
and eyes.

So we were all armed to the teeth with masks and arrows, but in
attacking or defending a fort your real strength is not in your
equipment, but in your power of Shove. Oswald, Alice, Noel and Denny
defended the fort. We were much the strongest side, but that was how
Dicky and Oswald picked up.

The others got in, it is true, but that was only because an arrow hit
Dicky on the nose, and it bled quarts as usual, though hit only
through the wire mask. Then he put into dock for repairs, and while the
defending party weren't looking he sneaked up the wall at the back and
shoved Oswald off, and fell on top of him, so that the fort, now that
it had lost its gallant young leader, the life and soul of the besieged
party, was of course soon overpowered, and had to surrender.

Then we sat on the top and ate some peppermints Albert's uncle brought
us a bag of from Maidstone when he went to fetch away the Roman pottery
we tried to sell the Antiquities with.

The battle was over, and peace raged among us as we sat in the sun on
the big wall and looked at the fields, all blue and swimming in the
heat.

We saw the tramp coming through the beetfield. He made a dusty blot on
the fair scene.

When he saw us he came close to the wall, and touched his cap, as I have
said, and remarked--

'Excuse me interrupting of your sports, young gentlemen and ladies, but
if you could so far oblige as to tell a labouring man the way to the
nearest pub. It's a dry day and no error.'

'The "Rose and Crown" is the best pub,' said Dicky, 'and the landlady is
a friend of ours. It's about a mile if you go by the field path.'

'Lor' love a duck!' said the tramp, 'a mile's a long way, and walking's
a dry job this 'ere weather.' We said we agreed with him.

'Upon my sacred,' said the tramp, 'if there was a pump handy I believe
I'd take a turn at it--I would indeed, so help me if I wouldn't! Though
water always upsets me and makes my 'and shaky.'

We had not cared much about tramps since the adventure of the villainous
sailor-man and the Tower of Mystery, but we had the dogs on the wall
with us (Lady was awfully difficult to get up, on account of her long
deer-hound legs), and the position was a strong one, and easy to defend.
Besides the tramp did not look like that bad sailor, nor talk like it.
And we considerably outnumbered the tramp, anyway.

Alice nudged Oswald and said something about Sir Philip Sidney and the
tramp's need being greater than his, so Oswald was obliged to go to the
hole in the top of the wall where we store provisions during sieges and
get out the bottle of ginger-beer which he had gone without when
the others had theirs so as to drink it when he got really thirsty.
Meanwhile Alice said--

'We've got some ginger-beer; my brother's getting it. I hope you won't
mind drinking out of our glass. We can't wash it, you know--unless we
rinse it out with a little ginger-beer.'

'Don't ye do it, miss,' he said eagerly; 'never waste good liquor on
washing.'

The glass was beside us on the wall. Oswald filled it with ginger-beer
and handed down the foaming tankard to the tramp. He had to lie on his
young stomach to do this.

The tramp was really quite polite--one of Nature's gentlemen, and a man
as well, we found out afterwards. He said--

'Here's to you!' before he drank. Then he drained the glass till the rim
rested on his nose.

'Swelp me, but I WAS dry,' he said. 'Don't seem to matter much what
it is, this weather, do it?--so long as it's suthink wet. Well, here's
thanking you.'

'You're very welcome,' said Dora; 'I'm glad you liked it.'

'Like it?'--said he. 'I don't suppose you know what it's like to have a
thirst on you. Talk of free schools and free libraries, and free baths
and wash-houses and such! Why don't someone start free DRINKS? He'd be a
ero, he would. I'd vote for him any day of the week and one over. Ef yer
don't objec I'll set down a bit and put on a pipe.'

