It had been proved, however, by the evidence of those who knew him best,
of his workpeople, his servants, of this poor lad whom the prosecution
had placed in the box as a witness against his brother, that this man's
life was a long lie; that, smiling and pleasant as he appeared, he was
a tyrant, a petty despot in his family, a hard master to his hands, a
cruel master in his house, What wonder that between this lad and such
a stepfather as this there was no love lost. There were scores, ay and
thousands of boys in England who similarly hated their stepfathers, and
was it to be said that, if any of the men came to a sudden and violent
death, these boys were to be suspected of their murder. But in the
present case, although he was not in a position to lay his finger upon
the man who perpetrated this crime, they need not go far to look for
him. Had they not heard that he was hated by his workpeople? Evidence
had been laid before them to show that he was a marked man, that he had
received threatening letters from secret associations which had, as was
notorious, kept the south of Yorkshire, and indeed all that part of
the country which was the seat of manufacture, in a state of alarm. So
imminent was the danger considered that the magistrates had requested
the aid of an armed force, and at the tame this murder was committed
there were soldiers actually stationed in the mill, besides a strong
force in the town for the protection of this man from his enemies.

The counsel for the prosecution had given them his theory as to the
actions of the prisoner, but he believed that that theory was altogether
wide of the truth. It was known that an accident had taken place to
the machinery, for the mill was standing idle for the day. It would be
probable that the deceased would go over late in the evening to see
how the work was progressing, as every effort was being made to get the
machinery to run on the following morning.

"What so probable, then, that the enemies of the deceased--and you know
that he had enemies, who had sworn to take his life--should choose this
opportunity for attacking him as he drove to or from the town. That an
enemy was prowling round the mill, as has been suggested to you, I admit
readily enough. That he stumbled upon the rope, that the idea occurred
to him of upsetting the gig on its return, that he cut off a portion
of the rope and fixed it between the two gateposts across the road, and
that this rope caused the death of William Mulready. All this I allow;
but I submit to you that the man who did this was a member of the secret
association which is a terror to the land, and was the terror of William
Mulready, and there is no proof whatever, not even the shadow not even
the shadow of a proof, to connect this lad with the crime.

"I am not speaking without a warrant when I assert my conviction that it
was an emissary of the association known as the Luddites who had a
hand in this matter, for I am in possession of a document, which
unfortunately I am not in a position to place before you, as it is not
legal evidence, which professes to be written by the man who perpetrated
this deed, and who appears, although obedient to the behests of this
secret association of which he is a member, to be yet a man not devoid
of heart, who says that if this innocent young man is found guilty of
this crime he will himself come forward and confess that he did it.

"Therefore, gentlemen of the jury, there is every reason to believe
that the slayer of William Mulready is indeed within these walls, but
assuredly he is not the most unfortunate and ill treated young man who
stands in the dock awaiting your verdict to set him free."

The summing up was brief. The judge commenced by telling the jury that
they must dismiss altogether from their minds the document of which the
counsel for the defense had spoken, and to which, as it had not been
put into court, and indeed could not be put into court, it was highly
irregular and improper for him to have alluded. They must, he said,
dismiss it altogether from their minds. Their duty was simple, they
were to consider the evidence before them. They had heard of the quarrel
which had taken place between the deceased and the prisoner. They had
heard the threat used by the prisoner that he would kill the deceased
if he had an opportunity, and they had to decide whether he had, in
accordance with the theory of the prosecution, carried that threat into
effect; or whether on the other hand, as the defense suggested, the
deceased had fallen a victim to the agent of the association which had
threatened his life. He was bound to tell them that if they entertained
any doubt as to the guilt of the prisoner at the bar they were bound to
give him the benefit of the doubt.

The jury consulted together for a short time and then expressed their
desire to retire to consider their verdict. They were absent about half
an hour and on their return the foreman said in reply to the question of
the judge that they found the prisoner "Not Guilty."

A perfect silence reigned in the court when the jury entered the box,
and something like a sigh of relief followed their verdict. It was
expected, and indeed there was some surprise when the jury retired, for
the general opinion was that whether guilty or innocent the prosecution
had failed to bring home unmistakably the crime to the prisoner. That
he might have committed it was certain, that he had committed it was
probable, but it was assuredly not proved that he and none other had
been the perpetrator of the crime.

Of all the persons in the court the accused had appeared the least
anxious as to the result. He received almost with indifference the
assurances which Mr. Wakefield, who was sitting at the solicitor's table
below him, rose to give him, that the jury could not find a verdict
against him, and the expression of his face was unchanged when the
foreman announced the verdict.

He was at once released from the dock. His solicitor, Dr. Green, and Mr.
Porson warmly shook his hand, and Charlie threw his arms round his neck
and cried in his joy and excitement.

"It is all right, I suppose," Ned said as, surrounded by his friends, he
left the court, "but I would just as lief the verdict had gone the other
way."

"Oh! Ned, how can you say so?" Charlie exclaimed.

"Well, no, Charlie," Ned corrected himself. "I am glad for your sake and
Lucy's that I am acquitted; it would have been awful for you if I had
been hung--it is only for myself that I don't care. The verdict only
means that they have not been able to prove me guilty, and I have got
to go on living all my life knowing that I am suspected of being a
murderer. It is not a nice sort of thing, you know," and he laughed
drearily.

"Come, come, Ned," Mr. Porson said cheerily, "you mustn't take too
gloomy a view of it. It is natural enough that you should do so now,
for you have gone through a great deal, and you are overwrought and worn
out; but this will pass off, and you will find things are not as bad as
you think. It is true that there may be some, not many, I hope, who will
be of opinion that the verdict was like the Scotch verdict 'Not Proven,'
rather than 'Not Guilty;' but I am sure the great majority will believe
you innocent. You have got the doctor here on your side, and he is a
host in himself. Mr. Simmonds told me when the jury were out of the
court that he was convinced you were innocent, and his opinion will go a
long way in Marsden, and you must hope and trust that the time will
come when your innocence will be not only believed in, but proved to the
satisfaction of all by the discovery of the actual murderer."

"Ah!" Ned said, "if we ever find that out it will be all right; but
unless we can do so I shall have this dreadful thing hanging over me all
my life."

They had scarcely reached the hotel where Mr. Porson, the doctor, and
Charlie were stopping, when Mr. Simmonds arrived.

"I have come to congratulate you, my boy," he said, shaking hands
with Ned. "I can see that at present the verdict does not give so much
satisfaction to you as to your friends, but that is natural enough. You
have been unjustly accused and have had a very hard time of it, and you
are naturally not disposed to look at matters in a cheerful light; but
this gives us time, my boy, and time is everything. It is hard for you
that your innocence has not been fully demonstrated, but you have your
life before you, and we must hope that some day you will be triumphantly
vindicated."

"That is what I shall live for in future," Ned said. "Of course now, Mr.
Simmonds, there is an end of all idea of my going into the army. A man
suspected of a murder, even if they have failed to bring it home to him,
cannot ask for a commission in the army. I know there's an end to all
that."

"No," Mr. Simmonds agreed hesitatingly, "I fear that for the present
that plan had better remain in abeyance; we can take it up again later
on when this matter is put straight."

"That may be never," Ned said decidedly, "so we need say no more about
it."

"And now, my boy," Mr. Porson said, "try and eat some lunch. I have
just ordered a post chaise to be round at the door in half an hour. The
sooner we start the better. The fresh air and the change will do you
good, and we shall have plenty of time to talk on the road."




CHAPTER XVI: LUKE MARNER'S SACRIFICE


Not until they had left York behind them did Ned ask after his mother.
He knew that if there had been anything pleasant to tell about her he
would have heard it at once, and the silence of his friends warned him
that the subject was not an agreeable one.

"How is my mother?" he asked at last abruptly.

"Well, Ned," Dr. Green replied, "I have been expecting your question,
and I am sorry to say that I have nothing agreeable to tell you."

"That I was sure of," Ned said with a hard laugh. "As I have received no
message from her from the day I was arrested I guessed pretty well that
whatever doubt other people might feel, my mother was positive that I
had murdered her husband."

"The fact is, Ned," Dr. Green said cautiously, "your mother is not at
present quite accountable for her opinions. The shock which she has
undergone has, I think, unhinged her mind. Worthless as I believe him
to have been, this man had entirely gained her affections. She has not
risen from her bed since he died.

"Sometimes she is absolutely silent for hours, at others she talks
incessantly; and painful as it is to tell you so, her first impression
that you were responsible for his death is the one which still remains
fixed on her mind. She is wholly incapable of reason or of argument. At
times she appears sane and sensible enough and talks of other matters
coherently; but the moment she touches on this topic she becomes excited
and vehement. It has been a great comfort to me, and I am sure it will
be to you, that your old servant Abijah has returned and taken up the
position of housekeeper.

"As soon as your mother's first excitement passed away I asked her if
she would like this, and she eagerly assented. The woman was in the
town, having come over on the morning after you gave yourself up, and
to my great relief she at once consented to take up her former position.
This is a great thing for your sister, who is, of course, entirely in
her charge, as your mother is not in a condition to attend to anything.
I was afraid at first that she would not remain, so indignant was she at
your mother's believing your guilt; but when I assured her that the poor
lady was not responsible for what she said, and that her mind was in
fact unhinged altogether by the calamity, she overcame her feelings;
but it is comic to see her struggling between her indignation at your
mother's irresponsible talk and her consciousness that it is necessary
to abstain from exciting her by contradiction."

Dr. Green had spoken as lightly as he could, but he knew how painful it
must be to Ned to hear of his mother's conviction of his guilt, and how
much it would add to the trials of his position.

Ned himself had listened in silence. He sighed heavily when the doctor
had finished.

"Abijah will be a great comfort," he said quietly, "a wonderful comfort;
but as to my poor mother, it will of course be a trial. Still, no wonder
that, when she heard me say those words when I went out, she thinks that
I did it. However, I suppose that it is part of my punishment."

"Have you thought anything of your future plans, Ned?" Mr. Porson asked
after they had driven in silence for some distance.

"Yes, I have been thinking a good deal," Ned replied, "all the time
I was shut up and had nothing else to do. I did not believe that they
would find me guilty, and of course I had to settle what I should do
afterward. If it was only myself I think I should go away and take
another name; but in that case there would be no chance of my ever
clearing myself, and for father's sake and for the sake of Charlie and
Lucy I must not throw away a chance of that. It would be awfully against
them all their lives if people could say of them that their brother was
the fellow who murdered their stepfather. Perhaps they will always say
so now; still it is evidently my duty to stay, if it were only on the
chance of clearing up the mystery.

"In the next place I feel that I ought to stay for the sake of money
matters. I don't think, in the present state of things, with the
Luddites burning mills and threatening masters, any one would give
anything like its real value for the mill now. I know that it did not
pay with the old machinery, and it is not every one who would care to
run the risk of working with the new. By the terms of the settlement
that was made before my mother married again the mill is now hers, and
she and Charlie and Lucy have nothing else to depend upon. As she is not
capable of transacting business it falls upon me to take her place,
and I intend to try, for a time at any rate, to run the mill myself. Of
course I know nothing about it, but as the hands all know their work the
foreman will be able to carry on the actual business of the mill till I
master the details.

"As to the office business, the clerk will know all about it. There was
a man who used to travel about to buy wool, I know my mother's husband
had every confidence in him, and he could go on just as before. As to
the sales, the books will tell the names of the firms who dealt with us,
and I suppose the business with them will go on as before. At any rate
I can but try for a time. Of course I have quite made up my mind that I
shall have no personal interest whatever in the business. They may think
that I murdered Mulready, but they shall not say that I have profited
by his death. I should suppose that my mother can pay me some very small
salary, just sufficient to buy my clothes. So I shall go on till Charlie
gets to an age when he can manage the business as its master; then if
no clue has been obtained as to the murder I shall be able to give it up
and go abroad, leaving him with, I hope, a good business for himself and
Lucy."

"I think that is as good a plan as any," Mr. Porson said; "but, however,
there is no occasion to come to any sudden determination at present.
I myself should advise a change of scene and thought before you decide
anything finally. I have a brother living in London and he would, I am
sure, very gladly take you in for a fortnight and show you the sights of
London."

"Thank you, sir, you are very kind," Ned said quietly; "but I have got
to face it out at Marsden, and I would rather begin at once."

Mr. Porson saw by the set, steady look upon Ned's face that he had
thoroughly made up his mind as to the part he had to play, and that any
further argument would be of no avail. It was not until the postchaise
was approaching Marsden that any further allusion was made to Ned's
mother. Then the doctor, after consulting Mr. Porson by various
upliftings of the eyebrows, returned to the subject.

"Ned, my boy, we were speaking some little time ago of your mother. I
think it is best that I should tell you frankly that I do not consider
her any longer responsible for her actions. I tell you this in order
that you may not be wounded by your reception.

"Since that fatal day she has not left her bed. She declares that she
has lost all power in her limbs. Of course that is nonsense, but the
result is the same. She keeps her bed, and, as far as I can see, is
likely to keep it. This is perhaps the less to be regretted, as you will
thereby avoid being thrown into contact with her; for I tell you plainly
such contact, in her present state of mind, could only be unpleasant
to you. Were you to meet, it would probably at the least bring on a
frightful attack of hysterics, which in her present state might be a
serious matter. Therefore, my boy, you must make up your mind not to see
her for awhile. I have talked the matter over with your old nurse, who
will remain with your mother as housekeeper, with a girl under her.
You will, of course, take your place as master of the house, with your
brother and sister with you, until your mother is in a position to
manage--if ever she should be. But I trust at any rate that she will
ere long so far recover as to be able to receive you as the good son you
have ever been to her."

"Thank you," Ned said quietly. "I understand, doctor."

Ned did understand that his mother was convinced of his guilt and
refused to see him; it was what he expected, and yet it was a heavy
trial. Very cold and hard he looked as the postchaise drove through the
streets of Marsden. People glanced at it curiously, and as they saw
Ned sitting by the side of the men who were known as his champions they
hurried away to spread the news that young Sankey had been acquitted.

The hard look died out of Ned's face as the door opened, and Lucy sprang
out and threw her arms round his neck and cried with delight at seeing
him; and Abijah, crying too, greeted him inside with a motherly welcome.
A feeling of relief came across his mind as he entered the sitting room.
Dr. Green, who was one of the trustees in the marriage settlement, had,
in the inability of Mrs. Mulready to give any orders, taken upon himself
to dispose of much of the furniture, and to replace it with some of an
entirely different fashion and appearance. The parlor was snug and cosy;
a bright fire blazed on the hearth; a comfortable armchair stood beside
it; the room looked warm and homely. Ned's two friends had followed him
in, and tears stood in both their eyes.

"Welcome back, dear boy!" Mr. Porson said, grasping his hand. "God grant
that better times are in store for you, and that you may outlive this
trial which has at present darkened your life. Now we will leave you
to your brother and sister. I am sure you will be glad to be alone with
them."

And so Ned took to the life he had marked out for himself. In two
months he seemed to have aged years. The careless look of boyhood had
altogether disappeared from his face. Except from his two friends he
rejected all sympathy. When he walked through the streets of Marsden
it was with a cold, stony face, as if he were wholly unaware of the
existence of passersby. The thought that as he went along men drew aside
to let him pass and whispered after he had gone, "That is the fellow
who murdered his stepfather, but escaped because they could not bring it
home to him," was ever in his mind. His friends in vain argued with him
against his thus shutting himself off from the world. They assured him
that there were very many who, like themselves, were perfectly convinced
of his innocence, and who would rally round him and support him if he
would give them the least encouragement, but Ned shook his head.

"I dare say what you say is true," he would reply; "but I could not do
it--I must go on alone. It is as much as I can bear now."

And his friends saw that it was useless to urge him further.

On the day after his return to Marsden Luke Marner and Bill Swinton
came back on the coach from York, and after it was dark Ned walked up to
Varley and knocked at Bill's door.

