"Is aught troubling you, Ulred?" the armourer's wife asked when breakfast
was over and the men had gone downstairs again to their work. "Never have I
seen you sit so silently at the board."

"I am worried about a matter which I have learned this morning. It matters
not what it is now. Some time later you shall hear of it, but at present I
am pledged to say no word about it. I want above all things to find one who
speaks the Norman tongue well, and is yet a true Englishman. I have been
puzzling my brains, but cannot bethink me of anyone. Canst thou help me?"

"Except about the court there are few such to be found, Ulred. If Wulf of
Steyning had been here he could doubtless have assisted you had it been a
matter you could have confided to him; for Osgod said that although he
himself had learned but little Norman his master was able to talk freely
with the Norman nobles."

"Ay, he learnt it partly when a page at court. But what you say reminds me
that it was but yesterday afternoon his friend Beorn came into my shop. He
had just arrived from his estate, and said how disappointed he was at
finding that Wulf had left London. I will go to the palace and see him at
once. I know but little of him save that I have heard from Osgod that he is
Wulf's firmest friend, and they fought together across in Normandy and
again against the Welsh. He has been here several times to have weapons
repaired, and knows that Osgod is Wulf's man. I wonder I did not think of
him, but my thoughts were running on people of our own condition."

Ulred at once put on his cap and proceeded to the palace, where he found
Beorn without difficulty.

"You have not come to tell me that the blade I left with you yesterday
cannot be fitted with a new hilt, Master Ulred? It is a favourite weapon
of mine, and I would rather pay twice the price of a new one than lose it."

"I have come on another matter, my Lord Beorn. It is for your private ear.
May I pray you to come with me to my house, where I can enter upon it
without fear of being overheard?"

"Certainly I will come, Ulred, though I cannot think what this matter may
be."

"It concerns in some way the Thane of Steyning, my lord, and others even
higher in position."

"That is enough," Beorn said. "Anything that concerns Wulf concerns me, and
as he is in the matter you can count on me without question."

Upon reaching his house Ulred left Beorn for a moment in the room upstairs,
and fetched Ulf down from the attic.

"This is an apprentice lad of mine," he said, "and as it is he who has been
employed by the Thane of Steyning in this affair, it were best that he
himself informed you of it."

When Ulf had finished his story Beorn exclaimed, "I will go at once, and
will put such an affront upon this Walter Fitz-Urse that he must needs meet
me in mortal combat."

"But even if you slay him, my lord, that may not interfere with the
carrying out of this enterprise, in which, as we know, another of equal
rank with him is engaged."

"That is true, master armourer, and I spoke hastily. I thought perhaps it
was for this that you had informed me of the matter."

"No, my lord; it seemed to me that the first thing was to assure ourselves
for a certainty that the affair is really a plot against the king's life,
of which we have as yet no manner of proof, but simply the suspicion
entertained by my son's master. The first necessity is to find out for a
truth that it is so, and secondly to learn how and when it is to be carried
out; and this can only be by overhearing another conversation between the
plotters. As you have heard, Ulf could have learnt all this if he had but
understood the Norman tongue. Could I have spoken it well enough to follow
the conversation I would not have troubled you, but it seemed to me that at
their next meeting it needed that one should be present who could speak
Norman well. After considering in vain how to find one who should at once
know the Norman tongue and be a true and trustworthy Englishman, my
thoughts fell upon you, of whom I have always heard my son speak as the
companion and friend of his master, and I made bold to come and lay the
matter before you, thinking that you might either take it in hand yourself
or name one suitable for it."

"Certainly I will take it in hand myself," Beorn said, "and right glad am I
that you came to me. A matter in which the king's life is concerned I would
trust to no one but myself. And now, how think you shall we proceed? for
it may well be that these plotters may not meet again for some time, seeing
that the king is away."

"So it seems to me," the armourer said; "and, moreover, they may in their
talk last night have appointed some other place of meeting."

"What think you, Ulf?" Beorn said, turning to the boy. "Wulf would not
have chosen you for this business had he not had a good opinion of your
shrewdness; and, indeed, you have shown yourself well worthy of his
confidence."

"I should say, my lord, that I must go on the watch as before. It is most
likely that the Norman will, sooner or later, go out in the same disguise
and by the same way as before, and that the hour will be between seven and
nine in the evening--most likely between seven and eight, in order that he
may return from the meeting before the bishop's doors are closed for the
night."

"I will keep watch with you, Ulf. Were I sure that the meeting would take
place at the same spot as before you should show me where they landed, and
I would lie down there in readiness, but as they may meet elsewhere, it
seems to me that I must post myself by your side."

"It would be better, my lord, if you would take your place on the other
side of the open space, for although I, being small, can escape notice, you
might well be seen by those approaching the door. It will be necessary,
too, that you should put on sandals of soft leather or cloth, so that your
footfall should not be heard. Then, as I follow him, I would run to where
you are posted, and you could follow me, so that you could keep me in sight
and yet be beyond his view, for all our plans would be foiled should he
suspect that he was being followed."

"I will do as you advise. Come with me now and we will fix upon a station
to night, and afterwards you may be sure of finding me there between
half-past six and ten. Should you wish to see me at any other time you will
find me at the palace; I will not stir out between eight and nine in the
morning. I must say I wish it were warmer weather, for a watch of three
hours with the snow on the ground--and it is beginning to fall now--is not
so pleasant a way of spending the evening as I had looked for when I came
hither."

Beorn went out with Ulf, and they fixed upon a doorway some twenty yards
from the street down which the Norman had before gone.

"We must hope he will go by the same way," Beorn said, "for should he turn
to the right or left after issuing from the gate he will have gone so far
before you can run across and fetch me that we may well fail to pick up his
track again. It were well if we could arrange some signal by which you
would let me know should he so turn off. It would not do for you to call or
whistle."

"No, my lord; but I could howl like a dog. He would but think it some cur
lying under the wall I might howl once if he turns to the right, twice if
he turns to the left, and you could then cross the ground in that
direction, and I could meet you on the way without losing sight of him for
long."

"That would do well, Ulf, if you are sure you could imitate the howl of a
dog so nearly that he would not suspect it."

"I can do that," Ulf said confidently. "I have used the signal before with
my comrades, and to make sure will go out to the fields and practise
daily."

A month passed. Harold was still away in the North, and complete success
was attending his journey. The influence of Bishop Wulfstan, who was
greatly respected throughout the kingdom, did much, but Harold himself did
more. His noble presence, his courtesy to all, the assurances he gave of
his desire that all men should be well and justly ruled, that evil-doers of
whatever rank should be punished, that there should be no oppression and no
exaction of taxes beyond those borne by the whole community, won the hearts
of the people. They were, moreover, gratified by the confidence that he had
shown in coming among them, and in seeing for the first time in the memory
of man a monarch of England in Northumbria.

Ulf and Beorn had kept regular watch, but without success, and Ulf's
comrades had as steadily watched the other entrances. Beorn had two or
three conferences with Ulf. He was becoming impatient at the long delay,
though he acknowledged that it was possible it had been arranged that no
more meetings should take place until it was known that Harold was about to
return. The armourer was perhaps the most impatient of the three. He was
doing nothing, and his anxiety made him so irritable and captious at his
work that his men wondered what had come over their master. After fretting
for three weeks over his own inaction, he one morning told Ulf to go to
Beorn and say that he begged to have speech with him. An hour later Beorn
returned with Ulf.

"I bethought me last night, my lord," Ulred said, "while I lay awake
wondering over the matter, whether these fellows are still on board ship or
are in lodgings in London."

"It might be either, Ulred. I have frequently thought over the matter.
Possibly they may have stayed on board their ship till she left, and then
have come on shore in the guise of peaceful traders."

"If the ship did not return at once they may still be on board," the
armourer said, "for the wind has blown steadily from the east for the last
five weeks, and no ships have been able to leave the port. I blame myself
sorely that I did not think of it before, but at least I will lose no time
now if you think that good might come of it."

"It would certainly be good if you could find either the ship or the house
where the men are in lodging, but seeing that you know nothing of their
appearance or number, nor the name of the ship in which they came nor the
port she sailed from, I see not how you could set about it."

"I will first go to the port-reeve's office and find out the names of the
ships that arrived just before the time that the meeting by the river took
place. She may have come in early that day, or on the day before. They
would surely send word at once to him that they had arrived."

"You might learn something that way, Ulred, but we do not know that the
meeting Ulf saw was their first."

"That is true. But as Ulf's friend declares that he certainly had not gone
out that way during the evenings that he had been keeping watch, it is
likely that it was their first meeting."

"That is so, Ulred; and at any rate it would be well that you should make
the inquiries, and that, while we are keeping our watch as before, you
should try to gather some tidings of the fellows in another way."




CHAPTER XVI.


A VOYAGE NORTH.

The armourer found without any difficulty that twenty-five vessels,
exclusive of small coasters, had arrived in the port during the thirty-six
hours previous to the time of the meeting on the bank. Of these, eighteen
were from English ports, seven from Normandy, France, or Flanders. Three of
the latter had sailed away, and of the four remaining in the port two were
from Rouen, one from Calais, and one from Flanders. Having obtained the
names of these, he took boat and rowed down the river and ascertained where
each lay at anchor. He then, with the assistance of some citizens of
standing of his acquaintance, obtained a view of the manifests of their
cargoes. The Flemish vessel carried cloth, the other three miscellaneous
cargoes--wine, dried fish, cloth, and other goods.

The Flemish vessel was the largest, those from Rouen and Calais were about
the same size. All had discharged their cargoes, and were waiting for a
change of wind to drop down the river. There was nothing unusual to be
observed on any of the ships. The men were for the most part down in the
forecastle, for the weather was too severe for them to lounge about on
deck. He talked the matter over with Beorn, and they agreed that it was
most probable that the men would embark from Calais rather than Rouen. It
was a far shorter and less perilous voyage, and moreover, as Frenchmen they
could move about without attracting attention, while as Normans they would
be viewed with a certain amount of hostility and suspicion.

"I will make it my business to watch that vessel. I know not whether any
good can come of it, but I would fain be doing something. If the wind
changes she will doubtless proceed to sea, and if they are still on board
of her they will come ashore, and I could see their numbers and where they
put up."

"That will indeed be important," Beorn said, "for we should then have two
places to watch, and should be almost certain to get to the root of the
matter. But how will you watch her?"

"There are many houses near the water's edge, on the southern side of the
river near which the ship is lying, she having moved away from the quays
when she discharged her cargo. I will hire a room in one of these, and will
there pass as much of my time as I can; and I will take with me my
apprentice Ernulf, whom I shall bid keep his eye upon the ship whenever I
myself am away. I need say nothing whatever of the reason of my desire that
I should be acquainted with everything that passes on board."

Ulred succeeded in getting a room exactly opposite the French vessel, and
sitting back from the window, was able, himself unseen, to notice
everything that passed on board the ship, which lay scarce her own length
from the shore. Upon the third day a boat containing a man wearing an ample
cloak with a hood, which was pulled far over his face, rowed up to the side
of the ship, and climbed up right nimbly into her waist.

"It is a Saxon cloak," the armourer said to himself, "but those are Norman
leggings. The man is tall, and the quickness with which he climbed over
shows that he is young. I doubt not that it is our man. I would give a
year's profits of the forge to be hidden down below at present. However, it
is much to have learnt that this is really the ship, and that the Norman's
friends are still on board. I would that Wulf were in London. He has a keen
wit, and would hit on some plan by which we might get to the bottom of the
matter. Beorn is a brave young thane, and were Wulf here would second him
valiantly, but he has none of the other's quickness of thought. As soon as
this fellow leaves the ship I will hurry back to take counsel with him, and
hear what the boy Ulf, who is a marvellously shrewd little knave, may think
of the matter."

Half an hour later the boat put off again; a man came to the side with the
visitor and retired below as soon as he left the ship. Ulred at once
hurried off, hailed a boat a short distance higher up and was rowed to
Westminster. As soon as he gained the house he despatched Ulf to Beorn. The
latter listened to the discovery that had been made, and then asked the
armourer what he advised should be done.

"That is just what I am at a loss about, my lord. Doubtless were we to go
to the city and tell the port-reeve that there are men on that craft who
have designs against the king's life, he would pounce upon them and throw
them into jail. But we have no evidence to give in support of the charge."

Beorn nodded his head in agreement. "If I had half a dozen of my own men
here," he said hotly, "I would go down in a boat after nightfall, seize the
vessel, and put all on board to the sword."

"That would hardly do, my lord," the armourer said gravely. "On the high
sea doubtless the thing might be done, but here in the port of London it
would be a desperate undertaking, especially as we have nought that in the
eyes of the law would in any way justify such action."

"Well, let us have your own advice, then," Beorn said impatiently. "You
think they cannot be arrested and they may not be slain. What do you
counsel shall be done!"

"I see nought to do but to continue to wait and to watch. We are better
off than we were before, inasmuch as we know where these men are."

"Yes, but we do not know where they will be to-morrow, for we know nothing
of what passed between Fitz-Urse and them; doubtless some settlement of
their plans has been come to. They may land or may sail away, for methinks
from the look of the sky there is like to be a change in the weather. You
see, the Norman may have taken them news that Harold will soon be on his
way back, for indeed a message arrived from him this morning with news that
all things had been well-nigh settled, and that he will shortly make for
York, where he is to wed the sister of the Northern earls. It may be that
the ship may be bound thither also. You left your apprentice on the watch,
I suppose?"

"Yes, I bade him keep his eye on the ship, and should any men leave her he
is to follow on their track and mark their movements."

"At any rate there can be little need for me to watch this evening," Beorn
said. "As Fitz-Urse has seen the others to-day he cannot want to meet them
to-night."

"No, that is certain," the armourer agreed; "but with your permission I
will call Ulf in. I told him before I sent him to you what I had observed.
Are you going to watch again this evening, boy?" he asked when Ulf entered.
"Methinks there can be little chance of his going out again to-night."

"I shall keep even a stricter watch than usual, master," Ulf said, "for it
may be that the agreement at which they arrived to-day is that they sail
north, and in that case Walter Fitz-Urse may go on board the ship, and hide
there until the wind changes and they can get up sail."

"I think the boy is right, my lord. In a dark matter like this, where we
know so little, it behoves us to provide for every chance. But I think not
that there can be any need for you to be on watch, for it can hardly be
that they will hold another consultation on the river bank."

Ulf returned soon after ten o'clock. "He has not gone out by my gate,
master, but I find that my comrade is missing. When I went round as usual
to the other entrance he was not there."

"Perhaps he was tired and went home."

"No, indeed," the boy replied indignantly; "he has sworn to do what I told
him, and he knows that it would be bad for him if he broke his word;
besides, we are sworn comrades. He has never before failed me, and I
cannot but think that he must have seen the man go out and followed him. I
instructed him that if at any time he saw a man like the one we are looking
for he was to follow him wherever he went, and to bring me word whether he
met anyone and whether he returned to the palace or went into any house. If
he did so he was to make a small mark on the door-post with chalk, so that
in the morning he would be able to point it out with surety. I will sit at
my window and watch, and I warrant it will not be long before he is here."

Half an hour later Ulf heard steps rapidly approaching; then a low whistle.
He put his head out of the window.

"What is the news, Edwyn?"

"A man came out in a cloak. He was tall. I followed him and heard a sword
clink under the cloak, and so felt sure it was the man we have been looking
for. I stole after him. He went straight down to the river and gave two
short calls. A boat was rowed up. Only a word or two was spoken, and then
he took his seat in it, and it was rowed away down the river."

"You have done well, comrade," Ulf said. "I warrant that some good will
come to us through your discovery. Good-night."

Ulf went and knocked at his master's door, and on Ulred opening it he told
him the news.

"I will go down right early," the armourer said.

"It is beginning to rain, master. The frost has broken, and the wind is
soft and warm."

"So much the worse, boy. I will be up at daylight, and you shall go down
the river with me. I may want to send you back with a message to Beorn."

Next morning they had rowed near to London Bridge when they saw a boat
approaching. The day had broken, but the light was still uncertain. As the
boat approached, however, Ulf said: "There is a boy in the boat, master,
and he wears an apprentice's cap. Maybe that it is Ernulf." The other boat
was keeping close inshore, for the tide had begun to run down. The
armourer told the boatman to row closer in, and presently called the boy's
name.

"Yes, master, it is I; I was just coming to you with news."

In a couple of minutes the boats were alongside of each other. "What is
your news, Ernulf? But I can guess; the ship has sailed."

"Yes, master; I lay down by the open window, and an hour before day broke I
was aroused by the creaking of ropes, and looking out could see that the
ship was getting up sail. Tide was then just on the turn, and five minutes
later her sails were spread and she went down the river. I came off to tell
you, but was some time before I could get a boat."

"Come on board here, Ernulf," the armourer said, "your message has saved us
further journey." He then paid off the lad's boatman, and with his two
apprentices returned to Westminster. "Beorn will be up by this time, Ulf.
You had best go and tell him the news. I will come with you to save time,
though I see not that there is aught to be done."

The thane at once came out and chatted for some time with Ulred, while Ulf
stood by, cap in hand. "It is certain that something should be done, and
yet I see not what it can be. What think you, boy? I see by your eyes that
you would fain speak."

"I should say, my lord, that it would be a good thing if we could discover
whether the Norman is still at the bishop's palace. He may have returned
early this morning."

"That can easily be done," Beorn said. "I will send my man to the bishop's
and bid him ask one of the servants if Walter Fitz-Urse is in. He need not
say that he comes from me, only that he has a message to deliver. If the
servant says he is there I will bid my fellow slip away when the man goes
to fetch him down. Supposing he has gone, as I should think he has done,
what then?"

"Then, my lord, I think there is more danger than if the Norman remained
here. It may be that the Normans have returned to France and abandoned any
plans they may have entertained. But it seems to me far more likely that
they have gone north to carry out the enterprise."

"Whither, think you, will they be bound, Ulf?"

"I should say to the Humber, my lord. They may on landing proceed to York,
or, if they have really designs against the king's life, may take post
somewhere on the road down from that city."

