   IN TER MI NA BLE, boundless.
   VA' RI E GA TED, diversified; varied.
   VERG' ING, tending; inclining.
   OB LIQUE' LY, slantingly.
   RES PI RA' TION, act of breathing.
   ZE' NITH, point in the heavens directly over head.
   MAN' DI BLES, jaws.
   EU ROC' LY DON, tempestuous wind.


LEAVES FROM AN AERONAUT.

WILLIS GAYLORD CLARK.

1. My hour had now come, and I entered the car. With a singular taste,
the band struck up, at this moment, the melting air of "Sweet Home." It
almost overcame me. A thousand associations of youth, friends, of all
that I must leave, rushed upon my mind. But I had no leisure for
sentiment. A buzz ran through the assemblage; unnumbered hands were
clapping, unnumbered hearts beating high; and _I_ was the cause. Every
eye was upon me. There was pride in the thought.

2. "Let go!" was the word. The cheers redoubled; handkerchiefs waved
from many a fair hand; bright faces beamed from every window, and on
every side. One dash with my knife, and I rose aloft, a habitant of air.
How magnificent was the sight which now burst upon me! How sublime were
my sensations! I waved the flag of my country; the cheers of the
multitude from a thousand housetops, reached me on the breeze; and a
taste of the rarer atmosphere elevated my spirits into ecstasy.

3. The city, with a brilliant sunshine striking the spires and domes,
now unfolded to view a sight incomparably beautiful. My gondola went
easily upward, cleaving the depths of heaven like a vital thing. A
diagram placed before you, on the table, could not permit you to trace
more definitely than I now could, the streets, the highways, basins,
wharves, and squares of the town. The hum of the city arose to my ear,
as from a vast bee-hive; and I seemed the monarch-bee, directing the
swarm.

4. I heard the rattling of carriages, the hearty _yo-heavo-s!_ of
sailors from the docks that, begirt with spars, hemmed the city round. I
was a spectator of all, yet aloof, and alone. Increasing stillness
attended my way; and, at last, the murmurs of earth came to my ear like
the vast vibrations of a bell. My car tilted and trembled, as I rose. A
swift wind sometimes gave the balloon a rotary motion, which made me
deathly sick for a moment; but strong emotion conquered all my physical
ailings.

5. My brain ached with the intensity of my rapture. Human sounds had
fainted from my ear. I was in the abyss of heaven, and _alone_ with my
God. I could tell my direction by the sun on my left; and, as his rays
played on the aerostat, it seemed only a bright bubble, wavering in the
sky, and I, a suspended mote, hung by chance to its train. Looking below
me, the distant Sound and Long Island appeared to the east; the bay lay
to the south, sprinkled with shipping; under me, the city, girded with
bright rivers and sparry forests.

6. The free wind was on my cheek, and in my locks; afar, the ocean
rolled its long, blue waves, checkered with masses of shadow, and gushes
of ruby sunlight; to the north and west, the interminable land,
variegated like a map, dotted with purple, and green, and silver, faded
to the eye. The atmosphere which I now breathed, seemed to dilate my
heart at every breath. I uttered some audible expressions. My voice was
weaker than the faintest sound of a reed. There was no object near to
make it reverb or echo.

7. My barometer now denoted an immense hight; and, as I looked upward
and around, the concave above seemed like a mighty waste of purple air,
verging to blackness. Below, it was lighter; but a long, lurid bar of
cloud stretched along the west, temporarily excluding the sun. The
shadows rushed afar into the void, and a solemn, Sabbath twilight
reigned around. I was now startled by a fluttering in my gondola. It was
my carrier-pigeon. I had forgotten him entirely. I attached a string to
his neck, with a label, announcing my hight, then nearly four miles, and
the state of the barometer.

8. As he sat on the side of the car, and turned his tender eyes upon me
in mute supplication, every feather shivering with apprehension, I felt
that it was a guilty act to push him into the waste beneath. But it was
done; he attempted to rise, but I out-sped him; he then fell obliquely,
fluttering and moaning, till I lost him in the haze. My greatest
altitude had not yet been reached. I was now five miles from _terra
firma_. [Footnote: Solid earth.] I began to breathe with difficulty. The
atmosphere was too rare for safe respiration.

9. I pulled my valve-cord to descend. It refused to obey my hand. For a
moment I was horror-struck. What was to be done? If I ascended much
higher, the balloon would explode. I threw over some tissue paper to
test my progress. It is well known that this will _rise_ very swiftly.
It _fell_, as if blown downward by a wind from the zenith. I was going
upward like an arrow. I attempted to pray, but my parched lips could not
move. I seized the cord again, with desperate energy. Blessed Heaven! it
moved.

10. I threw out more tissue. It rose to me like a wing of joy. I was
descending. Though far from sunset, it was now dark about me, except a
track of blood-red haze in the direction of the sun. I encountered a
strong current of wind; mist was about me; it lay like dew upon my coat.
At last, a thick bar of vapor being past, what a scene was disclosed! A
storm was sweeping through the sky, nearly a mile beneath; and I looked
down upon an ocean of rainbows, rolling in indescribable grandeur, to
the music of the thunder-peal, as it moaned afar and near, on the coming
and dying wind.

11. A frightened eagle had ascended through the tempest, and sailed for
minutes by my side, looking at me with panting weariness, and quivering
mandibles, but with a dilated eye, whose keen iris flashed unsubdued.
Proud emblem of my country! As he fanned me with his heavy wing, and
looked with a human intelligence at the car, my pulse bounded with
exulting rapture. Like the genius of my native land, he had risen above
every storm, unfettered and FREE.

12. But my transports were soon at an end. He attempted to light on the
balloon, and my heart sunk; I feared his huge claws would tear the silk.
I pulled my cord; he rose, as I sank, and the blast swept him from my
view in a moment. A flock of wild-fowl, beat by the storm, were coursing
below, on bewildered pinions; and, as I was nearing them, I knew I was
descending. A breaking rift now admitted the sun. The rainbows tossed
and gleamed; chains of fleecy rack, shining in prismatic rays of gold,
and purple, and emerald, "beautiful exceedingly," spread on every hand.

13. Vast curtains of clouds pavilioned the immensity, brighter than
celestial roses; masses of mist were lifted on high, like strips of
living fire, more radiant than the sun himself, when his glorious
noontide culminates from the equator. A kind of aerial Euroclydon now
smote my car, and three of the cords parted, which tilted my gondola to
the side, filling me with terror. I caught the broken cords in my hand,
but could not tie them.

14. The storm below was now rapidly passing away, and beneath its waving
outline, to the south-east, I saw the ocean. Ships were speeding on
their course, and their bright sails melting into distance; a rainbow
hung afar; and the rolling anthems of the Atlantic came like celestial
hymnings to my ear. Presently all was clear below me. The fresh air
played around. I had taken a noble circuit; and my last view was better
than the first, I was far over the bay, "afloating sweetly to the west."
The city, colored by the last blaze of day, brightened remotely to the
view.

15. Below, ships were hastening to and fro through the Narrows, and the
far country lay smiling like an Eden. Bright rivers ran like ribbons of
gold and silver, till they were lost in the vast inland, stretching
beyond the view; the gilded mountains were flinging their purple shadows
over many a vale; bays were blushing to the farewell day-beams; and now
I was passing over a green island. I sailed to the mainland; saw the
tall, old trees waving to the evening breeze; heard the rural lowing of
herds, and the welcome sound of human voices; and, finally, sweeping
over forest-tops and embowered villages, at last, descended with the
sun, among a kind-hearted, surprised, and hospitable community, in as
pretty a town as one could desire to see, "safe and well."

QUESTIONS.--1. What demonstrations were made by the people as the
aeronaut began to ascend? 2. How did the city and other objects appear
to him? 3. What could he hear? 4. Describe the appearance of the ocean.
5. What did he do with his carrier-pigeon? 6. How high did he ascend?
7. Describe his descent. 8. What is said about the eagle that came near
him? 9. Describe the appearance of the clouds beneath him.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXIX.

   BOUN' TY, charity; favor.
   FRU' GAL, prudent; economical.
   FLOUR' ISH ED, thrived; prospered.
   DIS CHARG' ED, performed.
   BREED' ING, education.
   EM BRAC' ED, accepted.
   MAIN TAIN' ED, supported.
   TRUDG' ED, traveled.
   BE GUIL' ED, amused.
   LE' GAL, lawful.
   TWAIN, two.
   BE WITCH' ING, charming.
   YOUNK' ER, lad; youngster.
   MED' I TA TIVE, thoughtful.
   PRO  VOK' ED, (PRO, _forward, forth_; VOKED, _called_;) called
   forth; excited.
   IN CLUDE', (IN, _in_; CLUDE, _shut_;) shut in; inclose.
   IN SERT', (IN, _in_; SERT, _join, set_;) join, or set in; put in.


THE DAPPLE MARE.

JOHN G. SAXE.

 1. "Once on a time," as ancient tales declare,
      There lived a farmer in a quiet dell
    In Massachusetts, but exactly where,
      Or when, is really more than I can tell,--
    Except that quite above the public bounty,
      He lived within his means and Bristol county.

 2. By patient labor and unceasing care,
      He earned, and so enjoyed, his daily bread;
    Contented always with his frugal fare,
      Ambition to be rich ne'er vexed his head;
    And thus unknown to envy, want, or wealth,
      He flourished long in comfort, peace, and health.

 3. The gentle partner of his humble lot,
      The joy and jewel of his wedded life,
    Discharged the duties of his peaceful cot,
      Like a true woman and a faithful wife;
    Her mind improved by thought and useful reading,
      Kind words and gentle manners showed her breeding.

 4. Grown old, at last, the farmer called his son,
      The youngest, (and the favorite I suppose,) And said,--
    "I long have thought, my darling John,
      'Tis time to bring my labors to a close;
    So now to toil I mean to bid adieu,
      And deed, my son, the homestead-farm to you."

 5. The boy embraced the boon with vast delight,
      And promised, while their precious lives remained,
    He'd till and tend the farm from morn till night,
      And see his parents handsomely maintained;
    God help him, he would never fail to love, nor
      Do aught to grieve his gen'rous old gov'nor.

 6. The farmer said,--"Well, let us now proceed,
      (You know there's always danger in delay,)
    And get 'Squire Robinson to write the deed;
      Come,--where's my staff?--we'll soon be on the way."
    But John replied, with tender, filial care,
      "You're old and weak--I'll catch the Dapple Mare."

 7. The mare was saddled, and the old man got on,
      The boy on foot trudged cheerfully along,
    The while, to cheer his sire, the duteous son
      Beguiled the weary way with talk and song.
    Arrived, at length, they found the 'Squire at home,
      And quickly told him wherefore they had come.

 8. The deed was writ in proper form of law,
      With many a "foresaid," "therefore," and "the same,"
    And made throughout without mistake or flaw,
      To show that John had now a legal claim
    To all his father's land--conveyed, given, sold,
      Quit-claimed, et cetera,[Footnote 1]--to have and hold.

 9. Their business done, they left the lawyer's door,
      Happier, perhaps, than when they entered there;
    And started off as they had done before,--
      The son on foot, the father on the mare.
    But ere the twain a single mile had gone,
      A brilliant thought occurred to Master John.

10. Alas for truth!--alas for filial duty!--
      Alas that Satan in the shape of pride,
    (His most bewitching form save that of beauty,)
      Whispered the lad--"My boy, you ought to ride!"
    "Get off!" exclaimed the younker--"'t isn't fair
      That you should always ride the Dapple Mare!"

11. The son was lusty, and the sire was old,
      And so, with many an oath and many a frown,
    The hapless father did as he was told;
      The man got off the steed, the boy got on,
    And rode away as fast as she could trot,
      And left his sire to trudge it home on foot!

12. That night, while seated round the kitchen fire
      The household sat, cheerful as if no word
    Or deed, provoked the injured father's ire,
      Or aught to make him sad had e'er occurred,--
    Thus spoke he to his son: "We quite forgot,
      I think, t'include that little turnip lot!"

13. "I'm very sure, my son, it wouldn't hurt it,"
      Calmly observed the meditative sire,
    "To take the deed, my lad, and just insert it;"
      Here the old man inserts it--_in the fire!_
    Then cries aloud with most triumphant air,
      "Who now, my son, shall ride the Dapple Mare?"

[Footnote 1: And so forth.]

QUESTIONS.--1. What proposition did the father make to his son? 2. What
did the son promise to do? 3. How did the son treat his father after he
got the deed? 4. What did the old gentleman do?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXX.

   HARD' I HOOD, bravery.
   MAIN TRUCK, small cap at the top of a flagstaff or masthead.
   A GHAST', horrified.
   GROUPS, clusters; crowds.
   PAL' LID, pale.
   LU' RID, dismal; gloomy.
   HUE, color.
   RIV' ET TED, firmly fixed.
   FOLD' ED, embraced; clasped.


A LEAP FOR LIFE.

GEORGE P. MORRIS.

1. Old Ironsides at anchor lay,
(sl.) In the harbor of Mahon [Footnote 1];
   A dead calm rested on the bay,--
     The waves to sleep had gone,--
   When little Jack,[Footnote 2] the captain's son,
     With gallant hardihood,
   Climbed shroud and spar,--and then upon
     The main-truck rose and stood!

2. A shudder ran through every vein,--
     All eyes were turned on high!
   There stood the boy, with dizzy brain,
     Between the sea and sky!
   No hold had he above,--below,
     Alone he stood in air!
   At that far hight none dared to go,--
     No aid could reach him there.

3. We gazed,--but not a man could speak;
     With horror all aghast,
   In groups, with pallid brow and cheek,
     We watched the quivering mast!
   The atmosphere grew thick and hot,
     And of a lurid hue,
   As, riveted unto the spot,
     Stood officers and crew.

4. The father came on deck. He gasped,
     "O God, Thy will be done!"
   Then suddenly a rifle grasped,
     And aimed it at his son!
   "Jump far out, boy, into the wave!
     Jump, or I fire!" he said.
   "That only chance your life can save:
('') Jump! jump, boy!" He obeyed.

5. He sank,--he rose,--he lived,--he moved,--
     He for the ship struck out!
   On board we hailed the lad beloved
     With many a manly shout.
   His father drew, in silent joy,
     Those wet arms round his neck,
   Then folded to his heart the boy,
     And fainted on the deck!

[Footnote 1: MA HON', (_Ma hone_,) a sea-port town on the island of
Minorca, in the Mediterranean Sea.]

[Footnote 2: A name commonly applied to a young sailor.]

QUESTIONS.--1. What did the captain's son do, on board the Ironsides? 2.
Describe his situation. 3. What is said of the officers and crew? 4.
What did the father say and do? 5. What did the boy do?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXI.

   COM MIN' GLE, mix or unite.
   PE DES' TRI AN, traveler on foot.
   PROM' I NENT, important.
   TRAG' lC, fatal; mournful.
   NAR RATE', tell; relate.
   YORE, olden time.
   WI' LY, craft; cunning.
   RE LENT' LESS, hard-hearted; cruel.
   WIG' WAM, Indian hut or cabin.
   EM BARK' ED, went aboard.
   TWANG, quick, sharp sound.
   SPA' CIOUS, large; capacious.
   WA' RI LY, cautiously.
   MYS TE' RI OUS LY, strangely.
   OM' IN OUS, foreboding ill.
   IM PLA' CA BLE, relentless.
   UN TRACE' A BLE, (UN, _not_; TRACE, _mark_; ABLE, _that can be_;)
   that can not be marked, or traced; not found out.


THE INDIAN BRIDE'S REVENGE.

L.M. STOWELL.

1. In the State of New York, where the dark, foaming waters of the Black
River, after roaring and surging through many pleasant fields, beautiful
groves, and dense woodlands, commingle with the clear, cold waters of
Lake Ontario, the wandering pedestrian or the lone fisherman may see,
resting upon a gravelly flat, the remains of an _old Indian canoe_,
whose once beautiful proportions, now untraceable in its rottenness,
bore a prominent part in the tragic event I am about to narrate.

2. Through these pleasant valleys, among the broken hills, and in the
majestic forests, of yore, the wily Indian and his dusky mate, held
undisputed possession; and many are the incidents, yet unwritten, of
tragic and thrilling interest, that transpired around the red men's
camp-fire, ere the white man disturbed their forest homes.

3. Si ous' ka, or the "Wild Flower," was the daughter of a powerful
chief of the Onondagas, and the only being ever known to turn the
relentless old chief from a savage purpose. Something of this influence
was owing to her great beauty; but more to the gentleness of which that
beauty was the emblem. Her downcast eye, her trembling lip, her quiet,
submissive motion, all bespoke its language; and many were the young
chieftains that sought to win her affections.

4. Among her admirers were two young chiefs of the Oneidas, with whom
the Onondagas were on the most friendly terms. Si ous' ka's father, in
order to cherish the friendly feeling of the two tribes, and, at the
same time, strengthen his power, besought her to accept the more
powerful chief, "Eagle Eye." He did not plead in vain; for she had long
loved the young Oneida.

5. One bright sunny morning, in early spring, as the old chief was out
hunting, the young Oneida crossed his path, upon which the old man
advanced, and, laying his hand upon his shoulder, pointed to the
dwelling of Si ous' ka. Not a word was spoken. The proud old man and the
strong, young chief proceeded toward her wigwam, and entered together.

6. Si ous' ka was seated in one corner, engaged upon some fancy
basket-work, and did not notice their approach until they had entered.
The old chief looked upon her with an expression of love, which his
stern countenance never wore except in her presence. "Sious'ka," he said
in a subdued tone, "Go to the wigwam of the Oneida, that your father's
tribe may be strengthened, and many moons may shine upon their peace and
prosperity."

7. There was mingled joy and modesty in the upward glance of the "Wild
Flower" of the Onondagas, and, when the young chief saw the light of her
mild eye suddenly and timidly vailed by its deeply-fringed lid, he knew
that her love had lost none of its power. The marriage song was soon
sung in the royal wigwam, in which the sweet voice of Sious'ka was
happily heard to mingle.

8. When the rejected chief of the Oneidas heard that the "Wild Flower"
had mated with the "Eagle Eye," his wrath knew no bounds, and he
secretly resolved upon revenge. Two years passed away, and, as yet, no
good opportunity had arrived; for he dared not attack "Eagle Eye" in
open conflict, for fear of his superior powers; and, assassin-like, he
sought to give the blow unperceived.

9. At length, the spring came, and a number of the tribe prepared to
visit Lake Ontario, on a fishing and hunting excursion. Among the number
who went, were the "Eagle Eye," Sious'ka, and their little boy. They
were obliged to carry their light, birchen canoes from home, and these
were packed with the necessary tackle, skins for beds, &c. The strong
men of the party carried the canoes on their shoulders, and the women
the smaller articles of furniture.

10. They had advanced across the country, until they reached the Black
River, and, by carrying their canoes around falls and rapids, gently
floated down the stream till they reached the great falls, about six
miles from the Lake. Here they halted for the night, and encamped about
half a mile above the falls.

11. The morning came; and, as the first beam of the rising sun pierced
the forest shade, the party again embarked in their canoes for the mouth
of the river, the gaudy canoe of Si ous' ka, which her father had given
her, taking the lead. They had scarcely started from the shore, ere the
sharp twang of a bow-string was heard from the shore, and an unerring
arrow pierced the heart of "Eagle Eye." He fell over the side of the
canoe, and was swept by the current over the great falls.

12. The party immediately started in pursuit of the coward murderer; but
they sought in vain. His hiding-place was too sure,--he had taken refuge
in a cave, the entrance of which was hid from observation by a thick
clump of cedars. Here he remained till he was certain the company had
departed. This cave is still there, and I have often been in its many
chambers,--some of which are very spacious.

13. The fatal shaft was winged from the bow of the revenged Oneida
chief. Having been apprised of the expedition, he had warily dogged the
steps of the party, until a favorable opportunity presented itself, and
then satisfied his secret longing for revenge upon the enemy, whom he
did not dare to attack even-handed. The party sought him far and near;
but, as no trace of any one could be found, they imagined, with
superstitious fear, that the "Great Spirit" had thus summoned "Eagle
Eye" to the "Spirit's Hunting Ground."

14. When they returned to their canoes, no traces of Si ous' ka and her
child were to be found. They, too, had mysteriously disappeared, and the
whole party, with ominous silence, hastened around the falls, and away
from the fearful place. When Si ous' ka saw the fatal shaft pierce her
companion, with, a fearful shriek she fell into the bottom of the canoe,
hid herself in the furs, and immediately her reason forsook her.

15. When she recovered, she found that her canoe, urged on by the
current, had floated into a large cave, and was firmly wedged in between
two rocks; and her little boy, with his bow and arrow in his hand, was
quietly sleeping by her side. Dislodging the canoe, she plied the oars,
and was soon outside the cave.

16. On finding her people had left her, she sought the shore, and,
fastening the canoe, proceeded below the falls, where she found the body
of the ill-fated "Eagle Eye," where it had washed ashore. With
superhuman strength, she bore the mangled body to a thick grove of
cedars, and, with her own hands, dug a rude grave, and covered his
remains with dried leaves and earth. That night she kept her lonely
watch beside the grave of all that she held dear on earth, save her boy,
intending to follow the party on the morrow.

17. The morning came, and the mid-day sun began to descend toward the
western hills, ere she left the grave of the murdered chief. But, at
length, she sorrowfully departed; and, on arriving where she moored the
canoe the day before, what was her surprise to see the murderer of her
husband, quietly sleeping upon the skins where last "Eagle Eye" had
reposed, in the bow of the canoe.

18. From that moment Si ous' ka was changed. Her quiet, submissive air
immediately gave place to fierce sternness, and the eye that had always
beamed with the smile of love, shot forth flashes of bitter hate and
passion, implacable as the most bloodthirsty of her tribe. Noiselessly
throwing the oars from the boat, with a wild shriek, she quickly swung
it around into the rapidly rolling current, and it was hurried toward
the brink of that awful cataract, over which no living being had ever
passed alive.

19. The young chief, awakened by that fearful, exulting cry of revenge,
and seeing the peril of his situation, leaped from the bark that was
hurrying him to sure destruction, and vainly sought to gain the shore.
After struggling with the swift tide for a moment, in which he was
carried nearer and nearer the awful brink, he turned, and, with a wild,
unearthly yell, plunged over, and the boiling waters only responded to
his death-wail, as he sunk to rise no more, and his spirit joined that
of his victim in the "Spirit Land."

20. After the gentle "Wild Flower" had avenged the death of the "Eagle
Eye," she returned to her father's wigwam, and spent the remainder of
her life to the memory of her heart's first devotion. The canoe, all
battered and broken, floated to the mouth of the river, bottom side up,
where it was seen by one of the party while fishing, drawn to the shore,
and left to decay. The party supposed that "Eagle Eye," Sious'ka, and
her child, had all perished in some mysterious manner.

QUESTIONS.--1. Who was Sious'ka? 2. Who became her husband? 3. What
effect had her marriage upon the rejected Oneida chief? 4. In what way
did he seek revenge? 5. How did Sious'ka avenge the death of her
husband?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXII.

   EN TER TAIN' ED, had; harbored.
   PE CUL IAR' I TY, something special.
   CHA GRIN'ED, (_sha grin'ed_,) vexed.
   MOR' TI FI ED, hurt in feeling.
   OUT STRIP', go beyond; excel.
   RI' VAL RY, emulation.
   RE VERS' ES, troubles; difficulties.
   IN VIG' OR A TED, made strong.
   DES O LA' TION, waste; ruin.
   REF' UGE, shelter; protection.
   SYM' PA THIZ ED, (SYM, _with_; PATH, _feeling_; IZE, _make, have_;
   ED, _did_;) did  have  feeling with. See Note on the suffix IZE,
