divided into many lights, disclosing to them with certainty the
presence of a camp. The figure of Garay appeared for a little while
outlined against a fire, another figure came forward to meet him, and
the two disappeared together.

From the direction of the fires came sounds subdued by the distance,
and the aroma of food.

"It is a large camp," said Tayoga. "I have counted twelve fires which
proves it, and the white men and the red men in it do not go hungry.
They have deer, bear, fish and birds also. The pleasant odors of them
all come to my nostrils, and make me hungry."

"That's too much for me," said Robert. "I can detect the blended
savor, but I know not of what it consists. Now we go on, I suppose,
and find out what this camp holds."

"We wouldn't dream of turning back," said the hunter. "Did you notice
anything familiar, Robert, about the figure that came forward to meet
Garay?"

"Now that you speak of it, I did, but I can't recall the identity of
the man."

"Think again!"

"Ah, now I have him! It was the French officer, Colonel Auguste de
Courcelles, who gave us so much trouble in Canada and elsewhere."

"That's the man," said Willet. "I knew him at once. Now, wherever De
Courcelles is mischief is likely to be afoot, but he's not the only
Frenchman here. We'll spy out this camp to the full. There's time yet
before the sunrise comes."

Now the three used all the skill in stalking with which they were
endowed so plentifully, creeping forward without noise through the
bushes, making so little stir among them that if a wary warrior had
been looking he would have taken the slight movement of twig or leaf
for the influence of a wandering breeze. Gradually the whole camp came
into view, and Tayoga's prediction that it would be a large one proved
true.

Robert lay on a little knoll among small bushes growing thick, where
the keenest eye could not see him, but where his own vision swept
the whole wide shallow dip, in which the French and Indian force was
encamped. Twelve fires, all good and large, burned gayly, throwing out
ruddy flames from great beds of glowing coals, while the aroma of food
was now much stronger and very appetizing.

The force numbered at least three hundred men, of whom about one third
were Frenchmen or Canadians, all in uniform. Robert recognized De
Courcelles and near him Jumonville, his invariable comrade, and a
little farther on a handsome and gallant young face.

"It's De Galissonniere of the Battalion Languedoc, whom we met in
Quebec," he whispered to Tayoga. "Now I wonder what he's doing here."

"He's come with the others on a projected foray," Tayoga whispered
back. "But look beyond him, Dagaeoga, and you will see one more to be
dreaded than De Courcelles or Jumonville."

Robert's gaze followed that of the young Onondaga and was intercepted
by the huge figure of Tandakora, the Ojibway, who stood erect by one
of the fires, bare save for a breech cloth and moccasins, his body
painted in the most hideous designs, of which war paint was possible,
his brow lowering.

"Tandakora is not happy," said Tayoga.

"No," said Robert. "He is thinking of the battle at Lake George that
he did not win, and of all the scalps he did not take. He is thinking
of his lost warriors, and the rout of his people and the French."

"Even so, Dagaeoga. Now Tandakora and De Courcelles talk with the spy,
Garay. They want his news. They rejoice when he tells them Waraiyageh
and his soldiers still make no preparations to advance after their
victory by the lake. The long delay, the postponement of a big
campaign until next spring will give the French and Indians time to
breathe anew and renew their strength. Tandakora and De Courcelles
consider themselves fortunate, and they are pleased with the spy,
Garay. But look, Dagaeoga! Behold who comes now!"

Robert's heart began to throb as the handsomest and most gallant
figure of them all walked into the red glow of the firelight, a tall
man, young, lithe, athletic, fair of hair and countenance, his manner
at once graceful and proud, a man to whom the others turned with
deference, and perhaps in the case of De Courcelles and Jumonville
with a little fear. He wore a white uniform with gold facings, and
a small gold hilted sword swung upon his thigh. Even in the forest,
dress impresses, and Robert was quite sure that St. Luc was in his
finest attire, not from vanity, but because he wished to create an
effect. It would be like him, when his fortunes were lowest, to assume
his highest manner before both friend and foe.

"You'd think from his looks that he had nothing but a string of
victories and never knew defeat," whispered Willet. "Anyway, his is
the finest spirit in all that crowd, and he's the greatest leader
and soldier, too. Notice how they give way to him, and how they stop
asking questions of Garay, leaving it to him. And now Garay himself
bows low before him, while De Courcelles, Jumonville and Tandakora
stand aside. I wish we could hear what they say; then we might learn
something worth all our risk in coming here."

But their voices did not reach so great a distance, though the three,
eager to use eye even if ear was of no use, still lay in the bushes
and watched the flow of life in the great camp. Many of the French and
Indians who had been asleep awoke, sat up and began to cook breakfast
for themselves, holding strips of game on sharp sticks over the coals.
St. Luc talked a long while with Garay, afterward with the French
officers and Tandakora, and then withdrew to a little knoll, where he
leaned against a tree, his face expressing intense thought. A dark,
powerfully built man, the Canadian, Dubois, brought him food which he
ate mechanically.

The dusk floated away, and the sun came up, great and brilliant. The
three stirred in their covert, and Willet whispered that it was time
for them to be going.

"Only the most marvelous luck could save us from detection in the
daylight," he said, "because presently the Indians, growing restless,
will wander about the camp."

"I'm willing to go," Robert whispered back. "I know the danger is too
great. Besides I'm starving to death, and the odors of all their good
food will hasten my death, if I don't take an antidote."

They retreated with the utmost care and Robert drew an immense breath
of relief when they were a full mile away. It was well to look upon
the French and Indian camp, but it was better to be beyond the reach
of those who made it.

"And now we make a camp of our own, don't we?" he said. "All my bones
are stiff from so much bending and creeping. Moreover, my hunger has
grown to such violent pitch that it is tearing at me, so to speak,
with red hot pincers."

"Dagaeoga always has plenty of words," said Tayoga in a whimsical
tone, "but he will have to endure his hunger a while longer. Let the
pincers tear and burn. It is good for him. It will give him a chance
to show how strong he is, and how a mighty warrior despises such
little things as food and drink."

"I'm not anxious to show myself a mighty warrior just now," retorted
young Lennox. "I'd be willing to sacrifice my pride in that respect if
I could have carried off some of their bear steaks and venison."

"Come on," said Willet, "and I'll see that you're satisfied. I'm
beginning to feel as you do, Robert."

Nevertheless he marshaled them forward pretty sternly and they pursued
a westward course for many miles before he allowed a halt. Even then
they hunted about among the rocks until they found a secluded place,
no fire being permitted, at which it pleased Robert to grumble,
although he did not mean it.

"We were better off last night when we had our little fire in the
hollow," he said.

"So we were, as far as the body is concerned," rejoined Willet,
"but we didn't know then where the Indian camp lay. We've at least
increased our knowledge. Now, I'm thinking that you two lads, who have
been awake nearly all night and also the half of the morning that has
passed, ought to sleep. Time we have to spare, but you know we should
practice all the economy we can with our strength. This place is
pretty well hidden, and I'll do the watching. Spread your blankets on
the leaves, Robert. It's not well even for foresters to sleep on the
bare ground. Now draw the other half of it over you. Tayoga has done
so already. I'm wondering which of you will get to sleep first.
Whoever does will be the better man, a question I've long wanted to
decide."

But the problem was still left for the future. They fell asleep so
nearly at the same time that Willet could tell no difference. He
noticed with pleasure their long, regular breathing, and he said to
himself, as he had said so often before, that they were two good and
brave lads.

Then he made a very comfortable cushion of fallen leaves to sit upon,
and remained there a long time, his rifle across his knees.

His eyes were wide open, but no part of his body stirred. He had
acquired the gift of infinite patience, and with it the difficult
physical art of remaining absolutely motionless for a long time. So
thorough was his mastery over himself that the small wild game began
to believe by and by that he was not alive. Birds sang freely over his
head and the hare hopped through the undergrowth. Yet the hunter saw
everything and his very stillness enabled him to listen with all the
more acuteness.

The sun which had arisen great and brilliant, remained so, flooding
the world with golden lights and making it wonderfully alluring to
Willet, whose eyes never grew weary of the forest's varying shades and
aspects. They were all peaceful now, but he had no illusions. He knew
that the hostile force would send out many hunters. So many men must
have much game and presently they would be prowling through the woods,
seeking deer and bear. The chief danger came from them.

The hours passed and noon arrived. Willet had not stirred. He did
not sleep, but he rested nevertheless. His great body was relaxed
thoroughly, and strength, after weariness, flowed back into his veins.
Presently his head moved forward a little and his attitude grew more
intent. A slight sound that was not a part of the wilderness had come
to him. It was very faint, few would have noticed it, but he knew it
was the report of a rifle. He knew also that it was not a shot fired
in battle. The hunters, as he had surmised, were abroad, and they had
started up a deer or a bear.

But Willet did not stir nor did his eyelids flicker. He was used to
the proximity of foes, and the distant report did not cause his heart
to miss a single beat. Instead, he felt a sort of dry amusement that
they should be so near and yet know it not. How Tandakora would have
rejoiced if there had been a whisper in his ear that Willet, Robert
and Tayoga whom he hated so much were within sound of his rifle! And
how he would have spread his nets to catch such precious game!

He heard a second shot presently from the other side, and then the
hunter began to laugh softly to himself. His faint amusement was
turning into actual and intense enjoyment. The Indian hunters were
obviously on every side of them but did not dream that the finest game
of all was at hand. They would continue to waste their time on deer
and bear while the three formidable rangers were within hearing of
their guns.

But the hunter was still silent. His laughter was wholly internal, and
his lips did not even move. It showed only in his eye and the general
expression of his countenance. A third shot and a fourth came, but no
anxiety marred his sense of the humorous.

Then he heard the distant shouts of warriors in pursuit of a wounded
bear and still he was motionless.

Willet knew that the French and Tandakora suspected no pursuit. They
believed that no American rangers would come among the lofty peaks and
ridges south of the border, and he and his comrades could lie in safe
hiding while the hunt went on with unabated zeal. But he was sure one
day would be sufficient for the task. That portion of the wilderness
was full of game, and, since the coming of the war, deer and bear were
increasing rapidly. Willet often noted how quickly game returned to
regions abandoned by man, as if the wild animals promptly told one
another the danger had passed.

Joyous shouts came now and then and he knew that they marked the
taking of game, but about the middle of the afternoon the hunt drifted
entirely away. A little later Tayoga awoke and sat up. Then Willet
moved slightly and spoke.

"Tandakora's hunters have been all about us while you slept," he said,
"but I knew they wouldn't find us."

"Dagaeoga and I were safe in the care of the Great Bear," said the
Onondaga confidently. "Tandakora will rage if we tell him some day
that we were here, to be taken if he had only seen us. Now Lennox
awakes also! O Dagaeoga, you have slept and missed all the great
jest."

"What do you mean, Tayoga?"

"Tandakora built his fire just beyond the big bush that grows ten feet
away, and sat there two hours without suspecting our presence here."

"Now I know you are romancing, Tayoga, because I can see the twinkle
in your eyes. But I suspect that what you say bears some remote
relation to the truth."

"The hostile hunters passed while you slept, and while I slept also,
but the Great Bear was all eyes and ears and he did not think it
needful to awaken us."

"What are we going to do now, Dave?"

"Eat more venison. We must never fail to keep the body strong."

"And then?"

"I'm not sure. I thought once that we'd better go south to our army at
Lake George with news of this big band, but it's a long distance down
there, and it may be wiser to stay here and watch St. Luc. What do you
say, Robert?"

"Stay here."

"And you, Tayoga?"

"Watch St. Luc."

"I was inclining to that view myself, and it's settled now. But we
mustn't move from this place until dark; it would be too dangerous in
the day."

The lads nodded and the three settled into another long period of
waiting.




CHAPTER II


ON THE RIDGES

Late in the afternoon Willet went to sleep and Robert and Tayoga
watched, although, as the hunter had done, they depended more upon
ear than eye. They too heard now and then the faint report of distant
shots from the hunt, and Robert's heart beat very fast, but, if the
young Onondaga felt emotion, he did not show it. At twilight, they
ate a frugal supper, and when the night had fully come they rose and
walked about a little to make their stiffened muscles elastic again.

"The hunters have all gone back to the camp now," said Tayoga, "since
it is not easy to pursue the game by dusk, and we need not keep so
close, like a bear in its den."

"And the danger of our being seen is reduced to almost nothing," said
Robert.

"It is so, Dagaeoga, but we will have another fight to make. We must
