
Now Boucher felt for the first time in his life that he had met the
better man. The great duelist who had ruffled it so grandly through the
inns and streets of Paris looked with growing terror into the stern,
accusing eyes that confronted him. But he did not always see Willet. It
was the ghosts of the boy, Gaston Lafitte, of the sick man Raoul de
Bassempierre and of the indifferent swordsman, Raymond de Neville, that
guided the hunter's blade, and his forehead became cold and wet with
perspiration.

De Galisonniere had moved in the crowd, until he stood with Robert and
Tayoga. He was perhaps the only one of the _honnetes gens_ in the
garden, and while he was a Frenchman, first, last and all the time, he
knew who Boucher was and what he represented, he understood the reason
why Robert had been drawn into the garden and he was willing to see the
punishment of the man who was to have been the sanguinary instrument of
the plot.

"A miracle will defeat the best of plans," he said to de Courcelles.

"What do you mean, de Galisonniere?" asked de Courcelles with a show of
effrontery.

"That an unknown hunter should prove himself a better swordsman than
your great duelist and bravo, Boucher."

"Why do you call him my duelist and bravo, de Galisonniere?"

"I understand that you brought young Lennox into the garden, apparently
his warm friend on the way, and then when he was here, stood aside."

"You must answer for such insinuations, Captain de Galisonniere."

"But not to you, my friend. My sword will be needed in the coming war,
and I'm not called upon to dull it now against one who was a principal
in a murderous conspiracy. I may be over particular about those with
whom I fight, de Courcelles, but I am what I am."

"You mean you will not fight me?"

"Certainly not. A meeting would cause the reasons for it to be threshed
out, and we are not so many here in Canada that those reasons would not
become known to all, and you, I fancy, would not relish the spread of
such knowledge. The Intendant is a powerful man, but the Marquis
Duquesne is the head of our military life, and he would not be pleased
to hear what one of his officers so high in rank has done here tonight."

All the blood left de Courcelles' face, and he shook with anger, but he
knew in his heart that de Galisonniere spoke the deadly truth. Besides,
the whole plan had gone horribly wrong. And it had been so well laid.
Who could have thought that a wandering hunter would appear at such a
time, take the whole affair into his hands, and prove himself a better
swordsman than Boucher, who was reputed not to have had his equal in
France. It was the one unlucky chance, in a million! Nay, it was worse!
It was a miracle that had appeared against them, and in that de
Galisonniere had told the truth. Rage and terror stabbed at his heart,
rage that the plan laid so smoothly had failed, and terror for himself.
No, he would not challenge de Galisonniere.

"You will notice, de Courcelles," said the young Captain, "that Boucher
is approaching exhaustion. Perhaps not another man in the world could
have withstood his tremendous offense so well, but the singular hunter
seems to be one man in a world, at least with the sword. Now, the
seconds will give them a little rest before they close once more, and,
I think, for the last time."

"For God's sake, de Galisonniere, cease! It's bad enough without your
unholy glee!"

"'Bad enough' and 'unholy glee,' de Courcelles! Not at all! It's very
well, and my pleasure is justified. I fear that villany is not always
punished as it should be, and seldom in the dramatic manner that leaps
to the eye and that has the powerful force of example. Ah, a foul blow
before the seconds gave the word! Boucher has gone mad! But you and I
won't trouble ourselves about him, since he will soon pay for it. I
think I see a change in the hunter's eye. It has grown uncommonly stern
and fierce. He has the look of an executioner."

De Galisonniere had read aright. When the treacherous blow was dealt and
turned aside barely in time, Willet's heart hardened. If Boucher lived
he would live to add more victims to those who had gone before. The
man's whole fiber, body and mind, was poison, nothing but poison, and
the murdered three whom Willet had known cried upon him to take
vengeance. He began to press the bravo and Boucher's followers were
silent. De Galisonniere was not the only one who had marked the change
in the hunter's eye.

"You will note, de Courcelles," said he, "that your man, Boucher, has
thrown his life away."

"He's not my man, de Galisonniere!"

"You compel me to repeat, de Courcelles, that your man, Boucher, has
thrown away his own life. It's not well to deal a foul blow at a
consummate swordsman. But I suppose it's hard for a murderer to change
his instincts. Ah, what a stroke! What a stroke! It was so swift that I
saw only a flash of light! And so, our friend, Boucher, has sped! And
when you seek the kernel of the matter, de Courcelles, it was you who
helped to speed him!"

De Courcelles, unable to bear more, strode away. Boucher was lying upon
his back, and the bravo had fought his last fight. Willet looked down at
him, shook his head a little, but he did not feel remorse. The ghosts of
the untrained boy, Gaston Lafitte, of the sick man, Raoul de
Bassempierre, and of Raymond de Neville, who had been murdered at dice,
guided his hand, and it was they who had struck the blow. Robert helped
him to put on the waistcoat and coat, as a group of men, Bigot, Cadet,
and Pean at their head, invaded the garden.

"What's this! What's this!" exclaimed Bigot, staring at the motionless
prostrate figure with the closed eyes.

Then de Galisonniere spoke up, and Robert was very grateful to him.

"It was done by Mr. Willet, as you see, sir, and if ever a man had
justification he has it. The quarrel was forced upon him, and, during a
pause, Boucher struck a foul blow, which, had it not been for Mr.
Willet's surpassing skill, would have proved mortal and would have
stained the honor of all Frenchmen in Quebec. Colonel de Courcelles will
bear witness to the truth of all that I have said, will you not, de
Courcelles?"

"Yes," said de Courcelles, though he shook in his uniform with anger.

"And so will Count Jean de Mezy. He too is eager to give testimony and
support me in what I say. Is it not so, de Mezy?"

"Yes," said de Mezy, the purple spots in his face deepening.

"Then," said the Intendant, "I see nothing left to do but bury Boucher.
He was but a quarrelsome fellow with none too good a record in France.
And keep it from the ladies at present."

He returned with his courtiers to the house, and the dancing continued,
but Robert felt that he could not stay any longer. Such cynicism shocked
him, and paying his respects to Bigot and his friends, he left with
Tayoga and the hunter for the Inn of the Eagle.

"It was a great fight," said Tayoga, as they stood outside and breathed
the cool, welcome air again. "What Hayowentha was with the bow and arrow
the Great Bear is with the sword."

"I don't like to take human life," said the hunter, "and it scarcely
seems to me that I've done it now. I feel as if I had been an instrument
in the hands of others, giving to Boucher the punishment deferred so
long."

"There will be no trouble about it," said Tayoga. "I read the face of
Bigot and no anger was there. It may be that he was glad to get rid of
the man Boucher. The assassin becomes at times a burden."

But Willet remained silent and thoughtful.

"I've a feeling, Robert," he said, "that our mission to Quebec will
fail. We've passed through too much, and all the signs are against us.
As for me, I'm going to get ready for war."

"Maybe the Governor General will arrive tomorrow," said Robert, "and if
so we can give him our letters and go. I was glad to come to Quebec, and
I'll be equally glad to leave."

"And we can see the lodges of the Hodenosaunee again," said Tayoga, his
eyes glistening.

"Yes, Tayoga, and glad I'll be to be once more among your great people,
the hunters of the hills."

It was about two o'clock in the morning, when Robert went to bed, and he
slept very late. Willet awoke shortly after dawn, dressed himself and
went to the window, where he stood, gazing absently at the deepening
sunlight on the green hills, although he saw the incidents of the heated
night before far more vividly. He was a man who did not favor bloodshed,
though it was a hard and stern age, and the slaying of Boucher, who
would have added another to his victims, did not trouble him even the
morning after. In his mind was the thought, expressed so powerfully,
that the mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small.
However, his anxiety to be away from Quebec had grown with the hours.
The dangers were too thick, and they also had a bad habit of increasing
continually.

When Robert awoke he found the hunter and Tayoga awaiting him.

"I've ordered breakfast," said Willet, "and it will be ready for us as
soon as you dress. After that I'll have to comply with some
formalities, owing to last night's affair, and then if the Governor
General arrives this afternoon, we can deliver our letters and depart.
It seems strange, Robert, that we should be here such a little while and
that both you and I should fight duels. Perhaps it will be Tayoga's turn
today, and he too will have to fight."

"Not unless Tandakora seeks me," said the young Onondaga.

"Did you see what became of him last night, Tayoga?" asked Willet.

"I watched him all the time you and the Frenchman were fighting, and I
watched also when we came back to the inn. He would willingly have
thrown a tomahawk in the dark at the head of any one of us, but he knew
I watched and he did not dare."

"And that Ojibway savage is another of our troubles. He's gone clean mad
with his hate of us."

Their late breakfast was served by Monsieur Berryer himself with much
deference and some awe. The large room also held many more guests than
usual at such an hour, but most of them ate little, only an egg or a
roll, perhaps, or they dallied over a cup of coffee, reserving most of
their attention for Willet, whom they regarded covertly, but with
extraordinary interest. The youth with him had shown himself to be a
fine swordsman, as Count Jean de Mezy could testify, but the elder man,
who had appeared to be a hunter, and who claimed to be one, was such a
master of the weapon as had never before appeared in New France. And it
was said by the French officers that his equal could not be found in
old France either. The interest aroused by his fame was increased by the
mystery that enshrouded him, and they gave him an attention that was not
at all hostile. In truth, it was strongly compounded with admiration. A
man who had removed Pierre Boucher as he had done, was to be regarded
with respect. Boucher had given every promise of becoming a public
danger in Quebec, and perhaps they owed gratitude to the hunter,
Bostonnais though he was.

Late in the afternoon they had word that the Marquis Duquesne had come
and would receive them. Again they arrayed themselves with the greatest
care, and took their way to the Castle of St. Louis. They found a man
very different in appearance and manner from the Intendant, Bigot. Tall,
austere, belonging to a race that was reckoned very noble in France, the
Marquis Duquesne was not popular in New France. He had none of the
geniality and easy generosity of Bigot, as he spent his own money, but
he had shown a military energy and foresight which the British governors
to the south were far from imitating. While Canada did not love him, it
respected him and his boldness, and his daring and foresight had deeply
impressed the powerful Indian tribes whose friendship and alliance were
so important in the coming war.

The manner of the Marquis was high, when he received the three in his
chamber of audience, but it was not deficient in courtesy. He looked
intently at each of them in turn.

"You come, so I am told, from the Governor of New York," he said, "and
judging from what I have heard he has chosen messengers who are able to
make a stir. Two days in Quebec and already you have fought two duels,
one of them ending fatally."

"My lord," said Willet, gravely, "they were not of our seeking."

"That also, I hear. They tell me, too, Mr. Willet, that you are an
incomparable swordsman, and it must be true, or you would not have been
able to defeat Boucher. But that matter is adjusted. You will not be
held here because of his death. It seems that the Intendant, Monsieur
Bigot himself, does not wish to carry it further. But the letters from
the Governor of New York?"

"Mr. Lennox has them," said Willet.

Robert bowed and took from an inner pocket of his waistcoat the letters
he had carried through so many dangers. They were contained in a small
deerskin pouch, and were only two in number. Bowing again, he handed
them to the Governor General, who said:

"Pray be seated, and excuse me for a few minutes while I read them."

He read slowly, stopping at times to consider, and when he had finished
he read them over again.

"Do you and Mr. Willet know the contents of these letters?" he said to
Robert.

"We do," replied the youth. "They were read to us by the Governor of New
York before he sealed them. If we were robbed of them on the way to
Quebec, and he knew the way was dangerous, we were to continue our
journey and deliver the message to you verbally."

"Their nature does credit to both the heart and head of the Governor of
New York. He makes a personal appeal to me to use all my influence
against the war seemingly at hand. He says that England and France have
nothing to gain by attacking each other in the American woods, which are
large enough to hide whole European kingdoms. But he wishes the letters
to be a secret with him and me and you three who have brought them. You
understand that?"

Robert bowed once more.

"The second letter explains and amplifies the first, contains, I should
say, his afterthoughts. As I said, 'tis a noble act, but what can I do?
A war may look to many men like a sudden outburst, but it is nearly
always the result of conditions that have been a long time in the
growth. Your hunters, your traders and your surveyors pressed forward
into the Ohio country, which is ours."

He looked at them as if he expected them to challenge the French claim
to the Ohio regions, but they were wisely silent.

"The letters do not demand an immediate reply," he continued. "His
Excellency prays me to consider. Perhaps I shall send one later through
a trusted messenger by sloop or schooner to New York, and naturally, I
shall choose one of my own officers."

"Naturally, my lord," said Robert. "We did not expect to take back the
answer."

The Marquis Duquesne looked at him very keenly.

"You speak as if you were relieved at not having the errand," he said.
"Perhaps there is something else on your mind which you wish to do and
with which such a mission would interfere."

Robert was silent and the Marquis laughed.

"I will not press the question, because I've no right to do so," he
said. "But I will let it remain an inference."

Then his eye rested upon Tayoga, at whom he looked long and searchingly,
and the eye of the Onondaga met him with an answering gaze, fixed and
unfaltering.

"Captain de Galisonniere has told me," said the Marquis, "that you are a
young chief, or coming chief, of the Iroquois, that despite your youth
you have thought much and have influence with your people. How do the
Iroquois feel toward the French who wish them so well?"

"They do not forget that this Quebec is the Stadacona of one of their
great warrior nations, the Mohawks," replied Tayoga.

The Marquis started and flushed.

"Quebec is ours," he said slowly, after taking due thought. "You cannot
undo what was done two centuries ago."

"The nations of the Hodenosaunee do not forget, what are two centuries
to them?"

"When you return to the Long House in the vale of Onondaga, and the
fifty sachems meet in council, tell them Onontio has only kindness in
his heart for them. The war clouds that hang over England and France
grow many and thick, and my children are brave and vigilant. They know
the ways of the forest. They travel by day and by night, and they strike
hard. The English are not a match for them."

"If I should tell them what Onontio tells to me they would say: 'Go back
to Quebec, which is by right the Stadacona of our great warrior nation,
the Mohawks, and say to Onontio that his words are like the songs of
birds, but we, the Hodenosaunee, do not forget. We remember Frontenac,
and we remember Champlain, the first of the white men to come among us
with guns, the use of which we did not know, killing our warriors.'"

"Time makes changes, Tayoga, and the Iroquois must change too."

Tayoga, was silent, but his haughty face did not relax a particle. The
Marquis was about to say more upon the subject, but he had a penetrating
mind and he saw that his words would be wasted.

"We shall see what we shall see," he said. "My master, His Majesty King
Louis, keeps his promises. Mr. Lennox, as I take it, still clinging to
my inference, it will be some time before you see the Governor of New
York again. But, when you do see him, and if my letter has not then
reached him, tell him it is coming by ship to New York. As for you and
your comrades, I wish you a safe journey whithersoever you go. An
aide-de-camp will give the three of you, as you go out, passports which
will be your safe conduct until you reach the borders of Canada. Of
