"I think, Herr Johann," said Ilse, "that you have left behind in
Lorraine a maid whom you love."

"It may be so," said John vaguely. "I saw one in Metz whom anybody could
love."

"What was she like?" asked Ilse, eagerly.

"A skin the tint of the young rose, eyes like the dawn on a summer
morning, hair a shower of the finest spun silk, and a walk like that of
a young goddess."

"It's beautiful, but it doesn't describe; what was the color of her hair
and eyes?"

"I don't know. They dazzled me so much that I merely remember their
loveliness and glory."

"It can't be!" exclaimed Ilse, who did not walk in Elysian paths. "You
jest with us. You recall her hair and eyes."

John shook his head impressively.

"The French prisoner, the one they call a spy, Mademoiselle Lannes, is
the most beautiful woman I've ever seen," said blond Olga, "but no one
could look at her without remembering the color of her hair and eyes,
such a marvelous gold and such a deep, dark blue."

"His Highness, Prince Karl, remembers them well," said Ilse.

"But not better than the young Count Kratzek," said Olga.

"Nor better than Count Pappenheim."

"And yet they're going to send her away."

"It's because the generals and princes are coming for the great council
and they wouldn't have more to fall in love with her."

"And it might give even Prince Karl trouble to answer questions why she
is here."

John's pulses began to beat heavily despite all his efforts at calmness
and he turned his face away that they might not see the eager light in
his eyes. When he had mastered himself sufficiently to use a quiet voice
he asked:

"When is this great council of which you speak?"

"In three or four days," replied Ilse. "We hear that many Serene
Highnesses are coming from both Berlin and Vienna."

"And the French girl is to be carried away before they come?"

"She goes the day after tomorrow with the dark woman, Suzanne, to the
hunting lodge of His Highness, higher in the mountains."

Then with a frightened gesture she clapped her hand upon her mouth.

"You will say nothing of it, Herr Johann?" she pleaded. "It is a secret
from all but a few, and His Highness doubtless would punish us terribly
if he knew that we told."

"You can trust me, Ilse," said John earnestly. "I would not bring
trouble upon you or Olga. Besides, what is it to me?"

He sought by indirect questions to learn more from them, but they would
not continue, seeming to be afraid that they had already said too much.
Then he turned casually from the subject, lest he rouse suspicion, and
spoke of his horses. But all the while he was searching his mind, as one
looks for a treasure, to discover how he could follow Julie and Suzanne
to their new abode.

He gathered from Walther that the hunting lodge was higher in the
mountains in the depths of a great forest, about six leagues from
Zillenstein where there was much big game. In times of peace the prince
frequently went there, and a good automobile road led to the lodge,
although in winter the snow was often so deep that the place was
inaccessible.

Late that afternoon the hoofs of horses beat steadily on the road
leading from the valley up to Zillenstein. John from a coign of vantage
saw approaching a young man in a gray German uniform, followed by four
hussars, also in German gray. Anyone who came to Zillenstein was of
interest, and as John looked the leading figure became familiar. Doubt
soon changed to certainty. He knew the swing of the broad shoulders and
the high pose of the head. It was the young prince, von Arnheim.

"And so they all gather," said John to himself.

He was swept by the little shiver that one often feels when influenced
suddenly by a powerful emotion. Fate or chance had a wonderful way of
bringing about strange things. He had seen it too often not to know. He
was sure in his heart now that von Boehlen too would come some time and
somehow.

He looked at the terrace. Julie and Suzanne had appeared there in the
last few minutes, and they were gazing at the gallant figure of young
von Arnheim who was now so near. The prince himself, when he saw Julie,
sprang from his horse, ran lightly up the steps, and bending low over
her hand, kissed it. Nor did John feel jealousy or hate of him.

He was glad that von Arnheim had come. He was sure that Julie did not
love him and never would, but he was a brave and honest man who would do
no wrong. Julie was safer from insult with him near. To the rank of
Prince Karl of Auersperg he could oppose a rank the equal of his own.

He was too far away to hear their words or even to note their faces, but
he saw the young prince talk with her for a little space and then go
into the castle, doubtless to notify Auersperg of his arrival. Julie as
her eyes roved about the great panorama of mountain and valley saw John,
and the wireless messages of their eyes passed and repassed again.

"I know that you are watching and risking your life for me," hers said.

"Gladly," his replied.

"I like Prince Wilhelm von Arnheim, but it's liking, not love."

"I wish to believe it and do."

Then the little waves of air were stilled, as she went back into the
castle, doubtless because she feared to arouse suspicion, and John
returned to his work with Walther, convinced that he must form some plan
now. Von Arnheim must merely be the vanguard of the council, and Julie
might be sent away earlier than Ilse had announced. He must contrive a
way to follow.

That night he lurked once more in the shrubbery. He had been there
nearly every night, hopeful that Suzanne would pass again, but not until
tonight did she come. The tall figure, swathed almost to the eyes in a
heavy cloak, came down the terrace to the walk, and John whistled low a
note of a French folksong. He had merely hoped that she would stop a
moment or two to listen, and the little device succeeded. She paused and
looked at the black mass of the shrubbery.

"Suzanne! Suzanne!" called John, his voice showing all the intenseness
of his anxiety.

"Monsieur Scott," she said in a loud whisper.

"Yes, Suzanne, here behind the bushes! I must have word with you!"

Silently she stepped into the impenetrable shadows and John eagerly
seized her hand.

"Your mistress, Mademoiselle Julie," he whispered eagerly, "she does not
break down with the suspense and anxiety? She still hopes?"

"You need not fear for her courage, Monsieur Scott. Did I not tell you
that she had a heart of steel, even the same as that of her great
brother. I should not tell it to you, but she has never despaired since
you came."

John's fingers closed convulsively upon the large muscular hand of
Suzanne and in the darkness the woman's grim face relaxed into a smile.

"You are holding my hand not that of Mademoiselle Julie," she said.

"Your words bring me such joy, Suzanne, that I forgot, but I must speak
to your mistress."

"You cannot. It is impossible. She is watched more closely than ever."

"But there is news that she must know! Then you must tell it to her!"

"What news? You surely don't mean that they will try her on this
ridiculous charge of being a spy!"

"No, not that, Suzanne, but they're preparing to send her and you away."

"And glad we both will be to leave this hateful castle of Zillenstein."

"But it's not that you will fare better. There will be no chance of
freedom now. You are to be sent into the higher mountains in the
wilderness to a hunting lodge belonging to Auersperg. You will be hidden
from all but a few of his most trusted followers."

"Then we're not afraid. We shall even be glad to go there, anywhere from
this terrible place. We do not fear the woods, my mistress and I. I can
think they're more friendly than those old stone walls above us."

"But tell her this, Suzanne, I pray you, that I shall follow her there."

"How?"

"I don't yet know, but I shall find a way. Tell her, Suzanne, that I'll
never leave her so long as I'm alive."

The eyes of the grim woman softened singularly, as she gazed in the dusk
at the young man. A devotion such as his, a devotion so evident, would
have moved a heart of stone. Her young mistress was dearer than anyone
else in the world to her, dearer than her own father, and her stern
spirit relaxed when she saw that another could love her in a different
way, but as well.

"I'll tell her," she said, "but I tell you that 'tis needless. She knows
already that wherever she goes you will follow. Does that bring any
comfort to your soul, Mr. Scott?"

"Aye, Suzanne, it fills it with thankfulness. Don't forget to tell her
that she will go soon. Von Arnheim, Pappenheim and Kratzek are her
friends, but they can't prevent it if they would. It may be too that
they will not know when or where she goes."

"She shall hear everything you say and, remember, that she has a brave
heart. She has less fear for herself than for you."

She slipped away in the darkness and John went back to his own little
place over the stables where he passed a night that was all but
sleepless thinking over his problem and finding no good solution. He
meant to follow Julie and Suzanne in any event to the hunting lodge, but
it was not sufficient merely to follow. He must appear in some capacity
that would permit him to be of service. And yet Providence was working
for him at that moment.

Prince Karl of Auersperg in his magnificent modernized apartments in the
huge castle was also troubled by an inability to sleep. Hitherto in his
fifty or more years of life he had always got what he wanted. His blood
was more ancient than that of either Hohenzollern or Hapsburg. The
Auerspergs had been princes of the Holy Roman Empire for a thousand
years and now he was a prince of both Teutonic empires and a general of
the first rank in the army of Germany. His wealth was so vast that he
scarcely knew the extent of his own lands and here in Zillenstein he
could maintain the power and state that appertained to a baron of the
Middle Ages.

A mind that has only to wish for a thing to get it becomes closed in
fifty years. It mistakes desire for right. It regards opposition as
sacrilege. Other minds that differ from it are wicked because they
differ. The thick armor of Prince Karl's self-complacency had been
pierced as it were by a tiny needle that stung, however tiny, as if its
point were laden with poison.

He, the omniscient and omnipotent, had been defied and by whom? A mere
slip of a girl! A child! She was not even of his own race! But perhaps
it was this very defiance that made him wish for her all the more. He
loved her as he had never loved that long-dead wife, a plain princess
who always thought what she was told to think.

But he would take Julie in all honor as his wife. He could not make her
a princess but he could make her a countess, and he would clothe her in
a golden shower. There had been hundreds of morganatic marriages. They
implied no disgrace. Noblewomen themselves had been glad to make them.
And yet she had refused. Nothing could move her. She had not even
flinched a particle when he had threatened her otherwise with death as a
spy, although the threat was merely words on his lips and had no abiding
place in his heart. She was most beautiful then, when the defiant fire
flashed in her dark blue eyes and the sunshine coming through a tall
stained glass window made deep red tints in her wonderful golden hair.
It was maddening to think of her, just a child turning into a woman, and
wholly in his power defying him as if he were some humble lieutenant and
not the mighty Prince Karl of Auersperg.

He rose and walked angrily back and forth. Now and then he went to a
window and looked out at the dusky panorama of valley, mountain and
shaggy forest. As far as he could see and farther it was all his and
yet he was powerless in the matter that now concerned him more than all
others. She was his prisoner, and yet she was as free as air. Her soul
and her heart were her own, and he could not reach either. He knew it.
That knowledge like the little poisoned needle had punctured the
triple-plate of his complacency and pride and left him no relief from
pain, a pain that would have become intolerable had he known that of all
the bars that stood between her and him the one that nothing could move
was a young peasant in his employ, who watered and fed horses, and who
often led them up and down the road within his plain view.

And yet knowing what he did, knowing that she would not marry him, he
had no thought to give her up. Hope will often spring anew in the face
of absolute knowledge itself, and deep in his heart a belief would
appear now and then that he might yet break her to his wish. He knew
that von Arnheim, Pappenheim and Kratzek knelt at the same shrine and he
laughed harshly to himself because he was sure that they knelt in vain.
They were young, handsome, attractive, men of the world, men whom any
girl might love but she did not love any of them. He knew the signals,
and Julie certainly hung out none for von Arnheim, nor for Kratzek nor
for Pappenheim.

He ran his fingers through his great brown forked beard, just such a
beard as many a robber baron might have worn, and thought deeply of what
he should do with her, before the great council of princes and generals
assembled in his castle. She must not be there then. Awkward questions
might be asked, but if she were well hidden no trouble could befall. Von
Arnheim or Kratzek or Pappenheim might speak, but any words of his would
outweigh all of theirs and that term of a spy was wonderfully
convenient.

But he wished only himself to know where Julie had gone. He wanted no
tattle and gossip about the castle and where there were so many servants
and followers it could not be prevented unless they were kept in
ignorance. It would be best to use a stranger, one who was known but
little at Zillenstein, and he recalled such a man. Second thought
confirmed first thought and his decision was made.




CHAPTER XII

THE HUNTING LODGE


John passed a troubled night. He could not yet see his way to follow
Julie and Suzanne to the hunting lodge in the manner he wished, and the
signs were multiplying that they would soon go. He had no doubt that the
arrival of von Arnheim would hasten their departure. Auersperg at such a
time could not tolerate the attitude of the young prince toward Julie
and he would avail himself of what he considered his feudal rights to
send her somewhere into the dark at the quickest possible moment.

But Providence was working for John. His courage and skill which tempted
fate were winning new points in his great battle. Walther told him a
little after noon that he was to take him into the presence of the
august Prince Karl himself. In some manner he had fallen under the
favorable eye of His Highness who was about to assign him to an
important duty. It was an honor that seldom fell to one so young and
ignorant and he hoped that he would conduct himself in a manner to
reflect credit upon his superior and instructor, Walther.

John gave his faithful promise but he wondered what the prince could
want with him personally and he did not look forward to the interview
with confidence. Perhaps his identity and the nature of his errand had
been discovered, and it was merely an easy method of making him walk
into the lion's jaws, but he could not have refused nor did he wish to
do so. His curiosity was aroused and he was willing to meet Auersperg
face to face and talk with him.

Cap in hand he followed Walther, also cap in hand, into the interior of
the castle. Auersperg sat in a great room overlooking the valley. His
chair stood on a slightly raised portion of the floor, and he was
enthroned like a sovereign. John, following Walther's example, bowed low
before him.

"You may go, Walther," said Auersperg. "I wish to speak alone with this
