settled and the wind fair--dead aft my lad, and blowin' stiff. You and
the hermit are goin' off to Krakatoa to-day, I suppose?"

"Yes. I am just now waiting for him and Moses," returned Nigel.

"Is Winnie going?"

"Don't know. I hope so."

"Humph! Well, if we have a fair wind I shall soon be in Batavia," said
the captain, descending to business matters, "and I expect without
trouble to dispose of the cargo that we landed there, as well as that
part o' the return cargo which I had bought before I left for
Keeling--at a loss, no doubt, but that don't matter much. Then I'll come
back here by the first craft that offers--arter which----. Ay!--Ay!
shove her in here. Plenty o' water."

The last remark was made to the seaman who steered the boat sent from
the vessel in the offing.

A short time thereafter Captain Roy was sailing away for Batavia, while
his son, with Van der Kemp, Moses, Winnie, and Spinkie, was making for
Krakatoa in a native boat.

The hermit, in spite of his injuries, had recovered his wonted
appearance, if not his wonted vigour. Winnie seemed to have suddenly
developed into a mature woman under her recent experiences, though she
had lost none of her girlish grace and attractiveness. As for
Moses--time and tide seemed to have no effect whatever on his ebony
frame, and still less, if possible, on his indomitable spirit.

"Now you keep still," he said in solemn tones and with warning looks to
Spinkie. "If you keep fidgitin' about you'll capsize de boat. You hear?"

Spinkie veiled his real affection for the negro under a look of supreme
indifference, while Winnie went off into a sudden giggle at the idea of
such a small creature capsizing the boat.

Mindful of his father's warning, Nigel did his best to "haul off" and to
prevent his "figurehead" from going "by the board." But he found it
uncommonly hard work, for Winnie looked so innocent, so pretty, so
unconscious, so sympathetic with everybody and everything, so very
young, yet so wondrously wise and womanly, that he felt an irresistible
desire to prostrate himself at her feet in abject slavery.

"Dear little thing," said Winnie, putting her hand on Spinkie's little
head and smoothing him down from eyes to tail.

Spinkie looked as if half inclined to withdraw his allegiance from Moses
and bestow it on Winnie, but evidently changed his mind after a moment's
reflection.

"O that I were a monkey!" thought Nigel, paraphrasing Shakespeare, "that
I might----" but it is not fair to our hero to reveal him in his
weaker moments!

There was something exasperating, too, in being obliged, owing to the
size of the boat, to sit so close to Winnie without having a right to
touch her hand! Who has not experienced this, and felt himself to be a
very hero of self-denial in the circumstances?

"Mos' awrful hot!" remarked Moses, wiping his forehead with the sleeve
of his shirt.

"_You_ hot!" said Nigel in surprise. "I thought nothing on earth could
be too hot for you."

"Dat's your ignerance," returned Moses calmly. "Us niggers, you see,
ought to suffer more fro' heat dan you whites."

"How so?"

"Why, don't your flossiphers say dat black am better dan white for
'tractin' heat, an' ain't our skins black? I wish we'd bin' born white
as chalk. I say, Massa Nadgel, seems to me dat dere's not much left ob
Krakatoa."

They had approached near enough to the island by that time to perceive
that wonderful changes had indeed taken place, and Van der Kemp, who had
been for some time silently absorbed in contemplation, at last turned to
his daughter and said--

"I had feared at first, Winnie, that my old home had been blown entirely
away, but I see now that the Peak of Rakata still stands, so perhaps I
may yet show you the cave in which I have spent so many years."

"But why did you go to live in such a strange place, dear father?" asked
the girl, laying her hand lovingly on the hermit's arm.

Van der Kemp did not reply at once. He gazed in his child's face with an
increase of that absent air and far-away look which Nigel, ever since he
met him, had observed as one of his characteristics. At this time an
anxious thought crossed him,--that perhaps the blows which his friend
had received on his head when he was thrown on the deck of the
_Sunshine_ might have injured his brain.

"It is not easy to answer your question, dear one," he said after a
time, laying his strong hand on the girl's head, and smoothing her
luxuriant hair which hung in the untrammelled freedom of nature over her
shoulders. "I have felt sometimes, during the last few days, as if I
were awaking out of a long long dream, or recovering from a severe
illness in which delirium had played a prominent part. Even now, though
I see and touch you, I sometimes tremble lest I should really awake and
find that it is all a dream. I have so often--so _very_ often--dreamed
something like it in years gone by, but never so vividly as now! I
cannot doubt--it is sin to doubt--that my prayers have been at last
answered. God is good and wise. He knows what is best and does not fail
in bringing the best to pass. Yet I have doubted Him--again and again."

Van der Kemp paused here and drew his hand across his brow as if to
clear away sad memories of the past, while Winnie drew closer to him and
looked up tenderly in his face.

"When your mother died, dear one," he resumed, "it seemed to me as if
the sun had left the heavens, and when _you_ were snatched from me, it
was as though my soul had fled and nought but animal life remained. I
lived as if in a terrible dream. I cannot recall exactly what I did or
where I went for a long long time. I know I wandered through the
archipelago looking for you, because I did not believe at first that you
were dead. It was at this time I took up my abode in the cave of Rakata,
and fell in with my good faithful friend Moses--"

"Your sarvint, massa," interrupted the negro humbly. "I's proud to be
call your frind, but I's only your sarvint, massa."

"Truly you have been my faithful servant, Moses," said Van der Kemp,
"but not the less have you been my trusted friend. He nursed me through
a long and severe illness, Winnie. How long, I am not quite sure. After
a time I nearly lost hope. Then there came a very dark period, when I
was forced to believe that you must be dead. Yet, strange to say, even
during this dark time I did not cease to pray and to wander about in
search of you. I suppose it was the force of habit, for hope seemed to
have died. Then, at last, Nigel found you. God used him as His
instrument. And now, praise to His name, we are reunited--for ever!"

"Darling father!" were the only words that Winnie could utter as she
laid her head on the hermit's shoulder and wept for joy.

Two ideas, which had not occurred to him before, struck Nigel with great
force at that moment. The one was that whatever or wherever his future
household should be established, if Winnie was to be its chief ornament,
her father must of necessity become a member of it. The other idea was
that he was destined to possess a negro servant with a consequent and
unavoidable monkey attendant! How strange the links of which the chain
of human destiny is formed, and how wonderful the powers of thought by
which that chain is occasionally forecast! How to convey all these
possessions to England and get them comfortably settled there was a
problem which he did not care to tackle just then.

"See, Winnie," said Van der Kemp, pointing with interest to a mark on
the side of Rakata, "yonder is the mouth of my cave. I never saw it so
clearly before because of the trees and bushes, but everything seems now
to have been burnt up."

"Das so, massa, an' what hasn't bin bu'nt up has bin blow'd up!"
remarked the negro.

"Looks very like it, Moses, unless that is a haze which enshrouds the
rest of the island," rejoined the other, shading his eyes with his
hands.

It was no haze, however; for they found, on drawing nearer, that the
greater part of Krakatoa had, as we have already said, actually
disappeared from the face of the earth.

When the boat finally rounded the point which hid the northern part of
the island from view, a sight was presented which it is not often given
to human eyes to look upon. The whole mountain named the Peak of Rakata
(2623 feet high) had been split from top to bottom, and about one-half
of it, with all that part of the island lying to the northward, had been
blown away, leaving a wall or almost sheer precipice which presented a
grand section of the volcano.

Pushing their boat into a creek at the base of this precipice, the party
landed and tried to reach a position from which a commanding view might
be obtained. This was not an easy matter, for there was not a spot for a
foot to rest on which was not covered deeply with pumice-dust and ashes.
By dint of perseverance, however, they gained a ledge whence the
surrounding district could be observed, and then it was clearly seen how
wide-spread and stupendous the effects of the explosion had been.

Where the greater part of the richly wooded island had formerly
flourished, the ocean now rippled in the sunshine, and of the smaller
islands around it _Lang_ Island had been considerably increased in bulk
as well as in height. _Verlaten_ Island had been enlarged to more than
three times its former size and also much increased in height. The
island named _Polish Hat_ had disappeared altogether, and two entirely
new islets--afterwards named _Steers_ and _Calmeyer_ Islands--had
arisen to the northward.

"Now, friends," said Van der Kemp, after they had noted and commented on
the vast and wonderful changes that had taken place, "we will pull round
to our cave and see what has happened there."

Descending to the boat they rowed round the southern shores of Rakata
until they reached the little harbour where the boat and canoe had
formerly been kept.




CHAPTER XXXI.

ENDS WITH A STRUGGLE BETWEEN INCLINATION AND DUTY.


"De cave's blowed away too!" was the first remark of Moses as they rowed
into the little port.

A shock of disappointment was experienced by Winnie, for she fancied
that the negro had referred to her father's old home, but he only meant
the lower cave in which the canoe had formerly been kept. She was soon
relieved as to this point, however, but, when a landing was effected,
difficulties that seemed to her almost insurmountable presented
themselves, for the ground was covered knee-deep with pumice-dust, and
the road to the upper cave was blocked by rugged masses of lava and
ashes, all heaped up in indescribable confusion.

On careful investigation, however, it was found that after passing a
certain point the footpath was almost unencumbered by volcanic debris.
This was owing to the protection afforded to it by the cone of Rakata,
and the almost overhanging nature of some of the cliffs on that side of
the mountain; still the track was bad enough, and in places so rugged,
that Winnie, vigorous and agile though she was, found it both difficult
and fatiguing to advance. Seeing this, her father proposed to carry her,
but she laughingly declined the proposal.

Whereupon Nigel offered to lend her a hand over the rougher places, but
this she also declined.

Then Moses, stepping forward, asserted his rights.

"It's _my_ business," he said, "to carry t'ings w'en dey's got to be
carried. M'r'over, as I's bin obleeged to leabe Spinkie in charge ob de
boat, I feels okard widout somet'ing to carry, an' you ain't much
heavier dan Spinkie, Miss Winnie--so, come along."

He stooped with the intention of grasping Winnie as if she were a little
child, but with a light laugh the girl sprang away and left Moses
behind.

"'S'my opinion," said Moses, looking after her with a grin, "dat if de
purfesser was here he 'd net her in mistook for a bufferfly. Dar!--she's
down!" he shouted, springing forward, but Nigel was before him.

Winnie had tripped and fallen.

"Are you hurt, dear--child?" asked Nigel, raising her gently.

"Oh no! only a little shaken," answered Winnie, with a little laugh that
was half hysterical. "I am strong enough to go on presently."

"Nay, my child, you _must_ suffer yourself to be carried at this part,"
said Van der Kemp. "Take her up, Nigel, you are stronger than I am
_now_. I would not have asked you to do it before my accident!"

Our hero did not need a second bidding. Grasping Winnie in his strong
arms he raised her as if she had been a feather, and strode away at a
pace so rapid that he soon left Van der Kemp and Moses far behind.

"Put me down, now," said Winnie, after a little while, in a low voice.
"I'm quite recovered now and can walk."

"Nay, Winnie, you are mistaken. The path is very rough yet, and the dust
gets deeper as we ascend. _Do_ give me the pleasure of helping you a
little longer."

Whatever Winnie may have felt or thought she said nothing, and Nigel,
taking silence for consent, bore her swiftly onward and upward,--with an
"Excelsior" spirit that would have thrown the Alpine youth with the
banner and the strange device considerably into the shade,--until he
placed her at the yawning black mouth of the hermit's cave.

But what a change was there! The trees and flowering shrubs and ferns
were all gone, lava, pumice, and ashes lay thick on everything around,
and only a few blackened and twisted stumps of the larger trees
remained to tell that an umbrageous forest had once flourished there.
The whole scene might be fittingly described in the two words--grey
desolation.

"That is the entrance to your father's old home," said Nigel, as he set
his fair burden down and pointed to the entrance.

"What a dreadful place!" said Winnie, peering into the black depths of
the cavern.

"It was not dreadful when I first saw it, Winnie, with rich verdure
everywhere; and inside you will find it surprisingly comfortable. But we
must not enter until your father arrives to do the honours of the place
himself."

They had not to wait long. First Moses arrived, and, shrewdly suspecting
from the appearance of the young couple that they were engaged in
conversation that would not brook interruption, or, perhaps, judging
from what might be his own wishes in similar circumstances, he turned
his back suddenly on them, and, stooping down, addressed himself to an
imaginary creature of the animal kingdom.

"What a bootiful bufferfly you is, to be sure! up on sitch a place too,
wid nuffin' to eat 'cept Krakatoa dust. I wonder what your moder would
say if she know'd you was here. You should be ashamed ob yourself!"

"Hallo! Moses, what are you talking to over there?"

"Nuffin', Massa Nadgel. I was on'y habin' a brief conv'sation wid a
member ob de insect wurld in commemoration ob de purfesser. Leastwise,
if it warn't a insect it must hab bin suffm' else. Won't you go in, Miss
Winnie?"

"No, I'd rather wait for father," returned the girl, looking a little
flushed, for some strange and totally unfamiliar ideas had recently
floated into her brain and caused some incomprehensible flutterings of
the heart to which hitherto she had been a stranger.

Mindful of his father's injunctions, however, Nigel had been
particularly careful to avoid increasing these flutterings.

In a few minutes the hermit came up. "Ah! Winnie," he said, "there has
been dire devastation here. Perhaps inside things may look better. Come,
take my hand and don't be afraid. The floor is level and your eyes will
soon get accustomed to the dim light."

"I's afeared, massa," remarked Moses, as they entered the cavern, "dat
your sun-lights won't be wu'th much now."

"You are right, lad. Go on before us and light the lamps if they are not
broken."

It was found, as they had expected, that, the only light which
penetrated the cavern was that which entered by the cave's mouth, which
of course was very feeble.

Presently, to Winnie's surprise, Moses was seen issuing from the kitchen
with a petroleum lamp in one hand, the brilliant light of which not only
glittered on his expressive black visage but sent a ruddy glare all over
the cavern.

Van der Kemp seemed to watch his daughter intently as she gazed in a
bewildered way around. There was a puzzled look as well as mere surprise
in her pretty face.

"Father," she said earnestly, "you have spoken more than once of living
as if in a dream. Perhaps you will wonder when I tell you that I
experience something of that sort now. Strange though this place seems,
I have an unaccountable feeling that it is not absolutely new to
me--that I have seen it before."

"I do not wonder, dear one," he replied, "for the drawings that surround
this chamber were the handiwork of your dear mother, and they decorated
the walls of your own nursery when you were a little child at your
mother's knee. For over ten long years they have surrounded me and kept
your faces fresh in my memory--though, truth to tell, it needed no such
reminders to do that. Come, let us examine them."

It was pleasant to see the earnest face of Winnie as she
half-recognised and strove to recall the memories of early childhood in
that singular cavern. It was also a sight worth seeing--the countenance
of Nigel, as well as that of the hermit, while they watched and admired
her eager, puzzled play of feature, and it was the most amazing sight of
all to see the all but superhuman joy of Moses as he held the lamp and
listened to facts regarding the past of his beloved master which were
quite new to him--for the hermit spoke as openly about his past domestic
affairs as if he and Winnie had been quite alone.

"He either forgets that we are present, or counts us as part of his
family," thought Nigel with a feeling of satisfaction.

"What a dear comoonicative man!" thought Moses, with unconcealed
pleasure.

"Come now, let us ascend to the observatory," said the hermit, when all
the things in the library had been examined. "There has been damage done
there, I know; besides, there is a locket there which belonged to your
mother. I left it by mistake one day when I went up to arrange the
mirrors, and in the hurry of leaving forgot to return for it. Indeed,
one of my main objects in re-visiting my old home was to fetch that
locket away. It contains a lock of hair and one of those miniatures
which men used to paint before photography drove such work off the
field."

Winnie was nothing loth to follow, for she had reached a romantic period
of life, and it seemed to her that to be led through mysterious caves
and dark galleries in the very heart of a still active volcano by her
own father--the hermit of Rakata--was the very embodiment of romance
itself.

But a disappointment awaited them, for they had not proceeded halfway
through the dark passage when it was found that a large mass of rock had
fallen from the roof and almost blocked it up.

"There is a space big enough for us to creep through at the right-hand
corner above, I think," said Nigel, taking the lantern from Moses and
examining the spot.

"Jump up, Moses, and try it," said the hermit. "If your bulky shoulders
get through, we can all manage it."

The negro was about to obey the order when Nigel let the lantern fall
and the shock extinguished it.

"Oh! Massa Nadgel; das a pritty business!"

"Never mind," said Van der Kemp. "I've got matches, I think, in my--no,
I haven't. Have you, Moses?"

"No, massa, I forgit to remember him."

"No matter, run back--you know the road well enough to follow it in the
dark. We will wait here till you return. Be smart, now!"

Moses started off at once and for some moments the sound of clattering
along the passage was heard.

"I will try to clamber through in the dark. Look after Winnie,
Nigel--and don't leave the spot where you stand, dear one, for there are
cracks and holes about that might sprain your little ankles."

"Very well, father."

"All right. I've got through, Nigel; I'll feel my way on for a little
bit. Remain where you are."

"Winnie," said Nigel when they were alone, "doesn't it feel awesome and
strange to be standing here in such intense darkness?"

"It does--I don't quite like it."

"Whereabouts are you?" said Nigel.

He carefully stretched out his hand to feel, as he spoke, and laid a
finger on her brow.

"Oh! take care of my eyes!" exclaimed Winnie with a little laugh.

"_I_ wish you would turn your eyes towards me for I'm convinced they
would give some light--? to _me_ at least. Here, do let me hold your
hand It will make you feel more confident."

To one who is at all familiar with the human frame, the way from the
brow to the hand is comparatively simple. Nigel soon possessed himself
of the coveted article. Like other things of great value the possession
turned the poor youth's head! He forgot his father's warnings for the
moment, forgot the hermit and Moses and Spinkie, and the thick
darkness--forgot almost everything in the light of that touch!

"Winnie!" he exclaimed in a tone that quite alarmed her; "I--I--" He
hesitated. The solemn embargo of his father recurred to him.

"What is it! Is there danger?" exclaimed the poor girl, clasping his
hand tighter and drawing nearer to him.

This was too much! Nigel felt himself to be contemptible. He was taking
unfair advantage of her.

"Winnie," he began again, in a voice of forced calmness, "there is no
danger whatever. I'm an ass--a dolt--that's all! The fact is, I made my
father a sort of half promise that I would not ask your opinion on a
certain subject until--until I found out exactly what you thought about
it. Now the thing is ridiculous--impossible--for how can I know your
opinion on any subject until I have asked you?"

"Quite true," returned Winnie simply, "so you better ask me."

"Ha! _ha_!" laughed Nigel, in a sort of desperate amusement, "I--I--Yes,
I _will_ ask you, Winnie! But first I must explain----"

"Hallo! Nigel!" came at that moment from the other side of the
obstruction, "are you there--all right?"

"Yes, yes--I'm here--_not_ all right exactly, but I'll be all right
_some day_, you may depend upon that!" shouted the youth, in a tone of
indignant exasperation.

"What said you?" asked Van der Kemp, putting his head through the hole.

"Hi! I's a-comin', look out, dar!" hallooed Moses in the opposite
direction.

"Just so," said Nigel, resuming his quiet tone and demeanour, "we'll be
all right when the light comes. Here, give us your hand, Van der Kemp."

The hermit accepted the proffered aid and leaped down amongst his
friends just as Moses arrived with the lantern.

"It's of no use going further," he said. "The passage is completely
blocked up--so we must go round to where the mountain has been split off
and try to clamber up. There will be daylight enough yet if we are
quick. Come."


