it up years ago at an auction. Mrs. Gorman Stanley was not a generous
person, and as the Berlin wool-work had always troubled her on account
of its magnificence, its uselessness, and the almost certainty that the
moths would get in and devour it, she thought it a good opportunity of
making an effective present, and getting rid of a household care.

Once that wool-work had been put together with love and pride. The
impossible lilies and roses, the huge peonies, and gigantic hollyhocks
which composed its pattern, had been formed, stitch by stitch, by
unknown fingers, probably now crumbled to dust.

The wool-work might have told a story could it speak, but it had never
imparted its secrets, pathetic or otherwise, to Mrs. Gorman Stanley, and
Beatrice received the gorgeous gift with little emotion, and some
shrinking away from its bad taste.

Mrs. Butler, after a great deal of consultation with her sister Maria,
decided to give the bride-elect a huge white, carved ivory brooch. This
brooch was her own favorite ornament; it was of gigantic dimensions, and
consisted of an elaborate circle of flowers, supporting the word
"Martha" in the centre.

"You'll wear it for me, love," said Mrs. Butler, "you'll never put it
on, but you'll give Martha Butler a thought."

Beatrice assured her friend that this must certainly be the case. She
was really grateful to Mrs. Butler, for she knew the old lady adored
that brooch, and it had cost her much to deprive herself of it.

Miss Peters smuggled her little gift into Beatrice's hand as they were
parting. It was a yard of Honiton lace, very old, and much darned. Bee
had often seen this lace round Miss Peters' little wintry throat. She
kissed it when she looked at it now, and placed it very near the
crotchet edging in her regard.

But it would take a much longer space than this story can afford to
recount all the presents that came to Beatrice Meadowsweet. From the
Bertram connection the gifts were of money value, from the Northbury
people they were rich with something better than money. Not one of Bee's
friends forgot her at this time.

September came on apace, and at last there wanted but a week of the
wedding day.

On a certain evening when the wind blew rather fresh from the sea,
Captain Bertram asked Beatrice to walk with him. She complied. They took
a long walk over the cliffs, and it was quite late and dark when they
returned home.

They had to pass the Manor on their way back to the Gray House, where
Bertram was to stay for supper.

As they walked along, talking gravely, for Beatrice did not often laugh
when alone with her lover, a slender and tall figure passed them quickly
in the darkness. Bertram, who was walking very close to Bee, stumbled
against her, and uttered a smothered oath.

"What is the matter?" she asked in astonishment. "Have you hurt
yourself?"

"No, I thought I recognized a face, but I must be mistaken."

"That slim girl who passed us so quickly just now? I, too, fancy I have
seen her before. Certainly she is a stranger here."

"Don't talk about her, Beatrice. It was a casual likeness. People look
so different--distorted by the darkness. To-night it is very dark. There
is no moon."

"Still, I can see," said Beatrice, pausing and looking back. "I can see,
and I fancy the stranger is standing still and looking at us. Back
there, by the hedge. Perhaps she is in trouble. Shall I run and speak to
her?"

"No, not for the world. Come home. Forget her."

His tone was almost rough. They walked on rapidly. The high wind of a
coming storm beat in their faces. Beatrice felt tired and dispirited,
and Bertram's agitation and complete change of manner puzzled her.

Presently they reached the house.

"Here we are at last; you will be glad of your supper," she said.

"No, thanks, I am not coming in."

"Not coming in? You promised. Mother expects you."

"Excuse me to-night, Beatrice. I have a headache. I shall go straight
home. Good-night. I'll come down early in the morning."

He took her hand, dropped it hastily, and almost before the door was
opened, had turned away. Beatrice did not go in at once. She heard his
quick, retreating steps. Presently they quickened into a run.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WE WILL RETURN TO OUR SECLUSION.


"I am mad," said Bertram to himself. "Mad, as ever was the proverbial
March hare. That girl who passed us in the darkness was Josephine Hart.
Yes, that girl was Nina, and I must, I will, see her again."

His heart was beating tumultuously; he felt the great passion of his
love tingling through all his veins. Money was nothing to him in this
hour, debts were forgotten, disgrace and dishonor were nowhere. Nina and
love were all in all. He _would_ see her, he would kiss her, he
would hold her in his arms, he would, he must. The very elements helped
him as he ran back to the place where he knew she had paused to watch
him. Why had she come back! She knew her power only too well. Why had
she come to exercise it? It was mad of her, wicked of her, it meant his
ruin, and yet he was glad, yet he rejoiced.

The moments seemed endless until he could reach her. Beatrice was as
absolutely forgotten by him at this moment as if she had never existed.

At last he gained the spot where Josephine had brushed past him in the
darkness. He knew it, he knew the sudden curve of the road, the bend in
the path where it began to dip downwards. He stood still, and strained
his eyes to look through the darkness. No one was there. Beatrice had
seen the slender figure leaning against the hedge, but all now was
emptiness and solitude. Not a soul was in sight. On this lonely road not
a being but himself breathed.

He stood motionless, he listened hard. Once even he called aloud:

"I am here, Nina! Here, Nina! waiting for you here!"

But no one responded. He was alone; the vision, the delicious,
heart-stirring vision, had vanished.

Captain Bertram wandered about, restless and miserable, for an hour or
two. Then he went home and retired straight to his room.

That night he did not attempt to keep the secret chamber of his heart in
which Josephine dwelt, locked and barred. No, he opened the doors wide,
and bade her come out, and talked to her. Passionate and wild and loving
words he used, and Beatrice was nothing to him. He did not go to bed
that night. In the morning his face showed symptoms of the vigil he had
passed through. His mother noticed the haggard lines round his eyes, and
she gave vent to a sigh--scarcely audible, it is true, and quickly
smothered.

Mrs. Bertram was happy, but still she lived on thorns. She felt that the
fairy palace she had built over that sepulchre of the past might crumble
at any moment. The lines of care on Bertram's brow gave her a sensation
of fear. Was anything the matter? Was the courage of the bride-elect
failing? At the eleventh hour could anything possibly injure the
arrangements so nearly completed?

Catherine and Mabel were in good spirits. Their bride's-maids' dresses
had arrived from town the previous night. They were of gauzy white over
silk slips; the girls had never possessed such luxurious costumes
before.

"You'd like to see us in them, wouldn't you, Loftie?" said Mabel.
"Catherine looks splendid in hers, and those big hats with Marguerites
are so becoming. Shall we put our dresses on, Loftie, for you to see
before you run away to Beatrice? Shall we?"

Loftus raised his dark eyes, and looked full at his young sister. There
were heavy shadows round his eyes; their depths looked gloomy and
troubled.

"What did you say?" he asked, in a morose voice.

"What did I say? Well, really, Loftie, you are too bad. I do think you
are the most selfish person I know. At one time I thought Bee was
improving you, but you are worse than ever this morning. You never,
never, take a bit of interest in things that don't immediately concern
yourself. I thought our bride's-maids' dresses would have been
sufficiently important to rouse a passing interest even in--now, what's
the matter, Catherine? I _will_ speak out."

"Forgive me, Mab, I have a headache and feel stupid," interrupted
Loftus, rising to his feet. "I'm going out for a stroll; the air will do
me good."

He went up to the end of the table where his mother sat, kissed her
almost tenderly, and left the room.

Catherine began to reprove Mabel.

"It is you who are selfish," she said. "You know Loftie must have a
great deal on his mind just now."

"Oh, well, I don't care. Every little pleasure is somehow or other
dashed to the ground. _I was_ pleased when I thought Bee was to be
my sister, and she was so sweet about the dresses, choosing just what
we'd look best in. Loftus was nice, too, until this morning. Now I don't
feel as if I cared about anything."

Mabel never reflected on the possibility of her own words causing
annoyance. She ate her breakfast without observing that both her mother
and Catherine looked depressed. Presently, like the thoughtless child
she was, she looked up with laughing eyes:

"Won't the Bells look funny in those grand robes. Do you know, Kate, I
heard such a ridiculous thing yesterday. It was Mrs. Gorman Stanley who
told me. She said Matty Bell was over head and ears in love with Loftie,
and that Mrs. Bell had quite made up her mind that Loftie was to marry
Mattie. She told such a funny story of the way Mrs. Butler broke the
news of Beatrice's engagement to the Bells. Now, what's up? Have I said
anything wrong again?"

"You have, Mabel," said her mother. "You have been guilty of repeating
common and vulgar gossip. You ought never to have listened to it. I had
hoped that a daughter of mine, a Bertram, too, would have inspired too
much respect to have any such rubbish spoken of in her presence."

"Oh, really, mother, I don't think people much care whether we are
Bertrams or not."

"Hush, my dear, that is sufficient. I always feared the effect of the
low society of this place on you both, and in especial on you, Mabel. My
fears have been justified by the results. As soon as Loftus's wedding is
over we will return to our seclusion, my dears."




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE LIGHTS WERE DIM.


Early on that very morning Miss Hart tapped at Mrs. Bell's door. That
good lady was not fully dressed, but she appeared in a voluminous
morning robe to answer her young visitor's summons.

"I am going away, Mrs. Bell," said Miss Hart.

"Oh, my dear!" Mrs. Bell's full-moon face turned absolutely pale. "Going
away, my love!" she said. She thought of her private hoard, not nearly
large enough, and her voice became absolutely pathetic. "Going away,
Miss Hart? I'm truly grieved to hear it. And haven't I made you
comfortable enough, my poor dear?"

"Oh, you misunderstand me, Mrs. Bell. I am going away, but only for a
little--just for a day or two. I don't know exactly when I shall be
back, but probably in a day or two. I am going by the early train, and I
tapped at your door to say good-bye."

Then Mrs. Bell in her delight and joy kissed Miss Hart, who soon
afterwards left the house.

She walked to the station, the hour was early, and there was no special
person about. She took a first-class ticket to a small town about thirty
miles away, and immediately afterwards her train came up.

During the greater part of her journey Miss Hart had the compartment to
herself. By-and-bye fellow-passengers got in, who almost started back at
the sight of the pale face of the girl, who sat with her veil thrown
back, looking straight out of the open window.

There was a strange expression on her face; her brows were slightly
drawn together, and the curves of her lips had a, weary and pathetic
droop. She had taken off her gloves, and now and then she clasped her
slender white hands together with a nervous, passionate tension. Then
the look in her eyes became almost ugly, and her fellow passengers were
uncomfortable as they watched her.

At the little country town of West Brockley, Miss Hart alighted. She had
brought all her luggage in a small handbag, and now she walked to her
destination. It was in the outskirts of the little town, and amongst a
row of poor houses. She stopped at one of these, and entered by the open
door. A woman met her in the passage.

"Is Mr. Hart within?"

"I don't know, madam, I'll inquire."

"No, don't do that. I'll go to him myself. He's at the top of the house,
of course, as usual?"

"Why, as usual, madam? Mr. Hart has never been my lodger before."

"I know his ways. He invariably seeks the top."

"From no prejudice, madam. He seems a very quiet gentleman."

"Exactly. Treasure him, he is a valuable lodger. Now let me pass,
please. I am going to seek him."

"Perhaps I had better tell him first, young lady."

"I am his grandchild. It is all right. Let me pass."

She brushed the woman aside, and flew lightly up the stairs. She knocked
at the door of the top attic, but followed her knock into the room
before any one had made response from within.

Old Hart was, as usual, messing over some cooking. He stopped it when he
saw Josephine, and an iron spoon which he held in his hand clattered
noisily to the floor.

"Now, Nina, what is the matter?"

"I am going to spend the day with you, Granddad, and probably the night
as well. You can give me a bed in a corner of this delightful
sitting-room. Is that breakfast? I wish you would serve it up; I am
starving."

"It's a very good breakfast, little Nina. Fried rabbit, done after a new
method. Bacon and eggs to follow, with a sauce of port wine. Olives and
sour claret for dessert. I know your taste, witch."

"I love olives," said Nina. "Sit at the table, Grand-dad, and let us
begin. By the way, when did you shave last?"

"Ha--ha, who have I to shave for now, my pretty Nina? Nobody cares for
the old man, nobody looks at him with eyes of admiration. Why should he
waste his money and his time over the barbarous rite of shaving? Nature
has her way with the old man now, sweet witch."

"Nature doesn't improve you, Grand-dad. You require the refining touches
of art. Your beard is unkempt, your hair too long. You shall visit the
barber after we have concluded our meal. It is distressing to mankind in
general to behold a spectacle like you. You owe a duty to the world at
large. You must visit the barber."

"Chut--chut! What a witch it is! Why didn't it stay at home, and not
worry the old man?"

"Serve up the breakfast, Grand-dad, and believe in the salutary nature
of your granddaughter's visitations."

The two sat down to their meal, and both ate for a time in unbroken
silence. After his third glass of sour claret, the old man spoke:

"How are you, Nina? You don't look up to much?"

"Would you be up to much if a fever consumed you day and night? Feel my
hand, Grand-dad."

The old man gripped the slender fingers, then flung them away.

"Good God! they burn!" he said. "Don't touch me, witch. You may have
contracted something catching."

"No, nothing that the old man can catch. Now, let us be pleasant, and
enjoy the day together."

"We can't. I am going to move to-day."

"You must stay here to-day; you can move tomorrow."

"Witch, how you order me. I won't be ordered. I shall move to-day."

"You have no idea of moving, either to-day or to-morrow. Don't talk
nonsense. You have had your breakfast. I will wash the things up. Go and
visit the barber."

The old man muttered and mumbled. Finally he tied a large crimson scarf
in a loose knot round his throat, shoved a soft felt hat on his head,
and donning a greasy and very old brown velvet cloak, he prepared to go
