
"Mrs. Flint," she said, "I have been talking to the two elder
Mainwaring girls; they are in the hall. No, Mrs. Mortlock, you can't
see Miss Primrose at present. The girls are in great trouble, for the
little one has gone away, and there seems to be a mystery about it
all. Your niece Sarah seems to be the last person who has seen the
child, Mrs. Flint, and, of course, Miss Primrose and Miss Jasmine want
to talk to her, and she had better go home with them. The friend they
live with, a Miss Egerton, left home this very afternoon to spend a
week in the country, and so the girls are quite defenceless, and have
nobody to consult. That being the case, I'm going back with them also
to their lodgings in a four-wheeler. Sarah Ann, go and fetch a
four-wheeler this instant, and don't stand gaping. Mind, a
four-wheeler, girl, and don't bring a hansom on no account near the
place. Yes, ladies, it's my duty to go with the poor orphans, and go I
will."

While Mrs. Dredge was speaking Mrs. Mortlock ceased to hold Miss
Slowcum's very thin hand. Miss Slowcum's face looked decidedly
jealous, for she would have dearly liked to have been herself in Mrs.
Dredge's interesting and sympathizing position. Mrs. Mortlock raised
her almost sightless eyes to the fat little woman's face, and remarked
in a slightly acid voice--

"I'm obliged to you, Mrs. Dredge, for thinking that in the moment of
trial the sight of me and a sympathizing squeeze from my hand would
have done my continual reader any harm. It's very good-natured of you
to go with the orphan girls, Mrs. Dredge, and I'm glad to think you've
just had the support of your chop to sustain you under the fatigue.
Please remember, Mrs. Dredge, that we lock up the house in this home
at ten o'clock, and no latch-keys allowed. Isn't that so, Mrs. Flint?"

"Under ordinary circumstances, quite so, ma'am," answered Mrs. Flint,
who would not have minded snubbing Miss Slowcum, but was anxious to
propitiate both the rich widows; "under ordinary circumstances that is
so, but in a dire moment like the present I think the ten minutes'
grace might be allowed to Mrs. Dredge's kind heart."

"Here's the four-wheeler!" exclaimed Mrs. Dredge.

"Good-bye, ladies. If I'm not in at ten minutes past ten don't look
for me until the morning."

When Mrs. Dredge, Primrose, Jasmine, and Poppy got back to the girls'
pretty sitting-room the good-natured little widow proved herself a
very practical friend. First of all, she listened carefully to Poppy's
account of all that had transpired that day. She then got Primrose to
tell her as much as possible about Daisy. All the child's distress and
nervousness and unaccountable unhappiness were related, and the sage
little woman shook her head several times over the narrative, and said
at last, in a very common-sense voice--

"It's as clear as a pikestaff to Jemima Dredge that that sweet little
child has been tampered with. Somebody has been frightening the bit of
a thing, Miss Primrose, and it's for you to find out who that somebody
is. As to where she's gone? Why, she has gone back to where she was
born, of course, and you and me will follow her by the first train in
the morning, my dear."

"She was taking care of a cheque of mine for seventeen pounds ten
shillings," exclaimed Primrose, "and in her little note she speaks of
the money being lost. I think nothing of the loss of the money beside
Daisy, but, Mrs. Dredge, Jasmine and I cannot afford even a
third-class ticket to Rosebury just at present."

"Tut, tut, my dear," said Mrs. Dredge, "what's the good of a full
purse except to share it? My poor husband Joshua was his name--we was
two J's, dear--he always said, 'Jemima, thank God the chandlery is
prospering. A full purse means light hearts, Jemima. We can shed
blessings with our means, Jemima.' Those was Joshua's words, Miss
Mainwaring, and I hear him now telling them to me from his grave. You
and me will go down to Rosebury in the morning, dear, and Miss
Jasmine will stay at home with Sarah Mary for company, for there's no
sense in waste, and one of you is quite enough to come."

While this conversation was going on Bridget knocked at the girls'
door, and presented Jasmine with a thick parcel, which had just
arrived for her by post. It was some of the manuscript, and the first
proofs of her story. The parcel came to hand at a sorrowful moment,
and Jasmine laid it on the sofa, made no comment about it, and did not
attempt to open it. Primrose scarcely raised her head from her hands,
and was not the least curious, but Poppy's eyes gleamed brightly, for
sharp Poppy guessed what the parcel contained, and she sincerely hoped
that whatever happened this story would prove a great success, and
that it would bring in so many gold coins to her young lady that she
would become not only rich herself, but able to pay back what she had
borrowed from her. For although Poppy was the soul of generosity, she
_did_ want her wages back.




CHAPTER XLII.

A NEW EMPLOYMENT.


At an early hour the next morning Mrs. Dredge and Primrose started for
Rosebury, and poor Jasmine and Poppy prepared to have a long and
lonely time by themselves. Poppy hoped that Jasmine would cheer up,
and look at that lovely printed story of hers, and perhaps read it
aloud to her; but poor Jasmine was really nearly broken-hearted, and
said once almost passionately--

"How can I look at it, Poppy, when I don't know where our little
darling is? Did she not share my secret? And she was so proud of me
and she always would believe I was a genius. I can't look at it,
Poppy--no, I can't; but if you like to open the manuscript, and read
what is printed of the story, why you may. Yes, I expect you will find
it exciting. Sit down and read it, Poppy, and I will go to the window
and look out. Oh, dear! oh, dear! Primrose promised to send me a
telegram when she got to Rosebury. Oh, what shall I do if I don't soon
hear some news of my darling little Daisy?"

"Seeing as I can't comfort you, Miss Jasmine, I may as well take to
reading the mysterious, lovely story," answered Poppy. "Maybe when
you're having your dinner bye-and-bye, miss, you won't object to me
telling you what I thinks of it."

"Only I shan't care in the least what you think to-day, dear Poppy,"
answered poor little Jasmine, in a tone of deep melancholy.

She went and stood by the window, and Poppy ensconced herself
comfortably on the sofa, and began to enjoy herself as best she could
under the circumstances.

In about an hour there came a tap at the door, and Arthur Noel came
in. Jasmine gave a little pleased exclamation when she saw him; then
she ran forward, took his hand in hers, and burst into tears.

"Daisy is lost," she said; "our sweet little Daisy, who loved you so
much, is lost."

"It's inferred that she's gone down with a single third to Rosebury,
sir," here interposed Poppy.

"Come and tell me all about it, Jasmine," said Noel, in his most
sympathizing tones. He led the poor little girl to the sofa, and,
sitting down by her, listened attentively to her story.

"But the Ellsworthys are in London," he said, when he heard that Daisy
had gone to them.

On hearing this news poor Jasmine burst into floods of fresh weeping.

"Oh, then she's sure to be quite lost!" she said. "Oh, Mr. Noel, if
you are in any sense a true friend, won't you try to find her?"

"Yes, Jasmine; I will never rest until I find her. I am glad I came in
to-day. I came to ask you to do something for me, but I find you want
my help instead. I will come here this evening, about the time your
sister is likely to be back, and I will then go and look for Daisy, in
case she is not found. Don't be frightened, Jasmine, I am quite sure
we shall soon get tidings of the dear little girl."

"And do you know," said Jasmine, who felt a little comforted, "that we
have not only lost Daisy, but all our quarter's money. It is most
mysterious. Primrose gave Daisy a check to take care of for her, and
Daisy says she has gone away because the cheque is lost. We have no
money now that the cheque is lost, except just what Primrose earns
from Mrs. Mortlock."

"There's a likelihood of some more earnings presently, Miss Jasmine,"
here interposed Poppy, in a cheerful voice; "there's a likelihood of a
good bit more money when this powerful and thrilling romance is
published."

"Your story, Jasmine?" said Noel, "and in type? Who did you get to
publish it, my dear child? Oh, you must let me read this."

"Another time, please, Mr. Noel. I don't think I could quite bear it
to-day," said Jasmine.

Noel looked at her earnestly.

"I wonder, Jasmine," he said, "even though you are in such trouble, if
you would be brave enough to help _me_, and to earn a little money to
day? I want you to do quite a simple thing, and something you will
probably enjoy. I have never read any of your romances, but I have
often noticed that you possess rather remarkable artistic tastes, and
that you have a very correct eye for the arrangement of color. I have
been struck with this even in this little room, and I happened to
mention my observations one day to a lady who is a friend of mine.
That lady is giving a dinner-party to-night, and she wants some one to
arrange the flowers on her table in as fresh and new a style as
possible. Will you come with me to her house now, and see what you can
do? She will provide you with the flowers and the glasses to put them
into, and you can arrange them on the table just as you like best. She
will give you a guinea for the work, and I think you will find it
light and pleasant."

Jasmine's eyes began to sparkle.

"Oh! at another time it would be delightful," she said.

"But don't you want a guinea very badly now? Don't you think you had
better put on your hat and come away with me, and try to earn it?"

"I will," said Jasmine, with sudden enthusiasm. "Oh, Mr. Noel, how
good you are! How I wish I had a brother, and that you were he!"

Noel took Jasmine to his friend's house, where the little girl began
by being almost frightened, but soon forgot herself in the strong
interest of her pleasant work. Noel was right when he said Jasmine had
true artistic instincts. Certainly, hers was untaught genius, but her
unerring taste came to her aid, and Mrs. Daintree's dinner-table never
looked prettier or fresher than when the little maiden had completed
her work. The room was bright and sunny, but Jasmine gave the table a
bower-like and cool effect, and she not only dressed the dinner-table
but placed flowers here and there about the room. Mrs. Daintree was
delighted, and asked the pretty little girl to come again to arrange a
dinner-table for her the following week.

With her golden sovereign and her shilling tucked tightly away in her
glove Jasmine did not feel altogether miserable as she went home; even
though Daisy might still be lost, those first earnings were sweet. She
rushed upstairs and told her tale to Poppy, who sympathized most
warmly with her. Very soon after her arrival a four-wheeler was heard
to draw up to the door, and Mrs. Dredge alone returned.

"I have left Primrose at Rosebury," she said; "we have made inquiries,
and there is no doubt a child resembling Daisy went down by the night
train yesterday. We have searched high and low, however, but cannot at
present get any trace of her. Don't look so pale, Jasmine, she must
soon be found. Primrose is staying with Miss Martineau, and they are
not leaving a stone unturned to find her. Most likely they have done
so by now. Don't cry, Jasmine; take example by your sister--she's a
fine plucky bit of a lass, and does not waste her time in tears when
there's something to be done."

"Yes, that's just it," said Jasmine; Primrose has got something to do,
but I haven't--I can do nothing to find my little darling! Oh, Mrs.
Dredge, are not you awfully frightened about her?"

"Tut, tut, my dear, not a bit of it! Of course, when a little lass
runs away all by herself there are most times difficulties in getting
trace of her, but don't you be in a way, for they won't last long."

Poor little Jasmine sighed, and all her deep depression returned. She
was soothed again, however, by the sight of Noel, who came in very
soon afterwards. He said he had seen the Ellsworthys, and meant to go
down to Rosebury by the night train.

"I'm pleased to hear it, young man," said Mrs. Dredge; "you're doing
just what my Joshua would have approved of had he been alive. Even
though Joshua was in the chandlery line he had a truly noble heart,
and one of his mottoes was that the strong should help the weak, and
if shoulders are made broad they should carry big burdens, so you go
down to Rosebury, young man, and prosper in your work."

Noel smiled.

"I will certainly do my best," he said; "I quite agree with your
husband's sentiments."

"Well, well, young man, Joshua would have liked to know you in his
day. Dear, how stupid I am! but I didn't rightly catch your name. What
are you pleased to call yourself, sir?"

"My name is Arthur Noel."

"Well, what a small world we live in; it was only to-day I heard talk
of you. When Miss Primrose and I were down at Rosebury we came across
a gentleman of the name of Danesfield, and he came straight up to Miss
Primrose and said he had had a letter from you which he had not been
able to answer, because he was away. He said a lot to Miss Primrose
about the letter you wrote him; it seems that somebody must have
stolen three five-pound notes, which Mr. Danesfield put into a closed
envelope, and gave Miss Primrose for a kind of emergency fund when
she left her home. The poor lassie turned as white as a sheet when he
talked to her. Well, young man, you look white enough yourself at the
present moment, but I'll tell you, now, what has struck me, that
whoever took the three five-pound notes helped himself or herself to
that cheque of Miss Primrose's, and that poor little Daisy knows about
it."

"I should not be the least surprised if you were right, Mrs. Dredge,"
answered Noel. "Well, I must go now if I want to catch my train.
Good-bye, Jasmine keep up your heart--expect good news soon, and get
all the orders you can for dressing dinner-tables."




CHAPTER XLIII.

IN THE FIELD.


Poor little Daisy, very faint and tired, and with a feeling of almost
despair in her little heart, presently crept through a gap in one of
the hedges, and sat down on the grass in a large field. She was so
foot-sore she could not walk another step; she was also terribly weak
from long fasting, and as she now had no hope at all of bringing
Primrose back her money, she felt disinclined to walk another step.

"I suppose I'll soon die," she said to herself. "I wonder if God will
take me to heaven? I know I was very selfish about the dungeon. I
might have gone to the dungeon, and dear Primrose would have had her
money, and she and Jasmine would not have starved; but Mr. Dove did so
terrify me I really had not courage. Please, dear Jesus, I had not
courage. I'm only a very weak, frightened little girl, and I gave Mr.
Dove Primrose's money, and now I can't get it back from him, and I
think my heart is broken. I know, Jesus, you are angry with me, but
please don't go on being angry; please forgive me, for I am all alone
now without Primrose and Jasmine, and I think I'll soon die, for I
feel so very weak. I didn't tell a lie, either, Jesus; I never told
any one about Mr. Dove and the sticky sweetmeats--no, though I am a
coward about the dungeon, I would not go so far as to break my word. I
often longed to tell the Prince, for I felt he would deliver me from
the ogre, but I couldn't tell a lie even to be saved. Please, Jesus,
forgive me for being such a cowardly little girl."

By this time the drizzling mist of the early morning had passed away,
the sun had come out, and the robins and thrushes in the hedge close
to Daisy began to sing. They poured out full notes of thrilling
sweetness and their music comforted the child, and she began to smile
very faintly to herself, and to hope that as God had let the sun come
out, and the birds sing, so He had forgiven her.

The poor little Pink began to mew loudly in her basket, and Daisy let
her out of her prison, and when kitty rubbed her soft head against her
little mistress's sleeve the child felt some fresh thrills of comfort.
She felt terribly disinclined to move, however, and was really more
weak and exhausted than absolutely hungry. The day wore on, and the
little girl and her cat remained unnoticed in their corner of the
large field. There was a right of way through the field, and
foot-passengers came and went, but Daisy in her sombre little black
dress failed to attract any attention. She was quite in the shade
under her hedge-row, and it is to be doubted if any one saw her. At
last from utter weariness she sank down on the ground and fell asleep.
The Pink curled herself up by her little mistress's side and slept
also. It was then that the sun, slowly travelling across the heavens,
found them out in their shady corner, and kissed them, and made
pussy's soft little grey coat shine. The child and the cat were thus
made visible, and attracted the attention of a woman who was walking
across the field with a market-basket on her arm. She came up at once
to examine the little group; then she bent down close, then she gave
an exclamation half of horror, half of delight, and then she took the
sleeping child up in her arms, and covered her with passionate kisses.

[Illustration: SHE CAME UP TO EXAMINE THE LITTLE GROUP. Palace B]

"Oh! my own little Miss Daisy--my own little darling precious lamb!
And is it thus you have come back to your poor old Hannah again!"

Nothing could have comforted Daisy more under present circumstances
than to find herself in her old nurse's arms. She quite gasped with
the joy and relief, and putting up her little hand to Hannah's face,
she stroked it fondly.

"Now, my darling, where have you come from? and what are you doing?
and--why, if that isn't the little Pink, I declare! Now, my pet, tell
me, have you all three come back to Rosebury again?"

"No, Hannah, I'm the only one who has come back. Oh Hannah, will you
please take me to our little cottage for a few hours--I should so like
to die there--I was born there, wasn't I, Hannah?"

"Yes, love, but you're not going to die there, nor nowhere else. I
can't take you back to the cottage, dearie, for it's let, and I'm not
living there. I've a little bit of a place of my own in the village of
Teckford and I keep a small shop, and don't do so bad. You must come
home now with me, darling. Oh, yes, you must--not a word must you say
against it; then, when you've rested, and have had some nice bread and
milk, you shall tell old Hannah your story; and if so be as you're in
any trouble, why, your old nurse Hannah will set her wits to work to
find a way out of it. Now, my darling, I'm going to carry you to my
cottage."

Daisy was certainly very weak. She tried to expostulate with
Hannah--she tried to say that her one and only duty was to try and get
tidings of Mrs. Ellsworthy's whereabouts, and then to follow her on
foot if necessary; but if the little spirit was willing, the flesh was
weak. The comfort of seeing her nurse again was too much for
Daisy--the knowledge that those were the very arms which had carried
her as a baby, and soothed her and tended her as a little child, was
quite too cheering to be resisted. Daisy made a valiant effort to say
