more or less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.

P. Henry. Speak, sirs; how was it?

Gadshill. We four set upon some dozen--

Fal. Sixteen, at least, my lord.

Gad. And bound them.

Peta. No, no, they were not bound.

Fal. You rogue, they were bound, every man of them; or I am a Jew,
else--an Ebrew Jew.

Gad. As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--

Fal. And unbound the rest; and then come in the other.

P. Henry. What! fought ye with them all?

Fal. All? I know not what ye call all; but if I fought not with fifty of
them, I am a bunch of radish: if there were not two or three and fifty
upon poor old Jack, then I am no two-legged creature.

P. Henry. Pray heaven, you have not murdered some of them.

Fal. Nay, that's past praying for; for I have peppered two of them; two I
am sure I have paid; two rogues in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal,
if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, and call me a horse. Thou knowest
my old ward; (he draws his sword and stands if about to fight) here I lay,
and thus I bore my point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--

P. Henry. What! four? Thou saidst but two even now.

Fal. Four, Hal; I told thee four.

Poins. Ay, ay, he said four.

Fal. These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me. I made no more
ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.

P. Henry. Seven? Why, there were but four, even now.

Fal. In buckram?

Poins. Ay, four, in buckram suits.

Fal. Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.

P. Henry. Prithee, let him alone; we shall have more anon.

Fal. Dost thou hear me, Hal?

P. Henry. Ay, and mark thee, too, Jack.

Fal. Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine in buckram, that
I told thee of--

P. Henry. So, two more already.

Fal. Their points being broken, began to give me ground; but I followed me
close, came in foot and hand; and, with a thought, seven of the eleven I
paid.

P. Henry. O, monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!

Fal. But three knaves, in Kendal green, came at my back, and let drive at
me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.

P. Henry. These lies are like the father of them; gross as a mountain,
open, palpable. Why, thou clay-brained, nott-pated fool; thou greasy
tallow keech--

Fal. What! Art thou mad! Art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?

P. Henry. Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green, when it
was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand? Come, tell us your reason; what
sayest thou to this?

Poins. Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.

Fal. What, upon compulsion? No, were I at the strappado, or all the racks
in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on
compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no
man a reason on compulsion, I.

P. Henry. I'll be no longer guilty of this sin: this sanguine coward, this
horseback breaker, this huge hill of flesh--

Fal. Away! you starveling, you eel skin, you dried neat's tongue, you
stockfish! Oh for breath to utter what is like thee!--you tailor's yard,
you sheath, you bow case, you--

P. Henry. Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again; and when thou hast
tired thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.

Poins. Mark, Jack.

P. Henry. We two saw you four set on four; you bound them, and were
masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain tale shall put you down.
Then did we two set on you four, and with a word outfaced you from your
prize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here in the house.--And,
Falstaff, you carried yourself away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity,
and roared for mercy, and still ran and roared, as ever I heard a calf.
What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say
it was in fight! What trick, what device, what starting hole, canst thou
now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?

Poins. Come, let's hear, Jack. What trick hast thou now?

Fal. Why, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why, bear ye, my masters:
was it for me to kill the heir apparent? Should I turn upon the true
prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules; but beware
instinct; the lion will not touch the true prince; instinct is a great
matter; I was a coward on instinct. I shall think the better of myself and
thee during my life; I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.
But, lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap to the doors. Watch
to-night, pray to-morrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold; all the
titles of good-fellowship come to you! What! shall we be merry? Shall we
have a play extempore?

P. Henry. Content; and the argument shall be thy running away.

Fal. Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!

                         Shakespeare.-Henry IV, Part I, Act ii, Scene iv.


NOTES.--The lime is a fruit allied to the lemon, but smaller, and more
intensely sour.

The strappado was an instrument of torture by which the victim's limbs
were wrenched out of joint and broken.

Hercules is a hero of fabulous history, remarkable for his great strength
and wonderful achievements.



XCII. STUDIES. (332)

Sir Francis Bacon, 1561-1626. This eminent man was the youngest son of Sir
Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper of the seal in the early part of Elizabeth's
reign, and Anne Bacon, one of the most learned women of the time, daughter
of Sir Anthony Cooke. He was born in London, and educated at Cambridge. He
was a laborious and successful student, but even in his boyhood conceived
a great distrust of the methods of study pursued at the seats of
learning,--methods which he exerted his great powers to correct in his
maturer years. Much of his life was spent in the practice of law, in the
discharge of the duties of high office, and as a member of Parliament;
but, to the end of life, he busied himself with philosophical pursuits,
and he will be known to posterity chiefly for his deep and clear writings
on these subjects. His constant direction in philosophy is to break away
from assumption and tradition, and to be led only by sound induction based
on a knowledge of observed phenomena. His "Novum Organum" and "Advancement
of Learning" embody his ideas on philosophy and the true methods of
seeking knowledge.

Bacon rose to no very great distinction during the reign of Elizabeth;
but, under James I, he was promoted to positions of great honor and
influence. In 1618 he was made Baron of Verulam; and, three years later,
he was made Viscount of St. Albans. During much of his life, Bacon was in
pecuniary straits, which was doubtless one reason of his downfall; for, in
1621, he was accused of taking bribes, a charge to which he pleaded
guilty. His disgrace followed, and he passed the last years of his life in
retirement. Among the distinguished names in English literature, none
stands higher in his department than that of Francis Bacon.
###


Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use
for delight is in privateness, and retiring; for ornament, is in
discourse; and for ability, is in the judgment and disposition of
business; for expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of the
particulars, one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots and
marshaling of affairs, come best from those that are learned.

To spend too much time in studies, is sloth; to use them too much for
ornament, is affectation; to make judgment wholly by their rules, is the
humor of a scholar; they perfect nature and are perfected by experience--
for natural abilities are like natural plants, that need pruning by study;
and studies themselves do give forth directions too much at large, except
they be bounded in by experience. Crafty men contemn studies, simple men
admire them, and wise men use them, for they teach not their own use; but
that is a wisdom without them, and above them, won by observation.

Read not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted,
nor to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some books are
to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and
digested; that is, some books are to be read only in parts; others to be
read, but not curiously; and some few to be read wholly, and with
diligence and attention. Some books also may he read by deputy, and
extracts made of them by others; but that would be only in the less
important arguments, and the meaner sort of books; else distilled books
are like common distilled waters, flashy things.

Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact
man; and, therefore, if a man write little, he had need have a great
memory; if he confer little, he had need have a present wit; and if he
read little, he had need have much cunning, to seem to know that he doth
not. Histories make men wise; poets, witty; the mathematics, subtle;
natural philosophy, deep; moral philosophy, grave; logic and rhetoric,
able to contend.



XCIII. SURRENDER OF GRANADA. (334)

Sir Edward George Bulwer-Lytton, 1806-1873, was born in Norfolk County,
England. His father died when he was young; his mother was a woman of
strong literary tastes, and did much to form her son's mind. In 1844, by
royal license, he took the surname of Lytton from his mother's family.
Bulwer graduated at Cambridge. He began to publish in 1826, and his novels
and plays followed rapidly. "Pelham," "The Caxtons," "My Novel," "What
will he do with it?" and "Kenelm  Chillingly" are among the best known of
his numerous novels; and "The Lady of Lyons" and "Richelieu" are his most
successful plays. His novels are extensively read on the continent, and
have been translated into most of the languages spoken there. "Leila, or
the Siege of Granada," from which this selection is adapted, was published
in 1840.
###


Day dawned upon Granada, and the beams of the winter sun, smiling away the
clouds of the past night, played cheerily on the murmuring waves of the
Xenil and the Darro. Alone, upon a balcony commanding a view of the
beautiful landscape, stood Boabdil, the last of the Moorish kings. He had
sought to bring to his aid all the lessons of the philosophy he had
cultivated.

"What are we," thought the musing prince, "that we should fill the world
with ourselves--we kings? Earth resounds with the crash of my falling
throne; on the ear of races unborn the echo will live prolonged. But what
have I lost? Nothing that was necessary to my happiness, my repose:
nothing save the source of all my wretchedness, the Marah of my life!
Shall I less enjoy heaven and earth, or thought or action, or man's more
material luxuries of food or sleep--the common and the cheap desires of
all? Arouse thee, then, O heart within me! Many and deep emotions of
sorrow or of joy are yet left to break the monotony of existence. . . .
But it is time to depart." So saying, he descended to the court, flung
himself on his barb, and, with a small and saddened train, passed through
the gate which we yet survey, by a blackened and crumbling tower,
overgrown with vines and ivy; thence, amidst gardens now appertaining to
the convent of the victor faith, he took his mournful and unwitnessed way.

When he came to the middle of the hill that rises above those gardens, the
steel of the Spanish armor gleamed upon him, as the detachment sent to
occupy the palace marched over the summit in steady order and profound
silence. At the head of this vanguard, rode, upon a snow-white palfrey,
the Bishop of Avila, followed by a long train of barefooted monks. They
halted as Boabdil approached, and the grave bishop saluted him with the
air of one who addresses an infidel and inferior. With the quick sense of
dignity common to the great, and yet more to the fallen, Boabdil felt, but
resented not, the pride of the ecclesiastic. "Go, Christian," said he,
mildly, "the gates of the Alhambra are open, and Allah has bestowed the
palace and the city upon your king; may his virtues atone the faults of
Boabdil!" So saying, and waiting no answer, he rode on without looking to
the right or the left. The Spaniards also pursued their way.

The sun had fairly risen above the mountains, when Boabdil and his train
beheld, from the eminence on which they were, the whole armament of Spain;
and at the same moment, louder than the tramp of horse or the clash of
arms, was heard distinctly the solemn chant of Te Deum, which preceded the
blaze of the unfurled and lofty standards. Boabdil, himself still silent,
heard the groans and exclamations of his train; he turned to cheer or
chide them, and then saw, from his own watchtower, with the sun shining
full upon its pure and dazzling surface, the silver cross of Spain. His
Alhambra was already in the hands of the foe; while beside that badge of
the holy war waved the gay and flaunting flag of St. Iago, the canonized
Mars of the chivalry of Spain. At that sight the King's voice died within
him; he gave the rein to his barb, impatient to close the fatal
ceremonial, and did not slacken his speed till almost within bowshot of
the first ranks of the army.

Never had Christian war assumed a more splendid and imposing aspect. Far
as the eye could reach, extended the glittering and gorgeous lines of that
goodly power, bristling with sunlit spears and blazoned banners; while
beside, murmured, and glowed, and danced, the silver and laughing Xenil,
careless what lord should possess, for his little day, the banks that
bloomed by its everlasting course. By a small mosque halted the flower of
the army. Surrounded by the archpriests of that mighty hierarchy, the
peers and princes of a court that rivaled the Rolands of Charlemagne, was
seen the kingly form of Ferdinand himself, with Isabel at his right hand,
and the highborn dames of Spain, relieving, with their gay colors and
sparkling gems, the sterner splendor of the crested helmet and polished
mail. Within sight of the royal group, Boabdil halted, composed his aspect
so as best to conceal his soul, and, a little in advance of his scanty
train, but never in mien and majesty more a king, the son of Abdallah met
his haughty conqueror.

At the sight of his princely countenance and golden hair, his comely and
commanding beauty, made more touching by youth, a thrill of compassionate
admiration ran through that assembly of the brave and fair. Ferdinand and
Isabel slowly advanced to meet their late rival,--their new subject; and,
as Boabdil would have dismounted, the Spanish king placed his hand upon
his shoulder. "Brother and prince," said he, "forget thy sorrows; and may
our friendship hereafter console thee for reverses, against which thou
hast contended as a hero and a king--resisting man, but resigned at length
to God."

Boabdil did not affect to return this bitter but unintentional mockery of
compliment, He bowed his head, and remained a moment silent; then
motioning to his train, four of his officers approached, and, kneeling
beside Ferdinand, proffered to him, upon a silver buckler, the keys of the
city. "O king!" then said Boabdil, "accept the keys of the last hold which
has resisted the arms of Spain! The empire of the Moslem is no more. Thine
are the city and the people of Granada; yielding to thy prowess, they yet
confide in thy mercy." "They do well," said the king; "our promises shall
not be broken. But since we know the gallantry of Moorish cavaliers, not
to us, but to gentler hands, shall the keys of Granada be surrendered."

Thus saying, Ferdinand gave the keys to Isabel, who would have addressed
some soothing flatteries to Boabdil, but the emotion and excitement were
too much for her compassionate heart, heroine and queen though she was;
and when she lifted her eyes upon the calm and pale features of the
fallen monarch, the tears gushed from them irresistibly, and her voice
died in murmurs. A faint flush overspread the features of Boabdil, and
there was a momentary pause of embarrassment, which the Moor was the first
to break.

"Fair queen," said he, with mournful and pathetic dignity, "thou canst
read the heart that thy generous sympathy touches and subdues; this is thy
last, nor least glorious conquest. But I detain ye; let not my aspect
cloud your triumph. Suffer me to say farewell." "Farewell, my brother,"
replied Ferdinand, "and may fair fortune go with you! Forget the past!"
Boabdil smiled bitterly, saluted the royal pair with profound and silent
reverence, and rode slowly on, leaving the army below as he ascended the
path that led to his new principality beyond the Alpuxarras. As the trees
snatched the Moorish cavalcade from the view of the king, Ferdinand
ordered the army to recommence its march; and trumpet and cymbal presently
sent their music to the ear of the Moslems.

Boabdil spurred on at full speed, till his panting charger halted at the
little village where his mother, his slaves, and his faithful wife,
Amine--sent on before--awaited him. Joining these, he proceeded without
delay upon his melancholy path. They ascended that eminence which is the
pass into the Alpuxarras. From its height, the vale, the rivers, the
spires, and the towers of Granada broke gloriously upon the view of the
little band. They halted mechanically and abruptly; every eye was turned
to the beloved scene. The proud shame of baffled warriors, the tender
memories of home, of childhood, of fatherland, swelled every heart, and
gushed from every eye.

Suddenly the distant boom of artillery broke from the citadel, and rolled
along the sunlit valley and crystal river. A universal wail burst from the
exiles; it smote,--it overpowered the heart of the ill-starred king, in
vain seeking to wrap himself in Eastern pride or stoical philosophy. The
tears gushed from his eyes, and he covered his face with his hands. The
band wound slowly on through the solitary defiles; and that place where
the king wept is still called The Last Sigh of the Moor.


NOTES.--Granada was the capital of an ancient Moorish kingdom of the same
name, in the southeastern part of Spain. The Darro River flows through it,
emptying into the Xenil (or Jenil) just outside the city walls. King
Ferdinand of Spain drove out the Moors, and captured the city in 1492.

Marah. See Exodus xv. 23.

Avila is an episcopal city in Spain, capital of a province of the same
name.

The Te Deum is an ancient Christian hymn, composed by St. Ambrose; it is
so called from the first Latin words, "Te Deum laudamus," We praise thee,
O God.

Mars, in mythology, the god of war.

The Alhambra is the ancient palace of the Moorish kings, at Granada.

Allah is the Mohammedan name for the Supreme Being.

Roland was a nephew of Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, emperor of the
West and king of France. He was one of the most famous knights of the
chivalric romances.

The Alpuxarras is a mountainous region in the old province of Granada,
where the Moors were allowed to remain some time after their subjugation
by Ferdinand.



XCIV. HAMLET'S SOLILOQUY. (339)

To be, or not to be; that is the question:--
Whether 't is nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them? To die,--to sleep,--
No more: and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to,--'t is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die,--to sleep:--
To sleep! perchance to dream:--ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,--
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns,--puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action.
                             Shakespeare.--Hamlet, Act iii, Scene i.



XCV. GINEVRA. (340)

Samuel Rogers, 1763-1855, was the son of a London banker, and, in company
with his father, followed the banking business for some years. He began to
write at an early age, and published his "Pleasures of Memory," perhaps
his most famous work, in 1792. The next year his father died, leaving him
an ample fortune. He now retired from business and established himself in
an elegant house in St. James's Place. This house was a place of resort
for literary men during fifty years. In 1822 he published his longest
poem, "Italy," after which he wrote but little. He wrote with care,
spending, as he said, nine years on the "Pleasures of Memory," and sixteen
on "Italy." "His writings are remarkable for elegance of diction, purity
of taste, and beauty of sentiment." It is said that he was very agreeable
in conversation and manners, and benevolent in his disposition; but he was
addicted to ill-nature and satire in some of his criticisms.
###


  If thou shouldst ever come by choice or chance
To Modena,--where still religiously
Among her ancient trophies, is preserved
Bologna's bucket (in its chain it hangs
Within that reverend tower, the Guirlandine),--
Stop at a palace near the Reggio gate,
Dwelt in of old by one of the Orsini.
Its noble gardens, terrace above terrace,
And rich in fountains, statues, cypresses,
Will long detain thee; through their arche'd walks,
Dim at noonday, discovering many a glimpse
Of knights and dames such as in old romance,
And lovers such as in heroic song,--
Perhaps the two, for groves were their delight,
That in the springtime, as alone they sate,
Venturing together on a tale of love.
Read only part that day.--A summer sun
Sets ere one half is seen; but, ere thou go,
Enter the house--prithee, forget it not--
And look awhile upon a picture there.

  'T is of a lady in her earliest youth,
The very last of that illustrious race,
Done by Zampieri--but by whom I care not.
He who observes it, ere he passes on,
Gazes his fill, and comes and comes again,
That he may call it up when far away.

  She sits, inclining forward as to speak,
Her lips half-open, and her finger up,
As though she said, "Beware!" her vest of gold,
Broidered with flowers, and clasped from head to foot,
An emerald stone in every golden clasp;
And on her brow, fairer than alabaster,
A coronet of pearls. But then her face,
So lovely, yet so arch, so full of mirth,
The overflowings of an innocent heart,--
It haunts me still, though many a year has fled,
Like some wild melody!

                          Alone it hangs
Over a moldering heirloom, its companion,
An oaken chest, half-eaten by the worm,
But richly carved by Antony of Trent
With scripture stories from the life of Christ;
A chest that came from Venice, and had held
The ducal robes of some old ancestors--
That, by the way, it may be true or false--
But don't forget the picture; and thou wilt not,
When thou hast heard the tale they told me there.

  She was an only child; from infancy
The joy, the pride, of an indulgent sire;
The young Ginevra was his all in life,
Still as she grew, forever in his sight;
And in her fifteenth year became a bride,
Marrying an only son, Francesco Doria,
Her playmate from her birth, and her first love.

  Just as she looks there in her bridal dress,
She was all gentleness, all gayety,
Her pranks the favorite theme of every tongue.
But now the day was come, the day, the hour;
Now, frowning, smiling, for the hundredth time,
The nurse, that ancient lady, preached decorum:
And, in the luster of her youth, she gave Her hand,
with her heart in it, to Francesco.

  Great was the joy; but at the bridal feast,
When all sate down, the bride was wanting there.
Nor was she to be found! Her father cried,
" 'Tis but to make a trial of our love!"
And filled his glass to all; but his hand shook,
And soon from guest to guest the panic spread.
'T was but that instant she had left Francesco,
Laughing and looking back and flying still,
Her ivory tooth imprinted on his finger.
But now, alas! she was not to be found;
Nor from that hour could anything be guessed,
But that she was not!--Weary of his life,
Francesco flew to Venice, and forthwith
Flung it away in battle with the Turk.
Orsini lived; and long was to be seen
An old man wandering as in quest of something,
Something he could not find--he knew not what.
When he was gone, the house remained a while
Silent and tenantless--then went to strangers.

  Full fifty years were past, and all forgot,
When on an idle day, a day of search
'Mid the old lumber in the gallery,
That moldering chest was noticed; and 't was said
By one as young, as thoughtless as Ginevra,
"Why not remove it from its lurking place?"
'T was done as soon as said; but on the way
It burst, it fell; and lo! a skeleton,
With here and there a pearl, an emerald stone,
A golden clasp, clasping a shred of gold.
All else had perished, save a nuptial ring,
And a small seal, her mother's legacy,
Engraven with a name, the name of both,
"Ginevra."---There then had she found a grave!
Within that chest had she concealed herself,
Fluttering with joy, the happiest of the happy;
When a spring lock, that lay in ambush there,
Fastened her down forever!

NOTES.--The above selection is part of the poem, "Italy." Of the story
Rogers says, "This story is, I believe, founded on fact; though the time
and place are uncertain. Many old houses in England lay claim to it."

Modena is the capital of a province of the same name in northern Italy.

Bologna's bucket. This is affirmed to be the very bucket which Tassoni, an
Italian poet, has celebrated in his mock heroics as the cause of a war
between Bologna and Modena.

Reggio is a city about sixteen miles northwest of Modena.

The Orsini. A famous Italian family in the Middle Ages.

Zampieri, Domenichino (b. 1581, d. 1641), was one of the most celebrated
of the Italian painters.



XCVI. INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES. (344)

John Caldwell Calhoun, 1782-1850. This great statesman, and champion of
southern rights and opinions, was born in Abbeville District, South
Carolina. In the line of both parents, he was of Irish Presbyterian
descent. In youth he was very studious, and made the best use of such
opportunities for education as the frontier settlement afforded. He
graduated at Yale College in 1804, and studied law at Litchfield,
Connecticut. In 1808 he was elected to the Legislature of South Carolina;
and, three years later, he was chosen to the National House of
Representatives. During the six years that he remained in the House, he
took an active and prominent part in the stirring events of the time. In
1817 he was appointed Secretary of War, and held the office seven years.
From 1825 to 1832 he was Vice President of the United States. He then
resigned this office, and took his seat as senator from South Carolina. In
1844 President Tyler called him to his Cabinet as Secretary of State; and,
in 1845, he returned to the Senate, where he remained till his death.
During all his public life Mr. Calhoun was active and outspoken. His
earnestness and logical force commanded the respect of those who differed
