
"We shall go on for another four hours. After that we shall hide up in
a wood, and sleep till the afternoon. Then it will depend upon you. If
you can sit your horse, we shall ride on through Anicull. If not, we
must wait till it gets dark again, and then go on as we are now. Are
you comfortable, child?"

"Very comfortable, Dick."

They were talking in English now, for the first time since they
started.

"I have almost forgotten how to talk English," she said. "We white
girls always used to talk it, when we were together, so as not to
forget it; and since the last one went, three years ago, I have always
talked it to myself, for a bit, before going to sleep, so as to keep
it up; but it does not come anything like so easy as the other. Still,
I like talking it to you. It almost seems as if I were at home again.
You see, I have never heard a man talk English, since I was carried
away. Even now, I can hardly believe this is not a happy dream, and
that I shall not wake up, presently, and find myself a slave girl in
the harem."

"It is pleasant to me to talk English, too," Dick said, "though it is
only a few months since I last spoke it. Now, the best thing you can
do is to try and get off to sleep again. When we stop you shall have
breakfast. I am sure you must want something. You have had nothing
since you ate a mouthful or two, in my room, before starting."

"Oh, I have slept hours and hours!" she said. "I shall not want to
sleep any more."

However, before long the easy motion lulled her off again, and she did
not wake until, at about four o'clock in the morning, they entered a
wood that was, as Dick supposed, some three or four miles from
Anicull.

"Well, how do you feel now?" Dick asked, as he set her on her feet.

"I feel stiff," she said; "but that will soon wear off, when I have
run about a little. Oh, how tired you must be, after carrying me all
these hours!"

"There has not been much to hold," Dick said with a laugh, "especially
since we started the last time. Before that, you were so dead asleep
that I did have to hold you; but, you see, you nestled up more
comfortably when we changed horses, and needed very little support
since then."

"Now, what can I do?" she asked, with a little laugh. "Please order me
to do something. I am your slave, you know, and I want to be helping
you."

"Well, then, I command you to aid me to gather some sticks for a fire.
We have nothing to cook, but it will be cheerful, and the air is
cool."

They picked up sticks, while Surajah and Ibrahim loosened the girths
of the horses, took off their bridles, and poured out another feed
from the bag of grain they had brought with them. In a few minutes a
fire was blazing, and the wallet of provisions brought out.

"I wish I had a cup of coffee to offer you, Annie," Dick said, as he
poured her out some wine and water, "but we must wait, for that, until
we get down to Tripataly."

"I have forgotten all about coffee, Dick, and what it tastes like. The
white girls used to talk about it, and say how they longed for a cup.
It seems, to me, funny to drink anything hot. I have never tasted
anything but water, that I can remember, until you gave me that wine
yesterday."

"It is very nice, and very refreshing. There is another drink that is
coming into fashion. It is called tea. I have tasted it a few times,
but I don't like it as well as coffee, and it is much more expensive."

"The sultan says that all the English get drunk, and there used to be
pictures of them on the walls. They used to make me so angry."

"I don't say that no English get drunk, Annie, because there is no
doubt that some do. But it is very far from being true of the great
proportion of them. Tippoo only says it to excite the people against
us, because, now that he has made them all Mohammedans, they cannot
drink wine--at any rate, openly. When I bought these two bottles, the
trader made a great mystery over it, and if I had not given him a sign
he understood, and which made him believe that I was a Hindoo and not
a Mussulman, he would not have admitted that he kept it at all. He did
say so, at first, for I have no doubt he thought that, as I was an
officer of the Palace, it was a snare, and that if he had admitted he
had wine I should have reported him, and it would have served as an
excuse for his being fined, and perhaps having all his goods
confiscated. When I made the sign that an old Hindoo had taught me,
his manner changed directly, and he took me to the back of his little
shop, and produced the wine. I told him I wanted it for medicine, and
that was quite true, for I thought it was a drug you were very likely
to need, on your journey."

"How much farther have we to ride?" she asked, after a pause.

"Only about thirty-five miles--that is to say, it is only that
distance to the frontier. There is a road that is rather more direct,
but it passes through Oussoor, a large town, which we had better
avoid. It is not more than fifty miles from the frontier to Tripataly,
but once across the line we can take matters easily, and stop whenever
you get tired."

"It will be all very strange to me, Dick. I sha'n't mind it, as long
as you are with me, but it will be dreadful when you go. I am afraid
your mother won't like me. You see, I know nothing of English ways,
and I am oh! so ignorant. I cannot even read--at least, very little.
One of the girls used to teach me, from a book she had when she was
carried off. It was a Bible--she used to tell me stories out of it.
But one day they found it, and she was beaten, very much, for
venturing to have it. I am afraid I have quite forgotten even my
letters; but she and the other girls used to teach me about religion,
and told me I must never forget that I was a Christian, whatever they
might do to me, and I was to say my prayers every night after I lay
down, and every morning before I got up. Of course, I have always done
it."

"You need not be afraid of my mother, Annie. She is very kind, and I
am sure she will take to you very much, and will be very glad that I
have brought you to Tripataly; for, you see, she has no girls of her
own. She will teach you to read and write, and if we go back to
England, I dare say you will go to school for a time, so as to learn
things like other girls."

"I can work very nicely," she said. "The ladies of the harem all used
to say that."

"Well, you will find that very useful, no doubt."

"And what else is there to learn?" she asked.

"No end of things, Annie--at least, there are no end of things for
boys to learn. I do not know anything about girls. But, of course, you
will have to get to know something of history and geography."

"What is geography, Dick?"

"Well, geography is where countries and places are. For instance, you
know something of the geography of India, without ever having learnt
it. You know that Madras and the Carnatic lie to the east, and
Travancore to the southwest, and Malabar to the west, and the Mahratta
country and the Nizam's dominions to the north. Well, that is the
geography of this part of the country--that and the names of the towns
and rivers. In the same way, there are a lot of nations in Europe, and
you want to know all about them, and where they lie with respect to
each other, and the names of their principal towns. Then there are
America, and Africa, and Asia, and all the countries in them. If you
don't know about these things, you can't follow what people are
talking about."

"And did you like learning geography, Dick?" she asked, a little
anxiously.

"Well no, I can't say that I did, Annie. I think I used to hate
geography. It was very hard to remember where all the places were, and
what rivers they stood on. I know very little about it now, except the
principal towns and places. But then, I never was very fond of
learning anything. I was a very stupid boy, at school."

"Oh, I am sure you could not have been that, Dick," she said
confidently.

"I was indeed, Annie. I think the only thing I could do well was
fighting. I was a beggar to fight--not because I used to quarrel with
fellows, but because it made me hard and tough, and my mother thought
that it would make me more fit to carry out this search for my
father."

"What did you fight with--swords?" Annie asked.

Dick laughed.

"No, no, Annie, when we quarrel in England we fight with our fists."

"What is a fist? I never heard of that weapon."

"That is a fist, Annie. You see, it is hard enough to knock a fellow
down, though it does not very often do that; but it hurts him a bit,
without doing him any harm, except that it may black his eyes or puff
up his face for a day or two--and no boy minds that. It accustoms one
to bear pain, and is a splendid thing for teaching a boy to keep his
temper, and I believe it is one reason why the English make such good
soldiers. It is a sort of science, you see, and one learns it just as
people here learn to be good swordsmen. I had lessons, when I was
twelve years old, from a little man who used to be a champion
lightweight--that is, a man of not more than a certain weight."

Annie looked doubtful for a minute, and then exclaimed:

"Ah, yes, I understand now. That is how it is you came to our help so
quickly and bravely, when the tiger burst in."

"I daresay it had something to do with it," Dick said, with a smile.
"There is no doubt that boxing, as we call it, does make you quick.
There is not much time to waste in thinking how you are to stop a
blow, and to return it at the same moment. One gets into the habit of
deciding at once what is the best thing to be done; and I have no
doubt that I should not have seen, at once, that one must cut through
the netting, run to the window, jump on to Surajah's shoulders, and
fire at the tiger, unless I had been sharpened up by boxing. I only
say I suppose that, because there were, no doubt, hundreds of men
looking on who had pluck enough to face the tiger, and who would have
gladly done the thing that we did, if the idea had occurred to them.
The idea did not occur to them, you see, and I have no doubt that it
was just owing to that boxing that I thought of it. So you see, Annie,
it was, in a way, the fights I had with boys at Shadwell--which is the
part of London where I lived--that saved you, and perhaps half a dozen
ladies of the sultan's harem, from being killed by that tiger.

"Now, I should advise you to walk about the wood for at least an hour,
to get rid of your stiffness. The longer you walk, the better. When
you have tired yourself, come back here. By that time, I daresay you
will be ready for another sleep. We will start about three o'clock,
and shall cross the frontier before it gets quite dark. Once across,
we can camp comfortably where we like, or put up at a village, if we
should light upon one.

"I should not go far away from here," he went on, as the girl at once
rose and prepared to start. "Very likely the wood may get thicker,
farther in, and you might lose your way, or come across a snake; so I
should not go far out of sight. The great thing is to keep moving. It
is getting broad daylight, now."

As soon as Annie had started, Dick lay down.

"I feel dog tired, Surajah. This right arm of mine is so stiff that I
can hardly lift it. I did not feel it at the time, and her weight was
nothing, but I certainly feel it now."

"You have a good sleep, Dick. Ibrahim and I will keep watch, by
turns."

"I don't think there is any occasion for that," Dick said. "No one is
likely to come into the wood."

"Not very likely," Surajah agreed; "but a body of travellers might
turn in here, for a halt in the middle of the day, and it would look
strange were they to find two of the Palace officers, and their
attendants, all fast asleep."

"They would only think we came in for a rest, a short time before they
did," Dick said drowsily. "Still, if you don't mind, perhaps it would
be best."

In two minutes, Dick was sound asleep.

"'Now, Ibrahim, you lie down," Surajah said. "I will call you in three
hours."

In half an hour Annie returned. She looked pitifully at Dick, and then
seated herself by Surajah.

"He must be tired," she said. "It was too bad of me, letting him carry
me like that all night. I thought so, over and over again, when he
believed I was fast asleep, but I knew that it was of no use asking
him to let me ride for a bit.

"You don't mind my sitting here for a little, do you? I am going away
again, presently. I only came back, so soon, because I thought he
might wonder what had become of me, if I did not. I could have gone on
walking for a long time. It was very hard work at first, for my back
ached dreadfully, and every step hurt me so, it was as much as I could
do to keep on walking; but gradually it got better, and at last I had
a long run, and after that I scarcely felt it.

"How long have you known him, Surajah?" and she nodded towards Dick.

"It is about two years and a half since he came to Tripataly, and I
have seen a great deal of him, ever since. I love him very much. He is
always the same. He never seems to get angry, and is kind to
everyone."

"Did he fight when he was with the army?"

"Not much. He was one of the general's own officers, and used to ride
with the others behind him. He fought in the battle before
Seringapatam, for the general and every one else had to fight, then."

"How is it you come to be always with him?" she asked.

"It first began when we went out on a scouting expedition together,
before the English army went up the ghauts. We volunteered to find
out, if we could, which way the sultan's army was going. We went
through a good deal of danger together, and some hard fighting, and
the Sahib was pleased with me; and since then we have always been
together."

"Tell me about that, Surajah?"

Surajah related the story of their capture and escape, of their making
their way through the fort, and the subsequent pursuit, and their
defence of the ruined hut. Annie listened almost breathlessly.

"How I should like to have been with you," she said, when he finished.
"At least, I think I should have liked it. I should have been
dreadfully in the way, but I could have sat down in the hut and loaded
the guns, while you were both fighting. You could have shown me how to
do it. How brave of you both to have fought fifty or sixty men!"

"It was not so very brave," Surajah said. "We knew we should be
killed, if they took us. There is nothing brave in doing your best,
when you know that. But it was not so much the fighting as arranging
things, and he did all that, and I only carried out his orders. He
always seemed to know exactly what was best to be done, and it was
entirely his doing, our getting through the fort, and taking to the
hut, and making the loopholes, and blocking up the windows; just as it
was his doing, entirely, that we killed that tiger. Whatever he says
is sure to be right, and when he tells me to do a thing I do it
directly, for I trust him entirely, and there is no need for me to
think at all. If he had told me to go up to the sultan and shoot him,
in the middle of his officers, I should have done it, though they
would have cut me in pieces a minute afterwards."

"I will go away again, now," Annie said, getting up. "He told me to
keep on walking about, and he would not like it if he were to wake up
and find me sitting here."

And she got up and strolled away again. By the time she returned,
Surajah had lain down to sleep, and Ibrahim was on watch. Annie was,
by this time, tired enough to be ready for sleep again, and, wrapping
herself in a rug, she lay down at a short distance from the others.

It was two o'clock when she awoke, and she sprang to her feet as she
saw Dick and Surajah standing by the fire, talking.

"I was going to wake you soon," Dick said, as she joined them, "for we
must have another meal before we start. I hope you feel all the
better, after your walk and sleep?"

"Ever so much better. I scarcely feel stiff at all, and shall be ready
to ride, as soon as you like. How do you feel, Dick?"

"Oh, I am all right, Annie. I was all right before, though I did feel
I wanted a sleep badly; and you see I have been having a long one, for
I only woke up ten minutes ago. I own, though, that I should like a
good wash. I don't suppose I can look dirty through this stain, but I
certainly feel so."

"There is a pool," she said, "a few hundred yards away there, on the
right. I found it the second time I went away, and I did enjoy a
wash."

"I thought you were looking wonderfully tidy," Dick said, smiling.
"Well, I will go there at once. I shall feel a new man, after a bath."

"I will come with you," Surajah said--for he had learned to speak a
good deal of English, during his companionship with Dick.

They returned in half an hour. Ibrahim had warmed up some of the
chupatties, over the ashes, and they all thoroughly enjoyed their
meal. The horses were saddled, and were taken to the pool for a good
drink.

Then Annie was helped into her saddle, and they started again. They
rode at a canter to Anicull, their badges of office securing them from
any questioning from the soldiers at the guard houses, when they
entered and left the town.

"I don't know whether there is any post established at the frontier,"
Dick said, as Annie, who had ridden behind with Ibrahim as they passed
through the town, took her place again between him and Surajah. "I
have no fear that they will be erecting a fort, for after our
capturing Bangalore and the hill fortresses, they will know very well
that nothing they could build on the flat would be of the slightest
use in stopping an army advancing by this line. Still, there may be a
guard placed there.

"How do you think we had better get past, Surajah? We have still got
the order to the governors of forts, and it is likely enough that the
officer in charge may not be able to read. Very few of those we met
before were able to do so. The sight of the sultan's seal at the
bottom was quite enough for them, and I should think it would suffice
to pass us here. Still, it would look suspicious, our leaving the the
country altogether, and we must give some explanation if they ask us."

"I might say that we are charged with a mission to the English
commander at Kistnagherry."

"That might do, Surajah. The fort is only eight or ten miles on the
other side of the frontier, and we might very well be sent on some
message. A complaint of some of the villagers, that their rights have
not been respected as agreed by the treaty, or that they have been
robbed by men from this side of the frontier--there are plenty of
things about which Tippoo might be sending a message to Kistnagherry.
The worst of it is that Tippoo has not given us a mission, and I do
hate your having to say what is not true."

Surajah was not so particular, and he replied:

"Well, he has given us a mission to visit the hill forts, and as
Kistnagherry is a hill fort, it is not a very great stretch to include
it."

Dick laughed.

"That is ingenious, Surajah. Anyhow, I don't see any better excuse for
crossing the frontier, and so we must make the best of it; but I hope
we sha'n't be asked at all."

"I think, if I say we are going to Kistnagherry, and then show
Tippoo's order and seal, that will be sufficient; and the story will
be quite true, for we shall go by Kistnagherry, as the road passes
close to the fortress."

"Yes, that will be quite true, Surajah, and the officers are not
likely to ask any further questions.

"How are you getting on, Annie?"

"Oh, much better than I did yesterday," she said. "I would much rather
not halt, until we are across the frontier. I am getting accustomed to
the motion now, and am not at all afraid of falling off. I dare say I
shall be rather stiff, when we halt, but that will not matter, then."

The sun was just setting when they arrived at a newly-erected house,
round which ten or twelve tents were arranged. An officer came out of
the house as they approached. He salaamed on seeing two officials of
the Palace, wearing the emblems of the rank of colonels. Surajah
returned the usual Moslem salutation.

"We are going to Kistnagherry," he said. "Here is the sultan's order."

The officer glanced at the seal, placed it to his forehead, and then
stood aside.

"Will you return tonight, my lord? I ask that I may give orders to the
sentries."

"No; there is no chance of our being able to be back before morning."

He touched his horse, and then trotted on again. Not a word was
spoken, until they had gone a few hundred yards, and then Dick checked
his horse, and, as Annie came alongside, held out his hand and said:

"Thank God, Annie, that we have got you safely back onto English
territory."



Chapter 17: Back At Tripataly.


Annie's lips moved, as Dick announced that they had crossed the Mysore
boundary, but no sound came from them. He saw her eyes close, and she
reeled in the saddle.

"Hold her, Surajah," Dick exclaimed, "or she will fall."

Leaning over, Surajah caught her by the shoulder; and Dick, leaping to
the ground, stopped her horse, and, lifting her from the saddle,
seated her upon a bank and supported her.

"Some water, Surajah!" he exclaimed.

Surajah poured a little water from the skin into the hollow of Dick's
hand, and the latter sprinkled the girl's face with it.

"I have not fainted," she murmured, opening her eyes, "but I turned
giddy. I shall be better, directly."

"Drink a little wine," Dick said.

Surajah poured some into a cup, but with an effort she sat up, and
pushed it from her.

"There is nothing the matter," she said. "Only, only" and she burst
suddenly into a passion of sobbing.

The spirit that she had shown, so long as there was danger, had
deserted her now that the peril had passed, and she was safe.

Dick looked at her, helplessly. A girl in tears was a creature wholly
beyond his experience, and he had no idea what he ought to do in such
an emergency. He therefore adopted what was, doubtless, the best
course, had he but known it, of letting her alone. After a time, the
violence of her crying abated, and only short sobs broke from her, as
she sat with her face hidden in her hands.

"That is right, Annie," he said, putting his hand on her shoulder. "It
is quite natural for you to cry, after the excitement and fatigue you
have gone through. You have been very brave, and have not said a word
of complaint today about your fatigue, although you must be
desperately tired. Now, try and pull yourself together. It is getting
dark already, and we ought to be moving on to Ryacotta, which cannot
be much more than a mile away. You shall ride in front of me, when we
get there."

"I would rather not," she said, getting up with a painful effort. "I
am awfully foolish, and I am so sorry that I broke down, but I felt so
delighted that I could not help it. You said we could camp, safely,
when we once got across the frontier. Would you mind doing so? For I
don't think I could go much farther."

"Certainly we can camp," Dick said cheerfully. "But we must get a
little bit farther from that post we passed. If they were to see a
