leaves of the camel bush; and this, to some extent, alleviated my
thirst.

"I determined at last that I would, in the first place, march to the
wells towards which we had been pressing, when the Dervishes came up to
us. They were nearly three miles south of the spot where the square had
stood. No doubt, Dervishes would be there; but, if discovered by them,
it was better to die so than of thirst.

"Half an hour before the sun sank, I started. No horsemen were in
sight, and if any were to come along, I could see them long before they
could notice me. Knowing the general direction, I was fortunate enough
to get sight of the palm grove which surrounded the wells, before
darkness set in.

"It lay about two miles away, and there were certainly moving objects
round it. I lay down until twilight had passed, and then went forward.
When within two or three hundred yards of the grove, I lay down again,
and waited. That the Dervishes would all go to sleep, however long I
might wait, was too much to hope for. They would be sure to sit and
talk, far into the night, of the events of the last three or four days.

"Shielding myself as well as I could, by the bushes, I crawled up until
I was in the midst of some camels, which were browsing. Here I stood
up, and then walked boldly into the grove. As I had expected, two or
three score of Dervishes were sitting in groups, talking gravely. They
had destroyed the Turks (as they always called the Egyptians, and their
infidel white leaders), but had suffered heavily themselves. The three
hundred Soudanese who had surrendered, and who had taken service with
the Mahdi, were but poor compensation for the losses they had suffered.

"'A year ago,' one old sheik said, 'I was the father of eight brave
sons. Now they have all gone before me. Four of them fell in the
assaults at El Obeid, two at Baria, and the last two have now been
killed. I shall meet them all again, in the abode of the blessed; and
the sooner the better, for I have no one left to care for.'

"Others had tales of the loss of relations and friends, but I did not
wait to listen further. Taking up a large water gourd, that stood empty
at the foot of one of the trees, I boldly walked to the well, descended
the rough steps at the water's edge, and drank till I could drink no
longer; and then, filling the gourd, went up again.

"No one noticed me. Had they looked at me they would have seen, even in
the darkness, the great patches down the front of the robe; but I don't
think anyone did notice me. Other figures were moving about, from group
to group, and I kept on through the grove, until beyond the trees. I
came out on the side opposite to that which I had entered, and, as I
expected, found some of the Dervish horses grazing among the bushes.

"No guard was placed over them, as they were too well trained to wander
far. I went out to them and chose the poorest, which happened to be
farther among the bushes than the others. I had thought the matter well
over. If a good horse were taken, there would be furious pursuit, as
soon as it was missed; and this might be soon, for the Arabs are
passionately fond of their favourite horses--more so than they are of
their families. While I had been waiting at the edge of the wood, more
than one had come out to pat and fondle his horse, and give it a
handful of dates. But a poor animal would meet with no such attention,
and the fact that he was missing was not likely to be discovered till
daylight. Probably, no great search would be made for it. The others
would ride on, and its owner might spend some hours in looking about,
thinking it had strayed away, and was lying somewhere among the bushes.

"I had no thought of trying to return to Khartoum. The wells were far
apart, and Dervish bands were certain to be moving along the line. It
seemed to me that El Obeid was the safest place to go to. True, it was
in the hands of the Mahdists, but doubtless many wounded would be
making their way there. Some, doubtless, would have wives and children.
Others might have come from distant villages, but these would all make
for the town, as the only place where they could find food, water, and
shelter.

"Riding till morning, I let the horse graze, and threw myself down
among the bushes, intending to remain there until nightfall. In the
afternoon, on waking from a long sleep, I sat up and saw, a quarter of
a mile away, a Dervish making his way along on foot, slowly and
painfully. This was the very chance I had hoped might occur. I got up
at once, and walked towards him.

"'My friend is sorely wounded,' I said.

"'My journey is well-nigh ended,' he said. 'I had hoped to reach El
Obeid, but I know that I shall not arrive at the well, which lies three
miles away. I have already fallen three times. The next will be the
last. Would that the bullet of the infidel had slain me, on the spot!'

"The poor fellow spoke with difficulty, so parched were his lips and
swollen his tongue. I went to the bush, where I had left the gourd,
half full of water. The man was still standing where I had left him,
but when he saw the gourd in my hand he gave a little cry, and tottered
feebly towards me.

"'Let my friend drink,' I said. I held the gourd to his lips. 'Sip a
little, first,' I said. 'You can drink your fill, afterwards.'

"'Allah has sent you to save me,' he said; and after two or three gulps
of water, he drew back his head. 'Now I can rest till the sun has set,
and then go forward as far as the well, and die there.'

"'Let me see your wound,' I said. 'It may be that I can relieve the
pain, a little.'

"He had been shot through the body, and it was a marvel to me how he
could have walked so far; but the Arabs, like other wild creatures,
have a wonderful tenacity of life. I aided him to the shelter of the
thick bush, then I let him have another and longer drink, and bathed
his wound with water. Tearing off a strip from the bottom of his robe,
I bound it round him, soaking it with water over the wound. He had been
suffering more from thirst than from pain, and he seemed stronger,
already.

"'Now,' I said, 'you had better sleep.'

"'I have not slept since the last battle,' he said. 'I started as soon
as it was dark enough for me to get up, without being seen by the
Turks. I have been walking ever since, and dared not lie down. At
first, I hoped that I might get to the town where my wife lived, and
die in my own house. But that hope left me, as I grew weaker and
weaker, and I have only prayed for strength enough to reach the well,
to drink, and to die there.'

"'Sleep now,' I said. 'Be sure that I will not leave you. Is it not our
duty to help one another? When the heat is over, we may go on. I have a
horse, here, which you shall ride. How far is it from the well to El
Obeid?'

"'It is four hours' journey, on foot.'

"'Good! Then you shall see your wife before morning. We will stop at
the well to give my horse a good drink; and then, if you feel well
enough to go on, we will not wait above an hour.'

"'May Allah bless you!' the man said, and he then closed his eyes, and
at once went to sleep.

"I lay down beside him, but not to sleep. I was overjoyed with my good
fortune. Now I could enter El Obeid boldly and, the wounded man being a
native there, no questions would be asked me. I had a house to go to,
and shelter, for the present.

"As to what might happen afterwards, I did not care to think. Some way
of escape would surely occur, in time. Once my position as a Mahdist
was fully established, I should be able to join any party going towards
Khartoum, and should avoid all questioning; whereas, if I were to
journey alone, I should be asked by every band I met where I came from;
and might, at any moment, be detected, if there happened to be any from
the village I should name as my abode. It was all important that this
poor fellow should live; until, at least, I had been with him two days,
in the town.

"From time to time, I dipped a piece of rag in the gourd, squeezed a
few drops of water between his lips, and then laid it on his forehead.
When the sun began to get low, I went out and caught the horse. As I
came up, the Dervish opened his eyes.

"'I am better,' he said. 'You have restored me to life. My head is
cool, and my lips no longer parched.'

"'Now,' I said, 'I will lift you into the saddle. You had better ride
with both legs on the same side. It will be better for your wound.
There is a mound of earth, a few yards away. If you will stand up on
that, I can lift you into the saddle, easily. Now put your arms round
my neck, and I will lift you in the standing position. If you try to
get up, yourself, your wound might easily break out again.'

"I managed better than I had expected and, taking the bridle, led the
horse towards the well.

"'You must tell me the way,' I said, 'for I am a stranger in this part,
having come from the Blue Nile.'

"'I know it perfectly,' he said, 'having been born in El Obeid. I
fought against the Mahdists, till we were starved out; and then, as we
all saw that the power of the Mahdi was great, and that Allah was with
him, we did not hesitate to accept his terms, and to put on his
badges.'

"In less than an hour, we saw the trees that marked the position of the
well; and, in another half hour, reached it. At least a score of
wounded men were there, many of them so sorely hurt that they would get
no farther. They paid little attention to us. One of them was known to
Saleh--for the wounded man told me that that was his name--he also was
from El Obeid. He was suffering from a terrible cut in the shoulder,
which had almost severed the arm. He told my man that it was given by
one of the infidel officers, before he fell.

"I thought it was as well to have two friends, instead of one; and did
what I could to bind his wound up, and fasten his arm firmly to his
side. Then I said to him:

"'My horse, after three hours' rest, will be able to carry you both.
You can sit behind Saleh, and hold him on with your unwounded arm.'

"'Truly, stranger, you are a merciful man, and a good one. Wonderful is
it that you should give up your horse, to men who are strangers to you;
and walk on foot, yourself.'

"'Allah commands us to be compassionate to each other. What is a walk
of a few miles? It is nothing, it is not worth speaking of. Say no more
about it, I beseech you. I am a stranger in El Obeid, and you may be
able to befriend me, there.'

"Three hours later Abdullah, which was the name of the second man,
mounted, and assisted me to lift Saleh in front of him, and we set out
for El Obeid. We got into the town at daybreak. There were few people
about, and these paid no attention to us. Wounded men had been coming
in, in hundreds. Turning into the street where both the men lived, we
went first to the house of Saleh, which was at the farther end, and
was, indeed, quite in the outskirts of the place. It stood in a walled
enclosure, and was of better appearance than I had expected.

"I went to the door, and struck my hand against it. A voice within
asked what was wanted, and I said, 'I bring home the master of the
house. He is sorely wounded.'

"There was a loud cry, and the door opened and a woman ran out.

"'Do not touch him,' Abdullah exclaimed. 'We will get him down from the
horse, but first bring out an angareb. We will lower him down onto
that.'

"The woman went in, and returned with an angareb. It was the usual
Soudan bed, of wooden framework, with a hide lashed across it. I
directed them how to lift one end against the horse, so that Saleh
could slide down onto it.

"'Wife,' the Arab said, when this was done, 'by the will of Allah, who
sent this stranger to my aid, I have returned alive. His name is Mudil.
I cannot tell you, now, what he has done for me. This house is his. He
is more than guest, he is master. He has promised to remain with me,
till I die, or am given back to life again. Do as he bids you, in all
things.'

"Abdullah would have assisted to carry the bed in, but I told him that
it might hurt his arm, and I and the woman could do it.

"'You had better go off, at once, to your own people, Abdullah. There
must be many here who understand the treatment of wounds. You had
better get one, at once, to attend to your arm."

"'I will come again, this evening,' the man replied. 'I consider that I
also owe my life to you; and when you have stayed a while here, you
must come to me. My wives and children will desire to thank you, when I
tell them how you brought me in here.'

"'Is there any place where I can put my horse?' I asked.

"'Yes,' the woman replied; 'take it to that door in the wall. I will go
and unfasten it.'

"There was a shed in the garden. Into this I put my horse, and then
entered the house.

"Most of the Arab women know something of the dressing of wounds.
Saleh's wife sent out the slave, to buy various drugs. Then she got a
melon from the garden, cut off the rind, and, mincing the fruit in
small pieces, squeezed out the juice and gave it to her husband to
drink. When she had done this, she set before me a plate of pounded
maize, which was boiling over a little fire of sticks, when we went in.

"'It is your breakfast,' I said.

"She waved her hand.

"'I can cook more,' she said. 'It matters not if we do not eat till
sunset.'

"I sat down at once, for indeed, I was famishing. The food had all been
exhausted, at the end of the first day's fighting. I had been more than
two days without eating a morsel. I have no doubt I ate ravenously, for
the woman, without a word, emptied the contents of the pot into my
bowl, and then went out and cut another melon for me.

"When the slave woman returned, she boiled some of the herbs, made a
sort of poultice of them, and placed it on the wound. Saleh had fallen
asleep, the moment he had drunk the melon juice, and did not move while
the poultice was being applied.

"The house contained three rooms--the one which served as kitchen and
living room; one leading from it on the right, with the curtains
hanging before the door (this was Saleh's room); and on the opposite
side, the guest chamber. I have not mentioned that there were four or
five children, all of whom had been turned out, as soon as we entered;
and threatened with terrible punishments, by their mother, if they made
any noise.

"When I finished my meal I went into the guest chamber, threw myself
down on the angareb there, and slept till sunset. When I awoke, I found
that a native doctor had come, and examined Saleh. He had approved of
what the woman had done, told told her to continue to poultice the
wound, and had given her a small phial, from which she was to pour two
drops into the wound, morning and evening. He said, what I could have
told her, that her husband was in the hands of Allah, If He willed it,
her husband would live.

"Of course, I had seen something of wounds, for in the old times--it
seems a lifetime back--when I was, for two years, searching tombs and
monuments with the professor, there had been frays between our workmen
and bands of robbers; and there were also many cases of injuries,
incurred in the work of moving heavy fragments of masonry. Moreover,
although I had no actual practice, I had seen a good deal of surgical
work; for, when I was at the university, I had some idea of becoming a
surgeon, and attended the courses there, and saw a good many
operations. I had therefore, of course, a general knowledge of the
structure of the human frame, and the position of the arteries.

"So far the wound, which I examined when the woman poured in what I
suppose was a styptic, looked healthy and but little inflamed. Of
course, a skilled surgeon would have probed it and endeavoured to
extract the ball, which had not gone through. The Soudanese were armed
only with old muskets, and it was possible that the ball had not
penetrated far; for if, as he had told me, he was some distance from
the square when he was hit, the bullet was probably spent.

"I told the woman so, and asked her if she had any objection to my
endeavouring to find it. She looked surprised.

"'Are you, then, a hakim?'

"'No, but I have been at Khartoum, and have seen how the white hakims
find which way a bullet has gone. They are sometimes able to get it
out. At any rate, I should not hurt him; and if, as is likely, the ball
has not gone in very far--for had it done so, he would probably have
died before he got home--I might draw it out.'

"'You can try,' she said. 'You have saved his life, and it is yours.'

"'Bring me the pistol that your husband had, in his belt.'

"She brought it to me. I took out the ramrod.

"'Now,' I said, 'it is most important that this should be clean;
therefore, heat it in the fire so that it is red hot, and then drop it
into cold water.'

"When this had been done, I took a handful of sand, and polished the
rod till it shone, and afterwards wiped it carefully with a cloth. Then
I inserted it in the wound, very gently. It had entered but an inch and
a half when it struck something hard, which could only be the bullet.
It was as I had hoped, the ball had been almost spent, when it struck
him.

"Saleh was awake now, and had at once consented to my suggestion,
having come to have implicit faith in me.

"'It is, you see, Saleh, just as I had hoped. I felt sure that it could
not have gone in far; as, in that case, you could never have walked
twenty miles, from the battlefield, to the point where you met me. Now,
if I had a proper instrument, I might be able to extract the bullet. I
might hurt you in doing so, but if I could get it out, you would
recover speedily; while if it remains where it is, the wound may
inflame, and you will die.'

"'I am not afraid of pain, Mudil.'

"I could touch the ball with my finger, but beyond feeling that the
flesh in which it was embedded was not solid to the touch, I could do
nothing towards getting the ball out. I dared not try to enlarge the
wound, so as to get two fingers in. After thinking the matter over in
every way, I decided that the only chance was to make a tool from the
ramrod. I heated this again and again, flattening it with the pistol
barrel, till it was not more than a tenth of an inch thick; then I cut,
from the centre, a strip about a quarter of an inch wide. I then rubbed
down the edges of the strip on a stone, till they were perfectly
smooth, and bent the end into a curve. I again heated it to a dull red,
and plunged it into water to harden it, and finally rubbed it with a
little oil. It was late in the evening before I was satisfied with my
work.

"'Now, Saleh,' I said, 'I am going to try if this will do. If I had one
of the tools I have seen the white hakims use, I am sure I could get
the ball out easily enough; but I think I can succeed with this. If I
cannot, I must make another like it, so as to put one down each side of
the bullet. You see, this curve makes a sort of hook. The difficulty is
to get it under the bullet.'

"'I understand,' he said. 'Do not mind hurting me. I have seen men die
of bullets, even after the wound seemed to heal. I know it is better to
try and get it out.'

"It was a difficult job. Pressing back the flesh with my finger, I
succeeded, at last, in getting the hook under the bullet. This I held
firmly against it, and to my delight felt, as I raised finger and hook
together, that the bullet was coming. A few seconds later, I held it
triumphantly between my fingers.

"'There, Saleh, there is your enemy. I think, now, that if there is no
inflammation, it will not be long before you are well and strong
again.'

"'Truly, it is wonderful!' the man said, gratefully. 'I have heard of
hakims who are able to draw bullets from wounds, but I have never seen
it done before.'

"If Saleh had been a white man, I should still have felt doubtful as to
his recovery; but I was perfectly confident that a wound of that sort
would heal well, in an Arab, especially as it would be kept cool and
clean. Hard exercise, life in the open air, entire absence of
stimulating liquors, and only very occasionally, if ever, meat diet,
render them almost insensible to wounds that would paralyse a white.
Our surgeons had been astonished at the rapidity with which the wounded
prisoners recovered.

"Saleh's wife had stood by, as if carved in stone, while I performed
the operation; but when I produced the bullet, she burst into tears,
and poured blessings on my head.

"I am writing this on the following morning. Saleh has slept quietly
all night. His hand is cool this morning, and I think I may fairly say
that he is convalescent. Abdullah's wife came in yesterday evening, and
told the women here that her husband was asleep, but that he would come
round in the morning. I warned her not to let him stir out of doors,
and said I would come and see him.

"It has taken me five hours to write this, which seems a very long time
to spend on details of things not worth recording; but the act of
writing has taken my thoughts off myself, and I intend always to note
down anything special. It will be interesting to me to read it, if I
ever get away; should I be unable to escape, I shall charge Saleh to
carry it to Khartoum, if he ever has the chance, and hand it over to
the Governor there, to send down to Cairo.

"A week later. I am already losing count of days, but days matter
nothing. I have been busy, so busy that I have not even had time to
write. After I had finished my story so far, Saleh's slave woman took
me to Abdullah's house. I found that he was in a state of high fever,
but all I could do was to recommend that a wet rag should be applied,
and freshly wetted every quarter of an hour; that his head should be
kept similarly enveloped, in wet bandages; and that his hands should be
dipped in water very frequently.

"When I got back, I found several women waiting outside Saleh's house.
His wife had gossiped with a neighbour, and told them that I had got
the bullet out of his wound. The news spread rapidly, and these women
were all there to beg that I would see their husbands.

"This was awkward. I certainly could not calculate upon being
successful, in cases where a bullet had penetrated more deeply; and
even if I could do so, I should at once excite the hostility of the
native hakims, and draw very much more attention upon myself than I
desired. In vain I protested that I was not a hakim, and had done only
what I had seen a white hakim do. Finding that this did not avail, I
said that I would not go to see any man, except with one of the native
doctors.

"'There are two here,' one of the women said. 'I will go and fetch
them.'

"'No,' I said; 'who am I, that they should come to me? I will go and
see them, if you will show me where they live.'

"'Ah, here they come!' she said, as two Dervishes approached.

"I went up to them, and they said: 'We hear that you are a hakim, who
has done great things.'

"'I am no hakim,' I said. 'I was just coming to you, to tell you so.
The man I aided was a friend, and was not deeply wounded. Having seen a
white hakim take bullets from wounded men, I tried my best; and as the
bullet was but a short way in, I succeeded. If I had had the
instruments I saw the infidel use, it would have been easy; but I had
to make an instrument, which sufficed for the purpose, although it
would have been of no use, had the bullet gone in deeper.'

"They came in and examined Saleh's wound, the bullet, and the tool I
had made.

"'It is well,' they said. 'You have profited by what you saw. Whence do
you come?'

"I told the same story that I had told Saleh.

"'You have been some time at Khartoum?'

"'Not very long,' I said; 'but I went down once to Cairo, and was there
some years. It was there I came to know something of the ways of the
infidels. I am a poor man, and very ignorant; but if you will allow me
I will act as your assistant, as I know that there are many wounded
here. If you will tell me what to do, I will follow your instructions
carefully.'

"The two hakims looked more satisfied, at finding that I was not a
dangerous rival. One said:

"'Among the things that have been brought in here is a box. Those who
brought it did not know what it contained, and it was too strong for
them to open, though of course they were able to hammer it, and break
it open. It contained nothing but many shining instruments, but the
only one that we knew the purport of was a saw. There were two boxes of
the same shape, and the other contained a number of little bottles of
drugs; and we thought that maybe, as the boxes were alike, these
shining instruments were used by the white hakim.'

"'I can tell you that, if I see them,' I said, and went with them.

"In a house where booty of all sorts was stored, I saw the chests which
I knew were those carried by Hicks's medical officer. The one contained
drugs, the other a variety of surgical instruments--probes, forceps,
amputating knives, and many other instruments of whose use I was
ignorant. I picked out three or four probes, and forceps of different
