Therefore, said Arthur, take thou Excalibur, my good sword, and go with
it to yonder water side, and when thou comest there, I charge thee throw
my sword in that water, and come again, and tell me what thou there
seest. My lord, said Bedivere, your commandment shall be done, and
lightly bring you word again. So Sir Bedivere departed, and by the way
he beheld that noble sword, that the pommel and haft were all of
precious stones, and then he said to himself, If I throw this rich sword
in the water, thereof shall never come good, but harm and loss. And then
Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur under a tree. And as soon as he might he
came again unto the king, and said he had been at the water, and had
thrown the sword into the water. What sawest thou there? said the king.
Sir, he said, I saw nothing but waves and winds. That is untruly said of
thee, said the king; therefore go thou lightly again, and do my command
as thou art to me lief and dear, spare not, but throw it in.

Then Sir Bedivere returned again, and took the sword in his hand; and
then him thought sin and shame to throw away that noble sword; and so
eft he hid the sword, and returned again, and told to the king that he
had been at the water, and done his commandment. What sawest thou there?
said the king. Sir, he said, I saw nothing but the waters wap and the
waves wan. Ah traitor, untrue, said king Arthur, now hast thou betrayed
me twice. Who would have wend that thou that hast been to me so lief and
dear, and thou art named a noble knight, and would betray me for the
riches of the sword. But now go again lightly, for thy long tarrying
putteth me in great jeopardy of my life, for I have taken cold. And
unless if thou do now as I bid thee, if ever I may see thee, I shall
slay thee with mine own hands, for thou wouldest for my rich sword see
me dead.

Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the sword, and lightly took it
up, and went to the water side, and there he bound the girdle about the
hilts, and then he threw the sword as far into the water as he might,
and there came an arm and an hand above the water, and met it, and
caught it, and so shook it thrice and brandished, and then vanished away
the hand with the sword in the water. So Sir Bedivere came again to the
king, and told him what he saw. Alas, said the king, help me hence, for
I dread me I have tarried over long.

Then Sir Bedivere took the king upon his back, and so went with him to
that water side. And when they were at the water side, even fast by the
bank hoved a little barge, with many fair ladies in it, and among them
all was a queen, and all they had black hoods, and all they wept and
shrieked when they saw king Arthur. Now put me into the barge, said the
king: and so he did softly. And there received him three queens with
great mourning, and so they set him down, and in one of their laps king
Arthur laid his head, and then that queen said, Ah, dear brother, why
have ye tarried so long from me? Alas, this wound on your head hath
caught over much cold. And so then they rowed from the land; and Sir
Bedivere beheld all those ladies go from him.

Then Sir Bedivere cried, Ah, my lord Arthur, what shall become of me now
ye go from me, and leave me here alone among mine enemies. Comfort
thyself, said the king, and do as well as thou mayest, for in me is no
trust for to trust in. For I will into the vale of Avilion, to heal me
of my grievous wound. And if thou hear never more of me, pray for my
soul. But ever the queens and the ladies wept and shrieked, that it was
pity to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the
barge, he wept and wailed, and so took the forest.

Sir Thomas Malory
Read: Tennyson's Morte D'Arthur.




THE ARMADA


    Attend, all ye who list to hear our noble
      England's praise;
    I tell of the thrice famous deeds she wrought
      in ancient days,
    When that great fleet invincible against her
      bore in vain
    The richest spoils of Mexico, the stoutest
      hearts of Spain.
    It was about the lovely close of a warm summer
      day,
    There came a gallant merchant-ship full sail
      to Plymouth Bay;
    Her crew hath seen Castile's black fleet,
      beyond Aurigny's isle,[2]
    At earliest twilight, on the waves lie heaving
      many a mile.
    At sunrise she escaped their van, by God's
      especial grace;
    And the tall Pinta, till the noon, had held
      her close in chase.
    Forthwith a guard at every gun was placed
      along the wall;
    The beacon blazed upon the roof of Edgecumbe's
      lofty hall;
    Many a light fishing-bark put out to pry along
      the coast,
    And with loose rein and bloody spur rode inland
      many a post.
    With his white hair unbonneted, the stout old
      sheriff comes;
    Behind him march the halberdiers; before him
      sound the drums;
    His yeomen, round the market-cross, make clear
      an ample space;
    For there behoves him to set up the standard
      of Her Grace.
    And haughtily the trumpets peal, and gaily
      dance the bells,
    As slow upon the labouring wind the royal
      blazon swells.
    Look how the lion of the sea lifts up his
      ancient crown,
    And underneath his deadly paw treads the gay
      lilies down.
    So stalked he when he turned to flight on that
      famed Picard field,[3]
    Bohemia's plume, and Genoa's bow, and Caesar's
      eagle shield:
    So glared he when at Agincourt in wrath he
      turned to bay,
    And crushed and torn beneath his claws the
      princely hunters lay.
    Ho! strike the flag-staff deep, Sir Knight: ho!
      scatter flowers, fair maids:
    Ho! gunners fire a loud salute: ho! gallants,
      draw your blades:
    Thou sun, shine on her joyously; ye breezes
      waft her wide;
    Our glorious SEMPER EADEM, the banner of our
      pride.
    The freshening breeze of eve unfurled that
      banner's massy fold;
    The parting gleam of sunshine kissed the haughty
      scroll of gold;
    Night sank upon the dusky beach and on the
      purple sea,
    Such night in England ne'er had been, nor e'er
      again shall be.
    From Eddystone to Berwick bounds, from Lynn to
      Milford Bay,
    That time of slumber was as bright and busy as
      the day;
    For swift to east and swift to west the ghastly
      war-flame spread;
    High on St. Michael's Mount it shone: it shone
      on Beachy Head.
    Far on the deep the Spaniard saw, along each
      southern shire,
    Cape beyond cape, in endless range, those
      twinkling points of fire.
    The fisher left his skiff to rock on Tamar's
      glittering waves:
    The rugged miners poured to war from Mendip's
      sunless caves:
    O'er Longleat's towers, o'er Cranbourne's oaks,
      the fiery herald flew:
    He roused the shepherds of Stonehenge, the
      rangers of Beaulieu.
    Right sharp and quick the bells all night rang
      out from Bristol town,
    And ere the day three hundred horse had met on
      Clifton down;
    The sentinel on Whitehall gate looked forth
      into the night,
    And saw o'erhanging Richmond Hill the streak
      of blood-red light.
    Then bugle's note and cannon's roar the
      deathlike silence broke,
    And with one start, and with one cry, the royal
      city woke.
    At once on all her stately gates arose the
      answering fires;
    At once the wild alarum clashed from all her
      reeling spires;
    From all the batteries of the Tower pealed
      loud the voice of fear;
    And all the thousand masts of Thames sent back
      a louder cheer;
    And from the farthest wards was heard the rush
      of hurrying feet,
    And the broad streams of pikes and flags rushed
      down each roaring street;
    And broader still became the blaze, and louder
      still the din,
    As fast from every village round the horse came
      spurring in:
    And eastward straight from wild Blackheath the
      warlike errand went,
    And roused in many an ancient hall the gallant
      squires of Kent.
    Southward from Surrey's pleasant hills flew
      those bright couriers forth;
    High on bleak Hampstead's swarthy moor they
      started for the North;
    And on, and on, without a pause, untired the
      bounded still:
    All night from tower to tower they sprang--they
      sprang from hill to hill:
    Till the proud peak unfurled the flag o'er
      Darwin's rocky dales,
    Till like volcanoes flared to Heaven the stormy
      hills of Wales,
    Till twelve fair counties saw the blaze on
      Malvern's lonely height,
    Till streamed in crimson on the wind the
      Wrekin's crest of light,
    Till broad and fierce the star came forth on
      Ely's stately fane,
    And tower and hamlet rose in arms o'er all the
      boundless plain;
    Till Belvoir's lordly terraces the sign to
      Lincoln sent,
    And Lincoln sped the message on o'er the wide
      vale of Trent;
    Till Skiddaw saw the fire that burned on Gaunt's
      embattled pile,
    And the red glare of Skiddaw roused the burghers
      of Carlisle.

Macaulay

FOOTNOTES:
[2] Alderney.
[3] Cressy.




DEPARTURE AND DEATH OF NELSON


Nelson, having despatched his business at Portsmouth, endeavoured to
elude the populace by taking a by-way to the beach, but a crowd
collected in his train, pressing forward to obtain a sight of his face:
many were in tears, and many knelt down before him and blessed him as he
passed. England has had many heroes, but never one who so entirely
possessed the love of his fellow-countrymen as Nelson. All men knew that
his heart was as humane as it was fearless; that there was not in his
nature the slightest alloy of selfishness or cupidity; but that, with
perfect and entire devotion, he served his country with all his heart,
and with all his soul, and with all his strength; and therefore, they
loved him as truly and as fervently as he loved England. They pressed
upon the parapet to gaze after him when his barge pushed off, and he
returned their cheers by waving his hat. The sentinels, who endeavoured
to prevent them from trespassing upon this ground, were wedged among the
crowd; and an officer who, not very prudently upon such an occasion,
ordered them to drive the people down with their bayonets, was compelled
speedily to retreat; for the people would not be debarred from gazing
till the last moment upon the hero--the darling hero of England!

It had been part of Nelson's prayer, that the British fleet might be
distinguished by humanity in the victory which he expected. Setting an
example himself, he twice gave orders to cease firing on the
Redoubtable, supposing that she had struck, because her guns were
silent; for, as she carried no flag, there was no means of instantly
ascertaining the fact. From this ship, which he had thus twice spared,
he received his death. A ball fired from her mizzen-top, which, in the
then situation of the two vessels, was not more than fifteen yards from
that part of the deck where he was standing, struck the epaulet on his
left shoulder, about a quarter after one, just in the heat of action. He
fell upon his face, on the spot which was covered with his poor
secretary's blood. Hardy, who was a few steps from him, turning round,
saw three men raising him up. "They have done for me at last, Hardy,"
said he. "I hope not," cried Hardy. "Yes," he replied, "my backbone is
shot through." Yet even now, not for a moment losing his presence of
mind, he observed, as they were carrying him down the ladder, that the
tiller ropes, which had been shot away, were not yet replaced, and
ordered that new ones should be rove immediately: then, that he might
not be seen by the crew, he took out his handkerchief, and covered his
face and his stars. Had he but concealed these badges of honour from the
enemy, England, perhaps, would not have had cause to receive with sorrow
the news of the battle of Trafalgar.

The cockpit was crowded with wounded and dying men, over whose bodies he
was with some difficulty conveyed, and laid upon a pallet in the
midshipmen's berth. It was soon perceived, upon examination, that the
wound was mortal. This, however, was concealed from all except Captain
Hardy, the chaplain, and the medical attendants. He himself being
certain, from the sensation in his back and the gush of blood he felt
momently within his breast, that no human care could avail him, insisted
that the surgeon should leave him and attend to those to whom he might
be useful; "for," said he, "you can do nothing for me." All that could
be done was to fan him with paper, and frequently to give him lemonade
to alleviate his intense thirst.

He was in great pain, and expressed much anxiety for the event of the
action, which now began to declare itself. As often as a ship struck,
the crew of the Victory hurrahed; and at each hurrah, a visible
expression of joy gleamed in the eyes and marked the countenance of the
dying hero. But he became impatient to see Hardy; and as that officer,
though often sent for, could not leave the deck, Nelson feared that some
fatal cause prevented him, and repeatedly cried, "Will no one bring
Hardy to me? He must be killed! He is surely dead!"

An hour and ten minutes elapsed from the time when Nelson received his
wound, before Hardy could come to him. They shook hands in silence,
Hardy in vain struggling to suppress the feelings of that most painful
and yet sublime moment. "Well, Hardy," said Nelson, "how goes the day
with us?" "Very well," replied Hardy: "ten ships have struck, but five
of the van have tacked and show an intention to bear down upon the
Victory. I have called two or three of our fresh ships round, and have
no doubt of giving them a drubbing." "I hope," said Nelson, "none of our
ships have struck." Hardy answered, "There is no fear of that." Then,
and not till then, Nelson spoke of himself. "I am a dead man, Hardy,"
said he; "I am going fast; it will be all over with me soon." Hardy
observed that he hoped Mr. Beatty could yet hold out some prospect of
life. "Oh, no," he replied; "it is impossible. My back is shot through.
Beatty will tell you so." Hardy then once more shook hands with him,
and, with a heart almost bursting, hastened upon deck.

By this time all feeling below the breast was gone, and Nelson, having
made the surgeon ascertain this, said to him: "You know I am gone. I
know it. I feel something rising in my breast," putting his hand on his
left side, "which tells me so." And upon Beatty's inquiring whether his
pain was very great, he replied, it was so great that he wished he was
dead. "Yet," he added in a lower voice, "one would like to live a little
longer, too!"

Captain Hardy, some fifty minutes after he had left the cockpit,
returned, and again taking the hand of his dying friend and commander,
congratulated him on having gained a complete victory. How many of the
enemy were taken he did not know, as it was impossible to perceive them
distinctly, but fourteen or fifteen at least. "That's well," said
Nelson; "but I bargained for twenty." And then, in a stronger voice, he
said, "Anchor, Hardy, anchor." Hardy, thereupon, hinted that Admiral
Collingwood would take upon himself the direction of affairs. "Not while
I live, Hardy," said the dying Nelson, ineffectually endeavouring to
raise himself from the bed: "do you anchor." His previous orders for
preparing to anchor had shown how clearly he foresaw the necessity for
this.

Presently calling Hardy back, he said to him in a low voice, "Don't
throw me overboard:" and he desired that he might be buried beside his
parents, unless it should please the king to order otherwise. Then
reverting to private feelings,--"Kiss me, Hardy," said he. Hardy knelt
down and kissed his cheek; and Nelson said, "Now I am satisfied. Thank
God, I have done my duty!" Hardy stood over him in silence for a moment
or two, then knelt again and kissed his forehead. "Who is that?" said
Nelson; and being informed, he replied, "God bless you, Hardy." And
Hardy then left him for ever.

Nelson now desired to be turned upon his right side, and said, "I wish I
had not left the deck, for I shall soon be gone." Death was, indeed,
rapidly approaching. His articulation now became difficult, but he was
distinctly heard to say, "Thank God, I have done my duty!" These words
he repeatedly pronounced, and they were the last words which he uttered.
He expired at thirty minutes after four, three hours and a quarter after
he had received his wound.

The death of Nelson was felt in England as something more than a public
calamity: men started at the intelligence and turned pale, as if they
had heard of the loss of a near friend. An object of our admiration and
affection, of our pride and of our hopes, was suddenly taken from us;
and it seemed as if we had never till then known how deeply we loved and
reverenced him. What the country had lost in its great naval hero--the
greatest of our own and of all former times--was scarcely taken into the
account of grief. So perfectly, indeed, had he performed his part, that
the maritime war, after the battle of Trafalgar, was considered at an
end. The fleets of the enemy were not merely defeated--they were
destroyed: new navies must be built, and a new race of seamen reared for
them, before the possibility of their invading our shores could again
be contemplated. It was not, therefore, from any selfish reflection upon
