The girl, thus suddenly addressed, coloured hotly.

"I should be glad to see him, father--he knows that very well--but
I should not like him to run risks."

"But he is always running risks, child; and that, so far as I can
see, without so good a reason. At any rate, I shall not join your
mother in protesting. What he says is very true. He has twice made
his way many hundreds of miles in disguise, for the purpose of
getting here in time for the first fighting; and I do not think
that there will be anything like the same risk in his coming here
to pay us a visit.

"At the same time, I would not say a single word to induce him to
do so. There is no saying where he may be when the next winter sets
in, or what may take place during the coming campaign. In times
like these it is folly to make plans of any sort, three months in
advance. I only say therefore that, should everything else be
favourable, I think that an Austrian occupation of Saxony would not
be a very serious obstacle to his paying us a visit, next winter.

"Once here, he would be absolutely safe, and as the household know
what he has done for us--and probably for them, for there is no
saying whether some, at least, of them might not have been killed
by those villains--their absolute discretion and silence can be
relied upon.

"However, it may be that we shall see him long before that. The
king may have occasion to be here many times, during the summer."

The count would not hear of Fergus returning to the hotel where he
had put up, and for a week he remained at the chateau, where the
time passed very pleasantly. The luxurious appointments, the
hospitable attentions of his host and hostesses, and the whole of
his surroundings formed a strong contrast, indeed, both to his life
when campaigning, and the five months he had spent in the casemate
at Linz.

At the end of that time he felt he ought to be on the move again.
He had learnt that the officers of the marshal's staff had been
dispersed, some being attached to other divisions; and that Lindsay
was now upon the staff of Prince Henry. The prince was out Erfurt
way, and had already had some sharp fighting with the French and
the Confederate army. Fergus had learned this on the day after his
arrival at the chateau, and also that to the east there was no sign
of any movement on the part of Daun or of the king. He therefore
suffered himself to be persuaded to stay on for the week.

"Nobody is expecting you, Drummond," the count said. "No doubt they
will be glad to see you, but they will be just as glad ten days
later as ten days earlier. You are believed to be safe in some
Austrian prison, and you may be sure that no one will make any
inquiries whether you spent a week, or a month, in recovering from
your fatigues before taking up your duties again. At any rate, you
must stay for at least a week."

The visit was, indeed, extended two days beyond that time; for the
count and countess so pressed him that he was glad to give way,
especially as his own inclinations strongly seconded their
entreaties. On the ninth morning he was astonished when his bedroom
door opened and Karl came in, and gave his morning's salute as
impassively as if he had seen him the evening before.


[Illustration: "Why, Karl!" Fergus exclaimed, "where do you
spring from--when did you arrive?"]


"Why, Karl!" he exclaimed, "where do you spring from--how did you
know that I was here--when did you arrive?"

"I arrived last night, major, but as it was late we went straight
to the stable."

"Who is we, Karl?"

"The count's messenger, sir. He reached me at Erfurt, where I was
with Captain Lindsay, four days ago; and I started with him half an
hour later. He had set out from here with a led horse, and had
ridden through with but one night in bed; and we had changes of
horses, coming back. And Tartar is in good condition, major. I led
him all the way down."

"That is most kind and thoughtful of the count," Fergus exclaimed,
as he began to dress.

"Well, I am heartily glad to see you again, Karl. I was by no means
sure that you had got off safely at Hochkirch. I looked round for
you, directly I had been captured; but could see nothing of you,
and knew not whether you had ridden off, or had been killed by that
volley that finished poor Turk, and brought about my capture."

"It was a bad business, major, and I have never forgiven myself
that I was not by your side; but the thing was so sudden that I was
taken altogether by surprise. My horse was grazed with a bullet,
and what with that and the sudden flash of fire, he bolted. I had
just caught sight of you and Turk, going down in a heap, as my
horse spun round; and it had galloped a full hundred yards before I
could check it.

"Then I did not know what was best to do. It seemed to me that you
must certainly be killed. If I had been sure that you had been
wounded and taken prisoner I should have gone back; but even then I
might, more likely than not, have been shot by the Austrians before
I could explain matters. But I really thought that you were killed;
and as, from the shouting and firing, it seemed to me that the
enemy had it all their own way there, I rode back to the farmhouse.

"Luckily the Austrians had not got there, so I took Tartar and rode
with him to the king's quarters, and left him with his grooms, who
knew him well enough; and then later on, having nothing else to do,
I joined Seidlitz, and had the satisfaction of striking many a good
blow in revenge for you.

"Late in the afternoon when the fighting was over I found Captain
Lindsay, and told him about your loss. He comforted me a bit by
saying that he did not think you were born to be shot, and said
that I had better stay with Donald till there was news about you.
Two days later he told me they had got the list of the prisoners
the Austrians had taken, and that you were with them, and
unwounded.

"Then, major, I was furious with myself that I had not been taken
prisoner, too. I should have been more troubled still if Captain
Lindsay had not said that, in the first place, Tartar would have
been lost if I had not come back straight to fetch him; and that,
in the second place, it was not likely you would have been able to
keep me with you had I been a prisoner, and we might not even have
been shut up in the same fortress.

"I asked him what I had better do, and he said:

"'I am going west to join Prince Henry. You had better come with
me. You may be sure that there will be no questions asked about
you, one way or the other. I have no doubt Major Drummond will be
back in the spring. He is sure to get out, somehow.'

"It seemed to me that that was the best plan too, major. If I had
been sent back to my regiment, I don't know what I should have done
with your horse; and then, if you did return, I might not have
heard about it, and you would not have known what had become of me.
Once or twice during the last month Captain Lindsay has said to me:

"'Your master ought to have been here before this, Karl. I quite
reckoned on his arriving by the end of March.'

"I said perhaps you had not been able to get out, but he would not
hear of it. He said once:

"'If you were to head up the major in a barrel, he could find a way
out of it somehow. He will be back soon.'

"He seemed so positive about it that I was not a bit surprised when
the messenger came, and said that you were at the count's here, and
that I was to ride with him post haste, so as to catch you before
you started to join the king at Breslau.

"Captain Lindsay was as pleased as I was. He was just mounting when
the messenger came in, but wrote a line on the leaf of his pocket
book. Here it is, sir."

The slip of paper merely contained the words:

"A thousand welcomes, my dear Drummond! I have been expecting you
for some time. I wish you had turned up here, instead of at
Dresden. Hope to see you again soon."

By this time Fergus had dressed.

"My dear count," he exclaimed, as he entered the room where the
count and his wife and daughter were already assembled, "how can I
thank you for your great kindness, in taking such pains to fetch
Karl and my horse down for me."

"I had no great pains about the matter," the count replied, with a
smile. "I simply wrote to my steward that a messenger must be sent
to Erfurt, at once; to order Major Drummond's soldier servant to
come here, at all speed, with his master's horse and belongings.

"'Make what arrangements you like,' I said, 'for relays of horses;
but anyhow, he must get to Erfurt in three days, and I will give
him four for coming back again with the man. He is to be found at
the quarters of Captain Lindsay, who is on the staff of Prince
Henry. If Captain Lindsay himself is away, you must find out his
servant.'

"That was all the trouble that I had in the matter. You have really
to thank Thirza, for it was her idea. Directly you had left the
room, after your telling us that Lindsay was with Prince Henry and
most likely at Erfurt, she said:

"'I should think, father, that there would be time to fetch Major
Drummond's servant and horse. It is not so very far, and surely it
might be done in a week.'

"'Well thought of!' I said. 'It is a hundred and seventy miles. A
courier with relays of horses could do it in three days, without
difficulty; and might be back here again, with Drummond's servant,
in another four days. I will give orders at once. We can manage to
get Drummond to delay his departure for a day or two.'

"So the thing was done."



Chapter 16: At Minden.


On the following day Fergus started, riding the new horse the count
had given him, while Karl led Tartar. The journey to Breslau was
performed without adventure. He found on arrival that the king had,
ten days before, gone to Landshut, round which place a portion of
his army was cantoned. At Landshut he commanded the main pass into
Bohemia, was in a position to move rapidly towards any point where
Daun might endeavour to break through into Silesia, and was yet but
a few marches from Dresden, should the tide of war flow in that
direction.

Already several blows had been struck at the enemy. As early as the
16th of February, Prince Henry had attacked the Confederate army
which, strengthened by some Austrian regiments, had intended to
fortify itself in Erfurt, and driven it far away; while the Prince
of Brunswick had made a raid into the small Federal states, and
carried off two thousand prisoners. Early in March a force from
Glogau had marched into Poland, and destroyed many Russian
magazines; while on April 13th, the very day on which Fergus
arrived at Breslau, Duke Ferdinand had fought a battle with the
French army under Broglio, near Bergen. The French, however, were
very strongly posted, and Ferdinand was unable to capture their
position, and lost twenty-five hundred men, while the French loss
was but nineteen hundred.

On the same day Prince Henry crossed the mountains, and destroyed
all the Austrian magazines through the country between Eger and
Prague--containing food for an army of fifty thousand for five
months--captured three thousand prisoners, and burnt two hundred
boats collected on the Elbe, near Leitmeritz; and was back again
after an absence of but nine days. A fortnight later he was off
again, marching this time towards Bamberg, burning magazines and
carrying off supplies. He captured Bayreuth and Bamberg, took
twenty-five hundred prisoners, and struck so heavy a blow at the
little princelings of the Confederacy that he was able to leave
matters to themselves in the west, should the king require his aid
against Daun or the Russians.

On the 16th of April Fergus arrived at Landshut, and proceeded to
the royal quarters. On sending his name to the king, he was at once
ushered in.

"So you have returned, Major Drummond," Frederick said cordially,
"and in plenty of time to see the play! Though indeed, I should not
be surprised if it is some time before the curtain draws up. I had
some hopes that you might rejoin, for after your last escape I
doubted whether any Austrian prison would hold you long. I am glad
to see you back again.

"Ah! it was a heavy loss, that of our good marshal. None but myself
can say how I miss him. He was not only, as a general, one of the
best and most trustworthy; but as a friend he was always cheery,
always hopeful, one to whom I could tell all my thoughts. Ah! If I
had but taken his advice at Hochkirch, I should not have had to
mourn his loss.

"It was a heavy blow to you also, Major Drummond."

"A heavy blow indeed, your Majesty. He was as kind to me as if he
had been my father."

"I will try to supply his place," the king said gravely. "He died
in my service, and through my error.

"For my own sake, I am glad that you are here. You have something
of his temperament, and I can talk freely with you, too, whatever
comes into my head."

"I did not know whether I did rightly in coming to report myself
direct to you, sire; but your kindness has always been so great to
me that I thought it would be best to come straight to you, instead
of reporting myself elsewhere, having indeed no fixed post or
commander."

"You did quite right. By the way, Keith's brother, the Scottish
Earl Marischal, is here."

He touched a bell, and said to the officer who came in:

"Will you give my compliments to Earl Marischal Keith, and beg him
to come to me for a few minutes."

Two minutes later Keith entered--a tall man, less strongly built
than his brother, but much resembling him.

"Excuse my sending for you, Earl Marischal," the king said, "but I
wanted to introduce to you your young cousin, Major Drummond; a
very brave young officer, as you may well imagine, since he has
already gained that rank, and wears our military order of the Black
Eagle. He tells me that he has not hitherto met you; but he came
over here at your brother's invitation, was a very great favourite
of his, and was deeply attached to him."

"My brother mentioned you frequently, in his letters to me," Keith
said, holding out his hand to Fergus. "I knew but little of your
mother, first cousin as she is; for being ten years older than my
brother, she was but a little child in my eyes when I last saw her.
Were it not that I am past military work, I would gladly try to
fill my brother's place to you; but if I cannot aid you in your
profession, I can at least give you a share of my affection."

"As to his profession, Keith, that is my business," the king said.
"He saved my life at Zorndorf, and has in so many ways distinguished
himself that his success in his career is already assured. He is, by
many years, the youngest major in the service; and if this war goes
on, there is no saying to what height he may rise.

"He has just returned from an Austrian prison where, as I told you
when you joined me, he was carried after Hochkirch. I don't know
yet how he escaped. He must dine with me this evening, and
afterwards he shall tell us about it. Mitchell dines with us, also.
He, too, is a friend of this young soldier, and has a high opinion
of him."

That evening after dinner Fergus related to the party, which
consisted only of the king, Keith, and the British ambassador, how
he had escaped from prison.

"The next time the Austrians catch you, Major Drummond," the king
said when he had finished, "if they want to keep you, they will
have to chain you by the leg, as they used to do in the old times."

For months the Prussian and Austrian armies lay inactive. Daun had
supposed that, as the king had begun the three previous campaigns
by launching his forces into Bohemia, he would be certain to follow
the same policy; and he had therefore placed his army in an almost
impregnable position, and waited for the king to assume the
offensive. Frederick, however, felt that with his diminished forces
he could no longer afford to dash himself against the strong
positions so carefully chosen and intrenched by the enemy; and must
now confine himself to the defensive, and leave it to the Austrians
to attempt to cross the passes and give battle. The slowness with
which they marched, in comparison with the speed at which the
Prussian troops could be taken from one point to another, gave him
good ground for believing that he should find many opportunities
for falling upon the enemy, when in movement.

It was a long time before the Austrian general recognized the
change in Frederick's strategy, still longer before he could bring
himself to abandon his own tactics of waiting and fortifying, and
determine to abandon his strongholds and assume the offensive. When
July opened he had, by various slow and careful marches, planted
himself in a very strong position at Marklissa; while Frederick, as
usual, was watching him. Daun was well aware that Frederick, of all
things, desired to bring on a battle; but knowing that the
Russians, one hundred thousand strong, under Soltikoff, were
steadily approaching, he determined to wait where he was, and to
allow the brunt of the fighting, for once, to fall on them.

Fergus, by this time, was far away. The long weeks had passed as
slowly to him as they had to the king, and he was very glad indeed
when, on the 2nd of June, Frederick said to him:

"I know that you are impatient for action, Major Drummond. Your
blood is younger than mine, and I feel it hard enough to be
patient, myself. However, I can find some employment for you. Duke
Ferdinand has now, you know, twelve thousand English troops with
him. He has written to me saying that, as neither of his
aides-de-camp can speak English, he begs that I would send him an
officer who can do so; for very few of the British are able to
speak German, and serious consequences might arise from the
misapprehension of orders on the day of battle. Therefore I have
resolved to send you to him, and you can start tomorrow, at
daybreak. I will have a despatch prepared for you to carry to the
duke; who of course, by the way, knows you, and will, I am sure, be
glad to have you with him. Later on I must send another of my
Scottish officers to take your place with him, for I like having
you with me. However, at present you are wasting your time, and may
as well go."

"We are off again tomorrow morning, Karl," Fergus said, in high
spirits, as he reached his quarters.

"That is the best news that I have heard since the count's
messenger brought me word, at Erfurt, that you had returned, major.
It has been the dullest six weeks we have had since we first
marched from Berlin; for while in winter one knows that nothing can
be done, and so is content to rest quietly, in spring one is always
expecting something, and if nothing comes of it one worries and
grumbles."

"It is a long ride we are going this time, Karl."

"I don't care how how long it is, major, so that one is moving."

"I am going to join the Duke of Brunswick's staff."

"That is something like a ride, major," Karl said in surprise, "for
it is right from one side of Prussia to the other."

"Yes, it is over four hundred and fifty miles."

"Well, major, we have got good horses, and they have had an easy
time of it, lately."

"How long do you think that we shall take?"

"Well, major, the horses can do forty miles a day, if they have a
day to rest, halfway. Your horses could do more, riding them on
alternate days; but it would be as much as mine could do to manage
that."

"We must take them by turns, Karl. That will give each horse a
partial rest--one day out of three."

"Like that they could do it, I should say, major, in about a
fortnight."

They rode first to Breslau, and thence to Magdeburg, passing
through many towns on the long journey, but none of any great
importance. At Magdeburg they heard that they must make for
Hanover, where they would be able to ascertain the precise position
of the duke's army, which was on the northern frontier of
Westphalia.

While the French, under the Duke of Broglio, were advancing north
from Frankfort-on-Maine; another French army, under Contades, was
moving against Ferdinand from the west. As it was probable that
there would, at least, be no great battle until the two French
armies combined, Fergus, who had already given his horses two days'
complete rest, remained for three days at Magdeburg; as it was
likely that he would have to work them hard, when he joined the
duke.

Five days later he rode into the Duke of Brunswick's principal
camp, which was near Osnabrueck, where was situated his central
magazine.

"I am glad to see you, Major Drummond," the duke said cordially,
when Fergus reported himself. "I thought perhaps the king would
select you for the service, and I know how zealous and active you
are. I am greatly in need of a staff officer who can speak English,
for none of mine can do so.

"I think that we shall have some hard fighting here, soon. You see
that I am very much in the position of the king, menaced from two
directions. If I move to attack Contades, Broglio will have Hanover
entirely open to him; while if I move against him, Contades will
capture Muenster and Osnabrueck and get all my magazines, and might
even push on and occupy the town of Hanover, before I could get
back. So you see, I have nothing to do but to wait in this
neighbourhood until I see their designs.

"I have some twelve thousand of your countrymen here, and I rely
upon them greatly. We know how they fought at Fontenoy. Splendid
fellows they are. There is a Scotch regiment with them, whose
appearance in kilts and feathers in no slight degree astonishes
both the people and my own soldiers. Their cavalry are very fine,
too. They have much heavier horses than ours, and should be
terrible in a charge.

"How long have you been on the road?"

"I have been eighteen days, sir. I could have ridden faster myself,
having a spare charger, but my orderly could hardly travel more
rapidly; and indeed, when I got to Magdeburg, and found that it was
not likely that there would be any engagement for some time, I
allowed the horses three days' rest, so that they should be fit for
service as soon as they arrived here."

A tent was at once erected in the staff lines for Fergus. He found,
upon inquiry, that the British division was at present at Muenster.
He was invited by the duke to dinner that evening, and was
introduced to the officers of the staff; who received him
courteously, but with some surprise that one so young should not
only bear the rank of major, but the coveted insignia of the Black
Eagle.

The duke, however, when the introductions were over, gave them a
short account of the newcomer's services, and after dinner begged
Fergus to tell them how he escaped from Linz; and they had a hearty
laugh over the manner in which he and his companions obtained their
first disguise.

