group standing round, when the messenger handed the letter to Mortimer;
"I will endeavour to carry the despatch for you. Methinks that, while
fifty men would not succeed in getting through to the army, two might,
perchance, manage to do so. I shall, of course, ride first to
Shrewsbury, through which the king passed; and so follow up the course
he took. There should be no great difficulty in doing that, for the
march of so great a body of men must have left many traces behind. They
will, doubtless, have harried the country, for some distance each side
of the line they followed; and it is not likely that I should meet any
of the Welsh, until I was near the army. Then, of course, great caution
would have to be used; for it is like enough that there are parties of
Glendower's men hanging on its skirts, to cut off stragglers, and
plunder any waggons whose horses may have fallen by the way."

"'Tis a terribly dangerous service," Sir Edmund said, gravely; "but in
truth, I see no other way of forwarding this letter; which, for aught I
know, may be of high importance. But if this is a desperate enterprise,
it is also one that will bring you great credit, if safely carried
through. I will myself, if you go, give you a letter to the king,
saying that you have volunteered for this desperate undertaking, from
your loyalty to his person, and because it is possible that the letter
may contain matter of the highest importance, to him and the realm in
general. I shall add that you have already greatly distinguished
yourself, in service against the Welsh, and are the trusty esquire of
my brother-in-law, Sir Henry Percy."

"I quite feel, Sir Edmund, that the enterprise is a dangerous one; but
I am nevertheless determined, with your permission, to undertake it. My
henchman and myself have, together, gone through dangers as great; and
may pass through this, as well."

"I will give you my answer in half an hour, Master Oswald, when I have
talked it over with my knights, and heard their opinions as to whether
any better plan can be devised."

Oswald bowed and retired and, seeking out Roger, told him of the offer
that he had made.

"Well, master, if you are bent upon this enterprise, you will not find
me backward; and indeed, I am so sick of this six months of idleness,
and of seeing others marching to Wales to fight, while we do nothing
here; that, by Saint Bride, were you to ask me to go into Glendower's
stronghold, and pluck him by the beard, I would willingly go with you."

Oswald laughed.

"'Tis not so bad as that, Roger, and yet 'tis a service of great
danger. How think you that we had best set about it, on horse or on
foot?"

Roger looked surprised at the question.

"It would surely be better to go on horseback, master; for if we met
too many Welshmen to fight, we might at least ride away from them."

"There is truth in that, Roger; but, on the other hand, our feet will
carry us up and down mountains, and fells, where our horses could not
go. If mounted, we must travel by beaten tracks, and might be seized by
parties of Welsh, lurking in the woods, before we knew of their
presence. Without horses, we could ourselves keep within shelter of the
trees, and could so evade the observation of any who might be stationed
on lofty hills, to watch if any body of troops were following the track
of the army. Moreover, we should have no trouble about forage and water
for our steeds."

"Enough, master, I see which way your inclinations lie; and as my legs
have had a long holiday, it is but right that they should carry me for
a bit; and assuredly, 'tis easier for footmen to hide than it is for
horsemen."

"I should say, Roger, that it would be best to leave armour, as well as
horses behind. If we are attacked by numbers, our armour will serve us
but little; while if without it, we may be able, even if chased, to
avoid the hands of these Welshmen. They say that they are swift of
foot; but, as we can hold our own with the Northumbrian border men, we
ought to be able to do so against these Welsh, especially as our legs
are nigh a foot longer than those of the greater part of them."

"Very well, master. I myself have no great love for travelling in
armour, and would almost as soon march in a monk's gown, again, as in
breastplate and back piece."

"Very well, so we will arrange it. We shall have to carry our
provisions, for you may be sure that we shall get nothing, whatever,
while we are following the army. They will strip the country clean. You
know how terribly they have suffered by famine, on the two previous
expeditions; and it will assuredly be no better, now. Food, however, we
can procure at Shrewsbury, from which point we shall take our start."

A retainer, at this moment, came out from the hall, and informed Oswald
that Sir Edmund would speak with him. When he entered, Mortimer said:

"My knights and I agree that this letter ought to be sent forward to
the king; for if it contains matters of importance, great harm might
result from delay, and the king's anger be excited against us, for not
having sent it to him. His orders to me were strict, that neither I nor
any of my force should join him; therefore I accept your offer, with
thanks. Have you formed any plan for your proceeding?"

Oswald repeated the substance of what he had said to Roger.

"I think, perhaps, you are right," Mortimer said, "and that you may
have more chance of getting safely through, on foot, than if you rode
with but a small force to escort you. When you are ready to start, I
will speak to you in private, touching some things connected with your
journey."

When Oswald returned, Mortimer said to him:

"You see, Master Oswald, the position is by no means simple. There can
be no doubt that the king regards me with no favourable eye. He holds
my nephews in his keeping, and doubtless imagines that I bear him ill
will. As their uncle, he supposes that, should at any time a party be
formed to place the Earl of March on the throne, I should be the leader
in the matter; though assuredly I have never given him any reason to
doubt my loyalty.

"I say not that I approved of the deposition of King Richard; and
indeed I have not, like Lord Grey and many other nobles, among them the
Percys, been a warm supporter of King Henry's cause. I hold myself
altogether neutral, in that matter. I saw that nothing would be more
ruinous, for the country, than that a boy like my nephew should mount
the throne; and had a party been formed to make him king, instead of
Henry, I would have taken no share in it. Nevertheless, there is no
getting over the fact that, by right, the Earl of March is King of
England, and there is no saying what may come about in the future; but
assuredly, at the present time, I am as ready to do my duty towards
King Henry as are those who are louder in their expressions of
attachment to him.

"Nevertheless, I am well aware that the king distrusts me. As you see,
he has not, these three times that he has invaded Wales, come near
Ludlow. He has not summoned me to join his banner; nay, more, has
strictly ordered me not to send a man-at-arms to join him.

"I own that this letter troubles me, somewhat. Why should it not have
been carried to Shrewsbury, instead of being brought hither? It has,
indeed, come from London, and those who sent it may not know that the
king would move by Shrewsbury, and not by this line; which would,
indeed, be more direct for him in advancing into Montgomery and
Cardiganshire. On the other hand, it may be a snare. If I send it not
forward, he might blame me greatly for holding it back. If I send it
forward, and perchance it falls, on the way, into the hands of the
Welsh, he might harbour the thought, even if he did not accuse me
openly, of conniving with Glendower. One pretext is as good as another,
however unlikely it may be, when a king desires to make a quarrel with
one of his vassals. Your offer to carry it is, then, a very seasonable
one, and goes far to get me out of the difficulty.

"In the first place, by sending it by you, I afford no ground for him
to say that I have disobeyed his orders, to send no one of my following
to his army; and in the next place, whatever suspicion he may have of
me, assuredly he can have none of the Percys, to whom he so largely
owes his crown; and that a trusted squire of Hotspur should be the
bearer of the letter, is sufficient proof that all that could be done,
was done, for its safe carriage. Should you fail to deliver it, he can,
at least, not put it down to any fault of mine.

"Sir James Burgon and Sir Philip Haverstone both offered to carry it,
urging that the danger should fall on them; and not upon you, who are
still an esquire, and have no duty towards me in the affair; and that
it were a shame that they should remain here, idle, while you rode,
perhaps, to your death.

"Assuredly, my feelings were with them and, were it not for the
circumstances in which I am placed, I should certainly intrust the
enterprise to them; but on my laying the whole matter before them, and
pointing out that the coming of two of my knights to him would be a
breach of the king's orders, they saw that, since you were willing to
undertake it, it were best that it should be so.

"I doubt not that Henry would, not unwillingly, fasten some quarrel on
me. He has his army at hand and, did he march hither, he could seize my
lands, and those of my nephew, and partition them out among his
friends; for I am in no condition to strike a single blow in my
defence. We know, well enough, that when a king wishes to get rid of
one of his nobles, there is never any great difficulty in finding a
pretext for his arrest, and execution."

"I quite understand, Sir Edmund; and for my part, I will assuredly do
my best to place this letter in the hands of the king. I shall say
that, being of Sir Henry Percy's household, and knowing that my lord
would be glad that I should have the opportunity of striking a blow
under the king's leading, I volunteered at once, when the letter
arrived, to bear it to him; and that, seeing his majesty had laid his
orders on you, to keep all your force in readiness to repel Glendower,
should he issue out in this quarter, you granted my request that I
should be its bearer."

"That will do well, Oswald. I know that the danger is by no means
small, but I trust that you may surmount it. I shall send off a letter,
today, to Hotspur. Doubtless you will, yourself, be writing to him, and
explain to him why I have suffered you to undertake so dangerous an
enterprise."

Two hours later, Oswald, having despatched the messenger to Hotspur
with his own letter, and that of Mortimer, mounted, and with Roger rode
to Shrewsbury. Here he was able to gather but little news, as to the
present position of the army. For four days no messengers had arrived
from the king.

The last news was to the effect that the army was marching forward,
through Montgomeryshire. On first starting, they had made a long march
to Welshpool, and thence had proceeded to Newtown. On the way, the
Welsh had rushed down from the hills, and had fallen on the baggage,
slain many of the drivers, and killed so many horses that it had been
necessary to leave some of the waggons behind.

At Newtown they halted, and parties had been sent out in all directions
to harry the country, while a part of the force left at Welshpool
marched upon Llanfair. This was the last news that had come through
from the king.

But from Welshpool they heard, next day, that there had been several
skirmishes with the Welsh, and that heavy rains had made the roads all
but impassable. No more messages had come. This was not surprising, as
it was certain that the Welsh would close in behind the army, as it
advanced; and as there would be no great occasion to send news back,
the king would not care to weaken himself, by detaching escorts of
sufficient strength to make their way down.

"If we could have been sure which way the king had been going, Roger,
it would have been much shorter for us to have made direct for
Llanidloes."

"Certainly it would, Master Oswald; but you see, he might have turned
more to the north, in which case we should have, perhaps, been unable
to gather news of his whereabouts, while we should have run no small
risk of getting our throats cut."

"It is evident, Roger, that the king is marching, at present, in the
direction of Plinlimmon. No doubt he hopes that Glendower will come
down and give him battle, but methinks he will not be foolish enough to
do so. The weather, and the hills, will fight far better for him than
the Welsh, themselves, can do; and he has but to leave the army to
wander about through the mountains and forests, as he did last time, to
ensure that they must, ere long, fall back."

At daybreak the next morning, they set out and rode to Welshpool. This
being a walled town, and the population almost entirely English, they
could leave their horses here, in safety. They first went to the
governor's, and upon Oswald's explaining that they were the bearers of
a letter for the king, and asking whether he could give them any
information as to the direction they had best take, he shook his head.

"No news has come hither, for the last five days," he said. "A herd of
bullocks arrived here, three days since, and were to have been
forwarded on to the army; but the Welsh are out in force, and every
road beset. Parties have come down from the hills overlooking us, and
have fired several houses, that escaped when they last attacked us. My
force is sufficient to hold the town against any attacks, but I cannot
spare so many men as would be required to convoy the cattle. I told the
king so, before he went on; but he said that no Welshman would dare
show himself, when the army had once passed on; and that every Welsh
house and village would be destroyed, and all within them put to the
sword, so that I should have no difficulty in sending forward cattle,
and other supplies.

"That the villages have been destroyed I have no doubt, for the
messengers who came in from Llanfair told me that, as they passed over
the hills, they could see smoke rising from the forests in all
directions; but whether the inhabitants remained, quietly awaiting the
arrival of the troops, is more than doubtful. There were beacon fires
on all the hills, the night before the army left Shrewsbury, and again
on the next night. Since then, we have seen no more from here, but
those who came from Llanfair told us that they were burning, on every
hill, the night they got there; so I have no doubt that the old men,
women, and children were at once sent off, probably to shelter in the
Plinlimmon district, or mayhap in the forests of Cader Idris. At any
rate, we may be sure that very few will be found at their villages. It
was so the last time the king's army marched along, and the same when
he made his way through Denbigh to Anglesey.

"The Welsh care little for the burning of their houses. It takes but
two or three days' work to rebuild them. The harrying of the villages
will not bring the matter a day nearer to a conclusion. It is by
destroying the castles and houses of the better class that an effect
will be produced. The peasants have little to lose. The Welsh gentry
have houses and estates, and the fear of losing these may drive them to
abandon Glendower, and to come over to us. Many did so, after the
king's last invasion. Methinks the best policy would be to spare the
villagers, and give the peasants no cause for complaint, and to war
only against their leaders.

"But as to yourself, sir, there is not the most remote chance of your
getting through; and you had best wait here until the army returns, or
some levies, who may have arrived late at Shrewsbury, come up on their
way to join the king."

"I inquired at Shrewsbury, last night, sir; but I heard that no more
parties were expected, the contingents from all the counties having
joined the king, at Worcester, on the day ordered. My intention is that
I and my man-at-arms will leave our horses here, and go forward on
foot. In that way we can travel, for the most part, through the
forests; and may escape being seen. We have already left our armour
behind us, at Ludlow, so as to be able to move more rapidly. We are
both Northumbrians, and are accustomed to traverse moors and fells;
and, even should we be seen by any straggling party of the enemy, we
shall have a fair chance of outrunning them, and throwing them off our
track. At any rate, it is my duty to endeavour to carry the letter to
the king."

"Is it a matter of life and death?"

"That I know not, sir. A royal messenger brought it, from London, to
Ludlow. He had ridden with relays of horses, but had no means of
getting farther, and begged Sir Edmund Mortimer to forward it. I
myself, an esquire of Sir Henry Percy, was staying as a guest with Sir
Edmund--who is, as you know, my lord's brother-in-law--and I
volunteered to carry it, being anxious to have an opportunity of doing
service to the king."

"It was a bold offer, young man, and doubtless, when you made it, you
were scarce aware how dangerous was the business that you undertook.
Did I think that it would be of any use, I would furnish you with
twenty men-at-arms to ride with you; but I know that such a force
would, in no way, add to your safety. You might get as far as
Llanidloes, or Llanfair, whichever route you might choose, though I
think not that you would do so; but beyond that, it would be hopeless
for any force, of less than five hundred good fighting men, to attempt
to make their way through.

"From what I hear, there are at least fifteen thousand Welshmen in
arms. Many, doubtless, are with Glendower himself. The rest will be
scattered among the hills, ready to pounce upon any party who may be
moving up the valleys to join the king; and there are plenty of places
where a couple of hundred men could check the advance of an army."

"Then it is all the more necessary, sir, that we should trust to good
fortune, and to making our way unseen. May I pray you to take care of
our horses, till we return to claim them? Should we never do so, there
are doubtless many upon whom you could bestow them; and they are both
rarely good animals, for one was presented to me by Sir Henry Percy,
and the other by Sir Edmund Mortimer."

"I will take care of them, willingly. If you do not return, before the
king marches back; and I find, when he comes, that you did not reach
him; I will use the horses myself, holding them always as your property
should you, at any time, return to claim them. Is there aught else that
I can do to help you?"

"No, sir; what would, of all other things, be most valuable to us would
be a guide; but, from what I have seen and heard of the Welsh, I fear
that no reliance, whatever, can be placed on one of them."

"Certainly not at present. Did you take one, he would but slip away at
the first opportunity; and there is no Englishman, so far as I know,
who could guide you through the mountains."

"In that case, sir, we must perforce travel close to the roads, so as
to be sure that we do not wander from the track, but keeping in the
shelter of the forest."

"That is the only possible course," the governor agreed; "to be lost,
among those hills, would be certain death. If you failed to fall in
with anyone, you would die of hunger. If you did meet anyone, you would
be killed. Glendower spares no Englishman who falls into his hands."

"I don't know that he can be greatly blamed for that, sir," Oswald said
with a smile, "seeing that the Welsh meet with such scant mercy, from
us."

"'Tis a savage war," the governor said, shrugging his shoulders, "and
it seems to me that it will continue, until the last Welshman is
exterminated."

"That will be a difficult thing, indeed, to effect," Oswald laughed;
"as difficult as was the extermination of wolves in England; but I hope
that matters will arrange themselves, long before that. Surely, in
time, the Welsh leaders will see that the struggle is a hopeless one;
and that they will lose their homes, and their possessions, and their
lives, if they continue it.

"Brave as the Welsh may be, they cannot withstand the whole strength of
England. They may exist in the forests, for a time; but, with all the
valleys and fertile lands in English hands, they will at last be forced
to submit."

"It would seem so; but Edward said the same thing, of Scotland. He
carried fire and sword through it, time after time; and yet Scotland
has still its king, and holds its own on the border."

"That is so, sir; but Scotland is a large country, whereas Wales is a
small one; and the towns and castles are English, as are all the ports;
and the people themselves, although brave, are wholly without
discipline, and are able to fight only in the mountains; while the
Scots are strong enough to give battle to us on level ground, and have
defeated us, more than once."

"My advice to you is to leave the town at night," the governor said, as
Oswald rose to leave. "There may be many of the Welsh lying round us
now; and doubtless they learn, from their countrymen here, all that is
doing. I will give you a scroll, ordering that you are allowed to pass
out at any time, by night or day."

"Thank you, sir. I had intended to start tomorrow morning, two hours
before daybreak, so as to get well into the forest before sunrise. I
shall, of course, go first to Llanidloes; where, doubtless, a strong
guard will have been left. As far as that I cannot well miss my way, as
I shall have but to keep along the side of the valley."

"That is so. Beyond that, the river is a mere streamlet, and you will
have to make across the hills."

"Do you know, sir, whether the force that went to Llanfair was to
effect a junction with the king?"

"No, I believe not; at any rate, not for the present. The party was to
march west; the king's force was to move south of Plinlimmon; Lord
Talbot's to cross the range of hills, and come down upon the river
Dovey and, if possible, prevent Glendower, if he is still on
Plinlimmon, from making his way to Dinas Mowddwy, or Cader Idris, or up
to Snowdon again. The plan is doubtless as good as another, but I doubt
whether Talbot's force, if ten times as numerous as it is, could
prevent Glendower from slipping away."

That evening Oswald bought a supply of bread and meat, sufficient to
last Roger and himself for three days. This was divided in halves and
placed in bags, which would be slung over their shoulders. The horses
had already been sent up to the castle and, after sleeping for a few
hours, the two left the town and, turning to the right, ascended the
hill.

Oswald carried his sword and dagger. Roger, in addition to these, had a
heavy oaken quarterstaff.

"This," he said, "may be of service in mountain work, and may suffice
to crack the skulls of any half-dozen Welshmen we may fall in with."

Both had put on plain leather jerkins and cloth caps, and wore,
underneath, their own suits with the Percy cognizance embroidered on
them, in order that they might present themselves in proper attire,
should they arrive at the king's camp. The weather was already becoming
cold, and the double suit was therefore not uncomfortable. As the dress
of the Welsh, in the towns and valleys, was very similar to that worn
by English villagers; they would attract but little attention, should
they have cause to take to the road, for any short distance.

Keeping within the edge of the belt of trees, they followed the valley
down past the ruins of Montgomery, and passed Newtown without entering
it. Many times during the morning they heard loud shouts, from the
woods in which they were, answered by similar cries from the other side
of the valley; and were obliged to move with great caution, for it was
evident that a considerable number of Welsh were in ambush in the
woods, in readiness to attack any party who might be proceeding up or
down the valley.

Towards noon, they were obliged to leave the edge of the forest, and to
ascend to the brow of the hills; as it was certain that any parties of
the enemy, who might be in the forest, would be assembled near its
edge, in readiness to pour suddenly down.

More than once they heard voices, but a short distance away; and
paused, for a time, to allow parties of men to cross ahead of them.
Their greatest danger lay in crossing the side valleys, but as the
Welsh would be expecting no one to come down these, they succeeded in
crossing without being observed.

They were well content when, just as night was falling, they came down
upon Llanidloes. Crossing the wooden bridge over the stream, they
entered the town boldly; for, looking down upon it, they had seen many
men in armour in the streets, and knew that the place was occupied by
the English.

At the gate at the end of the bridge they were asked their business,
