



The High Tide (1571)

(_Or "The Brides of Enderby"_)


The old mayor climbed the belfry tower,
  The ringers rang by two, by three;
"Pull, if ye never pulled before;
  Good ringers, pull your best," quoth he.
"Play uppe, play uppe O Boston bells!
Play all your changes, all your swells,
  Play uppe 'The Brides of Enderby.'"

Men say it was a stolen tyde--
  The Lord that sent it, He knows all;
But in myne ears doth still abide
  The message that the bells let fall:
And there was naught of strange, beside
The flight of mews ans peewits pied
  By millions crouched on the old sea-wall.

I sat and spun within the doore,
  My thread break off, I raised myne eyes;
The level sun, like ruddy ore,
  Lay sinking in the barren skies,
And dark against day's golden death
She moved where Lindis wandereth,
My sonne's faire wife, Elizabeth.

"Cusha! Cusha!" all along;
Ere the early dews were falling,
Farre away I heard her song.
"Cusha! Cusha!" all along;
Where the reedy Lindis floweth,
  Floweth, floweth,
From the meads where melick groweth
Faintly came her milking song:

"Cusha! Cusha! Cusha!" calling,
"For the dews will soone be falling;
Leave your meadow grasses mellow,
  Mellow, mellow;
Quit your cowslips, cowslips yellow;
Come uppe Whitefoot, come uppe Lightfoot,
Quit the stalks of parsley hollow,
  Hollow, hollow;
Come uppe Jetty, rise and follow,
From the clovers lift your head;
Come uppe Whitefoot, come uppe Lightfoot,
Come uppe Jetty, rise and follow,
Jetty, to the milking shed."

If it be long, ay, long ago,
  When I beginne to think howe long,
Againe I hear the Lindis flow,
  Swift as an arrowe, sharp and strong;
And all the aire, it seemeth mee,
Bin full of floating bells (sayeth she),
That ring the tune of Enderby.

Alle fresh the level pasture lay,
  And not a shadowe mote be seene,
Save where full fyve good miles away
  The steeple towered from out the greene;
And lo! the great bell farre and wide
Was heard in all the country side
That Saturday at eventide.

The swanherds where there sedges are
  Moved on in sunset's golden breath,
The shepherde lads I heard affare,
  And my sonne's wife, Elizabeth;
Till floating o'er the grassy sea
Came down that kindly message free,
The "Brides of Mavis Enderby."

Then some looked uppe into the sky,
  And all along where Lindis flows
To where the goodly vessels lie,
  And where the lordly steeple shows,
They sayde, "And why should this thing be?
What danger lowers by land or sea?
They ring the tune of Enderby!

"For evil news from Mablethorpe,
  Of pyrate galleys warping downe;
For shippes ashore beyond the scorpe,
  They have not spared to wake the towne;
But while the west bin red to see,
And storms be none, and pyrates flee,
Why ring 'The Brides of Enderby'?"

I looked without, and lo! my sonne
  Came riding down with might and main:
He raised a shout as he drew on,
  Till all the welkin rang again,
"Elizabeth! Elizabeth!"
(A sweeter woman ne'er drew breath
Than my sonne's wife, Elizabeth.)

"The old sea wall (he cried) is downe,
  The rising tide comes on apace,
And boats adrift in yonder towne
  Go sailing uppe the market-place."
He shook as one that looks on death:
"God save you, mother!" straight he saith,
"Where is my wife, Elizabeth?"

"Good sonne, where Lindis winds away,
  With her two bairns I marked her long;
And ere yon bells beganne to play
  Afar I heard her milking song."
He looked across the grassy lea,
To right, to left, "Ho, Enderby!"
They rang "The Brides of Enderby"!

With that he cried and beat his breast;
  For, lo! along the river's bed
A mighty eygre reared his crest,
  And uppe the Lindis raging sped.
It swept with thunderous noises loud;
Shaped like a curling snow-white cloud,
Or like a demon in a shroud.

And rearing Lindis backward pressed,
  Shook all her trembling bankes amaine,
Then madly at the eygre's breast
  Flung uppe her weltering walls again.
Then bankes came downe with ruin and rout--
Then beaten foam flew round about--
Then all the mighty floods were out.

So farre, so fast the eygre drave,
  The heart had hardly time to beat,
Before a shallow seething wave
  Sobbed in the grasses at oure feet.
The feet had hardly time to flee
Before it brake against the knee,
And all the world was in the sea.

Upon the roofe we sat that night,
  The noise of bells went sweeping by;
I marked the lofty beacon light
  Stream from the church tower, red and high,--
A lurid mark and dread to see;
And awesome bells they were to mee,
That in the dark rang "Enderby."

They rang the sailor lads to guide
  From roofe to roofe who fearless rowed;
And I--my sonne was at my side,
  And yet the ruddy beacon glowed;
And yet he moaned beneath his breath,
"Oh, come in life, or come in death!
Oh, lost! my love, Elizabeth."

And didst thou visit him no more?
  Thou didst, thou didst, my daughter deare;
The waters laid thee at his doore,
  Ere yet the early dawn was clear;
Thy pretty bairns in fast embrace,
The lifted sun shone on thy face,
Downe drifted to thy dwelling-place.

That flow strewed wrecks about the grass,
  That ebbe swept out the flocks to sea;
A fatal ebbe and flow, alas!
  To manye more than myne and me:
But each will mourn his own (she saith),
And sweeter woman ne'er drew breath
Than my sonne's wife, Elizabeth.

I shall never hear her more
By the reedy Lindis shore,
"Cusha! Cusha! Cusha!" calling
Ere the early dews be falling;
I shall never hear her song,
"Cusha! Cusha!" all along,
Where the sunny Lindis floweth,
  Goeth, floweth;
From the meads where melick groweth,
When the water winding down,
Onward floweth to the town.

I shall never see her more
Where the reeds and rushes quiver,
  Shiver, quiver;
Stand beside the sobbing river,
Sobbing, throbbing, in its falling
To the sandy lonesome shore;
I shall never hear her calling,
"Leave your meadow grasses mellow,
  Mellow, mellow;
Quit your cowslips, cowslips yellow;
Come uppe Whitefoot, come uppe Lightfoot;
Quit your pipes of parsley hollow,
  Hollow, hollow;
Come uppe Lightfoot, rise and follow;
  Lightfoot, Whitefoot,
From your clovers lift the head;
Come uppe Jetty, follow, follow,
Jetty, to the milking-shed."

    _Jean Ingelow._




September Days


O month of fairer, rarer days
Than Summer's best have been;
When skies at noon are burnished blue,
And winds at evening keen;
When tangled, tardy-blooming things
From wild waste places peer,
And drooping golden grain-heads tell
That harvest-time is near.

Though Autumn tints amid the green
Are gleaming, here and there,
And spicy Autumn odors float
Like incense on the air,
And sounds we mark as Autumn's own
Her nearing steps betray,
In gracious mood she seems to stand
And bid the Summer stay.

Though 'neath the trees, with fallen leaves
The sward be lightly strown,
And nests deserted tell the tale
Of summer bird-folk flown;
Though white with frost the lowlands lie
When lifts the morning haze,
Still there's a charm in every hour
Of sweet September days.

    _Helen L. Smith_




The New Year


Who comes dancing over the snow,
  His soft little feet all bare and rosy?
Open the door, though the wild wind blow,
  Take the child in and make him cozy,
Take him in and hold him dear,
Here is the wonderful glad New Year.

    _Dinah M. Craik_




An "If" For Girls

(_With apologies to Mr. Rudyard Kipling_.)


If you can dress to make yourself attractive,
  Yet not make puffs and curls your chief delight;
If you can swim and row, be strong and active,
  But of the gentler graces lose not sight;
If you can dance without a craze for dancing,
  Play without giving play too strong a hold,
Enjoy the love of friends without romancing,
  Care for the weak, the friendless and the old;

If you can master French and Greek and Latin,
  And not acquire, as well, a priggish mien,
If you can feel the touch of silk and satin
  Without despising calico and jean;
If you can ply a saw and use a hammer,
  Can do a man's work when the need occurs,
Can sing when asked, without excuse or stammer,
  Can rise above unfriendly snubs and slurs;

If you can make good bread as well as fudges,
  Can sew with skill and have an eye for dust,
If you can be a friend and hold no grudges,
  A girl whom all will love because they must;

If sometime you should meet and love another
  And make a home with faith and peace enshrined,
And you its soul--a loyal wife and mother--
  You'll work out pretty nearly to my mind
The plan that's been developed through the ages,
  And win the best that life can have in store,
You'll be, my girl, the model for the sages--
  A woman whom the world will bow before.

    _Elizabeth Lincoln Otis._




Boy and Girl of Plymouth


Little lass of Plymouth,--gentle, shy, and sweet;
Primly, trimly tripping down the queer old street;
Homespun frock and apron, clumsy buckled shoe;
Skirts that reach your ankles, just as Mother's do;
Bonnet closely clinging over braid and curl;
Modest little maiden,--Plymouth's Pilgrim girl!

Little lad of Plymouth, stanchly trudging by;
Strong your frame, and sturdy; kind and keen your eye;
Clad in belted doublet, buckles at your knee;
Every garment fashioned as a man's might be;
Shoulder-cloak and breeches, hat with bell-shaped crown;
Manly little Pilgrim,--boy of Plymouth town!

Boy and girl of Plymouth, brave and blithe, and true;
Finer task than yours was, children never knew;
Sharing toil and hardship in the strange, new land;
Hope, and help, and promise of the weary band;
Grave the life around you, scant its meed of joy;
Yours to make it brighter,--Pilgrim girl and boy!

    _Helen L. Smith_.




Work: A Song of Triumph


Work!
  Thank God for the might of it,
  The ardor, the urge, the delight of it,
  Work that springs from the heart's desire,
  Setting the brain and the soul on fire--
  Oh, what is so good as the heat of it,
  And what is so glad as the beat of it,
  And what is so kind as the stern command,
  Challenging brain and heart and hand?

Work!
  Thank God for the pride of it,
  For the beautiful, conquering tide of it,
  Sweeping the life in its furious flood,
  Thrilling the arteries, cleansing the blood,
  Mastering stupor and dull despair,
  Moving the dreamer to do and dare--
  Oh, what is so good as the urge of it,
  And what is so glad as the surge of it,
  And what is so strong as the summons deep,
  Rousing the torpid soul from sleep?

Work!
  Thank God for the pace of it,
  For the terrible, swift, keen race of it,
  Fiery steeds in full control,
  Nostrils a-quiver to reach the goal.
  Work, the power that drives behind,
  Guiding the purposes, taming the mind,
  Holding the runaway wishes back,
  Reining the will to one steady track,
  Speeding the energies, faster, faster,
  Triumphing ever over disaster;
  Oh, what is so good as the pain of it,
  And what is so great as the gain of it,
  And what is so kind as the cruel goad,
  Forcing us on through the rugged road?

Work!
  Thank God for the swing of it,
  For the clamoring, hammering ring of it,
  Passion of labor daily hurled
  On the mighty anvils of the world.
  Oh, what is so fierce as the flame of it?
  And what is so huge as the aim of it?
  Thundering on through dearth and doubt,
  Calling the plan of the Maker out,
  Work, the Titan; Work, the friend,
  Shaping the earth to a glorious end,
  Draining the swamps and blasting hills,
  Doing whatever the Spirit wills--
  Rending a continent apart,
  To answer the dream of the Master heart.
  Thank God for a world where none may shirk--
  Thank God for the splendor of Work!

    _Angela Morgan._




Reply to "A Woman's Question"

(_"A Woman's Question" is given on page 129 of Book I, "Poems Teachers
Ask For_.")


You say I have asked for the costliest thing
  Ever made by the Hand above--
A woman's heart and a woman's life,
  And a woman's wonderful love.

That I have written your duty out,
  And, man-like, have questioned free--
You demand that I stand at the bar of your soul,
  While you in turn question me.

And when I ask you to be my wife,
  The head of my house and home,
Whose path I would scatter with sunshine through life,
  Thy shield when sorrow shall come--

You reply with disdain and a curl of the lip,
  And point to my coat's missing button,
And haughtily ask if I want a _cook_,
  To serve up my _beef_ and my _mutton_.

'Tis a _king_ that you look for. Well, I am not he,
  But only a plain, earnest man,
Whose feet often shun the hard path they should tread,
  Often shrink from the gulf they should span.

'Tis hard to believe that the rose will fade
  From the cheek so full, so fair;
'Twere harder to think that a heart proud and cold
  Was ever reflected there.

True, the rose will fade, and the leaves will fall,
  And the Autumn of life will come;
But the heart that I give thee will be true as in May,
  Should I make it thy shelter, thy home.

Thou requir'st "all things that are good and true;
  All things that a man should be";
Ah! lady, my _truth_, in return, doubt not,
  For the rest, I leave it to thee.

    _Nettie H. Pelham._




The Romance of Nick Van Stann


I cannot vouch my tale is true,
Nor say, indeed, 'tis wholly new;
But true or false, or new or old,
I think you'll find it fairly told.
A Frenchman, who had ne'er before
Set foot upon a foreign shore,
Weary of home, resolved to go
And see what Holland had to show.
He didn't know a word of Dutch,
But that could hardly grieve him much;
He thought, as Frenchmen always do,
That all the world could "parley-voo."
At length our eager tourist stands
Within the famous Netherlands,
And, strolling gaily here and there,
In search of something rich or rare,
A lordly mansion greets his eyes;
"How beautiful!" the Frenchman cries,
And, bowing to the man who sate
In livery at the garden gate,
"Pray, Mr. Porter, if you please,
Whose very charming grounds are these?
And, pardon me, be pleased to tell
Who in this splendid house may dwell."
To which, in Dutch, the puzzled man
Replied what seemed like "Nick Van Stann,"[*]

"Thanks!" said the Gaul; "the owner's taste
Is equally superb and chaste;
So fine a house, upon my word,
Not even Paris can afford.
With statues, too, in every niche;
Of course Monsieur Van Stann is rich,
And lives, I warrant, like a king,--
Ah! wealth mast be a charming thing!"
In Amsterdam the Frenchman meets
A thousand wonders in the streets,
But most he marvels to behold
A lady dressed in silk and gold;
Gazing with rapture on the dame,
He begs to know the lady's name,
And hears, to raise his wonders more,
The very words he heard before!
"Mercie!" he cries; "well, on my life,
Milord has got a charming wife;
'Tis plain to see, this Nick Van Stann
Must be a very happy man."

Next day our tourist chanced to pop
His head within a lottery shop,
And there he saw, with staring eyes,
The drawing of the mammoth prize.
"Ten millions! 'tis a pretty sum;
I wish I had as much at home:
I'd like to know, as I'm a sinner,
What lucky fellow is the winner?"
Conceive our traveler's amaze
To hear again the hackneyed phrase.
"What? no! not Nick Van Stann again?
Faith! he's the luckiest of men.
You may be sure we don't advance
So rapidly as that in France:
A house, the finest in the land;
A lovely garden, nicely planned;
A perfect angel of a wife,
And gold enough to last a life;
There never yet was mortal man
So blest--as Monsieur Nick Van Stann!"

Next day the Frenchman chanced to meet
A pompous funeral in the street;
And, asking one who stood close by
What nobleman had pleased to die,
Was stunned to hear the old reply.
The Frenchman sighed and shook his head,
"Mon Dieu! poor Nick Van Stann is dead;
With such a house, and such a wife,
It must be hard to part with life;
And then, to lose that mammoth prize,--
He wins, and, pop,--the winner dies!
Ah, well! his blessings came so fast,
I greatly feared they could not last:
And thus, we see, the sword of Fate
Cuts down alike the small and great."

[Footnote *: Nicht verstehen:--"I don't understand."]

    _John G. Saxe._




