launched on such a mild course of St. Ambrose gaieties as two girls in
a college could with grace pursue. This included tennis parties, rowing
parties, water-lily and fritillary hunts, "strawberries," concerts
instead of lectures in the afternoons as well as in the evenings,
afternoon teas--not _tete-a-tete_, not confined to a party of three,
but under what even Miss Lascelles would have considered sufficient
surveillance in the rooms of liberal heads of houses, hospitable young
dons, social, idle undergraduates. These had no more business on their
hands than could be summed up in cricket-matches or boat-races, and in
meeting Miss Vanhansen and listening to her queer unconventional
remarks.

At all these gatherings, May Millar in the budding beauty of seventeen
and the simplicity of her youthful dress, with her modesty and
_naivete_, was made very welcome. Soon she began to feel herself ashamed
of the extent to which she was enjoying herself, as she was swept along
by the stream.

She was able to write home now long letters full of girlish enthusiasm
over the kindness of Miss Vanhansen, and the beauties and delights of
St. Ambrose's. Dora, though greatly relieved in her ungrudging devotion
to May, to find that Tom Robinson's words were fulfilled, was still a
little puzzled to understand how May could find time for so many gay
doings, and her studies into the bargain. But Dr. and Mrs. Millar could
only be happy in the happiness of their child, and hug themselves on
having thought more of her welfare than of her feelings at the moment of
parting. It was right she should see all the charming sights which were
to be seen, and enter a little into the special attractions of the great
University town--_that_ would not prevent her from settling down and
doing her proper work presently. You might trust the lady principal and
a studious young creature like May, who liked to be busy with her books
far before any other occupation, with a great deal more license than
that came to.

Then a new turn was given to the dissipation in which May was dipping.
The longing in which she had indulged, ever since she had first heard of
its possible fulfilment, was granted--a Greek play was to be acted by
the young women who stood for the "Grecians" of the year at Thirlwall
Hall, and May was there to see. From the moment the play was decided
upon to the hour of the first rehearsal, May spoke, thought, and dreamed
of nothing save "Alcestis."

Miss Vanhansen gave her up in disgust. "The ungrateful, soft-spoken
wretch!" cried the forsaken fair one; "the hypocritical young blue-grass
Penelope Blue! she has been bluer than the blue clouds all the time she
has been imposing on me as a pining, bread-and-butter, home-sick miss
among us Titanesses and daughters of the gods. Here I am ready to
collapse with trotting her about among the few girls in St. Ambrose's
who are sensible enough not to know the Empire of the East from the
Empire of the West, and would not care which was which if they did know,
and the still wiser young men who spend the long summer days lying on
their backs in their own canoes, reading Mark Twain. Oh! she is a
brazen-faced impostor. 'Molasses!' and 'Great Scott!' are not enough to
say to her. I should like to try her with the final polite remarks of
the last chief of the Dogs' Noses."

But contemporaneously with May's being thus dropped by her first friend,
she was peremptorily claimed and appropriated by the actresses. They had
not failed to notice her interest in their enterprise, and some of the
cleverest of them had already mastered an astonishing problem.

They had been guilty of nicknaming Miss Millar "Baby," because she had
been so lachrymose and shiftless when she came to Thirlwall Hall, and
had never looked up till she was handed over to Miss Vanhansen, who had
given her "airings" and "outings" all very well for a baby, and much to
Baby's taste as it seemed, but not exactly severe study. Yet in spite of
it all, and in spite of the halting inaccuracy of the training in a
private ladies'-school, May Millar knew more by sheer instinct, as it
sounded, of Alcestis, and felt more with her and for her, than the best
of those who professed to be her interpreters.

It was therefore not with wisely repairing the breaches in her Latin and
Greek, and laying these foundations afresh, as Rose was doing with her
art under Mr. St. Foy in London, that May was engrossed. It was with
becoming a bond-slave to those ambitious players. She lent herself to
the minutest details of their attempt, coached herself in them day and
night, till she could coach everybody in turn, and figured behind backs
as universal prompter, dresser, stage-manager--the girl who had been so
lifeless and incapable of looking after herself when she first came
among them that they had styled her the baby of the establishment!

Miss Lascelles, who was deeply interested in the play, both in her
highly-finished scholarship, and for the credit of Thirlwall Hall,
was electrified when she discovered the efficient coadjutor whom
the performers had found. "I am afraid there has been a mistake
made, and time lost," she said to herself ruefully. "How could I be
so shortsighted, when there is the making of the finest scholar in
the Hall in Miss Millar, who threatened to hang so heavily on my hands
that I was fain to send her to play with our generous 'Barbarian.'
What discrimination, what taste and feeling with regard to the
selection and fit declamation of these passages which we were doubtful
whether to retain or reject, or what to do with them! With what pretty
girlish shyness and timidity she made the suggestions! Nothing but her
passionate love of the subject, and her jealousy for its honour, as it
were, with her intense craving to have it fitly expressed, would have
induced her to come forward. I should like to hear what Professor
Hennessy," naming a great name among classical authorities, "thinks
of this young girl's interpretation of several parts of the play when
he comes to hear them. I should like to introduce Miss Millar to him
if she were not so frightened, and if she had taken the place which
she ought to have held to begin with. It is too late to rectify the
mistake and set her to work this term, and she had much better not go
in for the Markham scholarship which her father spoke of--that would
be worse than useless. But we'll turn over a new leaf next term. After
all, she is very young; and I suppose it is of no great consequence
that she has wasted her first half. Her family are professional
people, and these are generally well off." (Miss Lascelles was the
portionless daughter of the impecunious younger son of a poor
nobleman.)

When the play was performed nearly all the classical scholars of St.
Ambrose's--and what was a man doing at St. Ambrose's if he were not a
classical scholar, unless, to be sure, he happened to be a philosopher
of the first water, or a profound expounder of Anglo-Saxon, or a
strangely and wonderfully informed pundit?--came with their wives
and daughters, and graciously applauded the daring deed.

As for Keturah Vanhansen, she wore her _riviere_ of diamonds, dripping,
dancing, flashing like water that was perpetually flowing, and yet, by
some enchantment, arrested in its flow in glorious suspension. Set in
the middle of the enchanted water was such a breast-knot of rare,
exquisite, uncannily grotesque orchids as no queen or princess had ever
been seen to wear in St. Ambrose's. Indeed, it might have suited the
Queen of Sheba.

Miss Vanhansen announced that she wore her war-paint to do honour to the
Thirlwall Hall play, and to May Millar, whom she had forgiven, for
rancour never yet dwelt in the Yankee breast. "Alcestis" was a little
long, and "real right down funny," as her Aunt Sally would have said,
though it was a tragedy, and she, Keturah Vanhansen, did not understand
a word of it, notwithstanding this was her last year at Thirlwall Hall.
One good joke was the man who was in cats' skins, and carried a kitchen
poker for a club, and was half a head shorter than she was, and she was
not big; they should see her Aunt Abe if they wanted to know what a big
woman was like. Another joke was the sacks for the ladies' frocks, with
holes for the head and feet, and holes for the arms, so nice and simple,
and so graceful; Worth ought to get a hint of the costume. Only it was
not very distinctive, when one regarded the corresponding sacks for the
gentlemen. There was really nothing to mark out the ladies except the
large towels which they wore hanging down their backs, while the
gentlemen had Inverness capes over their sacks, fastened on the
shoulders with Highland brooches. How came the Greeks, in the time of
Euripides, to know about Inverness capes and Highland brooches? She,
Keturah Vanhansen, had been so startled by what she feared might be a
frightful anachronism that all her false hair had fallen off, and she
had been left like one of her Aunt Abe's moulting fowls.

The truth was that, in the matter of hair, nature had favoured Miss
Vanhansen with a peculiarly fine and luxuriant crop, so that she had no
need to apply to art for its help.

But as for May, she saw nothing and heard nothing of the discrepancies
which might mar the ancient story to far less ostentatiously
matter-of-fact and mocking critics than the would-be barbarian from
beyond the herring-pond. The piteous tragedy was enacted in all its
terror and pathos to May. She forgot even to sigh for one of the
original great open-air amphitheatres, with the cloudless blue sky of
Greece overhead, which had been the fit setting to those old-world
plays; while she appreciated, without being conscious of the
appreciation, every scenic item--the double stage, the attendant chorus,
the classic dress, that had awakened Miss Vanhansen's ridicule, from the
sandal on the foot to the toque on the head--all which could lend
verisimilitude to the spectacle. For the benefit of happy May, Alcestis
lived again in modern St. Ambrose's. Once more she suffered and died
willingly in the room of Admetus; once more the miserable husband's
half-heroic, half-savage ally, Harakles, fought Death for his pale prey,
and brought back the sacrificed wife from Hades, to restore her--a
figure veiled and motionless, yet instinct with glad life, every vein
throbbing with love and thankfulness--to the arms of her husband, more
joyful, and at the same time, in the middle of his joy, more full of
yearning sorrow and self-abasement than ever was happy bridegroom.

On the day after the play, Miss Lascelles casually mentioned to May that
even if she went in for the coming examination, she, Miss Lascelles,
thought May had better not try for the Markham scholarship.

"But I must, Miss Lascelles," protested May, starting up as if she
were awakening from a dream, and opening great eyes of distress and
apprehension--feelings which were only at that moment called into
life. "My father would be so vexed and disappointed if I did not."

"If you will take my advice, my dear, you will wait till next year;
there will be another scholarship falling in then. Very many of the
Thirlwall Hall girls do much better the second year than they have done
the first," Miss Lascelles continued to warn her girl-graduate, with the
delicate consideration and tact which qualified the lady principal for
her office. "It is bad policy to enter hastily into a competition with
failure staring you in the face. It will only serve to dishearten you,
and to mislead people with regard to what I am now certain--I can
honestly congratulate you on my conviction--are your really exceptional
gifts. You will do Thirlwall Hall credit, and we shall all be proud of
you, if you will have patience. You are very young; you can afford to
wait. It is a common occurrence for clever, studious girls, and lads
too, to come up to St. Ambrose's from the country, from private schools
or home-teaching, who are not sufficiently exact in their scholarship,
and do nothing beyond remedying the defect in their first or even their
second year. You don't grudge giving what is but a fraction of your
life, after all, to thorough as opposed to superficial learning, do you,
dear? Remember, the one is worthy and the other worthless--a mere
pretentious waste."

"I cannot help it," said May, with a little gasp of despair. "To wait is
just what I cannot afford to do. I am almost certain that my coming up
next year depends on what I can do this term. We have grown quite poor.
Father has lost a great deal of money lately. Even if he were content
to send me back here, I do not think it would be right in me to come,
unless I could do something to lessen the expense. My sister Annie is
in London learning to be a nurse, and my sister Rose is coming out as
an artist."

"I thought they were doing it from choice. Why did you not apply
yourself before, Miss Millar? You knew what you could do, better than
any of us here could possibly guess your talents and attainments.
From your general behaviour until the play was started, I for one, I
confess, fell into the grave error of supposing that you could do
little or nothing, or that any progress you had made was entirely
forced work." Miss Lascelles spoke sharply, for she was considerably
discomfited, and full of unavailing regret for her share in the
misadventure.

May could not tell her that she had been too miserable about coming
away from home, and leaving her mother and father, Dora and Tray, to
apply herself to learning; neither would there have been much use in
her applying if she had been destined to fade away presently as she
had imagined, and to die, bereft, among the lexicons, commentaries,
and lecture-notes of Thirlwall Hall. She preferred to say with meek
contriteness that she knew she had been very idle, but she would do
her best to atone for her idleness by working every lawful moment of
every hour of the few weeks which were left to her, if Miss Lascelles
would but allow her to go in for the examination, preparatory to
trying for the scholarship.

Miss Lascelles could not prevent her, she told May a little dryly, for
the students of Thirlwall Hall, though some of them were no more than
seventeen--May's age--were all regarded and treated as grown-up young
women capable of judging and acting for themselves. What Miss Lascelles
was bound to do was to see that Miss Millar did not run into the
opposite extreme, and bring on a brain fever by over-study. "And you
know, my dear," finished the kind, experienced woman, who was easily
softened, who had always the greatest difficulty to keep from being
sympathetic, "that would be a great deal worse than merely being turned
back in your examinations, though Dr. Millar is not rich, and there may
be obstacles--I sincerely trust they will not be insurmountable--to your
coming back in the autumn, to work with a will and at the same time with
moderation."

Poor May did not work herself into a brain fever, but she did in
other respects exactly as Miss Lascelles--a woman who understood
the position--had clearly foreseen. May succeeded in fretting, and
worrying, and getting herself into a state of nervous agitation.
Her brain, or that part of it which had to do with grammatical
declensions, derivations, rules, and principles, became a complete
muddle, so that in place of taking in new information, it seemed to
be rapidly letting go the old which it had once held securely.

Before the eventful day of May's examination, she had lost the last
shred of hope, and so had all who had heard her or formed a correct
estimate of the contents of her papers, of her crossing the rubicon. Of
her own accord she sorrowfully refrained from making any move to enter
the lists for the scholarship.

It is the fashion at St. Ambrose's not to issue the result of the
examinations for a considerable number of weeks, during which the
unhappy candidates hang on the tenterhooks of expectation. A looker-on
is inclined to consider this a refinement of cruelty till he or she has
taken into consideration that the motive of the protracted suspense is
to suit the convenience and lessen the arduous labours of the toil-worn
professors and tutors who serve as examiners.

But in May Millar's case her failure was such a foregone conclusion, was
so remedial by reason of her youth, and so qualified by the share she
had taken in the Greek play, that a point was stretched for her, and she
was privately put out of pain at once. Latterly May had not entertained
the slightest expectation of any other sentence, yet the blow fell so
heavily upon her that it was well it was the end of the term.

To do Thirlwall Hall no more than justice, everybody was sorry for
their youngest, gentlest, prettiest, most inspired, and withal most
inoffensive and obliging student. Miss Lascelles took May into her
private sitting-room and recklessly lavished the few moments the lady
principal had in which to rest and recruit from the fatigue of
receiving company, and playing a becoming part in the academical
gaieties with which the summer term at St. Ambrose's closes, in order
to speak encouraging words to the poor crestfallen child. Miss
Vanhansen implored May to cross the herring-pond at her expense, and
have a good time among the Barbarian's relations in Ol' Virginny and
Kentuck. The girl who had played Alcestis wanted to inaugurate a
reading-party in which May should be coached all round every day.
Failing this, the same adventurous spirit would get up a series of
Greek plays in London drawing-rooms, with Miss Millar's assistance;
and so far as she herself was concerned, she would never be contented
till Miss Millar played Admetus to her Alcestis. A large deputation of
blue-stockinged maidens from Thirlwall Hall escorted May to the
railway station, and more than one was relieved to find that she was
going first to join her sisters in London instead of carrying the
mortification of her failure straight to her country-town home.

It might be the deferring of an ordeal, and yet it was with a white
face, as abashed and well-nigh as scared as if she had committed a
crime, that May awaited Annie in the drawing-room to which the
probationers' friends were free at St. Ebbe's. The consciousness had
come too late of having wasted the little money her father had to spare
on sentimental self-indulgence and the gratification of her own feelings
instead of employing it as it was meant to be employed, in controlling
herself and doing her duty, so as to acquire fitting arms for the battle
of life.

It was this horrible comprehension which made her wistful eyes grow
distended and fixed in their sense of guilt and disgrace. She might have
committed a forgery, and be come to tell Annie what she had done. May
was essentially one-idea'd at this period of her life, and she had dwelt
on the fact of her failure and exaggerated its importance, like the most
egotistical of human beings, till it filled her imagination and blotted
out every other consideration.

Annie, in the full career of a busy professional morning, snatched a
