so far in his work, Swartboy had taken measures to prevent that.  He had
stayed the tree by fastening the rheim to its upper branches on the
_opposite_ side, and then carrying the rope to the limbs of another tree
that stood out in that direction.

Thus adjusted, the elephant's tree was only kept from falling by the
rheim-stay; and a slight push, in the direction of the latter, would
have thrown over.

Swartboy now replaced the section of bark, which he had preserved; and
after carefully collecting the chips, no one, without close examination,
could have told that the tree had ever felt the edge of an axe.

Another operation yet remained to be performed--that was the planting of
the stakes, already prepared by Von Bloom and Hendrik.  To set these
firmly deep holes had to be made.  But Swartboy was just the man to make
a hole; and in less than ten minutes he had sunk three, each over a foot
deep, and not a half-inch wider than the thickness of the stakes!

You may be curious to know how he accomplished this.  You would have dug
a hole with a spade, and necessarily as wide as the spade itself.  But
Swartboy had no spade, and would not have used it if there had been
one--since it would have made the holes too large for his purpose.

Swartboy sunk his holes by "crowing"--which process he performed by
means of a small pointed stick.  With this he first loosened the earth
in a circle of the proper size.  He then took out the detached mould,
flung it away, and used the point of the "crowing stick" as before.
Another clearing out of mould, another application of the stick; and so
on, till the narrow hole was deemed of sufficient depth.  That was how
Swartboy "crowed" the holes.

They were sunk in a kind of triangle near the bottom of the tree, but on
the side opposite to that where the elephant would stand, should he
occupy his old ground.

In each hole Swartboy now set a stake, thick end down and point upwards;
some small pebbles, and a little mould worked in at the sides, wedged
them as firmly as if they had grown there.

The stakes were now daubed over with soft earth, to conceal the white
colour of the wood; the remaining chips were picked up, and all traces
of the work completely obliterated.  This done, the hunters withdraw
from the spot.

They did not go far; but choosing a large bushy tree to leeward, all
three climbed up into it, and sat concealed among its branches.

The field-cornet held his long "roer" in readiness, and so did Hendrik
his rifle.  In case the ingenious trap of Swartboy should fail, they
intended to use their guns, but not otherwise.

It was now quite noon, and the day had turned into one of the hottest.
But for the shade afforded by the leaves, they would have felt it very
distressing.  Swartboy prognosticated favourably from this.  The great
heat would be more likely than anything else to send the elephant to his
favourite sleeping-place under the cool shady cover of the cameel-doorn.

It was now quite noon.  He could not be long in coming, thought they.

Sure enough he came, and soon, too.

They had not been twenty minutes on their perch, when they heard a
strange, rumbling noise, which they knew proceeded from the stomach of
an elephant.  The next moment they saw one emerge from the jungle, and
walk, with sweeping step, straight up to the tree.  He seemed to have no
suspicion of any danger; but placed himself at once alongside the trunk
of the acacia--in the very position and on the side Swartboy had said he
would take.  From his spoor the Bushman knew he had been in the habit of
so standing.

His head was turned from the hunters, but not so much as to prevent them
from seeing a pair of splendid tusks,--six feet long at the least.

While gazing in admiration at these rich trophies, they saw the animal
point his proboscis upward, and discharge a vast shower of water into
the leaves, which afterwards fell dripping in bright globules over his
body!

Swartboy said that he drew the water from his stomach.  Although
closet-naturalists deny this, it must have been so; for shortly after,
he repeated the act again and again--the quantity of water at each
discharge being as great as before.  It was plain that his trunk, large
as it was, could not have contained it all.

He seemed to enjoy this "shower-bath;" and the hunters did not wonder at
it, for they themselves, suffering at the time from heat and thirst,
would have relished something of a similar kind.  As the crystal drops
fell back from the acacia leaves, the huge animal was heard to utter a
low grunt expressive of gratification.  The hunters hoped that this was
the prelude to his sleep, and watched him with intense earnestness.

It proved to be so.

As they sat gazing, they noticed that his head sunk a little, his ears
ceased their flapping, his tail hung motionless, and his trunk, now
twined around his tusks, remained at rest.

They gaze intently.  Now they see his body droop a little to one side--
now it touches the tree--there is heard a loud crack, followed by a
confused crashing of branches--and the huge dark body of the elephant
sinks upon its side.

At the same instant a terrible scream drowns all other sounds, causing
the forest to echo, and the very leaves to quake.  Then follows a
confused roaring, mingled with the noise of cracking branches, and the
struggles of the mighty brute where he lies kicking his giant limbs
along the earth, in the agonies of death!

The hunters remain in the tree.  They see that the elephant is down--
that he is impaled.  There will be no need for their puny weapons.
Their game has already received the death-wound.

The struggle is of short duration.  The painful breathing that precedes
death is heard issuing from the long proboscis; and then follows a deep
ominous silence.

The hunters leap down, and approach the prostrate body.  They see that
it still lies upon the terrible _chevaux de frise_, where it had fallen.
The stakes have done their work most effectively.  The elephant
breathes no more.  He is dead!

It was the work of an hour to cut out those splendid tusks.  But our
hunters thought nothing of that; and they were only the more pleased to
find each of them a heavy load--as much as a man could carry!

Von Bloom shouldered one, Swartboy the other while Hendrik loaded
himself with the guns and implements; and all three, leaving the carcass
of the dead elephant behind them, returned triumphantly to camp.



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE WILD-ASSES OF AFRICA.

Notwithstanding the success of the day's hunt the mind of Von Bloom was
not at rest.  They had "bagged" their game, it was true, but in what
manner?  Their success was a mere accident, and gave them no earnest of
what might be expected in the future.  They might go long before finding
another "sleeping-tree" of the elephants, and repeating their easy
capture.

Such were the not very pleasant reflections of the field-cornet, on the
evening after returning from their successful hunt.

But still less pleasant were they, two weeks later, at the retrospect of
many an unsuccessful chase from which they had returned--when, after
twelve days spent in "jaging" the elephant, they had added only a single
pair of tusks to the collection, and these the tusks of a cow-elephant,
scarce two feet in length, and of little value!

The reflection was not the less painful, that nearly every day they had
fallen in with elephants, and had obtained a shot or two at these
animals.  That did not mend the matter a bit.  On the contrary, it
taught the hunter how easily they could run away from him, as they
invariably did.  It taught him how small his chances were of capturing
such game, so long as he could only follow it _afoot_.

The hunter on foot stands but a poor chance with the elephant.  Stalking
in upon one is easy enough, and perhaps obtaining a single shot; but
when the animal trots off through the thick jungle, it is tedious work
following him.  He may go miles before halting, and even if the hunter
should overtake him, it may be only to deliver a second shot, and see
the game once more disappear into the bushes--perhaps to be spoored no
farther.

Now the mounted hunter has this advantage.  His horse _can overtake_ the
elephant; and it is a peculiarity of this animal, that the moment he
finds that his enemy, whatever it be, _can_ do that thing, he disdains
to run any farther, but at once stands to bay; and the hunter may then
deliver as many shots as he pleases.

Herein lies the great advantage of the hunter on horseback.  Another
advantage is the security the horse affords, enabling his rider to avoid
the charges of the angry elephant.

No wonder Von Bloom sighed for a horse.  No wonder he felt grieved at
the want of this noble companion, that would have aided him so much in
the chase.

He grieved all the more, now that he had become acquainted with the
district, and had found it so _full_ of elephants.  Troops of an hundred
had been seen; and these far from being shy, or disposed to make off
after a shot or two.  Perhaps they had never heard the report of a gun
before that of his own long roer pealed in their huge ears.

_With_ a horse the field-cornet believed he could have killed many, and
obtained much valuable ivory.  _Without_ one, his chances of carrying
out his design were poor indeed.  His hopes were likely to end in
disappointment.

He felt this keenly.  The bright prospects he had so ardently indulged
in, became clouded over; and fears for the future once more harassed
him.  He would only waste his time in this wilderness.  His children
would live without books, without education, without society.  Were he
to be suddenly called away, what would become of them?  His pretty
Gertrude would be no better off than a little savage--his sons would
become not in sport, as he was wont to call them, but in reality a trio
of "Bush-boys."

Once more these thoughts filled the heart of the father with pain.  Oh!
what would he not have given at that moment for a pair of horses, of any
sort whatever?

The field-cornet, while making these reflections, was seated in the
great nwana-tree, upon the platform, that had been built on the side
towards the lake, and from which a full view could be obtained of the
water.  From this point a fine view could also be obtained of the
country which lay to the eastward of the lake.  At some distance off it
was wooded, but nearer the vley a grassy plain lay spread before the eye
like a green meadow.

The eyes of the hunter were turned outward on this plain, and just then
his glance tell upon a troop of animals crossing the open ground, and
advancing towards the vley.

They were large animals--nearly of the shape and size of small horses--
and travelling in single file; as they were, the troop at a distance
presented something of the appearance of a "cafila," or caravan.  There
were in all about fifty individuals in the line; and they marched along
with a steady sober pace, as if under the guidance and direction of some
wise leader.  How very different from the capricious and eccentric
movements of the gnoos!

Individually they bore some resemblance to these last-named animals.  In
the shape of their bodies and tails, in their general ground colour, and
in the "brindled" or tiger-like stripes that could be perceived upon
their cheeks, neck, and shoulders.  These stripes were exactly of the
same form as those upon a zebra; but far less distinct, and not
extending to the body or limbs, as is the case with the true zebra.  In
general colour, and in some other respects, the animals reminded one of
the ass; but their heads, necks, and the upper part of their bodies,
were of darker hue, slightly tinged with reddish-brown.  In fact, the
new-comers had points of resemblance to all four--horse, ass, gnoo, and
zebra--and yet they were distinct from any.  To the zebra they bore the
greatest resemblance--for they were in reality a species of zebra--they
were _quaggas_.

Modern naturalists have divided the _Equidae_, or horse family, into two
genera--the _horse (equus_) and the _ass (asinus_)--the principal points
of distinction being, that animals of the horse kind have long flowing
manes, full tails, and warty callosities on both hind and fore limbs;
while asses, on the contrary, have short, meagre, and upright manes,
tails slender and furnished only with long hairs at the extremity, and
their hind limbs wanting the callosities.  These, however, are found on
the fore-legs as upon horses.

Although there are many varieties of the horse genus--scores of them,
widely differing from each other--they can all be easily recognised by
these characteristic marks, from the "Suffolk Punch," the great London
dray-horse, down to his diminutive little cousin the "Shetland Pony."

The varieties of the ass are nearly as numerous, though this fact is not
generally known.

First, we have the common ass (_Asinus vulgaris_), the type of the
genus; and of this there are many breeds in different countries, some
nearly as elegant and as highly prized as horses.  Next there is the
"onagra," "koulan," or "wild-ass" (_Asinus onager_), supposed to be the
origin of the common kind.  This is a native of Asia, though it is also
found in the north-eastern parts of Africa.  There is also the
"dziggetai," or "great wild-ass" (_Asinus hemionus_), of Central and
Southern Asia, and another smaller species the "ghur" (_Asinus Hamar_)
found in Persia.  Again, there is the "kiang" (_Asinus kiang_) met with
in Ladakh, and the "yo-totze" (_Asinus equulus_), an inhabitant of
Chinese Tartary.

All these are Asiatic species, found in a wild state, and differing from
one another in colour, size, form, and even in habits.  Many of them are
of elegant form, and swift as the swiftest horses.

In this little book we cannot afford room for a description of each, but
must confine our remarks to what is more properly our subject--_the
wild-asses of Africa_.  Of these there are six or seven kinds--perhaps
more.

First, there is the "wild-ass" (_Asinus onager_), which, as already
stated, extends from Asia into the north-eastern parts of Africa,
contiguous to the former continent.

Next there is the "koomrah," of which very little is known, except that
it inhabits the forests of Northern Africa, and is solitary in its
habits, unlike most of the other species.  The koomrah has been
described as a "wild horse," but, most probably, it belongs to the genus
_asinus_.

Now there are four other species of "wild-asses" in Africa--wild horses
some call them--and a fifth reported by travellers, but as yet
undetermined.  These species bear such a resemblance to one another in
their form, the peculiar markings of their bodies, size, and general
habits, that they may be classed together under the title of the _zebra_
family.  First, there is the true zebra (_Equus zebra_), perhaps the
most beautiful of all quadrupeds, and of which no description need be
given.  Second, the "dauw," or "Burchell's zebra," as it is more
frequently called (_Equus Burchellii_).  Third, the "Congo dauw" (_Equus
hippotigris_), closely resembling the dauw.  Fourth, the "quagga"
(_Equus quagga_); and fifth, the undetermined species known as the
"white zebra" (_Equus Isabellinus_), so-called from its pale yellow, or
Isabella colour.

These five species evidently have a close affinity with each other--all
of them being more or less marked with the peculiar transversal bands or
"stripes," which are the well-known characteristics of the zebra.  Even
the quagga is so banded upon the head and upper parts of its body.

The zebra proper is "striped" from the tip of the nose to its very
hoofs, and the bands are of a uniform black, while the ground colour is
nearly white, or white tinged with a pale yellow.  The "dauws," on the
other hand, are not banded upon the legs; the rays are not so dark or
well defined, and the ground colour is not so pure or clean-looking.
For the rest, all these three species are much alike; and it is more
than probable that either "Burchell's" or the "congo dauw", was the
species to which the name of "zebra" was first applied; for that which
is now called the "true zebra" inhabits those parts of Africa where it
was less likely to have been the first observed of that genus.  At all
events, the "congo dauw" is the "hippotigris," or tiger-horse, of the
Romans; and this we infer from its inhabiting a more northerly part of
Africa than the others, all of which belong to the southern half of that
continent.  The habitat of the zebra is said to extend as far north as
Abyssinia; but, perhaps, the "congo dauw," which certainly inhabits
Abyssinia, has been mistaken for the true zebra.

Of the four species in South Africa, the zebra is a mountain animal, and
dwells among the cliffs, while the dauw and quagga rove over the plains
and wild karoo deserts.  In similar situations to these has the "white
zebra" been observed--though only by the traveller Le Vaillant--and
hence the doubt about its existence as a distinct species.

None of the kinds associate together, though each herds with other
animals!  The quagga keeps company with the gnoo, the "dauw" with the
