before him, but the carle was light and the old man was heavy, so he
could not help it.  I was about to follow, when a man cut at my head
with a great axe as I looked up through the hole.  I caught the blow on
my shield, and thrust my sword up into his leg, which made him give
back; but just at that moment the earth gave way under our feet, and a
great mass of stones and rubbish fell down on us, driving us all back
into the passage through which we had come, except the house-carle, who
had been caught by the enemy and dragged up into the hall.  As soon as
we could get on our feet we tried to make for the hole again, but it was
so filled with earth and stones that we could not get forward a step.
Knowing, therefore, that it was useless to stay longer there, we ran
back to the entrance of the tunnel, but here we found a body of men who
had been sent out of the castle to cut off our retreat.  We made short
work of these.  Disappointment and anger had made every man of us equal
to two, so we hewed our way right through them, and got back to the camp
with the loss of only two men besides the house-carle.

"Next morning when it was daylight, the enemy brought the poor prisoner
to the top of the castle wall, where they lopped off his head, and,
having cut his body into four pieces, they cast them down to us with
shouts of contempt.

"After this Guttorm Stoutheart appeared to lose all his fire and spirit.
He sent for his chief men, and said that he was going to die, and that
it was his wish to be left to do so undisturbed.  Then he went into his
tent, and no one was allowed after that to go near him except his
nephew.

"A week later we were told that Guttorm was dying, and that he wanted to
be buried inside the castle; for we had discovered that the people were
what they called Christians, and that they had consecrated ground there.

"When this was made known to the priests in the castle they were much
pleased, and agreed to bury our chief in their ground, if we would bring
his body to a spot near the front gateway, and there leave it and retire
to a safe distance from the walls.  There was some objection to this at
first, hit it was finally agreed to--only a request was made that two of
the next of kin to Guttorm might be allowed to accompany the body to the
burial-place, as it would be considered a lasting disgrace to the family
if it were buried by strange hands when friends were near.  This request
was granted on the understanding that the two relations were to go into
the castle unarmed.

"On the day of the funeral I was summoned to Guttorm's tent to help to
put him into his coffin, which had been made for him after the pattern
of the coffins used in that part of the country.  When I entered I found
the nephew standing by the side of the coffin, and the old Sea-king
himself sitting on the foot of it.

"`Thou art not quite dead yet?' says I, looking hard in his face.

"`Not yet,' says he, `and I don't expect to be for some time.'

"`Are we to put you into the coffin?'  I asked.

"`Yes,' says he, `and see that my good axe lies ready to my hand.  Put
thy sword on my left side, nephew, that thou mayst catch it readily.
They bury me in consecrated ground to-day, Kettle; and thou, being one
of my nearest of kin, must attend me to the grave!  Thou must go unarmed
too, but that matters little, for thy sword can be placed on the top of
my coffin, along with thy shield, to do duty as the weapons of the dead.
When to use them I leave to thy well-known discretion.  Dost
understand?'

"`Your speech is not difficult for the understanding to take in,' says
I.

"`Ha! especially the understanding of an Irishman,' says he, with a
smile.  `Well, help me to get into this box, and see that thou dost not
run it carelessly against gate-posts; for it is not made to be roughly
handled!'

"With that old Guttorm lay back in the coffin, and we packed in the
nephew's sword and shield with him, and his own axe and shield at his
right side.  Then we fastened down the lid, and two men were called to
assist us in carrying it to the appointed place.

"As we walked slowly forward I saw that our men were drawn up in a line
at some distance from the castle wall, with their heads hanging down, as
if they were in deep grief,--and so they were, for only a _few_ were
aware of what was going to be done; yet all were armed, and ready for
instant action.  The appointed spot being reached, we put the coffin on
the ground, and ordered the two men, who were armed, to retire.

"`But don't go far away, lads,' says I; `for we have work for ye to do.'

"They went back only fifty ells or so, and then turned to look on.

"At the same time the gate of the castle opened, and twelve priests came
out dressed in long black robes, and carrying a cross before them.  One
of them, who understood the Norse language, said, as they came forward--

"`What meaneth the sword and shield?'

"I told him that it was our custom to bury a warrior's arms along with
him.  He seemed inclined to object to this at first, but thinking better
of it, he ordered four of his men to take up the coffin, which they did,
shoulder high, and marched back to the castle, closely followed by the
two chief mourners.

"No sooner had we entered the gateway, which was crowded with warriors,
than I stumbled against the coffin, and drove it heavily against one of
the posts, and, pretending to stretch out my hands to support it, I
seized my sword and shield.  At the same moment the lid of the coffin
flew into the air, the sides burst out, and old Guttorm dropped to the
ground, embracing two of the priests so fervently in his descent that
they fell on the top of him.  I had only time to observe that the nephew
caught up his sword and shield as they fell among the wreck, when a
shower of blows from all directions called for the most rapid action of
eye and limb.  Before Guttorm could regain his feet and utter his
war-cry, I had lopped off two heads, and the nephew's sword was whirling
round him like lightning flashes, but of course I could not see what he
did.  The defenders fought bravely, and in the first rush we were almost
borne back; but in another moment the two men who had helped us to carry
the coffin were alongside of us; and now, having a front of five stout
men, we began to feel confident of success.  This was turned into
certainty when we heard, a minute later, a great rushing sound behind
us, and knew that our men were coming on.  Old Guttorm swung his
battle-axe as if it had been a toy, and, uttering a tremendous roar, cut
his way right into the middle of the castle.  We all closed in behind
him; the foe wavered--they gave way--at last they turned and fled; for
remembering, no doubt, how they had treated the poor house-carle, they
knew they had no right to expect mercy.  In a quarter of an hour the
place was cleared, and the castle was ours."

"And what didst thou do with it?" asked Alric, in much excitement.

"Do with it?  Of course we feasted in it till we were tired; then we put
as much of its valuables into our ships as they could carry, after which
we set the place on fire and returned to Norway."

"'Twas well done, and a lucky venture," observed Solve Klofe.

Alric appeared to meditate for a few minutes, and then said with a
smile--

"If Christian the hermit were here he would say it was ill done, and an
unlucky venture for the men of the castle."

"The hermit is a fool," said Solve.

"That he is not," cried the boy, reddening.  "A braver and better man
never drew bow.  But he has queer thoughts in his head."

"That may be so.  It matters naught to me," retorted Solve, rising and
going forward to the high prow of the ship, whence he looked out upon
the island-studded sea.--"Come, lads, change hands again, and pull with
a will.  Methinks a breeze will fill our sails after we pass yonder
point, and if so, we shall sleep to-night in Horlingdal."



CHAPTER TWENTY.

IN WHICH THE SKY AGAIN BECOMES OVERCAST--THE WAR-TOKEN IS SENT OUT--
ALRIC GETS A SURPRISE, AND A BERSERK CATCHES A TARTAR.

Erling the Bold was very fond of salmon-fishing, and it was his wont,
when the weather suited, and nothing of greater importance claimed his
attention, to sally forth with a three-pronged spear to fish in the
Horlingdal river, which swarmed with salmon in the summer season of the
year.

One evening he left Haldorstede with his fishing-spear on his shoulder,
and went up to the river, accompanied by one of the house-carles.  They
both wore shirts of mail, and carried shield and sword, for these were
not times in which men could venture to go about unarmed.  On reaching a
place where the stream ran shallow among rocks, our hero waded in, and
at the first dart of his spear struck a fish of about fifteen pounds
weight, which he cast, like a bar of burnished silver, on the grassy
bank.

"That will be our supper to-night," observed the carle, as he disengaged
the spear.

Erling made no reply, but in a few minutes he pulled out another fish,
and said, as he threw it down--

"That will do for a friend, should one chance to turn in to us
to-night."

After that he tried again, but struck no more, although he changed his
ground frequently; so he cast his eyes upwards as if to judge of the
time of evening, and appeared to doubt whether or not he should
persevere any longer.

"Try the foss," suggested the house-carle; "you seldom fail to get one
there."

"Well, I will try it.  Do thou leave the fish under that bush, and
follow me.  It needs three big fish to make a good feast for my father's
household."

"Besides," said the carle, "there is luck in an odd number, as Kettle
Flatnose is fond of telling us."

They were about to ascend the bank to the track which led to the
waterfall, about half a mile farther up the river, when their attention
was arrested by a shout; looking down the stream in the direction whence
it came, they saw a figure approaching them at full speed.

"That must be my brother Alric," said Erling, on hearing the shout
repeated.

"It looks like him," said the carle.

All doubt on the point was quickly set at rest by the lad, who ran at a
pace which soon brought him near.  Waving his cap above his head he
shouted--

"News! news! good news!"

"Out with thy news, then," said Erling, as Alric stood before him,
panting violently, "though I dare say the best news thou hast to give is
that thou hast come back to us safe and well."

"Hah! let me get wind! nay, I have better news than that," exclaimed
Alric; "Harald is coming--King Harald Haarfager--with a monstrous fleet
of longships, cutters, dragons, and little boats, and a mighty host of
men, to lay waste Horlingdal with fire and sword, and burn us all alive,
perhaps eat us too, who knows!"

"Truly if this be good news," said Erling, with a laugh, "I hope I may
never hear bad news.  But where got ye such news, Alric?"

"From the widow Gunhild, to be sure, who is true to us as steel, and
comes all the way from Drontheim, out of love to thee, Erling, to tell
it.  But, I say, _don't_ you think this good news?  I always thought you
would give your best battle-axe to have a chance of fighting Harald!"

"Aye, truly, for a chance of fighting Harald, but not for that chance
coupled with the other chance of seeing Horlingdal laid waste with fire
and sword, to say nothing of being eaten alive, which, I suppose, is
thine own addition to the news, boy.  But come, if this be so, we do not
well to waste time chattering here.  Fetch the two fish, carle.
To-night we must be content with what luck lies in an even number in
spite of the opinion of Kettle Flatnose.--Come, Alric, thou canst tell
me more of this as we hasten home."

"But I have more good news than that to tell," said the lad, as they
hurried towards Haldorstede.  "Solve Klofe with his men have come back
with us--indeed, I may rather say that we have come back with Solve, for
our own ship has been wrecked and lost, but Kettle and I and Thorer and
all the men were saved by Solve, with nearly everything belonging to us,
and all the booty.  It is not more than an hour since we sailed into the
fiord, loaded to the shield-circle with, oh! _such_ splendid things--
gold, silver, cups, tankards, gems, shawls--and--and I know not what
all, besides captives.  It was just after we landed that a small boat
came round the ness from the north with the widow Gunhild in it, and she
jumped ashore, and told what she had seen and heard at Drontheim, and
that we may expect Ada's father, King Hakon, in his longship, to our
aid; perhaps he may be coming into the fiord even now while we are
talking.  And--and, she said also that Rolf Ganger had left the King in
a huff, and perhaps we might look for help from him too.  So methinks I
bring good news, don't I?"

"Good, aye, and stirring news, my boy," cried Erling striding onward at
such a pace that the carle with the fish was left behind, and Alric was
compelled to adopt an undignified trot in order to keep up with his huge
brother.  "From this I see," continued Erling in a tone of deep
seriousness, "that the long-looked-for time is at last approaching.
This battle that must surely come will decide the fate of freemen.  King
Harald Haarfager must now be crushed, or Norway shall be enslaved.
Alric, my boy, thou hast been styled Lightfoot.  If ever thou didst
strive to merit that title, strive this night as ye have never striven
before, for there is urgent need that every friendly blade in the land
should assemble in the dale without delay.  I will send thee forth with
the split arrow as soon as I have seen and spoken with my father.--Ha!
I see him coming.  Go into the house, lad, and sup well and quickly, for
no sleep shall visit thine eyelids this night."

Alric's breast swelled with gratification at being spoken to thus
earnestly and made of such importance by his brother, whom he admired
and loved with an intensity of feeling that no words can convey.
Looking up in his face with sparkling eyes, he gave him a little nod.
Erling replied with another little nod and a sedate smile, and the boy,
turning away, dashed into the house, at which they had now arrived.

"Hast heard the news, Erling?" asked Haldor, as his son drew near.

"Aye, Alric has told it me."

"What thinkest thou?"

"That the game is about to be played out."

Haldor looked full in Erling's face, and his own noble countenance
glowed with an expression of majesty which cannot be described, and
which arose from the deep conviction that one of the most momentous eras
in his life had arrived--a period in which his own fate and that of all
he held most dear would in all probability be sealed.  Death or victory,
he felt assured, were now the alternatives; and when he reflected on the
great power of the King, and the stern necessity there was for the
exertion of not only the utmost bravery, but the most consummate skill,
his whole being glowed with suppressed emotion, while his bearing
betokened the presence, and bore the dignified stamp, of a settled
purpose to do his best, and meet his fate, for weal or woe, manfully.

"Come," said he, putting his arm within that of his stout son, "let us
turn into the wood awhile.  I would converse with thee on this matter."

"Alric is ready to start with the token," said Erling.

"I know it, my son.  Let him sup first; the women will care well for
him, for they will guess the work that lies before him.  The people of
Ulfstede are with us to-night, and Glumm is here; but Glumm is not of
much use as a counsellor just now, poor fellow.  It were kind to let him
be, until it is time to rouse him up to fight!"

A quiet smile played on Haldor's lips as he thus alluded to the
impossibility of getting Glumm to think of anything but love or fighting
at that time.

While the father and son strolled in the wood conversing earnestly, a
noisy animated scene was presented in the great hall of Haldorstede; for
in it were assembled, besides the ordinary household, the family from
Ulfstede, a sprinkling of the neighbours, Gunhild and her men, Guttorm
Stoutheart, and Solve Klofe, with Kettle Flatnose, Thorer the Thick, and
the chief men who had arrived from the recent viking cruise; all of whom
were talking together in the utmost excitement, while the fair Herfrida
and her daughters and maids prepared a sumptuous meal.

In those days, and at such an establishment as that of Haldor the
Fierce, it was not possible for friends to appear inopportunely.  A
dozen might have "dropped in" to breakfast, dinner, or supper, without
costing Dame Herfrida an anxious thought as to whether the cold joint of
yesterday "would do", or something more must be procured, for she knew
that the larder was always well stocked.  When, therefore, a miniature
army of hungry warriors made a sudden descent upon her, she was quite
prepared for them--received them with the matronly dignity and
captivating smile for which she was celebrated, and at once gave
directions to her commissariat department to produce and prepare meat
and drink suitable to the occasion.

The evening which had thus grown so unexpectedly big with present facts
and future portents had begun in a very small way--in a way somewhat
equivalent to the modern "small tea party".  Ulf of Romsdal, feeling a
disposition "to make a night of it", had propounded to Dame Astrid the
idea of "going up to Haldorstede for the evening."  His wife, being
amiably disposed, agreed.  Hilda and Ada were equally willing, and
Glumm, who by a mere chance happened to be there at the time, could not
choose but accompany them!

The family at Haldorstede were delighted to see their friends.  Dame
Herfrida carried off Dame Astrid to her apartment to divest her of her
hat and mantle.  Ingeborg bore off Ada, and the younger girls of the
household made away with Hilda, leaving Ulf to talk the politics of the
day with Haldor, while Glumm pretended to listen to them, but listened,
in reality, for Ada's returning footsteps.  In a short time the fair
ones re-entered the hall, and there they had supper, or, more properly,
an interlude supper--a sort of supperlet, so to speak, composed of cold
salmon, scones, milk, and ale, which was intended, no doubt, to give
them an appetite for the true supper that should follow ere long.  Over
this supperlet they were all very talkative and merry, with the
exception, poor fellow, of Glumm, who sat sometimes glancing at, and
always thinking of, Ada, and pendulating, as usual, between the
condition of being miserably happy or happily miserable.

No mortal, save Glumm himself, could have told or conceived what a life
Ada led him.  She took him up by the neck, figuratively speaking, and
shook him again and again as a terrier shakes a rat, and dropped him!
But here the simile ceases, for whereas the rat usually crawls away, if
it can, and evidently does not want more, Glumm always wanted more, and
never crawled away.  On the contrary, he crawled humbly back to the feet
