"Suliman," he said, in a low but remarkably firm tone of voice, "you
know more about Marizano than you choose to tell me.  Now," he
continued, gazing into the Arab's cold grey eyes, while he pulled a
revolver from his coat-pocket and cocked it, "I intend to make you tell
me all you know about him, or to blow your brains out."

He moved the pistol gently as he spoke, and placed his forefinger on the
trigger.

"I not know," began Suliman, who evidently did not believe him to be
quite in earnest; but before the words had well left his lips the drum
of his left ear was almost split by the report of the pistol, and a part
of his turban was blown away.

"You don't know? very well," said Lindsay, recocking the pistol, and
placing the cold muzzle of it against the Arab's yellow nose.

This was too much for Suliman.  He grew pale, and suddenly fell on his
knees.

"Oh! stop! no--no! not fire! me tell you 'bout 'im."

"Good, get up and do so," said the Lieutenant, uncocking the revolver,
and returning it to his pocket; "and be sure that you tell me all, else
your life won't be worth the value of the damaged turban on your head."

With a good deal of trepidation the alarmed interpreter thereupon gave
Lindsay all the information he possessed in regard to the slaver, which
amounted to this, that he had gone to Kilwa, where he had collected a
band of slaves sufficient to fill a large dhow, with which he intended,
in two days more, to sail, in company with a fleet of slavers, for the
north.

"Does he intend to touch at Zanzibar?" inquired Lindsay.

"Me tink no," replied the interpreter; "got many pritty garls--go
straight for Persia."

On hearing this the Lieutenant put the cutter about, and sailed out to
sea in search of the `Firefly,' which he knew could not at that time be
at any great distance from the shore.

He found her sooner than he had expected; and, to his immense
astonishment as well as joy, one of the first persons he beheld on
stepping over the side of his ship was Azinte.

"You have captured Marizano, sir, I see," he said to Captain Romer.

"Not the scoundrel himself, but one of his dhows," replied the Captain.
"He had started for the northern ports with two heavily-laden vessels.
We discovered him five days ago, and, fortunately, just beyond the
protected water, so that he was a fair and lawful prize.  The first of
his dhows, being farthest out from shore, we captured, but the other,
commanded by himself, succeeded in running ashore, and he escaped; with
nearly all his slaves--only a few of the women and children being
drowned in the surf.  And now, as our cargo of poor wretches is pretty
large, I shall run for the Seychelles.  After landing them I shall
return as fast as possible, to intercept a few more of these pirates."

"To the Seychelles!" muttered the Lieutenant to himself as he went
below, with an expression on his countenance something between surprise
and despair.

Poor Lindsay!  His mind was so taken up with, and confused by, the
constant and obtrusive presence of the Senhorina Maraquita that the
particular turn which affairs had taken had not occurred to him,
although that turn was quite natural, and by no means improbable.
Marizano, with Azinte on board of one of his piratical dhows, was
proceeding to the north.  Captain Romer, with his war-steamer, was on
the look-out for piratical dhows.  What more natural than that the
Captain should fall in with the pirate?  But Lieutenant Lindsay's mind
had been so filled with Maraquita that it seemed to be, for the time,
incapable of holding more than one other idea--that idea was the
fulfilment of Maraquita's commands to obtain information as to her lost
Azinte.  To this he had of late devoted all his powers, happy in the
thought that it fell in with and formed part of his duty, to his Queen
and country, as well as to the "Queen of his soul."  To rescue Azinte
from Marizano seemed to the bold Lieutenant an easy enough matter; but
to rescue her from his own Captain, and send her back into slavery!
"Ass! that I am," he exclaimed, "not to have thought of this before.  Of
course she can _never_ be returned to Maraquita, and small comfort it
will be to the Senhorina to be told that her favourite is free in the
Seychelles Islands, and utterly beyond her reach, unless she chooses to
go there and stay with her."

Overwhelmed with disgust at his own stupidity, and at the utter
impossibility of doing anything to mend matters, the unfortunate
Lieutenant sat down to think, and the result of his thinking was that he
resolved at all events to look well after Azinte, and see that she
should be cared for on her arrival at the Seychelles.

Among the poor creatures who had been rescued from Marizano's dhow were
nearly a hundred children, in such a deplorable condition that small
hopes were entertained of their reaching the island alive.  Their young
lives, however, proved to be tenacious.  Experienced though their hardy
rescuers were in rough and tumble work, they had no conception what
these poor creatures had already gone through, and, therefore, formed a
mistaken estimate of their powers of endurance.  Eighty-three of them
reached the Seychelles alive.  They were placed under the care of a
warm-hearted missionary, who spared no pains for their restoration to
health; but despite his utmost efforts, forty of these eventually died--
their little frames had been whipped, and starved, and tried to such an
extent, that recovery was impossible.

To the care of this missionary Lieutenant Lindsay committed Azinte,
telling him as much of her sad story as he was acquainted with.  The
missionary willingly took charge of her, and placed her as a nurse in
the temporary hospital which he had instituted for the little ones above
referred to.  Here Azinte proved herself to be a most tender,
affectionate, and intelligent nurse to the poor children, for whom she
appeared to entertain particular regard, and here, on the departure of
the `Firefly' shortly afterwards, Lindsay left her in a state of
comfort, usefulness, and comparative felicity.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

DESCRIBES SOME OF THE DOINGS OF YOOSOOF AND HIS MEN IN PROCURING BLACK
IVORY FROM THE INTERIOR OF AFRICA.

A dirty shop, in a filthy street in the unhealthy town of Zanzibar, is
the point to which we now beg leave to conduct our reader--whom we also
request to leap, in a free and easy way, over a few months of time!

It is not for the sake of the shop that we make this leap, but for the
purpose of introducing the two men who, at the time we write of, sat
over their grog in a small back-room connected with that shop.  Still
the shop itself is not altogether unworthy of notice.  It is what the
Americans call a store--a place where you can purchase almost every
article that the wants of man have called into being.  The prevailing
smells are of oil, sugar, tea, molasses, paint, and tar, a compound
which confuses the discriminating powers of the nose, and, on the
principle that extremes meet, removes the feeling of surprise that ought
to be aroused by discovering that these odours are in close connexion
with haberdashery and hardware.  There are enormous casks, puncheons,
and kegs on the floor; bales on the shelves; indescribable confusion in
the corners; preserved meat tins piled to the ceiling; with dust and
dirt encrusting everything.  The walls, beams, and rafters, appear to be
held together by means of innumerable cobwebs.  Hosts of flies fatten
on, without diminishing, the stock, and squadrons of cockroaches career
over the earthen floor.

In the little back-room of this shop sat the slave-dealer Yoosoof, in
company with the captain of an English ship which lay in the harbour.

Smoke from the captain's pipe filled the little den to such an extent
that Yoosoof and his friend were not so clearly distinguishable as might
have been desired.

"You're all a set of false-hearted, wrong-headed, low-minded,
scoundrels," said the plain-spoken captain, accompanying each
asseveration with a puff so violent as to suggest the idea that his
remarks were round-shot and his mouth a cannon.

The Briton was evidently not in a complimentary mood.  It was equally
evident that Yoosoof was not in a touchy vein, for he smiled the
slightest possible smile and shrugged his shoulders.  He had business to
transact with the captain which was likely to result very much to his
advantage, and Yoosoof was not the man to let feelings stand in the way
of business.

"Moreover," pursued the captain, in a gruff voice, "the trade in slaves
is illegally conducted in one sense, namely, that it is largely carried
on by British subjects."

"How you make that out?" asked Yoosoof.

"How? why, easy enough.  Aren't the richest men in Zanzibar the Banyans,
and don't these Banyans, who number about 17,000 of your population,
supply you Arabs with money to carry on the accursed slave-trade?  And
ain't these Banyans Indian merchants--subjects of Great Britain?"

Yoosoof shrugged his shoulders again and smiled.

"And don't these opulent rascals," continued the Briton, "love their
ease as well as their money, and when they want to increase the latter
without destroying the former, don't they make advances to the like of
you and get 100 per cent out of you for every dollar advanced?"

Yoosoof nodded his head decidedly at this, and smiled again.

"Well, then, ain't the whole lot of you a set of mean scoundrels?" said
the captain fiercely.

Yoosoof did not smile at this; he even looked for a moment as if he were
going to resent it, but it was only for a moment.  Self-interest came
opportunely to his aid, and made him submissive.

"What can we do?" he asked after a short silence.  "You knows what the
Sultan say, other day, to one British officer, `If you stop slave-trade
you will ruin Zanzibar.'  We mus' not do that.  Zanzibar mus' not be
ruin."

"Why not?" demanded the captain, with a look of supreme contempt, "what
if Zanzibar _was_ ruined?  Look here, now, Yoosoof, your dirty little
island--the whole island observe--is not quite the size of my own Scotch
county of Lanark.  Its population is short of 250,000 all told--scarce
equal to the half of the population of Lanark--composed of
semi-barbarians and savages.  That's one side of the question.  Here's
the other side: Africa is one of the four quarters of the earth, with
millions of vigorous niggers and millions of acres of splendid land, and
no end of undeveloped resources, and you have the impudence to tell me
that an enormous lump of this land must be converted into a desert, and
something like 150,000 of its best natives be drawn off _annually_--for
what?--for what?" repeated the sailor, bringing his fist down on the
table before him with such force that the glasses danced on it and the
dust flew up; "for what?  I say; for a paltry, pitiful island, ruled by
a sham sultan, without army or navy, and with little money, save what he
gets by slave-dealing; an island which has no influence for good on the
world, morally, religiously, or socially, and with little commercially,
though it has much influence for evil; an island which has helped the
Portuguese to lock up the east coast of Africa for centuries; an island
which would not be missed--save as a removed curse--if it were sunk this
night to the bottom of the sea, and all its selfish, sensual,
slave-dealing population swept entirely off the face of the earth."

The captain had risen and dashed his pipe to atoms on the floor in his
indignation as he made these observations.  He now made an effort to
control himself, and then, sitting down, he continued--"Just think,
Yoosoof; you're a sharp man of business, as I know to my cost.  You can
understand a thing in a commercial point of view.  Just try to look at
it thus: On the one side of the world's account you have Zanzibar sunk
with all its Banyan and Arab population; we won't sink the niggers, poor
wretches.  We'll suppose them saved, along with the consuls,
missionaries, and such-like.  Well, that's a loss of somewhere about
83,000 scoundrels,--a gain we might call it, but for the sake of
argument we'll call it a loss.  On the other side of the account you
have 30,000 niggers--fair average specimens of humanity--saved from
slavery, besides something like 150,000 more saved from death by war and
starvation, the results of the slave-trade; 83,000 from 150,000 leaves
67,000!  The loss, you see, would be more than wiped off, and a handsome
balance left at the world's credit the very first year!  To say nothing
of the opening up of legitimate commerce to one of the richest countries
on earth, and the consequent introduction of Christianity."

The captain paused to take breath.  Yoosoof shrugged his shoulders, and
a brief silence ensued, which was happily broken, not by a recurrence to
the question of slavery, but by the entrance of a slave.  He came in
search of Yoosoof for the purpose of telling him that his master wished
to speak with him.  As the slave's master was one of the wealthy Banyans
just referred to, Yoosoof rose at once, and, apologising to the captain
for quitting him so hurriedly, left that worthy son of Neptune to cool
his indignation in solitude.

Passing through several dirty streets the slave led the slaver to a
better sort of house in a more salubrious or, rather, less pestilential,
part of the town.  He was ushered into the presence of an elderly man of
quiet, unobtrusive aspect.

"Yoosoof," said the Banyan in Arabic, "I have been considering the
matter about which we had some conversation yesterday, and I find that
it will be convenient for me to make a small venture.  I can let you
have three thousand dollars."

"On the old terms?" asked Yoosoof.

"On the old terms," replied the merchant.  "Will you be ready to start
soon?"

Yoosoof said that he would, that he had already completed the greater
part of his preparations, and that he hoped to start for the interior in
a week or two.

"That is well; I hope you may succeed in doing a good deal of business,"
said the merchant with an amiable nod and smile, which might have led an
ignorant onlooker to imagine that Yoosoof's business in the interior was
work of a purely philanthropic nature!

"There is another affair, which, it has struck me, may lie in your way,"
continued the merchant.  "The British consul is, I am told, anxious to
find some one who will undertake to make inquiries in the interior about
some Englishmen, who are said to have been captured by the black fellows
and made slaves of."

"Does the consul know what tribe has captured them?" asked Yoosoof.

"I think not; but as he offers five hundred dollars for every lost white
man who shall be recovered and brought to the coast alive, I thought
that you might wish to aid him!"

"True," said Yoosoof, musing, "true, I will go and see him."

Accordingly, the slave-dealer had an interview with the consul, during
which he learned that there was no absolute certainty of any Englishmen
having been captured.  It was only a vague rumour; nevertheless it was
sufficiently probable to warrant the offer of five hundred dollars to
any one who should effect a rescue; therefore Yoosoof, having occasion
to travel into the interior at any rate, undertook to make inquiries.

He was also told that two Englishmen had, not long before, purchased an
outfit, and started off with the intention of proceeding to the interior
by way of the Zambesi river, and they, the consul said, might possibly
be heard of by him near the regions to which he was bound; but these, he
suggested, could not be the men who were reported as missing.

Of course Yoosoof had not the most remote idea that these were the very
Englishmen whom he himself had captured on the coast, for, after parting
from them abruptly, as described in a former chapter, he had ceased to
care or think about them, and besides, was ignorant of the fact that
they had been to Zanzibar.

Yoosoof's own particular business required a rather imposing outfit.
First of all, he purchased and packed about 600 pounds worth of beads of
many colours, cloth of different kinds, thick brass wire, and a variety
of cheap trinkets, such as black men and women are fond of, for Yoosoof
was an "honest" trader, and paid his way when he found it suitable to do
so.  He likewise hired a hundred men, whom he armed with guns, powder,
and ball, for Yoosoof was also a dishonest trader, and fought his way
when that course seemed most desirable.

With this imposing caravan he embarked in a large dhow, sailed for the
coast landed at Kilwa, and proceeded into the interior of Africa.

It was a long and toilsome journey over several hundred miles of
exceedingly fertile and beautiful country, eminently suited for the
happy abode of natives.  But Yoosoof and his class who traded in black
ivory had depopulated it to such an extent that scarce a human being was
to be seen all the way.  There were plenty of villages, but they were in
ruins, and acres of cultivated ground with the weeds growing rank where
the grain had once flourished.  Further on in the journey, near the end
of it, there was a change; the weeds and grain grew together and did
battle, but in most places the weeds gained the victory.  It was quite
evident that the whole land had once been a rich garden teeming with
human life--savage life, no doubt still, not so savage but that it could
manage to exist in comparative enjoyment and multiply.  Yoosoof--passed
through a hundred and fifty miles of this land; it was a huge grave,
which, appropriately enough, was profusely garnished with human bones.
[See Livingstone's _Tributaries of the Zambesi_, page 391.]

At last the slave-trader reached lands which were not utterly forsaken.

Entering a village one afternoon he sent a present of cloth and beads to
the chief, and, after a few preliminary ceremonies, announced that he
wished to purchase slaves.

The chief, who was a fine-looking young warrior, said that he had no
men, women or children to sell, except a few criminals to whom he was
welcome at a very low price,--about two or three yards of calico each.
There were also one or two orphan children whose parents had died
suddenly, and to whom no one in the village could lay claim.  It was
true that these poor orphans had been adopted by various families who
might not wish to part with them; but no matter, the chief's command was
law.  Yoosoof might have the orphans also for a very small sum,--a yard
of calico perhaps.  But nothing would induce the chief to compel any of
his people to part with their children, and none of the people seemed
desirous of doing so.

The slave-trader therefore adopted another plan.  He soon managed to
ascertain that the chief had an old grudge against a neighbouring chief.
In the course of conversation he artfully stirred up the slumbering
