When Miss Stivergill was left alone with the burglar she gazed at him
for some time in silence.

"Man," she said at length, "you are little Bones's father."

"If you means Tottie, ma'am, I is," replied Bones, with a look and tone
which were not amiable.

"I have a strong feeling of regard for your child, though not a scrap of
pity for yourself," said Miss Stivergill, with a frown.

Mr Bones muttered something to the effect that he returned the
compliment with interest.

"For Tottie's sake I should be sorry to see you transported," continued
the lady, "therefore I mean to let you off.  Moreover, bad as you are, I
believe you are not so bad as many people would think you.  Therefore
I'm going to trust you."

Bones looked inquiringly and with some suspicion at his captor.  He
evidently thought there was a touch of insanity about her.  This was
confirmed when Miss Stivergill, seizing a carving-knife from the
dresser, advanced with masculine strides towards him.  He made a
desperate effort to burst his bonds, but they were too scientifically
arranged for that.  "Don't fear," said the lady, severing the cord that
bound the burglar's wrists, and putting the knife in his hands.  "Now,"
she added, "you know how to cut yourself free, no doubt."

"Well, you _are_ a trump!" exclaimed Bones, rapidly touching his bonds
at salient points with the keen edge.

In a few seconds he was free.

"Now, go away," said Miss Stivergill, "and don't let me see you here
again."

Bones looked with admiration at his deliverer, but could only find words
to repeat that she _was_ a trump, and vanished through the back-door,
just as a band of men, with pitchforks, rakes, spades, and lanterns,
came clamouring in at the front garden gate from the neighbouring farm.

"What is it?" exclaimed the farmer.

"Only a burglar," answered Miss Stivergill.

"Where is he?" chorussed everybody.

"That's best known to himself," replied the lady, who, in order to give
the fugitive time, went into a minute and slow account of the whole
affair--excepting, of course, her connivance at the escape--to the great
edification of her audience, among whom the one who seemed to derive the
chief enjoyment was a black boy.  He endeavoured to screen himself
behind the labourers, and was obviously unable to restrain his glee.

"But what's come of 'im, ma'am?" asked the farmer impatiently.

"Escaped!" answered Miss Stivergill.

"Escaped!" echoed everybody, looking furtively round, as though they
supposed he had only escaped under the dresser or into the keyhole.

"Escaped!" repeated the policeman, who entered at the moment with two
comrades; "impossible!  I tied 'im so that no efforts of his own could
avail 'im.  Somebody _must_ 'ave 'elped 'im."

"The carving-knife helped him," said Miss Stivergill, with a look of
dignity.--"Perhaps, instead of speculating how he escaped, policeman, it
would be better to pursue him.  He can't be very far off, as it is not
twenty minutes since he cut himself free."

In a state of utter bewilderment the policeman rushed out of the
cottage, followed by his comrades and the agriculturists.  Peter Pax
essayed to go with them, but was restrained by an iron grip on his
collar.  Pulling him back, Miss Stivergill dragged her captive into a
parlour and shut the door.

"Come now, little Pax," she said, setting the boy in a chair in front of
her, "you needn't try to deceive _me_.  I'd know you among a thousand in
any disguise.  If you were to blacken your face with coal-tar an inch
thick your impertinence would shine through.  You know that the burglar
is little Bones's father; you've a pretty good guess that I let him off.
You have come here for some purpose in connection with him.  Come--out
with it, and make a clean breast."

Little Pax did make a clean breast then and there, was washed white,
supped and slept at The Rosebud, returned to town next day by the first
train, and had soon the pleasure of informing Tottie that the intended
burglary had been frustrated, and that her father wasn't "took" after
all.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

SHOWS HOW ONE THING LEADS TO ANOTHER, AND SO ON.

It is a mere truism to state that many a chain of grave and far-reaching
events is set in motion by some insignificant trifle.  The touching of a
trigger by a child explodes a gun which extinguishes a valuable life,
and perhaps throws a whole neighbourhood into difficulties.  The
lighting of a match may cause a conflagration which shall "bring down"
an extensive firm, some of whose dependants, in the retail trade, will
go down along with it, and cause widespreading distress, if not ruin,
among a whole army of greengrocers, buttermen, and other small fry.

The howling of a bad baby was the comparatively insignificant event
which set going a certain number of wheels, whose teeth worked into the
cogs which revolved in connection with our tale.

The howling referred to awoke a certain contractor near Pimlico with a
start, and caused him to rise off what is popularly known as the "wrong
side."  Being an angry man, the contractor called the baby bad names,
and would have whipped it had it been his own.  Going to his office
before breakfast with the effects of the howl strong upon him, he met a
humble labourer there with a surly "Well, what do you want?"

The labourer wanted work.  The contractor had no work to give him.  The
labourer pleaded that his wife and children were starving.  The
contractor didn't care a pinch of snuff for his wife or children, and
bade him be off.  The labourer urged that the times were very hard, and
he would be thankful for any sort of job, no matter how small.  He
endeavoured to work on the contractor's feelings by referring to the
premature death, by starvation, of his pet parrot, which had been for
years in the family, and a marvellous speaker, having been taught by his
mate Bill.  The said Bill was also out of work, and waiting for him
outside.  He too would be thankful for a job--anything would do, and
they would be willing to work for next to nothing.  The contractor still
professed utter indifference to the labourer's woes, but the incident of
the parrot had evidently touched a cord which could not be affected by
human suffering.  After a few minutes' consideration he said there _was_
a small job--a pump at the corner of a certain street not far off had to
be taken down, to make way for contemplated alterations.  It was not
necessary to take it down just then, but as the labourers were so hard
up for a job they were at liberty to undertake that one.

Thus two wheels were set in motion, and the result was that the old pump
at the corner of Purr Street was uprooted and laid low by these
labourers, one of whom looked into the lower end of the pump and said
"Hallo!"

His companion Bill echoed the "Hallo!" and added "What's up?"

"W'y, if there ain't somethink queer inside of the old pump," said the
labourer, going down on both knees in order to look more earnestly into
it.  "I do b'lieve it's letters.  Some double-extra stoopids 'ave bin
an' posted 'em in the pump."

He pulled out handfuls of letters as he spoke, some of which, from their
appearance, must have lain there for years, while others were quite
fresh!

A passing letter-carrier took charge of these letters, and conveyed them
to the Post-Office, where the machinery of the department was set in
motion on them.  They were examined, faced, sorted, and distributed.
Among them was the letter which George Aspel had committed to the care
of Tottie Bones at the time of his first arrival in London, and thus it
came to pass that the energies of Sir James Clubley, Baronet, were
roused into action.

"Dear me! how strange!" said Sir James to himself, on reading the
letter.  "This unaccountable silence is explained at last.  Poor fellow,
I have judged him hastily.  Come!  I'll go find him out."

But this resolve was more easily made than carried into effect.  At the
hotel from which the letter had been dated nothing was known of the
missing youth except that he had departed long long ago, leaving as his
future address the name of a bird-stuffer, which name had unfortunately
been mislaid--not lost.  Oh no--only mislaid!  On further inquiry,
however, there was a certain undersized, plain-looking, and rather
despised chamber-maid who retained a lively and grateful recollection of
Mr Aspel, in consequence of his having given her an unexpectedly large
tip at parting, coupled with a few slight but kindly made inquiries as
to her welfare, which seemed to imply that he regarded her as a human
being.  She remembered distinctly his telling her one evening that if
any one should call for him in his absence he was to be found at the
residence of a lady in Cat Street, Pimlico, but for the life of her she
couldn't remember the number, though she thought it must have been
number nine, for she remembered having connected it in her mind with the
well-known lives of a cat.

"Cat Street!  Strange name--very!" said Sir James.  "Are you sure it was
Cat Street?"

"Well, I ain't quite sure, sir," replied the little plain one, with an
inquiring frown at the chandelier, "but I know it 'ad somethink to do
with cats.  P'r'aps it was Mew Street; but I'm _quite_ sure it was
Pimlico."

"And the lady's name?"

"Well, sir, I ain't sure of that neither.  It was somethink queer, I
know, but then there's a-many queer names in London--ain't, there, sir?"

Sir James admitted that there were, and advised her to reflect on a few
of them.

The little plain one did reflect--with the aid of the chandelier--and
came to the sudden conviction that the lady's name had to do with
flowers.  "Not roses--no, nor yet violets," she said, with an air of
intense mental application, for the maiden's memory was largely
dependent on association of ideas; "it might 'ave been marigolds, though
it don't seem likely.  Stay, was it water--?--Oh! it was lilies!  Yes, I
'ave it now: Miss Lilies-somethink."

"Think again, now," said the Baronet, "everything depends on the
`something,' for Miss Lilies is not so extravagantly queer as you seem
to think her name was."

"That's true, sir," said the perplexed maid, with a last appealing gaze
at the chandelier, and beginning with the first letter of the alphabet--
Miss Lilies A-- Lilies B-- Lilies C--, etcetera, until she came to K.
"That's it now.  I 'ave it _almost_.  It 'ad to do with lots of lilies,
I'm quite sure--quantities, it must 'ave been."

On Sir James suggesting that quantities did not begin with a K the
little plain one's feelings were slightly hurt, and she declined to go
any further into the question.  Sir James was therefore obliged to rest
content with what he had learned, and continued his search in Pimlico.
There he spent several hours in playing, with small shopkeepers and
policemen, a game somewhat analogous to that which is usually commenced
with the words "Is it animal, vegetable, or mineral?"  The result was
that eventually he reached Number 9 Purr Street, and found himself in
the presence of Miss Lillycrop.

That lady, however, damped his rising hopes by saying that she did not
know where George Aspel was to be found, and that he had suddenly
disappeared--to her intense regret--from the bird-warehouse in which he
had held a situation.  It belonged to the brothers Blurt, whose address
she gave to her visitor.

Little Tottie Bones, who had heard the conversation through the open
parlour door, could have told where Aspel was to be found, but the
promise made to her father sealed her lips; besides, particular
inquiries after any one were so suggestive to her of policemen, and
being "took," that she had a double motive to silence.

Mr Enoch Blurt could throw no light on the subject, but he could, and
did, add to Sir James's increasing knowledge of the youth's reported
dissipation, and sympathised with him strongly in his desire to find out
Aspel's whereabouts.  Moreover, he directed him to the General
Post-Office, where a youth named Maylands, a letter-sorter--who had
formerly been a telegraph message-boy,--and an intimate friend of Aspel,
was to be found, and might be able to give some information about him,
though he (Mr Blurt) feared not.

Phil Maylands could only say that he had never ceased to make inquiries
after his friend, but hitherto without success, and that he meant to
continue his inquiries until he should find him.

Sir James Clubley therefore returned in a state of dejection to the
sympathetic Miss Lillycrop, who gave him a note of introduction to a
detective--the grave man in grey,--a particular friend and ally of her
own, with whom she had scraped acquaintance during one of her many
pilgrimages of love and mercy among the poor.

To the man in grey Sir James committed his case, and left him to work it
out.

Now, the way of a detective is a mysterious way.  Far be it from us to
presume to point it out, or elucidate or expound it in any degree.  We
can only give a vague, incomplete, it may be even incorrect, view of
what the man in grey did and achieved, nevertheless we are bound to
record what we know as to this officer's proceedings, inasmuch as they
have to do with the thread of our narrative.

It may be that other motives, besides those connected with George Aspel,
induced the man in grey to visit the General Post-Office, but we do not
certainly know.  It is quite possible that a whole host of subsidiary
and incidental cases on hand might have induced him to take up the
Post-Office like a huge stone, wherewith to knock down innumerable birds
at one and the same throw; we cannot tell.  The brain of a detective
must be essentially different from the brains of ordinary men.  His
powers of perception--we might add, of conception, reception, deception,
and particularly of interception--are marvellous.  They are altogether
too high for us.  How then can we be expected to explain why it was
that, on arriving at the Post-Office, the man in grey, instead of asking
eagerly for George Aspel at the Inquiry Office, or the Returned Letter
Office, or the _poste restante_, as any sane man would have done, began
to put careless and apparently unmeaning questions about little dogs,
and to manifest a desire to be shown the chief points of interest in the
basement of St. Martin's-le-Grand?

In the gratifying of his desires the man in grey experienced no
difficulty.  The staff of the Post-Office is unvaryingly polite and
obliging to the public.  An order was procured, and he soon found
himself with a guide traversing the mysterious regions underneath the
splendid new building where the great work of postal telegraphy is
carried on.

While his conductor led him through the labyrinthine passages in which a
stranger would infallibly have lost his way, he explained the various
objects of interest--especially pointing out the racks where thousands
on thousands of old telegrams are kept, for a short time, for reference
in case of dispute, and then destroyed.  He found the man in grey so
intelligent and sympathetic that he quite took a fancy to him.

"Do you happen to remember," asked the detective, in a quiet way, during
a pause in his companion's remarks, "anything about a mad dog taking
refuge in this basement some time ago--a small poodle I think it was--
which disappeared in some mysterious way?"

The conductor had heard a rumour of such an event, but had been ill and
off duty at the time, and could give him no details.

"This," said he, opening a door, "is the Battery Room, where the
electricity is generated for the instruments above.--Allow me to
introduce you to the Battery Inspector."

The man in grey bowed to the Inspector, who was a tall, powerful man,
quite fit, apparently, to take charge of a battery of horse artillery if
need were.

"A singular place," remarked the detective, looking sharply round the
large room, whose dimensions were partially concealed, however, by the
rows of shelving which completely filled it from floor to ceiling.

"Somewhat curious," assented the Inspector; "you see our batteries
require a good deal of shelving.  All put together, there is in this
room about three miles of shelving, completely filled, as you see, with
about 22,000 cells or jars.  The electricity is generated in these jars.
They contain carbon and zinc plates in a solution of bichromate of
potash and sulphuric acid and water.  We fill them up once every two
weeks, and renew the plates occasionally.  There is a deal of sulphate
of copper used up here, sir, in creating electricity--about six tons in
the year.  Pure copper accumulates on the plates in the operation, but
the zinc wears away."

The detective expressed real astonishment and interest in all this, and
much more that the Inspector told him.

"Poisonous stuff in your jars, I should fancy?" he inquired.

"Rather," replied the Inspector.

"Does your door ever stand open?" asked the detective.

"Sometimes," said the other, with a look of slight surprise.

"You never received a visit down here from a mad dog, did you?" asked
the man in grey.

"Never!"

"I only ask the question," continued the other, in a careless tone,
"because I once read in the newspapers of a poodle being chased into the
Post-Office and never heard of again.  It occurred to me that poison
might account for it.--A curious-looking thing here; what is it?"

He had come to a part of the Battery Room where there was a large frame
or case of dark wood, the surface of which was covered with innumerable
brass knobs or buttons, which were coupled together by wires.

"That is our Battery Test-Box," explained the Inspector.  "There are
four thousand wires connected with it--two thousand going to the
instruments up-stairs, and two thousand connected with the battery-jars.
When I complete the circuit by connecting any couple of these buttons,
the influence of the current is at once perceived."

