stringent "rules;" at that time they may not have been very particular
as to visitors, or perhaps Gertie, being one of themselves, as it were,
was privileged.  Be this as it may, there she was with a laughing face.

"May I come in, Sam?"

"May a cherub from the skies come in--yes," replied Sam, rising and
lifting Gertie in his strong arms until he could print a kiss on her
forehead without stooping.  "All well at home, Gertie?"

"Very well, thank you.  We expect father home to tea."

"I know that," said Sam, sitting down at his small table and attempting
dinner once again.

"How do you know that?" asked Gertie in surprise.

"'Cause I've got to pass him up wi' the express in half-an-hour,"
replied Sam, with his mouth full, "and, of course, he don't prefer
takin' tea on the _Lightenin'_ with his mate Bill Garvie, w'en he's got
a chance o' takin' it wi' his wife and a little angel, like you."

"I wish you'd not talk nonsense, Sam," remonstrated Gertie with a
serious look.

"That ain't nonsense," said Sam, stoutly.

"Yes, it is," said Gertie; "you know angels are good."

"Well, and ain't you good?" demanded the signalman, filling his mouth
with a potato.

"Mother says I am, and I feel as if I was," replied Gertie with much
simplicity, "but you know angels are _very_ _very_ good, and, of
_course_, I'm not near so good as them."

"You are," said Sam, with an obstinate snap at a piece of meat; "you're
better than any of 'em.  You only want wings to be complete."

Gertie laughed, and then remarked that Sam dined late, to which Sam
replied that he did, that he preferred it, and that he didn't see why
gentlefolk should have that sort of fun all to themselves.

"What's that?" exclaimed Gertie, as Sam dropped his knife and fork, rang
his electric bell, and laid hold of a lever.

"The limited mail, my dear," said Sam, as the train rushed by.

"Oh, how it shakes the house!  I wonder it don't fall," exclaimed the
child.

"It's made to be well shaken, like a bottle o' bad physic," replied Sam,
as he went through the various processes already described, before
sitting down to finish his oft-interrupted meal.

"Do you always take your dinner in that uncomfortable way?" asked
Gertie, sitting down on the chest and looking earnestly into the manly
countenance of her friend.

"Mostly," said Sam, at last finishing off with a draught of pure water,
and smacking his lips.

"Sometimes it's all I can do to get it eaten--other times I'm not so
hard pressed, but it's never got over without interruption, more or
less."

"Are breakfast and tea as bad?"

"Not quite," replied Sam with a laugh; "about breakfast time the traffic
ain't quite so fast and furious, and I takes tea at home."

"How long are you here at a time?" asked the inquisitive Gertie.

"Twelve hours, my dear, and no time allowed for meals."

"Surely you must be very tired?"

"Sometimes, but they talk of shortening the hours soon.  There's a want
of signalmen just now, that's how it is.  But what good fortune has sent
_you_ here this evenin', Gertie?"

"I want to ask you about a ring, Sam."

"A ring!  What! you ain't goin' to get married already, are you?"

Gertie replied by bursting into a hearty fit of laughter; when she had
sufficiently recovered her gravity, she revealed her troubles to the
sympathising signalman.

"Well, it _is_ a perplexin' business.  What was the old woman doin' wi'
such a ring tied up in such a queer way?"

"I don't know," said Gertie.

"Well, it ain't no business of mine, but we must try to git hold of it
somehow.  I'll be off dooty at six, and your dad'll be passin' in a few
minutes.  After I'm free, I'll go up to the shed and have a palaver with
'im.  There he is."

As he spoke the bell was rung by his signal-friend on the left replied
to in the usual way, and in a few minutes the chimney of the _Lightning_
was seen over the top of the embankment that hid a bend of the up-line
from view.

"Put your head out here at this window, and be ready to wave your hand,
Gertie," said Sam, placing the child.

The "Flying Dutchman" came on in its wonted wild fashion, and for a few
seconds Gertie saw her father's bronzed and stern face as he looked
straight ahead with his hand on the regulator.  John Marrot cast one
professional glance up, and gave a professional wave of his right hand
to the signalman.  At that instant his whole visage lighted up as if a
beam of sunshine had suffused it, and his white teeth, uncovered by a
smile, gleamed as he flew past and looked back.  Gertie waved
frantically with her kerchief, which flew from her hand and for some
distance followed the train.  In another moment the "Flying Dutchman"
was a speck in the distance--its terrific crash suddenly reduced by
distance to a low rumble.

"Evenin', Jack," said Sam, as his successor or comrade on the
"night-shift" entered the box, "Come along now, Gertie.  We'll go and
see your father.  He'll be up at the station in no time, and won't take
long to run back to the shed."

So saying, Sam Natly assisted Gertie down the long iron ladder, by which
his nest was reached, and walked with her to the engine-shed, which they
soon reached.  They had not waited long before John Marrot's iron horse
came panting slowly into its accustomed stable.

As there were at least twelve iron horses there in all stages of
being-put-to-bedism, and some, like naughty boys, were blowing off their
steam with absolutely appalling noise, it was next to impossible for
Gertie and Sam to make known their difficulty to John.  They therefore
waited until he had seen his satellites in proper attendance upon his
charger, and then left the shed along with him.

When the case was made known to John, he at once said, "Why didn't they
apply to the Clearin' House, I wonder?"

"Ah, why not?" said Sam.

"Nurse doesn't know about that place, I think," suggested Gertie.

"Very likely not; but if she'd only gone an' seen any one as know'd
anything about the line, she'd have found it out.  However, the parcel's
pretty sure to be somewhere, so I'll set some inquiries a-foot w'en I
goes up to town to-morrow.  Good-night, Sam."

"Good-night, John," answered the signalman, as he turned off in the
direction of his own dwelling, while the engine-driver and his little
daughter pursued the footpath that led to their cottage.

Sam Natly's residence was a very small one, for house-rent was high in
that neighbourhood.  There were only two rooms in it, but these two bore
evidence of being tended by a thrifty housewife; and, truly, when Sam's
delicate, but partially recovered, wife met him at the door that night,
and gave him a hearty kiss of welcome, no one with an atom of good taste
could have avoided admitting that she was a remarkably pretty, as well
as thrifty, little woman.

"You're late to-night, Sam," said little Mrs Natly.

"Yes, I've had to go to the shed to see John Marrot about a diamond
ring."

"A diamond ring!" exclaimed his wife.

"Yes, a diamond ring."

Hereupon Sam related all he knew about the matter, and you may be sure
the subject was quite sufficient to furnish ground for a very lively and
speculative conversation, during the preparation and consumption of as
nice a little hot supper, as any hard-worked signalman could desire.

"You're tired, Sam," said his little wife anxiously.

"Well, I am a bit.  It's no wonder, for it's a pretty hard job to work
them levers for twelve hours at a stretch without an interval, even for
meals, but I'm gittin' used to it--like the eels to bein' skinned."

"It's a great shame of the Company," cried Mrs Natly with indignation.

"Come, come," cried Sam, "no treason!  It ain't such a shame as it
looks.  You see the Company have just bin introducin' a noo system of
signallin', an' they ha'n't got enough of men who understand the thing
to work it, d'ye see; so of course we've got to work double tides, as
the Jack-tars say.  If they _continue_ to keep us at it like that I'll
say it's a shame too, but we must give 'em time to git things into
workin' order.  Besides, they're hard-up just now.  There's a deal o'
money throw'd away by companies fightin' an' opposin' one another--
cuttin' their own throats, I calls it--and they're awful hard used by
the public in the way o' compensation too.  It's nothin' short o'
plunder and robbery.  If the public would claim moderately, and juries
would judge fairly, an' directors would fight less, shareholders would
git higher dividends, the public would be better served, and railway
servants would be less worked and better paid."

"I don't care two straws, Sam," said little Mrs Natly with great
firmness, "not two straws for their fightin's, an' joories, and
davydens--all I know is that they've no right whatever to kill my
'usband, and it's a great shame!"

With this noble sentiment the earnest little woman concluded the
evening's conversation, and allowed her wearied partner to retire to
rest.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A SOIREE WILDLY INTERRUPTED, AND FOLLOWED UP BY SURPRISING REVELATIONS.

One afternoon Captain Lee and Emma called on Mrs Tipps, and found her
engaged in earnest conversation with Netta.  The captain, who was always
in a boiling-over condition, and never felt quite happy except when in
the act of planning or carrying out some scheme for the increase of
general happiness, soon discovered that Netta was discussing the details
of a little treat which she meant to give to the boys and girls of a
Sunday-school which she and her mother superintended.  With all his
penetration he did not, however, find out that the matter which called
most for consideration was the financial part of the scheme--in other
words, how to accomplish the end desired with extremely limited means.
He solved the question for them, however, by asserting that he intended
to give all the scholars of all the Sunday-schools in the neighbourhood
a treat, and of course meant to include Netta's school among the rest--
unless, of course, she possessed so much exclusive pride as to refuse to
join him.

There was no resisting Captain Lee.  As well might a red-skin attempt to
stop Niagara.  When once he had made up his mind to "go in" for
something, no mortal power could stop him.  He might indeed be _turned_.
Another object of interest, worthy of pursuit and judiciously put
before him, might perhaps induce him to abandon a previous scheme; but
once his steam was up, as John Marrot used to say, you could not get him
to blow it off into the air.  He was unlike the iron horse in that
respect, although somewhat like him in the rigour of his action.
Accordingly the thing was fixed.  Invitations were sent out to all the
schools and to all who took an interest in them, and the place fixed on
was a field at the back of Mrs Tipps's villa.

The day came, and with it the children in their best array.  The weather
was all that could be wished--a bright sun and a clear sky,--so that the
huge tent provided in case of rain, was found to be only required to
shade the provisions from the sun.  Besides the children there were the
teachers--many of them little more than children as to years, but with a
happy earnestness of countenance and manner which told of another
element in their breasts that evidently deepened and intensified their
joy.  There were several visitors and friends of Captain Lee and Mrs
Tipps.  Emma was there, of course, the busiest of the busy in making
arrangements for the feast which consisted chiefly of fruit, buns, and
milk.  Netta and she managed that department together.  Of course little
Gertie was there and her sister Loo, from which we may conclude that
Will Garvie was there in spirit, not only because that would have been
natural, but because he had expressly told Loo the day before that he
meant to be present in that attenuated condition.  Bodily, poor fellow,
he was on the foot-plate of the _Lightning_, which is as much as to say
that he was everywhere by turns, and nowhere long.  Mrs Marrot was
there too, and baby, with Nanny Stocks as his guardian.  Miss Stocks's
chief employment during the evening appeared to be to forget herself in
the excess of her delight, and run baby's head against all sorts of
things and persons.  Perhaps it was as well she did so, because it
tended to repress his energy.  She acted the part of regulator and
safety-valve to that small human engine, by controlling his actions and
permitting him good-naturedly to let off much of his superfluous steam
on herself.  Indeed she was a species of strong buffer in this respect,
receiving and neutralising many a severe blow from his irrepressible
feet and fists.  Bob Marrot was also there with his bosom friend Tomtit
Dorkin, whose sole occupation in life up to that time had been to put
screws on nuts; this must have been "nuts" to him, as the Yankees have
it, because, being a diligent little fellow, he managed to screw himself
through life at the Clatterby Works to the tune of twelve shillings a
week.  Joseph Tipps, having got leave of absence for an evening, was
also there,--modest amiable, active and self-abnegating.  So was Mrs
Natly, who, in consideration of her delicate health, was taken great
care of, and very much made of, by Mrs Tipps and her family--
conspicuously by Mrs Durby, who had become very fond of her since the
night she nursed her.  Indeed there is little doubt that Mrs Durby and
the bottle of wine were the turning-point of Mrs Natly's illness, and
that but for them, poor Sam would have been a widower by that time.  Mr
Able, the director, was also there, bland and beaming, with a brother
director who was anything but bland or beaming, being possessed of a
grave, massive, strongly marked and stern countenance; but nevertheless,
owning a similar spirit and a heart which beat high with philanthropic
desires and designs--though few who came in contact with him, except his
intimate friends, would believe it.  There were also present an elderly
clergyman and a young curate--both good, earnest men, but each very
different in many respects from the other.  The elder clergyman had a
genial, hearty countenance and manner, and he dressed very much like
other gentlemen.  The young curate might have breakfasted on his poker,
to judge from the stiffness of his back, and appeared to be afraid of
suffering from cold in the knees and chest, to judge from the length of
his surtout and the height of his plain buttonless vest.

When all were assembled on the green and the viands spread, the elder
clergyman gave out a hymn; and the curate, who had a capital voice, led
off, but he was speedily drowned by the gush of song that rose from the
children's lips.  It was a lively hymn, and they evidently rejoiced to
sing it.  Then the elder clergyman made the children a short speech.  It
was amazingly brief, insomuch that it quite took the little ones by
surprise--so short was it, indeed and so much to the point, that we will
venture to set it down here.

"Dear children," he said, in a loud voice that silenced every chattering
tongue, "we have met here to enjoy ourselves.  There is but one of your
Sunday lessons which I will remind you of to-day.  It is this,--`Whether
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.'
Before beginning, then, let us ask God's blessing."

Thereupon he asked a blessing, which was also so brief, that, but for
the all-prevailing name of Jesus, with which he closed it, some of those
who heard him would scarce have deemed it a prayer at all.  Yet this
elderly clergyman was not always brief.

He was not brief, for instance, in his private prayers for himself, his
friends, and his flock.  Brevity did not mark his proceedings when
engaged in preparing for the Sabbath services.  He was not brief when,
in his study, he pleaded with some awakened but unbelieving soul to cast
itself unreservedly on the finished work of our Saviour.  He was a man
who carried his tact and common-sense into his religious duties; who
hated formalism, regarding it as one of the great stumbling-blocks in
the progress of Christianity, and who endeavoured at all times to suit
his words and actions to the circumstances of the occasion.

The children regarded him with a degree of affection that was all but
irrepressible, and which induced them, at his earnest request, to sit
still for a considerable time while his young brother gave them "a
_short_ address."  He was almost emphatic on the word _short_, but the
young curate did not appear to take the hint, or to understand the
meaning of that word either in regard to discourses or surtouts.  He
asserted himself in his surtouts and vests, without of course having a
