scattered crew, cargo, and boat in all directions.

Some clung to the gunwale of the boat, others to the seaweed, and some
to the thwarts and oars which floated about, and which quickly carried
them out of the creek to a considerable distance from the spot where the
accident happened.

The instant the boat was overturned, Ruby darted towards one of the rock
boats which lay near to the spot where the party of workmen who manned
it had landed that morning.  Wilson, the landing-master, was at his side
in a moment.

"Shove off, lad, and jump in!" cried Wilson.

There was no need to shout for the crew of the boat.  The men were
already springing into her as she floated off.  In a few minutes all the
men in the water were rescued, with the exception of one of the
strangers, named Strachan.

This gentleman had been swept out to a small insulated rock, where he
clung to the seaweed with great resolution, although each returning sea
laid him completely under water, and hid him for a second or two from
the spectators on the rock.  In this situation he remained for ten or
twelve minutes; and those who know anything of the force of large waves
will understand how severely his strength and courage must have been
tried during that time.

When the boat reached the rock the most difficult part was still to
perform, as it required the greatest nicety of management to guide her
in a rolling sea, so as to prevent her from being carried forcibly
against the man whom they sought to save.

"Take the steering-oar, Ruby; you are the best hand at this," said
Wilson.

Ruby seized the oar, and, notwithstanding the breach of the seas and the
narrowness of the passage, steered the boat close to the rock at the
proper moment.

"Starboard, noo, stiddy!" shouted John Watt, who leant suddenly over the
bow of the boat and seized poor Strachan by the hair.  In another moment
he was pulled inboard with the aid of Selkirk's stout arms, and the boat
was backed out of danger.

"Now, a cheer, boys!" cried Ruby.

The men did not require urging to this.  It burst from them with
tremendous energy, and was echoed back by their comrades on the rock, in
the midst of whose wild hurrah, Ned O'Connor's voice was distinctly
heard to swell from a cheer into a yell of triumph!

The little rock on which this incident occurred was called _Strachan's
Ledge_, and it is known by that name at the present day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  It is right to state that this man afterwards obtained a
light-keeper's situation from the Board of Commissioners of Northern
Lights, who seem to have taken a kindly interest in all their servants,
especially those of them who had suffered in the service.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE BELL ROCK IN A FOG--NARROW ESCAPE OF THE SMEATON.

Change of scene is necessary to the healthful working of the human mind;
at least, so it is said.  Acting upon the assumption that the saying is
true, we will do our best in this chapter for the human minds that
condescend to peruse these pages, by leaping over a space of time, and
by changing at least the character of the scene, if not the locality.

We present the Bell Rock under a new aspect, that of a dense fog and a
dead calm.

This is by no means an unusual aspect of things at the Bell Rock, but as
we have hitherto dwelt chiefly on storms it may be regarded as new to
the reader.

It was a June morning.  There had been few breezes and no storms for
some weeks past, so that the usual swell of the ocean had gone down, and
there were actually no breakers on the rock at low water, and no
ruffling of the surface at all at high tide.  The tide had, about two
hours before, overflowed the rock and driven the men into the beacon
house, where, having breakfasted, they were at the time enjoying
themselves with pipes and small talk.

The lighthouse had grown considerably by this time.  Its unfinished top
was more than eighty feet above the foundation; but the fog was so dense
that only the lower part of the column could be seen from the beacon,
the summit being lost, as it were, in the clouds.

Nevertheless that summit, high though it was, did not yet project beyond
the reach of the sea.  A proof of this had been given in a very striking
manner, some weeks before the period about which we now write, to our
friend George Forsyth.

George was a studious man, and fond of reading the Bible critically.  He
was proof against laughter and ridicule, and was wont sometimes to urge
the men into discussions.  One of his favourite arguments was somewhat
as follows--

"Boys," he was wont to say, "you laugh at me for readin' the Bible
carefully.  You would not laugh at a schoolboy for reading his books
carefully, would you?  Yet the learnin' of the way of salvation is of
far more consequence to me than book learnin' is to a schoolboy.  An
astronomer is never laughed at for readin' his books o' geometry an'
suchlike day an' night--even to the injury of his health--but what is an
astronomer's business to _him_ compared with the concerns of my soul to
_me_?  Ministers tell me there are certain things I must know and
believe if I would be saved--such as the death and resurrection of our
Saviour Jesus Christ; and they also point out that the Bible speaks of
certain Christians, who did well in refusin' to receive the Gospel at
the hands of the apostles, without first enquirin' into these things, to
see if they were true.  Now, lads, _if_ these things that so many
millions believe in, and that _you_ all profess to believe in, are lies,
then you may well laugh at me for enquirin' into them; but if they be
true, why, I think the devils themselves must be laughing at _you_ for
_not_ enquirin' into them!"

Of course, Forsyth found among such a number of intelligent men, some
who could argue with him, as well as some who could laugh at him.  He
also found one or two who sympathised openly, while there were a few who
agreed in their hearts, although they did not speak.

Well, it was this tendency to study on the part of Forsyth, that led him
to cross the wooden bridge between the beacon and the lighthouse during
his leisure hours, and sit reading at the top of the spiral stair, near
one of the windows of the lowest room.

Forsyth was sitting at his usual window one afternoon at the end of a
storm.  It was a comfortless place, for neither sashes nor glass had at
that time been put in, and the wind howled up and down the shaft
dreadfully.  The man was robust, however, and did not mind that.

The height of the building was at that time fully eighty feet.  While he
was reading there a tremendous breaker struck the lighthouse with such
force that it trembled distinctly.  Forsyth started up, for he had never
felt this before, and fancied the structure was about to fall.  For a
moment or two he remained paralysed, for he heard the most terrible and
inexplicable sounds going on overhead.  In fact, the wave that shook the
building had sent a huge volume of spray right over the top, part of
which fell into the lighthouse, and what poor Forsyth heard was about a
ton of water coming down through storey after storey, carrying lime,
mortar, buckets, trowels, and a host of other things, violently along
with it.

To plunge down the spiral stair, almost headforemost, was the work of a
few seconds.  Forsyth accompanied the descent with a yell of terror,
which reached the ears of his comrades in the beacon, and brought them
to the door, just in time to see their comrade's long legs carry him
across the bridge in two bounds.  Almost at the same instant the water
and rubbish burst out of the doorway of the lighthouse, and flooded the
bridge.

But let us return from this digression, or rather, this series of
digressions, to the point where we branched off: the aspect of the
beacon in the fog, and the calm of that still morning in June.

Some of the men inside were playing draughts, others were finishing
their breakfast; one was playing "Auld Lang Syne", with many extempore
flourishes and trills, on a flute, which was very much out of tune.  A
few were smoking, of course (where exists the band of Britons who can
get on without that!) and several were sitting astride on the
cross-beams below, bobbing--not exactly for whales, but for any monster
of the deep that chose to turn up.

The men fishing, and the beacon itself, loomed large and mysterious in
the half-luminous fog.  Perhaps this was the reason that the sea-gulls
flew so near them, and gave forth an occasional and very melancholy cry,
as if of complaint at the changed appearance of things.

"There's naethin' to be got the day," said John Watt, rather peevishly,
as he pulled up his line and found the bait gone.

Baits are _always_ found gone when lines are pulled up!  This would seem
to be an angling law of nature.  At all events, it would seem to have
been a very aggravating law of nature on the present occasion, for John
Watt frowned and growled to himself as he put on another bait.

"There's a bite!" exclaimed Joe Dumsby, with a look of doubt, at the
same time feeling his line.

"Poo'd in then," said Watt ironically.

"No, 'e's hoff," observed Joe.

"Hm! he never was on," muttered Watt.

"What are you two growling at?" said Ruby, who sat on one of the beams
at the other side.

"At our luck, Ruby," said Joe.  "Ha! was that a nibble?"  ("Naethin' o'
the kind," from Watt.) "It was! as I live it's large; an 'addock, I
think."

"A naddock!" sneered Watt; "mair like a bit o' tangle than--eh! losh me!
it _is_ a fish--"

"Well done, Joe!" cried Bremner, from the doorway above, as a large
rock-cod was drawn to the surface of the water.

"Stay, it's too large to pull up with the line.  I'll run down and gaff
it," cried Ruby, fastening his own line to the beam, and descending to
the water by the usual ladder, on one of the main beams.  "Now, draw him
this way--gently, not too roughly--take time.  Ah! that was a miss--he's
off; no!  Again; now then--"

Another moment, and a goodly cod of about ten pounds weight was
wriggling on the iron hook which Ruby handed up to Dumsby, who mounted
with his prize in triumph to the kitchen.

From that moment the fish began to "take."

While the men were thus busily engaged, a boat was rowing about in the
fog, vainly endeavouring to find the rock.

It was the boat of two fast friends, Jock Swankie and Davy Spink.

These worthies were in a rather exhausted condition, having been rowing
almost incessantly from daybreak.

"I tell 'ee what it is," said Swankie; "I'll be hanged if I poo another
stroke."

He threw his oar into the boat, and looked sulky.

"It's my belief," said his companion, "that we ought to be near aboot
Denmark be this time."

"Denmark or Rooshia, it's a' ane to me," rejoined Swankie; "I'll hae a
smoke."

So saying, he pulled out his pipe and tobacco-box, and began to cut the
tobacco.  Davy did the same.

Suddenly both men paused, for they heard a sound.  Each looked
enquiringly at the other, and then both gazed into the thick fog.

"Is that a ship?" said Davy Spink.

They seized their oars hastily.

"The beacon, as I'm a leevin' sinner!" exclaimed Swankie.

If Spink had not backed his oar at that moment, there is some
probability that Swankie would have been a dead, instead of a living,
sinner in a few minutes, for they had almost run upon the north-east end
of the Bell Rock, and distinctly heard the sound of voices on the
beacon.  A shout settled the question at once, for it was replied to by
a loud holloa from Ruby.

In a short time the boat was close to the beacon, and the water was so
very calm that day, that they were able to venture to hand the packet of
letters with which they had come off into the beacon, even although the
tide was full.

"Letters," said Swankie, as he reached out his hand with the packet.

"Hurrah!" cried the men, who were all assembled on the mortar-gallery,
looking down at the fishermen, excepting Ruby, Watt, and Dumsby, who
were still on the cross-beams below.

"Mind the boat; keep her aff," said Swankie, stretching out his hand
with the packet to the utmost, while Dumsby descended the ladder and
held out _his_ hand to receive it.

"Take care," cried the men in chorus, for news from shore was always a
very exciting episode in their career, and the idea of the packet being
lost filled them with sudden alarm.

The shout and the anxiety together caused the very result that was
dreaded.  The packet fell into the sea and sank, amid a volley of yells.

It went down slowly.  Before it had descended a fathom, Ruby's head
cleft the water, and in a moment he returned to the surface with the
packet in his hand amid a wild cheer of joy; but this was turned into a
cry of alarm, as Ruby was carried away by the tide, despite his utmost
efforts to regain the beacon.

The boat was at once pushed off but so strong was the current there,
that Ruby was carried past the rock, and a hundred yards away to sea,
before the boat overtook him.

The moment he was pulled into her he shook himself, and then tore off
the outer covering of the packet in order to save the letters from being
wetted.  He had the great satisfaction of finding them almost uninjured.
He had the greater satisfaction, thereafter, of feeling that he had
done a deed which induced every man in the beacon that night to thank
him half a dozen times over; and he had the greatest possible
satisfaction in finding that among the rest he had saved two letters
addressed to himself, one from Minnie Gray, and the other from his
uncle.

The scene in the beacon when the contents of the packet were delivered
was interesting.  Those who had letters devoured them, and in many cases
read them (unwittingly) half-aloud.  Those who had none read the
newspapers, and those who had neither papers nor letters listened.

Ruby's letter ran as follows (we say his _letter_, because the other
letter was regarded, comparatively, as nothing):--

  "ARBROATH, etcetera.

  "DARLING RUBY,--I have just time to tell you that we have made a
  discovery which will surprise you.  Let me detail it to you
  circumstantially.  Uncle Ogilvy and I were walking on the pier a few
  days ago, when we overheard a conversation between two sailors, who
  did not see that we were approaching.  We would not have stopped to
  listen, but the words we heard arrested our attention, so--O what a
  pity! there, Big Swankie has come for our letters.  Is it not strange
  that _he_ should be the man to take them off?  I meant to have given
  you _such_ an account of it, especially a description of the case.
  They won't wait.  Come ashore as soon as you can, dearest Ruby."

The letter broke off here abruptly.  It was evident that the writer had
been obliged to close it abruptly, for she had forgotten to sign her
name.

"`A description of the case;' _what_ case?" muttered Ruby in vexation.
"O Minnie, Minnie, in your anxiety to go into details you have omitted
to give me the barest outline.  Well, well, darling, I'll just take the
will for the deed, but I _wish_ you had--"

Here Ruby ceased to mutter, for Captain Ogilvy's letter suddenly
occurred to his mind.  Opening it hastily, he read as follows:--

  "DEAR NEFFY,--I never was much of a hand at spellin', an' I'm not
  rightly sure o' that word, howsever, it reads all square, so ittle do.
  If I had been the inventer o' writin' I'd have had signs for a lot o'
  words.  Just think how much better it would ha' bin to have put a
  regular D like that instead o' writin' s-q-u-a-r-e.  Then _round_
  would have bin far better O, like that.  An' crooked thus," (draws a
  squiggly line); "see how significant an' suggestive, if I may say so;
  no humbug--all fair an' above-board, as the pirate said, when he ran
  up the black flag to the peak.

  "But avast speckillatin' (shiver my timbers! but that last was a
  pen-splitter), that's not what I sat down to write about.  My object
  in takin' up the pen, neffy, is two-fold,

  "`Double, double, toil an' trouble,'

  "as Macbeath said,--if it wasn't Hamlet.

  "We want you to come home for a day or two, if you can git leave, lad,
  about this strange affair.  Minnie said she was goin' to give you a
  full, true, and partikler account of it, so it's of no use my goin'
  over the same course.  There's that blackguard Swankie come for the
  letters.  Ha! it makes me chuckle.  No time for more--"

This letter also concluded abruptly, and without a signature.

