was some fourteen feet wide and twenty long. In the corner to the
left something was lying and, above it, a dark object was moving
backwards and forwards.

"It is a big boa," Meinik said. "Now, master, do you take the two
torches in one hand, and have your knife ready in the other. If it
coils round you, cut through it at once. This is a good place for
fighting it, for there is nothing here for it to get its tail
round; and a boa cannot squeeze very hard, unless he does that."

Stanley, feeling that in a combat of this sort the Burman would be
perfectly at home, while he himself knew nothing about it, did as
he was told; determining to rush in, should it attack his follower.

"You can advance straight towards him, master. I will steal round.
He will be watching you, and I may get a cut at him, before he
notices me."

Illustration: The great snake moved his head higher and higher,
hissing angrily.

Stanley moved slowly forward. As he did so, the great snake moved
its head higher and higher, hissing angrily, with its eyes fixed on
the torches. Stanley did not take his gaze from it; but advanced,
grasping his knife. He knew that the boa's bite was harmless, and
that it was only its embrace that was to be feared.

He was within some eight feet of the reptile, when there was a
spring. The snake's head disappeared and, in a moment, it was
writhing, twisting, and lashing its tail so quickly that his eyes
could hardly follow its contortions.

"Stand back, master," Meinik shouted. "If its tail strikes you, it
might do you an injury. It is harmless, otherwise. I have cut its
head off."

Stanley stepped back a pace or two, and stood gazing in awe at the
tremendous writhing of the headless snake.

"It is a monster, Meinik," he said.

"It is a big snake, master. Indeed, I should say that it must be
about forty feet long, and it is as thick as my body. It would be
more than a match for a tiger."

"Well, I hope there are not many more of them about, Meinik."

"That depends, master. It may have its mate, but it is more likely
there will be no other. It would eat any smaller ones of its own
kind, of course; but there may be some small poisonous ones about."

As the writhing of the snake ceased, Stanley looked round and saw a
narrow doorway, in the corner opposite that in which it had been
lying.

"Here is a passage, Meinik. Let us see where it goes to."

Meinik had, by this time, lighted two more torches.

"The more light the better," he said, "when you are looking for
snakes," and, holding them in one hand and his knife in the other,
he passed through the doorway, which was about four feet high.

Stanley followed him. The apartment was similar to the last, but
narrower; and was lighted by an opening not more than a foot
square.

"See, Meinik, there is a staircase, in the corner facing us."

The steps were very narrow, but in perfect preservation. Without
staying to examine the room, Meinik led the way up; examining every
step carefully, and holding the knife in readiness to strike. They
mounted some forty steps, and then entered a room about ten feet
square. Except a window, some eighteen inches by three feet, there
was no apparent exit from the chamber.

"I should think that there must be some way out of this place,
Meinik. Why should they have taken the trouble to cut that long
flight of steps through the rock, just to reach this miserable
little chamber?"

Meinik shook his head. The ways of these ancient builders were
beyond him.

"There must be an outlet somewhere, if we could but find it.
Besides, we have not found where the snake came in, yet."

"He could have come in at the door, master. A small snake could not
have climbed up, but that big fellow could rear his head up and
come in, quite easily. We have found no little snakes at all."

"Well, that may be so, but I still think that there must be some
way out from here. Why should men go to the labour of cutting this
long stair, and excavating this chamber here, without any reason
whatever? Let us look through the window, Meinik."

It was a passage, rather than a window; for the rock face had been
left four feet in thickness. Crawling out, Stanley saw that he was
fifty feet above the foot of the cliff. A yard below him was a
ledge of rock, some two feet wide. It was level, and had deep
grooves cut, at regular intervals, across it. He had no doubt that
the roof of the outside temple had started from this point; and
that the grooves were made for the ends of massive rafters, of teak
or stone. At that time the passage to the chamber that he had left
was, doubtless, used for an exit on to the flat roof.

Stepping on to the ledge, he called Meinik to him.

"Now, Meinik," he said, "we will follow this ledge. There may be
some way up from it."

Walking with a good deal of care, Stanley made his way along to a
point where the ledge stopped, abruptly. Looking down, he saw the
remains of a wall of solid masonry, and perceived that he had been
correct in his surmise as to the purpose of the ledge. Then they
turned, and went back to the other end of the ledge. A few feet
before they reached this, Meinik--who was now leading the
way--stopped.

"Here is a passage, master."

The entrance was about the same size as that through which they had
stepped out on to the ledge but, instead of going straight in, it
started upwards.

"Another flight of steps, Meinik. I am beginning to hope that we
shall find some way out, at the top. If we can do so, it will make
us safe. We could defend those stairs and the entrance for a long
time and, when we wanted to get away, we could make quietly off,
without anyone knowing that we had left."



Chapter 14: In The Temple.


They went up the flight of steps for a considerable distance, then
they found the passage blocked by a number of great stones. Stanley
uttered an exclamation of disgust.

"It has fallen in," he said. "No doubt we are near the top of the
rock. Either the staircase was roofed in, or there was a building
erected over the entrance; and either the roof or building,
whichever it was, has fallen in. That is very unlucky. When we go
down, we will climb up the hill and see if we can discover anything
about it.

"With plenty of food and water," he went on, as they descended into
the lowest chamber, "one could hold this place for any time."

"Yes, master, one could store away the food; but where should we
store the water? We might bring skins in that would last us for a
week, perhaps two weeks, but after that?"

"After that we should make our way off, somehow, Meinik," Stanley
said, confidently. "Well, there is no doubt that this is the place
to shelter in. They are less likely to find us here than anywhere
and, if they do find us, we can defend ourselves stoutly. I should
say, too, that if we think it over, we ought to be able to hit upon
some plan for making noises that would frighten them. You know how
scared the man and the two boys were, at that sighing sound in the
other chamber. We certainly could make more alarming noises than
that."

Meinik nodded.

"That we could, master. With some reeds of different sizes I could
make noises, some as deep as the roar of a tiger, and others like
the singing of a bird."

"Then we will certainly bring some reeds in here with us, Meinik. I
don't suppose they will mind, in the daytime, what sounds they
hear; but at night I don't think even their officers would care to
move about here, if we can but make a few noises they do not
understand.

"Well, for the present we have done our work here; and you had best
go off with the Burman to buy food, to serve in case of a siege.
You had better go to some of the cultivators' houses, near the edge
of the wood, for rice and fruit. If you can get the food there, you
will be able to make two or three journeys a day, instead of one.

"But, before we start back, we will climb round to the top of the
hill, and see what has happened to shut up the staircase."

It took them a quarter of an hour's climbing, through the forest
and undergrowth, before they reached the upper edge of the rock
wall in which the chambers had been excavated. It had evidently, in
the first place, been a natural cliff for, when on the ledge,
Stanley had noticed that while below that point the rock was as
smooth as a built wall, above it was rough, and evidently untouched
by the hand of man. Following the edge of the cliff, until standing
as nearly as they could guess above the entrance to the steps, they
walked back among the trees. At a distance of some thirty yards,
they came upon a ruin. It was built of massive stones, like those
which strewed the ground where the temple had stood. A great tree
rose on one side, and it was evident that its growth had, in the
first place, overthrown the wall at this point. Climbers and shrubs
had thrust their roots in between the blocks that had been but
slightly moved, by the growth of the tree; and had, in time, forced
them asunder; and so, gradually, the whole building had collapsed.

"This tree must be a very old one," Stanley said, looking up at it,
"for it is evident that this wall was thrown down a great many
years ago."

"Very old, master. It is one of our hardest woods, and such trees
live, they say, five or six hundred years. There are some which are
known to be even older than that."

"Well, it is clear that the staircase came up here; but we have no
means of knowing how far the point we reached is below this. I
should say that the stones we saw are the remains of the pavement
and roof, for you see these great blocks that formed the walls
don't go as far as the middle, where there is a great depression.
Still, of course, the steps may have come up on one side or the
other, and not just in the middle of this little temple--for, no
doubt, it was a temple.

"Now, you see, the reason for the steps up to that little square
room are explained. Probably those three chambers were the
apartments of the principal priests, and from them they could
either go out on to the roof of the temple; or could, by taking the
upper staircase to this point, leave or enter without observation.

"Now, let us be off."

On arriving at their tree shelter, they found that the Burman had
got a meal ready and, after partaking of this, Meinik, with the
man, started to buy provisions. It was fortunate that Stanley had,
before starting from Prome, drawn some twenty pounds' worth of
silver from the paymaster. He had expected to be away for three or
four weeks and, during that time, would have had to buy provisions
for himself, Harry, and the four troopers; and might possibly have
occasion for money for other matters. He had not paid the men from
the village, for he knew that one of these would willingly
accompany him to Prome, to receive payment for them all.

A very small amount of silver sufficed for the purchase of a
considerable quantity of food in Burma. Fruit, of which many kinds
grew wild in the woods, was extremely cheap; as was rice and grain.
Therefore as yet, with the exception of the small sum expended in
Toungoo, his money was virtually untouched.

The two Burmans made three journeys before nightfall and returned,
each time, with large baskets of fruit, grain, and rice. On the
following morning, they went into the town and bought six of the
largest sized water skins--such as are carried for the use of the
troops in India, one on each side of a bullock. As soon as they
returned with these, they started for the temple. At a stream about
a hundred yards from the entrance they partially filled one of the
skins and, placing a strong bamboo through the straps sewn on it
for the purpose, Meinik and the Burmans carried it to the temple
and, with Stanley's assistance, lifted it into the lower chamber.
The others were, one by one, placed beside it; then water was
carried in the smaller skins and poured in, until they were all as
full as they could hold.

"There is water enough to last us for a month, if needs be,"
Stanley said as, after securely tying up the mouths, they laid the
skins down, side by side.

The smaller mussucks were then filled and placed with the large
skins; and then, having done a long day's work, they returned to
their tree just as the sun was setting. The four men and two boys
were already there, they having done the sixty miles from the
village without a halt. They had already cooked some rice and some
slices of venison--which Meinik had brought, with the water skins,
from the town that morning--and were now lying smoking their cigars
with placid contentment.

For the next six days Meinik went to the town every afternoon. On
his return on the last evening, he said that the guard had told him
that the governor had paid a visit to the prison, that day, and had
seen the white captive; and had decided that he was now well enough
to travel, and that in two days' time he was to start for Ava, the
court having sent down an urgent order that he should be carried
there as soon as he was well enough to bear the fatigue.

"Then tomorrow we must get him out," Stanley said. "Will our two
men be on duty?"

"Yes, master, they have not been on since the last night we were
there. They will form the second watch, and will go on guard at
midnight. I have bought two very sharp saws, and have cut two
strong bamboos for the litter."

This was constructed the next day. It was very simple, being formed
by sewing a blanket strongly to the two bamboos. Two slighter
bamboos, each four feet long, were tied loosely to the main poles.
These were to be lashed across, as soon as they had got beyond the
palisade, so as to keep the poles three feet apart--which, as the
blanket was four feet, from pole to pole, would allow it to bag
comfortably. The cross pieces could not be attached until they were
beyond the palisade; for the window was but two feet wide, and it
was therefore proposed to make the gap through the palisade the
same width, only.

Late in the evening they entered the town, and sat down in a
deserted corner until the time came for them to begin their work.
At last Meinik said that, by the stars, it was already past
midnight; and they then proceeded to the spot where they had before
climbed the palisade. Here they at once set to work. The saws were
well oiled and, in a very few minutes, five bamboos were cut away,
at the level of the ground and six feet above it. As the stockade
was bound together by cross pieces, behind, the other portions of
the bamboos remained in their places.

Meinik and Stanley went first, followed by three of the Burmans,
one of whom carried the litter. The other two Burmans with the
boys, remained on guard at the opening. All were barefooted, except
that Stanley wore a pair of the lightest leather sandals. They went
noiselessly up to the window; the guard, as before, responding to
Meinik's hiss. Without a word, one after another entered the
chamber. The trooper had been sitting at the table, evidently
anxiously expecting their arrival.

Stanley went up to the bed.

"Are you better, Harry?" he asked, in a whisper.

"Better, but still weak."

Everything had been arranged beforehand. The litter was laid down
on the ground, with the poles as far apart as possible. Then
Stanley made a sign, to the trooper, to take one end of the rug on
which Harry was lying; while he took the other. The Burmans ranged
themselves on each side; and the blanket was lifted up, with the
occupant and the pillow composed of his clothes, and laid quietly
on to the blanket of the litter. Then two Burmans went outside,
while the other four men lifted the poles and carried one end to
the window.

The Burmans outside held the ends well above their heads, Stanley
and the trooper raising their hands similarly. The other Burmans
then crawled, under it, out of the window. As the litter was moved
forward through the window, they took the places of Stanley and the
trooper at the poles, and silently moved on towards the palisade.
Stanley and Meinik followed, joined by the two Burmese guards.

Not the slightest sound was made, as the eight men crossed the
short distance to the palisade and passed through the opening where
the others, spear in hand, were awaiting them; ready to rush in and
take part in the fray, should an alarm be given. Stanley breathed a
great sigh of relief, as they passed out. A few paces further they
halted, and the cross pieces were lashed to the poles.

"Thank God that you are out, Harry!" Stanley said, as soon as they
did this. "Has it hurt you much?"

"Nothing to speak of," Harry replied. "You managed it marvellously.
Am I really outside the place altogether?"

"Yes, fairly out. You will be more comfortable when we have lashed
these cross pieces. You will not be lying, then, at the bottom of a
bag; as you are now."

When the work was completed, they proceeded at a rapid pace; for
Harry's weight, reduced by fever as he had been, was a trifle to
his bearers. The others followed close behind and, in a quarter of
an hour, they were well beyond the town. Stanley spoke to Harry
once or twice, but received no answer; so he had no doubt that his
cousin had dozed quietly off to sleep. The gentle motion of the
litter would be likely to have that effect; especially as Harry had
probably been lying awake, for the last night or two, listening for
the friends who might arrive at any time.

When they reached the confines of the forest the torches, which had
been carried by the boys, were all lit; and each carried two--with
the exception of the bearers, who had but one each--while all kept
close together round the litter. They waved their torches as they
went and, although they heard the cries of several tigers in the
forest, they had no fear of being attacked; as so many waving
lights would deter the most hungry beast from venturing near.

Once in the chamber at the temple, the litter was laid down on a
pile of reeds and leaves that had been gathered the day before,
together with a great store of brushwood and logs. Harry still
sleeping quietly. In a short time a bright fire was blazing and,
with this and the light of the torches, the chamber assumed quite a
cheerful appearance. On the way, Stanley had spoken to the two
guards, thanked them for their service, and assured them that they
would receive the reward promised by Meinik.

"I am the British officer," he said, "who was at the village with
my friend, though I was absent when he was carried off. As you see,
I am disguised."

Both had shown signs of uneasiness, when they approached the
temple; but Meinik had assured them that the spirits would not
venture to approach a party having a white man with them, and that
a night had already been passed in the temple, without any harm
coming of it. A meal, consisting of slices of venison, was at once
prepared and, when this was eaten, and the whole party had lighted
cigars, their spirits rose at the success of the enterprise. The
