their bodies into contact, and performing various disgusting
contortions, would give place to another pair.  These would appear
without arms or legs, walking on their knees, or sliding along on their
hips!

One danced with his head under his arm, and another with one leg around
his neck; all eliciting more or less laughter, as the feat was more or
less comical.  During the dance every species of deformity was imitated
and caricatured, for this is the tagarota.  It was a series of grotesque
and repulsive pictures.  Some of the dancers, flinging themselves flat,
would roll across the open space without moving hand or foot.  This
always elicited applause, and we could not help remarking its
resemblance to the gymnastics we had lately been practising ourselves.

"Och, be me sowl! we can bate yez at that!" cried Chane, who appeared to
be highly amused at the tagarota, making his comments as the dance went
on.

I was sick of the scene, and watched it no longer.  My eyes turned to
the portale, and I looked anxiously through the half-drawn curtains.

"It is strange I have seen nothing of _them_!  Could they have turned
off on some other route?  No--they must be here.  Narcisso's promise for
to-night!  He at least is here.  And she?--perhaps occupied within--gay,
happy, indifferent--oh!"

The pain shot afresh through my heart.

Suddenly the curtain was drawn aside, and a brilliant picture appeared
within--brilliant, but to me like the glimpse which some condemned
spirit might catch over the walls of Paradise.  Officers in bright
uniforms, and amongst these I recognised the elegant person of Dubrosc.
Ladies in rich dresses, and amongst these--.  Her sister, too, was
there, and the Dona Joaquiana, and half a dozen other ladies, rustling
in silks and blazing with jewels.

Several of the gentlemen--young officers of the band--wore the
picturesque costume of the guerilleros.

They were forming for the dance.

"Look, Captain!" cried Clayley; "Don Cosme and his people, by the living
earthquake!"

"Hush! do not touch me--do not speak to me!"

I felt as though my heart would stop beating.  It rose in my bosom, and
seemed to hang for minutes without moving.  My throat felt dry and
husky, and a cold perspiration broke out upon my skin.

He approaches her--he asks her to dance--she consents!  No: she refuses.
Brave girl!  She has strayed away from the dancers, and looks over the
balustrade.  She is sad.  Was it a sigh that caused her bosom to rise?
Ha! he comes again.  She is smiling!--he touches her hand!

"Fiend! false woman!"  I shouted at the top of my voice as I sprang up,
impelled by passion.  I attempted to rush towards them.  My feet were
bound, and I fell heavily upon my face!

The guards seized me, tying my hands.  My comrades, too, were re-bound.
We were dragged over the stones into a small room in one corner of the
patio.

The door was bolted and locked, and we were left alone.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

A KISS IN THE DARK.

It would be impossible to describe my feelings as I was flung upon the
floor of our prison.  This was cold, damp, and filthy; but I heeded not
these grievances.  Greater sorrows absorbed the less.  There is no
torture so racking, no pain so painful as the throbbings of a jealous
heart; but how much harder to bear under circumstances like mine!  She
could sleep, smile, dance--dance by my prison, and with my jailer!

I felt spiteful--vengeful.  I was stung to a desire for retaliation, and
along with this came an eagerness to live for the opportunity of
indulging in this passion.

I began to look around our prison, and see what chances it afforded for
escape.

"Good heavens! if our being transferred to the cell should destroy the
plans of Narcisso!  How is he to reach us?  The door is double-locked,
and a sentry is pacing without."

After several painful efforts I raised myself upon my feet, propping my
body against the side of the prison.  There was an aperture--a window
about as large as a loophole for musketry.  I spun myself along the wall
until I stood directly under it.  It was just the height of my chin.
Cautioning my companions to silence, I placed my ear to the aperture and
listened.  A low sound came wailing from the fields without.  I did not
heed this.  I knew it was the wolf.  It rose again, louder than before.
A peculiarity in the howl struck me, and I turned, calling to Raoul.

"What is it, Captain?" inquired he.

"Do you know if the prairie wolf is found here?"

"I do not know if it be the true prairie wolf, Captain.  There is one
something like the _coyote_."

I returned to the aperture and listened.

"Again the howl of the prairie wolf--the bark!  By heavens! it is
Lincoln!"

Now it ceased for several minutes, and then came again, but from another
direction.

"What is to be done? if I answer him, it will alarm the sentry.  I will
wait until he comes closer to the wall."

I could tell that he was creeping nearer and nearer.

Finding he had not been answered, the howling ceased.  I stood listening
eagerly to every sound from without.  My comrades, who had now become
apprised of Lincoln's proximity, had risen to their feet and were
leaning against the walls.

We were about half an hour in this situation, without exchanging a word,
when a light tap was heard from without, and a soft voice whispered:

"_Hola, Capitan_!"

I placed my ear to the aperture.  The whisper was repeated.  It was not
Lincoln--that was clear.

It must be Narcisso.

"_Quien_?"  I asked.

"_Yo, Capitan_."

I recognised the voice that had addressed me in the morning.

It is Narcisso.

"Can you place your hands in the aperture?" said he.

"No; they are tied behind my back."

"Can you bring them opposite, then?"

"No; I am standing on my toes, and my wrists are still far below the
sill."

"Are your comrades all similarly bound?"

"All."

"Let one get on each side of you, and raise you up on their shoulders."

Wondering at the astuteness of the young Spaniard, I ordered Chane and
Raoul to lift me as he directed.

When my wrists came opposite the window I cautioned them to hold on.
Presently a soft hand touched mine, passing all over them.  Then I felt
the blade of a knife pressed against the thong, and in an instant it
leaped from my wrists.  I ordered the men to set me down, and I listened
as before.

"Here is the knife.  You can release your own ankles and those of your
comrades.  This paper will direct you further.  You will find the lamp
inside."

A knife, with a folded and strangely shining note, was passed through by
the speaker.

"And now, Capitan--one favour," continued the voice, in a trembling
tone.

"Ask it! ask it!"

"I would kiss your hand before we part."

"Dear, noble boy!" cried I, thrusting my hand into the aperture.

"Boy! ah, true--you think me a boy.  I am no boy, Capitan, but _a
woman--one who loves you with all her blighted, broken heart_!"

"Oh, heavens!  It is, then--dearest Guadalupe!"

"Ha!  I thought as much.  Now I will not.  But no; what good would it be
to me?  No--no--no!  I shall keep my word."

This appeared to be uttered in soliloquy, and the tumult of my thoughts
prevented me from noticing the strangeness of these expressions.  I
thought of them afterwards.

"Your hand! your hand!"  I ejaculated.

"You would kiss my hand?  Do so!"  The little hand was thrust through,
and I could see it in the dim light, flashing with brilliants.  I caught
it in mine, covering it with kisses.  It seemed to yield to the fervid
pressure of my lips.

"Oh!"  I exclaimed, in the transport of my feelings, "let us not part;
let us fly together!  I was wronging you, loveliest, dearest
Guadalupe--!"

A slight exclamation, as if from some painful emotion, and the hand was
plucked away, leaving one of the diamonds in my fingers.  The next
moment the voice whispered, with a strange sadness of tone, as I
thought:

"Adieu, Capitan! adieu!  _In this world of life we never know who best
loves us_!"

I was puzzled, bewildered.  I called out, but there was no answer.  I
listened until the patience of my comrades was well-nigh exhausted, but
still there was no voice from without; and with a strange feeling of
uneasiness and wonderment I commenced cutting the thongs from my ankles.

Having set Raoul at liberty, I handed him the knife, and proceeded to
open the note.  Inside I found a cocuyo; and, using it as I had been
already instructed, I read:

  "_The walls are adobe.  You have a knife.  The side with the loop-hole
  fronts outward.  There is a field of magueys, and beyond this you will
  find the forest.  You may then trust to yourselves.  I can help you no
  farther_.  Carissimo caballero, adios!"

I had no time to reflect upon the peculiarities of the note, though the
boldness of the style struck me as corresponding with the other.  I
flung down the firefly, crushing the paper into my bosom; and, seizing
the knife, was about to attack the adobe wall, when voices reached me
from without.  I sprang forward, and placed my ear to listen.  It was an
altercation--a woman--a man!  "By heaven! it is Lincoln's voice!"

"Yer cussed whelp! ye'd see the cap'n hung, would yer?--a man that's
good vally for the full of a pararer of green-gutted greasers; but I
ain't a-gwine to let _you_ look at his hangin'.  If yer don't show me
which of these hyur pigeon-holes is his'n, an' help me to get him outer
it, I'll skin yer like a mink!"

"I tell you, Mister Lincoln," replied a voice which I recognised as the
one whose owner had just left me, "I have this minute given the captain
the means of escape, through that loophole."

"Whar!"

"This one," answered the female voice.

"Wal, that's easy to circumstantiate.  Kum along hyur!  I ain't a-gwine
to let yer go till it's all fixed.  De ye hear?"

I heard the heavy foot of the hunter as he approached, and presently his
voice calling through the loophole in a guarded whisper:

"Cap'n!"

"Hush, Bob! it's all right," I replied, speaking in a low tone, for the
sentries were moving suspiciously around the door.

"Good!" ejaculated he.  "Yer kin go now," he added to the other, whose
attention I endeavoured to attract, but dared not call to loud enough,
lest the guards should hear me.  "Dash my buttons!  I don't want yer to
go--yer a good 'un arter all.  Why can't yer kum along?  The cap'n 'll
make it all straight agin about the desartion."

"Mr Lincoln, I cannot go with you.  Please suffer me to depart!"

"Wal! yer own likes! but if I can do yer a good turn, you can depend on
Bob Linkin--mind that."

"Thank you! thank you!"

And before I could interfere to prevent it, she was gone.  I could hear
the voice, sad and sweet in the distance, calling back, "_Adios_!"

I had no time for reflection, else the mystery that surrounded me would
have occupied my thoughts for hours.  It was time to act.  Again I heard
Lincoln's voice at the loophole.

"What is it?"  I inquired.

"How are yer ter get out, Cap'n?"

"We are cutting a hole through the wall."

"If yer can give me the spot, I'll meet yer half-ways."

I measured the distance from the loophole, and handed the string to
Lincoln.  We heard no more from the hunter until the moonlight glanced
through the wall upon the blade of his knife.  Then he uttered a short
ejaculation, such as may be heard from the "mountain men" at peculiar
crises; and after that we could hear him exclaiming:

"Look out, Rowl!  Hang it, man! ye're a-cuttin' my claws!"

In a few minutes the hole was large enough to pass our bodies; and one
by one we crawled out, and were once more at liberty.



CHAPTER FORTY.

MARIA DE MERCED.

There was a deep ditch under the wall, filled with cactus-plants and dry
grass.  We lay in the bottom of this for some minutes, panting with
fatigue.  Our limbs were stiff and swollen, and we could hardly stand
upright.  A little delay then was necessary, to bring back the blood and
determine our future course.

"We had best ter keep the gully," whispered Lincoln.  "I kum across the
fields myself, but that 'ar kiver's thin, and they may sight us."

"The best route is the ditch," assented Raoul: "there are some windows,
but they are high, and we can crawl under them."

"Forward, then!"  I whispered to Raoul.

We crept down the ditch on all-fours, passing several windows that were
dark and shut.  We reached one, the last in the row, where the light
streamed through.  Notwithstanding our perilous situation, I resolved to
look in.  There was an impulse upon me which I could not resist.  I was
yearning for some clue to the mystery that hung around me.

The window was high up, but it was grated with heavy bars; and, grasping
two of these, I swung myself to its level.  Meanwhile my comrades had
crept into the magueys to wait for me.

I raised my head cautiously and looked in.  It was a room somewhat
elegantly furnished, but my eye did not dwell long on that.  A man
sitting by the table engrossed my attention.  This man was Dubrosc.  The
light was full upon his face, and I gazed upon its hated lines until I
felt my frame trembling with passion.

I can give no idea of the hate this man had inspired me with.  Had I
possessed firearms, I could not have restrained myself from shooting
him; and but for the iron grating, I should have sprung through the sash
and grappled him with my hands.  I have thought since that some
providence held me back from making a demonstration that would have
baffled our escape.  I am sure at that moment I possessed no restraint
within myself.

As I gazed at Dubrosc, the door of the apartment opened, and a young man
entered.  He was strangely attired, in a costume half-military,
half-ranchero.  There was a fineness, a silky richness, about the dress
and manner of this youth that struck me.  His features were dark and
beautiful.

He advanced and sat down by the table, placing his hand upon it.
Several rings sparkled upon his fingers.  I observed that he was pale,
and that his hand trembled.

After looking at him for a moment, I began to fancy I had seen the
features before.  It was not Narcisso; him I should have known; and yet
there was a resemblance.  Yes--he even resembled _her_!  I started as
this thought crossed me.  I strained my eyes; the resemblance grew
stronger.

Oh, Heaven! could it be?--dressed thus?  No, no! those eyes--ha!  I
remember!  The boy at the rendezvous--on board the transport--the
island--the picture!  It is she--the cousin--_Maria de Merced_!

These recollections came with the suddenness of a single thought, and
passed as quickly.  Later memories crowded upon me.  The adventure of
the morning--the strange words uttered at the window of my prison--the
small hand!  This, then, was the author of our deliverance.

A hundred mysteries were explained in a single moment.  The unexpected
elucidation came like a shock--like a sudden light.  I staggered back,
giving way to new and singular emotions.

"Guadalupe knows nothing of my presence, then.  _She_ is innocent."

This thought alone restored me to happiness.  A thousand others rushed
through my brain in quick succession--some pleasant, others painful.

There was an altercation of voices over my head.  I caught the iron
rods, and, resting my toes upon a high bank, swung my body up, and again
looked into the room.  Dubrosc was now angrily pacing over the floor.

"Bah!" he ejaculated, with a look of cold brutality; "you think to make
me jealous, I believe.  That isn't possible.  I was never so, and _you_
can't do it.  I know you love the cursed Yankee.  I watched you in the
ship--on the island, too.  You had better keep him company where he is
going.  Ha, ha!  Jealous, indeed!  Your pretty cousins have grown up
since I saw them last."

The insinuation sent the blood in a hot stream through my veins.

It appeared to have a similar effect upon the woman; for, starting from
her seat, she looked towards Dubrosc, her eyes flashing like globes of
fire.

"Yes!" she exclaimed; "and if you dare whisper your polluting thoughts
to either of them, lawless as is this land, you know that I still
