Buttar took two or three.  Away they skated.  At first Tom got on very
well, but in a few minutes he declared that the ice had become more
slippery than ever, and that he had the greatest difficulty in keeping
his legs; at the same time, that he felt a strong inclination to push on
ahead.

"I say, Buttar, I believe that I could race the wind.  Come, let us try;
I don't mind what I do," he exclaimed, as he skated on furiously.  "I
don't mind what I do--do you?"

Buttar himself felt rather excited, but he suspected the cause, and
recommended Tom to come and sit down with him on the bank till they
became more composed.  It was fortunate that they found out in time the
strength of the punch, or they might have been, as some of the visitors
to the pond were, by their own imprudence, completely overcome.

Tom was very glad that he had escaped committing himself, and much
obliged to Buttar for warning him.  He had bully Blackall's career
before his eyes to warn him of the effects of drunkenness, and dreaded
by any chance being led into it.  He more than once went up to the fire
for a hot potato, but each time the punch was offered him he wisely
declined taking it.  By the end of the day everybody declared that never
was known so perfect a first day of skating.  Most of the party, except
the more practised skaters, were not a little stiff and sore from the
exertions and tumbles.  Ellis could scarcely move a limb, and Frank
declared that he felt as if he had been fighting away the whole day.
They had, indeed, been on their feet from half-past ten in the morning
till nearly dark.

The next day much the same scenes were enacted.

After luncheon, a jingling of bells was heard, and young Hotspur
appeared, drawing an elegant American sleigh.  John Bracebridge, who was
driving, dashed fearlessly on to the ice.  The steed seemed delighted to
have so slight a weight after him.  The sleigh--so it is called in
Canada and throughout America--had a seat in front for the driver, and
an easy sloping one behind for two passengers.  A handsome fur rug hung
over it behind, almost reaching the ground, while there were two or
three buffalo skins, in which those in the carriage might effectually
wrap themselves up.  Instead of having wheels, the carriage was placed
on runners, two skates as it were, made of iron, with a frame-work
lifting the body of the carriage about a foot, or a foot and a half,
from the ground, and giving it a very light appearance.  The harness was
ornamented with little silvery sounding bells, and fringe, and tufts of
red worsted, which made the whole turn-out look very gay.  It gained
universal admiration, and two ladies were easily persuaded by John
Bracebridge to get into it, and to be driven round and round the pond.

"You may fancy yourselves transported suddenly to Canada, and whisking
away over the Saint Lawrence," he observed, turning round as he drove
on; "only I assure you that so smooth a piece of ice as this is rarely
found to drive over.  In Lower Canada especially, the sleighs are driven
on the roads over the snow; but the old-fashioned French Canadian
sleigh, used by all the country people, is so low that the front part
sweeps the snow before it, and thus ridges are quickly formed all across
the road.  Another sleigh following has to surmount the ridges, and of
necessity digs down on the opposite side, and scoops out more of the
snow.  Sometimes, also, they slide off either on one side or the other,
and thus a succession of hills or waves, as it were, are made with
slides, which send the sleighs nearly off the road on one side or the
other, and make the driving away from the larger cities very far from
pleasant.  About Quebec, however, the roads are kept in good order, and
sleighing is there a very agreeable amusement."

As young Hotspur could not go trotting round and round the pond all day,
John at last drove him home, and then Frank proposed a game of hockey on
the ice.  He had provided a supply of sticks and a ball, and the
proposal was welcomed with applause.  The people present were not long
in forming sides.  Charles undertook to lead one side, Frank the other.
Frank got his stout friend to be on his side, but he generally chose
boys.  He got Ernest and all his schoolfellows, except Lemon, who joined
Charles, and there were several other boys who skated pretty well, and,
as he said, looked plucky.  A person must know how to balance himself
well to play hockey on skates, otherwise, after having struck the ball,
he is very likely to allow his stick to swing round, and to bring him
over.  There were twenty people on a side, big and little; but the
shorter ones had decidedly the advantage, and ran away with the ball
whenever they got up to it, driving it before them before any of the
opposite party could overtake them.  Ernest gave his brother some useful
hints, from which he profited.  The same tactics which Ernest had often
employed at school Frank brought into play.  The chief point in his plan
was to keep three or four boys together, one to follow up another.  If
the leader missed, then number two ran in; if he failed to strike, then
number three, and so on.  The stout gentleman also turned out to be a
capital player.  He went on the "sure and steady wins the race"
principle.  Quietly yet rapidly he glided about after the ball, and when
he got up to it, never failed to strike it, and to strike hard too.  His
exertions indeed mainly contributed to the success of Ernest's side,
which triumphantly gained the day.  Several games were played, and each
time Ernest's side was victorious, though the defeated party took it
very good-humouredly.  Charles, however, observed that he had received
several lessons from his opponents, and that he thought they would not
find him so easily beaten again.

"Don't be too sure of that, Charlie," sung out Frank.  "We also intend
to-morrow to play twice as well as we did yesterday.  Our motto is,
`We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.'"

The morrow came, and a great game of hockey was the absorbing amusement
of the day; even young Hotspur and the sleigh failed to attract so much
interest.  The stout gentleman was in his glory.  He appeared with a
hockey-stick of his own manufacture, and in garments which, if not
graceful, precluded any of the youngsters from catching hold of his
tails.  There were the same sides as on the previous day, with several
additional players; but none of them were very good, nor did they add
much to the relative strength of each party.  Ernest was the first to
place the ball on the ice to strike it.  The instant his stick
descended, and the ball went whirling away over the smooth glass-like
surface of the ice, Frank, followed by Buttar, Bouldon, and Ellis,
darted forth with tremendous speed in the hopes of reaching it before
any of the opposite party, and of driving it home; but before they could
strike, Charles and Lemon were up to it, and sent it flying back again.
The stout gentleman, however, who had only moved slowly on, saw it
coming, and gliding up as it slid on towards him, struck it a blow which
sent it two-thirds of the way across the pond once more.  Frank, Ernest,
and Buttar were up to it, Bouldon and Ellis keeping a little way behind
them: Frank struck the ball, and sent it flying on, but it was into the
midst of their opponents, who quickly drove it back again, when Bouldon,
skating up, prevented it getting between Charles and Lemon, who stood
prepared to drive it up to the goal, if, as they hoped, they could elude
the vigilance of the stout gentleman.  He, however, was not asleep, and
watching their movements, as Tom Bouldon observed, as keenly as a
boa-constrictor, glided swiftly up to the spot where they had driven the
ball, and sent it spinning back, till once more Frank and Ernest got it
within their power.  Thus the game continued fluctuating; but finally,
after many a bandy here and there, and many a tussle between the
opposing parties, not a few upsets and other catastrophes, it was sent
up to Ernest, who struck it a blow which sent it flying along between
everybody, nobody being able to stop it up to the goal.

The next game was, however, still more severely contested; and at last,
by desperate struggles, was won by Charles' party.  Ellis had made
wonderful progress in skating, thanks to Ernest's lessons, and his own
resolution to overcome all difficulties.  Of course, he got several
severe tumbles, but he always picked himself up and went away again as
if nothing had been the matter.  In a short time he overcame all fear,
and obtained the complete mastery over his feet.

"I should like to have your friend Ellis with me at sea for a few
months," said Frank to Ernest, as they watched him tumble down and get
up again, and go several times in succession to practise on the outside
edge, undeterred by failures.  "I like the fellow's spirit, and I am
sure that there is a great deal to be made out of him."

"I am sure there is," was the reply.  "At the same time, he is really so
talented, and so good-hearted and humble-minded.  He is one of my
greatest friends.  He trusts me, and I trust him, and that is, I
suspect, the true secret of friendship."

Another day, Frank, taking a hint from John's sleigh, rigged out one
with ropes.  It was little more than a wide plank on runners, with seats
for two people.  The boys harnessed themselves to it, and invited the
visitors to the lake to come and be dragged along.  They had many
applications for the honour, and it was a source of great amusement.  No
one seemed weary of dragging the sleigh, or of being dragged in it.
Round and round the pond they went, often at so tremendous a pace that
those being dragged shrieked out with terror; but their alarm could not
have been very great, for when they were asked if they would go on again
they never refused, or if they did, it was to let some sister or friend
take their places.  The next day three similar sleighs appeared, but
they were covered with cloaks or rugs, and each had a flag of a
different colour flying in front of it.  As each sleigh required several
persons to drag it, nearly all the gentlemen skaters were in a short
time turned into horses, while the ladies were all eager to be dragged
along; so away they all went, skating round and round the lake, and
those who looked on could distinguish where their friends were by the
colour of the flags.  Sometimes they raced, and then the excitement was
tremendous.  However, one of the sleighs was upset, and the passengers
thrown out, and the skaters sent here and there, some on their backs,
and some on all-fours, to the alarm of those at a distance, and to the
great amusement of those near, and who knew that no one was hurt.  Mr
Bracebridge, after this, prohibited racing with sleighs, for fear of
accidents of a more serious character.

It is impossible to describe minutely all the amusements of those
memorable Christmas holidays.  A fortnight passed away, and though the
glass-like appearance of the ice had somewhat disappeared, owing to the
innumerable cuts its surface had received from careless skaters, the
skating was continued with unabated ardour.  Then came down a heavy fall
of snow, which completely covered the ponds with a thick coat.
Passages, were, however, swept across the ice, but the interest of
skating was somewhat diminished.  More snow followed, and then, except
on small patches and walks which, with some exertion, were kept clear by
the gardeners, there was no room whatever for skating.  Notwithstanding
this there were abundant sources of amusement.  The younger guests were
fortunate in having so good a master of the revels as Frank, the
midshipman.

"Hurra, boys, a bright idea!" he exclaimed, one morning at breakfast,
when some of the party were lamenting the destruction of the ice.
"We'll build a castle of snow; not a puny little affair, but a castle
with high walls and parapets, and a deep ditch and outworks, such as
cannot be captured without hard fighting.  However, as we don't really
wish to kill each other, instead of cutlasses and bayonets, and swords,
and pistols, and all those sorts of deadly weapons, we will use good
honest snowballs.  We'll build the castle first, and choose sides
afterwards, so that no one will know whether they are going to defend or
attack it, and no one inclined to be treacherous will leave any weak
places.  There is a high mound in Beech-tree meadow, which will make a
capital foundation, and save a great deal of labour.  Who is for it?"

Of course, all the younger guests were delighted with Frank's proposal.
Mr Bracebridge also entered into it.  "You shall have the assistance of
all the gardeners, who can do nothing during this weather," he observed;
"I will tell them also to engage half-a-dozen men thrown out of work;
they with their barrows will much expedite the operation."

"Thank you, papa; thank you, sir," exclaimed the boys; and as soon as
breakfast was over most of them jumped up ready to go to the scene of
action.  Ernest, however, said that he had his holiday task to go
through, and that he must give one hour to that while he was fresh, and
before he allowed his thoughts to be occupied with the amusements of the
day.  This reminded Buttar and Ellis that they had their tasks, to which
they had as yet paid very little attention.  Bouldon was inclined to
think this proposal to study a very slow proceeding, as he had been in
the habit of not looking at his task till the last week of the holidays,
and often he did not finish off learning it till he was on his way to
school.  Now, however, as Ernest and others set the example, he began to
think that he ought to do something.

"Very well," observed Frank; "we will not start for an hour and a
quarter; that will give you time to get out your books; and if you all
read hard, you will do something.  I'll go to school, too, and rub up my
navigation."

Ernest, followed by his guests, accordingly repaired to the study.  Tom
Bouldon, on looking into his portmanteau, found that, by the most
unaccountable negligence, as he said, the servant had not packed up any
of his school-books, but had put in instead a copy of "Robinson Crusoe,"
"Tom Cringle's Log," and the "Boy's Own Book."  However, Ernest and
Ellis between them were able to supply him; so Master Tom, having no
excuse for idleness, set to with a will, and was surprised with the
progress he made, and the satisfaction it afforded him.

"Well, I really think I will do a bit of my task every day till it is
finished," he exclaimed, as Frank, pulling out his watch, told the party
that time was up, and that they might set off for the scene of action.

When they reached Beech-tree Meadow, they found a quantity of snow
already collected from a distance in the neighbourhood of the mound.  On
one side, a little way off, was a miniature castle, which Frank said he
had got up early in the morning to construct, so that everybody might
see what they were about.  The model was much admired, and Frank acting
as architect, the work proceeded with wonderful rapidity.  Some carried
the snow; others acted as masons, and piled it up and smoothed it off,
he, standing in the middle, aiding and directing.  A circular tower of
fully twenty feet in diameter was quickly raised, and fully fifteen feet
high, and finished off at the summit in a castellated form, with a
parapet; and then there was an outer wall with a deep ditch; between
them and the tower was a gateway, and a bridge, constructed partly of
snow and partly of planks, led to it.  It really had, when finished, a
very imposing appearance, and looked as capable of resisting a foe as
one of the Martello towers which guard the coasts of Great Britain.

Frank had, in the morning, despatched an invitation to all the boys he
knew of in the neighbourhood to come and join in the sport, and by the
afternoon a large army was collected.  Everybody was too eager in the
work to go in to luncheon, so it was brought out to them.  At last all
was ready.  Lemon undertook to be the leader of one party; of course,
Frank acted as general of the other.  Ernest, and Buttar, and Ellis were
on Frank's side; Bouldon, with Charles, and some of the other
Bracebridges, joined Lemon.  There were besides some twenty or more boys
on either side, so that there were fully fifty combatants.  They tossed
up as to which side was to defend and which to attack the castle.  Lemon
got the first choice, and undertook the defence of the place.  A flag on
a pole was hoisted in the centre, and till this was hauled down the
castle was not to be considered as captured.  As soon as these
preliminaries were arranged, all hands set to work to manufacture
snowballs.  Several piles were made at short distances surrounding the
castle.  These might be captured by a sortie.  There were also flags on
staffs stuck about which might be taken.  On the outworks of the castle
and on the walls were several flags.  Piles of snowballs were placed
inside the castle walls, and there were also heaps of snow out of which
others could be manufactured.  Lemon had brought his horn, and the
besieging army had a couple among them, which had a very fine effect.

Frank, having marshalled his troops, formed them into three divisions,
which were to attack simultaneously on different sides.  Ernest led one,
Buttar another, and Frank commanded the third party in person.  These
arrangements were made out of sight of the castle; and, to give more
effect to the attack, the army marched through the woods sounding their
horns, which were answered by a note of defiance from the castle.

"It is getting somewhat cold," exclaimed Buttar, who was practical in
his notions.  "The fellows inside must be colder still, waiting for us.
All our valour will be frozen up.  Let us begin to warm up our blood."

"Certainly, Colonel Buttar," answered Frank, laughing.  "A very sensible
remark.  On, brave army to the attack!  Death or victory!  Don't mind
the snowballs.  Turn your heads into battering-rams, and your pockets
into arsenals, and the place will quickly be ours.  Now, Colonels
Bracebridge and Buttar, lead round your men to the positions allotted to
you."

"Too-too-too!" sounded the horns louder than ever, and the three
divisions burst at the same moment out of the woods, and advanced to
take up their positions near where their ammunition had been piled up,
of the existence of which the defenders of the castle were supposed,
till that moment, not to be aware.

"Too-too-too!" again sounded the horns, and while a sentinel remained to
guard each pile of snowballs and their respective flag-staffs, the rest
of the army, having loaded themselves with ammunition, rushed bravely to
the attack.  Then began a regular snow-storm.  The besiegers and
besieged pelted away with tremendous energy, till the former were
covered with snow from head to foot, while the latter could scarcely
show their faces above the walls.  Under cover of this heavy fire, or
rather snow-storm, Ernest attempted to cross the bridge, which had been
allowed to remain, and to force the door.  He was followed closely by
Ellis and two other boys: but they were almost overwhelmed with the
heaps of snow showered down upon them.  Still they battered away with
their fists and shoulders, as they were unprovided with other weapons;
but the door would not yield.  In fact, it had been completely blocked
up from within, so that no force could have opened it.  Meantime,
Buttar, by Frank's directions, was shelling the castle from a distance;
but as this produced no effect, and only supplied the besieged with
ammunition, he was ordered to draw near to assist in a general escalade.
Frank's plan of dividing his forces had prevented the besieged from
making a sortie.  He now ordered a general escalade.  Scaling ladders
were not to be used, but the backs of the combatants were to serve for
the purpose.  No sooner was the order given than, rushing up together,
with masses of snow they filled up the ditch; and then one sprang on the
