do any good."

A week previously, a small privateer had come in with some
mailbags, which she had brought on from Lisbon. Among them was a
letter to Bob from the owners of the Antelope. It had been written
months before, after the arrival of the brig and her two prizes in
England. It said that the two vessels and their cargoes had been
sold, and the prize-money divided; and that his share amounted to
three hundred and thirty-two pounds, for which sum an order upon a
firm of merchants at Gibraltar was inclosed. The writers also said
that, after consultation with Captain Lockett, from whom they had
heard of the valuable services he had rendered, the owners of the
Antelope had decided--as a very small mark of their appreciation,
and gratitude--to present him with a service of plate, to the value
of five hundred pounds, and in such form as he might prefer on his
return to England.

He had said nothing to his sister of this letter, as his intention
was to surprise her with some present. But the doctor's words now
determined him to carry into effect an idea that had before
occurred to him, upon seeing so many sickly children among the
families of the officers of their acquaintance.

"Look here, doctor," he said, "I mean to go out and try and get a
few boxes of oranges and lemons; but mind, nobody but you and I
must know anything about it."

"How on earth do you mean to do it, Bob?"

"Well, I have not settled, yet; but there can't be any difficulty
about getting out. I might go down to the Old Mole, and swim from
there to the head of the bay; or I might get some of the fishermen
to go round the point, and land me to the east, well beyond the
Spanish lines."

"You couldn't do that, Bob; there is too sharp a lookout kept on
the batteries. No craft is allowed to go any distance from the
Rock, as they are afraid of the Spaniards learning the state to
which we are reduced, by illness. If you did swim to the head of
the bay, as you talk about, you would be certain to be captured at
once, by the Spaniards; and in that case you would, as likely as
not, be shot as a spy."

"Still, deserters do get out, you know, doctor. There is scarcely a
week that two or three don't manage to get away. I mean to try,
anyhow. If you like to help me, of course it will make it easier;
if not, I shall try by myself."

"Gerald and your sister would never forgive me, if anything
happened to you, Bob."

"There is no occasion for them to know anything about it. Anyhow, I
shall say nothing to them. I shall leave a note behind me, saying
that I am going to make an attempt to get out, and bring back a
boat full of oranges and lemons. I am past seventeen, now; and am
old enough to act for myself. I don't think, if the thing is
managed properly, there is any particular risk about it. I will
think it over, by tomorrow, and tell you what plan I have fixed
on."

On the following day, Bob told the doctor that there were two
plans.

"The first is to be lowered by a rope, down at the back of the
Rock. That is ever so much the simplest. Of course, there is no
difficulty about it if the rope is long enough. Some of the
deserters have failed because the rope has been too short, but I
should take care to get one long enough. The only fear is the
sentries; I know that there are lots of them posted about there, on
purpose to prevent desertion."

"Quite so, Bob; and no one is allowed to go along the paths after
dark, except on duty."

"Yes.

"Well, the other plan is to go out with the party that furnishes
the sentries, down on the neutral ground; choose some dark night,
manage to get separated from them, as they march out, and then make
for the shore and take to the water. Of course, if one could
arrange to have the officer with the party in the secret, it would
make it easy enough."

"It might be done, that way," the doctor said, thoughtfully. "Have
you quite made up your mind to do this thing, Bob?"

"I have quite made up my mind to try, anyhow."

"Well, if you mean to try, Bob, it is just as well that you
shouldn't get shot, at the start. I have just been round to the
orderly room. Our regiment furnishes the pickets on the neutral
ground, tonight. Captain Antrobus commands the party. He is a good
fellow and, as he is a married man, and all four of his children
are bad with scurvy, he would feel an interest in your attempt.

"You know him as well as I do. If you like, I will go with you to
his quarters, and see what we can do with him."

They at once set out.

"Look here, Antrobus," the doctor said, after asking that officer
to come out for a chat with him, "if we don't get some lemon juice,
I am afraid it will go very hard with a lot of the children."

"Yes, we have known that for some time, doctor."

"Well, Repton here has made up his mind to try to get out of the
place, and make his way to Malaga, and get a boatload of fruit and
try to bring it in. Of course he will go dressed as a native, and
he speaks Spanish well enough to pass anywhere, without suspicion.
So, once beyond the lines, I don't see much difficulty in his
making his way to Malaga. Whether he will get back again is another
matter, altogether. That is his business. He has plenty of money to
purchase the fruit, when he arrives there; and to buy a boat, and
all that sort of thing.

"The difficulty is in getting out. Now, nobody is going to know how
he does this, except our three selves."

"But why do you come to me, Burke?"

"Because you command the guard, tonight, on the neutral ground.
What he proposes is that he should put on a soldier's greatcoat and
cap, and take a firelock and, in the dark, fall in with your party.
When you get well out on the neutral ground, he could either slip
away and take his chance or, what would be better still, he might
be in the party you take forward to post as sentries, and you could
take him along with you, so that he would go with you as far as the
shore; and could then slip away, come back a bit, so as to be out
of sight of the farthest sentry, and then take to the water.

"He can swim like a fish, and what current there is will be with
him; so that, before it began to be light, he could land two or
three miles beyond the Spanish lines. He is going to leave a note
behind, for O'Halloran, saying he has left; but no one will know
whether he got down at the back of the Rock, or swam across the
bay, or how he has gone.

"I have tried to dissuade him; but he has made up his mind to try
it and, seeing that--if he succeeds--it may save the lives of
scores of children, I really cannot refuse to help him."

"Well, I don't know," Captain Antrobus said. "There certainly does
not seem much risk in his going out, as you say. I should get a
tremendous wigging, no doubt, if he is discovered, and it was known
that I had a hand in it; but I would not mind risking that, for the
sake of the children.

"But don't take a firelock, Repton. The sergeants would be sure to
notice that there was an extra man. You had better join us, just as
we set out. I will say a word or two to you, then do you follow on,
in the dark. The men will suppose you are one of the drummers I am
taking with me, to serve as a messenger, or something of that sort.
That way you can follow close behind me, while I am posting the
sentries after leaving the main body at the guardhouse. After
posting the last man at the seashore, I can turn off with you for a
few yards, as if giving you an order.

"Then I will go back and stay for a time with the last sentry, who
will naturally think that the drummer has been sent back to the
guardhouse. I will recommend him to be vigilant, and keep by him
for some time, till I am pretty sure you have taken to the water
and swam past; so that if the sentry should hear a splash, or
anything, I can say it can only be a fish; and that, at any rate,
it would not do to give an alarm, as it cannot be anything of
consequence.

"You see, you don't belong to the garrison, and it is no question
of assisting a deserter to escape. Anyhow, I will do it."

Thanking Captain Antrobus greatly, for his promise of assistance,
Bob went off into the town; where he bought a suit of Spanish
clothes, such as would be appropriate for a small farmer or trader.
He then presented his letter of credit at the merchant's, and drew
a hundred pounds, which he obtained in Spanish gold. This money and
the clothes he put in an oilskin bag, of which the mouth was
securely closed. This he left at the doctor's.

As soon as it became dark he went down again. The doctor had a
greatcoat and hat in readiness for him--there being plenty of
effects of men who had died in the hospital--and as soon as Bob had
put them on, walked across--with Bob following him--to the spot
where Captain Antrobus' company were falling in. Just as they were
about to march, the doctor went up to the captain; who after a word
or two with him said to Bob, in a voice loud enough to be heard by
the noncommissioned officer, close to him:

"Well, you will keep by me."

The night was a dark one, and the party made their way down to the
gate, where the passwords were exchanged; and the company then
moved along by the narrow pathway between the artificial inundation
and the foot of the Rock. They continued their way until they
arrived at the building that served as the main guard of the
outlying pickets. Here two-thirds of the company were left; and the
captain led the others out, an officer belonging to the regiment
whose men he was relieving accompanying him. As the sentries were
posted the men relieved fell in, under the orders of their officer
and, as soon as the last had been relieved, they marched back to
the guardhouse.

A minute later, Captain Antrobus turned to Bob.

"You need not wait," he said. "Go back to the guardhouse. Mind how
you go."

Bob saluted and turned off, leaving the officer standing by the
sentry. He went some distance back, then walked down the sand to
the water's edge, and waded noiselessly into the water. The oilskin
bag was, he knew, buoyant enough to give him ample support in the
water.

When he was breast deep, he let his uniform cloak slip off his
shoulders; allowed his shoes to sink to the bottom, and his
three-cornered hat to float away. The doctor had advised him to do
this.

"If you leave the things at the edge of the water, Bob, it will be
thought that somebody has deserted; and then there will be a lot of
questions, and inquiries. You had better take them well out into
the sea with you, and then let them go. They will sink, and drift
along under water and, if they are ever thrown up, it will be far
beyond our lines. In that way, as the whole of the guard will
answer to their names, when the roll is called tomorrow, no one
will ever give a thought to the drummer who fell in at the last
moment; or, if one of them does think of it, he will suppose that
the captain sent him into the town, with a report."

The bag would have been a great encumbrance, had Bob wanted to swim
fast. As it was, he simply placed his hands upon it, and struck out
with his feet, making straight out from the shore. This he did for
some ten minutes; and then, being certain that he was far beyond
the sight of anyone on shore, he turned and, as nearly as he could,
followed the line of the coast. The voices of the sentries calling
to each other came across the sea, and he could make out a light or
two in the great fort at the water's edge.

It was easy work. The water was, as nearly as possible, the
temperature of his body; and he felt that he could remain for any
time in it, without inconvenience. The lights in the fort served as
a mark by which he could note his progress; and an hour after
starting he was well abreast of them, and knew that the current
must be helping him more than he had expected it would do.

Another hour, and he began to swim shorewards; as the current
might, for aught he knew, be drifting him somewhat out into the
bay. When he was able to make out the dark line ahead of him, he
again resumed his former course. It was just eight o'clock when the
guard had passed through the gate. He had started half an hour
later. He swam what seemed to him a very long time, but he had no
means of telling how the time passed.

When he thought it must be somewhere about twelve o'clock, he made
for the shore. He was sure that, by this time, he must be at least
three miles beyond the fort; and as the Spanish camps lay
principally near San Roque, at the head of the bay, and there were
no tents anywhere by the seashore, he felt sure that he could land,
now, without the slightest danger.

Here, then, he waded ashore, stripped, tied his clothes in a
bundle, waded a short distance back again, and dropped them in the
sea. Then he returned, took up the bag, and carried it up the sandy
beach. Opening it, he dressed himself in the complete set of
clothes he had brought with him, put on the Spanish shoes and round
turned-up hat, placed his money in his pocket; scraped a shallow
hole in the sand, put the bag in it and covered it, and then
started walking briskly along on the flat ground beyond the sand
hills He kept on until he saw the first faint light in the sky;
then he sat down among some bushes, until it was light enough for
him to distinguish the features of the country.

Inland, the ground rose rapidly into hills--in many places covered
with wood--and half an hour's walking took him to one of these.
Looking back, he could see the Rock rising, as he judged, from
twelve to fourteen miles away. He soon found a place with some
thick undergrowth and, entering this, lay down and was soon sound
asleep.

When he woke it was already late in the afternoon. He had brought
with him, in the bag, some biscuits and hardboiled eggs; and of a
portion of these he made a hearty meal. Then he pushed up over the
hill until, after an hour's walking, he saw a road before him. This
was all he wanted, and he sat down and waited until it became dark.
A battalion of infantry passed along as he sat there, marching
towards Gibraltar. Two or three long lines of laden carts passed
by, in the same direction.

He had consulted a map before starting, and knew that the distance
to Malaga was more than twenty leagues; and that the first place of
any importance was Estepona, about eight leagues from Gibraltar,
and that before the siege a large proportion of the supplies of
fruit and vegetables were brought to Gibraltar from this town.
Starting as soon as it became dark, he passed through Estepona at
about ten o'clock; looked in at a wine shop, and sat down to a pint
of wine and some bread; and then continued his journey until,
taking it quietly, he was in sight of Marbella.

He slept in a grove of trees until daylight, and then entered the
town, which was charmingly situated among orange groves. Going into
a fonda--or tavern--he called for breakfast. When he had eaten
this, he leisurely strolled down to the port and, taking his seat
on a block of stone, on the pier, watched the boats. As, while
walking down from the fonda, he had passed several shops with
oranges and lemons, it seemed to him that it would in some respects
be better for him to get the fruit here, instead of going on to
Malaga.

In the first place, the distance to return was but half that from
Malaga; and in the second it would probably be easier to get out,
from a quiet little port like this, than from a large town like
Malaga. The question which puzzled him was how was he to get his
oranges on board. Where could he reasonably be going to take them?

Presently, a sailor came up and began to chat with him.

"Are you wanting a boat, senor?"

"I have not made up my mind, yet," he said. "I suppose you are busy
here, now?"

"No, the times are dull. Usually we do a good deal of trade with
Gibraltar but, at present, that is all stopped. It is hard on us
but, when we turn out the English hereticos, I hope we shall have
better times than ever. But who can say? They have plenty of money,
the English; and are ready to pay good prices for everything."

"But I suppose you take things to our camp?"

The fisherman shook his head.

"They get their supplies direct from Malaga, by sea. There are many
carts go through here, of course; but the roads are heavy, and it
is cheaper to send things by water. If our camp had been on the
seashore, instead of at San Roque, we might have taken fish and
fruit to them; but it is a long way across and, of course, in small
boats we cannot go round the great Rock, and run the risk of being
shot at or taken prisoners.

"No; there is nothing for us to do here, now, but to carry what
fish and fruit we do not want at Marbella across to Malaga; and we
get poor prices, there, to what we used to get at Gibraltar; and no
chance of turning an honest penny by smuggling away a few pounds of
tobacco, as we come back. There was as much profit, in that, as
there was in the sale of the goods; but one had to be very sharp,
for they were always suspicious of boats coming back from there,
and used to search us so that you would think one could not bring
so much as a cigar on shore. But you know, there are ways of
managing things.

"Are you thinking of going across to Malaga, senor?"

"Well, I have a little business there. I want to see how the new
wines are selling; and whether it will be better for me to sell
mine, now, or to keep them in my cellars for a few months. I am in
no hurry. Tomorrow is as good as today. If there had been a boat
going across, I might have taken a passage that way, instead of
riding."

"I don't know, senor. There was a man asking, an hour ago, if
anyone was going. He was wanting to take a few boxes of fruit
across, but he did not care about hiring my boat for himself. That,
you see, was reasonable enough; but if the senor wished to go, too,
it might be managed if you took the boat between you. I would carry
you cheaply, if you would be willing to wait for an hour or two; so
that I could go round to the other fishermen, and get a few dozen
fish from one and a few dozen from another, to sell for them over
there. That is the way we manage."

"I could not very well go until the afternoon," Bob said.

"If you do not go until the afternoon, senor, it would be as well
not to start until evening. The wind is very light, and we should
have to row. If you start in the afternoon, we should get to Malaga
at two or three o'clock in the morning, when everyone was asleep;
but if you were to start in the evening, we should be in in
reasonable time, just as the people were coming into the markets.
That would suit us for the sale of our fish, and the man with his
fruit. The nights are warm and, with a cloak and an old sail to
keep off the night dew, the voyage would be more pleasant than in
the heat of the day."

"That would do for me, very well," Bob said. "Nothing could be
better. What charge would you make, for taking me across and
bringing me back, tomorrow?"

"At what time would you want to return, senor?"

"It would matter little. I should be done with my business by noon,
but I should be in no hurry. I could wait until evening, if that
would suit you better."

"And we might bring other passengers back, and any cargo we might
pick up?"

"Yes, so that you do not fill the boat so full that there would be
no room for me to stretch my legs."

"Would the senor think four dollars too much? There will be my
brother and myself, and it will be a long row."

"It is dear," Bob said, decidedly; "but I will give you three
dollars and, if everything passes to my satisfaction, maybe I will
make up the other dollar."

"Agreed, senor. I will see if I can find the man who was here,
asking for a boat for his fruit."

"I will come back in an hour, and see," Bob said, getting up and
walking leisurely away.

The fisherman was waiting for him.

"I can't find the man, senor, though I have searched all through
the town. He must have gone off to his farm again."

"That is bad. How much did you reckon upon making from him?"

"I should have got another three dollars from him."

"Well, I tell you what," Bob said; "I have a good many friends, and
people are always pleased with a present from the country. A box of
fruit from Marbella is always welcome, for their flavour is
considered excellent. It is well to throw a little fish, to catch a
big one; and a present is like oil on the wheels of business. How
many boxes of fruit will your boat carry? I suppose you could take
twenty, and still have room to row?"

"Thirty, sir; that is the boat," and he pointed to one moored
against the quay.

She was about twenty feet long, with a mast carrying a good-sized
sail.

"Very well, then. I will hire the boat for myself. I will give you
six dollars, and another dollar for drink money, if all goes
pleasantly. You must be ready to come back, tomorrow evening; or
the first thing next morning, if it should suit you to stay till
then. You can carry what fish you can get to Malaga, and may take
in a return cargo if you can get one. That will be extra profit for
yourselves. But you and your brother must agree to carry down the
boxes of fruit, and put them on board here. I am not going to pay
porters for that.

"At what time will you start?"

"Shall we say six o'clock, senor?"

"That will suit me very well. You can come up with me, now, and
bring the fruit down, and put it on board; or I will be down here
at five o'clock, and you can go up and get it, then."

The man thought for a moment.

"I would rather do it now, senor, if it makes no difference to you.
Then we can have our evening meals at home with our families, and
come straight down here, and start."

"Very well; fetch your brother, and we will set about the matter at
once; as I have to go out to my farm and make some arrangements,
and tell them they may not see me again for three days."

In two or three minutes the fisherman came back, with his brother.
Bob went with them to a trader in fruit, and bought twenty boxes of
lemons and ten of oranges, and saw them carried down and put on
board. Then he handed a dollar to the boatman.

"Get a loaf of white bread, and a nice piece of cooked meat, and a
couple of bottles of good wine, and put them on board. We shall be
hungry, before morning. I will be here at a few minutes before
six."

Highly satisfied with the good fortune that had enabled him to get
the fruit on board without the slightest difficulty, Bob returned
into the town. It was but eleven o'clock now so--having had but a
short sleep the night before, and no prospect of sleep the next
