the bed with such startling suddenness and energy that Gildart was
himself rendered almost breathless.  Haco awoke with a yell so dreadful
that the brass band stopped for a single instant, but it burst forth
again with a degree of fury that almost rent the trombone in twain!

The appalled skipper uttered another yell, and sprang up into the air.
The four-poster could not stand the test.  Haco went crashing through
the bottom of the bed, flattened the French horn, and almost killed the
trombone, while the broken ends of the planking of the bed pinned them
to the floor.  Escape was impossible.

Haco perceived the joke, and instantly recovered his self-possession.
Springing from the bed, he seized the bucket of water which he had
recently drawn, and dashed its contents on the struggling band.
Thereafter he hauled the trombone out of the _debris_ by the neck,
flattened his instrument on his head, and twisted it round his neck.
The key-bugle, who had struggled to his feet, fell before a well-aimed
backhander, and the French horn was about to perish, when Gildart
succeeded in restraining and pacifying the giant by stoutly asserting
that he had won his bet, and insisted on having payment on the spot!

Haco burst into a loud laugh, flung the key-bugle from his grasp, and
pulled on his nether garments.

"I confess that you've won it, lad, so now I'll have another pipe."

He proceeded to fill the German pipe, and stirred up the fire while the
band made good its retreat.  Gildart paid the clarionet the stipulated
sum of twenty shillings outside the door, after which he returned and
seated himself beside the mad skipper.

Haco's laugh had changed into a good-humoured smile as he gazed into the
fire and puffed volumes of smoke from his lips.

"It was a risky thing to do, lad," he observed, as Gildart sat down;
"it's well for that feller wi' the long trumpet that the brass was so
thin and his head so hard, for my blood was up, bein' taken by surprise,
you see, an' I didn't measure my blows.  Hows'ever, `it's all well that
ends well,' as I once heard a play-actor say."

"But it's not ended yet," said Gildart with decision.

"How so, lad?"

"You've got to pay up your bet."

Haco's brow became a little clouded.  The bet had been taken more than
half in joke, for he was not given to betting in earnest; but he was too
proud to admit this on finding that Gildart took it in earnest.

"You'll not want it for a short while, I daresay?" he asked.

"Captain Barepoles--"

"Skipper, lad, I don't like to be cap'ned."

"Well, Skipper Barepoles," said the middy with much solemnity, "I always
pay my debts of honour on the spot, and I expect gentlemen who bet with
me to do the same."

Haco grinned.  "But I an't a gentleman," said he, "an' I don't set up
for one."

"Still, as a man of honour you must feel bound--"

"No, lad, not as a man of honour," interrupted the skipper, "but as a
British seaman I'll hold the debt due; only, not bein' in the habit o'
carrying the Bank of England in my weskit-pocket, you see, I must ask
you to wait till to-morrow mornin'."

Haco said this with a slightly disappointed look, for he thought the
middy rather sharp, and had formed a better opinion of him than his
conduct on this occasion seemed to bear out.

"Now, skipper, I'll tell you what it is.  I am not fond of betting, and
this bet of mine was taken in jest; in fact my usual bet is ten thousand
pounds, sometimes a million!  Nevertheless, you have admitted the debt
as due, and although I do not mean to claim payment in the usual way, I
don't intend to forego my rights altogether.  I'll only ask you to do me
a favour."

"What may it be, lad?"

"Will you grant it?"

"Well, that depends--"

"No, it doesn't; say Yes, or I'll claim the ten pounds."

"Well, yes, if it's right and proper for me to do it.  Now, what d'ye
want?"

"Humph!  Well then," said Gildart, "I want you to let your daughter
Susan get spliced to Dan Horsey."

Haco frowned, and said, "Unpossible."

"Come now, don't be hard on them, skipper; Dan is a good fellow and a
first-rate groom."

"He's an Irish blackguard," said Haco, "and not worth a pinch of his
namesake."

"You're quite mistaken," said Gildart, who went on to speak so highly of
the groom, that Haco, if not made to change his opinion, was so much
impressed as to agree at least to take the whole subject once again into
consideration.

"Another thing I wish you to do, skipper, which is to give me a passage
in your sloop to Athenbury.  You spoke of running round there for
repairs soon, and I would rather go by sea than by that snorting
railway.  Will you do it?"

"With pleasure, lad."

"Thank'ee; now I'll bid you good-night.  You may depend upon it that you
won't be disturbed again by a band," said Gildart, laughing.

"I know that," replied Haco with a grin; "it's my opinion they've had
enough of me for one night.  But won't ye stop an' share the
four-poster, lad?  It's big enough, an' we'll soon repair the damage to
its bottom-timbers.  There's a knuckle o' ham too, an' a flask o'
claret.  I brought it with me, 'cause I never drink nothin' stronger
than claret--vang ordinair they calls it in France.  What say you;
you'll stop?"

"No, thank'ee, skipper, much obliged, but I've business on hand
elsewhere.  Good-night, old boy."



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

PLOT AND COUNTERPLOT, ENDING IN A LONG CHASE.

One day, not long after his arrival at Athenbury, Kenneth Stuart was
seated in Colonel Crusty's drawing-room, awaiting the summons to dinner.

Pretty Bella sat beside him, endeavouring to get up a flirtation--for
Bella was an inveterate flirt.  Besides being pretty, she was sprightly
and full of life--a giddy gay thing, much addicted to that dangerous
practice of fluttering round improprieties with cheerful recklessness.
She was one of those human moths whose wings, alas! are being constantly
singed, sometimes burned off altogether.

Kenneth was not so stern as to object to a little of what the world
calls innocent flirtation, but he did not like Bella's style of
procedure; for that charming piece of wickedness made it her aim in life
to bring as many lovers to her feet as she could, and keep them there.
She never had too many of them, never tired of conquering them.  In the
language of pugilists, "One down another come on," was her motto.

She had just floored a captain of dragoons, who was expected that day to
dinner, and was now engaged at her fortieth round with Kenneth; but he
was too strong for her--at least she began to suspect so, and felt
nettled.

"I never met with such a provoking man as you," said Bella, pouting;
"you _promised_ to go round by Simpson's and bring me a bouquet, and now
you tell me you had not time.  That is not what I would have expected of
_you_.  Sir Kenneth."

Bella had knighted him with the poker the evening before!

"Well, really, I am sorry," said Kenneth in a deprecating tone, "but I'm
sure you will forgive me when I tell you that--"

"I won't forgive you," interrupted Bella pettishly.  "You are a false
man.  _Nothing_ should have prevented you from walking round by
Simpson's, as you said you would do."

"Indeed!" said Kenneth, smiling, "suppose I had broken my leg, now,
would that not have--"

"No, it wouldn't have been any excuse at all.  You would have hopped
there if you had been a good and true man, like the knights of the olden
time.  Oh! how I love that olden time, and wish that I had been born in
it."

Captain Bowels was announced at this moment.  He was a tall handsome
man, with a heavy dark moustache and a set of brilliant teeth.  Bella
instantly put the question to him whether, in the event of his being
interrupted in the fulfilment of a promise to a lady by the accident of
having his leg broken, he would not deem it his duty, as a man of
honour, to _hop_ out the engagement.

The captain expressed his earnest belief that that would be his duty,
and added that if both legs happened to be broken, he would deem it his
duty to walk out the engagement on his hands and knees, always assuming
that the lady to whom the promise was made should be young and
beautiful, and that the engagement did not involve dancing!

From this point Bella and the captain of dragoons cantered off into a
region of small-talk whither it is not necessary that we should follow
them.  They were interrupted by the entrance of Colonel Crusty and Miss
Peppy.

The former shook hands with the captain somewhat stiffly, and introduced
him to Miss Peppy.

"Dinner late as usual, Bella," said the colonel, taking out his watch.

"Now, papa, don't begin," cried Bella, running up to her father and
kissing his cheek, "because when you do begin to scold you never stop,
and it takes away your appetite.  Dinners were meant to be late--it's
the nature of such meals.  No dinner that is ready at the appointed time
_can_ be good; it _must_ be underdone."

The colonel was prevented from replying by the entrance of the footman
with a letter, which he presented to Kenneth.

"No letters for me!" cried Miss Peppy, with a slight look of
disappointment; "but, to be sure, I'm not at home, though, after all,
letters might come to me when I'm away if they were only rightly
addressed, but letters are never legible on the back; it is a perfect
mystery to me how the postmen ever find out where to go to with letters,
and they are such illiterate men too!  But what can one expect in a
world of inconsistencies, where things are all topsy-turvy, so to speak,
though I don't like slang, and never use it except when there is a want
of a proper what-d'ye-call-it to express one's thingumy-jigs.  Don't you
think so, Captain Bowels?"

"Certainly; I think your observations are very just, and much to the
point."

Kenneth Stuart retired to a window and read his letter, which ran as
follows:--

"Wreckumoft, _etcetera_.

"My Dear Kenneth--Since you left I have been thinking over your affairs,
and our last conversation, (which you must allow me to style
disagreeable), in regard to Miss Gordon.  I trust that you have now seen
the impropriety of thinking of that portionless girl as your wife.  At
all events, you may rest assured that on the day you marry her you shall
be disinherited.  You know me well enough to be aware that this is not
an idle threat.

"In the hope and expectation that you will agree with me in this matter,
I venture to suggest to you the propriety of trying to win the
affections of Miss Crusty.  You already know that her fortune will be a
large one.  I recommend this subject to your earnest consideration.

"Your affectionate father, George Stuart."

"Deary me, Kennie," said Miss Peppy, in some alarm, "I hope that nothing
has happened!  You seem so troubled that--"

"Oh! nothing of any consequence," said Kenneth with a laugh, as he
folded the letter and put it in his pocket.

"Ha! your lady-love is unkind," cried Bella; "I know it is from _her_."

"The writing is not lady-like," replied Kenneth, holding up the back of
the letter for inspection.  "It is a gentleman's hand, you see."

"Ladies sometimes write what I may call a masculine hand," observed the
captain.

"You are quite right, Captain Bowels," said Miss Peppy; "some write all
angles and some all rounds.  One never knows how one is to expect one's
correspondents to write.  Not that I have many, but one of them writes
square, a most extraordinary hand, and quite illegible.  Most people
seem to be proud of not being able to write, except schoolboys and
girls.  There is no accounting for the surprising things that are
scratched on paper with a pen and called writing.  But in a world of
things of that sort what is one to expect?  It is just like all the
rest, and I have given up thinking about it altogether.  I hope _you_
have, Captain Bowels?"

"Not quite, but very nearly," replied the gallant captain.

"Dinner at last," said Colonel Crusty, as the gong sounded its hideous
though welcome alarm.  "Captain Bowels, will you take my daughter?  Miss
Stuart, allow me.  Sorry we've got no one for _you_, Mr Stuart."

Kenneth fancied there was a touch of irony in the last observation, but
he did not feel jealous, for two reasons--first, he knew, (from Miss
Peppy), that the captain was no favourite with Colonel Crusty, and was
only tolerated because of having been introduced by an intimate friend
and old school companion of the former; and, second, being already in
love with another, he did not wish to have the honour of handing Bella
down to dinner at all.

During dinner Miss Peppy reminded Kenneth that he had promised to go to
the Sailors' Home that evening with the parcel which Mrs Gaff wished to
be delivered to her cousin George Dollins.  Bella remarked, in a sweet
voice, that Sir Kenneth's promises were not to be relied on, and that it
would be wiser to transfer the trust to Captain Bowels, a proposal which
the gallant captain received with a laugh and a _sotto voce_ remark to
Bella that his fidelity to promises depended on the youth and beauty of
the lady to whom they were made.

Soon after the ladies retired Kenneth rose, and, apologising for leaving
the table so early, set forth on his mission.

The night was calm and pleasant, but dark--a few stars alone rendering
the darkness visible.  Kenneth had to pass through the garden of the
colonel's house before reaching the road that led to the heart of the
town where the Sailors' Home was situated.  He felt sad that evening,
unusually so, and wandered in the grounds for some time in a meditative
mood.

There was a bower at the extremity of the garden to which, during the
few days of his visit, he had frequently repaired with the volatile
Bella.  He entered it now, and sat down.  Presently there was a rustle
among the leaves behind him, and a light hand was laid on his shoulder.

"Faithless man!" said Bella in a tremulous voice, "I have been expecting
you for half-an-hour at least.  My portmanteau is packed, and I only
await the word from you, dearest Charles--"

"Charles!" exclaimed Kenneth, starting up.

Bella uttered a suppressed scream.

"Oh!  Mr Stuart, you won't tell my father?  I mistook you for capt--."

"Hold, Miss Crusty; do not speak hastily.  I know nothing of that of
which you seem desirous that I should not speak.  Pray be calm."

"Of course I know that you don't know," cried Bella passionately, "but
you are capable of guessing, and--and--"

The poor girl burst into a flood of tears, and rushed from the bower,
leaving Kenneth in a most unenviable state of perplexity.

The words that she had uttered, coupled with what he had seen of the
intimacy subsisting between her and Captain Bowels, and the fact that
the name of the captain was Charles, were quite sufficient to convince
him that an immediate elopement was intended.  He entertained a strong
dislike to the captain, and therefore somewhat hastily concluded that he
was a villain.  Impressed with this conviction, his first impulse was to
return to the house, and warn the colonel of his daughter's danger; but
then he felt that he might be mistaken, and that, instead of doing good,
he might lay himself open to severe rebuke for interfering in matters
with which he had nothing to do.  After vacillating therefore, a few
minutes, he at last made up his mind first to execute his errand to the
cousin of Mrs Gaff, and then consider what should next be done.  He
resolved on this course all the more readily that he was sure the
mistake Bella had made would frustrate the elopement, at least on that
night.

Kenneth carried the parcel, which Mrs Gaff had put up with so much care
and anxiety, under his arm, and a thick stick in his right hand.  He was
so passionately fond of the sea and all connected with it, that he liked
to dress in semi-sailor costume, and mingle with seamen.  Consequently
he went out on this occasion clad in a rough pea-jacket and a sailor's
cap.  He looked more like a respectable skipper or first-mate than a
country gentleman.

Passing rapidly through the streets of Athenbury, he soon reached the
docks, where he made inquiry for the Sailors' Home.  He found it in a
retired street, near the principal wharf.
