the lifeboat sheered off again, and once more sprang into the "broken
water."  So might some mighty warrior spur from the battle-field charged
with despatches of the highest import bearing on the fight, and, having
delivered his message, turn on his heel and rush back into the whirling
tide of war to complete the victory which had been so well begun!

Once more they made for the wreck, which was by that time fast breaking
up.  Running right before the wind in such an awful gale, it was
necessary to make the men crowd aft in order to keep the boat's head
well out of the water.  On this occasion one or two of the seamen of the
Wellington, who had been allowed inadvertently to remain in the boat,
became alarmed, for the seas were rolling high over the gunwale on each
side, and rushing into her with such force as to make it a difficult
matter to avoid being washed out.  It was a new sensation to these men
to rush thus madly between two walls of foam eight or ten feet high!
They glanced backward, where another wall of foaming water seemed to be
curling over the stern, as if about to drop inboard.  The coxswain
observed their looks, and knew their feelings.  He knew there was no
lack of courage in them, and that a little experience would change their
minds on this point.

"Never look behind, lads," he cried; "look ahead; always look right
ahead."

"Ay, Geordy," remarked one of the men,--a Scotchman,--to his mate, "it's
rum sailin' this is.  I thocht we was a' gaun to the bottom; but nae
doot the cox'n kens best.  It's a wonderfu' boat!"

Having so said, the sedate Scot dismissed his anxieties, and thereafter
appeared to regard the surrounding chaos of water with no other feelings
than philosophic interest and curiosity.

On nearing the wreck the second time, it was found that the tide had
fallen so low that they could scarcely get alongside.  Three times they
struck on the shoal; on the third occasion the mizzen-mast and sail were
blown out of the boat.  They managed to drop anchor, however, and to
veer down under the port bow of the Wellington, whence the anxious
survivors threw ropes to them, and, one after another, leaped or swung
themselves into the boat.  But they were so long about it that before
all had been got out the coxswain was obliged to drop to leeward to
prevent being left aground.  In spite of this, the boat got fast, and
now they could neither advance to the wreck for the nine men who still
remained in her, nor push off to rejoin the tug.

The space between the boat and vessel was crossed by such a continuous
rush of broken water that for a time it was impossible to attempt
anything, but as the tide fell the coxswain consulted with his bowman,
and both agreed to venture to wade to the wreck, those on board having
become so exhausted as to be unable or unwilling to make further effort
to save themselves.

Acting on this resolve they with one of their men sprang into the raging
surf and staggered to the wreck, where they induced two of the crew to
leap overboard and brought them safely to the boat.  Others of the
lifeboat crew then joined them and four more were rescued.  [See note
1.]

The tide had been at its lowest when this desperate work was begun,--
before it was finished it had turned.  This, coupled with the fact that
they had all been nearly swept away during the last effort; and that
there was a fresh burst of violence in the gale, induced them to wait
until the tide should rise.  When it did so sufficiently, they hauled
and shoved the boat alongside, and the captain, who was one of the three
remaining men, made a desperate spring, but missed the boat and was
whirled away.  Pike made a grasp at him but missed.  The coxswain seized
a life-buoy and hurled it towards him.  It fell within his reach, and it
was supposed that he had caught it, but they could not be certain.  The
boat was now afloat and bumping violently.  If they had cut the cable in
order to rescue the captain, which they could by no means make sure of
doing, the improbability of being able to return in time to save the two
remaining men would have been very great.  It seemed to be life or death
in either case, so they stuck by the wreck.

It was grey dawn now, and the wreckage was knocking against and around
them to such an extent that the coxswain began to fear for the safety of
his boat.  Yet he was loath to leave the men to perish.

"Jump now, lads!" he cried, sheering up alongside, "it's your last
chance.  It's death to all of us if we stop longer here!"

The men sprang together.  One gained the side of the boat and was saved,
the other was swept away.  He made frantic efforts to gain the boat, but
before his companion had been got inboard he was out of sight, and
although the cable was promptly cut and the sail set he could not be
found.  The boat was then run down along the sands in search of the
captain.  The coxswain knew well from experience that he must certainly
have been swept by the current in the same direction as the wreckage.
He therefore followed this, and in a short time had the inexpressible
satisfaction and good fortune to find the captain.  He had caught the
life-buoy, and having managed to get it under his arms had floated about
for the greater part of an hour.  Though nearly dead he was still
sensible, and, after being well chafed and refreshed with a little rum
from the coxswain's case-bottle--provided for occasions of this sort--he
recovered.

The great work of the lifeboat had now been accomplished, but they could
not feel that it had been thoroughly completed without one more effort
being made to save the lost man.  They therefore ran still farther down
the sand in the direction where he had been last seen.  They followed
the drift of wreckage as before.  Presently the bowman uttered a
thrilling shout, for, through the turmoil of dashing spray, he saw the
man clinging to a spar!

So unexpected was this happy event that the whole crew involuntarily
gave vent to a ringing cheer, although, in the circumstances, and
considering the nature of their exhausting work and the time they had
been exposed to it, one might have supposed them incapable of such a
burst of enthusiasm.

In a few moments he was rescued, and now, with light hearts, they ran
for the tug, which was clearly visible in the rapidly increasing
daylight.  They did not put off time in transferring the saved men to
the steamer.  The big hawser,--their familiar bond of attachment,--was
made fast to them, and away went that noble big brother and splendid
little sister straight for Ramsgate harbour.  [See note 2.]

But the work of that wild night was not yet finished.  On their way home
they fell in with a schooner, the foretopmast and bowsprit of which were
gone.  As she was drifting towards the sands they hailed her.  No reply
being made, the lifeboat was towed alongside, and, on being boarded, it
was found that she was a derelict.  Probably she had got upon the sands
during the night, been forsaken by her crew in their own boat--in which
event there was small chance of any being saved--and had drifted off
again at the change of the tide.

Be that as it might, six lifeboat men were put on board.  Finding no
water in her, they slipt her two cables, which were hanging from the
bow, a rope was made fast to the steamer, and she was taken in tow.

It was drawing towards noon when they neared the harbour.  Very
different indeed was the aspect of things there then from what it had
been when they went out on their errand of mercy thirteen hours before.
Although the gale was still blowing fresh it had moderated greatly.  The
black clouds no longer held possession of the sky, but were pierced,
scattered, and gilded, as they were rolled away, by the victorious sun.
The sea still raged and showed its white "teeth" fiercely, as if its
spirit had been too much roused to be easily appeased; but blue sky
appeared in patches everywhere; the rain had ceased, and the people of
the town and visitors swarmed out to enjoy the returning sunshine,
inhale the fresh sea-breeze, and await, anxiously, the return of the
lifeboat--for, of course, every one in the town was aware by that time
that she had been out all night.

When, at length, the smoke of the "big brother" was observed drawing
near, the people flocked in hundreds to the piers and cliffs.--Wherever
a point of vantage was to be had, dozens of spectators crowned it.
Wherever a point of danger was to be gained, daring spirits--chiefly in
the shape of small boys--took it by storm, in absolute contempt of the
police.  "Jacob's Ladder"--the cliff staircase--was crowded from top to
bottom.  The west pier was rendered invisible to its outer extremity by
human beings.  The east pier, as far as it was dry, was covered by the
fashion and beauty--as well as by the fishy and tarry--of the town.
Beyond the point of dryness it was more or less besieged by those who
were reckless, riotous, and ridiculously fond of salt-water spray.  The
yards and shrouds of the crowded and much damaged shipping in the
harbour were manned, and the windows of the town that commanded the sea
were filled with human faces.  An absolute battery of telescopes, like
small artillery, was levelled at the approaching tug.  Everywhere were
to be seen and heard evidences of excitement, anxiety, and expectation.

It was not long before it was announced that flags were seen flying at
the mast-heads of the tug and lifeboat--a sure evidence that a rescue
had been successfully accomplished.  This caused many a burst of
cheering from the crowds, as the fact and its import became gradually
known.  But these were as nothing compared with the cheers that arose
when the steamer, with the lifeboat and the schooner in tow, drew near,
and it could be seen that there were many people on board--among them
women and children.  When they finally surged past the pier-head on the
crest of a tremendous billow, and swept into the harbour under a vast
shower of spray that burst over the pier and rose above the mast-heads
of the shipping within--as if to pour a libation on the gallant crews--
then a succession of cheers, that cannot be described, welcomed the
victors and re-echoed from the chalk-cliffs, to be caught up and sent
out again and again in thrilling cadence on the mad sea, which had thus
been plundered of its booty and disappointed of its prey!

Scarfs and hats and kerchiefs and hands were waved in wild enthusiasm,
strangely mingled with tender pity, when the exhausted women and
children and the worn-out and battered lifeboat-men were landed.  Many
cheered, no doubt, to think of the strong hearts and invincible courage
that dwelt in the breasts of Britain's sons; while others,--tracing
things at once to their true source,--cheered in broken tones, or were
incompetent to cheer at all, when they thought with thankfulness of
Britain's faith in the Word of God, which, directly or indirectly, had
given that courage its inspiration, and filled those hearts with fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The coxswain--Mr Isaac Jarman--who has rendered heroic service
in the Ramsgate Lifeboat during the last ten years, has been personally
instrumental in saving between four and five hundred lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 2.  If the reader should desire to know something more of the
history of the celebrated Ramsgate lifeboat, which, owing to its
position, opportunities, and advantages, has had the most stirring
career of all the lifeboat fleet, we advise the perusal of a work (at
present in the press, if it be not already published) named _Storm
Warriors, or the Ramsgate Lifeboat and the Goodwin Sands_, by the
Reverend John Gilmore, whose able and thrilling articles on the
lifeboat-service in _Macmillan's Magazine_ are well known.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

SHOWS THAT THERE ARE NO EFFECTS WITHOUT ADEQUATE CAUSES.

There were not a few surprising and unexpected meetings that day on
Ramsgate pier.  Foremost among the hundreds who pressed forward to shake
the lifeboat-men by the hand, and to sympathise with and congratulate
the wrecked and rescued people, was Mr George Durant.  It mattered
nothing to that stout enthusiast that his hat had been swept away into
hopeless destruction during his frantic efforts to get to the front,
leaving his polished head exposed to the still considerable fury of the
blast and the intermittent violence of the sun; and it mattered, if
possible, still less that the wreck turned out to be one of his own
vessels; but it was a matter of the greatest interest and amazement to
him to find that the first man he should meet in the crowd and seize in
a hearty embrace, was his young friend, Stanley Hall.

"What, Stanney!" he exclaimed in unmitigated surprise; "is it--can it
be?  Prodigious sight!"

The old gentleman could say no more, but continued for a few seconds to
wring the hands of his young friend, gaze in his face, and vent himself
in gusts of surprise and bursts of tearful laughter, to the great
interest and amusement of the bystanders.

Mr Durant's inconsistent conduct may be partly accounted for and
excused by the fact that Stanley had stepped on the pier with no other
garments on than a pair of trousers and a shirt, the former having a
large rent on the right knee, and the latter being torn open at the
breast, in consequence of the violent removal of all the buttons when
its owner was dragged into the lifeboat.  As, in addition to this, the
young man's dishevelled hair did duty for a cap, and his face and hands
were smeared with oil and tar from the flare-lights which he had
assisted to keep up so energetically, it is not surprising that the
first sight of him had a powerful effect on Mr Durant.

"Why, Stanney," he said at length, "you look as if you were some strange
sea-monster just broke loose from Neptune's menagerie!"

Perhaps this idea had been suggested by the rope round Stanley's waist,
the cut end of which still dangled at his side, for Mr Durant took hold
of it inquiringly.

"Ay, sir," put in the coxswain, who chanced to be near him, "that bit of
rope is a scarf of honour.  He saved the life of a soldier's widow with
it."

There was a tendency to cheer on the part of the bystanders who heard
this.

"God bless you, Stanney, my boy!  Come and get dressed," said the old
gentleman, suddenly seizing his friend's arm and pushing his way through
the crowd, "come along; oh, don't talk to me of the ship.  I know that
it's lost; no matter--you are saved.  And do _you_ come along with us
Wel--Wel--what's the name of --?  Ah!  Welton--come; my daughter is here
somewhere.  I left her near the parapet.  Never mind, she knows her way
home."

Katie certainly was there, and when, over the heads of the people--for
she had mounted with characteristic energy on the parapet, assisted by
Queeker and accompanied by Fanny Hennings--she beheld Stanley Hall in
such a plight, she felt a disposition to laugh and cry and faint all at
once.  She resisted the tendency, however, although the expression of
her face and her rapid change of colour induced Queeker with anxious
haste to throw out his arms to catch her.

"Ha!" exclaimed Queeker, "_I knew it_!"

What Queeker knew he never explained.  It may have had reference to
certain suspicions entertained in regard to the impression made by the
young student on Katie the night of their first meeting; we cannot tell,
but we know that he followed up the exclamation with the muttered
remark, "It was fortunate that I pulled up in time."

Herein Queeker exhibited the innate tendency of the human heart to
deceive itself.  That furious little poetical fox-hunter had, by his own
confession, felt the pangs of a guilty conscience in turning, just
because he could not help it, from Katie to Fanny, yet here he was now
basely and coolly taking credit to himself for having "pulled up in
time!"

"Oh, look at the _dear_ little children!" exclaimed Fanny, pointing
towards a part of the crowd where several seamen were carrying the
rescued and still terrified little ones in their strong arms, while
others assisted the women along, and wrapped dry shawls round them.

"How dreadful to think," said Katie, making a hard struggle to suppress
her agitation, "that all these would have been lost but for the
lifeboat; and how wonderful to think that some of our own friends should
be among them!"

"Ay, there be many more besides these saved last night, miss," remarked
a sturdy old boatman who chanced to be standing beside her.  "All along
the east coast the lifeboats has bin out, miss, you may be sure; and
they don't often shove off without bringin' somethin' back to show for
their pains, though they don't all 'ave steamers for to tug 'em out.
There's the Broadstairs boat, now; I've jist heerd she was out all night
an' saved fifteen lives; an' the Walmer and Deal boats has fetched in a
lot, I believe, though we han't got particklers yet."

Besides those whom we have mentioned as gazing with the crowd at the
arrival of the lifeboat, Morley Jones, and Nora, and Billy Towler were
there.  Jones and Billy had returned from London together the night
before the storm, and, like nearly every one else in the town, had
turned out to witness the arrival of the lifeboat.

Dick Moy also was there, and that huge lump of good-nature spent the
time in making sagacious remarks and wise comments on wind and weather,
wrecks and rescues, in a manner that commanded the intense admiration of
a knot of visitors who happened to be near him, and who regarded him as
a choice specimen--a sort of type--of the British son of Neptune.

"This is wot _I_ says," observed Dick, while the people were landing "so
long as there's 'ope, 'old on.  Never say die, and never give in; them's
my sentiments.  'Cause why? no one never knows wot may turn up.  If your
ship goes down; w'y, wot then?  Strike out, to be sure.  P'r'aps you may
be picked up afore long.  If sharks is near, p'r'aps you may be picked
down.  You can never tell.  If you gets on a shoal, wot then? w'y, stick
to the ship till a lifeboat comes off to 'ee.  Don't never go for to
take to your own boats.  If you do--capsize, an' Davy Jones's locker is
the word.  If the lifeboat can't git alongside; w'y, wait till it can.
If it can't; w'y, it can only be said that it couldn't.  No use cryin'
over spilt milk, you know.  Not that I cares for milk.  It don't keep at
sea, d'ye see; an's only fit for babbys.  If the lifeboat capsizes; w'y,
then, owin' to her parfection o' build, she rights again, an' you,
'avin' on cork jackets, p'r'aps, gits into 'er by the lifelines, all
handy.  If you 'aven't got no cork jackets on, w'y, them that has'll
pick 'ee up.  If not, it's like enough you'll go down.  But no matter,
you've did yer best, an' man, woman, or child can do no more.  You can
only die once, d'ye see?"

Whether the admiring audience did or did not see the full force of these
remarks, they undoubtedly saw enough in the gigantic tar to esteem him a
marvel of philosophic wisdom.  Judging by their looks that he was highly
appreciated, it is just possible that Dick Moy might have been tempted
to extend his discourse, had not a move in the crowd showed a general
tendency towards dispersion, the rescued people having been removed,
