"Here, boy, go aloft and reef tops'l; d'ye hear?"

Tommy hesitated.

"If you don't," said Job, hissing out the words in the extremity of his
passion, and stopping abruptly, as if unable to give utterance to his
feelings.

"Well, what if I don't?" asked the boy sternly.

"Why, then--ha! ha! ha!--why, I'll do it myself."

With another fiendish laugh Job sprang into the rigging, and was soon
out upon the topsail-yard busy with the reef points.

"Why, he's _shakin' out_ the reef," cried Jim in alarm.  "I've half a
mind to haul on the starboard brace, and try to shake the monster into
the sea!"

Job soon shook out the reef, and, descending swiftly by one of the
backstays, seized the topsail-halyards.

"Come, lay hold," he cried savagely.

But no one would obey, so, uttering a curse upon his comrades, he passed
the rope round a stanchion, and with his right hand partially hoisted
the sail, while with his left he hauled in the slack of the rope.

The vessel, already staggering under much too great a press of canvas,
now rushed through the water with terrific speed; burying her bows in
foam at one moment, and hurling off clouds of spray at the next as she
held on her wild course.  Job stood on the bowsprit, drenched with
spray, holding with one hand to the forestay, and waving the other high
above his head, cheering and yelling furiously as if he were daring the
angry sea to come on, and do its worst.

Jim, now unable to speak or act from terror, clung to the starboard
bulwarks, while Bunks stood manfully at the helm.  Tommy held on to the
mainmast shrouds, and gazed earnestly and anxiously out ahead.

Thus they flew, they knew not whither, for several hours that night.

Towards morning, a little before daybreak, the gale began to moderate.
Job's mood had changed.  His wild yelling fit had passed away, and he
now ranged about the decks in moody silence, like a chained tiger; going
down every now and then to drink, but never resting for a moment, and
always showing by his looks that he had his eye on Tommy Bogey.

The poor boy knew this well, and watched him intently the whole of that
terrible night.

Bunks, who had never once quitted his post, began to yawn, and suggested
to Jim that he might take a spell at the helm now, when the progress of
the schooner was suddenly arrested with a shock so violent that those on
board were hurled prostrate on the deck, the fore-topmast snapped and
went over the side, carrying the main-topmast and the jib-boom along
with it, and the sea made a clean breach over the stern, completely
sweeping the deck.

Job, who chanced to have gone down below, was hurled against the cabin
bulkhead, and the glass bottle he held to his lips was shivered to
atoms.  With his face cut and bleeding he sprang up the
companion-ladder.

"On the rocks!" he shouted.

"On the sand, anyhow," answered Bunks.

"The boat! the boat! she won't last ten minutes," cried Jim.

One of the two boats belonging to the "Butterfly" had been washed away
by the last wave, the other remained in its place.  To this the three
men rushed, and launched it quickly into the water.  Job was first to
get into it.

"Jump in, jump in," he cried to the others, who were prompt enough to
obey.

Tommy Bogey stood motionless and silent close to the main-mast.  His
face was very pale; but a stern pursing of the lips and compression of
the eyebrows showed that it was not cowardly fear that blanched his
cheek.

"The boy! the boy!" cried Bunks, as Job let go his hold of the schooner.

A wild stern laugh from Job showed that he had made up his mind to leave
Tommy to perish.

"Shame!" cried Jim, seizing one of the oars; "pull, Bunks, pull to
wind'ard a bit; we'll drop down and save him yet.  Pull, you murderer!"
shouted Jim, with a burst of anger so sudden and fierce that Job was
cowed.  He sat down and obeyed.

The boat was very small, and might have been easily pulled by so strong
a crew in ordinary circumstances; but the strength of wind and sea
together was so great, that they were in great danger of being swamped,
and it required their utmost efforts to pull a few yards to windward of
the schooner.

"Now then, look out!" cried Jim, endeavouring to turn the boat.

As he said this a wave caught its side and upset it.  The men uttered a
loud cry; a moment later, and they were swept against the bow of the
"Butterfly."  Tommy had sprung to the side, caught up a rope, and cast
it over.  Bunks did not see it; he made a wild grasp at the smooth wet
side of the vessel, but his hands found nothing to lay hold of, and he
was carried quickly away to leeward.  Jim caught the rope, but was
brought up so suddenly by it that it was torn from his grasp.  He also
went to leeward and perished.

Job had caught hold of the cutwater, and, digging his fingers into the
wood, held on by main strength for a few minutes.

"Here, lay hold o' the rope," cried Tommy, whose only desire now was to
save the life of the wretched man; "there, don't you feel it?"

He had rubbed the rope against Job's face in order to let him know it
was there, but the man seemed to have lost all power to move.  He simply
maintained his death-grip until his strength gave way.  Tommy understood
his case, and looked quickly round for one of those ring-shaped
lifebuoys which we are accustomed to see in our passenger steamers tied
up so securely that they would in most cases of sudden emergency be
utterly useless.  But the owners of the "Butterfly" were economists.
They did not think life-preserving worth the expenditure of a few
shillings, so there was no lifebuoy to be found.  There was a round cork
fender, however, which the boy seized and flung into the sea, just as
Job's grasp loosened.  He uttered a wild shriek, and tossed up his arms
imploringly, as he was carried away.  The buoy fell close beside him,
and he caught it.  But it was scarce sufficient to sustain his weight,
and merely prolonged the agonising struggle.  Tommy soon lost sight of
him in the darkness.  Soon after there arose a wild fierce cry, so loud
and strong that it seemed to have been uttered at the boy's elbow.
Tommy shuddered, for it suggested the idea of a despairing soul.

He listened intently, and twice again that thrilling cry broke on his
ear, but each time more faintly.  Still he continued to listen for it
with a feeling of horror, and once or twice fancied that he heard it
rising above the turmoil of wind and waves.  Long before he ceased to
listen in expectancy, the murderer's dead body lay tossing in that great
watery grave in which so many of the human race--innocent and guilty
alike--lie buried.

Ere long Tommy was called to renewed exertion and trial.

The tide happened to be rising when the schooner struck.  While the
incidents above related were taking place, the "Butterfly" was being
dashed on the sand so violently, that her breaking up in the course of a
short time was a matter of certainty.  Tommy knew this well, but he did
not give way to despair.  He resolved not to part with his young life
without a struggle, and therefore cast about in his mind what was best
to be done.

His first idea was to construct a raft.  He had just begun this
laborious work when the rising tide lifted the schooner over the
sand-bank, and sent her off into deep water.  This raised Tommy's hopes
and spirits to an unnaturally high pitch; he trimmed the foresail--the
only one left--as well as he could, and then, seizing the tiller, kept
the vessel running straight before the wind.

Standing thus at the helm he began to reflect on his position, and the
reflection did not tend to comfort him.  He was out in a gale on the
stormy sea, without companions, without compass to guide him, and
steering he knew not whither--possibly on rocks or shoals.  This latter
idea induced him to attempt to lie-to till day-break, but the crippled
condition of the schooner rendered this impossible.  There was nothing
for it, therefore, but to run before the gale.

In a short time his attention was attracted to a peculiar sound in the
hold.  On examination he found that the vessel had sprung a leak, and
that the water was rising slowly but steadily.  The poor boy's heart
sank, and for the first time his courage began to give way; but quickly
recovering himself he lashed the helm in position, and manfully set to
work at the pump.  He was somewhat relieved to find that the leak was
small.  In an hour he had pumped out nearly all the water.  Then he
returned to the helm and rested there for an hour, at the end of which
the water in the hold had increased so much that he had to ply the pump
again.

The day broke while he was thus engaged, but the morning was so thick
that he could see no land.  On returning to the helm the second time,
Tommy felt that this state of things could not go on much longer.  The
excitement, the watching, the horrors of the past night were beginning
to tell on him.  His muscles were exhausted, and he felt an irresistible
desire to sleep.  He struggled against this till about noon, by which
time the wind had moderated to a steady breeze, and the sun shone
through the mist as if to cheer him up a little.

He had eaten nothing for many hours, as he did not dare to quit his post
to go below for food, lest the schooner should come suddenly on some
other vessel and be run down.  Hunger and exhaustion, however, soon
rendered him desperate; he ran below, seized a handful of biscuit,
filled a can with water, and returned hastily on deck to break his fast.
It was one of the sweetest meals he ever ate, and refreshed him so much
that he was able to go on alternately steering and pumping till late in
the afternoon.  Then he suddenly broke down.  Exhausted nature could
bear up no longer.  He lashed the helm, pumped out the water in the hold
for the last time, and went below to rest.

He was half asleep as he descended the companion-ladder.  A strange and
sad yet dreamy feeling that everything he did was "for the last time,"
weighed heavily on his spirit, but this was somehow relieved by the
knowledge that he was now at last about to _rest_!  There was delight in
that simple thought, though there mingled with it a feeling that the
rest would terminate in death; he lay down to sleep with a feeling that
he lay down to die, and a half-formed prayer escaped his lips as his
wearied head fell upon the pillow.

Instantly he was buried in deep repose.

The sun sank in the ocean, the stars came out and spangled all the sky,
and the moon rose and sank again, but Tommy lay, regardless of
everything, in profound slumber.  Again the sun arose on a sea so calm
that it seemed like oil, ascended into the zenith, and sank towards its
setting.  Still the boy continued to sleep, his young head resting
quietly on the pillow of the dead skipper; his breath coming gently and
regularly through the half-opened lips that smiled as if he were resting
in peace on his mother's bosom.

Being dashed on the rocks, or run into by steamers, or whelmed in the
waves, were ideas that troubled him not, or, if they did, they were
connected only with the land of dreams.  Thus the poor boy rested calmly
in the midst of danger--yet in safety, for the arm of God was around
him.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE ANTIPODES.

A new scene breaks upon us now, patient reader.  We are among the
antipodes in that vast and wonderful region where the kangaroo reigns in
the wilderness, and gold is sown broadcast in the land.  The men we see
are, to a large extent, the same men we saw before leaving the shores of
Old England, but they are wonderfully changed!  Red flannel shirts, long
boots, leathern belts, felt hats, and unshorn chins meet us at every
turn; so do barrows and pick-axes and shovels.  It seems as if we had
got into a region inhabited solely by navvies.  Many of them, however,
appear to be very gentlemanly navvies!

There are no ladies here; scarcely any females at all, for we have left
the thriving settlements of Australia far behind us, and are now
wandering over the Daisy Hill gold-diggings.  The particular section of
that busy spot to which our attention is directed at this moment, is
named the "Kangaroo Flats."

None but strong men can get on here.  Let us go forward, and see how
they obtain this yellow metal that turns the world upside down!

Here is a man issuing from a hole in the earth close at our feet, like a
huge ground-squirrel.  He is tall; stout, and fair, with broad shoulders
and a fine manly countenance, which is ornamented by a thick beard and
moustache of glossy yellow hair.  The silken curly hair of this man,
contrasted with his great size and manliness, is very striking.  He
seats himself on a mass of clay, wipes the perspiration from his
forehead, and shouts to some one down in the earth.

"Hallo!  Jack, let's hoist out the stuff now."

"Ay, ay, Harry," replies a strong voice, with a sailor-like ring in it,
from below, "I'll be on deck in a jiffy."

Let us descend and look at this miner.  The hole is narrow and deep; at
the bottom of it is a dark tunnel two feet broad, between two and three
feet high, and twenty-five feet long.  At the farther extremity of it
crouches a man with a pickaxe in his hands, and a candle beside him.  It
is a very awkward position in which to work, and the result is that this
man pants and blows and sighs, and sometimes laughs quietly to himself
at the comicality of his attitudes, while the perspiration pours over
his face in large beads continuously.  It seems very hard work, and so,
indeed, it is, but the man is an unusually big and strong fellow, larger
even than his fair companion above ground.  His hair is short, black,
and curly, as are his beard and whiskers, but at this moment his whole
head and face are so besmeared with clay that his aspect is piebald and
not more becoming than his attitude.  Still, there is a massive grandeur
in the outline of his features which cannot be destroyed by
incrustations of clay, although his complexion is obscured by it.

Like his comrade above, his costume consists of flannel shirt, dark
trousers, and big boots.  His shirt sleeves being rolled up to the
shoulders, display a pair of arms that a sculptor might gaze on with
admiration.

This strong man pants and gasps more than ever with the heat as he
drives the pick and tears up the earth for gold.  Presently the candle
burns dim; the air is getting foul.

"Hallo, the candle's going out!" cries the dark miner, scrambling
towards the bottom of the shaft on his hands and knees.

"Ha! time to take a mouthful o' fresh air, Jack," remarks the fair
miner, looking into the hole.

In another moment a wild dishevelled clay-bespattered figure comes to
the surface, rises like a giant out of the earth, and the countenance
and proportions of our friend John Bax are revealed, in spite of the
strange costume and black moustache and beard and incrustations of clay
which more than half disguise him.

"Whew! how hot it is," said Bax, as he stepped out of the hole.

"You may say that," observed his friend, rising; "but come along, Jack,
let's get up the stuff and wash out as much as we can before dinner.
Mind, you've got to write home this afternoon, and won't be able to help
me much in the evening."

"Come along then," said Bax, going to work again with redoubled energy.

There was a windlass over the hole by which the clay was raised to the
surface.  Bax wrought at this, and his mate went below to fill the
buckets.  Then they washed it out, and flooded away cartloads of
worthless soil, until a small residue of clear shining particles
remained behind.  This they gathered carefully together, added it to the
bag that held their fortune, remarked that there were "no nuggets this
time," and that it was "hard work and little pay;" after which they
flung down their tools, washed their hands and faces, and went into
their tent to dine.

Thus did Bax and his mate (an old acquaintance unexpectedly met with
after arrival in Australia) dig, and sweat, and toil for gold.

But Bax and his friend worked thus hard, only because it was their
nature so to work at whatever their hands found to do.  They had not set
their hearts upon the gold.

After dinner Harry went out to drive his pick and shovel.  Bax remained
in the tent to drive the quill.

That night the two friends lay chatting and smoking in their tent after
supper, with a solitary candle between them, and the result of the day's
work--a small pile of shining dust--before them.

"We'll not make our fortunes at this rate," observed Harry, with a sigh.

"There's no saying what good fortune may be in store for us," observed
Bax; "but put away the gold, it will do us no good to gaze at it."

Harry rolled the little heap in a piece of paper, and tossed it into the
