thought; for, however much the princess might desire to be set free, she
was dreadfully afraid of the wrong prince. Now, however, the fairy was
going to do all she could.

She so contrived it by her deceitful spells, that the next night the
prince could not by any endeavour find his way to the glade. It would
take me too long to tell her tricks. They would be amusing to us, who
know that they could not do any harm, but they were something other than
amusing to the poor prince. He wandered about the forest till daylight,
and then fell fast asleep. The same thing occurred for seven following
days, during which neither could he find the good fairy's cottage. After
the third quarter of the moon, however, the bad fairy thought she might
be at ease about the affair for a fortnight at least, for there was no
chance of the prince wishing to kiss the princess during that period.
So the first day of the fourth quarter he did find the cottage, and the
next day he found the glade. For nearly another week he haunted it. But
the princess never came. I have little doubt she was on the farther
edge of it some part of every night, but at this period she always wore
black, and, there being little or no light, the prince never saw her.
Nor would he have known her if he had seen her. How could he have
taken the worn decrepit creature she was now, for the glorious Princess
Daylight?

At last, one night when there was no moon at all, he ventured near the
house. There he heard voices talking, although it was past midnight; for
her women were in considerable uneasiness, because the one whose turn it
was to watch her had fallen asleep, and had not seen which way she went,
and this was a night when she would probably wander very far, describing
a circle which did not touch the open glade at all, but stretched away
from the back of the house, deep into that side of the forest--a part
of which the prince knew nothing. When he understood from what they said
that she had disappeared, and that she must have gone somewhere in the
said direction, he plunged at once into the wood to see if he could find
her. For hours he roamed with nothing to guide him but the vague notion
of a circle which on one side bordered on the house, for so much had he
picked up from the talk he had overheard.

It was getting towards the dawn, but as yet there was no streak of light
in the sky, when he came to a great birch-tree, and sat down weary at
the foot of it. While he sat--very miserable, you may be sure--full of
fear for the princess, and wondering how her attendants could take it so
quietly, he bethought himself that it would not be a bad plan to light
a fire, which, if she were anywhere near, would attract her. This he
managed with a tinder-box, which the good fairy had given him. It was
just beginning to blaze up, when he heard a moan, which seemed to come
from the other side of the tree. He sprung to his feet, but his heart
throbbed so that he had to lean for a moment against the tree before he
could move. When he got round, there lay a human form in a little dark
heap on the earth. There was light enough from his fire to show that it
was not the princess. He lifted it in his arms, hardly heavier than a
child, and carried it to the flame. The countenance was that of an old
woman, but it had a fearfully strange look. A black hood concealed her
hair, and her eyes were closed. He laid her down as comfortably as he
could, chafed her hands, put a little cordial from a bottle, also the
gift of the fairy, into her mouth; took off his coat and wrapped it
about her, and in short did the best he could. In a little while she
opened her eyes and looked at him--so pitifully! The tears rose and
flowed from her grey wrinkled cheeks, but she said never a word. She
closed her eyes again, but the tears kept on flowing, and her whole
appearance was so utterly pitiful that the prince was near crying too.
He begged her to tell him what was the matter, promising to do all
he could to help her; but still she did not speak. He thought she was
dying, and took her in his arms again to carry her to the princess's
house, where he thought the good-natured cook might be able to do
something for her. When he lifted her, the tears flowed yet faster, and
she gave such a sad moan that it went to his very heart.

"Mother, mother!" he said. "Poor mother!" and kissed her on the withered
lips.

She started; and what eyes they were that opened upon him! But he did
not see them, for it was still very dark, and he had enough to do to
make his way through the trees towards the house.

Just as he approached the door, feeling more tired than he could have
imagined possible--she was such a little thin old thing--she began to
move, and became so restless that, unable to carry her a moment longer,
he thought to lay her on the grass. But she stood upright on her feet.
Her hood had dropped, and her hair fell about her. The first gleam
of the morning was caught on her face: that face was bright as the
never-aging Dawn, and her eyes were lovely as the sky of darkest blue.
The prince recoiled in overmastering wonder. It was Daylight herself
whom he had brought from the forest! He fell at her feet, nor dared to
look up until she laid her hand upon his head. He rose then.

"You kissed me when I was an old woman: there! I kiss you when I am a
young princess," murmured Daylight.--"Is that the sun coming?"




CHAPTER XXIX. RUBY


THE children were delighted with the story, and made many amusing
remarks upon it. Mr. Raymond promised to search his brain for another,
and when he had found one to bring it to them. Diamond having taken
leave of Nanny, and promised to go and see her again soon, went away
with him.

Now Mr. Raymond had been turning over in his mind what he could do both
for Diamond and for Nanny. He had therefore made some acquaintance with
Diamond's father, and had been greatly pleased with him. But he had come
to the resolution, before he did anything so good as he would like to
do for them, to put them all to a certain test. So as they walked away
together, he began to talk with Diamond as follows:--

"Nanny must leave the hospital soon, Diamond."

"I'm glad of that, sir."

"Why? Don't you think it's a nice place?"

"Yes, very. But it's better to be well and doing something, you know,
even if it's not quite so comfortable."

"But they can't keep Nanny so long as they would like. They can't keep
her till she's quite strong. There are always so many sick children they
want to take in and make better. And the question is, What will she do
when they send her out again?"

"That's just what I can't tell, though I've been thinking of it over and
over, sir. Her crossing was taken long ago, and I couldn't bear to see
Nanny fighting for it, especially with such a poor fellow as has taken
it. He's quite lame, sir."

"She doesn't look much like fighting, now, does she, Diamond?"

"No, sir. She looks too like an angel. Angels don't fight--do they,
sir?"

"Not to get things for themselves, at least," said Mr. Raymond.

"Besides," added Diamond, "I don't quite see that she would have any
better right to the crossing than the boy who has got it. Nobody gave it
to her; she only took it. And now he has taken it."

"If she were to sweep a crossing--soon at least--after the illness she
has had, she would be laid up again the very first wet day," said Mr.
Raymond.

"And there's hardly any money to be got except on the wet days,"
remarked Diamond reflectively. "Is there nothing else she could do,
sir?"

"Not without being taught, I'm afraid."

"Well, couldn't somebody teach her something?"

"Couldn't you teach her, Diamond?"

"I don't know anything myself, sir. I could teach her to dress the
baby; but nobody would give her anything for doing things like that:
they are so easy. There wouldn't be much good in teaching her to drive
a cab, for where would she get the cab to drive? There ain't fathers and
old Diamonds everywhere. At least poor Nanny can't find any of them, I
doubt."

"Perhaps if she were taught to be nice and clean, and only speak gentle
words."

"Mother could teach her that," interrupted Diamond.

"And to dress babies, and feed them, and take care of them," Mr. Raymond
proceeded, "she might get a place as a nurse somewhere, you know. People
do give money for that."

"Then I'll ask mother," said Diamond.

"But you'll have to give her her food then; and your father, not being
strong, has enough to do already without that."

"But here's me," said Diamond: "I help him out with it. When he's tired
of driving, up I get. It don't make any difference to old Diamond. I
don't mean he likes me as well as my father--of course he can't, you
know--nobody could; but he does his duty all the same. It's got to be
done, you know, sir; and Diamond's a good horse--isn't he, sir?"

"From your description I should say certainly; but I have not the
pleasure of his acquaintance myself."

"Don't you think he will go to heaven, sir?"

"That I don't know anything about," said Mr. Raymond. "I confess I
should be glad to think so," he added, smiling thoughtfully.

"I'm sure he'll get to the back of the north wind, anyhow," said Diamond
to himself; but he had learned to be very careful of saying such things
aloud.

"Isn't it rather too much for him to go in the cab all day and every
day?" resumed Mr. Raymond.

"So father says, when he feels his ribs of a morning. But then he says
the old horse do eat well, and the moment he's had his supper, down
he goes, and never gets up till he's called; and, for the legs of him,
father says that makes no end of a differ. Some horses, sir! they won't
lie down all night long, but go to sleep on their four pins, like a
haystack, father says. I think it's very stupid of them, and so does old
Diamond. But then I suppose they don't know better, and so they can't
help it. We mustn't be too hard upon them, father says."

"Your father must be a good man, Diamond." Diamond looked up in Mr.
Raymond's face, wondering what he could mean.

"I said your father must be a good man, Diamond."

"Of course," said Diamond. "How could he drive a cab if he wasn't?"

"There are some men who drive cabs who are not very good," objected Mr.
Raymond.

Diamond remembered the drunken cabman, and saw that his friend was
right.

"Ah, but," he returned, "he must be, you know, with such a horse as old
Diamond."

"That does make a difference," said Mr. Raymond. "But it is quite enough
that he is a good man without our trying to account for it. Now, if you
like, I will give you a proof that I think him a good man. I am going
away on the Continent for a while--for three months, I believe--and I
am going to let my house to a gentleman who does not want the use of
my brougham. My horse is nearly as old, I fancy, as your Diamond, but
I don't want to part with him, and I don't want him to be idle; for
nobody, as you say, ought to be idle; but neither do I want him to be
worked very hard. Now, it has come into my head that perhaps your father
would take charge of him, and work him under certain conditions."

"My father will do what's right," said Diamond. "I'm sure of that."

"Well, so I think. Will you ask him when he comes home to call and have
a little chat with me--to-day, some time?"

"He must have his dinner first," said Diamond. "No, he's got his dinner
with him to-day. It must be after he's had his tea."

"Of course, of course. Any time will do. I shall be at home all day."

"Very well, sir. I will tell him. You may be sure he will come. My
father thinks you a very kind gentleman, and I know he is right, for I
know your very own self, sir."

Mr. Raymond smiled, and as they had now reached his door, they parted,
and Diamond went home. As soon as his father entered the house, Diamond
gave him Mr. Raymond's message, and recounted the conversation that had
preceded it. His father said little, but took thought-sauce to his bread
and butter, and as soon as he had finished his meal, rose, saying:

"I will go to your friend directly, Diamond. It would be a grand thing
to get a little more money. We do want it." Diamond accompanied his
father to Mr. Raymond's door, and there left him.

He was shown at once into Mr. Raymond's study, where he gazed with
some wonder at the multitude of books on the walls, and thought what a
learned man Mr. Raymond must be.

Presently Mr. Raymond entered, and after saying much the same about
his old horse, made the following distinct proposal--one not
over-advantageous to Diamond's father, but for which he had
reasons--namely, that Joseph should have the use of Mr. Raymond's horse
while he was away, on condition that he never worked him more than six
hours a day, and fed him well, and that, besides, he should take Nanny
home as soon as she was able to leave the hospital, and provide for her
as one of his own children, neither better nor worse--so long, that is,
as he had the horse.

Diamond's father could not help thinking it a pretty close bargain. He
should have both the girl and the horse to feed, and only six hours'
work out of the horse.

"It will save your own horse," said Mr. Raymond.

"That is true," answered Joseph; "but all I can get by my own horse is
only enough to keep us, and if I save him and feed your horse and the
girl--don't you see, sir?"

"Well, you can go home and think about it, and let me know by the end of
the week. I am in no hurry before then."

So Joseph went home and recounted the proposal to his wife, adding that
he did not think there was much advantage to be got out of it.

"Not much that way, husband," said Diamond's mother; "but there would be
an advantage, and what matter who gets it!"

"I don't see it," answered her husband. "Mr. Raymond is a gentleman of
property, and I don't discover any much good in helping him to save a
little more. He won't easily get one to make such a bargain, and I
don't mean he shall get me. It would be a loss rather than a gain--I do
think--at least if I took less work out of our own horse."

"One hour would make a difference to old Diamond. But that's not the
main point. You must think what an advantage it would be to the poor
girl that hasn't a home to go to!"

"She is one of Diamond's friends," thought his father.

"I could be kind to her, you know," the mother went on, "and teach her
housework, and how to handle a baby; and, besides, she would help
me, and I should be the stronger for it, and able to do an odd bit of
charing now and then, when I got the chance."

"I won't hear of that," said her husband. "Have the girl by all means.
I'm ashamed I did not think of both sides of the thing at once. I wonder
if the horse is a great eater. To be sure, if I gave Diamond two hours'
additional rest, it would be all the better for the old bones of him,
and there would be four hours extra out of the other horse. That would
give Diamond something to do every day. He could drive old Diamond after
dinner, and I could take the other horse out for six hours after tea,
or in the morning, as I found best. It might pay for the keep of both of
them,--that is, if I had good luck. I should like to oblige Mr. Raymond,
though he be rather hard, for he has been very kind to our Diamond,
wife. Hasn't he now?"

"He has indeed, Joseph," said his wife, and there the conversation
ended.

Diamond's father went the very next day to Mr. Raymond, and accepted his
proposal; so that the week after having got another stall in the same
stable, he had two horses instead of one. Oddly enough, the name of the
new horse was Ruby, for he was a very red chestnut. Diamond's name came
from a white lozenge on his forehead. Young Diamond said they were rich
now, with such a big diamond and such a big ruby.




CHAPTER XXX. NANNY'S DREAM


NANNY was not fit to be moved for some time yet, and Diamond went to see
her as often as he could. But being more regularly engaged now, seeing
he went out every day for a few hours with old Diamond, and had his baby
to mind, and one of the horses to attend to, he could not go so often as
he would have liked.

One evening, as he sat by her bedside, she said to him:

"I've had such a beautiful dream, Diamond! I should like to tell it
you."

"Oh! do," said Diamond; "I am so fond of dreams!"

"She must have been to the back of the north wind," he said to himself.

"It was a very foolish dream, you know. But somehow it was so pleasant!
What a good thing it is that you believe the dream all the time you are
in it!"

My readers must not suppose that poor Nanny was able to say what she
meant so well as I put it down here. She had never been to school, and
had heard very little else than vulgar speech until she came to the
hospital. But I have been to school, and although that could never make
me able to dream so well as Nanny, it has made me able to tell her dream
better than she could herself. And I am the more desirous of doing this
for her that I have already done the best I could for Diamond's dream,
and it would be a shame to give the boy all the advantage.

