
Any boy who has snared sparrows in snow-time, has, no doubt, done so by
tying his snares upon a hoop netted across with twine or other small
cord.  Now, if he will conceive his hoop bent into an oblong shape--
something like what the figure of a boat turned on its mouth would make
in snow--and if he will also fancy the netting to consist of thongs of
twisted deer-hide woven somewhat closely together, he will get a very
good idea of an Indian snow-shoe.  It is usually from three to four feet
long, by about a foot wide at the middle part, from which it tapers
gently to a point, both at the heel and toe.  The frame, as I have said,
is like the hoop of a boy's bird-snare.  It is made of light, tough
wood, and, of course, carefully bent and polished with the knife.  The
slender branches of the "scrub-pine" (_Pinus Banksiana_) are esteemed
excellent for this purpose, as their wood is light, flexible and tough
in its fibres.  This is also a favourite tree, where it grows, to make
tent-poles, canoe-timbers, and other implements required by the Indians;
and these people use so much of it for their arrows, that it has
received from the Canadian voyageurs the name of _bois de fleche_
(arrow-wood).

Well, then, the frame of the snow-shoes being bent to its proper shape,
two transverse bars are placed across near the middle, and several
inches from each other.  They are for the foot to rest upon, as well as
to give strength to the whole structure.  These being made fast, the
netting is woven on, and extends over the whole frame, with the
exception of a little space in front of the bars where the ball of the
foot is to rest.  This space is left free of netting, in order to allow
play to the toes while walking.  The mesh-work is made of thongs usually
cut from the parchment-skin of a deer, and twisted.  Sometimes twisted
intestines are used, and the netting exactly resembles that seen in
"racquets" for ball play.

The snow-shoe, when finished, is simply fastened upon the foot by means
of straps or thongs; and a pair of them thus placed, will present a
surface to the snow of nearly six square feet--more, if required, by
making them larger.  But this is enough to sustain the heaviest man upon
the softest snow, and an Indian thus "shod" will skim over the surface
like a skater.

The shoes used by all tribes of Indians are not alike in shape.  There
are fashions and fancies in this respect.  Some are made--as among the
Chippewa Indians--with one side of the frame nearly straight; and these,
of course, will not do for either foot, but are "rights and lefts."
Generally, however, the shape is such that the snow-shoe will fit either
foot.

The snow-shoes having now become a necessary thing, our young voyageurs
set about making a complete set for the whole party--that is, no less
than four pairs.  Norman was the "shoemaker," and Norman knew how.  He
could splice the frames, and work in the netting, equal to an Indian
squaw.  Of course all the others assisted him.  Lucien cut the
moose-skin into fine regular strips; Basil waded off through the snow,
and procured the frames from the wood of the scrub-pine-trees where he
had encountered the porcupine; and then he and Francois trimmed them
with their knives, and sweated them in the hot ashes until they became
dry, and ready for the hands of the "shoemaker."

This work occupied them several days, and then each had a pair of shoes
fitted to his size and weight.

The next consideration was, to lay in a stock of meat.  The moose had
furnished them with enough for present use, but that would not last
long, as there was no bread nor anything else to eat with it.  Persons
in their situation require a great deal of meat to sustain them, much
more than those who live in great cities, who eat a variety of
substances, and drink many kinds of drinks.  The healthy voyageur is
rarely without a keen appetite; and meat by itself is a food that
speedily digests, and makes way for a fresh meal; so that the ration
usually allowed to the _employes_ of the fur companies would appear
large enough to supply the table of several families.  For instance, in
some parts of the Hudson's Bay territory, the voyageur is allowed eight
pounds of buffalo-meat _per diem_!  And yet it is all eaten by him, and
sometimes deemed barely sufficient.  A single deer, therefore, or even a
buffalo, lasts a party of voyageurs for a very short time, since they
have no other substance, such as bread or vegetables, to help it out.
It was necessary, then, that our travellers should use all their
diligence in laying up a stock of dried meat, before the winter became
too cold for them to hunt.  There was another consideration--their
clothing.  They all had clothing sufficient for such weather as they had
yet experienced; but that would never do for the winter of the Great
Slave Lake, and they knew it.  Many deer must be killed, and many hides
dressed, before they could make a full set of clothing for all, as well
as a set of deerskin blankets, which would be much needed.

As soon as the snow-shoes were finished, therefore, Basil and Norman
went out each day upon long hunting expeditions, from which they rarely
returned before nightfall.  Sometimes they brought with them a deer, of
the caribou or reindeer species, and the "woodland" variety, which were
plenty at this place.  They only carried to camp the best parts with the
skin, as the flesh of the woodland caribou is not much esteemed.  It is
larger than the other kind--the "Barren Ground caribou," weighing about
one hundred and fifty pounds; but both its venison and hide are of
inferior quality to those of the latter species.  Sometimes our hunters
killed smaller game; and on several occasions they returned without
having emptied their guns at all.  But there was one day that made up
for several--one grand day when they were extremely successful, and on
which they killed a whole herd of moose, consisting of five
individuals--the old bull, a spike buck--that is, a young buck, whose
horns had not yet got antlers upon them--the cow, and two calves.  These
they had tracked and followed for a long distance, and had succeeded, at
length, in running into a valley where the snow was exceedingly deep,
and where the moose became entangled.  There had been a shower of rain
the day before that had melted the surface of the snow; and this had
again frozen into an icy crust, upon which the deer lacerated their
ankles at every plunge, leaving a track of blood behind them as they
ran.  Under these circumstances they were easily trailed, and Basil and
Norman, skimming along upon their snow-shoes, soon came up with them,
and shot first one and then another, until the whole herd were stretched
in the valley.  They then butchered them, and hung the hides and
quarters upon high branches, so as to secure them from wolves and
wolverenes.  When the job was finished, the whole place looked like a
great slaughter-yard!  Next day a rude sledge was constructed; and the
voyageurs, returning in full force, transported the meat to camp.  Huge
fires were kindled outside the hut, and several days were spent in
cutting up and drying the flesh.  Had our travellers been certain that
the frost would have continued all winter, this would not have been
necessary--since the meat was already frozen as hard as a brick.  But
they knew that a sudden thaw would spoil it; and, as there was plenty of
good firewood on the spot, they were not going to run the risk of losing
it in that way.

They had now enough provision to last them for months; and hunting
became no longer necessary, except to obtain fresh meat--which was, of
course, preferable to the dry stock.  Hunting, also, gave them exercise
and amusement--both of which were necessary to their health; for to
remain idle and inactive in a situation such as that in which they were
placed is the worst possible plan, and is sure to engender both sickness
and _ennui_.  Indeed, the last grew upon them, notwithstanding all the
pains they took to prevent it.  There were days on which the cold was so
extreme, that they could not put their noses out of the door without the
danger of having them frost-bitten--although each had now a complete
suit of deerskin clothing, made by Lucien, the "tailor" of the party.
Upon such days they were fain to remain shut up in their hut; and,
seated around their huge log-fire, they passed the time in cleaning
their guns, mending their nets, stitching their clothes, and such-like
employments.  These days were far from being their dullest; for, what
with the varied and scientific knowledge of Lucien, which he took
pleasure in imparting to his companions--what with the practical
experience of Norman amid scenes of Arctic life, and the many "voyageur
tales" he could tell--what with Francois' merry jokes and _bon mots_--
and what with Basil's _talent for listening_--not the least important
element in a good _conversazione_,--our _quartette_ of young voyageurs
found their indoor days anything but dull.

This was all well enough for a while.  For a month or two they bore
their odd kind of life cheerfully enough; but the prospect of nearly six
months more of it began to appal them, when they reflected upon it; and
they soon found themselves longing for a change.  Hunting adventures,
that at other times would have interested them, now occurred without
creating any excitement; and the whole routine of their employments
seemed monotonous.  Nearly all of them were boys of an active character
of mind; and most of them were old enough to reason about the value of
time.  Their idea of such a long isolation from civilised life, and,
above all, the being debarred from following any useful pursuit, began
to impress some of them forcibly.  Others, as Francois, could not be
contented for a very great stretch of time with any sort of life; so
that all of them began to sigh for a change.

One day, while conversing upon this theme, a bold proposal was made by
Basil.  It was, that they should "strike camp," and continue their
journey.  This proposal took the others by surprise, but they were all
just in the frame of mind to entertain and discuss it; and a long
consultation was held upon the point.  Francois chimed in with the
proposal at once; while Lucien, more cautious, did not exactly oppose,
but rather offered the reasons that were against it, and pointed out the
perils of the undertaking.  Norman, of course, was appealed to--all of
them looking to him as one whose advice, upon that question at least,
was more valuable than their own.

Norman admitted the dangers pointed out by Lucien, but believed that
they might overcome them by a proper caution.  On the whole, Norman
approved of the plan, and it was at length adopted.  Perhaps Norman's
habitual prudence was to some extent influenced on this occasion by the
very natural desire he had of returning to what he considered his home.
He had now been absent nearly two years, and was desirous of once more
seeing his father and his old companions at the Fort.  There was another
feeling that influenced nearly all of them: that was _ambition_.  They
knew that to make such a journey would be something of a feat, and they
wished to have the credit of performing it.  To minds like that of
Basil, even the danger had something attractive in it.  It was resolved
then to break up the encampment, and continue their journey.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

TRAVELLING ON SNOW-SHOES.

Once their resolution was taken, they lost but little time in making
preparations to carry it out.  Most of the articles required for such a
journey were already in their hands.  They had the proper dresses--
snow-shoes, skin-blankets, and gloves.  They had prepared for themselves
sets of "snow spectacles."  These were made out of red cedar-wood.  Each
pair consisted of two small thin pieces, that covered the eyes, joined
together and fastened on by thongs of buckskin.  In each piece an oblong
slit served for the eye-hole, through which the eye looked without being
dazzled by the snow.  Without this, or some like contrivance, travelling
in the Arctic regions is painful to the eyes, and the traveller often
loses his sight.  Indeed, one of the most common infirmities of both the
Indians and Esquimaux of these parts is blindness or soreness of the
eyes, caused by the reflexion of the sunbeams from the crystals of the
frozen snow.  Norman was aware of this, and had made the spectacles to
guard against this peril.  Out of their spare skins they had made a
small tent.  This was to be carried along by Marengo in a light sledge,
which they had long since constructed, and taught the dog to draw.
Nothing else remained but to pack their provisions in the smallest bulk
possible, and this was done, according to the custom of the country, by
making "pemmican."  The dry meat was first pounded until it became a
powder; it was then put into small skin bags, made for the purpose, and
the hot melted fat was poured in and well mixed with it.  This soon
froze hard, and the mixture--that resembled "potted meat,"--was now
ready for use, and would keep for an indefinite time without the least
danger of spoiling.  Buffalo-beef, moose-meat, or venison of any sort,
thus prepared, is called "_pemmican_," and is more portable in this
shape than any other.  Besides no further cooking is required--an
important consideration upon those vast prairie deserts, where firewood
is seldom to be procured without the trouble of carrying it a great
distance.

Norman, who was the maker of the pemmican, had produced a superior
article upon this occasion.  Besides the pounded meat and fat, he had
mixed another ingredient with it, which rendered it a most delicious
food.  This third ingredient was a small purple-coloured berry--of which
we have already spoken--not unlike the whortleberry, but sweeter and of
a higher flavour.  It grows through most of the Northern regions of
America; and in some places, as upon the Red River and the Elk, the
bushes that produce it are seen in great plenty.  When in flower, they
appear almost white, so thickly are they covered with blossoms.  The
leaves are small, and generally of an oval shape; but there are several
varieties of the bush, some of them having the dimensions and form of
trees, of twenty-five feet in height.  The berries have received
different names in different parts of America.  They are known as
"shadberries", "June-berries", "service-berries," and by the Canadian
voyageurs they are called "le poire."  Even the botanists have given
them a great variety of names, as _pyrus, mespilus, aronia, crataegus_,
and _amelanchier_.  No matter which may be the best name, it is enough
to know that these little berries are delicious to eat when fresh, and
when dried, after the manner of currants, are excellent to mix in
puddings, as well as in pemmican.

Previous to the setting in of winter, our voyageurs had collected a
large bagful upon the banks of the Elk, which they had dried and stored
away--expecting to stand in need of them for this very purpose.  They
now came into use, and enabled Norman to make his pemmican of the very
choicest quality.  Five bags of it were put up, each weighing over
thirty pounds.  One of these was to be drawn upon the sledge, along with
the tent, the axe, and a few other articles.  The rest were to be
carried by the voyageurs themselves--each shouldering one, which, along
with their guns and accoutrements, would be load enough.

These arrangements being at length complete, the party bid adieu to
their log-hut--gave a parting look to their little canoe, which still
rested by the door--and then, shouldering their guns and bags of
pemmican, set out over the frozen surface of the snow.

Of course before starting they had decided upon the route they were to
take.  This decision, however, had not been arrived at until after much
discussion.  Lucien advised that they should follow the shore of the
lake until they should reach the Mackenzie River--which of course was
now frozen up.  Its channel, he argued, would then guide them; and, in
case their provisions should run short, they would be more likely to
find game upon its banks than elsewhere, as these were wooded almost to
the sea--in consequence of its head-waters rising in southern latitudes,
and carrying with them a warmer climate.

There was plausibility in Lucien's argument, combined with much
prudence.  Norman, however, advised a contrary course.  He said that
they would have to make a considerable journey westward before reaching
the place where the Mackenzie River flows out of the lake; and,
moreover, he knew that the river itself was very crooked--in some places
winding about in great curves, whose ends come near meeting each other.
Should they keep the course of the river, Norman believed it would
almost double their journey.  A much shorter route, he said, would be
obtained by striking across the country in a north-westerly direction,
so as to reach the Mackenzie near where another great stream--the River
of the Mountains--empties into it from the west.  This would certainly
be a more direct route, and they would avoid the windings of the river
channel.

Norman's reasoning prevailed.  Basil and Francois readily agreed to his
plan, and Lucien at length also gave his assent, but with some
reluctance.  Norman knew nothing whatever of the route he was advising
them to take.  His former journeys up and down the Mackenzie had been
made in summer, and of course he had travelled by canoe, in company with
the traders and voyageurs.  He only knew that to strike across the
country would be the shorter way.  But "the shortest way is not always
the nearest," says the proverb; and although Lucien remembered this
prudent maxim, the others did not give it a thought.  Before the end of
their journey they received a practical lesson of its wisdom--a lesson
they were not likely to forget.  But they knew not what was before them,
and they started off in high spirits.

Their first three or four days' journeys were without any event worth
being chronicled.  They travelled full twenty miles each day.  The
Southerners had become quite skilful in the management of their
snow-shoes, and they skimmed along upon the icy crust at the rate of
three or four miles an hour.  Marengo and his sledge gave them very
little trouble.  There was full sixty pounds weight upon it; but to the
huge dog this was a mere bagatelle, and he pulled it after him without
any great strain.  His harness was neatly made of moose-skin, and
consisted of a collar with a back strap and traces--the traces meeting
behind, where they were attached to the head of the sledge.  No
head-gear was necessary, as Marengo needed not to be either led or
driven.  The sledge consisted of two or three light planks of smooth
wood, laid alongside each other, and held together by transverse bands.
In front it turned up with a circular sweep, so as not to "plough" the
snow; and at the top of this curved part the traces were adjusted.  The
