
During the first part of this speech the young girl's face glowed with
evident pleasure, but the last part was unfortunate.  It did not suit
the temper of one who was brave as she was beautiful.

"I know not, sir," she said, with flashing eyes, while the little figure
drew up again, "what English girls may think or do, but Malagasy women
are not afraid to die with those whom they love.  Your advice may be
kindly meant, but I doubt if it is wise.  Besides, I am a servant of my
Queen, and owe allegiance to her."

"Your Queen, mademoiselle, is a servant of the devil," said Mark, whose
indignation was severely stirred.  "And, Rafaravavy, do you not profess
to be a servant of the Christians' God--the Almighty?  Does not the Book
state that it is impossible to serve _two_ masters?"

"Come, come!" cried the Secretary, in a sharp tone, after translating
this faithfully, "it is time to go.  Follow me!"

Mark's surprise at this abrupt termination of the interview was great,
but as Rafaravavy retired hastily, he had no resource but to follow his
friend.

"Why so sharp?" he asked, as they passed along the corridor.

"Because you have said enough," returned the Secretary, with a quiet
smile.  "You may understand your own women, no doubt, but not the
Malagasy girls as well as I do.  When a man has said _enough_ to a woman
he should stop and let it simmer.  All the rest that he would say she
will say to herself--and say it much better, too!  But tell me, when do
you think Ravoninohitriniony will meet Rafaravavy?"

"I don't know.  All I know is that a true lover is sure to manage a
meeting soon--and somehow."

He was glad to be able to make this indefinite reply; for although he
trusted the Secretary, and would have revealed his own affairs fully to
him, he felt that he had no right to reveal the affairs of his friend to
any one.

Before they reached the palace-yard a loud report was heard.  The palace
shook as with an earthquake.  Loud cries of soldiery were heard without,
and Mark's heart sank with an undefinable dread.

To account for this report we must go back a little.  When Hockins and
Ebony were left, as we have seen, to mix their "powders," the former,
being a reckless man, forgot to put his pipe out, and Ebony being a
careless man, (as regarded himself), did not observe the omission.  The
consequence was that the seaman kept on puffing and emitting sage
reflections to his admiring friend while they mixed their compounds in
concert.

"Hand me the powder, Ebony."

"Das good--ha! ha! das awrful good," cried the negro, referring to the
latest sage reflection--as he pushed across the powder canister, which
was a large one.

At that inauspicious moment a spark fell from the pipe!  Next moment the
door was burst open, the window blown out, Hockins was laid fiat on his
back, while Ebony went head-over-heels upon the floor!

Slowly and with a dazed look the seaman raised himself on one elbow and
looked round.

"Any--anything of ye left, boy?" he asked, quietly.

"I--I's not kite sure, 'Ockins," replied the negro, slowly passing his
hand down one of his legs without rising from the floor.  "'Ow does it
feel wid _you_?"

"All right, I think," replied the seaman, rising and presenting a
remarkable exhibition of singed beard and frizzled locks, "no bones
broke, anyhow."

At that instant Mark rushed into the smoke-filled room in consternation,
followed by the Secretary and a number of soldiers who formed the guard
of the palace, and great was their surprise, as well as their
satisfaction, to find that the two men had received no damage worth
mentioning.

"Well, I _am_ thankful," exclaimed Mark, beginning to pick up the debris
of plates and furniture.

"So am I," remarked the sailor, "thankful to think that I've got it over
at last--so easy too!"

"Why, what do you mean?"

"I means, doctor, that I've gone the whole round o' human possibilities
now--leastwise I think so--and am alive to tell it!  I've bin shot, an'
stabbed, an' drownded--all but--an' now I've bin blow'd up!"

"So's I, 'Ockins, so you needn't boast," remarked Ebony, as he tenderly
felt the place where his wool ought to have been, but where only a few
irregularly-shaped patches of scrub remained.

We need scarcely say that Mark Breezy did not allow this little
_contretemps_ to interfere with his plans.

"You'll have to work all night, both of you--that's your punishment for
disobeying orders--and without the solace of a pipe too," said Mark,
when order was somewhat restored and work resumed.  "The garden party,
you know, is fixed for to-morrow, and it's as much as our heads are
worth to disappoint the Queen of her expected amusements.  Time, tide,
and Ranavalona the First wait for no man!  I've got to go out for an
hour or so.  When I return I'll show you how to make stars and crackers
and red rain, etcetera."

"But I say, Doctor," asked Hockins, looking up from his work, "where are
the cases to hold all this here stuff?"

"Time enough for that when we want 'em.  I've got some fellows at work
on small ones, and there's a big one that will open the Madagaskite eyes
if there's virtue in saltpetre.  It's made of--ah! here it comes," he
added, as the door opened and two natives carried in a piece of
cast-iron pipe about six feet long and four inches in diameter.

"The pistol-barrel of a giant," exclaimed the seaman.

"A young cannon!" said Ebony.  "W'y, massa, you gwine to make a Roman
candle ob _dat_?"

He turned for an answer, but Mark had hastily quitted the house.

Encountering the Secretary in the court-yard, he took his arm and said,
"I want your help."

"Well, you shall have it.  But you are so mys--mys--what is it--sterious
about your leetil plans, that I fear my help is not useful."

"Oh! yes, it is, I want you to get me a paper from--I don't know who--
the proper officer, whoever he is, authorising me to take a gang of
convicts--four will do--to work for me."

"Good, you shall have it," returned the Secretary, with a laugh.  "I see
you are going to give us big surprises to-morrow."

"You are right, I am," said Mark, as the Secretary left him to execute
his mission.

Armed with an order, Mark left the palace and hurried through the steep
narrow streets of the town, until he reached a piece of road that was
being mended by four slaves in long chains.  That morning Mark had
observed that his friend the crocodile was one of the four.  Passing
close enough to attract the attention of the poor fellow, he whispered,
without stopping, "Mamba, expect me to-morrow."

This he had said in the native tongue, having by that time acquired a
few sentences, of which he made the best and most frequent use possible.

Going to the guard of these slaves, he presented his paper, and said
that he should come personally for them early in the morning.  Then he
returned to the laboratory and assisted his comrades to load the
firework cases with various kinds of "fire," stars, golden rain,
etcetera.  The young cannon especially was loaded, with a succession of
surprises, to the very muzzle, before midnight.

"Suppose he bust!" suggested Ebony, with a solemn visage.  "De Queen ob
Madigascur be blow'd into middle ob nixt week--hey?"

"I shall take precautions against that, Ebony.  In the first place, I'll
have it buried in the earth up to the muzzle, and, in the second place,
I'll not place it too near her Majesty."

When all was prepared the wearied triumvirate retired to rest, each to
dream of the subjects that lay nearest his heart and imagination at the
moment.  Hockins dreamed of tobacco-pipes and explosions; Mark dreamed
of freed slaves, thunder-struck queens, eloping lovers and terrible
consequences; and Ebony dreamed of incomprehensible situations, crashing
thunderbolts, and unimaginable coruscations of resplendent fire!



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

IN WHICH MARK CARRIES OUT HIS PLANS SUCCESSFULLY, AND POWERFULLY
ASTONISHES HIMSELF AS WELL AS EVERY ONE ELSE.

It was a brilliant lovely morning when the guests began to wend their
way to the suburban residence of Anosy, where Ranavalona was to hold her
garden party.

The people were very gay, somewhat excited, and very chatty, for they
were aware that the young English doctor had prepared something new and
surprising for the Queen's special benefit.

Just before the earliest of these guests, however, had set off to the
garden, our three heroes had passed down to that part of the road where
the four slaves were already at work with pick and shovel and clanking
chain.

It was a little after sunrise when Mark went up to the guard to relieve
him.

"Take care," said the guard, when about to leave, "that you keep the
slaves well out of the way when the Queen passes.  All the others in the
neighbourhood have been taken off long ago.  I was beginning to be
afraid you would not come in time."

"I understand," said Mark, who knew enough of the language, (and also of
the situation), to follow the drift of his meaning.

The guard thereupon turned, shouldered his musket, and went off,
apparently well pleased at the unexpected relief from duty.

While this little incident was occurring three of the slaves were
looking on with a slight expression of surprise in their sad faces.  The
fourth, Mamba, was standing in a dejected attitude before Hockins and
Ebony, holding a pick in one hand and his heavy chain in the other.

"Oh! man, I _am_ sorry to see you like this," said Hockins, extending
his brawny hand, "an' I does wish I could set you free--but you know I'm
as helpless as a babby in this matter."

Mamba dropped the pick and grasped the strong hand, but did not look up.
His heart was too full.  He did not understand the seaman's words, but
he understood the tone.  If he had looked up he would have seen that the
tears were hopping over Ebony's cheeks in spite of the powerful efforts
of that sympathetic soul to control them, and that he was unable to
speak because of a lump in his throat.

"Das most awrful!" he exclaimed at last.  "Oh, Mamby, I'd fight for you
like a wild-cat wid the cholera if that would do you any good, but it
would be ob no use."

Just then Mark came forward.  "Quick, follow me," he said, leading the
way to a thick clump of bushes behind a wall that bordered the road.
Here, quite concealed, yet able to peep through the leafy screen, he
ordered his party to sit down on a heap of stones and await orders.  He
then went to the top of a mound that lay immediately behind them.  From
this he could see the road winding along for about two or three hundred
yards.

Descending to his comrades he sat down beside them.

"You look anxious, doctor," remarked the seaman.

"I _am_ anxious," returned Mark, "I am on the point of making a great
venture, and the results may be serious.  But we are in God's hands;"
then, turning to Mamba, who looked at him with much curiosity and a
gleam of hope on his intelligent face, "I have hope of success and have
prayed for it."

Mamba, whose knowledge of English was very slight, shook his head and
looked puzzled.

"Have you forgotten, Mamba, the law of your land--that the criminal who
_looks_ upon the Queen is from that moment entitled to claim freedom?
Ranavalona is to pass along this road in less than half-an-hour."

Of course Mark said this in remarkably bad Malagasy, but Mamba
understood.  A gleam of intelligence shot into his swarthy visage, and
his chest began to heave with strong emotion as he glared rather than
gazed at the speaker.  Not less surprised were Hockins and Ebony when
Mark explained, for although they had indeed heard about the law in
question they had forgotten it.  After recovering the first shock, Mamba
turned quickly and pointed to his three comrades in suffering.

"Yes, yes--I understand," said Mark, "I shall set them free at the same
time.  Why not?  The risk will not be increased."

"A reg'lar jail-delivery!" murmured Hockins, as he drew in a long
breath.

"Hush! they come!" cried Mark, crouching so as the more effectually to
conceal himself, in which act he was quickly imitated by the others.

According to promise, Ranavalona had set out from her palace that
morning without her wonted display and ceremonial, with only a few of
her courtiers and a handful of troops around her.  She did not, however,
omit the scarlet umbrella of state, and it was this brilliant object
which had attracted Mark's attention.

When the procession had approached close to the place of concealment,
Mark whispered "Now!" and ran to the top of the mound before referred
to.  The four slaves followed him.  The summit gained they turned,
lifted up their arms and chains, _looked upon the Queen_, and gave vent
to the "oo!--oo!--oo!" which stands to the Malagasy in the place of a
cheer.  Recognising the importance of the event, Hockins and Ebony,
unable to restrain themselves, gave vent to a hearty British hurrah!

At this interruption, the bearers of the royal palanquin or chair
halted, the soldiers brought their muskets to the "ready," and a dark
frown overspread the features of the Queen.

Before the storm could burst, however, Mark descended the mound, went to
the side of the chair, knelt on one knee, and exclaimed--

"Forgive, madam--forgive me!"

"This, then, is _your_ doing," replied the Queen, sternly, through the
Secretary, who was at her side.

"It is, madam.  I am guilty.  If punishment must descend, I alone should
bear it."

There was something so modest, yet so fearless, in the youth's tone and
bearing, that the Queen's brows relaxed a little.

"But why did you dare to interfere with my laws?" demanded Ranavalona,
still angrily.

"I did not venture to interfere, madam," returned Mark, humbly, "I did
but use one law to neutralise another.  One of these slaves is my
friend.  I think he would be very useful in helping me to-night with my
magic fires!"

There was so much of cool presumption in thus quietly changing the
subject, with such charming modesty of demeanour, too, that the Queen
burst into a hearty laugh.

"Strike off his fetters," she said, and gave the signal to her bearers
to move on.

"Ay," said Mark to the Secretary in an authoritative tone, "and also
strike off the fetters of the other three!"

"You've got cheek for anything a'most, doctor," said the amazed and
amused seaman, as they fell into the procession, and followed the Queen
to the pleasure-garden.

Here extensive preparations had been made for spending the day in games
and festivities that far exceeded anything of the sort ever before
attempted in that land.  For Mark Breezy had not only an ingenious mind
to devise, but an organising spirit to make use of the services of
others in carrying out his plans.

When the guests were scattered about the grounds, after a good
breakfast, enjoying the delightful shade of the trees, tempting the
gold-fish in the lake with crumbs of food, and loitering among the
by-paths, the young doctor made himself almost ubiquitous.  Acting the
double part of manager of the games and amusements, and private
conspirator, he set an army of palace officials in motion, whom he
pledged to secrecy, and led each to suppose that he was the prime mover
in some plot that was to astonish and delight the Queen, in all which he
was ably assisted by the Secretary.  When he had thus stirred up, as it
were, an air of mystery and expectation, he led the Secretary, Hockins,
and Ebony, to a retired spot, and, bidding them sit down, gave them a
brief address.

"You see," he said, "the time has now come for me to explain to you more
fully, the plans and plots with which I have been engaged for some time
past.  And in doing so I would impress upon you, Mr Secretary, that I
am placing my life in your hands; but I do so without fear, believing
that you are a Christian and will not betray me."

Mark paused and looked full at the Secretary, who said, "But you must
remember that I can do nothing that will be disloyal to the Queen."

"If you were persecuted by the Queen and threatened with death, would
you consider it allowable to fly to the forests?"

"Yes--the Word of the Lord recommends that."

"Would you consider it right to assist a fellow-Christian to fly?"

"Truly I would!"

"Well then, you will assist me this night, for I have spoken to
Rafaravavy.  My Malagasy words are few, but love does not require many
words!  She has agreed to fly with Ravonino--"

"Have you seen Ravonino lately?" asked Hockins.

"No--I have not seen him _lately_."

"How, then, do you know he will be ready?"

"Because," said Mark, with a peculiar look, "I have been smitten with
his complaint, and know that it runs the same course and exhibits the
same phases in most men.  Let a young fellow see his intended bride
treated with cruelty, and you may be sure that, no matter what
difficulties may be in the way, he will hasten at the very first
