It was young Julien de Langeais, the kinsman of Lieutenant-Colonel
Hector St. Hilaire, and he too was unhurt.  The lads returned his grasp
warmly. They could not have kept from liking him had they tried, and
they certainly did not wish to try.

"You don't know how it rejoices me to see you," said Julien, speaking
very fast.  "I was sad! very sad!  Some of my best friends have
perished back there in those inhospitable Pennsylvania hills, and while
the band was playing it made me think of the homes they will never see
any more! Don't think I'm effusive and that I show grief too much, but
my heart has been very heavy!  Alas, for the brave lads!"

"Come, come, de Langeais," said Harry, putting his hand on his
shoulder. "You've no need to apologize for sorrow.  God knows we all
have enough of it, but a lot of us are still alive and here's an army
ready to fight again, whenever the enemy says the word."

"True!  True!" exclaimed de Langeais, changing at once from shadow to
sunshine.  "And when we're back in Virginia we'll turn our faces once
more to our foe!"

He took a step or two on the grass in time to the music which was now
that of a dance, and the brilliant beams of the setting sun showed a
face without a care.  Invincible youth and the invincible gayety of the
part of the South that was French were supreme again.  Dalton, looking
at him, shook his Presbyterian head.  Yet his eyes expressed admiration.

"I know your feelings," said Harry to the Virginian.

"Well, what are they?"

"You don't approve of de Langeais' lightness, which in your stern code
you would call levity, and yet you envy him possession of it.  You
don't think it's right to be joyous, without a care, and yet you know
it would be mighty pleasant.  You criticize de Langeais a little, but
you feel it would be a gorgeous thing to have that joyous spirit of
his."

Dalton laughed.

"You're pretty near the truth," he said.  "I haven't known de Langeais
so very long, but if he were to get killed I'd feel that I had lost a
younger brother."

"So would I."

Two immaculate youths, riding excellent horses, approached them, and
favored them with a long and supercilious stare.

"Can the large fair person be Lieutenant Kenton of the staff of the
commander-in-chief?" asked St. Clair.

"It can be and it is, although we did not think to see him again so
soon," replied Happy Tom Langdon, "and the other--I do not allude to de
Langeais--is that spruce and devout young man, Lieutenant George
Dalton, also of the staff of the commander-in-chief."

"Why do we find them in such humble plight, walking on weary feet in a
path beside the road?"

"For the most excellent reason in the world, Arthur."

"And what may that reason be, Tom?"

"Because at last they have come down to their proper station in life,
just as surely as water finds its level."

"But we'll not treat them too sternly.  We must remember that they also
serve who walk and wait."

But St. Clair and Langdon, their chaff over, gave them happy greeting,
and told them that the two colonels would be rejoiced to see them
again, if they could spare a few minutes before rejoining their
commander.

"And here is an orderly with both your horses," said St. Clair, "so,
under the circumstances, we'll sink our pride and let you ride with us."

De Langeais, with a cheerful farewell until the next day, returned to
his command, and Harry and Dalton, mounting, were in a few minutes
beside the Invincibles.  Colonel Leonidas Talbot and Lieutenant-Colonel
Hector St. Hilaire turned their horses from the road into the path and
saluted them with warmth.

"We caught a glimpse of you just after our departure, Harry," said
Colonel Talbot, "but we did not know what had happened since.  There is
always a certain amount of risk attending the removal of a great army."

"I am glad, Leonidas, that you used the word 'removal' to describe our
operations after our great victory at Gettysburg," said
Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire.  "I have been feeling about for the
right word or phrase myself, but you have found it first."

"Do you think it was a victory, sir?" asked Harry.

"Undoubtedly.  We have won several vast and brilliant triumphs, but
this is the greatest of them all.  We have gone far into the enemy's
country, where we have struck him a terrible blow, and now, of our own
choice--understand it is of our own choice--we withdraw and challenge
him to come and repeat on our own soil our exploit if he can.  It is
like a skilled and daring prize fighter who leaps back and laughingly
bids his foe come on.  Am I not right, Leonidas?"

"Neither Aristotle nor Plato was ever more right, Hector, old friend.
Usually there is more to a grave affair than appears upon the surface.
We could have gone on, after the battle, to Philadelphia, had we
chosen, but it was not alone a question of military might that General
Lee had to decide.  He was bound to give weight to some very subtle
considerations. You boys remember your Roman history, do you not?"

"Fragments of it, sir," replied Harry.

"Then you will recall that Hannibal, a fine general, to be named
worthily with our great Lee so far as military movements are concerned,
after famous victories over greatly superior numbers of Romans, went
into camp at Capua, crowded with beauty, wine and games, and the
soldiers became enervated.  Their fiber was weakened and their bodies
softened.  They were quicker to heed the call to a banquet than the
call to arms."

"Unless it was the arms of beauty, Leonidas."

"Well spoken, Hector.  The correction is most important, and I accept
it. But to take up again the main thread of my discourse.  General Lee
undoubtedly had the example of the Carthaginian army and Capua in mind
when he left Gettysburg and returned toward the South.  Philadelphia is
a great city, far larger and richer than any in our section.  It is
filled with magnificent houses, beautiful women, luxury of every
description, ease and softness.  Our brave lads, crowned with mighty
exploits and arriving there as conquerors, would have been received
with immense admiration, although we are official enemies.  And the
head of youth is easily turned.  The Army of Northern Virginia,
emerging from Philadelphia, to achieve the conquest of New York and
Boston would not be the army that it is to-day.  It would lack some of
that fire and dash, some of the extraordinary courage and tenacity
which have enabled it to surpass the deeds of the veterans of Hannibal
and Napoleon."

"But, sir, I've heard that the people of Philadelphia are mostly
Quakers, very sober in dress and manner."

"Harry, my lad, when you've lived as long as I have you will know that
a merry heart may beat beneath a plain brown dress, and that an ugly
hood cannot wholly hide a sweet and saucy face.  The girls--God bless
'em--have been the same in all lands since the world began, and will
continue so to the end.  While this war is on you boys cannot go
a-courting, either in the North or South.  Am I not right, Hector, old
friend?"

"Right, as always, Leonidas.  I perceive, though, that the sun is about
to set; not a new thing, I admit, but we must not delay our young
friends, when the general perhaps needs them."

"Well spoken again, Hector.  You are an unfailing fount of wisdom. Good
night, my brave lads.  Not many of the Invincibles are left, but every
one of them is a true friend of you both."

As they rode across the darkening fields Harry and Dalton knew that the
colonel spoke the truth about the Invincibles.

"I like a faith such as theirs," said Dalton.

"Yes, it can often turn defeat into real victory."

They quickly found the general's headquarters, and as usual, whenever
the weather permitted, he had made arrangements to sleep in the open
air, his blankets spread upon soft boughs.  Harry and Dalton, having
slept all day, would be on night duty, and after supper they sat at a
little distance, awaiting orders.

Coolness had come with the dark.  A good moon and swarms of bright
stars rode in the heavens, turning the skies to misty silver, and
softening the scars of the army, which now lay encamped over a great
space.  Lee was talking with Stuart, who evidently had just arrived
from a swift ride, as an orderly near by was holding his horse, covered
with foam.  The famous cavalryman was clothed in his gorgeous best.
His hat was heavy with gold braid, and the broad sash about his waist
was heavy with gold, also.  Dandy he was, but brilliant cavalryman and
great soldier too! Both friend and foe had said so.

Harry, sitting on the grass, with his back against a tree, watched the
two generals as they talked long and earnestly.  Now and then Stuart
nervously switched the tops of his own high riding boots with the
little whip that he carried, but the face of Lee, revealed clearly in
the near twilight, remained grave and impassive.

After a long while Stuart mounted and rode away, and Sherburne, who had
been sitting among the trees on the far side of the fire, came over and
joined Harry and Dalton.  He too was very grave.

"Do you know what has happened?" he said in a low tone to the two lads.

"Yes, there was a big battle at Gettysburg, and as we failed to win it
we're now retreating," replied Harry.

"That's true as far as it goes, but it's not all.  We've heard--and the
news is correct beyond a doubt--that Grant has taken Vicksburg and
Pemberton's army with it."

"Good God, Sherburne, it can't be so!"

"It shouldn't be so, but it is!  Oh, why did Pemberton let himself be
trapped in such a way!  A whole army of ours lost and our greatest
fortress in the West taken!  Why, the Yankee men-of-war can steam up
the Mississippi untouched, all the way from the Gulf to Minnesota."

Harry and Dalton were appalled, and, for a little while, were silent.

"I knew that man Grant would do something terrible to us," Harry said
at last.  "I've heard from my people in Kentucky what sort of a general
he is.  My father was at Shiloh, where we had a great victory on, but
Grant wouldn't admit it, and held on, until another Union army came up
and turned our victory into defeat.  My cousin, Dick Mason, has been
with Grant a lot, and I used to get a letter from him now and then,
even if he is in the Yankee army.  He says that when Grant takes hold
of a thing he never lets go, and that he'll win the war for his side."

"Your cousin may be right about Grant's hanging on," said Dalton with
sudden angry emphasis, "but neither he nor anybody else will win this
war for the Yankees.  We've lost Vicksburg, and an army with it, and
we've retreated from Gettysburg, with enough men fallen there to make
another army, but they'll never break through the iron front of Lee and
his veterans."

"Hope you're right," said Sherburne, "but I'm off now.  I'm in the
saddle all night with my troop.  We've got to watch the Yankee cavalry.
Custer and Pleasanton and the rest of them have learned to ride in a
way that won't let Jeb Stuart himself do any nodding."

He cantered off and the lads sat under the trees, ready for possible
orders.  They saw the fire die.  They heard the murmur of the camp
sink. Lee lay down on his bed of boughs, other generals withdrew to
similar beds or to tents, and the two boys still sat under the trees,
waiting and watching, and never knowing at what moment they would be
needed.




CHAPTER II

THE NORTHERN SPY


But the night remained very quiet.  Harry and Dalton, growing tired of
sitting, walked about the camp, and looked again to their horses,
which, saddled and bridled, were nevertheless allowed to nip the grass
as best they could at the end of their lariats.  The last embers of the
fire went out, but the moon and stars remained bright, and they saw
dimly the sleeping forms of Lee and his generals.  Harry, who had seen
nothing strange in Meade's lack of pursuit, now wondered at it.  Surely
when the news of Vicksburg came the exultant Army of the Potomac would
follow, and try to deliver a crushing blow.

It was revealed to him as he stood silent in the moonlight that a gulf
had suddenly yawned before the South.  The slash of Grant's sword in
the West had been terrible, and the wound that it made could not be
cured easily.  And the Army of Northern Virginia had not only failed in
its supreme attempt, but a great river now flowed between it and
Virginia. If the Northern leaders, gathering courage anew, should hurl
their masses upon Lee's retreating force, neither skill nor courage
might avail to save them.  He suddenly beheld the situation in all its
desperation; he shivered from head to foot.

Dalton saw the muscles of Harry's face quivering, and he noticed a
pallor that came for an instant.

"I understand," he said.  "I had thought of it already.  If a Northern
general like Lee or Stonewall Jackson were behind us we might never get
back across the Potomac.  It's somewhat the same position that we were
in after Antietam."

"But we've no Stonewall Jackson now to help us."

Again that lump rose in Harry's throat.  The vision of the sober figure
on Little Sorrel, leading his brigades to victory, came before him, but
it was a vision only.

"It's strange that we've not come in contact with their scouts or
cavalry," he said.  "In that fight with Pleasanton we saw what horsemen
they've become, and a force of some kind must be hanging on our rear."

"If it's there, Sherburne and his troop will find it."

"I think I can detect signs of the enemy now," said Harry, putting his
glasses to his eyes.  "See that hill far behind us.  Can't you catch
the gleam of lights on it?"

"I think I can," replied Dalton, also using glasses.  "Four lights are
there, and they are winking, doubtless to lights on another hill too
far away for us to see."

"It shows that the enemy at least is watching, and that while we may
retreat unattacked it will not be unobserved.  Hark! do you hear that,
George?  It's rifle shots, isn't it?"

"Yes, and a lot of 'em, but they're a long distance away.  I don't
think we could hear 'em at all if it were not night time."

"But it means something!  There they go again!  I believe it's a heavy
skirmish and it's in the direction in which Sherburne rode."

"The general's up.  It's likely that one of us will be sent to see what
it's all about."

General Lee and his whole staff had risen and were listening
attentively. The faint sound of many shots still came, and then a
sharper, more penetrating crash, as if light field guns were at work.
The commander beckoned to Harry.

"Ride toward it," he said briefly, "and return with a report as soon as
you can."

Harry touched his cap, sprang upon his horse and galloped away.  He
knew that other messengers would be dispatched also, but, as he had
been sent first, he wished to arrive first.  He found a path among the
trees along which he could make good speed, and, keeping his mind fixed
on the firing, he sped forward.

Thousands of soldiers lay asleep in the woods and fields on either side
of him, but the thud of the horse's hoofs awakened few of them.  Nor
did the firing disturb them.  They had fought a great battle three days
long, and then after a tense day of waiting under arms, they had
marched hard. What to them was the noise made by an affair of outposts,
when they had heard so long the firing of a hundred and fifty thousand
rifles and three or four hundred big guns?  Not one in a hundred stood
up to see.

The country grew rougher, and Harry was compelled to draw his horse
down to a walk.  But the firing, a half-mile or more ahead, maintained
its volume, and as he approached through thick underbrush, being able
to find no other way, he dismounted and led his horse.  Presently he
saw beads of flame appearing among the bushes, seen a moment, then gone
like a firefly, and as he went further he heard voices.  He had no
doubt that it was the Southern pickets in the undergrowth, and, calling
softly, he received confirmatory replies.

A rifleman, a tall, slender fellow in ragged butternut, appeared beside
him, and, recognizing Harry's near-gray uniform as that of an officer,
said:

"They're dismounted cavalry on the other side of a creek that runs
along over there among the bushes.  I don't think they mean any real
attack. They expect to sting us a little an' find out what we're about."

"Seems likely to me too.  They aren't strong enough, of course, for an
attempt at rushing us.  What troops are in here in the woods on our
side?"

"Captain Sherburne's cavalry, sir.  They're a bit to our right, an'
they're dismounted too.  You'll find the captain himself on a little
knoll about a hundred yards away."

"Thanks," said Harry, and leading his horse he reached the knoll, to
find the rifleman's statement correct.  Sherburne was kneeling behind
some bushes, trying with the aid of glasses and moonlight to pick out
the enemy.

"That you, Harry?" he said, glancing back.

"Yes, Captain.  The general has sent me to see what you and the rest of
you noisy fellows are doing."
