relief, he heard the friendly voice, and saw the good-natured face, of
his cousin Ben.

"Come back; come behind these people," said Ben, "and put on my
great-coat; here it is for you."

Right glad was Hal to cover his disgraced uniform with the rough
great-coat, which he had formerly despised. He pulled the stained,
drooping cockade out of his unfortunate hat; and he was now sufficiently
recovered from his vexation to give an intelligible account of his
accident to his uncle and Patty, who anxiously inquired what had
detained him so long, and what had been the matter. In the midst of the
history of his disaster, he was just proving to Patty that his taking
the hat-band to spin his top had nothing to do with his misfortune; and
he was at the same time endeavoring to refute his uncle's opinion, that
the waste of the whipcord that tied the parcel, was the original cause
of all his evils, when he was summoned to try his skill with his
_famous_ bow.

"My hands are numbed; I can scarcely feel," said he, rubbing them, and
blowing upon the ends of his fingers.

"Come, come," cried young Sweepstakes, "I'm within one inch of the mark;
who'll go nearer, I should like to see. Shoot away, Hal; but first,
understand our laws: we settled them before you came on the green. You
are to have three shots, with your own bow and your own arrows; and
nobody's to borrow or lend under pretence of other bows being better or
worse, or under any pretence. Do you hear, Hal?"

This young gentleman had good reasons for being so strict in these laws,
as he had observed that none of his companions had such an excellent bow
as he had provided for himself. Some of the boys had forgotten to bring
more than one arrow with them, and by his cunning regulation, that each
person should shoot with his own arrows, many had lost one or two of
their shots.

"You are a lucky fellow; you have your three arrows," said young
Sweepstakes. "Come, we can't wait whilst you rub your fingers,
man--shoot away."

Hal was rather surprised at the asperity with which his friend spoke. He
little knew how easily acquaintances, who call themselves friends, can
change, when their interest comes, in the slightest degree, in
competition with their friendship. Hurried by his impatient rival, and
with his hand so much benumbed that he could scarcely feel how to fix
the arrow in the string, he drew the bow. The arrow was within a quarter
of an inch of Master Sweepstakes' mark, which was the nearest that had
yet been hit. Hal seized his second arrow. "If I have any luck," said he
but just as he pronounced the word _luck_ and as he bent his bow, the
string broke in two, and the bow fell from his hands.

"There, it's all over with you," cried Master Sweepstakes, with a
triumphant laugh.

"Here's my bow for him and welcome," said Ben.

"No, no, Sir; that is not fair; that's against the regulation. You may
shoot with your own bow, if you choose it, or you may not, just as you
think proper but you must not lend it, Sir."

It was now Ben's turn to make his trial. His first arrow was not
successful. His second was exactly as near as Hal's first.

"You have but one more," said Master Sweepstakes: "now for it!"

Ben, before he ventured his last arrow prudently examined the string of
his bow; and as he pulled it to try its strength, it cracked.

Master Sweepstakes clapped his hands with loud exultations, and
insulting laughter. But his laughter ceased when our provident hero
calmly drew from his pocket an excellent piece of whipcord.

"The everlasting whipcord, I declare!" exclaimed Hal, when he saw that
it was the very same that had tied up the parcel.

"Yes," said Ben, as he fastened it to his bow, "I put it into my pocket
to-day, on purpose, because I thought I might happen to want it."

He drew his bow the third and last time.

"O Papa," cried little Patty, as his arrow hit the mark, "it's the
nearest, is not it the nearest?"

Master Sweepstakes, with anxiety, examined the hit. There could be no
doubt. Ben was victorious! The bow, the prize bow, was now delivered to
him; and Hal, as he looked at the whipcord, exclaimed, "How _lucky_ this
whipcord has been to you, Ben!"

"It is _lucky_ perhaps you mean, that he took care of it," said Mr.
Gresham.

"Ay," said Hal, "very true; he might well say, 'Waste not, want not'; it
is a good thing to have two strings to one's bow."



382

        Only a few of those who have written
        immediately for children have produced work
        distinguished by the same high artistic
        qualities found in the work of writers for
        readers of mature minds. Of these few one is
        Mrs. Juliana Horatia Ewing (1841-1885). Edmund
        Gosse has said that of the numerous English
        authors who have written successfully on or for
        children only two "have shown a clear
        recollection of the mind of healthy childhood
        itself. . . . Mrs. Ewing in prose and Mr.
        Stevenson in verse have sat down with them
        without disturbing their fancies, and have
        looked into the world of 'make-believe' with
        the children's own eyes." They might lead, he
        thinks, "a long romp in the attic when nurse
        was out shopping, and not a child in the house
        should know that a grown-up person had been
        there." This is very high praise indeed and it
        suggests the reason for the immense popularity
        of "Jackanapes," "The Story of a Short Life,"
        "Daddy Darwin's Dovecot,"
        "Lob-Lie-by-the-Fire," "Mrs. Overtheway's
        Remembrances," and many another of the stories
        that delighted young readers when they first
        appeared in the pages of _Aunt Judy's
        Magazine_. The preeminence of "Jackanapes"
        among these many splendid stories may at least
        partly be accounted for by the fact that it
        grew out of the heat of a great conviction
        about life. Early in 1879 the news reached
        England of the death of the Prince Imperial of
        France, who fell while serving with the English
        forces in South Africa during the war with the
        Zulus. Perhaps the present-day reader needs to
        be reminded that the Prince Imperial was the
        only son of the ex-Empress Eugenie, who, with
        her husband Napoleon III had taken refuge in
        England after the loss of the French throne at
        the close of the Franco-Prussian War in 1871.
        Napoleon's death shortly after made the young
        prince a central figure in all considerations
        of the possible recouping of the fortunes of
        the Napoleonic dynasty. Full of the spirit of
        adventure and courage, he had joined the
        English forces to learn something of the
        soldier's profession. Unexpectedly ambushed,
        the prince was killed while the young officer
        who had been assigned to look after him escaped
        unhurt. There immediately ensued a wide
        discussion of the action of this young officer
        in saving himself and, apparently, leaving the
        Prince to his fate. Now, Mrs. Ewing was a
        soldier's wife and believed in the standard of
        honor which would naturally be reflected in
        military circles on such an incident. But
        hearing the rule of "each man for himself" so
        often emphasized in other circles, she was
        moved to write the protest against such a view
        which forms the central motive in "Jackanapes."
        There is no argument, however, no undue
        moralizing. With the finest art she embodies
        that central doctrine in a great faith that the
        saving of a man's life lies in his readiness to
        lose it. It was Satan who said, "Skin for skin,
        yea, all that a man hath will he give for his
        life." The pathos in the story is naturally
        inherent in the situation and is never
        emphasized for its own sake. Mrs. Ewing was
        always a thoroughly conscientious artist. She
        believed that the laws of artistic composition
        laid down by Ruskin in his _Elements of
        Drawing_ applied with equal force to
        literature. "For example," says her brother in
        an article on her methods, "in the story of
        'Jackanapes' the law of Principality is very
        clearly demonstrated. Jackanapes is the one
        important figure. The doting aunt, the
        weak-kneed but faithful Tony Johnson, the
        irascible general, the punctilious postman, the
        loyal boy-trumpeter, the silent major, and the
        ever-dear, faithful, loving Lollo,--all and
        each of them conspire with one consent to
        reflect forth the glory and beauty of the
        noble, generous, recklessly brave, and gently
        tender spirit of the hero 'Jackanapes.'" As to
        the laws of repetition and contrast: "Again and
        again is the village green introduced to the
        imagination. It is a picture of eternal peace
        and quietness, amid the tragedies of our
        ever-changing life which are enacted around
        it."


JACKANAPES

JULIANA HORATIA EWING


CHAPTER I

        Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
        Last eve in Beauty's circle proudly gay,
        The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
        The morn the marshaling in arms--the day
        Battle's magnificently stern array!
        The thunder-clouds close o'er it, which when rent
        The earth is covered thick with other clay,
        Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
        Rider and horse,--friend, foe,--in one red burial blent.

        Their praise is hymn'd by loftier harps than mine:
        Yet one would I select from that proud throng.

               *       *       *       *       *

            To thee, to thousands, of whom each
        And one and all a ghastly gap did make
        In his own kind and kindred, whom to teach
        Forgetfulness were mercy for their sake;
        The Archangel's trump, not glory's, must awake
        Those whom they thirst for.
                                               --BYRON

Two Donkeys and the Geese lived on the Green, and all other residents of
any social standing lived in houses round it. The houses had no names.
Everybody's address was "The Green," but the Postman and the people of
the place knew where each family lived. As to the rest of the world,
what has one to do with the rest of the world when he is safe at home on
his own Goose Green? Moreover, if a stranger did come on any lawful
business, he might ask his way at the shop. Most of the inhabitants were
long-lived, early deaths (like that of the little Miss Jessamine) being
exceptional; and most of the old people were proud of their age,
especially the sexton, who would be ninety-nine come Martinmas, and
whose father remembered a man who had carried arrows, as a boy, for the
battle of Flodden Field. The Gray Goose and the big Miss Jessamine were
the only elderly persons who kept their ages secret. Indeed, Miss
Jessamine never mentioned any one's age, or recalled the exact year in
which anything had happened. She said that she had been taught that it
was bad manners to do so "in a mixed assembly." The Gray Goose also
avoided dates; but this was partly because her brain, though
intelligent, was not mathematical, and computation was beyond her. She
never got farther than "last Michaelmas," "the Michaelmas before that,"
and "the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas before that." After this her
head, which was small, became confused, and she said, "Ga, ga!" and
changed the subject.

But she remembered the little Miss Jessamine, the Miss Jessamine with
the "conspicuous hair." Her aunt, the big Miss Jessamine, said it was
her only fault. The hair was clean, was abundant, was glossy; but do
what you would with it, it never looked quite like other people's. And
at church, after Saturday night's wash, it shone like the best brass
fender after a spring cleaning. In short, it was conspicuous, which does
not become a young woman, especially in church.

Those were worrying times altogether, and the Green was used for strange
purposes. A political meeting was held on it with the village Cobbler in
the chair, and a speaker who came by stage-coach from the town, where
they had wrecked the bakers' shops, and discussed the price of bread. He
came a second time by stage; but the people had heard something about
him in the meanwhile, and they did not keep him on the Green. They took
him to the pond and tried to make him swim, which he could not do, and
the whole affair was very disturbing to all quiet and peaceable fowls.
After which another man came, and preached sermons on the Green, and a
great many people went to hear him; for those were "trying times," and
folk ran hither and thither for comfort. And then what did they do but
drill the ploughboys on the Green, to get them ready to fight the
French, and teach them the goose-step! However, that came to an end at
last; for Bony was sent to St. Helena, and the ploughboys were sent back
to the plough.

Everybody lived in fear of Bony in those days, especially the naughty
children, who were kept in order during the day by threats of "Bony
shall have you," and who had nightmares about him in the dark. They
thought he was an Ogre in a cocked hat. The Gray Goose thought he was a
Fox, and that all the men of England were going out in red coats to hunt
him. It was no use to argue the point; for she had a very small head,
and when one idea got into it there was no room for another.

Besides, the Gray Goose never saw Bony, nor did the children, which
rather spoilt the terror of him, so that the Black Captain became more
effective as a Bogy with hardened offenders. The Gray Goose remembered
_his_ coming to the place perfectly. What he came for she did not
pretend to know. It was all part and parcel of the war and bad times. He
was called the Black Captain, partly because of himself and partly
because of his wonderful black mare. Strange stories were afloat of how
far and how fast that mare could go when her master's hand was on her
mane and he whispered in her ear. Indeed, some people thought we might
reckon ourselves very lucky if we were not out of the frying-pan into
the fire, and had not got a certain well-known Gentleman of the Road to
protect us against the French. But that, of course, made him none the
less useful to the Johnsons' Nurse when the little Miss Johnsons were
naughty.

"You leave off crying this minnit, Miss Jane, or I'll give you right
away to that horrid wicked officer. Jemima! just look out o' the windy,
if you please, and see if the Black Cap'n's a-coming with his horse to
carry away Miss Jane."

And there, sure enough, the Black Captain strode by, with his sword
clattering as if it did not know whose head to cut off first. But he did
not call for Miss Jane that time. He went on to the Green, where he came
so suddenly upon the eldest Master Johnson, sitting in a puddle on
purpose, in his new nankeen skeleton suit, that the young gentleman
thought judgment had overtaken him at last, and abandoned himself to the
howlings of despair. His howls were redoubled when he was clutched from
behind and swung over the Black Captain's shoulder; but in five minutes
his tears were stanched, and he was playing with the officer's
accoutrements. All of which the Gray Goose saw with her own eyes, and
heard afterwards that that bad boy had been whining to go back to the
Black Captain ever since, which showed how hardened he was, and that
nobody but Bonaparte himself could be expected to do him any good.

But those were "trying times." It was bad enough when the pickle of a
large and respectable family cried for the Black Captain; when it came
to the little Miss Jessamine crying for him, one felt that the sooner
the French landed and had done with it, the better.

The big Miss Jessamine's objection to him was that he was a soldier; and
this prejudice was shared by all the Green. "A soldier," as the speaker
from the town had observed, "is a bloodthirsty, unsettled sort of a
rascal, that the peaceable, home-loving, bread-winning citizen can never
conscientiously look on as a brother till he has beaten his sword into a
ploughshare and his spear into a pruning-hook."

On the other hand, there was some truth in what the Postman (an old
soldier) said in reply,--that the sword has to cut a way for us out of
many a scrape into which our bread-winners get us when they drive their
ploughshares into fallows that don't belong to them. Indeed, whilst our
most peaceful citizens were prosperous chiefly by means of cotton, of
sugar, and of the rise and fall of the money-market (not to speak of
such salable matters as opium, firearms, and "black ivory"),
disturbances were apt to arise in India, Africa, and other outlandish
parts, where the fathers of our domestic race were making fortunes for
their families. And for that matter, even on the Green, we did not wish
the military to leave us in the lurch, so long as there was any fear
that the French were coming.[3]

To let the Black Captain have little Miss Jessamine, however, was
another matter. Her aunt would not hear of it; and then, to crown all,
it appeared that the Captain's father did not think the young lady good
enough for his son. Never was any affair more clearly brought to a
conclusion.

But those were "trying times"; and one moonlight night, when the Gray
Goose was sound asleep upon one leg, the Green was rudely shaken under
her by the thud of a horse's feet. "Ga, ga!" said she, putting down the
other leg and running away.

By the time she returned to her place not a thing was to be seen or
heard. The horse had passed like a shot. But next day there was hurrying
and scurrying and cackling at a very early hour, all about the white
house with the black beams, where Miss Jessamine lived. And when the sun
was so low and the shadows so long on the grass that the Gray Goose felt
ready to run away at the sight of her own neck, little Miss Jane Johnson
and her "particular friend" Clarinda sat under the big oak tree on the
Green, and Jane pinched Clarinda's little finger till she found that she
could keep a secret, and then she told her in confidence that she had
heard from Nurse and Jemima that Miss Jessamine's niece had been a very
naughty girl, and that that horrid wicked officer had come for her on
his black horse and carried her right away.

"Will she never come back?" asked Clarinda.

"Oh, no!" said Jane, decidedly. "Bony never brings people back."

"Not never no more?" sobbed Clarinda, for she was weak-minded, and could
not bear to think that Bony never, never let naughty people go home
again.

Next day Jane had heard more.

"He has taken her to a Green."

"A Goose Green?" asked Clarinda.

"No. A Gretna Green. Don't ask so many questions, child," said Jane,
who, having no more to tell, gave herself airs.

Jane was wrong on one point. Miss Jessamine's niece did come back, and
she and her husband were forgiven. The Gray Goose remembered it well; it
was Michaelmas-tide, the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas before the
Michaelmas--but, ga, ga! What does the date matter? It was autumn,
harvest-time, and everybody was so busy prophesying and praying about
the crops, that the young couple wandered through the lanes, and got
blackberries for Miss Jessamine's celebrated crab and blackberry jam,
and made guys of themselves with bryony wreaths, and not a soul troubled
his head about them, except the children and the Postman. The children
dogged the Black Captain's footsteps (his bubble reputation as an Ogre
having burst) clamoring for a ride on the black mare. And the Postman
would go somewhat out of his postal way to catch the Captain's dark eye,
and show that he had not forgotten how to salute an officer.

But they were "trying times." One afternoon the black mare was stepping
gently up and down the grass, with her head at her master's shoulder,
and as many children crowded on to her silky back as if she had been an
elephant in a menagerie; and the next afternoon she carried him away,
sword and _sabre-tache_ clattering war music at her side, and the old
Postman waiting for them, rigid with salutation, at the four
cross-roads.

War and bad times! It was a hard winter; and the big Miss Jessamine and
the little Miss Jessamine (but she was Mrs. Black-Captain now) lived
very economically, that they might help their poorer neighbors. They
neither entertained nor went into company; but the young lady always
went up the village as far as the _George and Dragon_, for air and
exercise when the London Mail[4] came in.

One day (it was a day in the following June) it came in earlier than
usual, and the young lady was not there to meet it.

But a crowd soon gathered round the _George and Dragon_, gaping to see
the Mail Coach dressed with flowers and oak-leaves, and the guard
wearing a laurel wreath over and above his royal livery. The ribbons
that decked the horses were stained and flecked with the warmth and foam
of the pace at which they had come, for they had pressed on with the
news of Victory.

Miss Jessamine was sitting with her niece under the oak tree on the
Green, when the Postman put a newspaper silently into her hand. Her
niece turned quickly,--

"Is there news?"

"Don't agitate yourself, my dear," said her aunt. "I will read it aloud,
and then we can enjoy it together; a far more comfortable method, my
love, than when you go up the village, and come home out of breath,
having snatched half the news as you run."

"I am all attention, dear aunt," said the little lady, clasping her
hands tightly on her lap.

Then Miss Jessamine read aloud,--she was proud of her reading,--and the
old soldier stood at attention behind her, with such a blending of pride
and pity on his face as it was strange to see:--

        "Downing Street
         _June_ 22, 1815, 1 A. M."

"That's one in the morning," gasped the Postman; "beg your pardon, mum."

But though he apologized, he could not refrain from echoing here and
there a weighty word: "Glorious victory,"--"Two hundred pieces of
artillery,"--"Immense quantity of ammunition,"--and so forth.

        "The loss of the British Army upon this
        occasion has unfortunately been most severe. It
        had not been possible to make out a return of
        the killed and wounded when Major Percy left
        headquarters. The names of the officers killed
        and wounded, as far as they can be collected,
        are annexed.
                                      I have the honor--"

"The list, aunt! Read the list!"

"My love--my darling--let us go in and--"

"No. Now! now!"

To one thing the supremely afflicted are entitled in their sorrow,--to
be obeyed; and yet it is the last kindness that people commonly will do
them. But Miss Jessamine did. Steadying her voice, as best she might,
she read on; and the old soldier stood bareheaded to hear that first
Roll of the Dead at Waterloo, which began with the Duke of Brunswick and
ended with Ensign Brown.[5] Five-and-thirty British Captains fell asleep
that day on the Bed of Honor, and the Black Captain slept among them.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are killed and wounded by war of whom no returns reach Downing
Street.

Three days later, the Captain's wife had joined him, and Miss Jessamine
was kneeling by the cradle of their orphan son, a purple-red morsel of
humanity with conspicuously golden hair.

"Will he live, Doctor?"

"Live? God bless my soul, ma'am. Look at him! The young Jackanapes!"


CHAPTER II

        And he wandered away and away
        With Nature, the dear old Nurse.
                                   --LONGFELLOW

The Gray Goose remembered quite well the year that Jackanapes began to
walk, for it was the year that the speckled hen for the first time in
all her motherly life got out of patience when she was sitting. She had
been rather proud of the eggs,--they were unusually large,--but she
never felt quite comfortable on them, and whether it was because she
used to get cramp and go off the nest, or because the season was bad, or
what, she never could tell; but every egg was addled but one, and the
one that did hatch gave her more trouble than any chick she had ever
reared.

It was a fine, downy, bright yellow little thing, but it had a monstrous
big nose and feet, and such an ungainly walk as she knew no other
instance of in her well-bred and high-stepping family. And as to
behavior, it was not that it was either quarrelsome or moping, but
simply unlike the rest. When the other chicks hopped and cheeped on the
Green about their mother's feet, this solitary yellow brat went waddling
off on its own responsibility, and do or cluck what the speckled hen
would, it went to play in the pond.

It was off one day as usual, and the hen was fussing and fuming after
it, when the Postman, going to deliver a letter at Miss Jessamine's
door, was nearly knocked over by the good lady herself, who, bursting
out of the house with her cap just off and her bonnet just not on, fell
into his arms, crying,--

"Baby! Baby! Jackanapes! Jackanapes!"

If the Postman loved anything on earth, he loved the Captain's
yellow-haired child; so, propping Miss Jessamine against her own
door-post, he followed the direction of her trembling fingers and made
for the Green.

Jackanapes had had the start of the Postman by nearly ten minutes. The
world--the round green world with an oak tree on it--was just becoming
very interesting to him. He had tried, vigorously but ineffectually, to
mount a passing pig the last time he was taken out walking; but then he
was encumbered with a nurse. Now he was his own master, and might, by
courage and energy, become the master of that delightful downy, dumpy,
yellow thing that was bobbing along over the green grass in front of
him. Forward! Charge! He aimed well, and grabbed it, but only to feel
the delicious downiness and dumpiness slipping through his fingers as he
fell upon his face. "Quawk!" said the yellow thing, and wabbled off
sideways. It was this oblique movement that enabled Jackanapes to come
up with it, for it was bound for the Pond, and therefore obliged to come
back into line. He failed again from top-heaviness, and his prey escaped
sideways as before, and, as before, lost ground in getting back to the
direct road to the Pond.

And at the Pond the Postman found them both,--one yellow thing rocking
safely on the ripples that lie beyond duckweed, and the other washing
his draggled frock with tears because he too had tried to sit upon the
Pond and it wouldn't hold him.


CHAPTER III

          If studious, copie fair what time hath blurred,
        Redeem truth from his jawes: if souldier,
        Chase brave employments with a naked sword
        Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
        If they dare try, a glorious life, or grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

        In brief, acquit thee bravely; play the man.
        Look not on pleasures as they come, but go.
        Defer not the least vertue: life's poore span
        Make not an ell, by trifling in thy woe.
        If thou do ill, the joy fades, not the pains.
        If well: the pain doth fade, the joy remains.
                                          --GEORGE HERBERT

Young Mrs. Johnson, who was a mother of many, hardly knew which to pity
more,--Miss Jessamine for having her little ways and her antimacassars
rumpled by a young Jackanapes, or the boy himself for being brought up
by an old maid.

Oddly enough, she would probably have pitied neither, had Jackanapes
been a girl. (One is so apt to think that what works smoothest, works to
the highest ends, having no patience for the results of friction.) That
father in God who bade the young men to be pure and the maidens brave,
greatly disturbed a member of his congregation, who thought that the
great preacher had made a slip of the tongue.

"That the girls should have purity, and the boys courage, is what you
would say, good father?"

"Nature has done that," was the reply; "I meant what I said."

In good sooth, a young maid is all the better for learning some robuster
virtues than maidenliness and not to move the antimacassars; and the
robuster virtues require some fresh air and freedom. As, on the other
hand, Jackanapes (who had a boy's full share of the little beast and the
young monkey in his natural composition) was none the worse, at his
tender years, for learning some maidenliness,--so far as maidenliness
means decency, pity, unselfishness, and pretty behavior.

And it is due to him to say that he was an obedient boy, and a boy whose
word could be depended on, long before his grandfather the General came
to live at the Green.

He was obedient; that is, he did what his great-aunt told him. But--oh,
dear! oh, dear!--the pranks he played, which it had never entered into
her head to forbid!

It was when he had just been put into skeletons (frocks never suited
him) that he became very friendly with Master Tony Johnson, a younger
brother of the young gentleman who sat in the puddle on purpose. Tony
was not enterprising, and Jackanapes led him by the nose. One summer's
evening they were out late, and Miss Jessamine was becoming anxious,
when Jackanapes presented himself with a ghastly face all besmirched
with tears. He was unusually subdued.

"I'm afraid," he sobbed,--"if you please, I'm very much afraid that Tony
Johnson's dying in the churchyard."

Miss Jessamine was just beginning to be distracted, when she smelt
Jackanapes.

"You naughty, naughty boys! Do you mean to tell me that you've been
smoking?"

"Not pipes," urged Jackanapes; "upon my honor, aunty, not pipes. Only
cigars like Mr. Johnson's! and only made of brown paper with a very,
very little tobacco from the shop inside them."

Whereupon Miss Jessamine sent a servant to the churchyard, who found
Tony Johnson lying on a tombstone, very sick, and having ceased to
entertain any hopes of his own recovery.

If it could be possible that any "unpleasantness" could arise between
two such amiable neighbors as Miss Jessamine and Mrs. Johnson, and if
the still more incredible paradox can be that ladies may differ over a
point on which they are agreed, that point was the admitted fact that
Tony Johnson was "delicate"; and the difference lay chiefly in this:
Mrs. Johnson said that Tony was delicate,--meaning that he was more
finely strung, more sensitive, a properer subject for pampering and
petting, than Jackanapes, and that, consequently, Jackanapes was to
blame for leading Tony into scrapes which resulted in his being chilled,
frightened, or (most frequently) sick. But when Miss Jessamine said that
Tony Johnson was delicate, she meant that he was more puling, less
manly, and less healthily brought up than Jackanapes, who, when they got
into mischief together, was certainly not to blame because his friend
could not get wet, sit a kicking donkey, ride in the giddy-go-round,
bear the noise of a cracker, or smoke brown paper with impunity, as he
could.

Not that there was ever the slightest quarrel between the ladies. It
never even came near it, except the day after Tony had been so very
sick with riding Bucephalus on the giddy-go-round. Mrs. Johnson had
explained to Miss Jessamine that the reason Tony was so easily upset was
the unusual sensitiveness (as a doctor had explained it to her) of the
nervous centers in her family--"Fiddlestick!" So Mrs. Johnson understood
Miss Jessamine to say; but it appeared that she only said
"Treaclestick!" which is quite another thing, and of which Tony was
undoubtedly fond.

It was at the Fair that Tony was made ill by riding on Bucephalus. Once
a year the Goose Green became the scene of a carnival. First of all,
carts and caravans were rumbling up all along, day and night. Jackanapes
could hear them as he lay in bed, and could hardly sleep for speculating
what booths and whirligigs he should find fairly established when he and
his dog Spitfire went out after breakfast. As a matter of fact, he
seldom had to wait so long for news of the Fair. The Postman knew the
window out of which Jackanapes's yellow head would come, and was ready
with his report.

"Royal Theayter, Master Jackanapes, in the old place, but be careful o'
them seats, sir; they're rickettier than ever. Two sweets and a ginger
beer under the Oak tree, and the Flying Boats is just a-coming along the
road."

No doubt it was partly because he had already suffered severely in the
Flying Boats that Tony collapsed so quickly in the giddy-go-round. He
only mounted Bucephalus (who was spotted, and had no tail) because
Jackanapes urged him, and held out the ingenious hope that the
round-and-round feeling would very likely cure the up-and-down
sensation. It did not, however, and Tony tumbled off during the first
revolution.

Jackanapes was not absolutely free from qualms; but having once mounted
the Black Prince, he stuck to him as a horseman should. During the first
round he waved his hat, and observed with some concern that the Black
Prince had lost an ear since last Fair; at the second, he looked a
little pale, but sat upright, though somewhat unnecessarily rigid; at
the third round he shut his eyes. During the fourth his hat fell off,
and he clasped his horse's neck. By the fifth he had laid his yellow
head against the Black Prince's mane, and so clung anyhow till the
hobby-horses stopped, when the proprietor assisted him to alight, and he
sat down rather suddenly and said he had enjoyed it very much.

The Gray Goose always ran away at the first approach of the caravans,
and never came back to the Green till there was nothing left of the Fair
but footmarks and oyster-shells. Running away was her pet principle; the
only system, she maintained, by which you can live long and easily and
lose nothing. If you run away when you see danger, you can come back
when all is safe. Run quickly, return slowly, hold your head high, and
gabble as loud as you can, and you'll preserve the respect of the Goose
Green to a peaceful old age. Why should you struggle and get hurt, if
you can lower your head and swerve, and not lose a feather?! Why in the
world should any one spoil the pleasure of life, or risk his skin, if he
can help it?

        "'What's the use?'
        Said the Goose."

Before answering which one might have to consider what world, which
life, and whether his skin were a goose-skin; but the Gray Goose's head
would never have held all that.

Grass soon grows over footprints, and the village children took the
oyster-shells to trim their gardens with; but the year after Tony rode
Bucephalus there lingered another relic of Fair-time in which Jackanapes
was deeply interested. "The Green" proper was originally only part of a
straggling common, which in its turn merged into some wilder waste land
where gypsies sometimes squatted if the authorities would allow them,
especially after the annual Fair. And it was after the Fair that
Jackanapes, out rambling by himself, was knocked over by the Gypsy's son
riding the Gypsy's red-haired pony at breakneck pace across the common.

Jackanapes got up and shook himself, none the worse except for being
heels over head in love with the red-haired pony. What a rate he went
at! How he spurned the ground with his nimble feet! How his red coat
shone in the sunshine! And what bright eyes peeped out of his dark
forelock as it was blown by the wind!

The Gypsy boy had had a fright, and he was willing enough to reward
Jackanapes for not having been hurt, by consenting to let him have a
ride.

"Do you mean to kill the little fine gentleman, and swing us all on the
gibbet, you rascal?" screamed the Gypsy mother, who came up just as
Jackanapes and the pony set off.

"He would get on," replied her son. "It'll not kill him. He'll fall on
his yellow head, and it's as tough as a cocoanut."

But Jackanapes did not fall. He stuck to the red-haired pony as he had
stuck to the hobby-horse; but, oh, how different the delight of this
wild gallop with flesh and blood! Just as his legs were beginning to
feel as if he did not feel them, the Gypsy boy cried, "Lollo!" Round
went the pony so unceremoniously that with as little ceremony Jackanapes
clung to his neck; and he did not properly recover himself before Lollo
stopped with a jerk at the place where they had started.

"Is his name Lollo?" asked Jackanapes, his hand lingering in the wiry
mane.

"Yes."

"What does Lollo mean?"

"Red."

"Is Lollo your pony?"

"No. My father's." And the Gypsy boy led Lollo away.

At the first opportunity Jackanapes stole away again to the common. This
time he saw the Gypsy father, smoking a dirty pipe.

"Lollo is your pony, isn't he?" said Jackanapes.

"Yes."

"He's a very nice one."

"He's a racer."

"You don't want to sell him, do you?"

"Fifteen pounds," said the Gypsy father; and Jackanapes sighed and went
home again. That very afternoon he and Tony rode the two donkeys; and
Tony managed to get thrown, and even Jackanapes's donkey kicked. But it
was jolting, clumsy work after the elastic swiftness and the dainty
mischief of the red-haired pony.

A few days later, Miss Jessamine spoke very seriously to Jackanapes. She
was a good deal agitated as she told him that his grandfather the
General was coming to the Green, and that he must be on his very best
behavior during the visit. If it had been feasible to leave off calling
him Jackanapes and to get used to his baptismal name of Theodore before
the day after to-morrow (when the General was due), it would have been
satisfactory. But Miss Jessamine feared it would be impossible in
practice, and she had scruples about it on principle. It would not seem
quite truthful, although she had always most fully intended that he
should be called Theodore when he had outgrown the ridiculous
appropriateness of his nickname. The fact was that he had not outgrown
it, but he must take care to remember who was meant when his grandfather
said Theodore.

Indeed, for that matter, he must take care all along.

"You are apt to be giddy, Jackanapes," said Miss Jessamine.

"Yes, aunt," said Jackanapes, thinking of the hobby-horses.

"You are a good boy, Jackanapes. Thank God, I can tell your grandfather
that. An obedient boy, an honorable boy, and a kind-hearted boy. But you
are--in short, you _are_ a Boy, Jackanapes. And I hope," added Miss
Jessamine, desperate with the results of experience, "that the General
knows that Boys will be Boys."

What mischief could be foreseen, Jackanapes promised to guard against.
He was to keep his clothes and his hands clean, to look over his
catechism, not to put sticky things in his pockets, to keep that hair of
his smooth ("It's the wind that blows it, aunty," said Jackanapes--"I'll
send by the coach for some bear's-grease," said Miss Jessamine, tying a
knot in her pocket-handkerchief), not to burst in at the parlor door,
not to talk at the top of his voice, not to crumple his Sunday frill,
and to sit quite quiet during the sermon, to be sure to say "sir" to the
General, to be careful about rubbing his shoes on the door-mat, and to
bring his lesson-books to his aunt at once that she might iron down the
dogs'-ears. The General arrived; and for the first day all went well,
except that Jackanapes's hair was as wild as usual, for the hair-dresser
had no bear's-grease left. He began to feel more at ease with his
grandfather, and disposed to talk confidentially with him, as he did
with the Postman. All that the General felt, it would take too long to
tell; but the result was the same. He was disposed to talk
confidentially with Jackanapes.

"Mons'ous pretty place this," he said, looking out of the lattice on to
the Green, where the grass was vivid with sunset and the shadows were
long and peaceful.

"You should see it in Fair-week, sir," said Jackanapes, shaking his
yellow mop, and leaning back in his one of the two Chippendale
arm-chairs in which they sat.

"A fine time that, eh?" said the General, with a twinkle in his left eye
(the other was glass).

Jackanapes shook his hair once more. "I enjoyed this last one the best
of all," he said. "I'd so much money."

"By George, it's not a common complaint in these bad times. How much had
ye?"

"I'd two shillings. A new shilling aunty gave me, and elevenpence I had
saved up, and a penny from the Postman,--_sir_!" added Jackanapes with a
jerk, having forgotten it.

"And how did ye spend it,--_sir_?" inquired the General.

Jackanapes spread his ten fingers on the arms of his chair, and shut his
eyes that he might count the more conscientiously.

"Watch-stand for aunty, threepence. Trumpet for myself, twopence; that's
fivepence. Gingernuts for Tony, twopence, and a mug with a Grenadier on
for the Postman, fourpence; that's elevenpence. Shooting-gallery a
penny; that's a shilling. Giddy-go-round, a penny; that's one and a
penny. Treating Tony, one and twopence. Flying Boats (Tony paid for
himself), a penny, one and threepence. Shooting-gallery again, one and
fourpence; Fat Woman a penny, one and fivepence. Giddy-go-round again,
one and sixpence. Shooting-gallery, one and sevenpence. Treating Tony,
and then he wouldn't shoot, so I did, one and eightpence. Living
Skeleton, a penny--no, Tony treated me, the Living Skeleton doesn't
count. Skittles, a penny, one and ninepence. Mermaid (but when we got
inside she was dead), a penny, one and tenpence. Theater, a penny
(Priscilla Partington, or the Green Lane Murder. A beautiful young lady,
sir, with pink cheeks and a real pistol); that's one and elevenpence.
Ginger beer, a penny (I _was_ so thirsty!), two shillings. And then the
Shooting-gallery man gave me a turn for nothing, because, he said, I was
a real gentleman, and spent my money like a man."

"So you do, sir, so you do!" cried the General. "Egad, sir, you spent it
like a prince. And now I suppose you've not got a penny in your pocket?"

"Yes, I have," said Jackanapes. "Two pennies. They are saving up." And
Jackanapes jingled them with his hand.

"You don't want money except at Fair-times, I suppose?" said the
General.

Jackanapes shook his mop.

"If I could have as much as I want, I should know what to buy," said he.

"And how much do you want, if you could get it?"

"Wait a minute, sir, till I think what twopence from fifteen pounds
leaves. Two from nothing you can't, but borrow twelve. Two from twelve,
ten, and carry one. Please remember ten, sir, when I ask you. One from
nothing you can't, borrow twenty. One from twenty, nineteen, and carry
one. One from fifteen, fourteen. Fourteen pounds nineteen and--what did
I tell you to remember?"

"Ten," said the General.

"Fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence, then, is what I want,"
said Jackanapes.

"God bless my soul! what for?"

"To buy Lollo with. Lollo means red, sir. The Gypsy's red-haired pony,
sir. Oh, he _is_ beautiful! You should see his coat in the sunshine! You
should see his mane! You should see his tail! Such little feet, sir, and
they go like lightning! Such a dear face, too, and eyes like a mouse!
But he's a racer, and the Gypsy wants fifteen pounds for him."

"If he's a racer you couldn't ride him. Could you?"

"No--o, sir, but I can stick to him. I did the other day."

"The dooce you did! Well, I'm fond of riding myself; and if the beast is
as good as you say, he might suit me."

"You're too tall for Lollo, I think," said Jackanapes, measuring his
grandfather with his eye.

"I can double up my legs, I suppose. We'll have a look at him
to-morrow."

"Don't you weigh a good deal?" asked Jackanapes.

"Chiefly waistcoats," said the General, slapping the breast of his
military frock-coat. "We'll have the little racer on the Green the first
thing in the morning. Glad you mentioned it, grandson; glad you
mentioned it."

The General was as good as his word. Next morning the Gypsy and Lollo,
Miss Jessamine, Jackanapes and his grandfather and his dog Spitfire,
were all gathered at one end of the Green in a group, which so aroused
the innocent curiosity of Mrs. Johnson, as she saw it from one of her
upper windows, that she and the children took their early promenade
rather earlier than usual. The General talked to the Gypsy, and
Jackanapes fondled Lollo's mane, and did not know whether he should be
more glad or miserable if his grandfather bought him.

"Jackanapes!"

"Yes, sir!"

"I've bought Lollo, but I believe you were right. He hardly stands high
enough for me. If you can ride him to the other end of the Green, I'll
give him to you."

How Jackanapes tumbled on to Lollo's back he never knew. He had just
gathered up the reins when the Gypsy father took him by the arm.

"If you want to make Lollo go fast, my little gentleman--"

"_I_ can make him go!" said Jackanapes; and drawing from his pocket the
trumpet he had bought in the Fair, he blew a blast both loud and shrill.

Away went Lollo, and away went Jackanapes's hat. His golden hair flew
out, an aureole from which his cheeks shone red and distended with
trumpeting. Away went Spitfire, mad with the rapture of the race and the
wind in his silky ears. Away went the geese, the cocks, the hens, and
the whole family of Johnson. Lucy clung to her mamma, Jane saved Emily
by the gathers of her gown, and Tony saved himself by a somersault.

The Gray Goose was just returning when Jackanapes and Lollo rode back,
Spitfire panting behind.

"Good, my little gentleman, good!" said the Gypsy. "You were born to the
saddle. You've the flat thigh, the strong knee, the wiry back, and the
light caressing hand; all you want is to learn the whisper. Come here!"

"What was that dirty fellow talking about, grandson?" asked the General.

"I can't tell you, sir. It's a secret."

They were sitting in the window again, in the two Chippendale
arm-chairs, the General devouring every line of his grandson's face,
with strange spasms crossing his own.

"You must love your aunt very much, Jackanapes?"

"I do, sir," said Jackanapes, warmly.

"And whom do you love next best to your aunt?"

The ties of blood were pressing very strongly on the General himself,
and perhaps he thought of Lollo. But love is not bought in a day, even
with fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence. Jackanapes
answered quite readily, "The Postman."

"Why the Postman?"

"He knew my father," said Jackanapes, "and he tells me about him and
about his black mare. My father was a soldier, a brave soldier. He died
at Waterloo. When I grow up I want to be a soldier too."

"So you shall, my boy; so you shall."

"Thank you, grandfather. Aunty doesn't want me to be a soldier, for fear
of being killed."

"Bless my life! Would she have you get into a feather-bed and stay
there? Why, you might be killed by a thunderbolt if you were a
butter-merchant!"

"So I might. I shall tell her so. What a funny fellow you are, sir! I
say, do you think my father knew the Gypsy's secret? The Postman says he
used to whisper to his black mare."

"Your father was taught to ride, as a child, by one of those horsemen of
the East who swoop and dart and wheel about a plain like swallows in
autumn. Grandson! love me a little too. I can tell you more about your
father than the Postman can."

"I do love you," said Jackanapes. "Before you came I was frightened. I'd
no notion you were so nice."

"Love me always, boy, whatever I do or leave undone. And--God help
me!--whatever you do or leave undone, I'll love you. There shall never
be a cloud between us for a day; no, sir, not for an hour. We're
imperfect enough, all of us--we needn't be so bitter; and life is
uncertain enough at its safest--we needn't waste its opportunities. God
bless my soul! Here sit I, after a dozen battles and some of the worst
climates in the world, and by yonder lych gate lies your mother, who
didn't move five miles, I suppose, from your aunt's apron-strings,--dead
in her teens; my golden-haired daughter, whom I never saw!"

Jackanapes was terribly troubled.

"Don't cry, grandfather," he pleaded, his own blue eyes round with
tears. "I will love you very much, and I will try to be very good. But I
should like to be a soldier."

"You shall, my boy; you shall. You've more claims for a commission than
you know of. Cavalry, I suppose; eh, ye young Jackanapes? Well, well; if
you live to be an honor to your country, this old heart shall grow young
again with pride for you; and if you die in the service of your
country--egad, sir, it can but break for ye!"

And beating the region which he said was all waistcoats, as if they
stifled him, the old man got up and strode out on to the Green.


CHAPTER IV

_Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends._--John 15:13.

Twenty and odd years later the Gray Goose was still alive, and in full
possession of her faculties, such as they were. She lived slowly and
carefully, and she lived long. So did Miss Jessamine; but the General
was dead.

He had lived on the Green for many years, during which he and the
Postman saluted each other with a punctiliousness that it almost drilled
one to witness. He would have completely spoiled Jackanapes if Miss
Jessamine's conscience would have let him; otherwise he somewhat
dragooned his neighbors, and was as positive about parish matters as a
rate-payer about the army. A stormy-tempered, tender-hearted soldier,
irritable with the suffering of wounds of which he never spoke, whom all
the village followed to his grave with tears.

The General's death was a great shock to Miss Jessamine, and her nephew
stayed with her for some little time after the funeral. Then he was
obliged to join his regiment, which was ordered abroad.

One effect of the conquest which the General had gained over the
affections of the village was a considerable abatement of the popular
prejudice against "the military." Indeed, the village was now somewhat
importantly represented in the army. There was the General himself, and
the Postman, and the Black Captain's tablet in the church, and
Jackanapes, and Tony Johnson, and a Trumpeter.

Tony Johnson had no more natural taste for fighting than for riding, but
he was as devoted as ever to Jackanapes. And that was how it came about
that Mr. Johnson bought him a commission in the same cavalry regiment
that the General's grandson (whose commission had been given him by the
Iron Duke) was in; and that he was quite content to be the butt of the
mess where Jackanapes was the hero; and that when Jackanapes wrote home
to Miss Jessamine, Tony wrote with the same purpose to his
mother,--namely, to demand her congratulations that they were on active
service at last, and were ordered to the front. And he added a
postscript, to the effect that she could have no idea how popular
Jackanapes was, nor how splendidly he rode the wonderful red charger
which he had named after his old friend Lollo.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sound Retire!"

A Boy Trumpeter, grave with the weight of responsibilities and
accoutrements beyond his years, and stained so that his own mother would
not have known him, with the sweat and dust of battle, did as he was
bid; and then, pushing his trumpet pettishly aside, adjusted his weary
legs for the hundredth time to the horse which was a world too big for
him, and muttering, "'Tain't a pretty tune," tried to see something of
this his first engagement before it came to an end.

Being literally in the thick of it, he could hardly have seen less or
known less of what happened in that particular skirmish if he had been
at home in England. For many good reasons,--including dust and smoke,
and that what attention he dared distract from his commanding officer
was pretty well absorbed by keeping his hard-mouthed troop-horse in
hand, under pain of execration by his neighbors in the melee. By and by,
when the newspapers came out, if he could get a look at one before it
was thumbed to bits, he would learn that the enemy had appeared from
ambush in overwhelming numbers, and that orders had been given to fall
back, which was done slowly and in good order, the men fighting as they
retired.

Born and bred on the Goose Green, the youngest of Mr. Johnson's
gardener's numerous offspring, the boy had given his family no "peace"
till they let him "go for a soldier" with Master Tony and Master
Jackanapes. They consented at last, with more tears than they shed when
an elder son was sent to jail for poaching; and the boy was perfectly
happy in his life, and full of _esprit de corps_. It was this which had
been wounded by having to sound retreat for "the young gentlemen's
regiment," the first time he served with it before the enemy; and he was
also harassed by having completely lost sight of Master Tony. There had
been some hard fighting before the backward movement began, and he had
caught sight of him once, but not since. On the other hand, all the
pulses of his village pride had been stirred by one or two visions of
Master Jackanapes whirling about on his wonderful horse. He had been
easy to distinguish, since an eccentric blow had bared his head without
hurting it; for his close golden mop of hair gleamed in the hot sunshine
as brightly as the steel of the sword flashing round it.

Of the missiles that fell pretty thickly, the Boy Trumpeter did not take
much notice. First, one can't attend to everything, and his hands were
full; secondly, one gets used to anything; thirdly, experience soon
teaches one, in spite of proverbs, how very few bullets find their
billet. Far more unnerving is the mere suspicion of fear or even of
anxiety in the human mass around you. The Boy was beginning to wonder if
there were any dark reason for the increasing pressure, and whether they
would be allowed to move back more quickly, when the smoke in front
lifted for a moment, and he could see the plain, and the enemy's line
some two hundred yards away. And across the the plain between them, he
saw Master Jackanapes galloping alone at the top of Lollo's speed, their
faces to the enemy, his golden head at Lollo's ear.

But at this moment noise and smoke seemed to burst out on every side;
the officer shouted to him to sound Retire! and between trumpeting and
bumping about on his horse, he saw and heard no more of the incidents of
his first battle.

Tony Johnson was always unlucky with horses, from the days of the
giddy-go-round onwards. On this day--of all days in the year--his own
horse was on the sick list, and he had to ride an inferior,
ill-conditioned beast, and fell off that, at the very moment when it was
matter of life or death to be able to ride away. The horse fell on him,
but struggled up again, and Tony managed to keep hold of it. It was in
trying to remount that he discovered, by helplessness and anguish, that
one of his legs was crushed and broken, and that no feat of which he was
master would get him into the saddle. Not able even to stand alone,
awkwardly, agonizingly, unable to mount his restive horse, his life was
yet so strong within him! And on one side of him rolled the dust and
smoke-cloud of his advancing foes, and on the other, that which covered
his retreating friends.

He turned one piteous gaze after them, with a bitter twinge, not of
reproach, but of loneliness; and then, dragging himself up by the side
of his horse, he turned the other way and drew out his pistol, and
waited for the end. Whether he waited seconds or minutes he never knew,
before some one gripped him by the arm.

"_Jackanapes! God bless you!_ It's my left leg. If you _could_ get me
on--"

It was like Tony's luck that his pistol went off at his horse's tail,
and made it plunge; but Jackanapes threw him across the saddle.

"Hold on anyhow, and stick your spur in. I'll lead him. Keep your head
down; they're firing high."

And Jackanapes laid his head down--to Lollo's ear.

It was when they were fairly off, that a sudden upspringing of the enemy
in all directions had made it necessary to change the gradual retirement
of our force into as rapid a retreat as possible. And when Jackanapes
became aware of this, and felt the lagging and swerving of Tony's horse,
he began to wish he had thrown his friend across his own saddle and left
their lives to Lollo.

When Tony became aware of it, several things came into his head: 1. That
the dangers of their ride for life were now more than doubled; 2. That
if Jackanapes and Lollo were not burdened with him they would
undoubtedly escape; 3. That Jackanapes's life was infinitely valuable,
and his--Tony's--was not; 4. That this, if he could seize it, was the
supremest of all the moments in which he had tried to assume the virtues
which Jackanapes had by nature; and that if he could be courageous and
unselfish now--

He caught at his own reins and spoke very loud,--

"Jackanapes! It won't do. You and Lollo must go on. Tell the fellows I
gave you back to them with all my heart. Jackanapes, if you love me,
leave me!"

There was a daffodil light over the evening sky in front of them, and it
shone strangely on Jackanapes's hair and face. He turned with an odd
look in his eyes that a vainer man than Tony Johnson might have taken
for brotherly pride. Then he shook his mop, and laughed at him,

"_Leave you?_ To save my skin? No, Tony, not to save my soul!"


CHAPTER V

        MR. VALIANT _summoned. His Will. His last
        Words._

        Then said he, "I am going to my Father's. . . . My
        Sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my
        Pilgrimage, and my Courage and Skill to him
        that can get it." . . . And as he went down
        deeper, he said, "Grave, where is thy Victory?"

        So he passed over, and all the Trumpets sounded
        for him on the other side.
                                BUNYAN, _Pilgrim's Progress_


Coming out of a hospital tent, at headquarters, the surgeon cannoned
against, and rebounded from, another officer,--a sallow man, not young,
with a face worn more by ungentle experiences than by age, with weary
eyes that kept their own counsel, iron-gray hair, and a moustache that
was as if a raven had laid its wing across his lips and sealed them.

"Well?"

"Beg pardon, Major. Didn't see you. Oh, compound fracture and bruises.
But it's all right; he'll pull through."

"Thank God."

It was probably an involuntary expression; for prayer and praise were
not much in the Major's line, as a jerk of the surgeon's head would have
betrayed to an observer. He was a bright little man, with his feelings
showing all over him, but with gallantry and contempt of death enough
for both sides of his profession; who took a cool head, a white
handkerchief, and a case of instruments, where other men went hot
blooded with weapons, and who was the biggest gossip, male or female, of
the regiment. Not even the major's taciturnity daunted him.

"Didn't think he'd as much pluck about him as he has. He'll do all right
if he doesn't fret himself into a fever about poor Jackanapes."

"Whom are you talking about?" asked the Major, hoarsely.

"Young Johnson. He--"

"What about Jackanapes?"

"Don't you know? Sad business. Rode back for Johnson, and brought him
in; but, monstrous ill-luck, hit as they rode. Left lung--"

"Will he recover?"

"No. Sad business. What a frame--what limbs--what health--and what good
looks! Finest young fellow--"

"Where is he?"

"In his own tent," said the surgeon, sadly.

The Major wheeled and left him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I do anything else for you?"

"Nothing, thank you. Except--Major! I wish I could get you to appreciate
Johnson."

"This is not an easy moment, Jackanapes."

"Let me tell you, sir--_he_ never will--that if he could have driven me
from him, he would be lying yonder at this moment, and I should be safe
and sound."

The Major laid his hand over his mouth, as if to keep back a wish he
would have been ashamed to utter.

"I've known old Tony from a child. He's a fool on impulse, a good man
and a gentleman in principle. And he acts on principle, which it's not
every--Some water, please! Thank you, sir. It's very hot, and yet one's
feet get uncommonly cold. Oh, thank you, thank you. He's no fire-eater,
but he has a trained conscience and a tender heart, and he'll do his
duty when a braver and more selfish man might fail you. But he wants
encouragement; and when I'm gone--"

"He shall have encouragement. You have my word for it. Can I do nothing
else?"

"Yes, Major. A favor."

"Thank you, Jackanapes."

"Be Lollo's master, and love him as well as you can. He's used to it."

"Wouldn't you rather Johnson had him?"

The blue eyes twinkled in spite of mortal pain.

"Tony _rides_ on principle, Major. His legs are bolsters, and will be to
the end of the chapter. I couldn't insult dear Lollo; but if you don't
care--"

"While I live--which will be longer than I desire or deserve--Lollo
shall want nothing but--you. I have too little tenderness for--My dear
boy, you're faint. Can you spare me for a moment?"

"No, stay--Major!"

"What? What?"

"My head drifts so--if you wouldn't mind."

"Yes! Yes!"

"Say a prayer by me. Out loud, please; I am getting deaf."

"My dearest Jackanapes--my dear boy--"

"One of the Church Prayers--Parade Service, you know."

"I see. But the fact is--God forgive me, Jackanapes!--I'm a very
different sort of fellow to some of you youngsters. Look here, let me
fetch--"

But Jackanapes's hand was in his, and it would not let go.

There was a brief and bitter silence.

"'Pon my soul I can only remember the little one at the end."

"Please," whispered Jackanapes.

Pressed by the conviction that what little he could do it was his duty
to do, the Major, kneeling, bared his head, and spoke loudly, clearly,
and very reverently,--

"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ--"

Jackanapes moved his left hand to his right one, which still held the
Major's.

"The love of God--"

And with that--Jackanapes died.


CHAPTER VI

        Und so ist der blaue Himmel groesser als jedes
        Gewoelk darin, und dauerhafter dazu.
                                      --JEAN PAUL RICHTER

Jackanapes's death was sad news for the Goose Green, a sorrow just
qualified by honorable pride in his gallantry and devotion. Only the
Cobbler dissented; but that was his way. He said he saw nothing in it
but foolhardiness and vainglory. They might both have been killed, as
easy as not; and then where would ye have been? A man's life was a man's
life, and one life was as good as another. No one would catch him
throwing his away. And, for that matter, Mrs. Johnson could spare a
child a great deal better than Miss Jessamine.

But the parson preached Jackanapes's funeral sermon on the text,
"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake shall find it"; and all the village went and wept to
hear him.

Nor did Miss Jessamine see her loss from the Cobbler's point of view. On
the contrary, Mrs. Johnson said she never to her dying day should
forget how, when she went to condole with her, the old lady came
forward, with gentlewomanly self-control, and kissed her, and thanked
God that her dear nephew's effort had been blessed with success, and
that this sad war had made no gap in her friend's large and happy
home-circle.

"But she's a noble, unselfish woman," sobbed Mrs. Johnson, "and she
taught Jackanapes to be the same; and that's how it is that my Tony has
been spared to me. And it must be sheer goodness in Miss Jessamine, for
what can she know of a mother's feelings? And I'm sure most people seem
to think that if you've a large family you don't know one from another
any more than they do, and that a lot of children are like a lot of
store apples,--if one's taken it won't be missed."

Lollo--the first Lollo, the Gypsy's Lollo--very aged, draws Miss
Jessamine's bath-chair slowly up and down the Goose Green in the
sunshine.

The Ex-postman walks beside him, which Lollo tolerates to the level of
his shoulder. If the Postman advances any nearer to his head, Lollo
quickens his pace; and were the Postman to persist in the injudicious
attempt, there is, as Miss Jessamine says, no knowing what might happen.

In the opinion of the Goose Green, Miss Jessamine has borne her troubles
"wonderfully." Indeed, to-day, some of the less delicate and less
intimate of those who see everything from the upper windows say (well,
behind her back) that "the old lady seems quite lively with her military
beaux again."

The meaning of this is, that Captain Johnson is leaning over one side of
her chair, while by the other bends a brother officer who is staying
with him, and who has manifested an extraordinary interest in Lollo. He
bends lower and lower, and Miss Jessamine calls to the Postman to
request Lollo to be kind enough to stop, while she is fumbling for
something which always hangs by her side, and has got entangled with her
spectacles.

It is a twopenny trumpet, bought years ago in the village fair; and over
it she and Captain Johnson tell, as best they can, between them, the
story of Jackanapes's ride across the Goose Green; and how he won
Lollo--the Gypsy's Lollo--the racer Lollo--dear Lollo--faithful
Lollo--Lollo the never vanquished--Lollo the tender servant of his old
mistress. And Lollo's ears twitch at every mention of his name.

Their hearer does not speak, but he never moves his eyes from the
trumpet; and when the tale is told, he lifts Miss Jessamine's hand and
presses his heavy black moustache in silence to her trembling fingers.

The sun, setting gently to his rest, embroiders the somber foliage of
the oak tree with threads of gold. The Gray Goose is sensible of an
atmosphere of repose, and puts up one leg for the night. The grass glows
with a more vivid green, and, in answer to a ringing call from Tony, his
sisters fluttering over the daisies in pale-hued muslins, come out of
their ever-open door, like pretty pigeons from a dovecote.

And if the good gossips' eyes do not deceive them, all the Miss Johnsons
and both the officers go wandering off into the lanes, where bryony
wreaths still twine about the brambles.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sorrowful story, and ending badly?

Nay, Jackanapes, for the End is not yet.

A life wasted that might have been useful?

Men who have died for men, in all ages, forgive the thought!

There is a heritage of heroic example and noble obligation, not reckoned
in the Wealth of Nations, but essential to a nation's life; the contempt
of which, in any people, may, not slowly, mean even its commercial fall.

Very sweet are the uses of prosperity, the harvests of peace and
progress, the fostering sunshine of health and happiness, and length of
days in the land.

But there be things--oh, sons of what has deserved the name of Great
Britain, forget it not!--"the good of" which and "the use of" which are
beyond all calculation of worldly goods and earthly uses: things such as
Love, and Honor, and the Soul of Man, which cannot be bought with a
price, and which do not die with death. And they who would fain live
happily ever after should not leave these things out of the lessons of
their lives.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] "The political men declare war, and generally for commercial
interests; but when the nation is thus embroiled with its neighbors, the
soldier . . . draws the sword at the command of his country. . . . One
word as to thy comparison of military and commercial persons. What manner
of men be they who have supplied the Caffres with the firearms and
ammunition to maintain their savage and deplorable wars? Assuredly they
are not military. . . . Cease then, if thou wouldst be counted among the
just, to vilify soldiers" (W. Napier, _Lieutenant-General_, November,
1851). [Author's Note.]

[4] The Mail Coach it was that distributed over the face of the land,
like the opening of apocalyptic vials, the heart-shaking news of
Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of Waterloo. . . . The grandest
chapter of our experience, within the whole Mail-Coach service, was on
those occasions when we went down from London with the news of Victory.
Five years of life it was worth paying down for the privilege of an
outside place.--(De Quincey.) [Author's Note.]

[5] "Brunswick's fated chieftain" fell at Quatre Bras the day before
Waterloo; but this first (very imperfect) list, as it appeared in the
newspapers of the day, did begin with his name and end with that of an
Ensign Brown. [Author's Note.]



383

        The story that follows was first published in
        _Harper's Round Table_, June 25, 1895, as the
        winner of first place in a short story contest
        conducted by that periodical. The author at
        that time was seventeen years of age. It seems
        quite fitting that a writer beginning his
        career in such fashion should finally write the
        most scholarly historical and critical account
        of the development of the short story, _The
        Short Story in English_ (1909). Mr. Canby was
        for several years assistant professor of
        English in the Sheffield Scientific School,
        Yale University, and is now the editor of _The
        Literary Review_, the literary section of the
        New York _Evening Post_. ("Betty's Ride" is
        used here by special arrangement with the
        author.)


BETTY'S RIDE: A TALE OF THE REVOLUTION

HENRY S. CANBY

The sun was just rising and showering his first rays on the gambrel-roof
and solid stone walls of a house surrounded by a magnificent grove of
walnuts, and overlooking one of the beautiful valleys so common in
southeastern Pennsylvania. Close by the house, and shaded by the same
great trees, stood a low building of the most severe type, whose
time-stained bricks and timbers green with moss told its age without the
aid of the half-obliterated inscription over the door, which read,
"Built A. D. 1720." One familiar with the country would have pronounced
it without hesitation a Quaker meeting-house, dating back almost to the
time of William Penn.

When Ezra Dale had become the leader of the little band of Quakers which
gathered here every First Day, he had built the house under the
walnut-trees, and had taken his wife Ann and his little daughter Betty
to live there. That was in 1770, seven years earlier, and before war had
wrought sorrow and desolation throughout the country.

The sun rose higher, and just as his beams touched the broad stone step
in front of the house the door opened, and Ann Dale, a sweet-faced woman
in the plain Quaker garb, came out, followed by Betty, a little
blue-eyed Quakeress of twelve years, with a gleam of spirit in her face
which ill became her plain dress.

"Betty," said her mother, as they walked out towards the great
horse-block by the road-side, "thee must keep house to-day. Friend
Robert has just sent thy father word that the redcoats have not crossed
the Brandywine since Third Day last, and thy father and I will ride to
Chester to-day, that there may be other than corn-cakes and bacon for
the friends who come to us after monthly meeting. Mind thee keeps near
the house and finishes thy sampler."

"Yes, mother," said Betty; "but will thee not come home early? I shall
miss thee sadly."

Just then Ezra appeared, wearing his collarless Quaker coat, and leading
a horse saddled with a great pillion, into which Ann laboriously climbed
after her husband, and with a final warning and "farewell" to Betty,
clasped him tightly around the waist lest she should be jolted off as
they jogged down the rough and winding lane into the broad Chester
highway.

Friend Ann had many reasons for fearing to leave Betty alone for a whole
day, and she looked back anxiously at her waving "farewell" with her
little bonnet.

It was a troublous time.

The Revolution was at its height, and the British, who had a short time
before disembarked their army near Elkton, Maryland, were now encamped
near White Clay Creek, while Washington occupied the country bordering
on the Brandywine. His force, however, was small compared to the extent
of the country to be guarded, and bands of the British sometimes crossed
the Brandywine and foraged in the fertile counties of Delaware and
Chester. As Betty's father, although a Quaker and a non-combatant, was
known to be a patriot, he had to suffer the fortunes of war with his
neighbors.

Thus it was with many forebodings that Betty's mother watched the slight
figure under the spreading branches of a great chestnut, which seemed to
rustle its innumerable leaves as if to promise protection to the little
maid. However, the sun shone brightly, the swallows chirped as they
circled overhead, and nothing seemed farther off than battle and
bloodshed.

Betty skipped merrily into the house, and snatching up some broken
corn-cake left from the morning meal, ran lightly out to the paddock
where Daisy was kept, her own horse, which she had helped to raise from
a colt.

"Come thee here, Daisy," she said, as she seated herself on the top rail
of the mossy snake fence. "Come thee here, and thee shall have some of
thy mistress's corn-cake. Ah! I thought thee would like it. Now go and
eat all thee can of this good grass, for if the wicked redcoats come
again, thee will not have another chance, I can tell thee."

Daisy whinnied and trotted off, while Betty, feeding the few chickens
(sadly reduced in numbers by numerous raids), returned to the house, and
getting her sampler, sat down under a walnut-tree to sew on the stint
which her mother had given her.

All was quiet save the chattering of the squirrels overhead and the
drowsy hum of the bees, when from around the curve in the road she heard
a shot; then another nearer, and then a voice shouting commands, and the
thud of hoof-beats farther down the valley. She jumped up with a
startled cry: "The redcoats! The redcoats! Oh, what shall I do!"

Just then the foremost of a scattered band of soldiers, their buff and
blue uniforms and ill-assorted arms showing them to be Americans,
appeared in full flight around the curve in the road, and springing over
the fence, dashed across the pasture straight for the meeting-house.
Through the broad gateway they poured, and forcing open the door of the
meeting-house, rushed within and began to barricade the windows.

Their leader paused while his men passed in, and seeing Betty, came
quickly towards her.

"What do you here, child?" he said, hurriedly. "Go quickly, before the
British reach us, and tell your father that, Quaker or no Quaker, he
shall ride to Washington, on the Brandywine, and tell him that we, but
one hundred men, are besieged by three hundred British cavalry in
Chichester Meeting-house, with but little powder left. Tell him to make
all haste to us."

Turning, he hastened into the meeting-house, now converted into a fort,
and as the doors closed behind him Betty saw a black muzzle protruding
from every window.

With trembling fingers the little maid picked up her sampler, and as the
thud of horses' hoofs grew louder and louder, she ran fearfully into the
house, locked and bolted the massive door, and then flying up the broad
stairs, she seated herself in a little window overlooking the
meeting-house yard. She had gone into the house none too soon. Up the
road, with their red coats gleaming and their harness jangling, was
sweeping a detachment of British cavalry, never stopping until they
reached the meeting-house--and then it was too late.

A sheet of flame shot out from the wall before them, and half a dozen
troopers fell lifeless to the ground, and half a dozen riderless horses
galloped wildly down the road. The leader shouted a sharp command, and
the whole troop retreated in confusion.

Betty drew back shuddering, and when she brought herself to look again
the troopers had dismounted, had surrounded the meeting-house, and were
pouring volley after volley at its doors and windows. Then for the first
time Betty thought of the officer's message, and remembered that the
safety of the Americans depended upon her alone, for her father was
away, no neighbor within reach, and without powder she knew they could
not resist long.

Could she save them? All her stern Quaker blood rose at the thought, and
stealing softly to the paddock behind the barn, she saddled Daisy and
led her through the bars into the wood road, which opened into the
highway just around the bend. Could she but pass the pickets without
discovery there would be little danger of pursuit; then there would be
only the long ride of eight miles ahead of her.

Just before the narrow wood road joined the broader highway Betty
mounted Daisy by means of a convenient stump, and starting off at a
gallop, had just turned the corner when a voice shouted "Halt!" and a
shot whistled past her head. Betty screamed with terror, and bending
over, brought down her riding-whip with all her strength upon Daisy,
then, turning for a moment, saw three troopers hurriedly mounting.

Her heart sank within her, but, beginning to feel the excitement of the
chase, she leaned over and patting Daisy on the neck, encouraged her to
do her best. Onward they sped. Betty, her curly hair streaming in the
wind, the color now mounting to, now retreating from her cheeks, led by
five hundred yards.

But Daisy had not been used for weeks, and already felt the unusual
strain. Now they thundered over Naaman's Creek, now over Concord, with
the nearest pursuer only four hundred yards behind; and now they raced
beside the clear waters of Beaver Brook, and as Betty dashed through its
shallow ford, the thud of horse's hoofs seemed just over her shoulder.

Betty, at first sure of success, now knew that unless in some way she
could throw her pursuers off her track she was surely lost. Just then
she saw ahead of her a fork in the road, the lower branch leading to the
Brandywine, the upper to the Birmingham Meeting-house. Could she but get
the troopers on the upper road while she took the lower, she would be
safe; and, as if in answer to her wish, there flashed across her mind
the remembrance of the old cross-road which, long disused, and with its
entrance hidden by drooping boughs, led from a point in the upper road
just out of sight of the fork down across the lower, and through the
valley of the Brandywine. Could she gain this road unseen she still
might reach Washington.

Urging Daisy forward, she broke just in time through the dense growth
which hid the entrance, and sat trembling, hidden behind a dense growth
of tangled vines, while she heard the troopers thunder by. Then, riding
through the rustling woods, she came at last into the open, and saw
spread out beneath her the beautiful valley of the Brandywine, dotted
with the white tents of the Continental army.

Starting off at a gallop, she dashed around a bend in the road into the
midst of a group of officers riding slowly up from the valley.

"Stop, little maiden, before you run us down," said one, who seemed to
be in command. "Where are you going in such hot haste?"

"Oh, sir," said Betty, reining in Daisy, "can thee tell me where I can
find General Washington?"

"Yes, little Quakeress," said the officer who had first spoken to her;
"I am he. What do you wish?"

Betty, too exhausted to be surprised, poured forth her story in a few
broken sentences, and (hearing as if in a dream the hasty commands for
the rescue of the soldiers in Chichester Meeting-house) fell forward in
her saddle, and, for the first time in her life, fainted, worn out by
her noble ride.

A few days later, when recovering from the shock of her long and
eventful ride, Betty, awaking from a deep sleep, found her mother
kneeling beside her little bed, while her father talked with General
Washington himself beside the fireplace; and it was the proudest and
happiest moment of her life when Washington, coming forward and taking
her by the hand, said, "You are the bravest little maid in America, and
an honor to your country."
