news came that a great battle had been fought last Friday; but when we
heard the next morning the enemy had been repulsed so easily we were not
so anxious, although it was not until this morning that the list of
killed and wounded was published, and our minds set at rest."

"No, mother; it was a tremendous artillery battle, but it was a little
more than that--at least on our side. But I have never heard anything at
all like it from sunrise to sunset. But, after all, an artillery fire is
more frightening than dangerous, except at comparatively close quarters.
The enemy must have fired at least fifty shots for every man that was
hit. I counted several times, and there were fully a hundred shots a
minute, and I don't think it lessened much the whole day. I should think
they must have fired two or three hundred rounds at least from each gun.
The roar was incessant, and what with the din they made, and the replies
of our own artillery, and the bursting of shells, and the rattle of
musketry, the din at times was almost bewildering. Wildfire was hit with
a piece of shell, but fortunately it was not a very large one, and he is
not much the worse for it, but the shock knocked him off his legs; of
course I went down with him, and thought for a moment I had been hit
myself. No; it was by far the most hollow affair we have had. The enemy
fought obstinately enough, but without the slightest spirit or dash, and
only once did they get up anywhere near our line, and then they went
back a good deal quicker than they came."

"And now you are going to be with us for three months, Vincent?"

"I hope so, mother; at least if they do not advance again. I shall be
here off and on. I mean to find Dinah Morris if it is possible, and if I
can obtain the slightest clew I shall follow it up and go wherever it
may lead me."

"Well, we will spare you for that, Vincent. As you know, I did not like
your mixing yourself up in that business two years ago, but it is
altogether different now. The woman was very willing and well conducted,
and I had got to be really fond of her. But putting that aside, it is
intolerable that such a piece of insolence as the stealing of one of our
slaves should go unpunished. Therefore if you do find any clew to the
affair we will not grumble at your following it up, even if it does take
you away from home for a short time. By the by, we had letters this
morning from a certain young lady in Georgia inclosing her photograph,
and I rather fancy there is one for you somewhere."

"Where is it, mother?" Vincent asked, jumping from his seat.

"Let me think," Mrs. Wingfield replied. "Did either of you girls put it
away, or where can it have been stowed?" The girls both laughed.

"Now, Vincent, what offer do you make for the letter? Well, we won't
tease you," Annie went on as Vincent gave an impatient exclamation.
"Another time we might do so, but as you have just come safely back to
us I don't think it will be fair, especially as this is the very first
letter. Here it is"--and she took out of the workbox before her the
missive Vincent was so eager to receive.


CHAPTER XVI. THE SEARCH FOR DINAH.

"By the by, Vincent," Mrs. Wingfield remarked next morning at breakfast,
"I have parted with Pearson."

"I am glad to hear it, mother. What! did you discover at last that he
was a scamp?"

"Several things that occurred shook my confidence in him, Vincent. The
accounts were not at all satisfactory, and it happened quite
accidentally that when I was talking one day with Mr. Robertson, who, as
you know, is a great speculator in tobacco, I said that I should grow no
more tobacco, as it really fetched nothing. He replied that it would be
a pity to give it up, for so little was now cultivated that the price
was rising, and the Orangery tobacco always fetched top prices. 'I think
the price I paid for your crop this year must at any rate have paid for
the labor that is to say, paid for the keep of the slaves and something
over.' He then mentioned the price he had given, which was certainly a
good deal higher than I had imagined. I looked to my accounts next
morning, and found that Pearson had only credited me with one-third of
the amount he must have received, so I at once dismissed him. Indeed, I
had been thinking of doing so some little time before, for money is so
scarce and the price of produce so low that I felt I could not afford to
pay as much as I have been giving him."

"I am afraid I have been drawing rather heavily, mother," Vincent put
in.

"I have plenty of money, Vincent. Since your father's death we have had
much less company than before, and I have not spent my income. Besides,
I have a considerable sum invested in house property and other
securities. But I have, of course, since the war began been subscribing
toward the expenses of the war--for the support of hospitals and so on.
I thought at a time like this I ought to keep my expenses down at the
lowest point, and to give the balance of my income to the State."

"How did Jonas take his dismissal, mother?"

"Not very pleasantly," Mrs. Wingfield replied; "especially when I told
him that I had discovered he was robbing me. However, he knew better
than to say much, for he has not been in good odor about here for some
time. After the fighting near here there were reports that he had been
in communication with the Yankees. He spoke to me about it at the time,
but as it was a mere matter of rumor, originating, no doubt, from the
fact that he was a Northern man by birth, I paid no attention to them."

"It is likely enough to be true," Vincent said. "I always distrusted the
vehemence with which he took the Confederate side. How long ago did this
happen?"

"It is about a month since I dismissed him."

"So lately as that! Then I should not be at all surprised if he had some
hand in carrying off Dinah. I know he was in communication with Jackson,
for I once saw them together in the street, and I fancied at the time
that it was through him that Jackson learned that Dinah was here. It is
an additional clew to inquire into, anyhow. Do you know what has become
of him since he left you?"

"No; I have heard nothing at all about him, Vincent, from the day I gave
him a check for his pay in this room. Farrell, who was under him, is now
in charge of the Orangery. He may possibly know something of his
movements."

"I think Farrell is an honest fellow," Vincent said "He was always about
doing his work quietly never bullying or shouting at the hands, and yet
seeing that they did their work properly. I will ride out and see him at
once."

As soon as breakfast was over Vincent started, and found Farrell in the
fields with the hands.

"I am glad to see you back, sir," the man said heartily.

"Thank you, Farrell. I am glad to be back, and I am glad to find you in
Pearson's place. I never liked the fellow, and never trusted him."

"I did not like him myself, sir, though we always got on well enough
together. He knew his work, and got as much out of the hands as any one
could do; but I did not like his way with them. They hated him."

"Have you any idea where he went when he left here?"

"No, sir; he did not come back after he got his dismissal. He sent a man
in a buggy with a note to me, asking me to send all his things over to
Richmond. I expect he was afraid the news might get here as soon as he
did, and that the hands would give him an unpleasant reception, as
indeed I expect they would have done."

"You don't know whether he has any friends anywhere in the Confederacy
to whom he would be likely to go?"

"I don't know about friends, sir; but I know he has told me he was
overseer, or partner, or something of that sort, in a small station down
in the swamps of South Carolina. I should think, from things he has let
drop, that the slaves must have had a bad time of it. I rather fancy he
made the place too hot for him, and had to leave; but that was only my
impression."

"In that case he may possibly have made his way back there," Vincent
said. "I have particular reasons for wishing to find out. You don't know
anything about the name of the place?" The man shook his head.

"He never mentioned the name in my hearing."

"Well, I must try to find out, but I don't quite see how to set about
it," Vincent said. "By the way, do you know where his clothes were sent
to?"

"Yes; the man said that he was to take them to Harker's Hotel. It's a
second-rate hotel not far from the railway station."

"Thank you. That will help me. I know the house. It was formerly used by
Northern drummers and people of that sort."

After riding back to Richmond and putting up his horse, Vincent went to
the hotel there. Although but a secondary hotel it was well filled, for
people from all parts of the Confederacy resorted to Richmond, and
however much trade suffered, the hotels of the town did a good business.
He first went up to the clerk in a little office at the entrance.

"You had a man named Pearson," he said, "staying here about a month ago.
Will you be good enough to tell me on what day he left?"

The clerk turned to the register, and said after a minute's examination:

"He came on the 14th of November, and he left on the 20th."

This was two days after the date on which Dinah had been carried off.

In American hotels the halls are large and provided with seats, and are
generally used as smoking and reading-rooms by the male visitors to the
hotel. At Harker's Hotel there was a small bar at the end of the hall,
and a black waiter supplied the wants of the guests seated at the
various little tables. Vincent seated himself at one of these and
ordered something to drink. As the negro placed it on the table he said:

"I will give you a dollar if you will answer a few questions."

"Very good, sah. Dat am a mighty easy way to earn a dollar."

"Do you remember, about a month ago, a man named Pearson being here?"

The negro shook his head.

"Me not know de names of de gentlemen, sah. What was de man like?"

"He was tall and thin, with short hair and a gray goatee--a regular
Yankee."

"Me remember him, sah. Dar used to be plenty ob dat sort here. Don't see
dem much now. Me remember de man, sah, quite well. Used to pass most of
de day here. Didn't seem to have nuffin to do."

"Was he always alone, or did he have many people here to see him?"

"Once dar war two men here wid him, sah, sitting at dat table ober in de
corner. Rough-looking fellows dey war. In old times people like dat
wouldn't come to a 'spectable hotel, but now most ebery one got rough
clothes, can't get no others, so one don't tink nuffin about it; but
dose fellows was rough-looking besides dar clothes. Didn't like dar
looks nohow. Dey only came here once. Dey was de only strangers that
came to see him. But once Massa Jackson--me know him by sight--he came
here and talk wid him for a long time. Earnest sort of talk dat seemed
to be. Dey talk in low voice, and I noticed dey stopped talking when any
one sat down near dem."

"You don't know where he went to from here, I suppose?"

"No, sah, dat not my compartment. Perhaps de outside porter will know.
Like enough he take his tings in hand-truck to station. You like to see
him, sah?"

"Yes, I should like to have a minute's talk with him. Here is your
dollar."

The waiter rang a bell, and a minute later the outdoor porter presented
himself.

"You remember taking some tings to station for a tall man wid gray
goatee, Pomp?" the waiter asked. "It was more dan tree weeks ago. I tink
he went before it was light in de morning. Me seem to remember dat."

The negro nodded.

"Me remember him bery well, sah. Tree heavy boxes and one bag, and he
only give me quarter dollar for taking dem to de station. Mighty mean
man dat."

"Do you know what train he went by?"

"Yes, sah, it was de six o'clock train for de souf."

"You can't find out wher his luggage was checked for?"

"I can go down to station, sah, and see if I can find out. Some of de
men dar may remember."

"Here is a dollar for yourself," Vincent said, "and another to give to
any of the men who can give you the news. When you have found out come
and tell me. Here is my card and address."

"Bery well, sah. Next time me go up to station me find about it, for
sure, if any one remember dat fellow."

In the evening the negro called at the house and told Vincent that he
had ascertained that a man answering to his description and having
luggage similar to that of Pearson had had it checked to Florence in
South Carolina.

Vincent now called Dan into his counsel and told him what he had
discovered. The young negro had already given proof of such intelligence
that he felt sure his opinion would be of value.

"Dat all bery plain, sah," Dan said when Vincent finished his story. "Me
no doubt dat old rascal Jackson give money to Pearson to carry off de
gal. Ob course he did it just to take revenge upon Tony. Pearson he go
into de plot, because, in de fust place, it vex Missy Wingfield and you
bery much; in de second place, because Jackson gib him money; in de
third place, because he get hold of negro slave worf a thousand dollar.
Dat all quite clear. He not do it himself, but arrange wid oder fellows,
and he stop quiet at de hotel for two days after she gone so dat no one
can 'spect his having hand in de affair."

"That is just how I make it out, Dan; and now he has gone off to join
them."

Dan thought for some time.

"Perhaps dey join him dar, sah, perhaps not; perhaps him send him
baggage on there and get out somewhere on de road and meet them."

"That is likely enough, Dan. No doubt Dinah was taken away in a cart or
buggy. As she left two days before he did, they may have gone from forty
to sixty miles along the road, to some place where he may have joined
them. The men who carried her off may either have come back or gone on
with him. If they wanted to go south they would go on; if they did not,
he would probably have only hired them to carry her off and hand her
over to him when he overtook them. I will look at the timetable and see
where that train stops. It is a fast train, I see," he said, after
consulting it; it stops at Petersburg, fifteen miles on, and at Hicks
Ford, which is about fifty miles. I should think the second place was
most likely, as the cart could easily have got there in two days. Now,
Dan, you had better start to-morrow morning, and spend two days there if
necessary; find out if you can if on the twentieth of last month any one
noticed a vehicle of any kind, with two rough men in it, and with,
perhaps, a negro woman. She might not have been noticed, for she may
have been lying tied up in the bottom of the cart, although it is more
likely they frightened her by threats into sitting up quiet with them.
They are sure not to have stopped at any decent hotel, but will have
gone to some small place, probably just outside the town.

"I will go with you to Mr. Renfrew the first thing in the morning and
get him to draw up a paper testifying that you are engaged in lawful
business, and are making inquiries with a view to discovering a crime
which has been committed, and recommending you to the assistance of the
police in any town you may go to. Then if you go with that to the head
constable at Hicks Ford he will tell you which are the places at which
such fellows as these would have been likely to put up for the night,
and perhaps send a policeman with you to make inquiries. If you get any
news telegraph to me at once. I will start by the six o'clock train on
the following morning. Do you be on the platform to meet me, and we can
then either go straight on to Florence, or, should there be any
occasion, I will get out there; but I don't think that is likely.
Pearson himself will, to a certainty, sooner or later, go to Florence to
get his luggage, and the only real advantage we shall get if your
inquiries are successful will be to find out for certain whether he is
concerned in the affair. We shall then only have to follow his traces
from Florence."

Two days later Mr. Renfrew received a telegram from the head constable
at Hicks Ford: "The two men with cart spent day here, 20th ult. Were
joined that morning by another man--negro says Pearson. One man returned
afternoon, Richmond. Pearson and the other drove off in buggy. A young
negress and child were with them. Is there anything I can do?"

Mr. Renfrew telegraphed back to request that the men, who were kidnaping
the female slave, should if possible be traced and the direction they
took ascertained. He then sent the message across to Vincent, who at
once went to his office.

"Now," the lawyer said, "you must do nothing rashly in this business,
Vincent. They are at the best of time a pretty rough lot at the edge of
these Carolina swamps, and at present things are likely to be worse than
usual. If you were to go alone on such an errand you would almost
certainly be shot. In the first place, these fellows would not give up a
valuable slave without a struggle; and in the next place, they have
committed a very serious crime. Therefore it is absolutely necessary
that you should go armed with legal powers and backed by the force of
the law. In the first place, I will draw up an affidavit and sign it
myself, to the effect that a female slave, the property of Vincent
Wingfield, has, with her male child, been kidnaped and stolen by Jonas
Pearson and others acting in association with him, and that we have
reason to know that she has been conveyed into South Carolina. This I
will get witnessed by a justice of the peace, and will then take it up
to Government House. There I will get the usual official request to the
governor of South Carolina to issue orders that the aid of the law shall
be given to you in recovering the said Dinah Morris and her child and
arresting her abductors. You will obtain an order to this effect from
the governor, and armed with it you will, as soon as you have discovered
where the woman is, call upon the sheriff of the county to aid you in
recovering her, and in arresting Pearson and his associates."

"Thank you, sir. That will certainly be the best way. I run plenty of
risk in doing my duty as an officer of the state, and I have no desire
whatever to throw my life away at the hands of ruffians such as Pearson
and his allies."

Two hours later Vincent received from Mr. Renfrew the official letter to
the governor of South Carolina, and at six o'clock next morning started
for Florence. On the platform of the station at Hicks Ford Dan was
waiting for him.

"Jump into the car at the end, Dan; I will come to you there, and you
can tell me all the news. We are going straight on to Columbia. Now,
Dan," Vincent went on when he joined him--for in no part of the United
States were negroes allowed to travel in any but the cars set apart for
them--"what is your news? The chief constable telegraphed that they had,
as we expected, been joined by Pearson here."

"Yes, sah, dey war here for sure. When I get here I go straight to de
constable and tell him dat I was in search of two men who had kidnaped
Captain Wingfield's slave. De head constable he Richmond man, and ob
course knew all about de family; so he take de matter up at once and
send constable wid me to seberal places where it likely dat the fellows
had put up, but we couldn't find nuffin about dem. Den next morning we
go out again to village four mile out of de town on de north road, and
dere we found sure 'nough dat two men, wid negro wench and chile, had
stopped dere. She seem bery unhappy and cry all de time. De men say dey
bought her at Richmond, and show de constable of de village de paper dat
dey had bought a female slave Sally Moore and her chile. De constable
speak to woman, but she seem frightened out of her life and no say
anything. Dey drive off wid her early in de morning. Den we make
inquiries again at de town and at de station. We find dat a man like
Pearson get out. He had only little hand-bag with him. He ask one of de
men at de station which was de way to de norf road. Den we find dat one
of de constables hab seen a horse and cart wid two men in it, with negro
woman and child. One of de men look like Yankee--dat what make him take
notice of it. We s'pose dat oder man went back to Richmond again."

"That is all right, Dan, and you have done capitally. Now at Florence we
will take up the hunt. It is a long way down there; and if they drive
all the way, as I hope they will, it will take them a fortnight, so that
we shall have gained a good deal of time on them. The people at the
station are sure to remember the three boxes that lay there for so long
without being claimed. Of course they may have driven only till they got
fairly out of reach. Then they may either have sold the horse and trap,
or the fellow Pearson has with him may have driven it back. But I should
think they would most likely sell it. In that case they would not be
more than a week from the time they left Richmond to the time they took
train again for the south. However, whether they have got a fortnight or
three weeks' start of us will not make much difference. With the
description we can give of Pearson, and the fact that there was a
negress and child, and those three boxes, we ought to be able to trace
him."

It was twelve at night when the train arrived at Florence. As nothing
could be done until next morning Vincent went to an hotel. As soon as
the railway officials were likely to be at their offices he was at the
station again. The tip of a dollar secured the attention of the man in
the baggage-room.

"Three boxes and a black bag came on here a month ago, you say, and lay
here certainly four or five days--perhaps a good deal longer. Of course
I remember them. Stood up in that corner there. They had been checked
right through. I will look at the books and see what day they went. I
don't remember what sort of men fetched them away. Maybe I was busy at
the time, and my mate gave them out. However, I will look first and see
when they went. What day do you say they got here?"

"They came by the train that left Richmond at six o'clock on the morning
of the 20th."

