gain additional height. He presently, after several attempts, succeeded
in fixing the strap firmly against the bar half-way up, and then placing
one knee in the loop and putting an arm through the bar to steady
himself, he set to work at the lead. The sharp point of the dagger
quickly cut out that near the surface, but farther down the hole
narrowed and the task was much more difficult. Several times Ralph
relieved him at the work, but at last it was accomplished, and the bar
was found to move slightly when they shook it. There now remained only
to loosen the cement above, and this was a comparatively easy task; it
crumbled quickly before the points of their daggers, and the bar was
soon free to move.

"Now," Walter said, "we have to find out whether the bar was first put
in from below or from above; one hole or the other must be a good deal
deeper than the iron, so that it was either shoved up or pushed down
until the other end could get under or over the other hole. I should
think most likely the hole is below, as if they held up the bar against
the top, when the lead was poured in it would fill up the space; so we
will first of all try to lift it. I must stand on your head again to
enable me to be high enough to try this."

"My head is strong enough, I warrant," Ralph replied, "but I will fold
up my jerkin, and put on it, for in truth you hurt me somewhat when you
were tying the strap to the bar."

All Walter's efforts did not succeed in raising the bar in the
slightest, and he therefore concluded that it had been inserted here and
lifted while the space was filled with lead. "It is best so," he said;
"we should have to cut away the stone either above or below, and can
work much better below. Now I will put my knee in the strap again and
set to work. The stone seems greatly softened by the wet, and will yield
to our daggers readily enough. It is already getting dark, and as soon
as we have finished we can start."

As Walter had discovered, the stone was rotten with the action of the
weather, and although as they got deeper it became much harder, it
yielded to the constant chipping with their daggers, and in two hours
Ralph, who at the moment happened to be engaged, announced to Walter
that his dagger had found its way under the bottom of the bar. The
groove was soon made deep enough for the bar to be moved out; but
another hour's work was necessary, somewhat further to enlarge the upper
hole, so as to allow the bar to have sufficient play. Fortunately it was
only inserted about an inch and a half in the stone, and the amount to
be cut away to give it sufficient play was therefore not large. Then at
last all was ready for their flight.



CHAPTER XVII: THE CAPTURE OF CALAIS


When the bar was once ready for removal the captives delayed not a
minute, for although it was now so late that there was little chance
of a visit being paid them, it was just possible that such might be the
case, and that it might occur to the knight that it would be safer to
separate them.

"Now, Ralph, do you go first, since I am lighter and can climb up by
means of the strap, which you can hold from above; push the bar out and
lay it down quietly on the thickness of the wall. A splash might attract
the attention of the sentries, though I doubt whether it would, for the
wind is high and the rain falling fast. Unbuckle the strap before you
move the bar, as otherwise it might fall and I should have difficulty in
handing it to you again. Now, I am steady against the wall."

Ralph seized the bar and with a great effort pushed the bottom from him.
It moved through the groove without much difficulty, but it needed a
great wrench to free the upper end. However, it was done, and laying
it quietly down he pulled himself up and thrust himself through the
loophole. It was a desperate struggle to get through, for it was only
just wide enough for his head to pass, and he was so squarely built that
his body with difficulty followed. The wall was four feet wide, and as
the loophole widened considerably without, there was, when he had once
passed through from the inside, space enough for him to kneel down and
lower one end of the strap to Walter. The latter speedily climbed up,
and getting through the slit with much less trouble than Ralph had
experienced--for although in height and width of shoulder he was his
equal, he was less in depth than his follower--he joined him in the
opening; Ralph sitting with his feet in the water in order to make room
for him.

The dungeon was upon the western side of the castle, and consequently
the stream would be with them in making for shore. It was pitch dark,
but they knew that the distance they would have to swim could not exceed
forty or fifty yards.

"Keep along close by the wall, Ralph, if we once get out in the stream
we might lose our way; we will skirt the wall until it ends, then there
is a cut, for as you saw when we entered, the moat runs right across
this neck. If we keep a bit farther down and then land, we shall be
fairly beyond the outworks."

Ralph slipped down into the water, and followed by Walter swam along at
the foot of the wall. They had already been deprived of their armour,
but had luckily contrived to retain their daggers in their belts, which
they had again girdled on before entering the water. The stream hurried
them rapidly along, and they had only to keep themselves afloat. They
were soon at the corner of the castle. A few strokes farther and they
again felt the wall which lined the moat. The stream still swept them
along, they felt the masonry come to an end, and bushes and shrubs lined
the bank. They were beyond the outer defences of the castle. Still a
little farther they proceeded down the stream in order to prevent the
possibility of any noise they might make in scrambling up being heard by
the sentinels on the outer postern. Then when they felt quite safe they
grasped the bushes, and speedily climbed the bank. Looking back at the
castle they saw lights still burning there. Short as was the time they
had been in the water they were both chilled to the bone, for it was the
month of February, and the water was bitterly cold.

"It cannot be more than nine o'clock now," Walter said, "for it is not
more than four hours since darkness fell. They are not likely to visit
the dungeon before eight or nine tomorrow, so we can rely upon twelve
hours' start, and if we make the best of our time we ought to be far on
travelling on a night like this through a strange country. I would that
the stars were shining. However, the direction of the wind and rain
will be a guide to us, and we shall soon strike the road we traveled
yesterday, and can follow that till morning."

They were not long before they found the track, and then started at a
brisk pace along it. All night they struggled on through wind and rain
until the first dawn enabled them to see the objects in the surrounding
country; and making for the forest which extended to within a mile
of the road, they entered deep into its shelter, and there utterly
exhausted, threw themselves down on the wet ground. After a few hours
of uneasy sleep they woke, and taking their place near the edge of the
forest watched for the passage of any party which might be in pursuit,
but until nightfall none came along.

"They have not discovered our flight," Ralph said at last, "or they
would have passed long before this. Sir Phillip doubtless imagines that
we are drowned. The water was within a few inches of the sill when we
started, and must soon have flooded the dungeon; and did he trouble to
look in the morning, which is unlikely enough seeing that he would be
sure of our fate, he would be unable to descend the stairs, and could
not reach to the door, and so discover that the bar had been removed.
No; whatever his motive may have been in compassing my death, he is
doubtless satisfied that he has attained it, and we need have no further
fear of pursuit from him. The rain has ceased, and I think that it will
be a fine night; we will walk on, and if we come across a barn will make
free to enter it, and stripping off our clothing to dry, will sleep in
the hay, and pursue our journey in the morning. From our travel-stained
appearance any who may meet us will take us for two wayfarers going to
take service in the army at Amiens."

It was not until nearly midnight that they came upon such a place as
they sought, then after passing a little village they found a shed
standing apart. Entering it they found that it was tenanted by two cows.
Groping about they presently came upon a heap of forage, and taking off
their outer garments lay down on this, covering themselves thickly with
it. The shed was warm and comfortable and they were soon asleep, and
awaking at daybreak they found that their clothes had dried somewhat.
The sun was not yet up when they started, but it soon rose, and ere noon
their garments had dried, and they felt for the first time comfortable.
They met but few people on the road, and these passed them with ordinary
salutations.

They had by this time left Amiens on the right, and by nightfall
were well on their way towards Calais. Early in the morning they had
purchased some bread at a village through which they passed; Walter's
Norman-French being easily understood, and exciting no surprise or
suspicion. At nightfall they slept in a shed within a mile of the
ruins of the castle of Pres, and late next evening entered the English
encampment at New Town. After going to his tent, where he and Ralph
changed their garments and partook of a hearty meal, Walter proceeded
to the pavilion of the prince, who hailed his entrance with the greatest
surprise.

"Why Sir Walter," he exclaimed, "what good saint has brought you here?
I have but an hour since received a message from the Count of Evreux
to the effect that you were a prisoner in the bands of Sir Phillip de
Holbeaut, with whom I must treat for your ransom. I was purporting to
send off a herald tomorrow to ask at what sum he held you; and now you
appear in flesh and blood before us! But first, before you tell us your
story, I must congratulate you on your gallant defence of the Castle of
Pres, which is accounted by all as one of the most valiant deeds of the
war. When two days passed without a messenger from you coming hither,
I feared that you were beleaguered, and started that evening with six
hundred men-at-arms. We arrived at daybreak to finding only a smoking
ruin. Luckily among the crowd of dead upon the breach we found one of
your men-at-arms who still breathed, and after some cordial had been
given him, and his wounds stanched, he was able to tell us the story of
the siege. But it needed not his tale to tell us how staunchly you had
defended the castle, for the hundreds of dead who lay outside of the
walls, and still more the mass who piled the breach, and the many who
lay in the castle-yard spoke for themselves of the valour with which the
castle had been defended. As the keep was gutted by fire, and the man
could tell us nought of what had happened after he had been stricken
down at the breach, we knew not whether you and your brave garrison
had perished in the flames. We saw the penthouse beneath which they had
laboured to cut through the wall, but the work had ceased before the
holes were large enough for entry, and we hoped that you might have seen
that further resistance was in vain, and have made terms for your lives;
indeed we heard from the country people that certain prisoners had been
taken to Amiens. I rested one day at Pres, and the next rode back here,
and forthwith despatched a herald to the Count of Evreux at Amiens
asking for news of the garrison; but now he has returned with word that
twenty-four men-at-arms and fifty-eight archers are prisoners in the
count's hands, and that he is ready to exchange them against an equal
number of French prisoners; but that you, with a man-at-arms, were in
the keeping of Sir Phillip of Holbeaut, with whom I must treat for your
ransom. And now tell me how it is that I see you here. Has your captor,
confiding in your knightly word to send him the sum agreed upon, allowed
you to return? Tell me the sum and my treasurer shall tomorrow pay it
over to a herald, who shall carry it to Holbeaut."

"Thanks, your Royal Highness, for your generosity," Walter replied, "but
there is no ransom to be paid."

And he then proceeded to narrate the incidents of his captivity at
Holbeaut and his escape from the castle. His narration was frequently
interrupted by exclamations of surprise and indignation from the prince
and knights present.

"Well, this well-nigh passes all belief," the prince exclaimed when he
had concluded. "It is an outrage upon all laws of chivalry and honour.
What could have induced this caitiff knight, instead of treating you
with courtesy and honour until your ransom arrived, to lodge you in a
foul dungeon, where, had you not made your escape, your death would have
been brought about that very night by the rising water? Could it be,
think you, that his brain is distraught by some loss or injury which
may have befallen him at our hands during the war and worked him up to a
blind passion of hatred against all Englishmen?"

"I think not that, your Royal Highness," Walter replied. "His manner
was cool and deliberate, and altogether free from any signs of madness.
Moreover, it would seem that he had specially marked me down beforehand,
since, as I have told you, he had bargained with the Count of Evreux for
the possession of my person should I escape with life at the capture of
the castle. It seems rather as if he must have had some private enmity
against me, although what the cause may be I cannot imagine, seeing that
I have never, to my knowledge, before met him, and have only heard his
name by common report.

"Whatever be the cause," the prince said, "we will have satisfaction for
it, and I will beg the king, my father, to write at once to Phillip
of Valois protesting against the treatment that you have received, and
denouncing Sir Phillip of Holbeaut as a base and dishonoured knight,
whom, should he fall into our hands, we will commit at once to the
hangman."

Upon the following day Walter was called before the king, and related to
him in full the incidents of the siege and of his captivity and escape;
and the same day King Edward sent off a letter to Phillip of Valois
denouncing Sir Phillip Holbeaut as a dishonoured knight, and threatening
retaliation upon the French prisoners in his hands.

A fortnight later an answer was received from the King of France saying
that he had inquired into the matter, and had sent a seneschal, who
had questioned Sir Phillip Holbeaut and some of the men-at-arms in the
castle, and that he found that King Edward had been grossly imposed upon
by a fictitious tale. Sir Walter Somers had, he found, been treated with
all knightly courtesy, and believing him to be an honourable knight and
true to his word, but slight watch had been kept over him. He had basely
taken advantage of this trust, and with the man-at-arms with him had
escaped from the castle in order to avoid payment of his ransom, and had
now invented these gross and wicked charges against Sir Phillip Holbeaut
as a cloak to his own dishonour.

Walter was furious when he heard the contents of this letter, and the
king and Black Prince were no less indignant. Although they doubted him
not for a moment, Walter begged that Ralph might be brought before them
and examined strictly as to what had taken place, in order that they
might see that his statements tallied exactly with those he had made.

When this had been done Walter obtained permission from the king
to despatch a cartel to Sir Phillip de Holbeaut denouncing him as a
perjured and dishonoured knight and challenging him to meet him in
mortal conflict at any time and place that he might name. At the same
time the king despatched a letter to Phillip of Valois saying that the
statements of the French knight and followers were wholly untrue,
and begging that a time might be appointed for the meeting of the two
knights in the lists.

To this King Phillip replied that he had ordered all private quarrels in
France to be laid aside during the progress of the war, and that so
long as an English foot remained upon French soil he would give no
countenance to his knights throwing away the lives which they owed to
France, in private broils.

"You must wait, Sir Walter, you see," the king said, "until you may
perchance meet him in the field of battle. In the mean time, to show
how lightly I esteem the foul charge brought against you, and how much
I hold and honour the bravery which you showed in defending the
castle which my son the prince entrusted to you, as well as upon other
occasions, I hereby promote you to the rank of knight-banneret."

Events now passed slowly before Calais. Queen Philippa and many of her
ladies crossed the Channel and joined her husband, and these added much
to the gaiety of the life in camp. The garrison at Calais was, it was
known, in the sorest straits for the want of food, and at last the
news came that the King of France, with a huge army of 200,000 men, was
moving to its relief. They had gathered at Hesdin, at which rendezvous
the king had arrived in the early part of April; but it was not until
the 27th of July that the whole army was collected, and marching by slow
steps advanced towards the English position.

King Edward had taken every precaution to guard all the approaches to
the city. The ground was in most places too soft and sandy to admit of
the construction of defensive works; but the fleet was drawn up close
inshore to cover the line of sand-hills by the sea with arrows and
war machines, while the passages of the marshes, which extended for
a considerable distance round the town, were guarded by the Earl of
Lancaster and a body of chosen troops, while the other approaches to the
city were covered by the English camp.

The French reconnoitering parties found no way open to attack the
English unless under grievous disadvantages. The Cardinals of Tusculum,
St. John, and St. Paul endeavoured to negotiate terms of peace, and
commissioners on both sides met. The terms offered by Phillip were,
however, by no means so favourable as Edward, after his own victorious
operations and those of his armies in Brittany and Guienne, had a right
to expect and the negotiations were broken off.

The following day the French king sent in a message to Edward saying
that he had examined the ground in every direction in order to advance
and give battle, but had found no means of doing so. He therefore
summoned the king to come forth from the marshy ground in which he was
encamped and to fight in the open plain; and he offered to send four
French knights, who, with four English of the same rank, should choose
a fair plain in the neighbourhood, according to the usages of chivalry.
Edward had little over 30,000 men with him; but the same evening that
Phillip's challenge was received a body of 17,000 Flemings and English,
detached from an army which had been doing good service on the borders
of Flanders, succeeded in passing round the enemy's host and in
effecting a junction with the king's army. Early the next morning, after
having consulted with his officers, Edward returned an answer to the
French king, saying that he agreed to his proposal, and enclosed a
safe-conduct for any four French knights who might be appointed to
arrange with the same number of English the place of battle.

The odds were indeed enormous, the French being four to one; but Edward,
after the success of Cressy, which had been won by the Black Prince's
division, which bore a still smaller proportion to the force engaging
