to be proud of him, Jeanne. What thought and devotion and courage
he has shown for us! And do you know, he saved Victor too. Jacques
has told me all about it--how Victor saw his father brought out
to be murdered; and how, half-mad, he was springing out to stand
beside him, when Harry as quick as thought knocked him down before
he could betray himself; and then Jacques, who was standing by saw
it, helped him carry him here. Oh, my dear, how much we owe him!

"And now, Virginie," she said, turning to the youngest, "I must
have a good look at you, little one--but no, I mustn't call you
little one any longer, for you are already almost as tall as I am.
My child, how you have been growing, and you look so well! Louise
must have been feeding you up. Ah, Louise, how much we all owe to
you too!  And I hear you are going to leave your comfortable home
and take care of the girls on their journey. It was such a comfort
to me when Harry told me!"

"I could not let them go alone, mademoiselle," the old woman said
simply; "it was only my duty. Besides, what should I do in Paris
with all my children in England?"

"Now, my dears, take your things off," Marie said. "I will just
run in and see how Victor is getting on. Harry went straight in to
him, and I want to know whether Victor recognized him."




CHAPTER XII

Nantes


Harry was very pleased to see a look of recognition on Victor's
face as he came up to the side of his couch.

"Well, Victor," he said cheerfully, "I am glad to see you looking
more yourself again."

Victor nodded assent, and his hand feebly returned the pressure of
Harry's.

"I can't understand it," he said after a pause. "I seem to be in
a dream; but it is true Marie is here, isn't it?"

"Oh yes! She is chatting now with her sisters, Jeanne and Virginie,
you know."

"And why am I here?" Victor asked, looking round the room.  "Marie
tells me not to ask questions."

"No. There will be plenty of time for that afterwards, Victor.  It
is all simple enough. You were out with me, and there was an accident,
and you got hurt. So I and a workman who was passing carried you
into his house, and he and his wife have been taking care of you.
You have been very ill, but you are getting on better now.  Marie
has come to nurse you, and she won't leave you until you are quite
well. Now, I think that's enough for you, and the doctor would be
very angry if he knew I had told you so much; because he said you
were not to bother yourself about things at all, but just to sleep
as much as you can, and eat as much as you can, and listen to Marie
talking and reading to you, and not trouble your brain in any way,
because it's your brain that has gone wrong, and any thinking will
be very bad for it."

This explanation seemed satisfactory to Victor, who soon after
dozed off to sleep, and Harry joined the party in Marie's sitting-room.

"Oh, if I could but keep them here with me, Harry, what a comfort
it would be!"

"I know that it would, Marie; but it is too dangerous. You know they
were denounced at Louise Moulin's. Already there is risk enough in
you and Victor being here. The search for Royalists does not relax,
indeed it seems to become more and more keen every day.  Victor's
extreme illness is your best safeguard. The neighbours have heard
that Jacques has had a fellow-workman dangerously ill for some long
time, and Victor can no longer be looked upon as a stranger to be
suspected, while your coming here to help nurse him will seem so
natural a step that it will excite no comment. But any fresh addition
of numbers would be sure to give rise to talk, and you would have
a commissary of the Commune here in no time to make inquiries, and
to ask for your papers of domicile."

"Yes, I know that it would be too dangerous to risk," Marie agreed;
"but I tremble at the thought of their journey."

"I have every hope that we shall get through safely," Harry said.
"I have some good news I have not yet told you. I have received a
paper from Robespierre stating that I have been his secretary, and
recommending us all to the authorities, so that we can dispense
with the ordinary papers which they would otherwise ask for."

"That is good news, indeed, Harry," Marie said. "That relieves me
of half my anxiety. Once on the sea-coast it will be comparatively
easy to get a passage to England. My dear Harry, you surprise me
more every day, and I am ashamed to think that when our dear father
and mother first told me that they had accepted your noble offer
to look after us, I was inclined in my heart to think that such
protection would be of little use. You see I confess, Harry; and
you know that is half-way to forgiveness."

"There is nothing either to confess or forgive," Harry said with
a smile. "It was perfectly natural for you to think that a lad
of eighteen was a slender reed to lean on in the time of trouble
and danger, and that it was only by a lucky accident--for saving
Robespierre's life was but an accident--that I have been enabled
to be of use to you; and that I have now a pass which will enable
me to take your sisters with comparative safety as far as Nantes.
Had it not been for that I could have done little indeed to aid
you."

"You must not say so, Harry. You are too modest. Besides, was it
not your quickness that saved Victor? No, we owe you everything, and
disclaimers are only thrown away. As for me, I feel quite jealous
of Jeanne's superior perspicacity, for she trusted you absolutely
from the first."

"It has nothing to do with perspicacity," Jeanne said. "Harry saved
my life from that dreadful dog, and after that I knew if there was
danger he would be able to get us out of it. That is, if it were
possible for anyone to do so."

"I hope I shall be able to justify your trust, Jeanne, and arrive
safely with you at my father's house. I can promise you the warmest
of welcomes from my mother and sisters. I fear they must long since
have given me up for dead. I shall be like a shipwrecked mariner
who has been cast upon an island and given up as lost. But my father
always used to say, that if I was a first-rate hand at getting
into scrapes, I was equally good at getting out of them again; and
I don't think they will have quite despaired of seeing me again,
especially as they know, by the last letters I sent them, that
you all said I could speak French well enough to pass anywhere as
a native."

"How surprised they will be at your arriving with two girls and
Louise!" Virginie said.

"They will be pleased more than surprised," Harry replied. "I have
written so much about you in my letters that the girls and my mother
will be delighted to see you."

"Besides," Jeanne added, "the boys will have told them you are
waiting behind with us, so they will not be so surprised as they
would otherwise have been. But it will be funny, arriving among
people who don't speak a word of our language."

"You will soon be at home with them," said Harry reassuringly.
"Jenny and Kate are just about your ages, and I expect they will
have grown so I shall hardly know them. It is nearly three years
now since I left them, and I have to look at you to assure myself
that Jenny will have grown almost into a young woman. Now I shall
go out for a bit, and leave you to chat together.

"You need not fidget about Victor, Marie. Elise is with him, and
will come and let you know if he wakes; but I hope that he has gone
off fairly to sleep for the night. He knew me, and I think I have
put his mind at rest a little as to how he came here. I have told
him it was an accident in the street, and that  we brought him in
here, and he has been too ill since to be moved. I don't think he
will ask any more questions. If I were you I would, while nursing,
resume the dress you came here in. It will be less puzzling to him
than the one you are wearing now."

The little party started the next morning at day-light, and at the
very first village they came to, found how strict was the watch upon
persons leaving Paris, and had reason to congratulate themselves
upon the possession of Robespierre's safe-conduct. No sooner had
they sat down in the village cabaret to breakfast than an official
with a red scarf presented himself, and asked them who they were
and where they were going. The production of the document at once
satisfied him; and, indeed, he immediately addressed the young man
in somewhat shabby garments, who had the honour of being secretary
to the great man, in tones of the greatest respect.

Virginie at present was shy and awkward in her attire as a boy, and
indeed had there been time the night before to procure a disguise
for her as a girl it would have been done, although Harry's opinion
that it would attract less attention for her to travel as a boy
was unchanged; but he would have given way had it been possible to
make the change. As any delay, however, would certainly be dangerous,
the original plan was adhered to.

Marie had cut her sister's hair short, and no one would have
suspected from her appearance that Virginie was not what she seemed,
a good-looking boy of some thirteen years old. With their bundles
in their hands they trudged along the road, and stopped for the
night at a village about twelve miles out of Paris. After having
again satisfied the authorities by the production of the pass,
Harry made inquiries, and the next morning went two miles away to
a farm-house, where there was, he heard, a cart and horse to be
disposed of.

After much haggling over terms--since to give the sum that was
first asked would have excited surprise, and perhaps suspicion--Harry
became the possessor of the horse and cart, drove triumphantly
back to the village, and having stowed Louise and the two girls on
some straw in the bottom of the cart, proceeded on the journey.

They met with no adventure whatever on the journey to Nantes, which
was performed in ten days. The weather was bitterly cold.  Although
it was now well on in March the snow lay deep on the ground; but
the girls were well wrapped  up, and the cart was filled with straw,
which helped to keep them warm. Harry walked for the most part by
the side of the horse's head, for they could only proceed at foot-pace;
but he sometimes climbed up and took the reins, the better to chat
with the girls and keep up their spirits. There was no occasion for
this in the case of Jeanne, but Virginie often gave way and cried
bitterly, and the old nurse suffered greatly from the cold in spite
of her warm wraps.

On arriving at Nantes Harry proceeded first to the Maine, and on
producing Robespierre's document received a permit to lodge in the
town. He then looked for apartments in the neighbourhood of the
river, and when he had obtained them disposed of the horse and cart.
The statement that he was Robespierre's secretary at once secured
for him much attention from the authorities, and he was invited to
become a member of the Revolutionary Committee during his stay in
the town, in order that he might see for himself with what zeal
the instructions received from Paris for the extermination of the
Royalists were being carried out.

This offer he accepted, as it would enable him to obtain information
of all that was going on. Had it not been for this he would gladly
have declined the honour, for his feelings were daily harrowed by
arrests and massacres which he was powerless to prevent, for he
did not venture to raise his voice on the side of mercy, for had he
done so, it would have been certain to excite suspicion. He found
that, horrible as were the atrocities committed in Paris, they
were even surpassed by those which were enacted in the provinces,
and that in Nantes in particular a terrible persecution was raging
under the direction of Carrier, who had been sent down from Paris
as commissioner from the Commune there.

Harry's next object was to make the acquaintance of some of the
fishermen, and to find out what vessels were engaged in smuggling
goods across to England; for it was in one of these alone that he
could hope to cross the Channel. This, however, he found much more
difficult than he had expected.

The terror was universal. The news of the execution of the king
had heightened the dismay. Massacres were going on all over France.
The lowest ruffians in all the great towns were now their masters,
and under pretended accusations were wreaking their hate upon the
respectable inhabitants. Private  enmities were wiped out in blood.
None were too high or too low to be denounced as Royalists, and
denunciation was followed as a matter of course by a mock trial
and execution. Every man distrusted his neighbour, and fear caused
those who most loathed and hated the existing regime to be loudest
in their advocacy of it. There were spies everywhere--men who
received blood-money for every victim they denounced.

Thus, then, Harry's efforts to make acquaintances among the
sailors met with very slight success. He was a stranger, and that
was sufficient to cause distrust, and ere long it became whispered
that he had come from Paris with special authority to hasten on the
work of extirpation of the enemies of the state. Soon, therefore,
Harry perceived that as he moved along the quay little groups of
sailors and fishermen talking together broke up at his approach, the
men sauntering off to the wine-shops, and any he accosted replied
civilly indeed, but with embarrassment and restraint; and although
any questions of a general character were answered, a profound
ignorance was manifested upon the subject upon which he wished to
gain information. The sailors all seemed to know that occasionally
cargoes of spirits were run from the river to England, but none
could name any vessel engaged in the trade. Harry soon perceived
that he was regarded with absolute hostility, and one day one of
the sailors said to him quietly:

"Citizen, I am a good sans-culotte, and I warn you, you had best
not come down the river after dark, for there is a strong feeling
against you; and unless you would like your body to be fished out
of the river with half a dozen knife-holes in it, you will take my
advice."

Harry began to feel almost crushed under his responsibilities.  His
attendance at the Revolutionary Committee tried him greatly.  He
made no progress whatever in his efforts to obtain a passage; and
to add to his trouble the old nurse, who had been much exhausted
by the change from her usual habits, and the inclemency of the
weather on her journey, instead of gaining strength appeared to be
rapidly losing it, and was forced to take to her bed. The terrible
events in Paris, and the long strain of anxiety as to the safety
of the girls and the fate of Marie, had completely exhausted her
strength, and the last six months had aged her as many  years. Harry
tried hard to keep up his appearance of hopefulness, and to cheer
the girls; but Jeanne's quick eye speedily perceived the change in
him.

"You are wearing yourself out, Harry," she said one evening as they
were sitting by the fire, while Virginie was tending Louise in the
next room. "I can see it in your face. It is of no use your trying
to deceive me. You tell us every day that you hope soon to get
hold of the captain of a boat sailing for England; but I know that
in reality you are making no progress. All those months when we
were hoping to get Marie out of prison--though it seemed next to
impossible--you told us not to despair, and I knew you did not
despair yourself; but now it is different. I am sure that you do
in your heart almost give up hope. Why don't you trust me, Harry?
I may not be able to do much, but I might try to cheer you. You
have been comforting us all this time. Surely it is time I took my
turn. I am not a child now."

"I feel like one just at present," Harry said unsteadily with
quivering lips. "I feel sometimes as if--as we used to say at
school--I could cry for twopence. I know,  Jeanne, I can trust you, and
it isn't because I doubted your courage that I have not told you
exactly how things are going on, but because it is entirely upon
you now that Louise and Virginie have to depend, and I do not wish
to put any more weight on your shoulders; but it will be a relief
to me to tell you exactly how we stand."

Harry then told her how completely he had failed with the sailors,
and how an actual feeling of hostility against him had arisen.

"I think I could have stood that, Jeanne; but it is that terrible
committee that tries me. It is so awful hearing these fiends marking
out their victims and exulting over their murder, that at times I
feel tempted to throw myself upon some of them and strangle them."

"It must be dreadful, Harry," Jeanne said soothingly. "Will it not
be possible for you to give out that you are ill, and so absent
yourself for a time from their meetings? I am sure you look ill--ill
enough for anything. As to the sailors,  do not let that worry
you.  Even if you could hear of a ship at present it would be of no
use. I couldn't leave Louise; she seems to me to be getting worse
and worse, and the doctor you called in three days ago thinks
so too. I can see it by his face. I think he is a good man.  The
woman whose sick child I sat up with last night tells me the poor
all love him. I am sure he guesses that we are not what we seem.
He said this morning to me:

"' I cannot do much for your grandmother. It is a general break-up.
I have many cases like it of old people  and women upon whom the
anxiety of the times has told. Do not worry yourself with watching,
child. She will sleep quietly, and will not need attendance.  If
you don't mind I shall have you on my hands. Anxiety affects the
young as well as the old.'

"At anyrate, you see, we cannot think of leaving here at present.
Louise has risked everything for us. It is quite impossible for
us to leave her now, so do not let that worry you. We are all in
God's hands, Harry, and we must wait patiently what He may send
us."

