
  Lord let me bear whate'er thy Love
    May send of grief or sorrow,
  Until Thou, in thy Heaven above
    Make dawn a brighter morrow.


And in the midst of her urgent praying, the mother's tears flowed
abundantly, and little Toni, deeply moved in his heart by his mother's
weeping and earnest prayer, kept his hands folded and wept softly too.

So the time passed. Elsbeth struggled along and little Toni was able to
help her in many ways, for he was now seven years old. He was his mother's
only joy, and she was able to take delight in him for he was obedient and
willing to do everything she desired. He had always been so inseparable
from his mother that he knew exactly how the tasks of the day had to be
done, and he desired nothing but to help her whenever he could. If she
was working in the little field, he squatted beside her, pulled out the
weeds, and threw the stones across the path.

If his mother was taking the goat out of the shed so that she could nibble
the grass around the hut, he went with her step by step, for his mother
had told him he must watch her so that she would not run away.

If his mother was sitting in winter by her spinning-wheel, he sat the
whole time beside her, mending his winter shoes with strong strips of
cloth, as she had taught him to do. He had no greater wish than to see his
mother happy and contented. His greatest pleasure was, when Sunday came
and she was resting from all work, to sit with her on the little wooden
bench in front of the house and listen as she told him about his father
and talk with her about all kinds of things.

But now the time had come for Toni to go to school. It was very hard for
him to leave his mother and remain away from her so much. The long way
down to Kandergrund and up again took so much time, that Toni was hardly
ever with his mother any more through the day, but only in the evening.
Indeed he always came home so quickly that she could hardly believe it
possible, for he looked forward with pleasure all day long to getting home
again. He lost no time with his school-mates but ran immediately away from
them as soon as school was over. He was not accustomed to the ways of the
other boys since he had been constantly alone with his quietly working
mother and used to performing definite tasks continually without any
noise.

So it was altogether strange to him and he took no pleasure in it, when
the boys coming out of the school-house, set up a great screaming, one
running after another, trying to see which was the stronger, and throwing
one another on the ground, or wrestling so that their caps were thrown far
away and their jackets half torn off.

The wrestlers would often call to him:

"Come and play!" and when he ran away from them they would call after
him: "You are a coward." But this made little difference to him; he didn't
hear it long, for he ran with all his might in order to be at home again
with his mother.

Now a new interest for him arose in the school: he had seen beautiful
animals drawn on white sheets, which the children of the upper classes
copied. He quickly tried to draw them, too, with his pencil and at home
continued drawing the animals again and again as long as he had a bit of
paper. Then he cut out the animals and tried to make them stand on the
table, but this he could not do. Then suddenly the thought came to him
that if they were of wood they could stand. He began quickly with his
knife to cut around on a little piece of wood until there was a body and
four legs; but the wood was not large enough for the neck and the head; so
he had to take another piece and calculate from the beginning how high it
must be and where the head must be placed. So Toni cut away with much
perseverance until he succeeded in making something like a goat and could
show it with great satisfaction to his mother. She was much delighted at
his skill and said:

"You are surely going to be a wood-carver, and a very good one."

From that time on Toni looked at every little piece of wood which came in
his way, to see if it would be good for carving, and if so he would
quickly put it away, so that he often brought home all his pockets full of
these pieces, which he then collected like treasures into a pile and spent
every free moment carving them.

Thus the years passed by. Although Elsbeth always had many cares, she
experienced only joy in her Toni. He still clung to her with the same
love, helped her in every way as well as he could and spent his life
beside her, entirely at his quiet occupation, in which he gradually
acquired a quite gratifying skill. Toni was never so content as when he
was sitting in the little stone hut with his carving and his mother came
in and out happily employed, always saying a kindly word to him and
finally sat down beside him at her spinning-wheel.




CHAPTER SECOND

A HARD SENTENCE


Toni was twelve years old in the winter, and now his school days were
over, and the time had come to look about for some kind of work which
would bring him in some money and by which he could learn something
necessary for future years.

Spring had come and work had begun in the fields. His mother thought it
would be best to ask the proprietor of the Matten farm, if he had some
light work for Toni; but every time she spoke about it he would say
beseechingly:

"Oh, Mother, don't do that; let me be a wood-carver!"

She would have had no objection to this, but knew no way to bring it
about, and she had known the farmer up on the Matten farm ever since her
husband had worked there, and ever since his death, from time to time he
had sent her a little wood or meal.

She hoped that he would employ Toni at first for light tasks in the field,
so that he would gradually learn to do the heavier work.

So on Saturday night after the day's work was ended and she sat down with
Toni to their scanty supper, she said once more:

"Toni, now we must take a decided step; I think it is best for me to go up
to the Matten farm to-morrow."

"Oh, Mother, don't do that!" said Toni quite beseechingly. "Don't go to
the farmer! If you will only let me be a wood-carver, I will work so hard,
that I will earn enough, and you will not have to do so much, and then I
can stay at home with you. Besides you would be all alone, and I can't
bear it, if I have to be always away from you. Let me stay with you; don't
send me away, Mother."

"Oh, you good Toni," said his mother, "what wouldn't I give to be able to
keep you always with me! But that really cannot be. I know of no way for
you to be a wood-carver; some one would have to teach you, and when you
had learned, how should we sell the carvings? You would have to know
people and go about, or else your work wouldn't bring any money. If only I
could talk with some one, who could give me good advice!"

"Don't you know any one, Mother, you can ask?" said Toni anxiously and
racked his brain to try to think of some one. His mother too began to
consider.

"I think I will go to the pastor, who has already given me advice," said
his mother, delighted to have found a way out of the difficulty.

Toni was quite happy and now was determined that early the next morning
they should go down to the church and then his mother could go in to see
the pastor and Toni would wait outside.

Everything was carried out on Sunday morning as they had planned. His
mother had put two of the little carved animals in her pocket to show the
pastor as examples of her boy's good ability. The pastor received her very
cordially, had her sit down beside him and enquired with interest about
her affairs, for he knew Elsbeth and how bravely she had helped herself
through all the hard times.

She told him now the whole story, how Toni from a very early age had
worked at the carving with so much interest and now wished for nothing so
much as to carry on this work, but how she knew of no way for him to
learn, nor how, later, the work could be sold. Finally she showed him the
two little animals as examples of Toni's skill.

The pastor replied to the mother that the plan would be very difficult to
carry out. Although the two little goats were not badly carved, yet in
order to perform the work right and to earn his bread by it, Toni would
