
[Illustration: Boy and Dog]


Look at Tom and his dog. The dog has a black spot on his back. Do you
think he is a good dog?

Tom has a big top, too. It is on the box with Kitty's doll.



LESSON XIV.

sun    we     how    pond    stop    for

go     swim   her    us      hot     duck

e      o


[Illustration: Man and girl standing by a pond.]


The sun is up. The man has fed the black hen and the fat duck.

Now the duck will swim in the pond. The hen has run to her nest.

Let us not stop at the pond now, for it is hot.

See how still it is! We will go to see Tom and his top.



LESSON XV.

John    rock     set    jump    fun    must

may     un'der   skip   bank    but    touch


O John! the sun has just set. It is not hot, now.

Let us run and jump. I think it is fun to run, and skip, and jump.

See the duck on the pond! Her nest is up on the bank, under the rock.

We must not touch the nest, but we may look at it



LESSON XVI. REVIEW.

The sun has set, and the pond is still.

John, Ned, Ben, Tom, and Nell stand on the bank, and look at the duck.


The dog with a black spot on his back, is with Tom. See! Tom has his hat
in his hand. He has left his big top on the box.

Kitty's doll is on the rock. Nell has put her pet in the cage. It will
sing a sweet song. The duck has her nest under the rock.

It is not hot now. Let us run, and skip, and jump on the bank. Do you not
think it is fun?



LESSON XVII.

are    ink    moss    this    tub    up set'    a


SLATE WORK

[Illustration: Script Exercise:
The pen and the ink are on
the stand.  Is this a good
pen?  The moss is on the
rock.  This duck can swim.
Ben upset the tub.
]


LESSON XVIII.

nut    did    shut    shall    lost    fox

men    met    step    in'to    hunt    mud


SLATE WORK.

[Illustration: Script Exercise:

Will the dog hunt a fox?
Ben lost his hat. Shall I
shut the box? I met him
on the step. Did you jump
into the mud? I have a
nut. I met the man.
]



LESSON XIX.

Kate    old     no     grass    dear    likes

be      drink   milk   cow      out     gives

a


[Illustration: Cow standing in pond.]


O Kate! the old cow is in the pond: see her drink! Will she not come out
to get some grass?

No, John, she likes to be in the pond. See how still she stands!

The dear old cow gives us sweet milk to drink.



LESSON XX.

mam ma'    large    as      pa pa     arms      ride

far        barn     both    Prince    trot      your


[Illustration: Man and girl riding a horse.]


Papa, will you let me ride with you on Prince? I will sit still in your
arms.

See, mamma! We are both on Prince. How large he is!

Get up, Prince! You are not too fat to trot as far as the barn.



LESSON XXI.

of      that    toss     fall               well      Fan'ny

ball    wall    was      pret'ty(prit-)     done      what

a       a


[Illustration: Two girls standing in meadow play with a ball.]


O Fanny, what a pretty ball!

Yes; can you catch it, Ann?

Toss it to me, and see. I will not let it fall.

That was well done

Now, Fanny, toss it to the top of the wall, if you can.



LESSON XXII.

had    went    call    might    flag    near    swam    swing


[Illustration: Woman and two girls standing by gate in fence.]


Did you call us, mamma?

I went with Tom to the pond. I had my doll, and Tom had his flag.

The fat duck swam to the bank, and we fed her. Did you think we might fall
into the pond?

We did not go too near, did we, Tom?

May we go to the swing, now, mamma?



LESSON XXIII.

here    band     hear     horse    play    they

pass    where    front    fine     hope    comes

e       e


[Illustration: Two boy standing on porch as band passes in street.]


Here comes the band! Shall we call mamma and Fanny to see it?

Let us stand still, and hear the men play as they pass.

I hope they will stop here and play for us.

See the large man in front of the band, with his big hat. What has he in
his hand? How fine he looks!

Look, too, at the man on that fine horse.

If the men do not stop, let us go with them and see where they go.



LESSON XXIV.

Bess       hap'py    make    cart       tent    woods

lit'tle    ver'y     bed     Rob'ert    gone    draw


[Illustration: Boy and girl with goat-cart in woods; tent in background.]
