the ground or on account of passage through lead pipes, but the danger is
never from ordinary decomposing vegetable matter. If you have to choose
between a bright, clear stream which may be polluted at some point above,
and a pond full of dead leaves and peaty matter, but which you can inspect
all around and find free from contamination, choose the pond. Even in the
woods it is not easy to find surface waters that are surely protected, and
streams particularly are dangerous sources of water supply. We have now
got rid of the idea that running water purifies itself. It is standing
water which purifies itself, if anything, for in stagnation there is much
more chance for the disease germs to die out. Better than either a pond or
stream, unless you can carry out a rather careful exploration of their
surroundings, is ground water from a well or spring; though that again is
not necessarily safe. If the well is in good sandy soil with no cracks or
fissures, even water that has been polluted may be well purified and made
safe to drink. In a clayey or rocky region, on the other hand,
contaminating material may travel for considerable distance under ground.
Even if your well is protected below, a very important point to look after
is the pollution from the surface. I believe more cases of typhoid fever
from wells are due to surface pollution than to the character of the water
itself. This is a danger which can, of course, be done away with by
protection of the well from surface drainage, by seeing that the surface
wash is not allowed to drain toward it and that it is protected by a tight
covering from the entrance of its own waste water. If good water cannot be
secured in any of these ways, the water must be purified. It has been said
that what we desire in water supply is innocence and not repentance; but
if you cannot get pristine innocence, you can, at least, secure works meet
for repentance and make the water safe, by filtering through either a
Pasteur or a Berkefeld filter--either of those filters will take out
bacteria, while no other filters that I know of will or by various
chemical disinfectants, not any of them very satisfactory--or, best of
all, by boiling, which will surely destroy all disease germs."

Indians had a way of purifying water from a pond or swamp by digging a
hole about one foot across and down about six inches below the water
level, a few feet from the pond. After it had filled with water, they
bailed it out quickly, repeating the bailing process about three times.
After the third bailing the hole would fill with filtered water. Try it.

Drinking Cups

Insist upon the boys bringing to camp a supply of inexpensive paper cups
or collapsible pocket drinking cups. Filthy and dangerous diseases are not
infrequently transmitted by the use of a common drinking cup.

Paper Drinking Cup.

Take a piece of clean paper about 6 inches square and fold it on the
dotted lines, as shown in Figure 1, so as to make a triangle. Do not use
paper having anything printed on it, as there is danger of poison from the
ink. The other folds are made in the dotted lines, as shown in Figure 2.
Each pointed end of the triangle is turned over on one side, as shown in
Figure 3, then the sheets of the remaining points are separated and each
one folded down on its respective side. This practical idea is furnished
by R. H. Lufkin in Popular Mechanics for February, 1911.

Board of Health

Boys should be encouraged to cooperate in keeping the camp clean. A Board
of Health may be organized, to be composed of an equal number of boys and
camp leaders with the camp physician, or director of the camp as chairman.

[Illustration: A Paper Drinking Cup]

The duties of the board will be to inspect daily the toilets, sinks, and
drains, the water supply, the garbage disposal and waste barrels; condemn
everything that is unsanitary, and correct all sanitary disorders. The
board will also arrange for a series of talks upon "Sanitation and
Health," such as:

Sunshine and Health
Johnnie and the Microbes
Dirt and Cleanliness
Fresh Air
Flies and Filth
Health--Its Value and Its Cost.

Have the boys write essays upon these subjects and give credits or points
for original interpretation, accuracy of report of talk given, and
observance and correction of sanitary disorders.

Maxims

Clean up as you go. Sunshine and dryness are great microbe killers. It is
better to keep clean, than to get clean. Dirt, dampness and disease can
often be avoided by decency, dryness and determination. Uncleanness is at
the root of many of the evils which cause suffering and ill health. Fire
is the best disinfectant. Typhoid fever and cholera are carried by dirty
habits, by dirty water and dirty milk.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Camp Sanitation-Review and Herald Pub. Assn., Washington, D. C. 6 cents. A
twelve-page folder of useful hints on what to do and what not to do.

Wastes and Their Disposal--Henry J. Barnes, M.D. Health-Education League,
Boston, Mass., 4 cents. An authoritative booklet written by the Professor
of Hygiene, Tufts Medical School. This League publishes a number of very
valuable and comprehensive booklets on health subjects.

Good Health--Francis Gulick Jewett. Ginn and Co., 40 cents. Gives detail
instruction in matters of health and hygiene. Prepared especially for
younger people.

Health--B. Franklin Richards. Pacific Press Pub. Co., $1.00. Written in
language easily understood and filled with sensible suggestions.

[Illustration: "The Sardines"--Eight Boys in a 12X14 Tent--Camp Becket]



CHAPTER IV--CAMP EQUIPMENT

ADVANCE PARTY
PLAN OF CAMP GROUNDS
A MEASURING DEVICE
SETTING UP A WALL TENT
GUYING THE TENT
TRENCHING
PEG WISDOM
INTERIOR TENT CONVENIENCES
HOW TO MAKE A TEPEE
TENT WISDOM
SLEEPING ON THE GROUND
A "HIP HOLE"
HOW TO KEEP WARM
MAKING A BED
DOUBLE-DECK BUNKS
BLANKETS
PILLOWS
KITCHEN WARE
TABLE WARE
TABLE TOPS
A "HORSE" IDEA
PERMANENT BUILDINGS
SURVEYING
HOME-MADE INSTRUMENTS
CAMP SURVEY


The greatest help after all is to take the children back to the garden
that the Lord God planted. A boy must learn to sleep under the open sky
and to tramp ten miles through the rain if he wants to be strong. He must
learn what sort of men it was who made America, and he must not get into
this fuss and flurry of our American civilization and think that patent
leather shoes and white kid gloves are necessary for the salvation of his
life.--Edward Everett Hale.

Selecting a camp site and general directions for the laying out of the
camp grounds is treated very fully in the chapter on Camp Sanitation, so
that this chapter will be devoted to methods that to the experienced
camper may seem trite, but which the novice will appreciate.

[Illustration: Laying Out a Camp]

Advance Party

If the camp is a large one it is usually customary to send an advance
party several days ahead to erect the tents and get the camp in readiness
for the larger party. The successful management of a camp depends very
much upon placing the tents in such a position as to give plenty of room
and yet be compact. When tents are scattered the difficulty of control is
increased. The above diagram is a suggestion for the laying out of a camp
which provides for room and control.

Plan of Grounds

The following hints will help the advance party to layout the camp in a
systematic and scientific manner. To find the right angle of the camp
square, drive a peg at A, another 3 feet distant at B; attach a 5-foot
cord from the peg at B, and a 4 foot cord from the peg at A. The point at
which the two cords meet at C, where another peg may be driven in, will be
the line at right angles to B-A.

[Illustration: Right Angle of Camp Square]

Measuring Device

The illustrations opposite show a device by which a camp, baseball
grounds, running track, tennis court or any distance may be quickly and
accurately measured. The first thing to do is to get an inch board and cut
a round disc (a) about 12 inches in diameter. Cut two of them and tack
them together. The diagram "b" is easier to cut out and will serve the
purpose just as well. When the two are temporarily tacked together, bore a
hole through the centre for the axle. The eight spokes should be of light
material and not too pointed or they will sink in the ground and prevent
accuracy. The spokes are tacked on one disc as shown in "c" and then the
other disc is nailed on the outside.

[Illustration: A Measuring Device]

Paint the end of one spoke red, so that you can count it every time it
comes around. By having the points that touch the ground exactly 9 inches
apart, one revolution of the wheel will measure six feet. For an axle use
a small piece of broom handle, and for a handle use a long light pole. By
varying the length of the spokes you can make the wheel measure any
desired distance.

Wall Tent

The line of the camp having been laid out, the next thing is the erection
of the tents. The best way of setting up a wall tent (either the 12 x 14
or 14 x 16 size), the type used in most of the boys' camps, is the method
used by the army and described in Kephart's "Book of Camping and
Woodcraft." Four boys or men proceed as follows: Nos. 1 and 2 procure
canvas, and Nos. 3 and 4 the poles.

Nos. 3 and 4 lay the ridge pole on the ground, in the direction that the
tent is to stand; then lay the uprights at each end of ridge-pole and at
right angles to it, on the side opposite that from which the wind blows.
Then drop the tent pins and hammers at their respective ends of the tent;
then drive a pin at each end of the ridge to mark front and rear.
Meanwhile Nos. 1 and 2 unroll the tent and spread it out over the
ridge-pole and on both sides of it.

Nos. 1 and 3 now go to the rear, and Nos. 2 and 4 to the front, and slip
the pins of the uprights through the ridge-pole and tent. If a fly is
used, it is placed in position over the tent, and the loops of the long
guys over the front and rear pole pins. No. 4 secures center (door) loops
over center pin in front, and No. 1 in rear. Each goes to his corner, No.
1 right rear, No. 2 right front, No. 3 left rear, No. 4 left front.

All draw bottom of tent taut and square, the front and rear at right
angles to the ridge, and fasten it with pins through the corner loops,
then stepping outward two paces from the corner, and a pace to the front
(Nos. 2 and 4) or rear (Nos. 1 and 3) each securely sets a long pin, over
which is passed the extended corner guy rope. Care must be taken that the
tent is properly squared and pinned to the ground at the door and four
corners before raising it.

[Illustration: Shelter Tents, Seton Tepee, Tent Made Of A "Fly", Wall
Tent]

Nos. 1 and 3 now go to the rear, and Nos. 2 and 4 to the front pole, and
raise the tent to a convenient height from the ground, when Nos. 2 and 3
enter and seize their respective poles, and all together raise the tent
until the upright poles are vertical. While Nos. 2 and 3 support the
poles, Nos. 1 and 4 tighten the corner guys, beginning on the windward
side. The tent being thus temporarily secured, all set the guy pins and
fasten the guy ropes, Nos. 1 and 2 to the right, Nos. 3 and 4 left, and
then set the wall pins.

To prevent the upright poles from sinking in the ground under the pressure
of the canvas, place a flat stone or piece of wood under the pole.

Guying the Tent

One of the troubles with tents is their remarkable proclivity for
tightening and slackening with the varying conditions of the weather. This
means a constant loosening or tightening of the guy ropes, and the longer
the guy ropes the more they will shrink or stretch according as they are
wet or dry. This may be overcome to some extent by using very heavy corner
posts securely driven into the ground and spiking a pole across them, and
very short guy ropes fastening to this pole. (See page 47.) A shower, or
even ordinary dew, will cause the canvas to shrink, therefore be sure to
slacken the guys, or you may have a torn tent or broken ridge pole.

Trenching

Dig a trench around the tent and do it before you have to. If you have
ever gotten out in the middle of the night when the rain was coming down
in torrents, to dig a ditch or trench, you will appreciate this bit of
advice.

Warn the boys not to touch the roof of the tent on the inside when it is
raining, for it will surely leak wherever it is touched.

There is a right and a wrong way of driving stakes into the ground. Study
illustrations, p. 47.

Peg Wisdom

In taking down the tent, don't pound loose the tent pins or pegs, but with
a looped  rope and a pull in the direction from which they are driven they
can easily be removed.

Conveniences

After pitching your tent, put everything in order. Run a stout line,
either of rope or rustless wire, between the two upright poles, about a
foot below the ridge pole. A very convenient thing to throw clothes over.
In some camps they have a shelf suspended from the ridge pole, divided
into compartments, one for each boy in the tent. Nails driven in the
upright poles afford convenient pegs to hang things on. Be sure the nails
are removed before taking down the tent or a rip in the canvas will be the
result.

A bundle of elder leaves in a tent will keep away flies. If ants show a
desire to creep into your tent, dust cayenne pepper into their holes and
they will no longer trouble you.

When there is no wooden floor in the tent, strew small hemlock twigs. They
make a fine carpet and the odor is both pleasant and healthful.

In addition to the different styles of tents shown in the illustrations on
page 43, the following description of how to make a ten-foot teepee is
given by Charles R. Scott in his Vacation Diary:

Making a Teepee

Sew canvas together making oblong ABCD 20 by 10 feet; with E as centre and
EA as a radius, draw half-circle AFD. From remaining canvas cut smoke
flaps LKCM and ONBP. Sew piece of canvas at C and B making pocket for ends
of smoke poles. Sew ML to HI and PO to GJ on one large piece of canvas.
Sew lash to E to tie teepee to pole. Sew 6 or 7-foot lash to K and N to
set smoke flaps with. Make holes in pairs from L to D and O to A for
lacing pins. Ten poles 12 feet long are needed. Make tripod of nine of
these and tie teepee at E to pole two feet from top and place over tripod.

In "Recreation," April, 1911, in an article on "Tent Making Made Easy," H.
J. Holden tells how to make ten different tents with but one piece of
canvas.

[Illustration: The Ten Foot Teepee]

Tent Wisdom

The best type of tent to use in a permanent camp is a wall tent, either 12
x 14 or 14 x 16, which will accommodate from four to six fellows. An eight
ounce, mildew-proofed duck, with a ten or twelve ounce duck fly will give
excellent wear. Have a door at each end of the tent and the door ties made
of cotton cord instead of tape. Double pieces of canvas should be sewed in
all the corners and places where there is unusual strain. Manilla rope is
best for guys, and metal slides are preferable to wood. If the tents are
made to order, have a cotton cord about two feet long sewed in each seam
just under the eaves, so that one end shall hang down inside the tent and
the other outside. The walls of the tent can then be rolled up and tied so
that the tent will be thoroughly aired. Make sure that the end of the
ridge pole and of the upright poles have iron bands to prevent splitting
of the poles.

Bed on Ground

For a short-term camp, pine boughs make the best kind of a bed (see
chapter on Tramps and Hikes for description of bed). Sometimes a rubber
blanket is spread upon the ground and the boys roll themselves up in their
blankets. An old camper gives the following suggestion to those who desire
to sleep in this fashion:

The bed should be made in the afternoon while the sun is shining. To make
the bed, clear the ground of twigs and stones. The space should be about 6
x 3 feet.

A "Hip Hole"

A shovelful of dirt is removed, making a shallow, transverse trench, about
midway of the bed. This trench is the "hip hole" and the making of it
properly is what renders the bed comfortable. In making the bed the
following order should be observed:

(1) spread the rubber blanket;

(2) the blanket spread so that one-half only covers the prepared couch;

(3) then spread the woolen blankets so that the "hip hole" is in the right
place;

(4) add the pillow;

(5) fold the blankets over you and pin them with big safety pins across
the bottom and along the side.

To Keep Warm

Stewart Edward White in "Camp and Trail" tells how to keep warm when
sleeping on the ground: "Lie flat on your back. Spread the blanket over
you. Now raise your legs rigid from the hip, the blanket, of course,
draping over them. In two swift motions tuck first one edge under your
legs from right to left, then the second edge under from left to right,
and over the first edge. Lower your legs, wrap up your shoulders and go to
sleep. If you roll over, one edge will unwind but the other will tighten."

A bed tick[1] 6-1/2 feet long and 2-1/2 feet wide, to be filled with
grass, leaves, straw or any available stuff makes a comfortable bed.

[Transcribers Footnote 1:  Cloth case for a mattress or pillow or a light
mattress without springs.]

To Make a Bed

A comfortable bed used at Camp Durrell, is made by driving four posts in
the ground and nailing a frame work of saplings on these posts. Rope is
then interwoven from side to side in somewhat the fashion of the old-time
cord bed. Pine boughs are then placed "shingle" fashion in the cording,
making a very comfortable bed.

Double-Deck Bunks

Many of the long-term camps, however, have cots or bunks with canvas
bottoms. This is the best way to sleep for boys who are going to be in
camp the entire summer. The following type of double-deck bunk is in use
at Camps Adirondack, Becket, Wawayanda and Dudley. The illustrations give
a clear idea of its construction. Use wood as free from knots as possible.
Spruce seems to be the best kind as it is both light in weight and very
durable. The top section upon which the canvas beds are tacked is bolted
to the uprights which makes a bunk easily taken apart. Three of these
uprights, one at each end and one in the middle, will make a bed section
accommodating four boys, two on the "first floor" and two on the "second
floor." In this manner eight boys may be comfortably housed in a 12 x 14
or 14 x 16 foot tent, with room for baggage in the center, as shown in the
illustration on page 37.

Blankets

Always remember that to keep warm while sleeping in a cot or bunk, you
must have as much thickness of blanket under you as above you. Usually
boys will pile blankets on top of them and have only one blanket under
them and then wonder why they are cold.

Pillows

A pillow may be made out of a bag of muslin or dark denim and stuffed with
a sweater or extra clothing. Much better--take a small pillow with you
with removable and washable "case" made of dark green or brown denim.

[Illustration: Bunk Diagram]

Kitchen Ware

In purchasing kitchen ware, a mistake is frequently made by getting a
cheap kind of ware unfitted for the hard usage of camp life. The kind
manufactured for hotels and restaurants and of sufficient capacity, is
more expensive, but will outwear two outfits of the cheaper type and is
really more economical in the long run. In the buying do not omit that
most adaptable and convenient of all cooking utensils for camp--a wash
boiler. Get one that is copper-lined and made of the heaviest tin.

Table Ware

Campers prefer the white enamel ware on account of its appearance and
wear. If the imported kind is purchased it will last for at least three
long-term seasons. Avoid tin and the cheap gray enamel ware. Each boy
should be provided with a large plate of the deep soup pattern, cereal
bowl not too large, a saucer for sauce and dessert, a cup, knife, fork,
table spoon and tea spoon. In a small camp the boy usually brings his own
"eating utensils." When the table is set with white oil cloth, white
enamelled dishes, both serving and individual, with decorations of ferns,
wild flowers or blossoms, the food always seems to taste better and the
meal proceeds with that keen enjoyment, which is not only conducive to
good digestion but promotive of good fellowship. A dirty table and dishes
and rough-house table manners are a disgrace to a camp even as small as
