but you elected me captain, and I do want a little success in the houses,
and how can we get it if the fellows don't combine? Say no more about it;
I was rather afraid you weren't going to come, which is the unadorned
truth."

This last delicate touch, which showed Chalmers that, without the apology,
his captain had meant to cut him adrift, _sans_ hesitation, and yet
contained a pretty little compliment to his footer, embarrassed Chalmers
more than a little; but Acton offered his forward tea and muffins, and
five minutes afterwards Chalmers was finding out what a nice fellow Acton
really could be. The next day Chalmers smoothed his ruffled feelings by
piling on three goals against the Fifth, who sneaked off the Acres five
goals to the bad. This was the first time for ages that Biffen's had
tasted blood, and the news of the victory staggered others besides the
victims. There was quite a flutter among the house captains, and Acton, by
the way, had no more mutinies.

"Without haste, without rest," Biffen's captain started his second project
for the elevation of his house. He had noticed what none of the other
fellows would condescend to see, that two of the despised niggers of
Biffen's were rather neat on the bars. He spent a quarter of an hour one
evening quietly watching the two in the gym, and he went away thoughtful.
Singh Ram and Mehtah thereupon each received a polite note, and "could
they call about seven in Acton's study?" They came, and Acton talked to
them briefly but to the point. When they sought their quarters again they
were beaming, and "Singed" Ram carried a fat book of German physical
exercises under his arm.

"Am I not coming out strong?" said Acton, laughing to himself, "when I set
the very niggers a-struggling for the greater glory of Biffen's--or is it
Acton's? Then, there's that exhibition, which we must try to get for this
double-superlative house. Raven must beat that Sixth prig Hodgson, the
very bright particular star of Corker's. Would two hours' classics, on
alternate nights, meet his case? He shall have 'em, bless him! He shall
know what crops Horace grew on his little farm, and all the other rot
which gains Perry Exhibitions. Hodgson may strong coffee and wet towel
_per noctem_; but, with John Acton as coach, Raven shall upset the
apple-cart of Theodore Hodgson. There's Todd in for the Perry, too, I
hear. Hodgson may be worth powder and shot, but I'm hanged if Raven need
fear Cotton's jackal! If only half of my plans come off, still that will
put Philip Bourne in a tighter corner than he's ever been in before.
Therefore--_en avant!_"




CHAPTER V

COTTON AND HIS JACKAL


As I said before, the victory of the despised Biffenites over the Fifth
Form eleven--a moderate one, it is true--caused quite a little breeze of
surprise to circulate around the other houses, which had by process of
time come to regard that slack house as hopeless in the fields or in the
schools. Over all the tea-tables that afternoon the news was commented on
with full details; how Chalmers had gained in deadliness just as much as
he had lost in selfishness, and how Raven and Worcester had worked like
horses, and mown down the opposition--"Fifth Form opposition!" said the
fags, with a lift of the eyebrows--like grass, and as for Biffen's new
captain, well, if there was one player who could hold a candle to him it
must be Phil Bourne, and he only.

In the Rev. E. Taylor's house, Cotton senior, who answered to the name of
"Jim" among his familiars, and was "Bully Cotton" to his enemies--every
Amorian below the Fifth, and a good sprinkling elsewhere--and Augustus
Vernon Robert Todd, who was "Gus" to every one, sat at tea together in
Todd's room. Cotton had been one of the slain that afternoon on the Acres,
and was still in his footer clothes, plus a sweater, which almost came up
to his ears. There was a bright fire in the grate, and though Todd's room
was not decorative compared with most of the other fellows' dens, yet it
was cheerful enough. Cotton had come back from the match hungry and a
trifle bruised from a smart upset, only to find his own fire out, and
preparations for tea invisible. Having uttered dire threats against his
absent, erring fag, he moved into his friend's room, and the two clubbed
together their resources, and the result was a square meal, towards which
Cotton contributed something like 19/20, A.V.R. Todd's share being limited
to the kettle, the water, and the fire. When Cotton had satisfied his
footer appetite, he turned down his stocking and proceeded vigorously to
anoint with embrocation his damaged leg, the pungent scent of the liniment
being almost ornamental in its strength.

"How did you get that, Jim?" said Gus, surveying the brawny limb with
interest.

"Acton brought me down like a house, my boy."

"Fair?"

"Oh yes; but you've got to go down if he catches you in his swing."

"You fellows must have played beautifully to let Biffen's mob maul you to
that extent."

"Gus, my boy, instead of frowsing up here all the afternoon with your
books, you should have been on the touch-line watching those Biffenites at
their new tricks. Your opinion then would have a little avoirdupois. As it
is, you Perry Exhibit, it is worth exactly nothing."

"You're deucedly classical to-night, Jim."

"Oh, I'm sick of this forsaken match and all the compliments we've had
over it. I'm going now to have a tub, and then we'll get that Latin paper
through, and, thirdly, I'll have the chessmen out."

"Sorry, I can't, Jim," said Todd, discontentedly. "There is that beastly
Perry Scholarship--I must really do something for that!"

"Thomas Rot, Esq.!" said Cotton. "Haven't you been a-cramming and
a-guzzling for that all this afternoon? You've a duty towards your chums,
Toddy, so I tell you."

"That's all very well, Jim, for you, who are going to break some crammer's
heart, and then crawl into the Army through the Militia, but my pater
wants me to do something in the Perry, I tell you."

"Chess!" said Cotton, disregarding Todd's bleat, and then, with a sly
smile, he added, "Shilling a game, Gus, and you know you always pull off
the odd one."

"All right," said Todd, swallowing the bait with forlorn eagerness; "I'll
have the board set out if you must come in."

"Oh, I must!" said Cotton, with a half-sneer at Todd's anxiety to pick up
a small sum. "Clear the table, and we'll make a snug evening of it."

Todd's method of clearing a table was novel, if not original. He carried
it bodily into Cotton's room, and then returned with his friend's
mahogany, which was undoubtedly more ornamental than his own.

Acton was absolutely right when he sneeringly called Gus "Cotton's
jackal." Todd was exactly of the material which makes a good jackal,
though he never became quite Jim Cotton's toady. He was a sharp, selfish
individual, good-looking in an aimless kind of way, with a slack, feeble
mouth, and a wandering, indecisive glance. He had a quick, shallow
cleverness, which could get up pretty easily enough of inexact knowledge
to pass muster in the schools. Old Corker knew his capabilities to a hair,
and would now and then, when Gus offered up some hazy, specious
guess-work, blister him with a little biting sarcasm. Todd feared the
Doctor as he feared no one else. Todd's chief private moan was that he
never had any money. His father was a rich man, but had some ideas which
were rather rough on his weak-kneed son. He tipped poor Gus as though he
were some thrifty hairdresser's son, and Todd had to try to ruffle it with
young Amorians on as many shillings as they had crowns. Not a lad who ever
had naturally any large amount of self-respect, the little he had soon
went, and he became, while still a fag, a hewer of wood and drawer of
water to his better-tipped cronies. His destiny finished when, on his
entry into the Fifth, Jim Cotton claimed him, and subsidized him as his
man.

At the beginning of the term his father had told him that if he could make
a good show in the Perry Exhibition there need not be any more grumbling
about his tip. Gus came back to St. Amory's hysterically anxious to cut
out all competitors for the Perry, but the shackles of his old serfdom
were still about him. When he showed signs of being restive to the old
claims, and recommended Cotton to do his own classics and mathematics,
Cotton coolly and calmly demanded repayment of sundry loans contracted of
old. Todd had not the pluck to face a term of plain living and high
thinking by paying his former patron all he owed him and exhausting all
his present tip by so doing, but flabbily, though discontentedly, caved
in, and became Cotton's jackal as before.

Cotton was by no means as bad as his endearing name might make you think.
He was a tall, heavy fellow, with a large, determined-looking face. He was
wonderfully stupid in the schools, but was quite clever enough to know it.
He had some good qualities. He was straight enough in all extra-school
affairs, did not lie, nor fear any one; kept his word, and expected you to
keep yours.

"You can't beat Hodgson of the Sixth, Gus, so what is the good of sweating
all the term? Hodgson's got the deuce of a pull over you to start with."

"I'm not frightened of Hodgson if you wouldn't bother, Jim."

"Can't do without you, old cock. You're just the fellow to lift my Latin
and those filthy mathematics high enough out of the mud to keep the beaks
from worrying me to death. I tried Philips for a week, but he did such
weird screeds in the 'unseens' that Merishall smelt a rat, and was most
particular attentive to me, but your leverage is just about my fighting
weight."

Gus had sniffed discontentedly at this dubious compliment; but Cotton had
smiled stolidly, and continued to use Gus as his classical and
mathematical hack. Besides, there was something about Gus's easy-going
lackadaisical temperament which exactly suited Cotton, and he felt for his
grumbling jackal a friendliness apart from Gus's usefulness to him.

This afternoon had been a fair sample of Todd's usual half-holiday.
Feeling no heart for any serious work for the Perry, he had spent it in
reading half a worthless novel, and skimming through a magazine, and
feeling muddled and discontented in consequence. He had the uneasy feeling
that he was an arrant ass in thus fooling time away, but had not
sufficient self-denial to seize upon a quiet afternoon for a little
genuine work.

Cotton soon returned from his bath, and the two cronies spent about an
hour in getting up the least modicum of their classics which would satisfy
Merishall; and then they played chess, by which Gus was one florin richer.
A third game was in progress, but Todd managed to tip over the board when
he was "going to mate in five moves." Cotton thereupon said he had had
enough, but Gus avariciously tried to reconstruct the positions. He failed
dismally, and Cotton laughed sweetly. Now Cotton's laugh would almost make
his chum's hair curl, so he retorted pretty sweetly himself, "I say, Jim.
I can't get out of my head that awful hammering you fellows got this
afternoon. Think Biffen's lot likely to shape well in the House matches?"

"There's no telling, old man. But if they get moderate luck they'll be
waltzing about in the final."

"That's absolute blazing idiocy!" said Todd, knocking over more chessmen
in his astonishment.

"All right, Gus. To talk absolute blazing idiocy is my usual habit, of
course. They may carry off the final even, but that, perhaps, is a tall
order."

Todd nursed his astonishment for a full five minutes, whistling
occasionally, as at some very fantastic idea. At last he said more
seriously: "Aren't you now, Jim, really pulling my leg?"

"No, honour bright! Biffen's are really eye-openers."

Gus said with infinite slyness: "Look here, I'll bet you evens Biffen's
_don't_ pull off the final."

"Oh, that is rot, Gus, to talk about betting, for you can't pay if you
lose."

Gus had not too much sensitiveness in his character, but this unmeant
insult stung him.

"You've no right to say that. I've paid all I've ever betted with you."

Cotton considered heavily in his own mind for a moment. "That is almost
true, but--"

"Well, what do you mean--" began Todd, in a paddy.

"All right," said Cotton; "shut up, confound you! I'll take you."

"Three quid Biffen's are not cock-house at 'footer.'"

"Done," said Cotton, unwillingly pulling out his note-book; "and straight,
Todd, I shall expect you to pay if you lose."

"Oh, shut up, Cotton, you cad! I shall pay if I lose, man. What do you
want to keep on insulting me like that for?"

"Steady, Gus. You'll have Taylor up if you howl like that. I meant
nothing."

"Nothing!" said Gus in a fury, seeking for something particularly sweet to
say to his patron. "I jolly well hope, then, that if our house should meet
'em in the rounds you will do your little best to put a stopper on their
career. Don't, for the sake of pulling off your bet, present 'em with a
few goals. You 'keep' for our house, you know."

"Oh, dash it all, Todd," said Cotton, in a white rage, "you are a bounder!
Think I'd sell my side?" he demanded furiously.

"Ah!" said Gus, delighted at having got through Cotton's skin. "You don't
stomach insults any more than I do. Then why do you ladle them out so
jolly freely to me?"

"That was a particularly low one," said Cotton angrily; "and anyway, you
avaricious beggar, you've got thundering good terms, for it is hardly
likely that Biffen's can really be cock-house. There's Corker's house,
with Bourne and Hodgson and a few more good men. You're a sight more
likely to see my three sovs, that I am yours."

"I hope so," said Gus, with some relief at the anticipation of this
pleasant prospect.

Then the anger of the two simmered down, each having given and received
some very choice compliments, and as these little breezes were usual
between the two, ten minutes afterwards they were amiably entertaining
each other. Cotton was putting up a pair of dumb-bells three hundred
times, and his crony was counting and criticising his form. The Perry
Exhibition did not enter Todd's head, but his bet--"such a gilt-edged
one," he chuckled--was never once out of it. And Todd's bet had some
momentous consequences for him, too.




CHAPTER VI

THE LAST CAP


While Acton was thus making such strenuous exertions to lift Biffen's out
of the mire, Bourne was finding out the whole unpainted beauty of the
situation--as far as it concerned himself.

The experimental footer elevens were chosen in what, I believe, is the
usual manner. The old members of the school eleven formed a committee, and
chose fellows to play in the weekly matches, and if any one of them showed
special talent he was, of course, retained, and by-and-by the captain gave
him his school cap, and he was henceforth a full-blown member of the
eleven, with a seat on the committee like any of the old gang.

There were left of the last year's team five players--Bourne, Mivart,
Vercoe, Baines, and Roberts. The final promotion of fellows into the
eleven, however, rested with the captain alone, and when he considered any
fellow good enough he signified the same by presenting him with the blue
and silver cap of St. Amory.

The giving away of a cap had become quite a function. Whenever there was
the rumour that some one was to have a cap after a match, pretty well the
whole school swarmed round the pavilion, and when the new member came out
in all the glory of his new blue and silver he got the cheers which his
play or popularity deserved, and especially did the new member's house
distinguish themselves in the shouting.

Thus Bourne had six caps at his disposal, and since "Socker" had been
introduced, the last cap was always given so that when the school played
the last match--the Carthusians--the eleven would be complete.

Bourne saw at once the cloud which was rising on the horizon when, at the
first committee meeting to choose the eleven against "The Cognoscenti"
Mivart said, "Well, Bourne, we've got your partner for to-morrow ready
made. I think we may put that new chap Acton down right off."

"Rather," said Vercoe. "He can't be left out."

"Best back we've seen for an age-barring Phil, of course," said Baines.

"And the others we'll have to fight over, as usual. My choice is Hodgson
for centre."

"Too lazy, Roberts. Mine is Chalmers."

"Rot! He's a winger."

And so the selection of an eleven against the Cognoscenti went on in the
usual old-fashioned style.

Bourne dropped into my study afterwards and said, gloomily; "On the whole,
Carr, had I not better tell the fellows that they may elect Acton for our
school fixtures, but he cannot have his cap? That will take the bull by
the horns from the beginning."

"By no means. The other fellows have nothing whatever to do with giving
caps away; that is your business entirely. Besides, who knows? Acton may
not care to play when he knows he cannot get his cap."

"I'd be agreeably surprised if he didn't. But that won't be his little
game. Take my word for it, he'll turn out on every blessed occasion, play
like a master of the game, and give us no end of trouble."

"Perhaps he may. Anyhow, something may turn up between now and the last
match--we'll hope so, anyhow; and until the last cap is given away the
fellows generally won't spot your little game."

"'Tis only putting off the evil day, Carr," said Phil, discontentedly.

"A good day to put off."

Thus, when Hodgson was given the first cap, there was the general comment
that he was pretty sure to annex a cap sooner or later, and might as well
have it soon. Acton's turn--so said the school would come later, though
Biffen's house sneered. "Of course, Hodgson is in the Sixth. What else but
a Sixth Form fellow is wanted in a footer eleven?"

Sharpe's house secured the next two caps, and Biffen's groaned aloud.
"Whatever is old Phil about? One might think he was blind in his right eye
and straddled in his left. We'll send him a pair of gig lamps, and then
perhaps he may discover Acton--Acton, of Biffen's."

The weeks went by, and after a spirited display by Chalmers against the
Emeriti, he was given his cap, and for the first time since Biffen's was a
house they had a man in the eleven. But they gasped as Chalmers came out
of the pavilion with his blue and silver cap on his curls. "That ass
Bourne found the house at last, and then he goes and carefully spots the
wrong man. Whatever _is_ the matter with him? To pick Chalmers before
Acton! Rot!"

Over tea that night Biffen's bubbled and choked, and the other houses
began to take a lively interest in the next distribution, for this
constant passing of Acton was becoming exciting. But still--and I was glad
to see it--the school had faith in Phil; they counted on justice being
done, as it were, in the last laps. No one mentioned a word to him about
the intense curiosity and even anxiety that his odd bestowal of caps had
excited amongst them, for Phil has that way with him that can shut up a
fellow quicker than you can snap a knife if that fellow is travelling out
of bounds.

However, when Place, of Merishall's, came out of the pavilion a full-blown
member of the school eleven there was a scene. The whole body of fellows
now thought that the comedy was pretty nearly becoming a tragedy, and they
showed their feelings unmistakably. Place was cheered by Merishall's, but
not overwhelmingly, and from the other houses there was an ominous
silence. Place, as he trotted out, looked rather puzzled, and a bit
undecided how to take his odd reception, and glanced rather helplessly
round at the sea of faces all turned anxiously towards him. There would be
pretty nearly seven hundred fellows round the pavilion, for there was no
end of excitement.

"Keep up your pecker, Place! You're all right, anyhow!" shouted some one.

The other members came out one by one, and were cheered to the echo, and
at last Phil came out with Hodgson. He was rather pale, but had his back
