Back-swording and wrestling were the most serious holiday pursuits of
the Vale--those by which men attained fame--and each village had its
champion. I suppose that, on the whole, people were less worked then
than they are now; at any rate, they seemed to have more time and energy
for the old pastimes. The great times for back-swording came round once
a year in each village; at the feast. The Vale "veasts" were not
the common statute feasts, but much more ancient business. They are
literally, so far as one can ascertain, feasts of the dedication--that
is, they were first established in the churchyard on the day on which
the village church was opened for public worship, which was on the wake
or festival of the patron saint, and have been held on the same day in
every year since that time.

There was no longer any remembrance of why the "veast" had been
instituted, but nevertheless it had a pleasant and almost sacred
character of its own; for it was then that all the children of the
village, wherever they were scattered, tried to get home for a holiday
to visit their fathers and mothers and friends, bringing with them their
wages or some little gift from up the country for the old folk. Perhaps
for a day or two before, but at any rate on "veast day" and the day
after, in our village, you might see strapping, healthy young men and
women from all parts of the country going round from house to house in
their best clothes, and finishing up with a call on Madam Brown,
whom they would consult as to putting out their earnings to the best
advantage, or how best to expend the same for the benefit of the old
folk. Every household, however poor, managed to raise a "feast-cake"
and a bottle of ginger or raisin wine, which stood on the cottage table
ready for all comers, and not unlikely to make them remember feast-time,
for feast-cake is very solid, and full of huge raisins. Moreover,
feast-time was the day of reconciliation for the parish. If Job Higgins
and Noah Freeman hadn't spoken for the last six months, their "old
women" would be sure to get it patched up by that day. And though there
was a good deal of drinking and low vice in the booths of an evening,
it was pretty well confined to those who would have been doing the like,
"veast or no veast;" and on the whole, the effect was humanising and
Christian. In fact, the only reason why this is not the case still is
that gentlefolk and farmers have taken to other amusements, and have, as
usual, forgotten the poor. They don't attend the feasts themselves, and
call them disreputable; whereupon the steadiest of the poor leave them
also, and they become what they are called. Class amusements, be
they for dukes or ploughboys, always become nuisances and curses to a
country. The true charm of cricket and hunting is that they are still
more or less sociable and universal; there's a place for every man who
will come and take his part.

No one in the village enjoyed the approach of "veast day" more than Tom,
in the year in which he was taken under old Benjy's tutelage. The feast
was held in a large green field at the lower end of the village. The
road to Farringdon ran along one side of it, and the brook by the side
of the road; and above the brook was another large, gentle, sloping
pasture-land, with a footpath running down it from the churchyard; and
the old church, the originator of all the mirth, towered up with its
gray walls and lancet windows, overlooking and sanctioning the whole,
though its own share therein had been forgotten. At the point where the
footpath crossed the brook and road, and entered on the field where the
feast was held, was a long, low roadside inn; and on the opposite side
of the field was a large white thatched farmhouse, where dwelt an old
sporting farmer, a great promoter of the revels.

Past the old church, and down the footpath, pottered the old man and the
child hand-in-hand early on the afternoon of the day before the feast,
and wandered all round the ground, which was already being occupied
by the "cheap Jacks," with their green-covered carts and marvellous
assortment of wares; and the booths of more legitimate small traders,
with their tempting arrays of fairings and eatables; and penny
peep-shows and other shows, containing pink-eyed ladies, and dwarfs, and
boa-constrictors, and wild Indians. But the object of most interest to
Benjy, and of course to his pupil also, was the stage of rough planks
some four feet high, which was being put up by the village carpenter for
the back-swording and wrestling. And after surveying the whole tenderly,
old Benjy led his charge away to the roadside inn, where he ordered a
glass of ale and a long pipe for himself, and discussed these unwonted
luxuries on the bench outside in the soft autumn evening with mine
host, another old servant of the Browns, and speculated with him on the
likelihood of a good show of old gamesters to contend for the morrow's
prizes, and told tales of the gallant bouts of forty years back, to
which Tom listened with all his ears and eyes.

But who shall tell the joy of the next morning, when the church bells
were ringing a merry peal, and old Benjy appeared in the servants' hall,
resplendent in a long blue coat and brass buttons, and a pair of old
yellow buckskins and top-boots which he had cleaned for and inherited
from Tom's grandfather, a stout thorn stick in his hand, and a nosegay
of pinks and lavender in his buttonhole, and led away Tom in his best
clothes, and two new shillings in his breeches-pockets? Those two, at
any rate, look like enjoying the day's revel.

They quicken their pace when they get into the churchyard, for already
they see the field thronged with country folk; the men in clean, white
smocks or velveteen or fustian coats, with rough plush waistcoats of
many colours, and the women in the beautiful, long scarlet cloak--the
usual out-door dress of west-country women in those days, and which
often descended in families from mother to daughter--or in new-fashioned
stuff shawls, which, if they would but believe it, don't become them
half so well. The air resounds with the pipe and tabor, and the drums
and trumpets of the showmen shouting at the doors of their caravans,
over which tremendous pictures of the wonders to be seen within hang
temptingly; while through all rises the shrill "root-too-too-too" of Mr.
Punch, and the unceasing pan-pipe of his satellite.

"Lawk a' massey, Mr. Benjamin," cries a stout, motherly woman in a red
cloak, as they enter the field, "be that you? Well, I never! You do look
purely. And how's the Squire, and madam, and the family?"

Benjy graciously shakes hands with the speaker, who has left our village
for some years, but has come over for "veast" day on a visit to an old
gossip, and gently indicates the heir-apparent of the Browns.

"Bless his little heart! I must gi' un a kiss.--Here, Susannah,
Susannah!" cries she, raising herself from the embrace, "come and see
Mr. Benjamin and young Master Tom.--You minds our Sukey, Mr. Benjamin;
she be growed a rare slip of a wench since you seen her, though her'll
be sixteen come Martinmas. I do aim to take her to see madam to get her
a place."

And Sukey comes bouncing away from a knot of old school-fellows, and
drops a curtsey to Mr. Benjamin. And elders come up from all parts to
salute Benjy, and girls who have been madam's pupils to kiss Master
Tom. And they carry him off to load him with fairings; and he returns
to Benjy, his hat and coat covered with ribbons, and his pockets crammed
with wonderful boxes which open upon ever new boxes, and popguns, and
trumpets, and apples, and gilt gingerbread from the stall of Angel
Heavens, sole vender thereof, whose booth groans with kings and queens,
and elephants and prancing steeds, all gleaming with gold. There
was more gold on Angel's cakes than there is ginger in those of
this degenerate age. Skilled diggers might yet make a fortune in the
churchyards of the Vale, by carefully washing the dust of the consumers
of Angel's gingerbread. Alas! he is with his namesakes, and his receipts
have, I fear, died with him.

And then they inspect the penny peep-show--at least Tom does--while old
Benjy stands outside and gossips and walks up the steps, and enters the
mysterious doors of the pink-eyed lady and the Irish giant, who do not
by any means come up to their pictures; and the boa will not swallow his
rabbit, but there the rabbit is waiting to be swallowed; and what can
you expect for tuppence? We are easily pleased in the Vale. Now there
is a rush of the crowd, and a tinkling bell is heard, and shouts of
laughter; and Master Tom mounts on Benjy's shoulders, and beholds a
jingling match in all its glory. The games are begun, and this is the
opening of them. It is a quaint game, immensely amusing to look at;
and as I don't know whether it is used in your counties, I had better
describe it. A large roped ring is made, into which are introduced
a dozen or so of big boys and young men who mean to play; these are
carefully blinded and turned loose into the ring, and then a man is
introduced not blindfolded; with a bell hung round his neck, and his two
hands tied behind him. Of course every time he moves the bell must ring,
as he has no hand to hold it; and so the dozen blindfolded men have to
catch him. This they cannot always manage if he is a lively fellow, but
half of them always rush into the arms of the other half, or drive their
heads together, or tumble over; and then the crowd laughs vehemently,
and invents nicknames for them on the spur of the moment; and they, if
they be choleric, tear off the handkerchiefs which blind them, and not
unfrequently pitch into one another, each thinking that the other must
have run against him on purpose. It is great fun to look at a jingling
match certainly, and Tom shouts and jumps on old Benjy's shoulders at
the sight, until the old man feels weary, and shifts him to the strong
young shoulders of the groom, who has just got down to the fun.

And now, while they are climbing the pole in another part of the field,
and muzzling in a flour-tub in another, the old farmer whose house, as
has been said, overlooks the field, and who is master of the revels,
gets up the steps on to the stage, and announces to all whom it may
concern that a half-sovereign in money will be forthcoming to the old
gamester who breaks most heads; to which the Squire and he have added a
new hat.

The amount of the prize is sufficient to stimulate the men of the
immediate neighbourhood, but not enough to bring any very high talent
from a distance; so, after a glance or two round, a tall fellow, who is
a down shepherd, chucks his hat on to the stage and climbs up the steps,
looking rather sheepish. The crowd, of course, first cheer, and then
chaff as usual, as he picks up his hat and begins handling the sticks to
see which will suit him.

"Wooy, Willum Smith, thee canst plaay wi' he arra daay," says his
companion to the blacksmith's apprentice, a stout young fellow of
nineteen or twenty. Willum's sweetheart is in the "veast" somewhere, and
has strictly enjoined him not to get his head broke at back-swording, on
pain of her highest displeasure; but as she is not to be seen (the women
pretend not to like to see the backsword play, and keep away from the
stage), and as his hat is decidedly getting old, he chucks it on to the
stage, and follows himself, hoping that he will only have to break other
people's heads, or that, after all, Rachel won't really mind.

Then follows the greasy cap lined with fur of a half-gipsy, poaching,
loafing fellow, who travels the Vale not for much good, I fancy:

     "For twenty times was Peter feared
     For once that Peter was respected,"

in fact. And then three or four other hats, including the glossy
castor of Joe Willis, the self-elected and would-be champion of
the neighbourhood, a well-to-do young butcher of twenty-eight or
thereabouts, and a great strapping fellow, with his full allowance of
bluster. This is a capital show of gamesters, considering the amount
of the prize; so, while they are picking their sticks and drawing their
lots, I think I must tell you, as shortly as I can, how the noble old
game of back-sword is played; for it is sadly gone out of late, even in
the Vale, and maybe you have never seen it.

The weapon is a good stout ash stick with a large basket handle, heavier
and somewhat shorter than a common single-stick. The players are called
"old gamesters"--why, I can't tell you--and their object is simply
to break one another's heads; for the moment that blood runs an inch
anywhere above the eyebrow, the old gamester to whom it belongs is
beaten, and has to stop. A very slight blow with the sticks will fetch
blood, so that it is by no means a punishing pastime, if the men don't
play on purpose and savagely at the body and arms of their adversaries.
The old gamester going into action only takes off his hat and coat, and
arms himself with a stick; he then loops the fingers of his left hand in
a handkerchief or strap, which he fastens round his left leg, measuring
the length, so that when he draws it tight with his left elbow in the
air, that elbow shall just reach as high as his crown. Thus you see, so
long as he chooses to keep his left elbow up, regardless of cuts, he
has a perfect guard for the left side of his head. Then he advances his
right hand above and in front of his head, holding his stick across, so
that its point projects an inch or two over his left elbow; and thus
his whole head is completely guarded, and he faces his man armed in like
manner; and they stand some three feet apart, often nearer, and feint,
and strike, and return at one another's heads, until one cries "hold,"
or blood flows. In the first case they are allowed a minute's time; and
go on again; in the latter another pair of gamesters are called on. If
good men are playing, the quickness of the returns is marvellous: you
hear the rattle like that a boy makes drawing his stick along palings,
only heavier; and the closeness of the men in action to one another
gives it a strange interest, and makes a spell at back-swording a very
noble sight.

They are all suited now with sticks, and Joe Willis and the gipsy man
have drawn the first lot. So the rest lean against the rails of the
stage, and Joe and the dark man meet in the middle, the boards having
been strewed with sawdust, Joe's white shirt and spotless drab breeches
and boots contrasting with the gipsy's coarse blue shirt and dirty green
velveteen breeches and leather gaiters. Joe is evidently turning up his
nose at the other, and half insulted at having to break his head.

The gipsy is a tough, active fellow, but not very skilful with his
weapon, so that Joe's weight and strength tell in a minute; he is too
heavy metal for him. Whack, whack, whack, come his blows, breaking down
the gipsy's guard, and threatening to reach his head every moment. There
it is at last. "Blood, blood!" shout the spectators, as a thin stream
oozes out slowly from the roots of his hair, and the umpire calls to
them to stop. The gipsy scowls at Joe under his brows in no pleasant
manner, while Master Joe swaggers about, and makes attitudes, and thinks
himself, and shows that he thinks himself, the greatest man in the
field.

Then follow several stout sets-to between the other candidates for the
new hat, and at last come the shepherd and Willum Smith. This is the
crack set-to of the day. They are both in famous wind, and there is no
crying "hold." The shepherd is an old hand, and up to all the dodges. He
tries them one after another, and very nearly gets at Willum's head
by coming in near, and playing over his guard at the half-stick; but
somehow Willum blunders through, catching the stick on his shoulders,
neck, sides, every now and then, anywhere but on his head, and his
returns are heavy and straight, and he is the youngest gamester and a
favourite in the parish, and his gallant stand brings down shouts and
cheers, and the knowing ones think he'll win if he keeps steady; and
Tom, on the groom's shoulder, holds his hands together, and can hardly
breathe for excitement.

Alas for Willum! His sweetheart, getting tired of female companionship,
has been hunting the booths to see where he can have got to, and now
catches sight of him on the stage in full combat. She flushes and turns
pale; her old aunt catches hold of her, saying, "Bless 'ee, child,
doan't 'ee go a'nigst it;" but she breaks away and runs towards the
stage calling his name. Willum keeps up his guard stoutly, but glances
for a moment towards the voice. No guard will do it, Willum, without the
eye. The shepherd steps round and strikes, and the point of his stick
just grazes Willum's forehead, fetching off the skin, and the blood
flows, and the umpire cries, "Hold!" and poor Willum's chance is up for
the day. But he takes it very well, and puts on his old hat and coat,
and goes down to be scolded by his sweetheart, and led away out of
mischief. Tom hears him say coaxingly, as he walks off,--

"Now doan't 'ee, Rachel! I wouldn't ha' done it, only I wanted summut
to buy 'ee a fairing wi', and I be as vlush o' money as a twod o'
feathers."

"Thee mind what I tells 'ee," rejoins Rachel saucily, "and doan't 'ee
kep blethering about fairings."

Tom resolves in his heart to give Willum the remainder of his two
shillings after the back-swording.

Joe Willis has all the luck to-day. His next bout ends in an easy
victory, while the shepherd has a tough job to break his second head;
and when Joe and the shepherd meet, and the whole circle expect and hope
to see him get a broken crown, the shepherd slips in the first round and
falls against the rails, hurting himself so that the old farmer will not
let him go on, much as he wishes to try; and that impostor Joe (for he
is certainly not the best man) struts and swaggers about the stage the
conquering gamester, though he hasn't had five minutes' really trying
play.

Joe takes the new hat in his hand, and puts the money into it, and then,
as if a thought strikes him, and he doesn't think his victory quite
acknowledged down below, walks to each face of the stage, and looks
down, shaking the money, and chaffing, as how he'll stake hat and money
and another half-sovereign "agin any gamester as hasn't played already."
Cunning Joe! he thus gets rid of Willum and the shepherd, who is quite
fresh again.

No one seems to like the offer, and the umpire is just coming down,
when a queer old hat, something like a doctor of divinity's shovel, is
chucked on to the stage and an elderly, quiet man steps out, who has
been watching the play, saying he should like to cross a stick wi' the
prodigalish young chap.

The crowd cheer, and begin to chaff Joe, who turns up his nose and
swaggers across to the sticks. "Imp'dent old wosbird!" says he; "I'll
break the bald head on un to the truth."

The old boy is very bald, certainly, and the blood will show fast enough
if you can touch him, Joe.

He takes off his long-flapped coat, and stands up in a long-flapped
waistcoat, which Sir Roger de Coverley might have worn when it was new,
picks out a stick, and is ready for Master Joe, who loses no time, but
begins his old game, whack, whack, whack, trying to break down the old
man's guard by sheer strength. But it won't do; he catches every blow
close by the basket, and though he is rather stiff in his returns,
after a minute walks Joe about the stage, and is clearly a stanch old
gamester. Joe now comes in, and making the most of his height, tries to
get over the old man's guard at half-stick, by which he takes a smart
blow in the ribs and another on the elbow, and nothing more. And now he
loses wind and begins to puff, and the crowd laugh. "Cry 'hold,' Joe;
thee'st met thy match!" Instead of taking good advice and getting his
wind, Joe loses his temper, and strikes at the old man's body.

"Blood, blood!" shout the crowd; "Joe's head's broke!"

Who'd have thought it? How did it come? That body-blow left Joe's head
unguarded for a moment; and with one turn of the wrist the old gentleman
has picked a neat little bit of skin off the middle of his forehead; and
though he won't believe it, and hammers on for three more blows despite
of the shouts, is then convinced by the blood trickling into his eye.
Poor Joe is sadly crestfallen, and fumbles in his pocket for the other
half-sovereign, but the old gamester won't have it. "Keep thy money,
man, and gi's thy hand," says he; and they shake hands. But the old
gamester gives the new hat to the shepherd, and, soon after, the
half-sovereign to Willum, who thereout decorates his sweetheart with
ribbons to his heart's content.

"Who can a be?" "Wur do a cum from?" ask the crowd. And it soon flies
about that the old west-country champion, who played a tie with Shaw the
Lifeguardsman at "Vizes" twenty years before, has broken Joe Willis's
crown for him.

How my country fair is spinning out! I see I must skip the wrestling;
and the boys jumping in sacks, and rolling wheelbarrows blindfolded;
and the donkey-race, and the fight which arose thereout, marring the
otherwise peaceful "veast;" and the frightened scurrying away of the
female feast-goers, and descent of Squire Brown, summoned by the wife of
one of the combatants to stop it; which he wouldn't start to do till he
had got on his top-boots. Tom is carried away by old Benjy, dog-tired
and surfeited with pleasure, as the evening comes on and the dancing
