
"Not necessarily. I may not need the money so soon. Besides, you may
find some one else to take it off my hands."

"Can't you say five years, squire?" pleaded the farmer.

Squire Carter shook his head.

"No; you can take it or leave it. I am not at all anxious to take the
mortgage, and if my terms are not agreeable, we will consider the
negotiations at an end."

"I won't make any difficulty, squire; I accept your terms."

"That is sensible. I can't, for my part, see how five years would have
been more favorable to you than two."

"My son Andrew is sixteen. By the time he is twenty-one he might help
me."

"There's not much chance of that--unless he marries a fortune," said the
squire, jocosely. "I suppose you will keep him at home to help you on
the farm?"

"We haven't talked the matter over yet. I will consult his wishes as far
as I can. He can't earn much money on the farm. What are you going to do
with your son?"

"Conrad will probably be a merchant, or a banker," said the squire,
pompously.

"With your means you can select any path in life for him."

"True; as my son he will have a great advantage. Well, as our business
is arranged, I will leave you. If you will call at Lawyer Tower's office
to-morrow at noon the papers can be drawn up, and I will give you a
check for the money."

"Thank you, squire. I will meet the appointment."

"If you don't want Andrew to work on the farm I will turn over his case
in my mind and see if I can get him a position."

"Thank you. I should be glad to have him well started in some business
where he can raise himself."

As the term of the academy was so nearly completed, Andy went back with
his father's permission, to remain till vacation. He sought an interview
at once with Dr. Crabb, the principal, and informed him of the
necessity he was under of leaving the institution.

"I am really sorry, Andrew," said the doctor. "You are one of my best
pupils. I am not sure but the best. There is scarcely one that I would
not sooner lose. I shall be willing to take you for half price--that is,
for one hundred and fifty dollars--till you are ready for college."

"Thank you, Dr. Crabb," replied Andy, gratefully. "You are very kind,
but even that sum my father, in his changed circumstances, would be
unable to pay. Besides, it would be quite out of my power to go to
college even if I were prepared."

"It is a thousand pities," said the principal, with concern. "If you
must leave, you must. I am not sure but I should be willing to take you
gratuitously."

"Thank you; but I feel that I ought to go to work at once to help my
father. It is not enough that I free him from expense."

"No doubt you are right. I respect you for your determination. You need
not hesitate to apply to me at any time in the future if you see any way
in which I can be of service to you."

"I think it will help me if you will give me a letter of recommendation,
which I can show to any one from whom I seek employment."

"I will give you such a letter with great pleasure;" and the doctor,
sitting down at his desk, wrote a first-class recommendation of his
favorite pupil.

There was general regret in the academy when it was learned that Andy
must leave them. One little boy of twelve--Dudley Cameron, a special
favorite of Andy--came to him to ask if there was no way by which he
could manage to stay.

"No, Dudley! I am too poor," said Andy.

"If I write to papa and ask him to send you a thousand dollars, will you
stay?" asked the little boy, earnestly.

"No, Dudley; you mustn't do anything of the kind. Even if your father
liked me as well as you do, and would give me the money, I could not
take it. I must go to work to help my father."

"You will write to me sometimes, Andy?"

"Yes; I will be sure to do that."

The little fellow's warm-hearted offer, and the expressions of sympathy
and regret on the part of his schoolmates, cheered Andy. It was pleasant
to think that he would be missed.

On the closing day he received the first prize for scholarship from the
hands of Dr. Crabb.

"You will take my best wishes with you, Andy," said the venerable
principal. "Let me hear from you when you have made any business
arrangement."

The farewells were said, and Andy set out on his return home.

He was leaving the old life behind him. A new one lay before him, but
what it was to be he could not foresee.

He reached Arden in due course and set out to walk home. He had barely
started when he heard his name called.

Looking around, he saw Conrad Carter, the squire's only son, on his
bicycle.

"So you've come home from the academy?" said Conrad, curiously.

"Yes," answered Andy, briefly.

He never could bring himself to like Conrad, who made himself offensive
and unpopular by his airs of superiority. Indeed, there was no boy in
Arden so thoroughly disliked as Conrad.

"You'll have a pretty long vacation," went on Conrad, with a significant
laugh.

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Oh, well, it's the best thing for you. I thought it foolish when your
father sent you off to the academy. If the Arden grammar school is good
enough for me it is good enough for you."

"There is nothing to prevent your going to the academy."

"I know that. My father could afford it, even if it cost a good deal
more. You wanted to go to college, didn't you?"

"Yes."

"It was very foolish for a poor boy like you."

"Of course your age and experience make your opinion of value," said
Andy, with a sarcasm which he did not care to conceal.

"I advise you not to be too independent," returned Conrad, displeased.
"Are you going to work on the farm?"

"I may till I get a situation."

"I'll speak to father. He might take you for an errand boy."

"I don't think that place would suit me."

"Why not?"

"I want to go into some mercantile establishment and learn business."

"That's what I am going to do when I get through school. Of course there
is no hurry in my case."

"I suppose not."

"I suppose you know that my father has taken a mortgage on your father's
farm?"

"Yes, I know that."

"If your father can't pay the mortgage when it is due, father will have
to take the farm."

Andy made no answer, but thought Conrad more disagreeable than ever. By
way of changing the conversation, he said:

"That's a new bicycle, isn't it?"

"Yes; I got tired of the old one. This is a very expensive one.
Wouldn't you like to own a bicycle?"

"Yes."

"Of course, you never will."

"Then I must be content without one."

"Well, I must leave you. I'll come around soon and see you ride a horse
to plow."

As Conrad sped away on his wheel, Andy said to himself:

"I shouldn't like to be rich if it made me as disagreeable as Conrad."




CHAPTER IV.

PREPARING FOR THE PICNIC.


The change in his father's circumstances had come so suddenly that Andy
could not immediately decide upon a plan of securing employment.

He was not idle, however. There was work to do on the farm, and he took
off his uniform, for Penhurst Academy was a military school, and donned,
instead, a rough farm suit, in which he assisted his father.

If he felt a pang of regret he did not show it, for he did not wish to
add to his father's grief over his imprudent act of friendship.

It was while he was at work hoeing corn that Conrad Carter came up one
day, and leaning against the fence, looked at Andy with an amused
expression.

"Oho, you've turned farmer in earnest!" he said.

"Yes, for the time being," answered Andy, composedly.

"You look fine in your overalls."

"Do you think so? Thank you for the compliment."

"You might as well keep on. You will probably succeed better as a farmer
than in business."

"I mean to succeed in anything I undertake."

"You've got a comfortable opinion of yourself."

"While you, on the contrary, are modest and unassuming."

"What do you mean?" asked Conrad, coloring.

"I meant to compliment you, but if you don't like it I will take it
back. Suppose I say that you are neither modest nor unassuming."

"If that is the way you are going to talk to me I will go away," said
Conrad, haughtily. "It is a little imprudent, considering--"

"Considering what?"

"That my father can turn you all out at the end of two years."

"If that is the way you are going to talk to me I shall be glad to have
you go away, as you just threatened."

"Pride and poverty don't go together very well," said Conrad, provoked.

"I don't want to be either proud or poor," returned Andy, smiling.

"That fellow provokes me," thought Conrad. "However, he'll repent it
some time."

In five minutes his place was taken by Valentine Burns, an intimate
friend of Andy's. His father kept the village store, and was one of the
leading citizens of Arden.

"Hard at work, I see, Andy," he said.

"Don't you want to help me?"

"No, I'm too lazy. I have to work in the store out of school hours, you
know. Are you going to the picnic?"

"What picnic?"

"There's a Sunday-school picnic next Thursday afternoon. Both churches
unite in it. All the young people will be there. You would have heard of
it if you hadn't been absent at school."

"I will certainly go. There are so few amusements in Arden that I can't
afford to miss any. I suppose there will be the usual attractions?"

"Yes, and an extra one besides. There's a gentleman from the city
staying at the hotel, who has offered a prize of ten dollars to the boy
who will row across the pond in the shortest time."

"The distance is about half a mile, isn't it?"

"Yes; a little more."

"I suppose you will go in for the prize, Val. You have a nice boat to
practice in."

"No amount of practice would give me the prize. I don't excel as a
rower."

"Who is expected to win?"

"Conrad Carter confidently counts on securing the prize. There is no boy
in Arden that can compete with him, except--"

"Well, except whom?"

"Andy Grant."

"I don't know," said Andy, thoughtfully. "I can row pretty well--that
is, I used to; but I am out of practice."

"Why don't you get back your practice?"

"I have no boat."

"Then use mine," said Valentine, promptly.

