
    Oh, where do you come from,
      You little drops of rain,
    Pitter-patter, pitter-patter,
      Down the windowpane?

    Tell me, little raindrops,
      Is that the way you play?
    Pitter-patter, pitter-patter,
      All the rainy day?

    I sit here at the window;
      I've nothing else to do;
    Oh, I wish that I could play,
      This rainy day, with you!

    The little raindrops cannot speak,
      But "pitter-patter-pat"
    Means, "We can play on this side,
      Why can't you play on that?"

    ANN HAWKSHAWE




[Illustration]

THE FOUR FRIENDS--I

comb  music  giants  chief


Once upon a time a man had a donkey.

His donkey had worked for him many years.

At last the donkey grew so old that he was no longer of any use for
work, and his master wished to get rid of him.

The donkey, fearing he might be killed, ran away.

He took the road to Bremen, where he had often heard the street band
playing.

He liked music, so he thought he might join the band.

He had not gone far when he came upon an old dog.

The dog was panting, as if he had been running a long way.

"Why are you panting, my friend?" asked the donkey.

"Ah," said the dog, "I am too old for the hunt. My master wished to have
me killed. So I ran away. But how I am to find bread and meat, I do not
know."

"Well," said the donkey, "come with me. I am going to play in the band
at Bremen. I think you and I can easily earn a living by music. I can
play the lute, and you can play the kettledrum."

The dog was quite willing, and so they be walked on.

They had not gone far when they saw a cat sitting in a yard.

He looked as sad as three days of rainy weather.

"What's the matter with you, old Tom?" asked the donkey.

"You would be sad, too," said the cat, "if you were in my place; for now
that I am getting old and cannot catch mice, they wish to drown me. I
have run away, but how I am going to live, I do not know."

"Come with us to Bremen," said the donkey. "We are going to play in the
band.

I know you love music, as you sing so well at night. You too can join
the band."

"That is just what I should like to do," said the cat.

So the donkey, the dog, and the cat all walked on together.

[Illustration]

After a time the three came to a farmyard.

There on the gate sat a cock, crying "Cock-a-doodle-doo" with all his
might.

"Why are you making so much noise?" asked the donkey.

"Ah," said the cock, "I find I must have my head cut off so that I may
serve as a dinner for Monday. I'm crowing as hard as I can while my head
is still on."

"Come with us, old Red Comb," said the donkey. "We are going to Bremen
to join the band. You have a fine voice. You can join, too."

"Ah," said the cock, "that is just what I should like to do."

And they all went on their way to Bremen.


THE FOUR FRIENDS--II

At evening the four friends came to a wood, where they stopped for the
night.

The donkey and the dog lay down under a large tree.

The cat climbed up on one of the branches.

The cock flew to the very top of the tree, where he felt quite safe.

From his perch on the top of the tree the cock saw a light.

Calling to his friends, he said, "We are not far from a house. I can see
a light."

"Let us go on," said the donkey, "for it may be just the house for us."

As they drew near, the light grew larger and brighter.

At last they could see that it came from the window of a robber's house.

The donkey, who was the tallest, went up and looked in.

"What do you see, old Long Ears?" asked the cock.

"What do I see?" answered the donkey. "Why, a table spread with plenty
to eat and drink, and the robbers having their supper."

"We should be there, too, if we had our rights," said the cock.

"Ah, yes," said the donkey; "if we could only get inside."

Then the four friends talked over what they had better do in order to
drive the robbers out of the house.

At last they hit upon a plan.

The donkey stood upon his hind legs and placed his front feet on the
window sill.

[Illustration]

The dog then stood on the donkey's back

The cat climbed upon the dog, while the cock perched upon the cat's
head.

The donkey gave a signal, and they began all at the same time, to make
their loudest music.

The donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed,
all with such force that the windowpane shook and was almost broken.

The robbers had never heard such a noise.

They thought it must come from witches, or giants, or goblins, and they
all ran as fast as they could to the wood behind the house.

Then our four friends rushed in and ate what the robbers had left upon
the table.

It did not take long, for they acted as if they had been hungry for a
month.

When the four had eaten, they put out the light, and each went to sleep
in the spot which he liked the best.

The donkey lay down in the yard.

The dog lay behind the door.

The cat curled himself in front of the fire, while the cock flew up on a
high beam.

They soon fell fast asleep.


THE FOUR FRIENDS--III

When all was still and the light was out, the robber chief sent one of
his bravest men back to the house.

The man found the house quiet, so he went into the kitchen to strike a
light.

Seeing the great fiery eyes of the cat, he thought they were live coals
and held a match to them.

Puss was so angry that he flew up and scratched the man's face. This
gave the robber a great fright, and he ran for the door.

As he went by, the dog sprang up and bit him in the leg.

In the yard the robber ran into the donkey, who gave him a great kick.

The cock on the beam was waked by the! noise, and cried,
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!"

The man ran as fast as his legs could carry him back to the robber
chief.

"Ah!" he cried. "In that house is a wicked witch, who flew at me and
scratched my face with her long nails.

By the door stood a man with a knife, who cut me in the leg.

[Illustration]

Out in the yard lay a great black giant, who struck me a blow with his
wooden club.

Upon the roof sat the judge, who cried, 'What did he do? What did he
do?'

When I heard this I ran off as fast as I could."

The robbers never went near the house again.

The four friends liked the place so well that they would not leave it,
and so far as I know, they are there to this day.

WILLIAM AND JACOB GRIMM




    LITTLE BIRDIE

    What does little birdie say,
    In her nest at peep of day?
    Let me fly, says little birdie,
    Mother, let me fly away.
    Birdie, rest a little longer,
    Till the little wings are stronger.
    So she rests a little longer,
    Then she flies away.

    What does little baby say,
    In her bed at peep of day?
    Baby says, like little birdie,
    Let me rise and fly away.
    Baby, sleep a little longer,
    Till the little limbs are stronger.
    If she sleeps a little longer,
    Baby too shall fly away.

    ALFRED TENNYSON




[Illustration]

MOTHER FROST--I

broad  daughters  through  heart


At the edge of a wood there was a great, clear, bubbling spring of cold
water.

Near this spring lived a widow and her two daughters.

One of them was very beautiful and a great help about the house, while
the other was ugly and idle.

The mother loved only the ugly one, for she was her own child.

She cared so little for the other daughter that she made her do all the
hard work.

Every day the poor girl would sit beside the spring and spin and spin,
until her fingers bled.

One day, while she was washing the blood from her hands, the spindle
fell into the spring and sank to the bottom.

With tears in her eyes, she ran and told her stepmother what she had
done.

The stepmother was angry and said, "You let the spindle fall into the
spring. Now you must go and get it out."

The maiden went back to the spring to look for the spindle.

She leaned so far over the edge that her hand slipped, and down, down,
she sank to the very bottom.

All at once she found that she was in a beautiful field where many wild
flowers grew.

As she walked across the field, she came to a baker's oven full of new
bread.

The loaves cried to her, "Oh, pull us out! pull us out, or we shall
burn!"

"Indeed I will!" cried the maiden.

Stepping up, she pulled all the sweet brown loaves out of the oven.

As she walked along, she came to a tree full of apples.

The tree cried, "Shake me! shake me! my apples are all quite ripe!"

"Indeed I will!" cried the maiden.

So she shook the tree again and again, until there was not an apple left
on its branches.

Then she picked up the apples, one by one, and piled them in a great
heap.

[Illustration]

When she had picked up all the apples, she walked on.

At last she came to a small house.

In the doorway sat an old woman who had such large teeth that the girl
felt afraid of her and turned to run away.

Then the old woman cried, "What do you fear, my child? Come in and live
here with me. If you will do the work about the house, I will be very
kind to you. Only take care to make my bed well.

You must shake it and pound it so that the feathers will fly about. Then
the children down on the earth will say that snowflakes are falling, for
I am Mother Frost."

The old woman spoke so kindly that she won the maiden's heart.

"I will gladly work for you," she said.

The girl did her work well, and each day she shook up the bed until the
feathers flew about like snowflakes.

She was very happy with Mother Frost, who never spoke an angry word.

After the girl had stayed a long time with the kind old woman, she began
to feel homesick.

She could not help it, though her life with Mother Frost had been so
happy.

At length she said, "Dear Mother Frost, you have been very kind to me,
but I should like to go home to my friends."

"I am pleased to hear you say that you wish to go home," said Mother
Frost. "You have worked for me so well that I will show you the way
myself."

She took the maiden by the hand and led her to a broad gateway.

The gate was open, and as she went through a shower of gold fell over
the maiden.

It clung to her clothes, so that she was dressed in gold from her head
to her feet.

"That is your pay for having worked so hard," said the old woman. "And
here is your spindle that fell into the spring."

Then the gate was closed, and the maiden found herself once more in the
world.

She was not far from her own home, and as she came into the farmyard, a
cock on the roof cried loudly:

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!

Our golden lady has come home, too."


MOTHER FROST--II

When the stepmother saw the girl with her golden dress, she was kind to
her. Then the maiden told how the gold had fallen upon her.

The mother could hardly wait to have her own child try her luck in the
same way.

This time she made the idle daughter go to the spring and spin.

The lazy girl did not spin fast enough to make her fingers bleed.

So she pricked her finger with a thorn until a few drops of blood
stained the spindle.

At once she let it drop into the water, and sprang in after it herself.

The ugly girl found herself in a beautiful field, just as her sister
had.

She walked along the same path until she came to the baker's oven.

She heard the loaves cry, "Pull us out! pull us out, or we shall burn!"

[Illustration]

But the lazy girl said to the brown loaves, "I will not. I do not want
to soil my hands in your dirty oven."

Then she walked on until she came to the apple tree.

"Shake me! shake me!" it cried, "for my apples are quite ripe."

"I will not," said the girl, "for some of your apples might fall on my
head."

As she spoke, she walked lazily on.

At last the girl stood before the door of Mother Frost's house.

She had no fear of Mother Frost's great teeth, but walked right up to
the old woman and offered to be her servant.

For a whole day the girl was very busy, and did everything that she was
told to do.

On the second day she began to be lazy, and on the third day she was
still worse.

She would not get up in the morning.

The bed was never made, or shaken, so the feathers could fly about.

At last Mother Frost grew tired of her and told her that she must go
away.

This was what the lazy girl wanted, for she felt sure that now she would
have the golden shower.

Mother Frost led her to the great gate, but she passed under it, a
kettle full of black pitch was upset over her.

[Illustration]

"That is what you get for your work," said the old woman, as she shut
the gate.

The idle girl walked home, covered with pitch.

When she went into the farmyard the cock on the roof cried out:
