
Should you mind, just for a little while, pretending you are my
grandmother?  Sallie has one and Julia and Leonora each two, and they
were all comparing them tonight.  I can't think of anything I'd rather
have; it's such a respectable relationship.  So, if you really don't
object--When I went into town yesterday, I saw the sweetest cap of
Cluny lace trimmed with lavender ribbon.  I am going to make you a
present of it on your eighty-third birthday.

! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

That's the clock in the chapel tower striking twelve.  I believe I am
sleepy after all.

                           Good night, Granny.
                             I love you dearly.
                                               Judy





                                   The Ides of March

Dear D.-L.-L.,

I am studying Latin prose composition.  I have been studying it.  I
shall be studying it.  I shall be about to have been studying it.  My
re-examination comes the 7th hour next Tuesday, and I am going to pass
or BUST.  So you may expect to hear from me next, whole and happy and
free from conditions, or in fragments.

I will write a respectable letter when it's over.  Tonight I have a
pressing engagement with the Ablative Absolute.

                   Yours--in evident haste
                                           J. A.




                                       26th  March

Mr. D.-L.-L. Smith,

SIR:  You never answer any questions; you never show the slightest
interest in anything I do.  You are probably the horridest one of all
those horrid Trustees, and the reason you are educating me is, not
because you care a bit about me, but from a sense of Duty.

I don't know a single thing about you.  I don't even know your name.
It is very uninspiring writing to a Thing.  I haven't a doubt but that
you throw my letters into the waste-basket without reading them.
Hereafter I shall write only about work.

My re-examinations in Latin and geometry came last week.  I passed them
both and am now free from conditions.

                       Yours truly,
                                   Jerusha Abbott




                                               2nd April

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I am a BEAST.

Please forget about that dreadful letter I sent you last week--I was
feeling terribly lonely and miserable and sore-throaty the night I
wrote.  I didn't know it, but I was just sickening for tonsillitis and
grippe and lots of things mixed.  I'm in the infirmary now, and have
been here for six days; this is the first time they would let me sit up
and have a pen and paper.  The head nurse is very bossy.  But I've been
thinking about it all the time and I shan't get well until you forgive
me.

Here is a picture of the way I look, with a bandage tied around my head
in rabbit's ears.

Doesn't that arouse your sympathy?  I am having sublingual gland
swelling.  And I've been studying physiology all the year without ever
hearing of sublingual glands.  How futile a thing is education!

I can't write any more; I get rather shaky when I sit up too long.
Please forgive me for being impertinent and ungrateful.  I was badly
brought up.

                       Yours with love,
                                         Judy Abbott




                                       THE INFIRMARY
                                                   4th April

Dearest Daddy-Long-Legs,

Yesterday evening just towards dark, when I was sitting up in bed
looking out at the rain and feeling awfully bored with life in a great
institution, the nurse appeared with a long white box addressed to me,
and filled with the LOVELIEST pink rosebuds.  And much nicer still, it
contained a card with a very polite message written in a funny little
uphill back hand (but one which shows a great deal of character). Thank
you, Daddy, a thousand times.  Your flowers make the first real, true
present I ever received in my life.  If you want to know what a baby I
am I lay down and cried because I was so happy.

Now that I am sure you read my letters, I'll make them much more
interesting, so they'll be worth keeping in a safe with red tape around
them--only please take out that dreadful one and burn it up.  I'd hate
to think that you ever read it over.

Thank you for making a very sick, cross, miserable Freshman cheerful.
Probably you have lots of loving family and friends, and you don't know
what it feels like to be alone.  But I do.

Goodbye--I'll promise never to be horrid again, because now I know
you're a real person; also I'll promise never to bother you with any
more questions.

Do you still hate girls?

                               Yours for ever,
                                               Judy




                                       8th hour, Monday

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I hope you aren't the Trustee who sat on the toad?  It went off--I was
told--with quite a pop, so probably he was a fatter Trustee.

Do you remember the little dugout places with gratings over them by the
laundry windows in the John Grier Home?  Every spring when the hoptoad
season opened we used to form a collection of toads and keep them in
those window holes; and occasionally they would spill over into the
laundry, causing a very pleasurable commotion on wash days.  We were
severely punished for our activities in this direction, but in spite of
all discouragement the toads would collect.

And one day--well, I won't bore you with particulars--but somehow, one
of the fattest, biggest, JUCIEST toads got into one of those big
leather arm chairs in the Trustees' room, and that afternoon at the
Trustees' meeting--But I dare say you were there and recall the rest?

Looking back dispassionately after a period of time, I will say that
punishment was merited, and--if I remember rightly--adequate.

I don't know why I am in such a reminiscent mood except that spring and
the reappearance of toads always awakens the old acquisitive instinct.
The only thing that keeps me from starting a collection is the fact
that no rule exists against it.


                                       After chapel, Thursday

What do you think is my favourite book?  Just now, I mean; I change
every three days.  Wuthering Heights.  Emily Bronte was quite young
when she wrote it, and had never been outside of Haworth churchyard.
She had never known any men in her life; how COULD she imagine a man
like Heathcliffe?

I couldn't do it, and I'm quite young and never outside the John Grier
Asylum--I've had every chance in the world.  Sometimes a dreadful fear
comes over me that I'm not a genius.  Will you be awfully disappointed,
Daddy, if I don't turn out to be a great author?  In the spring when
everything is so beautiful and green and budding, I feel like turning
my back on lessons, and running away to play with the weather.  There
are such lots of adventures out in the fields!  It's much more
entertaining to live books than to write them.

Ow ! ! ! ! ! !

That was a shriek which brought Sallie and Julia and (for a disgusted
moment) the Senior from across the hall.  It was caused by a centipede
like this:  only worse.  Just as I had finished the last sentence and
was thinking what to say next--plump!--it fell off the ceiling and
landed at my side.  I tipped two cups off the tea table in trying to
get away.  Sallie whacked it with the back of my hair brush--which I
shall never be able to use again--and killed the front end, but the
rear fifty feet ran under the bureau and escaped.

This dormitory, owing to its age and ivy-covered walls, is full of
centipedes.  They are dreadful creatures.  I'd rather find a tiger
under the bed.


                                           Friday, 9.30 p.m.

Such a lot of troubles!  I didn't hear the rising bell this morning,
then I broke my shoestring while I was hurrying to dress and dropped my
collar button down my neck.  I was late for breakfast and also for
first-hour recitation.  I forgot to take any blotting paper and my
fountain pen leaked.  In trigonometry the Professor and I had a
disagreement touching a little matter of logarithms.  On looking it up,
I find that she was right.  We had mutton stew and pie-plant for
lunch--hate 'em both; they taste like the asylum.  The post brought me
nothing but bills (though I must say that I never do get anything else;
my family are not the kind that write).  In English class this
afternoon we had an unexpected written lesson.  This was it:

               I asked no other thing,
               No other was denied.
               I offered Being for it;
               The mighty merchant smiled.

               Brazil?  He twirled a button
               Without a glance my way:
               But, madam, is there nothing else
               That we can show today?


That is a poem.  I don't know who wrote it or what it means.  It was
simply printed out on the blackboard when we arrived and we were
ordered to comment upon it.  When I read the first verse I thought I
had an idea--The Mighty Merchant was a divinity who distributes
blessings in return for virtuous deeds--but when I got to the second
verse and found him twirling a button, it seemed a blasphemous
supposition, and I hastily changed my mind.  The rest of the class was
in the same predicament; and there we sat for three-quarters of an hour
with blank paper and equally blank minds.  Getting an education is an
awfully wearing process!

But this didn't end the day.  There's worse to come.

It rained so we couldn't play golf, but had to go to gymnasium instead.
The girl next to me banged my elbow with an Indian club.  I got home to
find that the box with my new blue spring dress had come, and the skirt
was so tight that I couldn't sit down.  Friday is sweeping day, and the
maid had mixed all the papers on my desk.  We had tombstone for dessert
(milk and gelatin flavoured with vanilla).  We were kept in chapel
twenty minutes later than usual to listen to a speech about womanly
women.  And then--just as I was settling down with a sigh of
well-earned relief to The Portrait of a Lady, a girl named Ackerly, a
dough-faced, deadly, unintermittently stupid girl, who sits next to me
in Latin because her name begins with A (I wish Mrs. Lippett had named
me Zabriski), came to ask if Monday's lesson commenced at paragraph 69
or 70, and stayed ONE HOUR.  She has just gone.

Did you ever hear of such a discouraging series of events?  It isn't
the big troubles in life that require character.  Anybody can rise to a
crisis and face a crushing tragedy with courage, but to meet the petty
hazards of the day with a laugh--I really think that requires SPIRIT.

It's the kind of character that I am going to develop.  I am going to
pretend that all life is just a game which I must play as skilfully and
fairly as I can.  If I lose, I am going to shrug my shoulders and
laugh--also if I win.

Anyway, I am going to be a sport.  You will never hear me complain
again, Daddy dear, because Julia wears silk stockings and centipedes
drop off the wall.

                               Yours ever,
                                           Judy

Answer soon.




                                                   27th May

Daddy-Long-Legs, Esq.

DEAR SIR:  I am in receipt of a letter from Mrs. Lippett.  She hopes
that I am doing well in deportment and studies.  Since I probably have
no place to go this summer, she will let me come back to the asylum and
work for my board until college opens.

I HATE THE JOHN GRIER HOME.

I'd rather die than go back.

                   Yours most truthfully,
                                           Jerusha Abbott



Cher Daddy-Jambes-Longes,

Vous etes un brick!

Je suis tres heureuse about the farm, parceque je n'ai jamais been on a
farm dans ma vie and I'd hate to retourner chez John Grier, et wash
dishes tout l'ete. There would be danger of quelque chose affreuse
happening, parceque j'ai perdue ma humilite d'autre fois et j'ai peur
that I would just break out quelque jour et smash every cup and saucer
dans la maison.

Pardon brievete et paper.  Je ne peux pas send des mes nouvelles
parceque je suis dans French class et j'ai peur que Monsieur le
Professeur is going to call on me tout de suite.

He did!

                       Au revoir,
                          je vous aime beaucoup.
                                                   Judy




                                                   30th May

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Did you ever see this campus?  (That is merely a rhetorical question.
Don't let it annoy you.) It is a heavenly spot in May.  All the shrubs
are in blossom and the trees are the loveliest young green--even the
old pines look fresh and new.  The grass is dotted with yellow
dandelions and hundreds of girls in blue and white and pink dresses.
Everybody is joyous and carefree, for vacation's coming, and with that
to look forward to, examinations don't count.

Isn't that a happy frame of mind to be in?  And oh, Daddy!  I'm the
happiest of all!  Because I'm not in the asylum any more; and I'm not
anybody's nursemaid or typewriter or bookkeeper (I should have been,
you know, except for you).

I'm sorry now for all my past badnesses.

I'm sorry I was ever impertinent to Mrs. Lippett.

I'm sorry I ever slapped Freddie Perkins.

I'm sorry I ever filled the sugar bowl with salt.

I'm sorry I ever made faces behind the Trustees' backs.

I'm going to be good and sweet and kind to everybody because I'm so
happy.  And this summer I'm going to write and write and write and
begin to be a great author.  Isn't that an exalted stand to take?  Oh,
I'm developing a beautiful character!  It droops a bit under cold and
frost, but it does grow fast when the sun shines.

That's the way with everybody.  I don't agree with the theory that
adversity and sorrow and disappointment develop moral strength.  The
happy people are the ones who are bubbling over with kindliness.  I
have no faith in misanthropes.  (Fine word!  Just learned it.) You are
not a misanthrope are you, Daddy?

I started to tell you about the campus.  I wish you'd come for a little
visit and let me walk you about and say:

'That is the library.  This is the gas plant, Daddy dear.  The Gothic
building on your left is the gymnasium, and the Tudor Romanesque beside
it is the new infirmary.'

Oh, I'm fine at showing people about.  I've done it all my life at the
asylum, and I've been doing it all day here.  I have honestly.

And a Man, too!

That's a great experience.  I never talked to a man before (except
occasional Trustees, and they don't count). Pardon, Daddy, I don't mean
to hurt your feelings when I abuse Trustees.  I don't consider that you
really belong among them.  You just tumbled on to the Board by chance.
The Trustee, as such, is fat and pompous and benevolent.  He pats one
on the head and wears a gold watch chain.

That looks like a June bug, but is meant to be a portrait of any
Trustee except you.

However--to resume:

I have been walking and talking and having tea with a man.  And with a
very superior man--with Mr. Jervis Pendleton of the House of Julia; her
uncle, in short (in long, perhaps I ought to say; he's as tall as you.)
Being in town on business, he decided to run out to the college and
call on his niece.  He's her father's youngest brother, but she doesn't
know him very intimately.  It seems he glanced at her when she was a
baby, decided he didn't like her, and has never noticed her since.

Anyway, there he was, sitting in the reception room very proper with
his hat and stick and gloves beside him; and Julia and Sallie with
seventh-hour recitations that they couldn't cut.  So Julia dashed into
my room and begged me to walk him about the campus and then deliver him
to her when the seventh hour was over.  I said I would, obligingly but
unenthusiastically, because I don't care much for Pendletons.

But he turned out to be a sweet lamb.  He's a real human being--not a
Pendleton at all.  We had a beautiful time; I've longed for an uncle
ever since.  Do you mind pretending you're my uncle?  I believe they're
superior to grandmothers.

Mr. Pendleton reminded me a little of you, Daddy, as you were twenty
years ago.  You see I know you intimately, even if we haven't ever met!

He's tall and thinnish with a dark face all over lines, and the
funniest underneath smile that never quite comes through but just
wrinkles up the corners of his mouth.  And he has a way of making you
feel right off as though you'd known him a long time.  He's very
companionable.

We walked all over the campus from the quadrangle to the athletic
grounds; then he said he felt weak and must have some tea.  He proposed
that we go to College Inn--it's just off the campus by the pine walk.
I said we ought to go back for Julia and Sallie, but he said he didn't
like to have his nieces drink too much tea; it made them nervous.  So
we just ran away and had tea and muffins and marmalade and ice-cream
and cake at a nice little table out on the balcony.  The inn was quite
conveniently empty, this being the end of the month and allowances low.

We had the jolliest time!  But he had to run for his train the minute
he got back and he barely saw Julia at all.  She was furious with me
for taking him off; it seems he's an unusually rich and desirable
uncle.  It relieved my mind to find he was rich, for the tea and things
cost sixty cents apiece.

This morning (it's Monday now) three boxes of chocolates came by
express for Julia and Sallie and me.  What do you think of that?  To be
getting candy from a man!

I begin to feel like a girl instead of a foundling.

I wish you'd come and have tea some day and let me see if I like you.
But wouldn't it be dreadful if I didn't? However, I know I should.

Bien!  I make you my compliments.

                           'Jamais je ne t'oublierai.'
                                                       Judy


PS.  I looked in the glass this morning and found a perfectly new
dimple that I'd never seen before.  It's very curious.  Where do you
suppose it came from?




                                               9th June

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Happy day!  I've just finished my last examination Physiology.  And now:

Three months on a farm!

I don't know what kind of a thing a farm is.  I've never been on one in
my life.  I've never even looked at one (except from the car window),
but I know I'm going to love it, and I'm going to love being FREE.

I am not used even yet to being outside the John Grier Home.  Whenever
I think of it excited little thrills chase up and down my back.  I feel
as though I must run faster and faster and keep looking over my
shoulder to make sure that Mrs. Lippett isn't after me with her arm
stretched out to grab me back.

I don't have to mind any one this summer, do I?

Your nominal authority doesn't annoy me in the least; you are too far
away to do any harm.  Mrs. Lippett is dead for ever, so far as I am
concerned, and the Semples aren't expected to overlook my moral
welfare, are they?  No, I am sure not.  I am entirely grown up.  Hooray!

I leave you now to pack a trunk, and three boxes of teakettles and
dishes and sofa cushions and books.

                                   Yours ever,
                                               Judy


PS.  Here is my physiology exam.  Do you think you could have passed?




                           LOCK WILLOW FARM,
                                               Saturday night

Dearest Daddy-Long-Legs,

I've only just come and I'm not unpacked, but I can't wait to tell you
how much I like farms.  This is a heavenly, heavenly, HEAVENLY spot!
The house is square like this:  And OLD.  A hundred years or so.  It
has a veranda on the side which I can't draw and a sweet porch in
front.  The picture really doesn't do it justice--those things that
look like feather dusters are maple trees, and the prickly ones that
border the drive are murmuring pines and hemlocks.  It stands on the
top of a hill and looks way off over miles of green meadows to another
line of hills.

That is the way Connecticut goes, in a series of Marcelle waves; and
Lock Willow Farm is just on the crest of one wave.  The barns used to
be across the road where they obstructed the view, but a kind flash of
lightning came from heaven and burnt them down.

The people are Mr. and Mrs. Semple and a hired girl and two hired men.
The hired people eat in the kitchen, and the Semples and Judy in the
dining-room. We had ham and eggs and biscuits and honey and jelly-cake
and pie and pickles and cheese and tea for supper--and a great deal of
conversation.  I have never been so entertaining in my life; everything
I say appears to be funny.  I suppose it is, because I've never been in
the country before, and my questions are backed by an all-inclusive
ignorance.

The room marked with a cross is not where the murder was committed, but
the one that I occupy.  It's big and square and empty, with adorable
old-fashioned furniture and windows that have to be propped up on
sticks and green shades trimmed with gold that fall down if you touch
them.  And a big square mahogany table--I'm going to spend the summer
with my elbows spread out on it, writing a novel.

Oh, Daddy, I'm so excited!  I can't wait till daylight to explore.
It's 8.30 now, and I am about to blow out my candle and try to go to
sleep.  We rise at five.  Did you ever know such fun?  I can't believe
this is really Judy.  You and the Good Lord give me more than I
deserve.  I must be a very, very, VERY good person to pay.  I'm going
to be.  You'll see.

                               Good night,
                                               Judy


PS.  You should hear the frogs sing and the little pigs squeal and you
should see the new moon!  I saw it over my right shoulder.





                                           LOCK WILLOW,
