"I think he was. He certainly appeared to be."

"But what does Frank know about farming?"

"I asked him that question myself. He admitted that he didn't know much
at present, but thought that, with Mr. Maynard's advice, he might get
along."

Mrs. Frost was silent a moment. "It will be a great undertaking," she
said, at last; "but if you think you can trust Frank, I will do all
I can to help him. I can't bear to think of having you go, yet I am
conscious that this is a feeling which I have no right to indulge at the
expense of my country."

"Yes," said her husband seriously. "I feel that I owe my country a
service which I have no right to delegate to another, as long as I am
able to discharge it myself. I shall reflect seriously upon Frank's
proposition."

There was no more said at this time. Both Frank and his parents felt
that it was a serious matter, and not to be hastily decided.

After breakfast Frank went up-stairs, and before studying his Latin
lesson, read over thoughtfully the following passage in his prize essay
on "The Duties of American Boys at the Present Crisis:"

"Now that so large a number of our citizens have been withdrawn from
their families and their ordinary business to engage in putting down
this Rebellion, it becomes the duty of the boys to take their places as
far as they are able to do so. A boy cannot wholly supply the place of a
man, but he can do so in part. And where he is not called on to do this,
he can so conduct himself that his friends who are absent may feel at
ease about him. He ought to feel willing to give up some pleasures, if
by so doing he can help to supply the places of those who are gone.
If he does this voluntarily, and in the right spirit, he is just as
patriotic as if he were a soldier in the field."

"I didn't think," thought Frank, "when I wrote this, how soon my words
would come back to me. It isn't much to write the words. The thing is
to stand by them. If father should decide to go, I will do my best, and
then, when the Rebellion is over, I shall feel that I did something,
even if It wasn't much, toward putting it down."

Frank put his essay carefully away in a bureau drawer in which he kept
his clothes, and, spreading open his Latin lexicon, proceeded to prepare
his lesson in the third book of Virgil's Aeneid.



CHAPTER V. MR. RATHBURN MAKES A SPEECH

Frank's seat in the schoolroom was directly in front of that occupied by
John Haynes. Until the announcement of the prize John and he had been on
friendly terms. They belonged to the same class in Latin, and Frank had
often helped his classmate through a difficult passage which he had not
the patience to construe for himself. Now, however, a coolness grew up
between them, originating with John. He felt envious of Frank's success;
and this feeling brought with it a certain bitterness which found
gratification in anything which he had reason to suppose would annoy
Frank.

On the morning succeeding the distribution of the prizes, Frank arrived
at the schoolhouse a few minutes before the bell rang. John, with half a
dozen other boys, stood near the door.

John took off his hat with mock deference. "Make way for the great prize
essayist, gentlemen!" he said. "The modern Macaulay is approaching."

Frank colored with annoyance. John did not fail to notice this with
pleasure. He was sorry, however, that none of the other boys seemed
inclined to join in the demonstration. In fact, they liked Frank much
the better of the two.

"That isn't quite fair, John," said Frank, in a low voice.

"I am always glad to pay my homage to distinguished talent," John
proceeded, in the same tone. "I feel how presumptuous I was in venturing
to compete with a gentleman of such genius!"

"Do you mean to insult me?" asked Frank, growing angry.

"Oh, dear, no! I am only expressing my high opinion of your talents!"

"Let him alone, John!" said Dick Jones, "It isn't his fault that the
teacher awarded the prize to him instead of you."

"I hope you don't think I care for that!" said John, snapping his
fingers. "He's welcome to his rubbishing books; they don't amount to
much, anyway. I don't believe they cost more than two dollars at the
most. If you'd like to see what I got for my essay, I'll show you."

John pulled out his portemonnaie, and unrolled three new and crisp
bank-notes of ten dollars each.

"I think that's pretty good pay," he said, looking about him
triumphantly. "I don't care how many prizes Rathburn chooses to give his
favorite. I rather think I can get along without them."

John's face was turned toward the door, otherwise he would have observed
the approach of the teacher, and spoken with more caution. But it was
too late. The words had been spoken above his ordinary voice, and were
distinctly heard by the teacher. He looked sharply at John Haynes, whose
glance fell before his, but without a word passed into the schoolroom.

"See if you don't get a blowing-up, John," said Dick Jones.

"What do I care!" said John, but in a tone too subdued to be heard by
any one else. "It won't do Rathburn any harm to hear the truth for once
in his life."

"Well, I'm glad I'm not in your place, that's all!" replied Dick.

"You're easily frightened!" rejoined John, with a sneer.

Nevertheless, as he entered the schoolroom, and walked with assumed
bravado to his seat in the back part of the room, he did not feel quite
so comfortable as he strove to appear. As he glanced stealthily at the
face of the teacher, who looked unusually stern and grave, he could not
help thinking, "I wonder whether he will say anything about it."

Mr. Rathburn commenced in the usual manner; but after the devotional
exercises were over, he paused, and, after a brief silence, during which
those who had heard John's words listened with earnest attention, spoke
as follows:

"As I approached the schoolroom this morning I chanced to catch some
words which I presume were not intended for my ear. If I remember
rightly they were, 'I don't care how many prizes Rathburn gives his
favorite!' There were several that heard them, so that I can be
easily corrected if I have made any mistake. Now I will not affect
to misunderstand the charge conveyed by these words. I am accused of
assigning the prizes, or at least, one of them, yesterday, not with
strict regard to the merit of the essays presented, but under the
influence of partiality. If this is the real feeling of the speaker, I
can only say that I am sorry he should have so low an opinion of me.
I do not believe the scholars generally entertain any such suspicion.
Though I may err in judgment, I think that most of you will not charge
me with anything more serious. If you ask me whether a teacher has
favorites, I say that he cannot help having them. He cannot help making
a difference between the studious on the one hand, and the indolent and
neglectful on the other. But in a matter like this I ask you to believe
me when I say that no consideration except that of merit is permitted to
weigh. The boy who made this charge is one of my most advanced scholars,
and has no reason to believe that he would be treated with unfairness.
I do not choose to say any more on this subject, except that I have
decided to offer two similar prizes for the two best compositions
submitted within the next four weeks. I shall assign them to the best of
my judgment, without regard to the scholarship of the writer."

Mr. Rathburn spoke in a quiet, dignified manner, which convinced all
who heard him of his fairness. I say all, because even John Haynes was
persuaded against his own will, though he did not choose to acknowledge
it. He had a dogged obstinacy which would not allow him to retract what
he had once said. There was an unpleasant sneer on his face while the
teacher was speaking, which he did not attempt to conceal.

"The class in Virgil," called Mr. Rathburn.

This class consisted of Frank Frost, John Haynes, and Henry Tufts. John
rose slowly from his seat, and advanced to the usual place, taking care
to stand as far from Frank as possible.

"You may commence, John," said the teacher.

It was unfortunate for John that he had been occupied, first, by
thoughts of his rejected essay, and afterward by thoughts of the boat
which he proposed to buy with the thirty dollars of which he had become
possessed, so that he had found very little time to devote to his Latin.
Had he been on good terms with Frank, he would have asked him to read
over the lesson, which, as he was naturally quick, would have enabled
him to get off passably. But, of course, under the circumstances, this
was not to be thought of. So he stumbled through two or three sentences,
in an embarrassed manner. Mr. Rathburn at first helped him along.
Finding, however, that he knew little or nothing of the lesson, he
quietly requested Frank to read, saying, "You don't seem so well
prepared as usual, John."

Frank translated fluently and well, his recitation forming a very
favorable contrast to the slipshod attempt of John. This John, in a
spirit of unreasonableness, magnified into a grave offense, and a desire
to "show off" at his expense.

"Trying to shine at my expense," he muttered. "Well, let him! Two or
three years hence, when I am in college, perhaps things may be a little
different."

Frank noticed his repellent look, and it made him feel uncomfortable. He
was a warm-hearted boy, and wanted to be on good terms with everybody.
Still, he could not help feeling that in the present instance he had
nothing to reproach himself with.

John went back to his seat feeling an increased irritation against
Frank. He could not help seeing that he was more popular with his
schoolmates than himself, and, of course, this, too, he considered a
just cause of offense against him.

While he was considering in what way he could slight Frank, the thought
of the boat he was about to purchase entered his mind. He brightened up
at once, for this suggested something. He knew how much boys like going
out upon the water. At present there was no boat on the pond. His would
hold six or eight boys readily. He would invite some of the oldest boys
to accompany him on his first trip, carefully omitting Frank Frost. The
slight would be still more pointed because Frank was his classmate.

When the bell rang for recess he lost no time in carrying out the scheme
he had thought of.

"Dick," he called out to Dick Jones, "I am expecting my boat up from
Boston next Tuesday, and I mean to go out in her Wednesday afternoon.
Wouldn't you like to go with me?"

"With all the pleasure in life," said Dick, "and thank you for the
invitation."

"How many will she hold?"

"Eight or ten, I expect. Bob Ingalls, would you like to go, too?"

The invitation was eagerly accepted. John next approached Henry Tufts,
who was speaking with Frank Frost.

Without even looking at the latter, he asked Henry if he would like to
go.

"Very much," was the reply.

"Then I will expect you," he said. He turned on his heel and walked off
without taking any notice of Frank.

Frank blushed in spite of himself.

"Don't he mean to invite you?" asked Henry, in surprise.

"It appears not," said Frank.

"It's mean in him, then," exclaimed Henry; "I declare, I've a great mind
not to go."

"I hope you will go," said Frank hastily. "You will enjoy it. Promise me
you will go."

"Would you really prefer to have me?"

"I should be very sorry if you didn't."

"Then I'll go; but I think he's mean in not asking you, for all that."



CHAPTER VI. MR. FROST MAKES UP HIS MIND

"Well, Frank," said his father at supper-time, "I've been speaking to
Mr. Maynard this afternoon about your plan."

"What did he say?" asked Frank, dropping his knife and fork in his
eagerness.

"After he had thought a little, he spoke of it favorably. He said that,
being too old to go himself, he should be glad to do anything in his
power to facilitate my going, if I thought it my duty to do so."

"Didn't he think Frank rather young for such an undertaking?" asked Mrs.
Frost doubtfully.

"Yes, he did; but still he thought with proper advice and competent
assistance he might get along. For the first, he can depend upon Mr.
Maynard and myself; as for the second, Mr. Maynard suggested a good man,
who is seeking a situation as farm laborer."

"Is it anybody in this town?" asked Frank.

"No, it is a man from Brandon, named Jacob Carter. Mr. Maynard says he
is honest, industrious, and used to working on a farm. I shall write to
him this evening."

"Then you have decided to go!" exclaimed Frank and his mother in
concert.

"It will depend in part upon the answer I receive from this man Carter.
I shall feel if he agrees to come, that I can go with less anxiety."

"How we shall miss you!" said his wife, in a subdued tone.

"And I shall miss you quite as much. It will be a considerable sacrifice
for all of us. But when my country has need of me, you will feel that
I cannot honorably stay at home. As for Frank, he may regard me as his
substitute."

"My substitute!" repeated Frank, in a questioning tone.

"Yes, since but for you, taking charge of the farm in my absence, I
should not feel that I could go."

Frank looked pleased. It made him feel that he was really of some
importance. Boys, unless they are incorrigibly idle, are glad to be
placed in posts of responsibility. Frank, though very modest, felt
within himself unused powers and undeveloped capacities, which he knew
must be called out by the unusual circumstances in which he would be
placed. The thought, too, that he would be serving his country, even at
home, filled him with satisfaction.

After a pause, Mr. Frost said: "There is one point on which I still have
some doubts. As you are all equally interested with myself, I think it
proper to ask your opinion, and shall abide by your decision."

Frank and his mother listened with earnest attention.

"You are aware that the town has decided to give a bounty of one hundred
and fifty dollars to such as may volunteer toward filling the quota.
You may remember, also, that although the town passed the vote almost
unanimously, it was my proposition, and supported by a speech of mine."

"Squire Haynes opposed it, I think you said, father."

"Yes, and intimated that I urged the matter from interested motives. He
said he presumed I intended to enlist."

"As if that sum would pay a man for leaving his home and incurring the
terrible risks of war!" exclaimed Mrs. Frost, looking indignant.

"Very likely he did not believe it himself; but he was irritated with
me, and it is his habit to impute unworthy motives to those with whom
he differs. Aside from this, however, I shall feel some delicacy in
availing myself of a bounty which I was instrumental in persuading the
town to vote. Though I feel that I should be perfectly justified in so
doing, I confess that I am anxious not to put myself in such a position
as to hazard any loss of good opinion on the part of my friends in
town."

"Then don't take it," said Mrs. Frost promptly.

"That's what I say, too, father," chimed in Frank.

"Don't decide too hastily," said Mr. Frost. "Remember that in our
circumstances this amount of money would be very useful. Although Frank
will do as well as any boy of his age, I do not expect him to make the
farm as profitable as I should do, partly on account of my experience
being greater, and partly because I should be able to accomplish more
work than he. One hundred and fifty dollars would procure many little
comforts which otherwise you may have to do without."

"I know that," said Mrs. Frost quickly. "But do you think I should
enjoy them, if there were reports circulated, however unjustly, to your
prejudice? Besides, I shall know that the comforts at the camp must be
fewer than you would enjoy at home. We shall not wish to fare so much
better than you."

"Do you think with your mother, Frank?" asked Mr. Frost.

"I think mother is right," said Frank, proud of having his opinion
asked. He was secretly determined, in spite of what his father had said,
to see if he could not make the farm as profitable as it would be under
his father's management.

Mr. Frost seemed relieved by his wife's expression of opinion. "Then,"
said he, "I will accept your decision as final. I felt that it should be
you, and not myself, who should decide it. Now my mind will be at ease,
so far as that goes."

"You will not enlist at once, father?" asked Frank.

"Not for three or four weeks. I shall wish to give you some special
instructions before I go, so that your task may be easier."

"Hadn't I better leave school at once?"

"You may finish this week out. However, I may as well begin my
instructions without delay. I believe you have never learned to milk."

"No, sir."

"Probably Carter will undertake that. Still, it will be desirable that
you should know how, in case he gets sick. You may come out with me
after supper and take your first lesson."

Frank ran for his hat with alacrity. This seemed like beginning in
earnest. He accompanied his father to the barn, and looked with new
interest at the four cows constituting his father's stock.

"I think we will begin with this one," said his father, pointing to a
red-and-white heifer. "She is better-natured than the others, and, as I
dare say your fingers will bungle a little at first, that is a point to
be considered."

If any of my boy readers has ever undertaken the task of milking for the
first time, he will appreciate Frank's difficulties. When he had seen
his father milking, it seemed to him extremely easy. The milk poured out
in rich streams, almost without an effort. But under his inexperienced
fingers none came. He tugged away manfully, but with no result.

"I guess the cow's dry," said he at last, looking up in his father's
face.

Mr. Frost in reply drew out a copious stream.

"I did the same as you," said Frank, mystified, "and none came."

"You didn't take hold right," said his father, "and you pressed at the
wrong time. Let me show you."

Before the first lesson was over Frank had advanced a little in the art
of milking, and it may as well be said here that in the course of a week
or so he became a fair proficient, so that his father even allowed him
to try Vixen, a cow who had received this name from the uncertainty of
her temper. She had more than once upset the pail with a spiteful kick
when it was nearly full. One morning she upset not only the pail, but
Frank, who looked foolish enough as he got up covered with milk.

Frank also commenced reading the Plowman, a weekly agricultural paper
which his father had taken for years. Until now he had confined his
readings in it to the selected story on the fourth page. Now, with an
object in view, he read carefully other parts of the paper. He did this
not merely in the first flush of enthusiasm, but with the steady purpose
of qualifying himself to take his father's place.

"Frank is an uncommon boy," said Mr. Frost to his wife, not without
feelings of pride, one night, when our hero had retired to bed. "I would
trust him with the farm sooner than many who are half a dozen years
older."


