
CHAPTER II.

THE YOUNG AMERICA.


With Mr. Lowington, the Academy Ship, which was the name he usually
applied to the idea he had matured, and thus far carried into effect,
was not a speculation; he did not intend to see how much money could be
made by the scheme. It was an experiment in the education of rich men's
sons, for only rich men could pay for scholarships in such an expensive
institution.

The Brockway Academy was to be continued, under the management of a
board of trustees. An accomplished teacher had been selected by Mr.
Lowington, and the school, under its present administration, was in a
highly prosperous condition. Only ten of its pupils had been transferred
to the Academy Ship, for it required no little nerve on the part of
parents to send their sons to school on the broad ocean, to battle with
the elements, to endure the storms of the Atlantic, and to undergo the
hardships which tender mothers supposed to be inseparably connected with
a life on shipboard.

For six months Mr. Lowington had studied upon his plan, and it was
hardly matured when the new ship came to anchor in Brockway harbor.
During this period he had visited the principal cities of the Northern
States, those of the southern section being closed against his
operations by the war of the rebellion then raging at the height of its
fury. He had interested his friends in his bold enterprise, and boys
with, whom the experiment was to be inaugurated were gathered from all
parts of the country.

The securing of the requisite number of pupils was the first success,
and what he had regarded as the most difficult part of the enterprise.
More than half of them had been obtained before it was deemed prudent to
lay the keel of the ship. The details of the plan had been carefully
considered during the winter, and when the ship was moored at Brockway,
the organization of the school, its rules and regulations had all been
written out. The boys began to arrive about the first of March, and by
the first of April all of them, eighty-seven in number, were on board.

Mr. Lowington was naturally very anxious for the success of his
experiment, and for months he had labored with unceasing diligence in
perfecting his plan, and carrying it into operation. In this occupation
he had found the activity he needed; and he may not be blamed for
believing, all the time, that he was laboring for his country and his
race.

If it has been inferred from what has been said of Mr. Lowington, of his
domestic afflictions, and of his views on the subject of discipline,
that he was an austere, cold, and unsympathizing man, a wrong impression
has been conveyed. The boys of the Brockway Academy, when they came to
know him, loved him as much as they respected him. He was not the man
needlessly to abridge the harmless enjoyment of youth, or to repress its
innocent hilarity. He watched the sports of the students with interest
and pleasure, and encouraged them by all the means in his power. He was
fond of humor, enjoyed a harmless joke, and had a keen appreciation of
juvenile wit. He was a good companion for the boys, and when they
understood him, he was always welcome to the play-ground.

The new ship had been duly christened Young America at the launching, by
Miss Josey Martyn--a name which was rapturously applauded by the boys.
She was one hundred and eighteen feet in length, and of about four
hundred tons burden. She had been built as strong as wood, iron, and
copper could make her. For a ship, she was small, which permitted her to
be light sparred, so that her juvenile crew could handle her with the
more ease. She had a flush deck; that is, it was unbroken from stem to
stern. There was no cabin, poop, camboose, or other house on deck, and
the eye had a clean range over the whole length of her. There was a
skylight between the fore and the main mast, and another between the
main and mizzen masts, to afford light and air to the apartments below.
There were three openings in the deck by which entrance could be
obtained to the interior of the ship: the fore hatch, the main hatch,
and the companion-way, the two former being used by the crew, and the
latter by the officers.

The between-decks, which is the space included between the upper and the
lower deck, was fitted up for the accommodation of the officers and
crew. Descending by the companion-way--which in the Young America
extended athwartships--on the right, at the foot of the stairs, was the
officers' cabin, occupying the part of the ship nearest to the stern.
This apartment was twenty-eight feet long, by fifteen in breadth at the
widest part, with four state rooms on each side. The mizzen mast passed
up through the middle of it. This cabin was richly but plainly fitted
up, and was furnished well enough for a drawing-room on shore. It was
for the use of the juvenile officers of the ship, fifteen in number, who
were to hold their positions as rewards of merit. The captain had a room
to himself, while each of the other apartments was to accommodate two
officers.

On the left of the companion-way, descending the stairs, was the "old
folks' cabin," as it was called by the students. It was in the locality
corresponding to that occupied by the ward room of a man-of-war. Though
the after cabin is the place of honor on board a ship, Mr. Lowington had
selected the ward room for himself and the teachers, in preference to
the after cabin, because it was next to the steerage, which was occupied
by the larger portion of the pupils, and because the form of the ship
did not contract the dimensions of the state rooms. This cabin was
twenty-two feet long and fifteen feet wide, with no waste room, as in
the after cabin, caused by the rounding in of the ship's counter. On the
sides were five state rooms, besides a pantry for the steward, and a
dispensary for the surgeon.

The forward room on the starboard side was occupied by Mr. Lowington
alone; the next on the same side by the chaplain and doctor; and each of
the three on the port side by two of the teachers. This cabin was
elegantly finished and furnished, and the professors were delighted with
its cheerful and pleasant aspect.

From the main cabin, as that of the "faculty" was called, were two
doors, opening into the steerage, fifty-two feet in length by fifteen
feet in width of clear space between the berths, which diminished to
nine feet abreast of the foremast. This apartment was eight feet high,
and was lighted in part by a large skylight midway between the fore and
main mast, and partly by bull's eyes in the side of the ship. There were
seventy-two berths, placed in twelve rooms, opening from passage-ways,
which extended athwartships from the main steerage, and were lighted by
the bull's eyes. There were no doors to these dormitories, each of which
contained six berths, in two tiers of three each. It was intended that
the six boys occupying one of these rooms should form a mess. Between
the gangways, or passages, were mess tables, which could be swung up
against the partition when not in use.

The steerage was neatly and tastefully fitted up, and furnished, though
not so elegantly as the cabins. It was to be the school room, as well as
the parlor and dining room of the boys, and it would compare favorably
with such apartments in well-ordered academies on shore. There was
plenty of shelves, pouches, and lockers, under the lower berths, and
beneath the bull's eyes at the head of the main gangways, for clothing
and books, and each boy had a place for every article which regulations
allowed him to possess.

Forward of the foremast there were two large state rooms; that on the
starboard side having four berths, for the boatswain, carpenter,
sailmaker, and head steward; and the one on the port side with six, for
the two cooks and the four under stewards, all of whom were men skilful
and experienced in their several departments. Forward of these was the
kitchen, from which opened the lamp room, a triangular closet in the bow
of the ship. Mr. Lowington had taken the idea of locating the cooking
apartment in the extreme forward part of the vessel from the Victoria
and Albert, the steam yacht of the Queen of England.

The hold beneath the berth deck contained the water tanks, bread room,
chain lockers, and a multitude of store rooms for provisions, clothing,
and supplies of every description needed on board during a long voyage.

The Young America was to be officered and manned by the students. They
were to work the ship, to make and take in sail, to reef, steer, and
wash down decks, as well as study and recite their lessons. They were to
go aloft, stand watch, man the capstan, pull the boats; in short, to do
everything required of seamen on board a ship. Mr. Lowington was to lure
them into the belief, while they were hauling tacks and sheets, halyards
and braces, that they were not at work, but at play. The labor required
of them was an essential element in the plan, by which the boys were to
obtain, the necessary physical exercise, and the discipline they so much
needed.

By the first of April the last of the students had reported to the
principal on board, and the professors, as the boys insisted upon
calling them, had taken possession of their state rooms. Though some of
the pupils had been on board nearly a month, the organization of the
ship had not been commenced; but classes had been formed in some of the
studies, by the teachers, and the pupils recited every day. The
boatswain had instructed the boys in rowing, and some temporary
regulations had been adopted for the eating and sleeping departments.
But not a boy had been allowed to go aloft, and nothing more than
ordinary school discipline had been attempted.

The boys, as boys always are, were impatient at this delay. They wanted
to be bounding over the ocean--to be on their way to some foreign port.
They were anxious to work, to climb the rigging, and stand at the wheel.
As yet they knew very little of the purposes of the principal, and had
but a faint perception of the life they were to lead in the Academy
Ship. It was understood that the officers were to be selected for their
merit, and that the ship, some time or other, was to cross the ocean;
but beyond this, all was darkness and uncertainty.

"To-morrow will be the first day of April," said George Wilton, as he
walked the deck of the Young America with Richard Carnes, a dignified
young gentleman of seventeen. "Mr. Lowington said we should go to work
on that day."

"If he said so, then of course we shall go to work," replied Carnes.

"I'm tired of waiting," added Wilton. "I think this is a stupid kind of
life. We are not even tied to a bell rope here."

"You will get discipline enough as soon as the crew are organized."

"I suppose we shall. Do you think we shall go to sea to-morrow?"

"Go to sea to-morrow!" exclaimed Carnes.

"Shuffles said so."

"How can we go to sea to-morrow? The crew don't know the mainmast from a
handspike. They couldn't do anything with the ship now; they don't know
the ropes."

"You do, Carnes."

"Well, I know something about a ship," replied the dignified young
gentleman, who had made one voyage up the Mediterranean with his uncle.

"I was pretty sure we should get out into blue water by to-morrow."

"Nonsense!"

"Shuffles said so."

"He is mistaken."

"What are we going to do?"

"I don't know? I'm content to wait till orders come."

"I don't want to wait any longer," added Wilton.

"What are you talking about, fellows?" asked Shuffles, joining them, as
they walked forward.

"Didn't you say we were going to sea to-morrow, Shuffles?" asked Wilton.

"Of course we are."

"Who says so?" demanded Carnes.

"All the fellows say so."

"It can't be true."

"Why not? We are not going to stay here forever."

"In my opinion, we shall stay here some weeks, if not some months,"
added Carnes.

"What for?"

"To pursue our studies, in the first place, and to learn our duty as
seamen, in the second."

"I don't believe I shall stay here a great while longer," said Shuffles,
with evident disgust. "There's no fun lying here."

"You can't help yourself," added Wilton.

"Perhaps I can't, but I can try," said Shuffles, as he glanced towards
the shore.

"All hands ahoy!" shouted Peaks, the boatswain, as his shrill whistle
rang through the ship.

The boys had been taught the meaning of this call, and they gathered in
the waist, eager to know what was to be required of them.

Mr. Lowington stood on the raised hatch over the main scuttle, where all
the students could see him. It was evident that he had some announcement
to make, especially as the following day had been assigned for
organizing the ship's company. The boys were silent, and their faces
betrayed the curiosity which they felt.

"Young gentleman," the principal began, "this ship will go into
commission to-morrow."

"Don't know what you mean, sir," said Paul Kendall as Mr. Lowington
paused to observe the effect of his announcement.

"I did not suppose that many of you would understand the expression. In
the navy, a ship is said to go into commission when the captain takes
his place on board, and the crew are organized for duty. When this
takes place, the ensign is hoisted. To-morrow, at twelve o'clock, we
shall display the colors at the peak. With us, going into commission
will only mean the organization of our school. From that time, we shall
observe the discipline of a man-of-war, so far as the ship and crew are
concerned."

"Shall we go to sea then?" asked Wilton.

"I think not," replied Mr. Lowington, laughing. "We shall not leave the
harbor till every officer and seaman knows his duty. You shall have
enough to do to-morrow, young gentlemen."

"When shall we be able to go to sea?"

"I don't know. There are many ropes in the ship, and you have a great
deal to learn before I shall be willing to trust you with the anchor at
the cat-head."

"What is the cat-head, sir?" asked Kendall

"Do you wish to go to sea without knowing what the cat-head is?" replied
the principal. "You shall know in due time. To-morrow we shall select
the officers, fifteen in number, who are to occupy the after cabin."

This announcement created a decided sensation among the eighty-seven
boys gathered in the waist, for the subject had been full of interest to
them. The after cabin had thus far been a sealed book; the door was
locked, and they had not even seen the inside of the apartment. They
were curious to visit this cabin, and to know who were to occupy it.

"After the organization of the school, it is my intention to give these
offices to those who obtain the highest number of merit marks, which
will be given for good conduct, good lessons, and progress in
seamanship. The best boy, who is at the same time the best scholar and
the best seaman, shall be captain. We have no marks now by which to make
the selection, and I intend to have you elect him the first time,
reserving to myself the right to veto your choice if it is obviously an
improper one."

As Mr. Lowington uttered this last remark, he glanced, perhaps
unconsciously, at Shuffles, who stood directly in front of him.

"Young gentlemen, the ballot will take place to-morrow morning, at nine
o'clock. I have given you this notice, that you may be able to consider
the matter and, if you choose, to make nominations for the several
offices," continued the principal.

"What are the offices, sir?"

"The first and most important one, of course, is the captain. The others
are four lieutenants, four masters, two pursers, and four midshipmen."

"What are they to do?" asked Kendall.

"I will not explain their duties now; it would require too much time. I
mentioned them in the order of their importance. Now, young gentlemen,
you should select your candidates for these offices by merit, not by
favor. I am aware that a few of you have been to sea, but probably none
of you are competent to handle a ship; and your choice should be based
mainly on good character and good conduct. I hope I shall be able to
approve the choice you may make. You are dismissed now."

"Three cheers for the principal!" shouted one of the boys.

"Silence, young gentleman! Let me say now, that no expressions of
approbation or disapprobation are to be allowed."

The boys separated into groups, and immediately gave their attention to
the important subject suggested to them by Mr. Lowington. It must be
acknowledged that violent symptoms of "log-rolling" began to be
exhibited. There were fifty, if not eighty-seven young men who wished to
be captain, and sit at the head of the table in the after cabin. Some of
them went down into the steerage, and in five minutes there was a
confused jabbering in every part of the ship.

"For whom shall you vote, Wilton?" asked Shuffles in a group of half a
dozen which had gathered around one of the mess tables.

"I don't know? whom do you go for?" replied Wilton.

"I rather think I shall go for Bob Shuffles. In my opinion, he is the
best fellow on board," replied the owner of that name.

"That's modest," laughed Wilton.

"Do you know of any fellow that would make a better captain than I
should?"

"You don't know the first thing about a ship."

"What odds does that make? I can learn as fast as anybody else."

"Do you expect every fellow to vote for himself?" asked Howe, another of
the group.

"Of course I don't; I expect them to vote for me," answered Shuffles,
with great good-nature.

"You are rather cheeky, Shuffles."

"What's the use of mincing the matter? Here we are, half a dozen of the
