came the Queen, while the air was filled with gay voices singing
to welcome her.

She placed the child beside her, saying, "Little Eva, you shall see
now how the flowers on your great earth bloom so brightly.  A band
of loving little gardeners go daily forth from Fairy-Land, to tend
and watch them, that no harm may befall the gentle spirits that dwell
beneath their leaves.  This is never known, for like all good it is
unseen by mortal eyes, and unto only pure hearts like yours do we
make known our secret.  The humblest flower that grows is visited by
our messengers, and often blooms in fragrant beauty unknown, unloved
by all save Fairy friends, who seek to fill the spirits with all sweet
and gentle virtues, that they may not be useless on the earth; for the
noblest mortals stoop to learn of flowers.  Now, Eglantine, what have
you to tell us of your rosy namesakes on the earth?"

From a group of Elves, whose rose-wreathed wands showed the flower
they loved, came one bearing a tiny urn, and, answering the Queen,
she said,--

"Over hill and valley they are blooming fresh and fair as summer sun
and dew can make them.  No drooping stem or withered leaf tells of any
evil thought within their fragrant bosoms, and thus from the fairest
of their race have they gathered this sweet dew, as a token of their
gratitude to one whose tenderness and care have kept them pure and
happy; and this, the loveliest of their sisters, have I brought to
place among the Fairy flowers that never pass away."

Eglantine laid the urn before the Queen, and placed the fragrant rose
on the dewy moss beside the throne, while a murmur of approval went
through the hall, as each elfin wand waved to the little Fairy
who had toiled so well and faithfully, and could bring so fair a gift
to their good Queen.

Then came forth an Elf bearing a withered leaf, while her many-colored
robe and the purple tulips in her hair told her name and charge.

"Dear Queen," she sadly said, "I would gladly bring as pleasant
tidings as my sister, but, alas! my flowers are proud and wilful,
and when I went to gather my little gift of colored leaves for royal
garments, they bade me bring this withered blossom, and tell you
they would serve no longer one who will not make them Queen over all
the other flowers.  They would yield neither dew nor honey, but
proudly closed their leaves and bid me go."

"Your task has been too hard for you," said the Queen kindly, as she
placed the drooping flower in the urn Eglantine had given, "you will
see how this dew from a sweet, pure heart will give new life and
loveliness even to this poor faded one.  So can you, dear Rainbow, by
loving words and gentle teachings, bring back lost purity and peace
to those whom pride and selfishness have blighted.  Go once again
to the proud flowers, and tell them when they are queen of their own
hearts they will ask no fairer kingdom.  Watch more tenderly than ever
over them, see that they lack neither dew nor air, speak lovingly
to them, and let no unkind word or deed of theirs anger you.  Let them
see by your patient love and care how much fairer they might be,
and when next you come, you will be laden with gifts from humble,
loving flowers."

Thus they told what they had done, and received from their Queen some
gentle chiding or loving word of praise.

"You will be weary of this," said little Rose-Leaf to Eva; "come now
and see where we are taught to read the tales written on flower-leaves,
and the sweet language of the birds, and all that can make a Fairy
heart wiser and better."

Then into a cheerful place they went, where were many groups of
flowers, among whose leaves sat the child Elves, and learned from
their flower-books all that Fairy hands had written there.  Some
studied how to watch the tender buds, when to spread them to the
sunlight, and when to shelter them from rain; how to guard the
ripening seeds, and when to lay them in the warm earth or send them
on the summer wind to far off hills and valleys, where other Fairy
hands would tend and cherish them, till a sisterhood of happy flowers
sprang up to beautify and gladden the lonely spot where they had
fallen.  Others learned to heal the wounded insects, whose frail limbs
a breeze could shatter, and who, were it not for Fairy hands, would
die ere half their happy summer life had gone.  Some learned how by
pleasant dreams to cheer and comfort mortal hearts, by whispered words
of love to save from evil deeds those who had gone astray, to fill
young hearts with gentle thoughts and pure affections, that no sin
might mar the beauty of the human flower; while others, like mortal
children, learned the Fairy alphabet.  Thus the Elves made loving
friends by care and love, and no evil thing could harm them, for
those they helped to cherish and protect ever watched to shield and
save them.

Eva nodded to the gay little ones, as they peeped from among the
leaves at the stranger, and then she listened to the Fairy lessons.
Several tiny Elves stood on a broad leaf while the teacher sat
among the petals of a flower that bent beside them, and asked
questions that none but Fairies would care to know.

"Twinkle, if there lay nine seeds within a flower-cup and the wind
bore five away, how many would the blossom have?"  "Four," replied the
little one.

"Rosebud, if a Cowslip opens three leaves in one day and four the
next, how many rosy leaves will there be when the whole flower
has bloomed?"

"Seven," sang the gay little Elf.

"Harebell, if a silkworm spin one yard of Fairy cloth in an hour,
how many will it spin in a day?"

"Twelve," said the Fairy child.

"Primrose, where lies Violet Island?"

"In the Lake of Ripples."

"Lilla, you may bound Rose Land."

"On the north by Ferndale, south by Sunny Wave River, east by the hill
of Morning Clouds, and west by the Evening Star."

"Now, little ones," said the teacher, "you may go to your painting,
that our visitor may see how we repair the flowers that earthly hands
have injured."

Then Eva saw how, on large, white leaves, the Fairies learned to
imitate the lovely colors, and with tiny brushes to brighten the blush
on the anemone's cheek, to deepen the blue of the violet's eye, and
add new light to the golden cowslip.

"You have stayed long enough," said the Elves at length, "we have
many things to show you.  Come now and see what is our dearest work."

So Eva said farewell to the child Elves, and hastened with little
Rose-Leaf to the gates.  Here she saw many bands of Fairies, folded in
dark mantles that mortals might not know them, who, with the child
among them, flew away over hill and valley.  Some went to the cottages
amid the hills, some to the sea-side to watch above the humble fisher
folks; but little Rose-Leaf and many others went into the noisy city.

Eva wondered within herself what good the tiny Elves could do in this
great place; but she soon learned, for the Fairy band went among the
poor and friendless, bringing pleasant dreams to the sick and old,
sweet, tender thoughts of love and gentleness to the young, strength
to the weak, and patient cheerfulness to the poor and lonely.

Then the child wondered no longer, but deeper grew her love
for the tender-hearted Elves, who left their own happy home to cheer
and comfort those who never knew what hands had clothed and fed them,
what hearts had given of their own joy, and brought such happiness
to theirs.

Long they stayed, and many a lesson little Eva learned:  but when
she begged them to go back, they still led her on, saying, "Our work
is not yet done; shall we leave so many sad hearts when we may
cheer them, so many dark homes that we may brighten?  We must stay
yet longer, little Eva, and you may learn yet more."

Then they went into a dark and lonely room, and here they found
a pale, sad-eyed child, who wept bitter tears over a faded flower.

"Ah," sighed the little one, "it was my only friend, and I
cherished it with all my lone heart's love; 't was all that made
my sad life happy; and it is gone."

Tenderly the child fastened the drooping stem, and placed it
where the one faint ray of sunlight stole into the dreary room.

"Do you see," said the Elves, "through this simple flower will we
keep the child pure and stainless amid the sin and sorrow around her.
The love of this shall lead her on through temptation and through
grief, and she shall be a spirit of joy and consolation to the sinful
and the sorrowing."

And with busy love toiled the Elves amid the withered leaves,
and new strength was given to the flower; while, as day by day the
friendless child watered the growing buds, deeper grew her love for
the unseen friends who had given her one thing to cherish in her
lonely home; sweet, gentle thoughts filled her heart as she bent
above it, and the blossom's fragrant breath was to her a whispered
voice of all fair and lovely things; and as the flower taught her,
so she taught others.

The loving Elves brought her sweet dreams by night, and happy thoughts
by day, and as she grew in childlike beauty, pure and patient amid
poverty and sorrow, the sinful were rebuked, sorrowing hearts grew
light, and the weak and selfish forgot their idle fears, when they saw
her trustingly live on with none to aid or comfort her.  The love
she bore the tender flower kept her own heart innocent and bright,
and the pure human flower was a lesson to those who looked upon it;
and soon the gloomy house was bright with happy hearts, that learned
of the gentle child to bear poverty and grief as she had done, to
forgive those who brought care and wrong to them, and to seek for
happiness in humble deeds of charity and love.

"Our work is done," whispered the Elves, and with blessings on the
two fair flowers, they flew away to other homes;--to a blind old man
who dwelt alone with none to love him, till through long years of
darkness and of silent sorrow the heart within had grown dim and cold.
No sunlight could enter at the darkened eyes, and none were near
to whisper gentle words, to cheer and comfort.

Thus he dwelt forgotten and alone, seeking to give no joy to others,
possessing none himself.  Life was dark and sad till the untiring
Elves came to his dreary home, bringing sunlight and love.  They
whispered sweet words of comfort,--how, if the darkened eyes could
find no light without, within there might be never-failing happiness;
gentle feelings and sweet, loving thoughts could make the heart fair,
if the gloomy, selfish sorrow were but cast away, and all would be
bright and beautiful.

They brought light-hearted children, who gathered round him, making
the desolate home fair with their young faces, and his sad heart gay
with their sweet, childish voices.  The love they bore he could not
cast away, sunlight stole in, the dark thoughts passed away, and the
earth was a pleasant home to him.

Thus their little hands led him back to peace and happiness,
flowers bloomed beside his door, and their fragrant breath brought
happy thoughts of pleasant valleys and green hills; birds sang to him,
and their sweet voices woke the music in his own soul, that never
failed to calm and comfort.  Happy sounds were heard in his once
lonely home, and bright faces gathered round his knee, and listened
tenderly while he strove to tell them all the good that gentleness and
love had done for him.

Still the Elves watched near, and brighter grew the heart as kindly
thoughts and tender feelings entered in, and made it their home;
and when the old man fell asleep, above his grave little feet trod
lightly, and loving hands laid fragrant flowers.

Then went the Elves into the dreary prison-houses, where sad hearts
pined in lonely sorrow for the joy and freedom they had lost.  To
these came the loving band with tender words, telling of the peace
they yet might win by patient striving and repentant tears, thus
waking in their bosoms all the holy feelings and sweet affections
that had slept so long.

They told pleasant tales, and sang their sweetest songs to cheer and
gladden, while the dim cells grew bright with the sunlight, and
fragrant with the flowers the loving Elves had brought, and by their
gentle teachings those sad, despairing hearts were filled with patient
hope and earnest longing to win back their lost innocence and joy.

Thus to all who needed help or comfort went the faithful Fairies; and
when at length they turned towards Fairy-Land, many were the grateful,
happy hearts they left behind.

Then through the summer sky, above the blossoming earth, they
journeyed home, happier for the joy they had given, wiser for the good
they had done.

All Fairy-Land was dressed in flowers, and the soft wind went singing
by, laden with their fragrant breath.  Sweet music sounded through the
air, and troops of Elves in their gayest robes hastened to the palace
where the feast was spread.

Soon the bright hall was filled with smiling faces and fair forms, and
little Eva, as she stood beside the Queen, thought she had never seen
a sight so lovely.

The many-colored shadows of the fairest flowers played on the pure
white walls, and fountains sparkled in the sunlight, making music
as the cool waves rose and fell, while to and fro, with waving wings
and joyous voices, went the smiling Elves, bearing fruit and honey,
or fragrant garlands for each other's hair.

Long they feasted, gayly they sang, and Eva, dancing merrily
among them, longed to be an Elf that she might dwell forever
in so fair a home.

At length the music ceased, and the Queen said, as she laid her hand
on little Eva's shining hair:--

"Dear child, tomorrow we must bear you home, for, much as we long
to keep you, it were wrong to bring such sorrow to your loving earthly
friends; therefore we will guide you to the brook-side, and there say
farewell till you come again to visit us.  Nay, do not weep, dear
Rose-Leaf; you shall watch over little Eva's flowers, and when she
looks at them she will think of you.  Come now and lead her to the
Fairy garden, and show her what we think our fairest sight.  Weep
no more, but strive to make her last hours with us happy as you can."

With gentle caresses and most tender words the loving Elves gathered
about the child, and, with Rose-Leaf by her side, they led her through
the palace, and along green, winding paths, till Eva saw what seemed
a wall of flowers rising before her, while the air was filled with the
most fragrant odors, and the low, sweet music as of singing blossoms.

"Where have you brought me, and what mean these lovely sounds?"
asked Eva.

"Look here, and you shall see," said Rose-Leaf, as she bent aside
the vines, "but listen silently or you cannot hear."

Then Eva, looking through the drooping vines, beheld a garden filled
with the loveliest flowers; fair as were all the blossoms she had seen
in Fairy-Land, none were so beautiful as these.  The rose glowed
with a deeper crimson, the lily's soft leaves were more purely white,
the crocus and humble cowslip shone like sunlight, and the violet
was blue as the sky that smiled above it.

"How beautiful they are," whispered Eva, "but, dear Rose-Leaf, why
do you keep them here, and why call you this your fairest sight?"

"Look again, and I will tell you," answered the Fairy.

Eva looked, and saw from every flower a tiny form come forth to
welcome the Elves, who all, save Rose-Leaf, had flown above the wall,
and were now scattering dew upon the flowers' bright leaves and
talking gayly with the Spirits, who gathered around them, and seemed
full of joy that they had come.  The child saw that each one wore the
colors of the flower that was its home.  Delicate and graceful were
the little forms, bright the silken hair that fell about each lovely
face; and Eva heard the low, sweet murmur of their silvery voices and
the rustle of their wings.  She gazed in silent wonder, forgetting she
knew not who they were, till the Fairy said,--

"These are the spirits of the flowers, and this the Fairy Home where
those whose hearts were pure and loving on the earth come to bloom in
fadeless beauty here, when their earthly life is past.  The humblest
flower that blooms has a home with us, for outward beauty is a
worthless thing if all be not fair and sweet within.  Do you see
yonder lovely spirit singing with my sister Moonlight?  a clover
blossom was her home, and she dwelt unknown, unloved; yet patient and
content, bearing cheerfully the sorrows sent her.  We watched and saw
how fair and sweet the humble flower grew, and then gladly bore her
here, to blossom with the lily and the rose.  The flowers' lives
are often short, for cruel hands destroy them; therefore is it our
greatest joy to bring them hither, where no careless foot or wintry
wind can harm them, where they bloom in quiet beauty, repaying our
care by their love and sweetest perfumes."

"I will never break another flower," cried Eva; "but let me go
to them, dear Fairy; I would gladly know the lovely spirits, and ask
forgiveness for the sorrow I have caused.  May I not go in?"

"Nay, dear Eva, you are a mortal child, and cannot enter here; but I
will tell them of the kind little maiden who has learned to love them,
and they will remember you when you are gone.  Come now, for you have
seen enough, and we must be away."

On a rosy morning cloud, surrounded by the loving Elves, went Eva
through the sunny sky.  The fresh wind bore them gently on, and soon
they stood again beside the brook, whose waves danced brightly as if
to welcome them.

"Now, ere we say farewell," said the Queen, as they gathered nearer
to the child, "tell me, dear Eva, what among all our Fairy gifts
will make you happiest, and it shall be yours."

"You good little Fairies," said Eva, folding them in her arms, for
she was no longer the tiny child she had been in Fairy-Land, "you dear
good little Elves, what can I ask of you, who have done so much
to make me happy, and taught me so many good and gentle lessons,
the memory of which will never pass away?  I can only ask of you the
power to be as pure and gentle as yourselves, as tender and loving
to the weak and sorrowing, as untiring in kindly deeds to all.  Grant
me this gift, and you shall see that little Eva has not forgotten
what you have taught her."

"The power shall be yours," said the Elves, and laid their soft hands
on her head; "we will watch over you in dreams, and when you would have
tidings of us, ask the flowers in your garden, and they will tell you
all you would know.  Farewell.  Remember Fairy-Land and all your
loving friends."

They clung about her tenderly, and little Rose-Leaf placed a flower
crown on her head, whispering softly, "When you would come to us
again, stand by the brook-side and wave this in the air, and we will
gladly take you to our home again.  Farewell, dear Eva.  Think of your
little Rose-Leaf when among the flowers."

Long Eva watched their shining wings, and listened to the music of
their voices as they flew singing home, and when at length the last
little form had vanished among the clouds, she saw that all around her
where the Elves had been, the fairest flowers had sprung up, and the
lonely brook-side was a blooming garden.

Thus she stood among the waving blossoms, with the Fairy garland in
her hair, and happy feelings in her heart, better and wiser for her
visit to Fairy-Land.

"Now, Star-Twinkle, what have you to teach?" asked the Queen.

"Nothing but a little song I heard the hare-bells singing," replied
the Fairy, and, taking her harp, sang, in a low, sweet voice:--




THE FLOWER'S LESSON.


  THERE grew a fragrant rose-tree where the brook flows,
  With two little tender buds, and one full rose;
  When the sun went down to his bed in the west,
  The little buds leaned on the rose-mother's breast,
  While the bright eyed stars their long watch kept,
  And the flowers of the valley in their green cradles slept;
  Then silently in odors they communed with each other,
  The two little buds on the bosom of their mother.
  "O sister," said the little one, as she gazed at the sky,
  "I wish that the Dew Elves, as they wander lightly by,
  Would bring me a star; for they never grow dim,
  And the Father does not need them to burn round him.
  The shining drops of dew the Elves bring each day
  And place in my bosom, so soon pass away;
  But a star would glitter brightly through the long summer hours,
  And I should be fairer than all my sister flowers.
  That were better far than the dew-drops that fall
  On the high and the low, and come alike to all.
  I would be fair and stately, with a bright star to shine
  And give a queenly air to this crimson robe of mine."
  And proudly she cried, "These fire-flies shall be
  My jewels, since the stars can never come to me."
  Just then a tiny dew-drop that hung o'er the dell
  On the breast of the bud like a soft star fell;
  But impatiently she flung it away from her leaf,
  And it fell on her mother like a tear of grief,
  While she folded to her breast, with wilful pride,
  A glittering fire-fly that hung by her side.
  "Heed," said the mother rose, "daughter mine,
  Why shouldst thou seek for beauty not thine?
  The Father hath made thee what thou now art;
  And what he most loveth is a sweet, pure heart.
  Then why dost thou take with such discontent
  The loving gift which he to thee hath sent?
  For the cool fresh dew will render thee far
  More lovely and sweet than the brightest star;
