"Well, dear, I hope they will not come tonight: tomorrow I will have
them all in custody; but if they do come, we must do our best to beat
them off. It is fortunate that Edward left the guns and pistols which
he found in Clara's cottage, as we shall have no want of firearms; and
we can barricade the doors and windows, so that they can not get in in
a hurry; but I must have Pablo to help me, for there is no time to be
lost."

"But can not I help you, Humphrey?" said Alice. "Surely I can do
something?"

"We will see, Alice; but I think I can do without you. We have still
plenty of daylight. I will take the box into your room."

Humphrey, who had only taken the box out of the cart and carried it
within the threshold of the door, now took it into his sisters'
bedroom, and then went out and called Pablo, who came running to him.

"Pablo," said Humphrey, "we must bring to the cottage some of the large
pieces we sawed out for rafters; for I should not be surprised if the
cottage were attacked this night." He then told Pablo what had taken
place. "You see, Pablo, I dare not send to the intendant to-night, in
case the robbers should come here."

"No, not send to-night," said Pablo; "stay here and fight them; first
make door fast, then cut hole to fire through."

"Yes, that was my idea. You don't mind fighting them, Pablo?"

"No; fight hard for Missy Alice and Missy Edith," said Pablo; "fight
for you too, Massa Humphrey, and fight for myself," added Pablo,
laughing.

They then went for the pieces of squared timber, brought them from the
saw-pit to the cottage, and very soon fitted them to the doors and
windows, so as to prevent several men, with using all their strength,
from forcing them open.

"That will do," said Humphrey; "and now get me the small saw, Pablo,
and I will cut a hole or two to fire through."

It was dark before they had finished, and then they made all fast, and
went to Pablo's room for the arms, which they got ready for service,
and loaded.

"Now we are all ready, Alice, so let us have our supper," said
Humphrey. "We will make a fight for it, and they shall not get in so
easily as they think."

After they had had their supper, Humphrey said the prayers, and told
his sisters to go to bed.

"Yes, Humphrey, we will go to bed, but we will not undress, for if they
come, I must be up to help you. I can load a gun, you know, and Edith
can take them to you as fast as I load them. Won't you, Edith?"

"Yes, I will bring you the guns, Humphrey, and you shall shoot them,"
replied Edith.

Humphrey kissed his sisters, and they went to their room. He then put a
light in the chimney, that he might not have to get one in case the
robbers came, and then desired Pablo to go and lie down on his bed, as
he intended to do the same. Humphrey remained awake till past three
o'clock in the morning, but no robbers came. Pablo was snoring loud,
and at last Humphrey fell asleep himself, and did not wake till broad
daylight. He got up, and found Alice and Edith were already in the
sitting-room, lighting the fire.

"I would not wake you, Humphrey, as you had been sitting up so long.
The robbers have not made their appearance, that is clear; shall we
unbar the door and window-shutters now?"

"Yes, I think we may. Here, Pablo!"

"Yes," replied Pablo, coming out half asleep; "what the matter? thief
come?"

"No," replied Edith, "thief not come, but sun shine, and lazy Pablo not
get up."

"Up now, Missy Edith."

"Yes, but not awake yet."

"Yes, Missy Edith, quite awake."

"Well, then, help me to undo the door, Pablo."

They took down the barricades, and Humphrey opened the door cautiously,
and looked out.

"They won't come now, at all events, I should think," observed
Humphrey; "but there is no saying--they may be prowling about, and may
think it easier to get in during daytime than at night. Go out, Pablo,
and look about every where; take a pistol with you, and fire it off if
there is any danger, and then come back as fast as you can."

Pablo took the pistol, and then Humphrey went out of the door and
looked well round in front of the cottage, but he would not leave the
door till he was assured that no one was there. Pablo returned soon
after, saying that he had looked round every where, and into the
cow-house and yard, and there was nobody to be seen. This satisfied
Humphrey, and they returned to the cottage.

"Now, Pablo, get your breakfast, while I write the letter to the
intendant," said Humphrey; "and then you must saddle Billy, and go over
to him as fast as you can with the letter. You can tell him all I have
not said in it. I shall expect you back at night, and some people with
you."

"I see," said Pablo, who immediately busied himself with some cold meat
which Alice put before him. Pablo had finished his breakfast and
brought Billy to the door, before Humphrey had finished his letter. As
soon as it was written and folded, Pablo set off, as fast as Billy
could go, to the other side of the forest.

Humphrey continued on the look-out during the whole day, with his gun
on his arm, and his two dogs by his side; for he knew the dogs would
give notice of the approach of any one, long before he might see them;
but nothing occurred during the whole day; and when the evening closed
in he barricaded the doors and windows, and remained on the watch with
the dogs, waiting for the coming of the robbers, or for the arrival of
the party which he expected would be sent by the intendant to take the
robbers. Just as it was dark, Pablo returned with a note from Edward,
saying that he would be over, and at the cottage by ten o'clock, with a
large party.

Humphrey had said in his letter, that it would be better that any force
sent by the intendant should not arrive till after dark, as the robbers
might be near and perceive them, and then they might escape; he did not
therefore expect them to come till some time after dark. Humphrey was
reading a book--Pablo was dozing in the chimney corner--the two girls
had retired into their room and had lain down on the bed in their
clothes, when the dogs both gave a low growl.

"Somebody come," said Pablo, starting up.

Again the dogs growled, and Humphrey made a sign to Pablo to hold his
tongue. A short time of anxious silence succeeded, for it was
impossible to ascertain whether the parties were friends or enemies.
The dogs now sprung up and barked furiously at the door, and as soon as
Humphrey had silenced them, a voice was heard outside, begging for
admission to a poor benighted traveler. This was sufficient; it could
not be the party from the intendant's, but the robbers who wished to
induce them to open the door. Pablo put a gun into Humphrey's hand, and
took another for himself; he then removed the light into the chimney,
and on the application from outside being repeated, Humphrey answered,

"That he never opened the door at that hour of the night, and that it
was useless their remaining."

No answer or repetition of the request was made, but, as Humphrey
retreated with Pablo into the fireplace, a gun was fired into the lock
of the door, which was blown off into the room, and, had it not been
for the barricades, the doors must have flown open. The robbers
appeared surprised at such not being the case, and one of them inserted
his arm into the hole made in the door, to ascertain what might be the
further obstacle to open it, when Pablo slipped past Humphrey, and
gaining the door, discharged his gun under the arm which had been
thrust into the hole in the door. The party, whoever it might have
been, gave a loud cry, and fell at the threshold outside.

"I think that will do," said Humphrey: "we must not take more life than
is necessary. I had rather that you had fired through his arm--it would
have disabled him, and that would have sufficed."

"Kill much better," said Pablo. "Corbould shot through leg, come again
to rob; suppose shot dead, never rob more."

The dogs now flew to the back of the cottage, evidently pointing out
that the robbers were attempting that side. Humphrey put his gun
through the hole in the door, and discharged it.

"Why you do that, Massa Humphrey? nobody there!"

"I know that, Pablo; but if the people are coming from the intendant's,
they will see the flash and perhaps hear the report, and it will let
them know what is going on."

"There is another gun loaded, Humphrey," said Alice, who with Edith had
joined them without Humphrey observing it.

"Thanks, love; but you and Edith must not remain here; sit down on the
hearth, and then you will be sheltered from any bullet which they may
fire into the house. I have no fear of their getting in, and we shall
have help directly, I have no doubt. Pablo, I shall fire through the
back door; they must be there, for the dogs have their noses under it,
and are so violent. Do you fire another gun, as a signal, through the
hole in the front door."

Humphrey stood within four feet of the back door, and fired just above
where the dogs held their noses and barked. Pablo discharged his gun as
directed, and then returned to reload the guns. The dogs were now more
quiet, and it appeared as if the robbers had retreated from the back
door. Pablo blew out the light, which had been put more in the center
of the room when Alice and Edith took possession of the fireplace.

"No fear, Missy Edith, I know where find every thing," said Pablo, who
now went and peered through the hole in the front door, to see if the
robbers were coming to it again; but he could see and hear nothing for
some time.

At last the attack was renewed; the dogs flew backward and forward,
sometimes to one door and then to another, as if both were to be
assailed; and at the same time a crash in Alice's bedchamber told them
that the robbers had burst in the small window in that room, which
Humphrey had not paid any attention to, as it was so small that a man
could hardly introduce his body through it. Humphrey immediately called
Holdfast and opened the door of the room, for he thought that a man
forcing his way in would be driven back or held by the dog, and he and
Pablo dared not leave the two doors. Watch, the other dog, followed
Holdfast into the bedroom; and oaths and curses, mingled with the
savage yells of the dogs, told them that a conflict was going on. Both
doors were now battered with heavy pieces of timber at the same time,
and Pablo said,

"Great many robbers here."

A moment or more had passed, during which Pablo and Humphrey had both
again fired their guns through the door, when, of a sudden, other
sounds were heard--shots were fired outside, loud cries, and angry
oaths and exclamations.

"The intendant's people are come," said Humphrey, "I am sure of it."

Shortly afterward Humphrey heard his name called by Edward, and he
replied, and went to the door and undid the barricades.

"Get a light, Alice, dear," said Humphrey, "we are all safe now. I will
open the door directly, Edward, but in the dark I can not see the
fastenings."

"Are you all safe, Humphrey?"

"Yes, all safe, Edward. Wait till Alice brings a light,"

Alice soon brought one, and then the door was unfastened. Edward
stepped over the body of a man which lay at the threshold, saying--

"You have settled somebody there, at all events," and then caught Edith
and Alice in his arms.

He was followed by Oswald and some other men, leading in the prisoners.

"Bind that fellow fast, Oswald," said Edward. "Get another light,
Pablo; let us see who it is that lies outside the door."

"First see who is in my bedroom, Edward," said Alice, "for the dogs are
still there."

"In your bedroom, dearest? Well, then, let us go there first."

Edward went in with Humphrey, and found a man half in the window and
half out, held by the throat and apparently suffocated by the two dogs.
He took the dogs off; and desiring the men to secure the robber, and
ascertain whether he was alive or not, he returned to the sitting-room,
and then went to examine the body outside the door.

"Corbould, as I live!" cried Oswald.

"Yes," replied Edward, "he has gone to his account. God forgive him!"

On inquiry they found, that of all the robbers, to the number of ten,
not one had escaped--eight they had made prisoners, Corbould, and the
man whom the dogs had seized, and who was found to be quite dead, made
up the number. The robbers were all bound and guarded; and then,
leaving them under the charge of Oswald and five of his men, Edward and
Humphrey set off with seven more to Clara's cottage, to ascertain if
there were any more to be found there. They arrived by two o'clock in
the morning, and, on knocking several times, the door was opened and
they seized another man, the only one who was found in it. They then
went back to the cottage with their prisoner, and by the time that they
had arrived it was daylight. As soon as the party sent by the intendant
had been supplied with a breakfast, Edward bade farewell to Humphrey
and his sisters, that he might return and deliver up his prisoners.
Pablo went with him to bring back the cart which carried the two dead
bodies. This capture cleared the forest of the robbers which had so
long infested it, for they never had any more attempts made from that
time.

Before Edward left, Humphrey and he examined the box which Humphrey had
dug up from under the oak, and which had occasioned such danger to the
inmates of the cottage; for one of the men stated to Edward that they
suspected that the box which they had seen Humphrey dig out contained
treasure, and that without they had seen him in possession of it, they
never should have attacked the cottage, although Corbould had often
persuaded them so to do; but as they knew that he was only seeking
revenge--and they required money to stimulate them--they had refused,
as they considered that there was nothing to be obtained in the cottage
worth the risk, as they knew that the inmates had firearms, and would
defend themselves. On examination of its contents, they found in the
box a sum of 40 pounds in gold, a bag of silver, and some other
valuables in silver spoons, candlesticks, and ornaments for women.
Edward took a list of the contents, and when he returned he stated to
the intendant all that had occurred, and requested to know what should
be done with the money and other articles which Humphrey had found.

"I wish you had said nothing to me about it," said the intendant,
"although I am pleased with your open and fair dealing. I can not say
any thing, except that you had better let Humphrey keep it till it is
claimed--which, of course, it never will be. But, Edward, Humphrey must
come over here and make his deposition, as I must report the capture of
these robbers, and send them to trial. You had better go with the clerk
and take the depositions of Pablo and your sisters, while Humphrey
comes here. You can stay till his return. Their depositions are not of
so much consequence as Humphrey's, as they can only speak as to the
attack, but Humphrey's I must take down myself."

When Patience and Clara heard that Edward was going over, they obtained
leave to go with him to see Alice and Edith, and were to be escorted
back by Humphrey. This the intendant consented to, and they had a very
merry party. Humphrey remained two days at the intendant's house, and
then returned to the cottage, where Edward had taken his place during
his absence.




CHAPTER XXI.


The winter set in very severe, and the falls of snow were very heavy
and frequent. It was fortunate that Humphrey had been so provident in
making so large a quantity of hay, or the stock would have been
starved. The flock of goats, in a great part, subsisted themselves on
the bark of trees and moss; at night they had some hay given to them,
and they did very well. It was hardly possible for Edward to come over
to see his brother and sisters, for the snow was so deep as to render
such a long journey too fatiguing for a horse. Twice or thrice after
the snow fell, he contrived to get over; but after that they knew it
was impossible, and they did not expect him. Humphrey and Pablo had
little to do except attending to the stock, and cutting firewood to
keep up their supply, for they now burned it very fast. The snow lay
several feet high round the cottage, being driven against it by the
wind. They had kept a passage clear to the yard, and had kept the yard
as clear of snow as possible: they could do no more. A sharp frost and
clear weather succeeded to the snow-storms, and there appeared no
chance of the snow melting away. The nights were dark and long, and
their oil for their lamp was getting low. Humphrey was anxious to go to
Lymington, as they required many things but it was impossible to go any
where except on foot, and walking was, from the depth of the snow, a
most fatiguing exercise. There was one thing, however, that Humphrey
had not forgotten, which was, that he had told Edward that he would try
and capture some of the forest ponies; and during the whole of the time
since the heavy fall of snow had taken place he had been making his
arrangements. The depth of the snow prevented the animals from
obtaining any grass, and they were almost starved, as they could find
nothing to subsist upon except the twigs and branches of trees which
they could reach. Humphrey went out with Pablo, and found the herd,
which was about five miles from the cottage, and near to Clara's
cottage. He and Pablo brought with them as much hay as they could
carry, and strewed it about, so as to draw the ponies nearer to them,
and then Humphrey looked for a place which would answer his purpose.
About three miles from the cottage, he found what he thought would suit
him; there was a sort of avenue between the two thickets, about a
hundred yards wide; and the wind blowing through this avenue, during
the snow-storm, had drifted the snow at one end of it, and right across
it raised a large mound several feet high. By strewing small bundles of
hay, he drew the herd of ponies into this avenue; and in the avenue he
left them a good quantity to feed upon every night for several nights,
till at last the herd of ponies went there every morning.

"Now, Pablo, we must make a trial," said Humphrey. "You must get your
lassoes ready, in case they should be required. We must go to the
avenue before daylight, with the two dogs, tie one upon one side of the
avenue and the other on the other, that they may bark and prevent the
ponies from attempting to escape through the thicket. Then we must get
the ponies between us and the drift of snow which lies across the
avenue, and try if we can not draw them into the drift. If so, they
will plunge in so deep that some of them will not be able to get out
before we have thrown the ropes round their necks."

"I see," said Pablo; "very good--soon catch them."

Before daylight they went with the dogs and a large bundle of hay,
which they strewed nearer to the mound of drift-snow. They then tied
the dogs up on each side, ordering them to lie down and be quiet. They
then walked through the thicket so as not to be perceived, until they
considered that they were far enough from the drift-snow. About
daylight, the herd came to pick up the hay as usual, and after they had
passed them Humphrey and Pablo followed in the thicket, not wishing to
show themselves till the last moment. While the ponies were busy with
the hay, they suddenly ran out into the avenue and separated, so as to
prevent the ponies from attempting to gallop past them. Shouting as
loud they could, as they ran up to the ponies, and calling to the dogs,
who immediately set up barking on each side, the ponies, alarmed at the
noise and the appearance of Humphrey and Pablo, naturally set off in
the only direction which appeared to them to be clear, and galloped
away over the mound of drift-snow, with their tails streaming, snorting
and plunging in the snow as they hurried along; but as soon as they
arrived at the mound of drift-snow, they plunged first up to their
bellies, and afterward, as they attempted to force their way where the
snow was deeper, many of them stuck fast altogether, and attempted to
clear themselves in vain. Humphrey and Pablo, who had followed them as
fast as they could run, now came up with them and threw the lasso over
the neck of one, and ropes with slip-nooses over two more, which were
floundering in the snow there together. The remainder of the herd,
after great exertions, got clear of the snow by turning round and
galloping back through the avenue. The three ponies captured made a
furious struggle, but by drawing the ropes tight round their necks they
were choked, and soon unable to move. They then tied their fore-legs,
and loosed the ropes round their necks, that they might recover their
breath.

"Got them now, Massa Humphrey," said Pablo.

"Yes; but our work is not yet over, Pablo; we must get them home; how
shall we manage that?"

"Suppose they no eat to-day and to-morrow, get very tame."

"I believe that will be the best way; they can not get loose again, do
all they can."

"No, sir; but get one home to-day. This very fine pony; suppose we try
him."

Pablo then put the halter on, and tied the end short to the fore-leg of
the pony, so that it could not walk without keeping its head close to
the ground--if it raised its head, it was obliged to lift up its leg.
Then he put the lasso round its neck, to choke it if it was too unruly,
and having done that, he cast loose the ropes which had tied its
fore-legs together.

"Now, Massa Humphrey, we get him home somehow. First I go loose the
dogs; he 'fraid of the dogs, and run t'other way."

The pony, which was an iron-gray and very handsome, plunged furiously
and kicked behind, but it could not do so without falling down, which
