dog was exactly behind him. Toby held on for a moment or two,
ascertained that the wound was both deep and painful, then retreated to
take up his post by Cecile's pillow. Nor did the faithful creature
close his eyes again that night. Anton, too, lay awake. Angry and
burning were his revengeful thoughts. He was more determined than ever
to find the purse, not to let his victims escape him. As to Toby, he
would kill him if he could. There seemed little doubt now that the
children had not the purse with them. Still Anton remembered Joe's
confused manner when he had sounded him on the subject of money. Anton
felt sure that Joe knew where the purse was. How could he force his
secret from the lad? How could he make him declare where the gold was
hidden? A specious, plausible man, Anton had, as I before said, made
friends with Joe. Joe in a moment of ill-advised confidence had told to
Anton his own sad history. Anton pondering over it now in the darkness,
for there was no moon shining into _his_ bedroom, felt that he could
secure a very strong hold over the lad.

Joe had been apprenticed to a Frenchman, who taught him to dance and
play the fiddle. Anton wondered what the law bound these apprentices
to. He had a hazy idea that, if they ran away, the punishment was
severe. He hoped that Joe had broken the law. Anton resolved to learn
more about these apprentice laws. For this purpose he rose very early
in the morning and went out. He was absent for about two hours. When he
returned he had learned enough to make up a bad and frightening tale.
Truly his old plans had been defeated in the night. But in the morning
he had made even worse than these. He came in to find the children
awakening from the effects of their long slumber, and Joe audibly
lamenting that they were not already on their way.

"Not yet," said Anton, suddenly dropping his French and speaking to the
astonished children in English as good as their own, "I have a word to
say about that same going away. You come out with me for a bit, my lad."

Joe, still heavy from the drug, and too amazed to refuse, even if he
wished to do so, stumbled to his feet and obeyed.

Cecile and Maurice chatted over the wonderful fact of Anton knowing
English, and waited patiently. There was no Pericard to amuse them
to-day; he had gone out long ago. They waited one hour--two
hours--three hours, still no Joe appeared. At the end of about four
hours there was a languid step on the stairs, and the lad who had gone
away--God knows with how tranquil a heart--reappeared.

Where was his gayety? Where had the light in his dark eyes vanished to?
His hands trembled. Fear was manifest on his face. He came straight up
to Cecile, and clasping her little hands between both his own, which
trembled violently, spoke.

"Oh, Cecile! he's a bad man. He's a bad, bad man, and I am ruined.
We're all ruined, Cecile. Is there any place we can hide in--is there
any place? I must speak to you, and he'll be back in half an hour. I
must speak to you, Cecile, before he comes back."

"Let's run away," said Cecile promptly. "Let's run away at once before
he comes again. There must be lots of hiding places in Paris. Oh!
here's Pericard. Pericard, I know, is faithful. You ask Pericard to
hide us, Joe. To hide us at once before Anton comes back."




CHAPTER XIV.

A PLAN.


Cecile, impelled by some instinct, had said: "I know Pericard is
faithful."

Joe, now turning to the French boy, repeated these few words in his
best French:

"She says she knows you are faithful. We are in great danger--in great
danger from that bad man Anton. Will you hide us and not betray us?"

To this appeal Cecile had added power by coming up and taking
Pericard's hand. He gave a look of devotion to his little princess,
nodded to Joe, and, bidding them all follow him, and quickly, left the
room.

Down the stairs he took the children, down, down, down! at last they
reached the cellars. The cellars, too, were full of human beings; but
interested in their own most varied pursuits and callings, they took
little notice of the children. They went through one set of cellars,
then through another, then through a third. At the third Pericard
stopped.

"You are safe here," he said. "These cellars have nothing to say to our
house. No one lives in them. They are to be let next week. They are
empty now. You will only have the company of the rats here. Don't be
afraid of them. If you don't fight them they won't come nigh you, and,
anyhow, Toby will keep 'em away. I'll be back when it grows dark. Don't
stir till I return. Anton shan't find you here. Little Miss is right.
Pericard will be faithful."

After having delivered this little speech in French, Pericard turned a
rusty key in a lock behind the children, then let himself out by an
underground passage directly into the street.

"Now, Joe," said Cecile, coming up at once to where the poor boy was
standing, "we are safe here, safe for a little. What is the matter?
What is wrong, dear Joe?"

"Maurice must not hear," said Joe; "it will only make things still
harder if little Maurice hears what I have got to say."

"Maurice will not care to hear. See, how sleepy he looks? There is some
straw in that corner, some nice clean straw; Maurice shall lie down on
it, and go to sleep. I can't make out why we are all so sleepy; but
Maurice shall have a good sleep, and then you can talk to me. Toby will
stay close to Maurice."

To this arrangement Maurice himself made no objection. He could
scarcely keep his eyes open, and the moment he found himself on the bed
of straw was sound asleep.

Toby, in obedience to Cecile's summons, sat down by his side, and then
the little girl returned to Joe.

"No one can hear us now. What is wrong, Jography?"

"This is wrong," said Joe, in a low, despairing voice: "I'm a ruined
lad. Ef I don't rob you, and become a thief, I'm a quite ruined lad.
I'll never, never see my mother nor my brother Jean. I'm quite ruined,
Missie, dear."

"But how, Joe. How?"

"Missie, that man wot come wid us all the way from Normandy, he's a spy
and a thief. He wants yer purse, Missie, darling, and he says as he'll
get it come what may. He wor at that farm in Kent when you was there,
and he heard all about the purse, and he wor determined to get it. That
wor why he tried to make friends wid us, and would not let out as he
knew a word of English. Then last night he put some'ut in the soup to
make us hall sleep sound, and he looked for the purse and he could not
find it; and this morning he called me away, to say as he knows my old
master wot I served in Lunnon, and that I wor apprenticed quite proper
to him, and that by the law I could not run away without being
punished. He said, Anton did, that he would lock me hup in prison this
werry day, and then go and find Massenger, and give me back to him. I
am never, never to see my old mother now. For I'm to go to prison if I
don't give up yer purse to Anton, Missie."

"But you would not take the Russia-leather purse that I was given to
take care of for Lovedy? You would rather be shut up in prison than
touch my purse or gold?" said Cecile.

It was nearly dark in the cellar; but the child's eyes shining with a
steadfast light, were looking full at Joe. He returned their gaze as
steadfastly.

"Missie, dear, 'tis a hard thing to give up seeking of yer own mother,
and to go back to blows and starvation. But Joe 'ull do it. He once
said, Missie Cecile, that he'd rayther be cut in pieces nor touch that
purse o' gold. This is like being cut in pieces. But I'll stand up to
wot I said. I'll go wid Anton when he comes back. But wot puzzles me
is, how he'll get the purse from you, Missie? and how ere you two
little mites ever to find Lovedy without your Joe to guide yer?"

"Yes, Joe, you shall guide us; for now I have got something to
say--such a wonderful, wonderful thing, Joe dear."

Then Cecile related all about her strange dream, all about Pericard
taking them to the Faubourg St. G----, then of her finding Miss Smith,
of her intrusting the purse to Miss Smith, and finally of the clever,
clever manner in which Miss Smith had sewn the money that was necessary
to take them to the south of France into her little winsey frock. All
this did Cecile tell with glowing cheeks and eager voice, and only one
mistake did she make. For, trusting Joe fully, she showed him the
little piece of paper which anyone presenting to Miss Smith could
obtain the purse in exchange.

Poor Joe! he bitterly rued that knowledge by and by, but now his
feelings were all thankfulness.

"Then Anton can't get the purse: you ha'n't got it to give to him!"

"No; and if he comes and finds us, I will tell him so my own self; it
won't do him no good putting you in prison, for he shan't never get
Lovedy's purse."

"Thank God," said Joe, in a tone of deep and great relief. "Oh! Missie,
that's a good, good guide o' your'n, and poor Joe 'ull love Him now."

"Yes, Jography, was it not lovely, lovely of Him? I know He means you
to go on taking care of us little children; and, Jography, I'm only
quite a little girl, but I've got a plan in my head, and you must
listen. My Aunt Lydia wanted to get the purse; and me and Maurice, we
ran away from her and afterward we saw her again in London, and she
wanted our purse we were sure, and then we ran away again. Now, Joe,
could not we run away this time too? Why should we see that wicked,
wicked Anton any more?"

"Yes, Missie, but he's werry clever; werry clever indeed, Anton is, and
he 'ud foller of us; he knows 'tis down south we're going, and he'd
come down south too."

"Yes; but, Joe, perhaps south is a big place, as big as London or
Paris, it might not be so easy for him to find us; you might get safe
back to your old mother and your good brother Jean, and I might see
Lovedy before Anton had found us again, then we should not care what he
did; and, Jography, what I've been thinking is that as we're in great
danger, it can't be wrong to spend just a franc or two out of my winsey
frock on you, and when Pericard comes back this evening I'll ask him to
direct us to some place where a train can take us all a good bit of the
way. You don't know how fast the train took me and Maurice and Toby to
London, and perhaps it would take us a good bit of the way south so
that Anton could not find us; that is my plan, Joe, and you won't have
to go to prison, Joe, dear."




CHAPTER XV.

AN ESCAPE.


It was very late, in fact quite night, when Pericard returned. By this
time the rats had come out in troops, and even Toby could scarcely keep
them at bay. He barked, however, loudly, and ran about, and so kept
them from absolutely attacking the children. By this, however, he
exposed them to another danger, for his noise must soon have been heard
in the street above, and it was well for them that the cellar in which
they were hiding was not in the same house with Anton.

It was, as I said, quite late at night when Pericard arrived. He let
himself in, not by the entrance through which he had come previously,
but by the underground passage. He carried a dark lantern in one hand,
and a neat little basket in the other. Never was knight of old more
eagerly welcomed than was this French boy now by the poor little
prisoners. They were all cold and hungry, and the rushing and scraping
of the rats had filled their little hearts with most natural alarm.

Pericard came in softly, and laying down his dark lantern proceeded to
unpack the contents of the basket. It contained cold sausages, broken
bits of meat, and some rolls buttered and cut in two: there was also a
pint bottle of _vin ordinaire_.

Pericard broke the neck of the bottle on the cellar wall. He then gave
the children a drink by turns in a little tin mug.

"And now," he said in French, "we must be off. Anton is in the house;
he is waiting for you all; he is roaring with anger and rage; he would
be out looking for you, but luckily--or you could not escape--he is
lame. The brave good dog bit him severely in the leg, and now he cannot
walk; and the grandmere has to poultice his leg. He thinks I have gone
to fetch you, for I pretend to be on his side. You have just to-night
to get away in; but I don't answer for the morning, for Anton is so
dying to get hold of Joe there that he will use his leg, however he
suffers, after to-night. You have just this one short night in which to
make your escape."

Then Joe told Cecile's plan to Pericard, and Pericard nodded, and said
it was good--only he could not help opening his eyes very widely at the
idea of three such little beggars, as he termed the children, being
able to afford the luxury of going by train. As, however, it was
impossible and, dangerous to confide in him any further, and as Cecile
had already given Joe the number of francs they thought they should
require out of her frock, he had to bear his curiosity in silence.

Pericard, who was well up to Paris, and knew not only every place of
amusement, nearly every stall-owner, nearly every trade, and every
possible way of securing a sou, but also had in his head a fund of odd
knowledge with regard to railway stations, could now counsel the
children what station to go to, and even what train to take on their
way south.

He said they would probably be in time if they started at once to catch
a midnight train to Orleans; that for not too large a sum they might
travel third-class to Orleans, which city they would reach the next
morning. It was a large place, and as it would be impossible for Anton
to guess that they had gone by train at all, they would have such a
good start of him that he would probably not be able to find them again.

Pericard also proposed that they should start at once, and as they had
no money to spare for cabs or omnibuses, they must walk to the distant
terminus from which they must start for the south. How strange they
felt as they walked through the gayly-lighted streets! How tired was
Maurice! how delighted Joe! how dreamy and yet calm and trustful, was
Cecile. Since the vision about her purse, her absolute belief in her
Guide knew no bounds.

As near and dear, as certain and present, was He now to Cecile as if in
reality he was holding her little hand; as if in reality He was
carrying tired Maurice. He was there, the Goal was certain, the End
sure. When they got to the great big terminus she still felt dreamlike,
allowing Joe and Pericard to get their tickets and make all
arrangements. Then the children and dog found themselves in a
third-class compartment. Toby was well and skillfully hidden under the
seat, the whistle sounded, and Pericard came close and took Cecile's
hand. She was only a little child, but she was his princess, the first
sweet and lovely thing he had ever seen. Cecile raised her lips to kiss
him.

"Good-by, Pericard--good Pericard--faithful Pericard."

Then the train pulled slowly out of the station, and the children were
carried into the unknown darkness, and Pericard went home. He never saw
the children again. But all through his after-life he carried a memory
about with him of them, and when he heard of the good God and the
angels, this wild Paris lad would cross himself devoutly, and think of
Cecile.




CHAPTER XVI.

CHILDREN'S ARCADIA.


It was early spring in the south of France--spring, and delicious,
balmy weather. All that dreadful cold of Normandy seemed like a
forgotten dream. It was almost impossible to believe that the limbs
that ached under that freezing atmosphere could be the same that now
felt the sun almost oppressive.

Little Maurice had the desire of his heart, for the sun shone all day
long. He could pick flowers and smell sweet country air, and the boy
born under these sunny skies revived like a tropical plant beneath
their influence. It was a month now since the children had left Paris.
They had remained for a day or so in Orleans, and then had wandered on,
going farther and farther south, until at last they had passed the
