flock of every kind of bird.

'"Who are you, little girl," said she, "who dares to come where I allow
no mortal to live, lest my birds should be disturbed? Still, if you are
clever at anything," she added, "I might be able to put up with your
presence."

'"Madam," I answered, rising, "you may be very sure that I shall not do
anything to alarm your birds. I only beg you, for pity's sake, to give
me something to eat."

'"I will do that," she replied, "before I send you where you deserve to
go."

'And thereupon she despatched six jays, who were her pages, to fetch
me all sorts of biscuits, while some of the other birds brought ripe
fruits. In fact, I had a delicious breakfast, though I do not like to be
waited upon so quickly. It is so disagreeable to be hurried. I began to
think I should like very well to stay in this pleasant country, and I
said so to the stately lady, but she answered with the greatest disdain:

'"Do you think I would keep you here? _You_! Why what do you suppose
would be the good of you in this country, where everybody is wide-awake
and busy? No, no, I have shown you all the hospitality you will get from
me."

'With these words she turned and gave a vigorous pull to the silken rope
which I mentioned before, but instead of a melodious chime, there arose
a hideous clanging which quite terrified me, and in an instant a huge
Black Bird appeared, which alighted at the Fairy's feet, saying in a
frightful voice--

'"What do you want of me, my sister?"

'"I wish you to take this little Princess to my cousin, the Giant of the
Green Castle, at once," she replied, "and beg him from me to make her
work day and night upon his beautiful tapestry."

'At these words the great Bird snatched me up, regardless of my cries,
and flew off at a terrific pace--'

'Oh! you are joking, cousin,' interrupted Prince Vivien; 'you mean as
slowly as possible. I know that horrible Black Bird, and the lengthiness
of all his proceedings and surroundings.'

'Have it your own way,' replied Placida, tranquilly. 'I cannot bear
arguing. Perhaps, this was not even the same bird. At any rate, he
carried me off at a prodigious speed, and set me gently down in this
very castle of which you are now the master. We entered by one of the
windows, and when the Bird had handed me over to the Giant from whom you
have been good enough to deliver me, and given the Fairy's message, it
departed.

'Then the Giant turned to me, saying,

'"So you are an idler! Ah! well, we must teach you to work. You won't be
the first we have cured of laziness. See how busy all my guests are."

'I looked up as he spoke, and saw that an immense gallery ran all round
the hall, in which were tapestry frames, spindles, skeins of wool,
patterns, and all necessary things. Before each frame about a dozen
people were sitting, hard at work, at which terrible sight I fainted
away, and as soon as I recovered they began to ask me what I could do.

'It was in vain that I replied as before, and with the strongest desire
to be taken at my word, "Nothing at all."

'The Giant only said,

'"Then you must learn to do something; in this world there is enough
work for everybody."

'It appeared that they were working into the tapestry all the stories
the Fairies liked best, and they began to try and teach me to help them,
but from the first class, where they tried me to begin with, I sank
lower and lower, and not even the most simple stitches could I learn.

'In vain they punished me by all the usual methods. In vain the Giant
showed me his menagerie, which was entirely composed of children who
would not work! Nothing did me any good, and at last I was reduced to
drawing water for the dyeing of the wools, and even over that I was so
slow that this morning the Giant flew into a rage and changed me into
a gazelle. He was just putting me into the menagerie when I happened to
catch sight of a dog, and was seized with such terror that I fled away
at my utmost speed, and escaped through the outer court of the castle.
The Giant, fearing that I should be lost altogether, sent his green lion
after me, with orders to bring me back, cost what it might, and I should
certainly have let myself be caught, or eaten up, or anything, rather
than run any further, if I had not luckily met you by the fountain. And
oh!' concluded the Princess, 'how delightful it is once more to be able
to sit still in peace. I was so tired of trying to learn things.'

Prince Vivien said that, for his part, he had been kept a great deal too
still, and had not found it at all amusing, and then he recounted all
his adventures with breathless rapidity. How he had taken shelter with
Dame Patience, and consulted the Oracle, and voyaged in the paper ship.
Then they went hand in hand to release all the prisoners in the castle,
and all the Princes and Princesses who were in cages in the menagerie,
for the instant the Green Giant was dead they had resumed their natural
forms. As you may imagine, they were all very grateful, and Princess
Placida entreated them never, never to do another stitch of work so long
as they lived, and they promptly made a great bonfire in the courtyard,
and solemnly burnt all the embroidery frames and spinning wheels. Then
the Princess gave them splendid presents, or rather sat by while Prince
Vivien gave them, and there were great rejoicings in the Green Castle,
and everyone did his best to please the Prince and Princess. But with
all their good intentions, they often made mistakes, for Vivien and
Placida were never of one mind about their plans, so it was very
confusing, and they frequently found themselves obeying the Prince's
orders, very, very slowly, and rushing off with lightning speed to do
something that the Princess did not wish to have done at all, until,
by-and-by, the two cousins took to consulting with, and consoling one
another in all these little vexations, and at last came to be so fond of
each other that for Placida's sake Vivien became quite patient, and for
Vivien's sake Placida made the most unheard-of exertions. But now the
Fairies who had been watching all these proceedings with interest,
thought it was time to interfere, and ascertain by further trials if
this improvement was likely to continue, and if they really loved one
another. So they caused Placida to seem to have a violent fever, and
Vivien to languish and grow dull, and made each of them very uneasy
about the other, and then, finding a moment when they were apart, the
Fairy Mirlifiche suddenly appeared to Placida, and said--

'I have just seen Prince Vivien, and he seemed to me to be very ill.'

'Alas! yes, madam,' she answered, 'and if you will but cure him, you may
take me back to the farm, or bring the Green Giant to life again, and
you shall see how obedient I will be.'

'If you really wish him to recover,' said the Fairy, 'you have only to
catch the Trotting Mouse and the Chaffinch-on-the-Wing and bring them to
me. Only remember that time presses!'

She had hardly finished speaking before the Princess was rushing
headlong out of the castle gate, and the Fairy after watching her till
she was lost to sight, gave a little chuckle and went in search of the
Prince, who begged her earnestly to send him back to the Black Castle,
or to the paper boat if she would but save Placida's life. The Fairy
shook her head, and looked very grave. She quite agreed with him, the
Princess was in a bad way--'But,' said she, 'if you can find the Rosy
Mole, and give him to her she will recover.' So now it was the Prince's
turn to set off in a vast hurry, only as soon as he left the Castle he
happened to go in exactly the opposite direction to the one Placida had
taken. Now you can imagine these two devoted lovers hunting night
and day. The Princess in the woods, always running, always listening,
pursuing hotly after two creatures which seemed to her very hard to
catch, which she yet never ceased from pursuing. The Prince on the other
hand wandering continually across the meadows, his eyes fixed upon the
ground, attentive to every movement among the moles. He was forced to
walk slowly--slowly upon tip-toe, hardly venturing to breathe. Often
he stood for hours motionless as a statue, and if the desire to succeed
could have helped him he would soon have possessed the Rosy Mole. But
alas! all that he caught were black and ordinary, though strange to say
he never grew impatient, but always seemed ready to begin the tedious
hunt again. But this changing of character is one of the most ordinary
miracles which love works. Neither the Prince nor the Princess gave a
thought to anything but their quest. It never even occurred to them to
wonder what country they had reached. So you may guess how astonished
they were one day, when having at last been successful after their long
and weary chase, they cried aloud at the same instant: 'At last I have
saved my beloved,' and then recognising each other's voice looked up,
and rushed to meet one another with the wildest joy. Surprise kept them
silent while for one delicious moment they gazed into each other's eyes,
and just then who should come up but King Gridelin, for it was into his
kingdom they had accidentally strayed. He recognized them in his turn
and greeted them joyfully, but when they turned afterwards to look for
the Rosy Mole, the Chaffinch, and the Trotting-Mouse, they had vanished,
and in their places stood a lovely lady whom they did not know, the
Black Bird, and the Green Giant. King Gridelin had no sooner set eyes
upon the lady than with a cry of joy he clasped her in his arms, for
it was no other than his long-lost wife, Santorina, about whose
imprisonment in Fairyland you may perhaps read some day.

Then the Black Bird and the Green Giant resumed their natural form,
for they were enchanters, and up flew Lolotte and Mirlifiche in their
chariots, and then there was a great kissing and congratulating, for
everybody had regained someone he loved, including the enchanters,
who loved their natural forms dearly. After this they repaired to the
Palace, and the wedding of Prince Vivien and Princess Placida was held
at once with all the splendour imaginable.

King Gridelin and Queen Santorina, after all their experiences had no
further desire to reign, so they retired happily to a peaceful place,
leaving their kingdom to the Prince and Princess, who were beloved by
all their subjects, and found their greatest happiness all their lives
long in making other people happy.

Nonchalante et Papillon





LITTLE ONE-EYE, LITTLE TWO-EYES, AND LITTLE THREE-EYES



There was once a woman who had three daughters, of whom the eldest was
called Little One-eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead; and the second, Little Two-eyes, because she had two eyes like
other people; and the youngest, Little Three-eyes, because she had three
eyes, and _her_ third eye was also in the middle of her forehead. But
because Little Two-eyes did not look any different from other children,
her sisters and mother could not bear her. They would say to her, 'You
with your two eyes are no better than common folk; you don't belong to
us.' They pushed her here, and threw her wretched clothes there, and
gave her to eat only what they left, and they were as unkind to her as
ever they could be.

It happened one day that Little Two-eyes had to go out into the fields
to take care of the goat, but she was still quite hungry because her
sisters had given her so little to eat. So she sat down in the meadow
and began to cry, and she cried so much that two little brooks ran out
of her eyes. But when she looked up once in her grief there stood a
woman beside her who asked, 'Little Two-eyes, what are you crying for?'
Little Two-eyes answered, 'Have I not reason to cry? Because I have two
eyes like other people, my sisters and my mother cannot bear me; they
push me out of one corner into another, and give me nothing to eat
except what they leave. To-day they have given me so little that I am
still quite hungry.' Then the wise woman said, 'Little Two-eyes, dry
your eyes, and I will tell you something so that you need never be
hungry again. Only say to your goat,

"Little goat, bleat, Little table, appear,"

and a beautifully spread table will stand before you, with the most
delicious food on it, so that you can eat as much as you want. And when
you have had enough and don't want the little table any more, you have
only to say,

"Little goat, bleat, Little table, away,"

and then it will vanish.' Then the wise woman went away.

But Little Two-eyes thought, 'I must try at once if what she has told me
is true, for I am more hungry than ever'; and she said,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table appear,'

and scarcely had she uttered the words, when there stood a little table
before her covered with a white cloth, on which were arranged a plate,
with a knife and fork and a silver spoon, and the most beautiful dishes,
which were smoking hot, as if they had just come out of the kitchen.
Then Little Two-eyes said the shortest grace she knew, and set to work
and made a good dinner. And when she had had enough, she said, as the
wise woman had told her,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table, away,'

and immediately the table and all that was on it disappeared again.
'That is a splendid way of housekeeping,' thought Little Two-eyes, and
she was quite happy and contented.

In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a little
earthenware dish with the food that her sisters had thrown to her, but
she did not touch it. The next day she went out again with her goat, and
left the few scraps which were given her. The first and second times
her sisters did not notice this, but when it happened continually, they
remarked it and said, 'Something is the matter with Little Two-eyes, for
she always leaves her food now, and she used to gobble up all that was
given her. She must have found other means of getting food.' So in
order to get at the truth, Little One-eye was told to go out with Little
Two-eyes when she drove the goat to pasture, and to notice particularly
what she got there, and whether anyone brought her food and drink.

Now when Little Two-eyes was setting out, Little One-eye came up to her
and said, 'I will go into the field with you and see if you take good
care of the goat, and if you drive him properly to get grass.' But
Little Two-eyes saw what Little One-eye had in her mind, and she drove
the goat into the long grass and said, 'Come, Little One-eye, we will
sit down here, and I will sing you something.'

Little One-eye sat down, and as she was very much tired by the long walk
to which she was not used, and by the hot day, and as Little Two-eyes
went on singing.

'Little One-eye, are you awake? Little One-eye, are you asleep?'

she shut her one eye and fell asleep. When Little Two-eyes saw that
Little One-eye was asleep and could find out nothing, she said,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table, appear,'

and sat down at her table and ate and drank as much as she wanted. Then
she said again,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table, away.'

and in the twinkling of an eye all had vanished.

Little Two-eyes then woke Little One-eye and said, 'Little One-eye, you
meant to watch, and, instead, you went to sleep; in the meantime the
goat might have run far and wide. Come, we will go home.' So they went
home, and Little Two-eyes again left her little dish untouched, and
Little One-eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat, and said
as an excuse, 'I was so sleepy out-of-doors.'

The next day the mother said to Little Three-eyes, 'This time you shall
go with Little Two-eyes and watch whether she eats anything out in the
fields, and whether anyone brings her food and drink, for eat and drink
she must secretly.' So Little Three-eyes went to Little Two-eyes and
said, 'I will go with you and see if you take good care of the goat, and
if you drive him properly to get grass.' But little Two-eyes knew what
Little Three-eyes had in her mind, and she drove the goat out into the
tall grass and said, 'We will sit down here, Little Three-eyes, and I
will sing you something.' Little Three-eyes sat down; she was tired by
the walk and the hot day, and Little Two-eyes sang the same little song
again:

'Little Three eyes, are you awake?'

but instead of singing as she ought to have done,

'Little Three-eyes, are you asleep?'

she sang, without thinking,

'Little _Two-eyes_, are you asleep?'

She went on singing,

'Little Three-eyes, are you awake? Little _Two-eyes_, are you asleep?'

so that the two eyes of Little Three-eyes fell asleep, but the third,
which was not spoken to in the little rhyme, did not fall asleep. Of
course Little Three-eyes shut that eye also out of cunning, to look as
if she were asleep, but it was blinking and could see everything quite
well.

And when Little Two-eyes thought that Little Three-eyes was sound
asleep, she said her rhyme,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table, appear,'

and ate and drank to her heart's content, and then made the table go
away again, by saying,

'Little goat, bleat, Little table, away.'

But Little Three-eyes had seen everything. Then Little Two-eyes came
to her, and woke her and said, 'Well, Little Three-eyes, have you been
asleep? You watch well! Come, we will go home.' When they reached home,
Little Two-eyes did not eat again, and Little Three-eyes said to the
mother, 'I know now why that proud thing eats nothing. When she says to
the goat in the field,

"Little goat, bleat, Little table, appear,"

a table stands before her, spread with the best food, much better than
we have; and when she has had enough, she says,

"Little goat, bleat, Little table, away,"

and everything disappears again. I saw it all exactly. She made two
of my eyes go to sleep with a little rhyme, but the one in my forehead
remained awake, luckily!'

Then the envious mother cried out, 'Will you fare better than we do? you
shall not have the chance to do so again!' and she fetched a knife, and
killed the goat.

When Little Two-eyes saw this, she went out full of grief, and sat down
in the meadow and wept bitter tears. Then again the wise woman stood
before her, and said, 'Little Two-eyes, what are you crying for?' 'Have
I not reason to cry?' she answered, 'the goat, which when I said the
little rhyme, spread the table so beautifully, my mother has killed, and
now I must suffer hunger and want again.' The wise woman said, 'Little
Two-eyes, I will give you a good piece of advice. Ask your sisters to
give you the heart of the dead goat, and bury it in the earth before the
house-door; that will bring you good luck.' Then she disappeared, and
Little Two-eyes went home, and said to her sisters, 'Dear sisters, do
give me something of my goat; I ask nothing better than its heart.' Then
they laughed and said, 'You can have that if you want nothing more.' And
Little Two-eyes took the heart and buried it in the evening when all was
quiet, as the wise woman had told her, before the house-door. The next
morning when they all awoke and came to the house-door, there stood
a most wonderful tree, which had leaves of silver and fruit of gold
growing on it--you never saw anything more lovely and gorgeous in your
life! But they did not know how the tree had grown up in the night; only
Little Two-eyes knew that it had sprung from the heart of the goat, for
it was standing just where she had buried it in the ground. Then the
mother said to Little One-eye, 'Climb up, my child, and break us off the
fruit from the tree.' Little One-eye climbed up, but just when she was
going to take hold of one of the golden apples the bough sprang out of
her hands; and this happened every time, so that she could not break off
a single apple, however hard she tried. Then the mother said, 'Little
Three-eyes, do you climb up; you with your three eyes can see round
better than Little One-eye.' So Little One-eye slid down, and Little
Three-eyes climbed up; but she was not any more successful; look round
as she might, the golden apples bent themselves back. At last the mother
got impatient and climbed up herself, but she was even less successful
than Little One-eye and Little Three-eyes in catching hold of the fruit,
and only grasped at the empty air. Then Little Two-eyes said, 'I will
just try once, perhaps I shall succeed better.' The sisters called out,
'You with your two eyes will no doubt succeed!' But Little Two-eyes
climbed up, and the golden apples did not jump away from her, but
behaved quite properly, so that she could pluck them off, one after the
other, and brought a whole apron-full down with her. The mother took
them from her, and, instead of behaving better to poor Little Two-eyes,
as they ought to have done, they were jealous that she only could reach
the fruit and behaved still more unkindly to her.

It happened one day that when they were all standing together by the
tree that a young knight came riding along. 'Be quick, Little Two-eyes,'
cried the two sisters, 'creep under this, so that you shall not disgrace
us,' and they put over poor Little Two-eyes as quickly as possible an
empty cask, which was standing close to the tree, and they pushed the
golden apples which she had broken off under with her. When the knight,
who was a very handsome young man, rode up, he wondered to see the
marvellous tree of gold and silver, and said to the two sisters, 'Whose
is this beautiful tree? Whoever will give me a twig of it shall have
whatever she wants.' Then Little One-eye and Little Three-eyes answered
that the tree belonged to them, and that they would certainly break him
off a twig. They gave themselves a great deal of trouble, but in vain;
the twigs and fruit bent back every time from their hands. Then the
knight said, 'It is very strange that the tree should belong to you,
and yet that you have not the power to break anything from it!' But they
