At half-past four, twenty-one rather dispirited candidates filed from
the room.

"Well, thank goodness it's over! I never want to write another word in
my life. My hand's stiff with cramp!" exclaimed the girl with the red
hair-ribbon to a sympathetic audience in the passage.

"It was awful! I didn't answer half the questions. My swastika isn't
worth its salt. I shall give it away!" mourned the owner of the mascot.

"They expected us to know so very much; we should be absolute
encyclopaedias if we had all that pat off at our fingers' ends!" sighed
the girl with the fair pigtail.

"How did you get on?" Winona asked the ruddy-haired girl, who was wiping
her spectacles nervously.

"Oh, I don't know. It's so hard to tell. I answered most of the
questions, but of course I can't say whether they're right or wrong.
Wasn't the Latin translation just too horrible? I yearned for a
dictionary. And some of the French grammar questions were absolute
catches!"

"We went on too long," said Winona. "It would have been much better to
spread the exam, over two days."

"Do you think so? I'd rather have 'sudden death' myself. It's such a
relief to feel it's finished. It would be wretched to have to begin
again to-morrow. I hardly slept a wink last night for thinking about it.
I'm going to try and forget it now."

Winona nodded good-by to her fellow candidates, and took her leave. How
many of them would she see again, she wondered, and which among all the
number would have the luck?

"Certainly not myself," she thought ruefully. "I know my papers weren't
up to standard. I believe that red-haired girl will be one. She looked
clever!"

Winona had spent the preceding night with Aunt Harriet, who offered to
keep her until the result of the examination should be published, but
the prospect of spending a week of suspense at Abbey Close was so
formidable, that she had begged to be allowed to return home, excusing
herself on the plea that she would like to be with Percy during the
remainder of his holidays. It was a very subdued Winona who reached
Highfield next afternoon.

"Hello, Tiddleywinks! You've lost the starch out of you!" Percy greeted
her. "Did they say they wouldn't have you at any price?"

"The result won't be out till the fifteenth, but I expect I've failed,"
answered Winona gloomily.

"Buck up, young 'un! Look at yours truly! I fail nine times out of ten,
and do I take it to heart?"

Winona laughed in spite of herself. Percy's complacency over small
achievements was proverbial. But she had higher ambitions, and the cloud
of depression soon settled down again. Her temper, not always her strong
point, displayed a degree of irritability that drove her family to the
verge of mutiny.

"Really, Winona, I don't remember you so fractious since you were
cutting your teeth!" complained her much-tried mother.

The days dragged slowly by. Winona had never before realized that each
hour could hold so many minutes. On the morning of the 15th she came
down to breakfast with dark rings round her eyes.

"I shall be glad to be put out of my misery!" she thought, as the
postman's rap-tap sounded at the door.

Mamie made a rush for the letter-box, and returned bearing a foolscap
envelope addressed to:

                                   MISS WINONA WOODWARD,
                                             Highfield,
                                                  Ashbourne,
                                                    nr. Great Marston.

Winona opened it with trembling fingers. But as she read, her face
flushed and her eyes sparkled.

"I have much pleasure in informing you" (so ran the letter) "that the
Governors of the Seaton High School have decided to award you a
Scholarship tenable for two years...."

In silence she passed the paper to her mother.

"Congratulations, dear child!" cried Mrs. Woodward, clapping her hands.
"It's the unexpected that happens!"

"Oh, my goodness!" ejaculated Percy. "You never mean to tell me that
Tiddleywinks has actually been and gone and won!"




CHAPTER III

Seaton High School


The autumn term at Seaton High School began on September 22nd. On the
21st Winona set forth with great flourish of trumpets, feeling more or
less of a heroine. To have been selected for a scholarship among
twenty-one candidates was a distinction that even Aunt Harriet would
admit. In the brief interval pending her departure, her home circle had
treated her with a respect they had never before accorded her.

"I hope you'll do well, child," said her mother, half proud and half
tearful when it came to the parting. "We shall miss you here, but when
you get on yourself you must help the younger ones. I shall look to you
to push them on in life."

There is a certain satisfaction in the knowledge that you are considered
the prop of the family. Winona's eyes glowed. In imagination she was
already Principal of a large school, and providing posts as assistant
mistresses for Letty, Mamie and Doris, that is to say unless she turned
her attention to medicine, but in that case she could be head of a
Women's Hospital, and have them as house surgeons or dispensers, or
something else equally distinguished and profitable. It might even be
possible to provide occupation for Godfrey or Ernie, though this was
likely to prove a tougher job than placing the girls. With such a
brilliant beginning, the future seemed an easy walk-over.

Mrs. Woodward was exulting over the fact that she had engaged Miss Jones
when she did, and that Winona's school clothes were all made and
finished. There had been a fluster at the last, when it was discovered
that her mackintosh was fully six inches too short for her new skirts,
and that she had outgrown her thick boots, but a hurried visit to Great
Marston had remedied these deficiencies, and the box was packed to
everybody's satisfaction. There was a universal feeling in the family
that such an outfit could not fail to meet with Aunt Harriet's approval.
The first sight of the nightdress case and the brush-and-comb bag must
wring admiration from her. They had been bought at a bazaar, and were
altogether superior to those in daily use. As for the handkerchief case,
Letty had decided that unless one equally well embroidered were
presented to her on her next birthday, she would be obliged to assert
her individuality by showing temper.

Winona walked into the dressing-room of the High School on September
22nd with a mixture of shyness and importance. On the whole the latter
predominated. It was a trifle embarrassing to face so many strangers,
but it was something to have won a scholarship. She wondered who was the
other fortunate candidate.

"I expect it will be that red-haired girl with the spectacles," she
thought. "I believe she answered every question, though she was rather
quiet about it."

She looked round, but could not see the ruddy locks, nor indeed any of
the companions who had taken the examination with her.

"Hunting for some one you know?" asked a girl who had appropriated the
next hook to hers.

"Yes, at least I'm not sure whether she'll be here or not. I believe her
name's Marjorie Kaye."

"Never heard of her!"

"There are heaps of new girls," volunteered another who stood by.

"I wondered if she'd won a County Scholarship," added Winona.

"Ask me a harder! I tell you I've never heard her name before."

"I've won the other scholarship."

Winona's voice was intended to sound very casual.

"Indeed!"

Her neighbor was taking off her boots, and did not seem as much
impressed as the occasion merited.

"Oh! so you're one of the 'outlanders,'" sniggered another. "It's a sort
of 'go into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in'
business."

"I suppose we shall be having Council School Scholarships next!" drawled
a third.

They were friends, and went off together without another glance at
Winona. She followed soberly, wondering what she ought to do next. She
had a vague idea that the winner of a scholarship should present herself
at the Head Mistress' study to receive a few words of encouragement and
congratulation on her success. At the top of the stairs she met the
mistress who had presided over the examination. The latter greeted her
unceremoniously.

"Winona Woodward, you've been placed in V.a., first room to the
right, round the corner. You'll find the number on the door."

Other girls were hurrying in the same direction. Winona entered with
what seemed to her quite a small crowd. Everybody appeared to know where
to go, except herself. She stood in such evident hesitation that one,
more good-natured than the rest, remarked:

"You'd better seize on any desk you fancy, as quick as you can. They're
getting taken up fast, if you want a front one!"

Winona slid into the nearest seat at hand, and appropriated it by
placing her note-book, pencil-box, ruler, atlas and dictionaries inside
the desk.

The room was filling quickly. Every moment fresh arrivals hurried in and
took their places. Marjorie Kaye was nowhere to be seen, but in the
second row sat the dark-eyed girl with the red ribbon in her hair. She
turned round and nodded pleasantly.

"So she's got the other scholarship!" thought Winona. "I shouldn't have
expected it. I'd have staked my reputation on the sandy-haired one.
Well, I suppose her answers weren't correct, after all. I'm rather glad
on the whole it's this girl; she looks jolly."

At that moment Miss Huntley, the form mistress, entered and took the
call-over, and the day's work began. Each girl was given a time-table
and a list of the books she would require, and after that, class
succeeded class until one o'clock, with a ten minutes' interval for
lunch at eleven. The conclusion of the morning left Winona with a
profound respect for High School methods. After the easy-going routine
of Miss Harmon's it was like stepping into a new educational world. She
supposed she would be able to keep pace with it when she got her books,
but the mathematics, at any rate, were much more advanced than what she
had before attempted. As she walked down the corridor, the girl with the
red hair-ribbon overtook her, and claimed acquaintance.

"So you're Winona Woodward? And I'm Garnet Emerson. We had the luck,
after all! I'm sure I never expected to win. It was the greatest
surprise to me when the letter arrived. Yes, five of the other
candidates are at school, but they've been put in IV.a., and
IV.b. Marjorie Kaye? You mean that girl in spectacles? No,
she's not come. I heard her say that if she didn't win she was to be
sent somewhere else. Where are you staying? With an aunt? I'm with a
second cousin. She's nice, but I wish they'd open a hostel; it would be
topping to be with a heap of others, wouldn't it? We'd get up acting in
the evenings, and all sorts of fun. Well, perhaps that may come later
on. I shall see you this afternoon, shan't I?"

"Yes, I'm coming for my books. It's too late to stop and get them now."

Afternoon attendance at the High School was not nominally compulsory.
All the principal subjects were taken in the morning, but there were
classes for drawing, singing or physical culture from half-past two
until four, and practically very few girls had more than one free
afternoon in a week. Any who liked might do preparation in their own
form room, and many availed themselves of the permission, especially
those who came from a distance, and stayed for dinner at the school.
When Winona first examined her time-table she had not considered its
demands excessively formidable, but before she had been a week at Seaton
she began to realize that she would have very few spare moments to call
her own. Miss Bishop believed in girls being fully occupied, and in
addition to the ordinary form work, expected every one to take part in
the games, and in the numerous societies and guilds which had been
instituted. Winona found that she was required to join the Debating
Club, and the Patriotic Knitting Guild, while a Dramatic Society and a
Literary Association would be prepared to open their doors to her if she
proved worthy of admission. So far, however, she considered that she had
enough on her hands. The demands of her new life were almost
overwhelming, and she lived from day to day in a whirl of fresh
experiences. It took her some time even to grasp the names of the
seventeen other girls in her form. Audrey Redfern, her left-hand
neighbor, was friendly, but Olave Parry, at the desk in front, ignored
her very existence. She gathered that Audrey, like herself, was a
new-comer, while Olave had attended the school since its foundation; but
she did not realize the significance of this in the difference of their
behavior to her. The fact was that the three new girls in the form were
on probation. The others, who had come up from the Lower School, and
were well versed in the traditions of the place, were not willing to
admit them too quickly into favor. They talked them over in private.

"Audrey Redfern seems a decent enough little soul," said Estelle
Harrison. "There's really nothing offensive about her, to my mind.
Garnet Emerson I rather like. I fancy she could be jolly. I'm going to
speak to her in a day or two, but not too soon."

"What do you think of Winona Woodward?" queried Bessie Kirk.

"Much too big an opinion of herself. Began bragging about her
scholarship first thing. She needs sitting upon, to my mind."

"She's pretty!"

"Yes, and she knows it, too!"

"Well, she can't help knowing it. I call her most striking looking. Her
eyes are lovely, though I never can make out whether they're dark gray
or hazel under those long lashes. Her hair's just the color of bronze,
and such a lot of it! It beats Joyce Newton's hollow; besides, Joyce has
absolutely white eyelashes."

"Like a pig's!" laughed Hilda Langley. "I agree with you that Winona's
pretty, but I don't think she'll ever be a chum of mine, all the same."

The result of the stand-off attitude on the part of the rest of the form
was the cementing of a close friendship between Winona and Garnet. It
seemed natural for the holders of the two County Scholarships to become
chums, also they found each other's society congenial. It marked a new
epoch for Winona. She had had few friends of her own age. She had been
the eldest pupil at Miss Harmon's small school, and her sisters were so
much younger than herself that their interests were on a different plane
to her own. Garnet, with her merry brown eyes, eager and enthusiastic
nature, and amusing tongue, seemed a revelation.

The two girls spent every available moment together, and soon waxed
confidential on the subject of their home affairs.

"We're all named after precious stones," said Garnet. "Pearl, my eldest
sister, is classics mistress at a school; Jacinthe is studying for a
health visitor, Ruby is at a Horticultural College, and Beryl is
secretary at a Settlement. Aren't there a lot of us? All girls too, and
not a single brother. I'm the baby of the family! I'd like to go to
Holloway, if I can get a scholarship, but that remains to be seen.
Meanwhile two years at the High's not so bad, is it? I expect I'm going
to enjoy it. Aren't you?"

"Yes--perhaps. If the rest of the form were nicer, I might."

"Oh, they'll come round! We can't expect them to take us to their bosoms
straight off! We're goods on approval."

"We've as much right here as they have!" grunted Winona.

"But they were here first, and of course that always counts for
something. We shall have to show that we're worth our salt before we get
any footing in the form. The question is how best to do it."

Winona shook her head. It was beyond her comprehension.

"I had a few tips from Jacinthe," ruminated Garnet. "She was Captain the
last year she was at school, so she ought to know. You see, we've to
steer between Scylla and Charybdis. We mustn't push ourselves forward
too violently, or they'll call us cheeky, but on the other hand, if
we're content to take a back seat, we may stay there for the rest of the
term. Comprenez vous? It's a matter of seizing one's chance. I've an
idea floating about in my mind. Do you happen to be anything extra
special at singing, or reciting, or acting?"

"I haven't had much practice at acting, but I can play the guitar.
Mummie taught me. She lived in Spain for three years when she was a
girl, and learnt there."

"The very thing! How perfectly splendid! I play the mandoline myself,
and the two go so well together. Did you bring your guitar with you?"

"No. I didn't think I should have any time for it."

"But you could write for it, couldn't you?"

"Oh, yes! Mummie would send it to me."

"Well, this is my idea. You know next week there's to be a big general
meeting of the whole school to choose a Games Captain. So far the games
department here is rather in its infancy. I've been making enquiries,
and there isn't such a thing as a form trophy. There certainly ought to
be, to spur on enthusiasm. I'm going to pluck up my courage, tackle one
or two members of the Sixth, and suggest that after the meeting we hold
a sing-song, and take a collection to provide a form trophy. I don't
believe anybody's ever thought of it."

"Ripping! But what exactly is a sing-song?"

"Oh, just an informal concert. I thought if you and I played the
mandoline and guitar together, it would make a good item. I see two of
the prefects coming along over there, I believe I'll go and ask them."

"I admire your courage!"

Garnet returned in a few minutes, tolerably well satisfied with her
mission.

"I believe the idea will catch on," she announced. "Of course I couldn't
expect them to say 'yes' immediately. They were very cautious, and said
they would put it to the form. I've sown the seed at any rate, and we
must wait for developments."

Apparently Garnet's proposition proved acceptable to the Sixth, for the
very next day a notice was pinned on the board in the hall:

        "There will be a General Meeting of the School on Tuesday,
        October 4th, at 3 p.m., for the purpose of electing a Games
        Captain.

        "The meeting will be followed by a Symposium, when a collection
        will be taken, the proceeds of which will be devoted to the
        purchase of a form trophy.

        "Performers kindly submit their names without delay to M.
        HOWELL, as the program is being made up."

Garnet was one of the first to read the notice, and she started off at
once to the Sixth Form room. She sought out Winona on her return.

"So my little scheme's come off!" she beamed. "You bet the Sixth will
take all the credit for evolving it, but I don't care! I've put our
names down for a mandoline and guitar duet, and said we'd be ready to
help with any accompaniments they like. Meg Howell just jumped at that.
It seems Patricia Marshall and Clarice Nixon are going to sing a Christy
Minstrel song, and she thought our instruments would add to the effect
no end. I tell you we shall score. Did you write for your guitar?"

"Yes, I expect it will be sent off to-day."

"Then we must begin and practice. I've got a topping duet that's quite
easy. Can you come home with me after school to-morrow for half an hour
or so? I know my cousins will be glad to see you. Then we might try over
one or two things, and see how they go."

"It will be all right if I tell Aunt Harriet I shall be late," agreed
Winona.

The instrument arrived the same evening, so she was able to keep her
promise to Garnet next day. Fortunately they had only one class that
afternoon, and were able to leave school at half-past three. Garnet's
cousins lived within a short tramcar ride. They were musical people, and
sympathized with her project. Garnet led Winona into the drawing-room,
and began without waste of time.

"Let me look at your guitar! Oh, what a beauty! What's the label inside?
Juan Da Costa, Seville! Then it must be Spanish. I suppose they're the
best. My mandoline's Italian; it was made in Milan. We must tune them
together, mustn't we? Can you read well? This is the book of duets. I
thought this Barcarolle would be easy, it has such a lovely swing about
it. Here's the guitar part."


