On hearing who it was Bill threw on his cap and came out to him. For a
minute the lads stood with their hands clasped firmly in each other's
without a word being spoken.

"Thank God, Maister Ned," Bill said at last, "we ha' got thee again!"

"Thank God too!" Ned said; "though I think I would rather that it had
gone the other way."

They walked along for some time without speaking again, and then Ned
said suddenly:

"Now, Bill, who is the real murderer?"

Bill stopped his walk in astonishment.

"The real murderer!" he repeated; "how ever should oi know, Maister
Ned?"

"I know that you know, Bill. It was you who wrote that letter to Mr.
Wakefield saying that the man who did it would be at the trial, and
that if I were found guilty he would give himself up. It's no use your
denying it, for I knew your handwriting at once."

Bill was silent for some time, It had never occurred to him that this
letter would be brought home to him.

"Come, Bill, you must tell me," Ned said. "Do not be afraid. I promise
you that I will not use it against him. Mind, if I can bring it home to
him in any other way I shall do so; but I promise you that no word shall
ever pass my lips about the letter. I want to know who is the man of
whose crime the world believes me guilty. The secret shall, as far as he
is concerned, be just as much a secret as it was before."

"But oi dunno who is the man, Maister Ned. If oi did oi would ha' gone
into the court and said so, even though oi had been sure they would
ha' killed me for peaching when oi came back. Oi dunno no more than a
child."

"Then you only wrote that letter to throw them on to a false scent,
Bill? Who put you up to that, for I am sure it would never have occurred
to you?"

"No," Bill said slowly, "oi should never ha' thought of it myself; Luke
told oi what to wroit, and I wroited it."

"Oh, it was Luke! was it?" Ned said sharply. "Then the man who did it
must have told him."

"Oi didn't mean to let out as it waar Luke," Bill said in confusion;
"and oi promised him solemn to say nowt about it."

"Well," Ned said, turning sharp round and starting on his way back to
the village, "I must see Luke himself."

Bill in great perplexity followed Ned, muttering: "Oh, Lor'! what ull
Luke say to oi? What a fellow oi be to talk, to be sure!"

Nothing further was said until they reached Luke's cottage. Ned knocked
and entered at once, followed sheepishly by Bill.

"Maister Ned, oi be main glad to see thee," Luke said as he rose from
his place by the fire; while Polly with a little cry, "Welcome!" dropped
her work.

"Thanks, Luke--thanks for coming over to York to give evidence. How are
you, Polly? There! don't cry--I ain't worth crying over. At any rate,
it is a satisfaction to be with three people who don't regard me as a
murderer. Now, Polly, I want you to go into the other room, for I have
a question which I must ask Luke, and I don't want even you to hear the
answer."

Polly gathered her work together and went out. Then Ned went over to
Luke, who was looking at him with surprise, and laid his hand on his
shoulder.

"Luke," he said, "I want you to tell me exactly how it was that you came
to tell Bill to write that letter to Mr. Wakefield?"

Luke started and then looked savagely over at Bill, who stood twirling
his cap in his hand.

"Oi couldn't help it, Luke," he said humbly. "Oi didn't mean vor to say
it, but he got it out of me somehow. He knowed my fist on the paper,
and, says he, sudden loike, 'Who war the man as murdered Foxey?' What
was oi vor to say? He says at once as he knowed the idea of writing that
letter would never ha' coom into my head; and so the long and short of
it be, as your name slipped owt somehow, and there you be."

"Now, Luke," Ned said soothingly, "I want to know whether there was a
man who was ready to take my place in the dock had I been found guilty,
and if so, who he was. I shall keep the name as a secret. I give you my
word of honor. After he had promised to come forward and save my life
that is the least I can do, though, as I told Bill, if I could bring it
home to him in any other way I should feel myself justified in doing so.
It may be that he would be willing to go across the seas, and when he is
safe there to write home saying that he did it."

"Yes, oi was afraid that soom sich thawt might be in your moind,
Maister Ned, but it can't be done that way. But oi doan't know," he said
thoughtfully, "perhaps it moight, arter all. Perhaps the chap as was
a-coomin' forward moight take it into his head to go to Ameriky. Oi
shouldn't wonder if he did, In fact, now oi thinks on't, oi am pretty
sure as he will. Yes. Oi can say for sartin as that's what he intends. A
loife vor a loife you know, Maister Nod, that be only fair, bean't it?"

"And you think he will really go?" Ned asked eagerly.

"Ay, he will go," Luke said firmly, "it's as good as done; but," he
added slowly, "I dunno as he's got money vor to pay his passage wi'.
There's some kids as have to go wi' him. He would want no more nor just
the fare. But oi doan't see how he can go till he has laid that by, and
in these hard toimes it ull take him some time to do that."

"I will provide the money," Ned said eagerly. "Abijah would lend me some
of her savings, and I can pay her back some day."

"Very well, Maister Ned. Oi expect as how he will take it as a loan.
Moind, he will pay it hack if he lives, honest. Oi doan't think as how
he bain't honest, that chap, though he did kill Foxey. Very well," Luke
went on slowly, "then the matter be as good as settled. Oi will send
Bill down tomorrow, and he will see if thou canst let un have the money.
A loife vor a loife, that's what oi says, Maister Ned. That be roight,
bain't it?"

"That's right enough, Luke," Ned replied, "though I don't quite see
what that has to do with it, except that the man who has taken this life
should give his life to make amends."

"Yes, that be it, in course," Luke replied. "Yes; just as you says, he
ought vor to give his loife to make amends."

That night Ned arranged with Abijah, who was delighted to hand over her
savings for the furtherance of any plan that would tend to clear Ned
from the suspicion which hung over him. Bill came down next morning, and
was told that a hundred pounds would be forthcoming in two days.

Upon the following evening the servant came in and told Ned that a young
woman wished to speak to him. He went down into the study, and, to his
surprise, Mary Powlett was shown in. Her eyes were swollen with crying.

"Master Ned," she said, "I have come to say goodby."

"Good-by, Polly! Why, where are you going?"

"We are all going away, sir, tomorrow across the seas, to Ameriky I
believe. It's all come so sudden it seems like a dream, Feyther never
spoke of such a thing afore, and now all at once we have got to start.
I have run all the way down from Varley to say goodby. Feyther told me
that I wasn't on no account to come down to you. Not on no account,
he said. But how could I go away and know that you had thought us so
strange and ungrateful as to go away without saying goodby after your
dear feyther giving his life for little Jenny. I couldn't do it, sir. So
when he started off to spend the evening for the last time at the 'Cow'
I put on my bonnet and ran down here. I don't care if he beats me--not
that he ever did beat sir, but he might now--for he was terrible stern
in telling me as I wasn't to come and see you."

Ned heard her without an interruption. The truth flashed across his
mind. It was Luke Marner himself who was going to America, and was
going to write home to clear him. Yet surely Luke could never have done
it--Luke, so different from the majority of the croppers--Luke, who had
steadily refused to have anything to say to General Lud and his
schemes against the masters. Mary's last words gave him a clue to the
mystery--"Your dear feyther gave his life for little Jenny." He coupled
it with Luke's enigmatical words, "A loife for a loife."

For a minute or two he sat absolutely silent. Mary was hurt at the
seeming indifference with which he received the news. She drew herself
up a little, and said, in an altered voice,

"I will say goodby, sir. I hope you won't think I was taking a liberty
in thinking you would be sorry if we were all to go without your knowing
it."

Ned roused himself at her words.

"It is not that, Polly. It is far from being that. But I want to ask
you a question. You remember the night of Mr. Mulready's murder? Do you
remember whether your father was at home all that evening?"

Polly opened her eyes in surprise at a question which seemed to her so
irrelevant to the matter in hand;

"Yes, sir," she replied, still coldly. "I remember that night. We are
not likely any of us to forget it. Feyther had not gone to the 'Cow.'
He sat smoking at home. Bill had dropped in, and they sat talking of the
doings of the Luddites till it was later than usual. Feyther was sorry
afterward, because he said if he had been down at the 'Cow' he might
have noticed by the talk if any one had an idea that anything was going
to take place."

"Then he didn't go out at all that night, Polly?"

"No, sir, not at all that night; and now, sir, I will say goodby."

"No, Polly, you won't, for I shall go back with you, and I don't think
that you will go to America."

"I don't understand," the girl faltered.

"No, Polly, I don't suppose you do; and I have not understood till now.
You will see when you get back."

"If you please," Mary said hesitatingly, "I would rather that you would
not be there when feyther comes back. Of course I shall tell him that I
have been down to see you, and I know he will be very angry."

"I think I shall be able to put that straight. I can't let your father
go. God knows I have few enough true friends, and I cannot spare him and
you; and as for Bill Swinton, he would break his heart if you went."

"Bill's only a boy; he will get over it," Polly said in a careless tone,
but with a bright flush upon her cheek.

"He is nearly as old as you are, Polly, and he is one of the best
fellows in the world. I know he's not your equal in education, but a
steadier, better fellow, never was."

Mary made no reply, and in another minute the two set out together for
Varley. In spite of Ned's confident assurance that he would appease
Luke's anger, Mary was frightened when, as they entered the cottage, she
saw Luke standing moodily in front of the fire.

"Oi expected this," he said in a tone of deep bitterness. "Oi were a
fool vor to think as you war different to other gals, and that you would
give up your own wishes to your feyther's."

"Oh, feyther!" Polly cried, "don't speak so to me. Beat me if you like,
I deserve to be beaten, but don't speak to me like that. I am ready to
go anywhere you like, and to be a good daughter to you; forgive me for
this once disobeying you."

"Luke, old friend," Ned said earnestly, putting his hand on the
cropper's shoulder, "don't be angry with Polly, she has done me a great
service. I have learned the truth, and know what you meant now by a life
for a life. You were going to sacrifice yourself for me. You were going
to take upon yourself a crime which you never committed to clear me. You
went to York to declare yourself the murderer of Mulready, in case I had
been found guilty. You were going to emigrate to America to send home a
written confession."

"Who says as how oi didn't kill Foxey?" Luke said doggedly. "If oi
choose to give myself oop now who is to gainsay me?"

"Mary and Bill can both gainsay you," Ned said. "They can prove that you
did not stir out of the house that night. Come, Luke, it's of no use.
I feel with all my heart grateful to you for the sacrifice you were
willing to make for me. I thank you as deeply and as heartily as if you
had made it. It was a grand act of self sacrifice, and you must not be
vexed with Polly that she has prevented you carrying it out. It would
have made me very unhappy had she not done so. When I found that you
were gone I should certainly have got out from Bill the truth of the
matter, and when your confession came home I should have been in a
position to prove that you had only made it to screen me. Besides, I
cannot spare you. I have few friends, and I should be badly off indeed
if the one who has proved himself the truest and best were to leave
me. I am going to carry on the mill, and I must have your help. I have
relied upon you to stand by me, and you must be the foreman of your
department. Come, Luke, you must say you forgive Polly for opening my
eyes just a little sooner than they would otherwise have been to the
sacrifice you wanted to make for me."

Luke, who was sorely shaken by Mary's pitiful sobs, could resist no
longer, but opened his arms, and the girl ran into them.

"There, there," he said, "don't ee go on a crying, girl; thou hasn't
done no wrong, vor indeed it must have seemed to thee flying in the face
of natur to go away wi' out saying goodby to Maister Ned. Well, sir,
oi be main sorry as it has turned out so. Oi should ha' loiked to ha'
cleared thee; but if thou won't have it oi caan't help it. Oi think thou
beest wrong, but thou know'st best."

"Never mind, Luke, I shall be cleared in time, I trust," Ned said. "I
am going down to the mill tomorrow for the first time, and shall see
you there. You have done me good, Luke. It is well, indeed, for a man to
know that he has such a friend as you have proved yourself to be."




CHAPTER XVII: A LONELY LIFE


The machinery had not started since the death of Mr. Mulready, the
foreman having received several letters threatening his life if he
ventured to use the new machinery; and the works had therefore been
carried on on their old basis until something was settled as to their
future management.

The first few days after his return Ned spent his time in going
carefully through the books with the clerk, and in making himself
thoroughly acquainted with the financial part of the business. He was
assisted by Mr. Porson, who came every evening to the house, and went
through the accounts with him. The foreman and the men in charge of the
different rooms were asked to give their opinion as to whether it was
possible to reduce expenses in any way, but they were unanimous in
saying that this could not be done. The pay was at present lower than in
any other mill in the district, and every item of expenditure had been
kept down by Mr. Mulready to the lowest point.

"It is clear," Ned said at last, "that if the mill is to be kept on we
must use the new machinery. I was afraid it would be so, or he would
never have taken to it and risked his life unless it had been absolutely
necessary. I don't like it, for I have strong sympathies with the men,
and although I am sure that in the long run the hands will benefit by
the increased trade, it certainly cause great suffering at present, so
if it had been possible I would gladly have let the new machinery stand
idle until the feeling against it had passed away; but as I see that
the mill has been running at a loss ever since prices fell, it is quite
clear that we must use it at once."

The next morning Ned called the foreman into his office at the mill,
and told him that he had determined to set the new machinery at work at
once.

"I am sorry to be obliged to do so," he said, "as it will considerably
reduce the number of hands at work; but it cannot be helped, it is
either that or stopping altogether, which would be worse still for the
men. Be as careful as you can in turning off the hands, and as far as
possible retain all the married men with families. The only exception to
that rule is young Swinton, who is to be kept on whoever goes."

That evening Luke Marner called at the house to see Ned.

"Be it true, Maister Ned, as the voreman says, the new machines is to be
put to work?"

"It is true, Luke, I am sorry to say. I would have avoided it if
possible; but I have gone into the matter with Mr. Porson, and I find
I must either do that or shut up the mill altogether, which would be a
good deal worse for you all. Handwork cannot compete with machinery,
and the new machines will face a dozen yards of cloth while a cropper is
doing one, and will do it much better and more evenly."

"That be so, surely, and it bain't no use my saying as it ain't, and
it's true enough what you says, that it's better half the hands should
be busy than none; but those as gets the sack won't see it, and oi fears
there will be mischief. Oi don't hold with the Luddites, but oi tell
ye the men be getting desperate, and oi be main sure as there will be
trouble afore long. Your loife won't be safe, Maister Ned."

"I don't hold much to my life," Ned laughed bitterly, "so the Luddites
won't be able to frighten me there."

"I suppose thou wilt have some of the hands to sleep at the mill, as
they do at some of the other places. If thou wilt get arms those as is
at work will do their best to defend it. Cartwright has got a dozen or
more sleeping in his mill."

"I will see about it," Ned said, "but I don't think I shall do that. I
don't want any men to get killed in defending our property."

"Then they will burn it, thou wilt see if they doan't," Luke said
earnestly.

"I hope not, Luke. I shall do my best to prevent it anyhow."

"Oi will give ee warning if a whisper of it gets to moi ears, you may be
