
Be that which you would make others.

Amiel




THE BATTLE OF THE PIPES


A thing happened worth narrating at the close of a visit paid me by
Robin Oig, one of the sons of the notorious Rob Roy. As he was leaving,
just in the door, he met Alan coming in; and the two drew back and
looked at each other like strange dogs. They were neither of them big
men, but they seemed fairly to swell out with pride. Each wore a sword,
and by a movement of his haunch, thrust clear the hilt of it, so that it
might be the more readily grasped and the blade drawn.

"Mr. Stewart, I am thinking," says Robin.

"Troth, Mr. Macgregor, it's not a name to be ashamed of," answered Alan.

"I did not know ye were in my country, sir," says Robin.

"It sticks in my mind that I am in the country of my friends, the
Maclarens," says Alan.

"That's a kittle point," returned the other. "There may be two words to
say to that. But I think I will have heard that you are a man of your
sword?"

"Unless ye were born deaf, Mr. Macgregor, ye will have heard a good
deal more than that," says Alan. "I am not the only man who can draw
steel in Appin; and when my kinsman and captain, Ardshiel, had a talk
with a gentleman of your name, not so many years back, I could never
hear that the Macgregor had the best of it."

"Do you mean my father, sir?" says Robin.

"Well, I wouldnae wonder," says Alan. "The gentleman I have in my mind
had the ill-taste to clap Campbell to his name."

"My father was an old man," returned Robin. "The match was unequal. You
and me would make a better pair, sir."

"I was thinking that," said Alan.

I was half out of bed, and Duncan had been hanging at the elbow of these
fighting cocks, ready to intervene upon the least occasion. But when
that word was uttered, it was a case of now or never; and Duncan, with
something of a white face to be sure, thrust himself between.

"Gentlemen," said he, "I will have been thinking of a very different
matter. Here are my pipes, and here are you two gentlemen who are baith
acclaimed pipers. It's an auld dispute which one of ye's the best. Here
will be a braw chance to settle it."

"Why, sir," said Alan, still addressing Robin, from whom indeed he had
not so much as shifted his eyes, nor yet Robin from him, "why, sir,"
says Alan, "I think I will have heard some sough of the sort. Have ye
music, as folk say? Are ye a bit of a piper?"

"I can pipe like a Maccrimmon!" cries Robin.

"And that is a very bold word," quoth Alan.

"I have made bolder words good before now," returned Robin, "and that
against better adversaries."

"It is easy to try that," says Alan.

Duncan Dhu made haste to bring out the pair of pipes that was his
principal possession, and to set before his guests a muttonham and a
bottle of that drink which they call Athole brose. The two enemies were
still on the very breach of a quarrel; but down they sat, one upon each
side of the peat fire, with a mighty show of politeness. Maclaren
pressed them to taste his muttonham and "the wife's brose," reminding
them the wife was out of Athole and had a name far and wide for her
skill in that confection. But Robin put aside these hospitalities as bad
for the breath.

"I would have ye to remark, sir," said Alan, "that I havenae broken
bread for near upon ten hours, which will be worse for the breath than
any brose in Scotland."

"I will take no advantages, Mr. Stewart," replied Robin. "Eat and drink;
I'll follow."

Each ate a small portion of the ham and drank a glass of the brose to
Mrs. Maclaren; and then, after a great number of civilities, Robin took
the pipes and played a little spring in a very ranting manner.

"Ay, ye can blow," said Alan; and, taking the instrument from his rival,
he first played the same spring in a manner identical with Robin's; and
then wandered into variations, which, as he went on, he decorated with a
perfect flight of grace-notes, such as pipers love, and call the
"warblers."

I had been pleased with Robin's playing, Alan's ravished me.

"That's no very bad, Mr. Stewart," said the rival, "but ye show a poor
device in your warbler."

"Me!" cried Alan, the blood starting to his face. "I give ye the lie."

"Do ye own yourself beaten at the pipes, then," said Robin, "that ye
seek to change them for the sword?"

"And that's very well said, Mr. Macgregor," returned Alan; "and in the
meantime" (laying a strong accent on the word) "I take back the lie. I
appeal to Duncan."

"Indeed, ye need appeal to naebody," said Robin. "Ye're a far better
judge than any Maclaren in Balwhidder: for it's a God's truth that
you're a very creditable piper for a Stewart. Hand me the pipes."

Alan did as he asked; and Robin proceeded to imitate and correct some
part of Alan's variations, which it seemed that he remembered perfectly.

"Ay, ye have music," said Alan, gloomily.

"And now be the judge yourself, Mr. Stewart," said Robin; and taking up
the variations from the beginning, he worked them throughout to so new a
purpose, with such ingenuity and sentiment, and with so odd a fancy and
so quick a knack in the grace-notes, that I was amazed to hear him.

As for Alan his face grew dark and hot, and he sat and gnawed his
fingers, like a man under some deep affront. "Enough!" he cried. "Ye can
blow the pipes--make the most of that." And he made as if to rise.

But Robin only held out his hand as if to ask for silence, and struck
into the slow music of a pibroch. It was a fine piece of music in
itself, and nobly played; but, it seems besides, it was a piece peculiar
to the Appin Stewarts and a chief favourite with Alan. The first notes
were scarce out, before there came a change in his face; when the time
quickened, he seemed to grow restless in his seat; and long before that
piece was at an end, the last signs of his anger died from him, and he
had no thought but for the music.

"Robin Oig," he said, when it was done, "ye are a great piper. I am not
fit to blow in the same kingdom with ye. Body of me! ye have more music
in your sporran than I have in my head! And, though it still sticks in
my mind that I could show ye another of it with the cold steel, I warn
ye beforehand--it'll no be fair! It would go against my heart to haggle
a man that can blow the pipes as you can!"

Thereupon the quarrel was made up. All night long the pipes were
changing hands, and the day had come pretty bright before Robin as much
as thought upon the road.

Robert Louis Stevenson: "Kidnapped."




BEGA


    From the clouded belfry calling
    Hear my soft ascending swells,
    Hear my notes like swallows falling:
    I am Bega, least of bells.
    When great Turkeful rolls and rings
    All the storm-touched turret swings,
    Echoing battle, loud and long.
    When great Tatwin wakening roars
    To the far-off shining shores,
    All the seamen know his song.
    I am Bega, least of bells;
    In my throat my message swells.
    I, with all the winds athrill,
    Murmuring softly, murmuring still,
      "God around me, God above me,
      God to guard me, God to love me."

    I am Bega, least of bells;
    Weaving wonder, wind-born spells.
    High above the morning mist,
    Wreathed in rose and amethyst,
    Still the dreams of music float
    Silver from my silver throat,
    Whispering beauty, whispering peace.
    When great Tatwin's golden voice
    Bids the listening land rejoice,
    When great Turkeful rings and rolls
    Thunder down to trembling souls,
    Then my notes, like curlews flying,
    Sinking, falling, lifting, sighing,
    Softly answer, softly cease.
    I, with all the airs at play,
    Murmuring softly, murmuring say,
      "God around me, God above me,
      God to guard me, God to love me."

Marjorie L. C. Pickthall




Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering evil for evil
or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing.

For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:

Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace and ensue it.

For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and His ears are open
unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do
evil.

And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is
good?

I. Peter, III.




A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT


    What was he doing, the great god Pan,
      Down in the reeds by the river?
    Spreading ruin and scattering ban,
    Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat,
    And breaking the golden lilies afloat
      With the dragon-fly on the river.

    He tore out a reed, the great god Pan
      From the deep, cool bed of the river:
    The limpid water turbidly ran,
    And the broken lilies a-dying lay,
    And the dragon-fly had fled away,
      Ere he brought it out of the river.

    High on the shore sat the great god Pan,
      While turbidly flow'd the river;
    And hack'd and hew'd as a great god can,
    With his hard, bleak steel at the patient reed,
    Till there was not a sign of a leaf, indeed,
      To prove it fresh from the river.

    He cut it short, did the great god Pan,
      (How tall it stood in the river!)
    Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man,
    Steadily from the outside ring,
    And notch'd the poor, dry, empty thing
      In holes, as he sat by the river.

    "This is the way," laugh'd the great god Pan,
      (Laugh'd while he sat by the river)
    "The only way, since gods began
    To make sweet music, they could succeed."
    Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed,
      He blew in power by the river.

    Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan!
      Piercing sweet by the river!
    Blinding sweet, O great god Pan!
    The sun on the hill forgot to die,
    And the lilies reviv'd, and the dragon-fly
      Came back to dream on the river.

    Yet, half a beast is the great god Pan,
      To laugh as he sits by the river,
    Making a poet out of a man:
    The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,--
    For the reed which grows nevermore again
      As a reed with the reeds in the river.

Elizabeth Barrett Browning




    If little labour, little are our gains;
    Man's fortunes are according to his pains.

Herrick




WOLFE AND MONTCALM


The eventful night of the twelfth was clear and calm, with no light but
that of the stars. Within two hours before daybreak thirty boats,
crowded with sixteen hundred soldiers, cast off from the vessels and
floated downward in perfect order with the current of the ebb-tide. To
the boundless joy of the army, Wolfe's malady had abated, and he was
able to command in person. His ruined health, the gloomy prospect of the
siege, and the disaster at Montmorenci, had oppressed him with the
deepest melancholy, but never impaired for a moment the promptness of
his decisions, or the impetuous energy of his action.

He sat in the stern of one of the boats, pale and weak, but borne up to
a calm height of resolution. Every order had been given, every
arrangement made, and it only remained to face the issue. The ebbing
tide sufficed to bear the boats along, and nothing broke the silence of
the night but the gurgling of the river, and the low voice of Wolfe, as
he repeated to the officers about him the stanzas of Gray's "Elegy in a
Country Churchyard," which had recently appeared, and which he had just
received from England. Perhaps as he uttered those strangely
appropriate words:--

"The paths of glory lead but to the grave," the shadows of his own
approaching fate stole with mournful prophecy across his mind.
"Gentlemen," he said, as he closed his recital, "I would rather have
written those lines than take Quebec to-morrow."

As they approached the landing-place, the boats edged closer in towards
the northern shore, and the woody precipices rose high on their left
like a wall of undistinguished blackness.

"_Qui vive?_" shouted a French sentinel from out the impervious gloom.

"_La France!_" answered a captain of Fraser's Highlanders from the
foremost boat.

As boats were frequently passing down the river with supplies for the
garrison, and as a convoy from Bougainville was expected that very
night, the sentinel was deceived and allowed the English to proceed. A
few moments later, they were challenged again, and this time they could
discern the soldier running close down to the water's edge, as if all
his suspicions were aroused; but the skilful replies of the Highlander
once more saved the party from discovery.

They reached the landing-place in safety,--an indentation in the shore
about a league above the city and now bearing the name of Wolfe's Cove.
Here a narrow path led up the face of the heights, and a French guard
was posted at the top to defend the pass. By the force of the current
the foremost boats, including that which carried Wolfe himself, were
borne a little below the spot. The general was one of the first on
shore. He looked upward at the rugged heights which towered above him in
the gloom. "You can try it," he coolly observed to an officer near him;
"but I don't think you'll get up."

At the point where the Highlanders landed, one of their captains, Donald
Macdonald, apparently the same whose presence of mind had just saved the
enterprise from ruin, was climbing in advance of his men, when he was
challenged by a sentinel. He replied in French, by declaring that he had
been sent to relieve the guard, and ordering the soldier to withdraw.
Before the latter was undeceived, a crowd of Highlanders were close at
hand, while the steeps below were thronged with eager climbers, dragging
themselves up by trees, roots, and bushes. The guard turned out and made
a brief though brave resistance. In a moment they were cut to pieces,
dispersed, or made prisoners, while men after men came swarming up the
height and quickly formed upon the plains above. Meanwhile the vessels
had dropped downward with the current and anchored opposite the
landing-place. The remaining troops disembarked, and with the dawn of
day, the whole were brought in safety to the shore.

The sun rose, and from the ramparts of Quebec the astonished people saw
the Plains of Abraham glittering with arms, and the dark-red lines of
the English forming in array of battle. Breathless messengers had borne
the evil tidings to Montcalm, and far and near his wide-extended camp
resounded with the rolling of alarm-drums and the din of startled
