
"I _ask_ you nothing," said Master Drury. "I _command_ you to swear this
moment that you will enter the King's service without delay; and if you
do not obey me, you leave this house at once, and I have no son from
this night."

Harry slowly rose from his knees with bowed head.

"I cannot swear," he said. "I will serve my country, not sell her into
the power of tyrants," and he turned to leave the room. But at the door
he paused for a moment, and then turned back. "You will give me your
blessing once more, my father, before I depart?" he said; and he would
have knelt to receive it, but the old man waved him off.

"Leave me, leave me at once, lest I curse you!" he said, in a hoarse
voice; and Harry, without glancing at the purse, which still lay on the
table, retreated from that look of stern wrath which had settled on his
face.

The two young men walked straight out into the fields, and for some time
neither spoke; but at length Harry said,--

"What are we to do, Clayton?"

"We had better get round to the barn for to-night, and sleep there,"
replied Gilbert, "and then to-morrow you had better see your father
again."

But Harry shook his head sadly.

"Marry, it will be of no use," he said.

"By my troth, I would try, though you cannot marvel that he is angry,
speaking as you did," said Gilbert, warmly.

"Yes, I know I was wrong; but you do not know my father, Gilbert, or you
would not advise me to thrust myself into his presence again for a
while. No, no; I must go to London now, and seek my fortune there."

"But you will stay here to-night?" said his friend.

"Yes, to-night," sighed Harry; "for I must see Maud to-morrow."

Clayton hoped that Master Drury's anger might be somewhat appeased by
the next day, and he resolved to see him, if possible, when he went to
the house for his things, which in the hurry and confusion had been left
behind.

Anxiety kept Harry awake as much as his strange quarters that night; but
Clayton, who had many times slept out in the open field when upon the
march, did not feel much inconvenience from sleeping on the barn floor.
He awoke about the usual time, but would not stir, for fear of
disturbing Harry. At length, however, one of the men pushed open the
door, and not recognising the intruders, at once ordered them off in a
loud, rough voice.

Harry started to his feet, crying, "Maud, Maud, I will save you!" and
then rubbed his eyes to see if it was true that the man was staring and
Gilbert laughing at him.

"Marry, but you have been dreaming," said Clayton, rising and stretching
himself.

"Is it my young master?" uttered the man, slowly, as if scarcely able to
believe the evidence of his eyes.

"Yes, it is me; Harry Drury," said Harry. "Have you heard how Mistress
Maud is this morning?" he asked, anxiously.

"But sadly, I hear," said the man, shaking his head. "Marry, but 'tis a
bad business, this, Master Harry," he added.

"Will you go and tell one of the maids to ask Mistress Maud to come to
me?" said Harry, in a tone of impatience.

"Mistress Maud has not yet left her room," said the man. "I heard----"

"Then go and ask if I can see her in the painted gallery," interrupted
Harry. "Stop!" he cried, as the man was moving off; "you are not to go
to Mistress Mabel, but ask Jane, or one of the other maids."

The man gave a knowing nod, and departed on his errand, determined to
accomplish it too, for he had no doubt but that the visit to Maud was to
ask her to intercede with Master Drury; and Harry being a general
favourite with the servants, they had all felt sorry for his dilemma,
although they did not understand it.

He slowly followed the man round to a small entrance at the side of the
house, and presently the door opened and Jane beckoned him to enter. A
staircase close to the door led direct to one end of the painted
gallery, which was close to Maud's room, and here Harry sat down in the
broad window-seat to wait her coming. He did not have to wait long. In a
minute or two her chamber-door opened, and the young lady stepped into
the gallery, looking very pale and sad, but almost as stern as Master
Drury himself.

"Oh, Maud, forgive me!" burst forth Harry, starting forward when he saw
her.

But she coldly waved him off.

"I have nothing to forgive," she said.

Harry paused in amazement.

"Prithee, tell me what is the matter," he said; "are you ill, Maud?"

"Prithee, no," said Maud, lightly (which was not quite the truth).

Harry advanced a step nearer, and Maud drew further back.

"Do not seek to touch me," she said, proudly. "I give not my hand to
traitors."

"But I am not a traitor," said Harry. "I have followed your advice, and
told my father I must go on in----"

"Followed my advice!" repeated Maud. "By my faith, I never advised you!"

"Nay, nay, did you not understand me when I conversed with you?"

"I understand you now, Master Drury," interrupted Maud, "but I choose
not to hold converse with a traitor;" and with a haughty gesture she
turned and went into her own room, leaving Harry overwhelmed with
surprise and distress.

He went down-stairs, and out of the little unused door into the sunny
fields, without knowing where he was, and he wandered up and down,
trying to collect his bewildered thoughts, and think over what had
happened, until Gilbert Clayton overtook him.

He had collected the few belongings he brought with him to Hayslope
Grange, and now carried them in his hand, but he had utterly failed in
his mission to Master Drury. The old man was more bitter this morning
than he had been the previous evening, and vowed he would never own his
son again, unless he took service under King Charles.

"Let us get away from here as fast as we can," said Harry, as his friend
joined him.

"Have you seen Mistress Maud?" asked Gilbert, hoping that she at least
had spoken a word of comfort to him.

"Prithee, do not ask me," said Harry, in a hoarse voice. "I am an
outcast from my father's house; every one spurns me."

"Say not so, Harry," said Gilbert, in a gentle tone. "Remember the word
of the Lord, 'When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will
take me up.'"

"But I know not that I have the right to that promise," said Harry,
moodily.

"But you confess that you need it," said Gilbert.

"Yes, I need it," said Harry.

"Then Christ came to satisfy the needy, whatever their wants might be.
He came to show us the love of the Father that it was inexhaustible, not
like the love of earthly friends, which is often cold and changeful, but
ever full, free, and unchangeable."

Harry sighed.

"I feel utterly desolate and deserted," he said.

"Then will you not go to Him who is waiting to take you up and adopt you
into His family, and make you His son in Christ Jesus? He wishes to do
so. He is waiting to be gracious."

"Go on," said Harry, when Gilbert paused. "I am listening; your words
are like water to a thirsty soul;" and Gilbert went on until they
reached the village, where Gilbert bought a loaf of rye bread, and after
eating this, and drinking some water from the spring, they started on
their journey to London; for although Gilbert was not a poor man, they
had not much money with them, not enough to buy a horse, and
stage-coaches were unheard of in those days.




CHAPTER IV.

CROMWELL'S IRONSIDES.


Gilbert Clayton and Harry Drury kept on their weary tramp to London, and
at length reached the little village of Whitechapel, which was outside
the city walls. They had run some risks from highwaymen and footpads;
but now they thought all danger was over, for they had almost reached
their destination. But just as they were about to leave the village, a
party of the King's pikemen rode in, and at once seized upon the
travellers, to compel them to enter the King's service.

This was a dilemma neither of them had foreseen. To declare they were in
favour of the Parliament would be the signal for their arrest as
traitors to his Majesty; and to escape on any other pretext, without
telling an actual lie, seemed equally impossible. Gilbert was seized
first, and asked his name and condition. The latter was not easy to
comply with, as he had left the army on account of his wounds, and was
not at all sure that he should be received back again. He therefore gave
his former occupation--a mercer of the city of London. Harry gave his as
a farmer, for although he did not look much like one, he spoke of that
being his occupation. After a few more questions had been asked and
answered, they were marched off to the captain of the band, who began
his examination by asking Harry his name.

"Drury!" he repeated. "Are you one of the Hayslope Drurys?"

"My father lives at Hayslope Grange," said Harry.

"Ay, a right true and trusty servant of the King's is Master Drury. I
marvel that he has not sent you to do service for the King ere this,"
said the officer.

"My father meddleth not with public matters," said Harry, pondering what
would come next.

"I trow not, I trow not," said the soldier, shaking his head; "but I
must have a word with Master Drury on this same matter as I pass through
the village, and I doubt not he will bid you wield your arms for King
Charles after your visit to London. You may pursue your journey now,
young man; but nathless you will speed your return, for the King needs
trusty men to do him service in these troublous times. But we wish not
to force our friends too much in this matter, therefore will I suffer
you both to depart."

All the time he was speaking he eyed Gilbert most narrowly, as if trying
to recall where he had seen that face before, as in truth he had, for
they had met in the first battle fought between Charles and his
Parliament, at Edgehill, on the borders of Warwickshire.

Gilbert remembered Captain Stanhope quite well, for he had been his
prisoner for a little while, until an exchange of prisoners took place.
Long illness had, however, altered Gilbert far more than the two years'
campaign had altered the captain; and he rode away, thinking his eyes
had played him false for once. Perhaps his being in the company of one
whose family was known to be so strongly attached to the royal cause
helped his escape; for he could not think it possible that a Drury would
hold any intimacy with the Claytons.

"We have had a narrow escape, Harry, and we must not stay long in
London," said Gilbert, as they left the village, and saw the soldiers
ride out towards Essex; and then he told his companion of his former
acquaintance with Captain Stanhope.

Harry could not help laughing, in spite of his sorrow, and quite agreed
that their stay in London should be as short as possible. They would
only stay a few hours to rest, to replenish their purses, and ascertain
where Lieutenant Cromwell was now with his army, and then hasten to join
him. The long tramp from Essex to London in the heat and dust had
somewhat wearied Harry, unused to such exertion; but no sooner did he
hear that horses had been provided, than he was anxious to start again,
and they were soon on the great road leading to Yorkshire, where Lord
Kimbolton and his lieutenant, Cromwell, were mustering their forces.

It was sad to pass along the edge of uncultivated fields in this bright
summer weather; and yet, what encouragement was there for the farmer to
plant or sow, when crops might be trodden down by the feet of horses and
soldiers, or, if allowed to ripen, to see the grain cut down by that
lawless Prince Rupert and his band of soldier-robbers. Truly the land
might be said to mourn as well as the inhabitants, although as yet they
had not reached the scene of actual strife.

Gilbert was anxious to reach his kinsman Cromwell as soon as possible,
and so pressed on with all speed, making inquiries now and then at the
villages where they slept, or of people they met on the road, as to the
whereabouts of the two armies. It seems almost incredible in these days
of rapid communication that this necessary intelligence could not be
furnished in London, but that both forces lay somewhere in or near
Yorkshire was the utmost Gilbert could learn about them.

[Illustration: A RIDE TO THE NORTH.]

The farther they travelled northwards the more people did they meet, and
it soon became plain that these were many of them fugitives flying from
impending ruin. The tales they told were of course conflicting, and in
their fright and anxiety to escape and save their families, often
confused. But Gilbert was able to make out that the Scots army, which
had marched over the Border to the help of the Parliament, had been shut
up in Sunderland by the Royalists under the Earl of Newcastle; but the
Parliamentary forces under Fairfax coming to their relief, the Earl had
retired to York, and the English and Scotch together had now laid siege
to that city.

As they drew near to Yorkshire, evidence of the commotion became still
more apparent. The roads were strewed with beds and bedding, and various
articles of household furniture, which the fugitives had attempted to
take with them, but afterwards had thrown away; for the rumour had gone
abroad that Prince Rupert was coming, and enough had been heard of his
atrocities in Cheshire and Lancashire to make the people dread his
approach as they would the plague. At length, as they neared the
besieged city, they heard that Lord Kimbolton's army was in the
neighbourhood, and Gilbert was not long in discovering the encampment
and seeking out Lieutenant Cromwell.

He warmly welcomed his young kinsman, and at once accepted his services
and that of his companion. Harry Drury was not unused to arms. He had
been taught fencing as a part of his education, and would use the
singlestick, arquebus, and crossbow, while the fashion of every
gentleman wearing a sword had rendered it necessary that this weapon
should be handled skilfully. The necessary drill was therefore soon
learned by Harry, and he was admitted to serve in the same corps as his
friend.

Every addition to the army was welcome now, and the work of drilling the
recruits went on all day, and often far into the night too. The life of
a soldier here in Cromwell's camp was very different from the gay scene
of revel he had sometimes heard the Royalist troopers describe. There
was no rioting or drunkenness, no shouting or brawling, for these were
sober-minded earnest men, who felt they had a real work to do, and
sacrificed much in the doing of it. None had been forced to come here;
but they had left home, and wife, and little ones, of their own accord,
to fight their country's battles and set all England free. No wonder
that they were earnest when they thought of the dear ones far away. They
were not like the paid soldiers of the regular army; they could not
afford to trifle and lose their time in play when they might be at work
preparing for the battle; and so when not at drill, the cleaning of
armour and furbishing of arms went on ceaselessly, and the clatter of
this and the ring of the blacksmith's tools were broken only by the
singing of some pious hymn or the voice of one reading to his comrade
from the Word of Life. The day was begun and closed with prayer, and but
for the tramp of the sentry, when once the word of command had been
given that all work should cease, all the camp was as quiet and still,
as a sleeping village.

Harry joyfully took his share of the labour going forward; he was
willing to do anything, or bear any fatigue, to prepare himself to take
part in the expected action when Prince Rupert should show himself. July
was drawing near now, and they had almost reached the united armies
besieging York, and it was expected that when Prince Rupert came into
the field a battle would be fought. Scouts were sent out in all
directions to give timely notice of his approach, but they were able to
reach the forces of Fairfax before he came. But, however, only just in
time. On the second of July, Prince Rupert came upon them by way of
Marston Moor, but Kimbolton and his lieutenants were prepared for his
coming.

A desperate battle was fought, and for some time it seemed that the
Royalists must be victorious, for Prince Rupert fought with the most
desperate bravery, driving several generals from the field, and thus
disconcerting all their plans. He tried to do the same with Cromwell's
cavalry, but they kept together like an iron phalanx, and all Rupert's
dashing charges and feigned retreats failed to throw them into disorder.
