
"I'm tired of watching the Peacock."

"Then," said the mother, "you must help somebody else. You are old
enough to think of such things now, and you must remember this wise
saying: 'When you don't know what to do, help somebody.'"

"Whom can I help?" said the lame Duckling. "People can all do things for
themselves."

"There is the Blind Horse," answered his mother. "He is alone to-day,
and I'm sure he would like somebody to visit him."

"Quack!" said the Duckling. "I will go to see him." He waddled slowly
away, stopping now and then to rest, and shaking his little pointed tail
from side to side as Ducks do. The Blind Horse was grazing in the
pasture alone.

"I've come to see you, sir," said the Duckling. "Shall I be in your
way?"

The Blind Horse looked much pleased. "I think from your voice that you
must be one of the young Ducks," said he. "I shall be very glad to have
you visit me, only you must be careful to keep away from my feet, for I
can't see, and I might step on you."

"I'll be careful," said the Duckling. "I can't waddle much anyway this
morning, because my leg hurts me so."

"Why, I'm sorry you are lame," said the Horse. "What is the matter?"

"A Weasel bit me in the night, sir. But it doesn't hurt so much as it
did before I came to see you. Perhaps the pasture is a better place for
lame legs than the farmyard." He didn't know that it was because he was
trying to make somebody else happy that he felt so much better, yet that
was the reason.

The Blind Horse and the Duckling became very fond of each other and had
a fine time. The Horse told stories of his Colthood, and of the things
he had seen in his travels before he became blind. And the Duckling told
him what the other farmyard people were doing, and about the soft,
fleecy clouds that drifted across the blue sky. When the mother Duck
came to look for him, the little fellow was much surprised. "Didn't you
go to the brook?" he asked.

"Yes," said his mother, with a smile. "We have been there all the
morning. Don't you see how high the sun is?"

"Why-ee!" said the Duckling. "I didn't think I had been here long at
all. We've been having the nicest time. And I'm coming again, am I not?"
He asked this question of the Blind Horse.

"I wish you would come often," answered the Blind Horse. "You have given
me a very pleasant morning. Good-bye!"

The mother Duck and her son waddled off together. "How is your leg?"
said she.

"I forgot all about it until I began to walk," answered the Duckling.
"Isn't that queer?"

"Not at all," said his mother. "It was because you were making somebody
else happy. 'When you don't know what to do, help somebody.'"




THE FUSSY QUEEN BEE


In a sheltered corner of the farmyard, where the hedge kept off the cold
winds and the trees shaded from hot summer sunshine, there were many
hives of Bees. One could not say much for the Drones, but the others
were the busiest of all the farmyard people, and they had so much to do
that they did not often stop to visit with their neighbors.

In each hive, or home, there were many thousand Bees, and each had his
own work. First of all, there was the Queen. You might think that being
a Queen meant playing all the time, but that is not so, for to be a
really good Queen, even in a Beehive, one must know a great deal and
keep at work all the time. The Queen Bee is the mother of all the Bee
Babies, and she spends her days in laying eggs. She is so very precious
and important a person that the first duty of the rest is to take care
of her.

The Drones are the stoutest and finest-looking of all the Bees, but they
are lazy, very, very lazy. There are never many of them in a hive, and
like most lazy people, they spend much of their time in telling the
others how to work. They do not make wax or store honey, and as the
Worker Bees do not wish them to eat what has been put away for winter,
they do not live very long.

Most of the Bees are Workers. They are smaller than either the Queen
Mother or the Drones, and they gather all the honey, make all the wax,
build the comb, and feed the babies. They keep the hive clean, and when
the weather is very warm, some of them fan the air with their wings to
cool it. They guard the doorway of the hive, too, and turn away the
robbers who sometimes come to steal their honey.

In these busy homes, nobody can live long just for himself. Everybody
helps somebody else, and that makes life pleasant. The Queen Mother
often lays as many as two thousand eggs in a day. Most of these are
Worker eggs, and are laid in the small cells of the brood comb, which is
the nursery of the hive. A few are Drone eggs and are laid in large
cells. She never lays any Queen eggs, for she does not want more Queens
growing up. It is a law among the Bees that there can be only one grown
Queen living in each home.

The Workers, however, know that something might happen to their old
Queen Mother, so, after she has gone away, they sometimes go into a cell
where she has laid a Worker egg, and take down the waxen walls between
it and the ones on either side to make a very large royal cell. They
bite away the wax with their strong jaws and press the rough edges into
shape with their feet. When this egg hatches, they do not feed the baby,
or Larva, with tasteless bread made of flower-dust, honey, and water, as
they would if they intended it to grow up a Worker or a Drone. Instead,
they make what is called royal jelly, which is quite sour, and tuck this
all around the Larva, who now looks like a little white worm.

The royal jelly makes her grow fast, and in five days she is so large as
to nearly fill the cell. Then she stops eating, spins a cocoon, and lies
in it for about two and a half days more. When she comes out of this,
she is called a Pupa. Sixteen days after the laying of the egg, the
young Queen is ready to come out of her cell. It takes twenty-one days
for a Worker to become fully grown and twenty-five for a Drone.

In the hive by the cedar tree, the Queen Mother was growing restless
and fussy. She knew that the Workers were raising some young Queens, and
she tried to get to the royal cells. She knew that if she could only do
that, the young Queens would never live to come out. The Workers knew
this, too, and whenever she came near there, they made her go away.

The Queen Larvae and Pupae were of different ages, and one of them was now
ready to leave her cell. They could hear her crying to be let out, but
they knew that if she and the Queen Mother should meet now, one of them
would die. So instead of letting her out, they built a thick wall of wax
over the door and left only an opening through which they could feed
her. When she was hungry she ran her tongue out and they put honey on
it.

She wondered why the Workers did not let her out, when she wanted so
much to be free. She did not yet know that Queen Mothers do not get
along well with young Queens.

The Workers talked it over by themselves. One of them was very
tender-hearted. "It does seem too bad," said she, "to keep the poor
young Queen shut up in her cell. I don't see how you can stand it to
hear her piping so pitifully all the time. I am sure she must be
beautiful. I never saw a finer tongue than the one she runs out for
honey."

"Humph!" said a sensible old Worker, who had seen many Queens hatched
and many swarms fly away, "you'd be a good deal more sorry if we did let
her out now. It would not do at all."

The tender-hearted Worker did not answer this, but she talked it over
with the Drones. "I declare," said she, wiping her eyes with her
forefeet, "I can hardly gather a mouthful of honey for thinking of her."

"Suppose you hang yourself up and make wax then," said one Drone. "It
is a rather sunshiny day, but you ought to be doing something, and if
you cannot gather honey you might do that." This was just like a Drone.
He never gathered honey or made wax, yet he could not bear to see a
Worker lose any time.

The Worker did not hang herself up and make wax, however. She never did
that except on cloudy days, and she was one of those Bees who seem to
think that nothing will come out right unless they stop working to see
about it. There was plenty waiting to be done, but she was too sad and
anxious to do it. She might have known that since her friends were only
minding the law, it was right to keep the new Queen in her cell.

The Queen Mother was restless and fussy. She could not think of her
work, and half the time she did not know whether she was laying a Drone
egg or a Worker egg. In spite of that, she did not make any mistake, or
put one into the wrong kind of cell. "I cannot stay here with a young
Queen," said she. "I will not stay here. I will take my friends with me
and fly away."

Whenever she met a Worker, she struck her feelers on those of her
friend, and then this friend knew exactly how she felt about it. In this
way the news was passed around, and soon many of the Workers were as
restless as their Queen Mother. They were so excited over it at times
that the air of the hive grew very hot. After a while they would become
quiet and gather honey once more. They whispered often to each other.
"Do you know where we are going?" one said.

"Sh!" was the answer. "The guides are looking for a good place now."

"I wish the Queen Mother knew where we are going," said the first.

"How could she?" replied the second. "You know very well that she has
not left the hive since she began to lay eggs. Here she comes now."

"Oh dear!" exclaimed the Queen Mother. "I can never stand this. I
certainly cannot. To think I am not allowed to rule in my own hive! The
Workers who are guarding the royal cells drive me away whenever I go
near them. I will not stay any longer."

"Then," said a Drone, as though he had thought of it for the first time,
"why don't you go away?"

"I shall," said she. "Will you go with me?"

"No," said the Drone. "I hate moving and furnishing a new house.
Besides, somebody must stay here to take care of the Workers and the
young Queen."

The Queen Mother walked away. "When we were both young," she said to
herself, "he would have gone anywhere with me."

And the Drone said to himself, "Now, isn't that just like a Queen
Mother! She has known all the time that there would be young Queens
coming on, and that she would have to leave, yet here she is, making the
biggest kind of fuss about it. She ought to remember that it is the
law."

Indeed she should have remembered that it was the law, for everything is
done by law in the hive, and no one person should find fault. The law
looks after them all, and will not let any one have more than his
rightful share.

That same afternoon there was a sudden quiet in their home. The Workers
who had been outside returned and visited with the rest. While they were
waiting, a few who were to be their guides came to the door of the hive,
struck their wings together, and gave the signal for starting. Then all
who were going with the Queen Mother hurried out of the door and flew
with her in circles overhead. "Good-bye!" they called. "Raise all the
young Queens you wish. We shall never come back. We are going far, far
away, and we shall not tell you where. It is a lovely place, a very
lovely place."

"Let them go," said the Drones who stayed behind. "Now, isn't it time to
let out the young Queen?"

"Not yet," answered a Worker, who stood near the door. "Not one feeler
shall she put outside her cell until that swarm is out of sight."

The tender-hearted Worker came up wiping her eyes. "Oh, that poor Queen
Mother!" said she. "I am so sorry for her. I positively cannot gather
honey to-day, I feel so badly about her going."

"Better keep on working," said her friend. "It's the best thing in the
world for that sad feeling. Besides, you should try to keep strong."

"Oh, I will try to eat something from the comb," was the answer, "but I
don't feel like working."

"Zzzt!" said the other Worker. "I think if you can eat, you can hunt
your food outside, and not take honey we have laid up for winter or food
that will be needed for the children."

The Drones chuckled. It was all right for them to be lazy, they thought,
but they never could bear to see a Worker waste time. "Ah," cried one of
them suddenly, "what is the new swarm doing now?"

The words were hardly out of his mouth when the Queen Mother crawled
into the hive again. "Such dreadful luck!" said she. "A cloud passed
over the sun just as we were alighting on a tree to rest."

"I wouldn't have come back for that," said a Drone.

"No," said she, in her airiest way, "I dare say you wouldn't, but I
would. I dare not go to a new home after a cloud has passed over the
sun. I think it is a sign of bad luck. I should never expect a single
egg to hatch if I went on. We shall try it again to-morrow."

All the others came back with her, and the hive was once more crowded
and hot. "Oh dear!" said the tender-hearted Worker, "isn't it too bad to
think they couldn't go?"

The next morning they started again and were quite as excited over it as
before. The Queen Mother had fussed and fidgeted all the time, although
she had laid nine hundred and seventy-three eggs while waiting, and that
in spite of interruptions. "Being busy keeps me from thinking," said
she, "and I must do something." This time the Queen Mother lighted on an
apple-tree branch, and the others clung to her until all who had left
the hive were in a great mass on the branch,--a mass as large as a small
cabbage. They meant to rest a little while and then fly away to the new
home chosen by their guides.

While they were hanging here, the farmer came under the tree, carrying
a long pole with a wire basket fastened to the upper end. He shook the
clustered Bees gently into it, and then changed them into an empty hive
that stood beside their old home.

"Now," said the Workers who had stayed in the old hive, "we will let out
the new Queen, for the Queen Mother will never return."

It did not take long to bite away the waxen wall and let her out. Then
they gathered around and caressed her, and touched their feelers to her
and waited upon her, and explained why they could not let her out
sooner. She was still a soft gray color, like all young Bees when they
first come from the cell, but this soon changed to the black worn by her
people.

The Workers flew in and out, and brought news from the hive next door.
They could not go there, for the law does not allow a Bee who lives in
one home to visit in another, but they met their old friends in the air
or when they were sipping honey. They found that the Queen Mother had
quite given up the idea of living elsewhere and was as busy as ever. The
farmer had put a piece of comb into the new hive so that she could begin
housekeeping at once.

The new Queen was petted and kept at home until she was strong and used
to moving about. That was not long. Then she said she wanted to see the
world outside. "We will go with you," said the Drones, who were always
glad of an excuse for flying away in pleasant weather. They said there
was so much noise and hurrying around in the hive that they could never
get any real rest there during the daytime.

So the young Queen flew far away and saw the beautiful world for the
first time. Such a blue sky! Such green grass! Such fine trees covered
with sweet-smelling blossoms! She loved it all as soon as she saw it.
"Ah," she cried, "what a wonderful thing it is to live and see all this!
I am so glad that I was hatched. But now I must hurry home, for there is
so much to be done."

She was a fine young Queen, and the Bees were all proud of her. They let
her do anything she wished as long as she kept away from the royal
cells. She soon began to work as the old Queen Mother had done, and was
very happy in her own way. She would have liked to open the royal cells
and prevent more Queens from hatching, and when they told her it was the
law which made them keep her away, she still wanted to bite into them.

"That poor young Queen Mother!" sighed the tender-hearted Worker. "I am
so sorry for her when she is kept away from the royal cells. This is a
sad, sad world!" But this isn't a sad world by any means. It is a
beautiful, sunshiny, happy world, and neither Queen Bees nor anybody
else should think it hard if they cannot do every single thing they
wish. The law looks after great and small, and there is no use in
pouting because we cannot do one certain thing, when there is any amount
of delightful work and play awaiting us. And the young Queen Mother knew
this.




THE BAY COLT LEARNS TO MIND


The span of Bays were talking together in their stalls, and the other
Horses were listening. That was one trouble with living in the barn, you
could not say anything to your next-door neighbor without somebody else
hearing. The farmer had solid walls between the stalls, with openings so
far back that no Horse could get his head to them without breaking his
halter. This had been done to keep them from biting each other, and as
nobody but the Dappled Gray ever thought of doing such a thing, it was
rather hard on the rest. It made it difficult for the mothers to bring
up their children properly, for after a Colt was old enough to have a
stall to himself, his mother had to call out her advice and warnings so
loudly that everybody could hear, and you know it is not well to reprove
a child before company if it can be helped. Indeed, it was this very
question that was troubling the span of Bays now. Each of them had a
two-year-old Colt, and they knew that it was nearly time for the farmer
to put these Colts to work. The span of Bays were sisters, so of course
their children were cousins, and they were all very fond of each other
and of the Blind Horse, who was the uncle of the Bays and the
great-uncle of the Bay Colt and the Gray Colt.

"I am worried about the Bay Colt," said his mother. "Since he was
brought into the barn last fall and had a stall away from me, he has
gotten into bad ways. I have told him again and again that he must not
nibble the edge of the manger, yet the first thing I heard this morning
was the grating of his teeth on the wood."

"Well," said his aunt, "you know he is teething, and that may be the
reason."

"That is no excuse," said his mother sternly. "He has been teething ever
since he was five days old, and he will not cut his last tooth for three
years yet. I don't call it goodness to keep from cribbing when you don't
want to crib, and the time to stop is now. Besides, if he waits until he
has all his teeth, he won't be able to break himself of the habit when
he does try."

"That is so," said his aunt, "and he will ruin his teeth, too."

"Pooh!" exclaimed the Bay Colt, who had heard what they were saying. "I
can stop whenever I want to, and they're my own teeth, anyway. It isn't
anybody else's business if I do ruin them."

"There!" said his mother to his aunt, "you see what I mean. That is just
the way he talks all the time. Now what would you do?"

"Let him alone," snorted the Dappled Gray. "Let him alone, and he will
get some Horse sense after he has been broken. He'll have a hard time of
it, but he'll come out all right."

The Bay Colt kicked against the side of the stall, he was so vexed.
"I'll thank you to let me alone," said he. "I don't see why everybody
tells me what I ought to do. Guess I know a thing or two."

"I'll tell you why," said the Dappled Gray, in a voice that sounded as
though he were trying very hard not to lose his temper. "It is because
you are young and we like you, and we can save you trouble if you mind
what we tell you. I had lost the black pits in my front teeth before you
were born, and when a Horse has lived long enough to lose the black pits
from his front teeth, he knows a good deal. You don't know a curb-bit
from a snaffle now, but you will learn many things when you are
broken--a very great many things."

The Bay Colt tossed his head and did not answer. When he was led out to
drink, the Dappled Gray spoke quickly to his friends. "We will let him
alone," said he, "as he wishes. We will not advise him until he asks us
to do so." They were all whinnying "Yes" when the Bay Colt came back.
Then it became so still that you could have heard a stem of hay drop.

For a few days after this, the Bay Colt had a very good time. Nobody
gave him any advice, and even when he gnawed at the edge of the manger,
his mother did not seem to notice it. After he found that she didn't say
anything, he didn't gnaw, or crib, so much. He was such a foolish and
contrary young fellow that when people told him not to do a thing, he
always wanted to do that thing worse than anything else in the world.
His cousin, the Gray Colt, was not at all like him. She was a gentle
little two-year-old whom everybody loved. She was full of fun and was
the gayest possible companion in the meadow, yet when the older Horses
gave her advice, she always listened and obeyed.

The Bay Colt was very fond of his cousin, but he did like to tease her,
and once in the fall, before they came to stay in the barn, he called
her a "goody-goody" because she wouldn't jump the fence and run away
with him. He said she wouldn't do such things because she didn't know
what fun was. Then she did show that she had a temper, for her brown
eyes snapped and her soft lips were raised until she showed all her
biting teeth. "I'm not a 'goody-goody,'" she cried, stamping the ground
with her pretty little hoofs, "and I just ache to go. I feel as though
there were ropes that I couldn't see, pulling me toward that fence
every time I think of it, but I won't go! I won't go! My mother says
that she jumped a fence and ran away when she was a Colt, and that she
felt as mean as could be afterward."

"I don't care," said her cousin, "I'm going anyway, and you can stay at
home if you want to. Good-bye!" He ran and leaped over the fence, and
trotted down the road with his head well up and his tail in the air. And
then how the Gray Colt did want to follow! "I won't!" she said again. "I
won't do it. I'll look the other way and try to forget it, but I wish he
knew how hard it is to be good sometimes."

The next morning the Bay Colt was in the pasture again. The farmer and
his man had found him far away and led him back. "I had a fine time," he
said to his cousin, "and I don't feel a bit mean. I'm going again
to-day, but don't you tell." When his mother scolded him as he
deserved, he just switched his tail and thought about something else
until she stopped talking. Then he ran away again.

The next morning when the Gray Colt saw him, he had a queer wooden thing
around his neck, and fastened to this was a pole that stuck out ahead of
him. It tired his neck and bothered him when he wanted to run. If he had
tried to jump the fence, it would have thrown him down. When the Gray
Colt came toward him, he pretended not to see her. He might just as well
have looked squarely at her as soon as she came, because, you know, he
had to look at her sometime, but he had a mean, slinking, afraid
feeling, such as people always have when they have done something wrong
and have had time to think about it. Besides, he had changed his mind
since the wooden poke had been put on him, and somehow his running away
seemed very foolish now. He wondered how he could ever have thought it
any fun, and he was so disgusted that he couldn't keep his ears still,
but moved them restlessly when he remembered his own silliness.
