
"Just wait till his father is dead, and mother is his guardian!" he said
to himself. "Then, my young gentleman, your pride'll be taken down, see
if it ain't!"

His politic forbearance surprised the other boys, who did not understand
the secret cause.

"Ain't you goin' to lick that new boy?" asked Tower, a sycophantic
follower of Thorne.

"What for?" asked Nicholas.

"Because he licked you the other day."

"Who says he licked me?" demanded the young tyrant, with a frown.

"Why, all the boys say so," stammered Tower.

"Do you say so?" demanded Nicholas, savagely.

"N-no," said Tower, timidly.

"Lucky you don't," said Thorne, significantly. "I'll lick any boy that
tells such a lie about me."

Tower was silent.

"The fact is," he continued, in a milder tone, "we were stopped in the
middle of the fight. I was called to see a lady visitor. But for that I
should have licked him in the end."

"I guess you can lick him," said the young sycophant.

"Of course I can," said Nicholas, loftily.

"Are you going to try it?"

"Why should I? I haven't anything against him. We came out even. What's
the use of bearing malice?"

Tower was astonished to hear such sentiments from Thorne. It did not
sound at all like him. He was about the last boy who would be singled
out for forbearance or forgiveness of injuries. So the younger boy
concluded that his leader was afraid of Jasper. But here he did him
wrong. Thorne had learned to respect his adversary's strength and skill,
but he would have hazarded a second encounter but for the prudential
reasons already suggested. For the present he thought it best to keep
quiet.

Jasper also had made a discovery, though, as we know, the information he
had received was not correct. He supposed Thorne to be a nephew of his
father's governess, whereas she was his mother.

"Does Thorne know this?" he asked himself.

He could not feel quite satisfied on this point, nor could he determine
precisely how far his feelings were affected by this discovery. He felt
a dislike toward Thorne on account of his tyrannical disposition and
ill-treatment of younger boys. He cherished a dislike for the governess,
the cause of which he could not as well define. Now, it appeared that
these two were allied to each other. I beg to say that Jasper was too
sensible and gentlemanly to dislike the governess simply because she was
poor. That he knew very well had nothing to do with the substantial
worth of a person. But he could not rid himself of the feeling that Miss
Thorne's residence in his father's family portended misfortune to the
parent whom he loved so well.

So a week passed without any new disturbance or outbreak between the two
boys. Jasper had been on the lookout, fearing that Thorne would take
some opportunity to wreak vengeance on young Cameron when he was not
present. But his fears were gradually allayed. Thorne seemed usually
peaceable--so much so that his school-mates, who knew him well, thought
he had turned over a new leaf, and speculated as to what had produced
the change. But neither boys nor men change suddenly and completely,
though policy and self-interest may for a time lead them to suppress the
manifestation of their characteristic traits.

Nine days after the fight recorded in my first chapter, as Jasper was
walking in the school-yard, Davies came up hurriedly.

"Kent," he said, "you're wanted."

"Who wants me?" asked Jasper. "Is it Dr. Benton?"

"No, the doctor's absent."

"Who wants me, then?"

"Little Cameron."

"What! is Thorne at him again?" asked Jasper, stopping short and looking
toward the house.

"Yes, Thorne's at his old business, bullying him. He took the
opportunity when he thought you were out of hearing."

"I must stop it," said Jasper. "Where are they?"

"In the back yard."

"I suppose I shall have to fight him again," said Kent, regretfully.

"You needn't be afraid to try it. You are a match for him."

"I think I am. That is not my reason."

"What then?"

"I don't like fighting--it's brutal. Besides, I have another reason,
which I don't care to mention."

By this time they had reached the scene of the difficulty, Little
Cameron was half-crying, and Thorne stood over him with upraised arm.

"Do as I tell you, you little blackguard!" he was just saying, when a
voice he well knew was heard, calm and resolute:

"Thorne, are you bullying that boy again?"

Nicholas turned and saw his old antagonist. He was sorry to see him, but
he could not well withdraw now.

"It's none of your business," he answered, sullenly.

"I shall make it my business to protect the weak," said Jasper, quietly.

"You may need to protect yourself," sneered Thorne.

"If necessary, I feel competent to do so. Cameron, come here."

"Don't you go!" said Thorne, menacingly.

The little boy looked in terror from one to the other. Evidently he
dreaded that the immediate result of his obeying Kent would be to
precipitate a blow from the bully.

Jasper saw the little boy's quandary, and he quickly advanced to the
rescue. Throwing one arm protectingly round Cameron's waist, he regarded
Nicholas firmly.

"Well," he said, "what do you propose to do?"

Thorne had had time to think. He hated Jasper worse than ever, but he
knew that our hero did not care for blows. Moreover, he was likely to
give back better than he received. There was another way of wounding
him, which prudence would have led him to hold in reserve. But he was
too angry to be prudent. Moreover, he had had a note two days before
from his mother, from which he learned that the wedding was to be
solemnized on that very day. Probably at that moment his mother was Mrs.
Kent.

"I won't fight," he said, with an unpleasant smile, "seeing we're
relations."

"Relations!" repeated Jasper, with a look of surprise and inquiry. "I
don't know what you mean."

"You'll know soon enough," said Thorne, mockingly.

A suspicion of the truth entered Jasper's mind. He turned pale, and
said:

"Will you step aside with me, Thorne, and tell me what you mean!"

"If you like," said Thorne, indifferently.

"Now," said Jasper, when they had withdrawn a few rods from the other
boys.

"It appears you haven't heard the news," said Thorne, with malicious
enjoyment. "Your father has married my mother. That makes us
step-brothers, doesn't it?"

"My father married again!" said Jasper, recoiling as if he had received
a blow.

"Yes. Strange you wasn't invited to the wedding, isn't it?"

An hour later Jasper, having obtained special permission from Dr.
Benton, was on his way home, sick with apprehension lest this threatened
misfortune should prove real.




CHAPTER V.

JASPER'S RETURN HOME.


His father married again, and he left in ignorance of his intention!
Jasper felt hurt that his father, for whom he cherished so deep and warm
an affection, should have taken such a step without apprising him of it
in advance. If he was to marry, certainly his only son ought to have
been present at the wedding.

"But it isn't father's fault," he thought, bitterly. "It's the fault of
Miss Thorne. She is more artful and designing even than I thought. She
has married my father for his wealth and position, and she was afraid I
would dissuade him from such a step."

It was certainly a bitter thought that he must look upon this woman as
his step-mother--that she was to take the place of the mother whom he
tenderly remembered, though six years had passed since she left him.
But, after all, was it true? Might it not be the case that Thorne, who
evidently disliked him, had fabricated the story in order to annoy him?
There was a gleam of comfort in this, and he felt that he would
willingly run the risk of being laughed at for having started on a
"wild-goose chase" if only his fears could be relieved. But, after all,
there was the possibility--nay, the probability, considering what he
knew of Miss Thorne--that Thorne's story was all true.

The cars stopped for a brief minute at the depot in Morton, Jasper's
destination, and he jumped out. He looked eagerly about him to see if
there was anyone of whom he could ask information. To his joy he caught
sight of John, a serving-man in his father's employ.

"Halloo, John!" he cried, "give me a hand with my valise!"

"Why, Master Jasper!" returned John, in evident surprise, "I didn't know
you were coming home."

"I am not expected," said Jasper. "I came at a moment's notice."

"You're too late for the wedding, Master Jasper."

"For the wedding!" repeated Jasper, his heart sinking at this
confirmation of his worst fears.

"Yes; didn't you know of it?"

"I heard something, but not much. Tell me about it. When did it take
place?"

"At ten o'clock this morning."

"At the house?"

"No; your father and the governess walked over to the church, and were
married private like. There was nobody invited, but we were all
surprised that you didn't come to it."

"I knew nothing about it," said Jasper, sadly.

"It was Miss Thorne's doings, then--leastways, I must say Mrs. Kent's,
now."

"I know it, John. My father would not have treated me that way. How long
has it been going on--the--"

"The courtship? Well, that was all on the side of Miss Thorne, I'm
thinkin'. She wheedled your father into marrying her."

"I wish I had been here."

"Poor man! he felt too weak to resist, and he did it only because she
teased him. I can take my oath of that."

"It is infamous!" said Jasper. "Have they gone away?"

"No; they ain't goin', I've heard. Your father don't feel able to
travel, and the governess--I mean your step-mother--she don't care much.
They're at home now."

"Then I will go up. I suppose they will be surprised to see me."

"Yes, they will, but your father'll be glad. He sets the world by you,
Master Jasper."

"I believe he does, John," said Jasper. "I wish I could have saved him
from this misfortune."

"It's too late now entirely."

"You are right. I don't know but it might be best for me to turn round
and go back again to school without going to the house at all; but I
must face this thing, and see for myself. If you've got nothing else to
do, John, you may carry my valise."

"I'll do it, Master Jasper, directly. You go up to the house, and I'll
be there in a jiffy."

So Jasper walked thoughtfully and sadly homeward.

We must precede him.

In a sunny sitting-room on the second-floor sat Jasper Kent's father in
a luxurious arm-chair. He was barely fifty, but evidently a chronic
invalid. His constitution had been undermined years before by a
residence of several years in Central America, where he had acquired a
fortune, but paid a costly price therefor in the loss of his health.

For years he had done no business other than to take care of his
property, which was amply sufficient to enable him to live luxuriously.
Yet he did not find the time hanging heavily upon his hands. Of a
studious taste, he had surrounded himself with books and pictures. He
received regularly a New York daily paper, and the leading magazines and
reviews, and barring his ill-health, and occasional seasons of pain,
passed his time in a placid and agreeable manner. Circumstances,
perhaps, had fostered a disposition to indolence, and made it more
difficult to resist the artful schemes of Miss Thorne, whom he had
admitted into the house as governess of his little niece, Florence
Grantley, but who had from the first cherished the ambitious design of
making herself mistress of the establishment.

It is needless to recapitulate the steps she took in this direction. It
is enough to chronicle her ultimate success.

We introduce the newly-married pair, as they sit conversing in the
pleasant sitting-room already referred to.

"I think Jasper ought to be at once informed of our marriage," said Mr.
Kent.

"There is no need of haste, in my opinion, my dear," said Mrs. Kent.

"Indeed, he ought to have been present at the ceremony. I am afraid the
poor boy will feel hurt that I should have left him wholly in the dark."

Mrs. Kent's lip curled. Evidently she had no particular feeling for the
"poor boy."

"Lay the whole blame upon me, Mr. Kent," she said. "It was I who advised
it, and I am willing to take the responsibility."

"I know you advised it, my dear," said Mr. Kent, to whom this phrase was
yet new; "but I could not understand why."

"I will explain, and I think you will consider my explanation a good
one. It would have taken Jasper's attention from his studies, and it
might have been some time before he would have been able to resume them
to advantage."

"That may be, but still on an occasion of this kind--"

"If the ceremony had not been so private--wholly out of regard to your
health--of course he should have been recalled. As it is, it is better
on all accounts not to disturb him. Did I tell you that I saw him last
week?"

"Saw Jasper?"

"Yes."

"Was he here? Why did I not see him?" asked Mr. Kent, in surprise.

"It was not here that I saw him--it was at his school."

"At his school! How came you to go there?" inquired her husband in still
greater surprise.

"I will tell you, though I have hitherto kept it a secret, as a matter
of my own. Now, since I am your wife, it is only proper that I should
acquaint you with it. I have a nephew at the same school."

"You have a nephew at Dr. Benton's boarding-school?"

"Yes," answered Mrs. Kent, lowering her voice to a compassionate
inflection. "Poor boy! he has neither father nor mother! He is entirely
dependent upon me. Out of my salary I have paid his expenses ever since
I entered your employ."

"That was generous and kind of you," said her husband, approvingly.
"What is the boy's name?"

"Nicholas Thorne."

"Your brother's son, I suppose?" said Mr. Kent.

"Ye--es," she replied, hesitatingly.

"What is his age?"

"Sixteen. He is about the same age as Jasper. Do I venture too much in
asking you to become his friend?"

Mrs. Kent modulated her voice, as she well knew how to do, to
counterfeit warm and tender feeling, as she proffered this request. Her
nature was feline, and she knew how to conceal her claws.

"You may rely upon my co-operation, my dear," said Mr. Kent, kindly, "in
your noble task."

There was a latent gleam of triumph in Mrs. Kent's eyes as she heard
this promise, which transferred to her husband a burden which had long
been a drain upon her own slender purse. She had dreaded the effect of
this announcement upon her husband, and finally, as we have seen,
thought it best to change the relationship and call Nicholas her nephew,
and not her son. So that difficulty was well surmounted, and the effect
had been to impress Mr. Kent with a sense of her generous and unselfish
devotion.

But her exultation was short-lived. A bustle was heard outside. An
instant later the door was thrown open, and Jasper entered the room,
flushed and excited.




CHAPTER VI.

THE STEP-MOTHER.


"Jasper!" exclaimed his father, in surprise, but showing pleasure,
nevertheless, at his son's unexpected presence.

The boy went straight up to his father, passing within two feet of his
father's wife, but without even looking at her.

"Father!" he burst forth, impulsively, "is it true?"

"Is what true?" asked his father, embarrassed, for he guessed what
Jasper meant.

"Are you married--to her?" pointing to Mrs. Kent, who looked indignant
at the reference.

"Yes, Jasper," answered his father, nervously. "Shake hands with
your--with Mrs. Kent."

He was about to say "your mother," but something in his memory, perhaps
something in his son's face, led him to change the expression.

Jasper did not apparently heed the suggestion. Instead, he said,
reproachfully:

"Why was it, father, that you left me in ignorance of your intention?"

"She thought it best," said his father, in an apologetic tone.

Mrs. Kent spoke for the first time.

"Yes, Jasper, we thought it would only interrupt your studies."

Jasper could not help a slight sneer, as he answered:

"You were very considerate, madam; but it seems to me that such an
important event in my father's life would justify an interruption."

Mrs. Kent repressed her real feelings of anger and vexation, and
answered mildly, and with an affectation of good humor:
