
Dorothy stood grave and silent.

"Oh, Dorothy, is it right for you to go?" exclaimed Effie, who was
watching her friend anxiously.

"Yes," said Dorothy, "it is right. They may possibly be obliged to fill
my place at St. Joseph's. I was only considering that point for a
moment. After all, it is not worth troubling about. I am at your
service, Dr. Staunton. We may require one or two other nurses to help us
if things are as bad as you fear."

"God bless you!" said the doctor. Something very like moisture came into
his eyes. He began to blow his nose violently. "Now, Effie, you will do
your best at home," he said, turning to his daughter. "This way, please,
Miss Fraser."

"Good-by, Effie, dear," said Dorothy. She kissed her friend. The doctor
and the nurse walked toward the dog-cart; he helped her to mount, and
then drove rapidly down the street. The vehicle was soon out of sight.

"I wonder what father will think of Dorothy after this?" thought Effie
to herself. The feeling that her father would really approve of her
friend gave her much consolation. She went back into the house, and as
it was now half-past five, decided that it was not worth while to return
to bed. There was always plenty to be done in this little house with its
overflowing inhabitants, and Effie found heaps to occupy her until it
was time to go into the nursery to help the little nursemaid with her
various duties.

The children always hailed Effie with a scream of delight; they were not
a bit afraid of her, for she was the most indulgent elder sister in the
world, but all the same she managed to make them obey her.

Susan was sent downstairs to get her breakfast, while Effie saw the
elder ones safely through the process of dressing. She took the baby on
her knee, and, removing his night-clothes, put him into his bath, and
dressed him herself quickly and expeditiously. She then carried him into
her mother's room.

Mrs. Staunton had spent a troubled night.

"Is that you, Effie?" she exclaimed, looking at her daughter; "and oh,
there is baby--how sweet he looks! What a splendid nurse you are, my
darling, and what a wonderful comfort to me! Give me my dear little man.
I will take care of him while you see about breakfast."

"How are you this morning, mother?" asked Effie. "Have you had a good
night?"

"Yes, pretty well. I had one or two bad dreams. I could not help
thinking of poor Mrs. Watson and that heart-trouble your father spoke
about. I wonder how she is this morning."

"Now, mother dear," said Effie, "you know father said you were not to
dwell upon that--you must turn your thoughts away from illness of every
sort. I thought we might go for a little drive in the gig this morning."

"But your father will want the gig."

"No, that's just it, he won't."

"What do you mean? Surely he will go out as early as he can to see Mrs.
Watson?"

"No, mother," said Effie, "he won't--not to-day. I have something to
tell you. Now, please don't be frightened; there is nothing to be
frightened about."

Mrs. Staunton was half sitting up in bed; she had thrown a little pale
blue shawl round her shoulders, and held the pretty baby in her arms.
She was a remarkably good-looking woman, a really young-looking woman
for her age, but weakness was written all over her--the weakness of a
frail although loving spirit, and the weakness of extreme bodily
illness, for she was ill, far more ill than her children knew. The
greatest anxiety of the honest doctor's life was connected with his
wife's physical condition. Effie looked at her mother now, and something
of the fear which dwelt in her father's heart seemed to visit her.

"I have something to tell you," she said, "but it is nothing that need
make you the least bit afraid. Father has left you in my charge. He says
I am to look after you, and to do all in my power to help you."

"But what can you mean, Effie? Has your father gone away?"

"Not really away," replied Effie, "for he is close to us, and can come
back if necessary at any moment; but the fact is this: If all is well,
father is not coming home for two or three days. In one way you will be
pleased to hear this, mother. You know how you have wished him to be
called in at The Grange."

"At The Grange!" exclaimed Mrs. Staunton, starting up. "You don't mean
to tell me that the Harveys have sent for your father?"

"Yes, mother, I do; and is not that good news? The little girl is very
ill, and Squire Harvey came over to fetch father last night--that time
when the bell rang so suddenly."

"I remember," said Mrs. Staunton. "I made sure that someone came from
the Watsons'."

"No; it was the Squire who called--Squire Harvey. Father went there and
found the little girl very ill. He came back again this morning, and
took Dorothy Fraser out with him as nurse, and he saw me, and he asked
me to tell you that he would stay at The Grange for a couple of days
until he could pull the child through, and you are on no account to
expect him home, but you are to keep as well and cheerful as possible
for his sake; and Dr. Edwards from Boltonville is to take father's work
for the time. So you see," continued Effie in conclusion, "that the
horse and gig will be at liberty, and we can go for a drive. I thought
we might go to Boltonville, and take baby, and buy some fruit for
preserving. There are sure to be heaps of strawberries at the Bolton
Farm if we drive over early."

All the time Effie was speaking, Mrs. Staunton kept gazing at her. As
the eager words flowed from the young girl's lips, the heart of the
mother seemed to faint within her.

"You," she said, after a pause; her voice trembled, no words could come
for an instant,--"you," she went on,--"Effie, you have not told me what
ails the child?"

"She is very ill, mother; that goes without saying."

"But what ails her? Why should not your father come home?"

Effie thought for a moment. "I will tell about the scarlet fever, but
not about the diphtheria," she said to herself. "Mother is always so
terrified about diphtheria ever since poor little Johnny died of it,
long, long ago. She won't mind scarlet fever so much."

"Why don't you speak, Effie?" exclaimed her mother. "You terrify me with
your grave and silent way."

"There is nothing to be terrified about, mother, but you are weak, and
therefore you get unduly nervous. I was only thinking for a moment
whether you had better know; but of course, if you wish it, you must be
told. The child at The Grange is suffering from scarlet fever."

"Do you think it will spread?"

"Father is very anxious. I heard him telling Dorothy that Mrs. Harvey
had been very imprudent. You know how young she is, mother, and how
beautiful; and she has been with this dear little child day and night
from the beginning, not knowing in the least what ailed her, and Mrs.
Harvey is expecting another baby, and of course father is anxious."

"I should think he is," cried Mrs. Staunton, drawn completely out of
herself by the tragedy conveyed in these words. "Oh, poor young thing,
poor young mother! I wish I were strong and well myself, that I might go
and help her. She will have a bad time. She will have an awful risk when
her baby arrives, Effie. Well, my darling, we can do nothing but pray
for them all. There is One who can guide us even through dark days. Go
down, Effie, and get breakfast, and then come back to me. I am very
tired this morning, and will lie still for a little, now that I have got
such a dear, useful daughter to take my place for me."

Effie put on a bright smile, and turned toward the door.

As she was leaving the room, her mother called out after her:

"There is one good thing, there is no diphtheria in the case; nothing
terrifies me like that."

Effie shut the door hastily without reply.




CHAPTER III.


Meanwhile Dr. Staunton and Dorothy drove quickly to The Grange. It was
still very early in the morning, and when they arrived at the great hall
door it was opened by Squire Harvey himself.

"That's right, Dr. Staunton!" he exclaimed. "I am so glad you have come.
Oh, and I see you have brought a nurse. What a blessing! Now, perhaps,
you will induce my wife to take some rest. How lucky that you were able
to find a nurse in a little place like Whittington!"

"I am very fortunate indeed," replied the doctor in his hearty voice.
"Nurse Fraser has been trained at St. Joseph's, and happens to be
staying at Whittington for a brief holiday. She has most kindly
consented to undertake the case until we can get fresh assistance from
London."

"I will stay as long as I am wanted," said Dorothy in her quiet voice.
"If I can be shown to a room for a moment to take off my bonnet and
cloak, I will go immediately afterward to the little patient."

Dorothy's voice was perfectly cool and calm. She did not speak in the
constrained whisper which the poor Squire thought it right to use. There
was an everyday tone in her voice which at this moment was absolutely
refreshing, and the sympathy in her blue eyes just gave the right
quality to the cool tones.

The doctor looked at her with unconcealed admiration. "That girl is one
in ten thousand," he said to himself. "She will keep us all on our
mettle, I can see, but there is plenty of heart underneath that cool
exterior."

The great luxurious house looked neglected and wretched. Although the
father and mother were up, and one or two servants were assisting in the
sickroom, the greater number of the servants were still in bed. There
was no one to take Miss Fraser to a room, and the Squire looked round
him in hopeless bewilderment.

Dorothy saw at a glance that she must take matters into her own hands.

"I do not want to trouble you," she said. "I can put my cloak and bonnet
in here. I should like to put on my cap and apron before I go
upstairs."

She opened a door as she spoke, and went into a room where all the
blinds were down, took off her outdoor things, and, taking a cap out of
her bag, slipped it over her hair, tied on a white apron, and then stood
ready and capable, and fresh and bright, before the Squire and the
doctor.

"Now, come straight upstairs with me," said the doctor.

They went up together; Squire Harvey followed them at a distance. When
the doctor reached the first landing, he opened a green baize door, shut
it behind him, and walked down a long, cool corridor which led in the
direction of the nurseries.

"Now, look here," he said, turning and facing Dorothy, "the great thing
that we have both to do is to keep this terrible disease from spreading.
One or two of the servants have been with the case from the first; the
father and mother have been in and out of the room as freely and
unconstrainedly as if the child had only a cold the matter with her; if
they are likely to take the infection, the mischief is probably done
already; but, on the chance of this not being so, I shall beg of the
Squire to come into this part of the house as seldom as possible. And as
to Mrs. Harvey, she must be got away; that is your task, nurse. You will
allow me to call you nurse, won't you?"

"Certainly. Call me Nurse Dorothy; I like that name best. I am called
that by the children at St. Joseph's."

"Very well. I am sure you will be a blessing here; but a great deal of
tact must be used. The position of affairs is extremely difficult."

"I will do my best," replied the nurse. The doctor gave her another look
of complete satisfaction, and they entered the room where the little
patient lay between life and death.

A small cot had been drawn almost into the center of the room, the
blinds were down, there was a sense of desolation, and a heavy smell in
the air.

"Who has shut these windows?" said the doctor in a voice of disapproval.

He went straight across the room, drew up one of the blinds, and opened
the window two or three inches. A fresh current of air immediately
improved the close atmosphere.

When he spoke, and when he and Nurse Fraser came into the room, a
fair-haired young woman, who was on her knees by the side of the cot,
started up suddenly, and gazed at them out of a pair of wide blue eyes.
Her cheeks were deeply flushed, her lips were parched and dry.

"Oh, doctor," she said, staggering toward Dr. Staunton, "you have come
back. What a blessing! She is asleep now; perhaps she is better."

The doctor went over and looked at the child. She was a little creature
of not more than five years of age. In health she may have been pretty,
she probably was; but now, the shadowy little face, the emaciated hands,
the hot, dry, cracked lips, were the reverse of beautiful. They were all
that was pathetic, however; and Dorothy's heart went straight out to the
baby who lay there in such suffering and weakness.

The doctor looked at her, and gave a significant glance toward Mrs.
Harvey.

Dorothy took her cue at once.

"I have come to nurse your dear little girl, madam," she said. "Dr.
Staunton has brought me. I have a great deal of experience, as I am
superintendent of one of the children's wards at St. Joseph's Hospital.
I think you may trust your little girl to me; but first of all, let me
take you to your room and put you to bed."

"Put me to bed!" said Mrs. Harvey, with a laugh which jarred on
everyone's nerves. "I have not been in bed for nights. I could not
sleep. When the doctor tells me that Freda is out of danger, then I may
be able to sleep, but not before--not before."

"Whether you sleep or not," continued Dorothy, "you must come and lie
down. You are completely worn out, and can do no good whatever to the
child in your present condition. While she sleeps it is surely right
that you should sleep too. Come, I will promise to call you if you are
wanted."

"Yes, dear madam, let me entreat of you to go to bed," said the doctor.

The door was opened at this moment, and the Squire came in.

"Now Elfreda," he said, coming up to his wife, "you will go and take
some rest, won't you?"

She looked from him to the nurse, and from the nurse to the doctor, and
then her tired, bright eyes fell upon the little parched face lying on
the pillow.

"I know she is going to die!" she said, with a kind of broken sob. "I
cannot leave her. How can anyone dare to ask me to leave my little child
just now?" Her agitation became more terrible each moment. She was
evidently on the verge of hysterics.

Dorothy walked straight from the nursery to a sort of dressing-room
which lay beyond. There was a small bed there, which was sometimes
occupied by the under-nurse. A scared-looking, tired young woman was
standing in this room. Dorothy gave her quick directions. "Get clean
sheets, and make this bed up immediately," she said.

The girl started, but looked relieved at having anything explicit to do.
She ran off to obey, and Dorothy came back to the sickroom.

"Hush!" she said, going up to Mrs. Harvey, who was standing shaking from
head to foot with dry sobs. "You must not give way like this; it is very
wrong. Remember you have not only yourself to think of." She bent
forward and whispered a word in the young mother's ear. Mrs. Harvey
started, and with a violent effort controlled herself.

"I see that you must not be separated from your child," continued
Dorothy--"at least, not at present. I am having a bed made up for you in
the dressing-room, where you will be within call."

"Ah, yes, that's better," said the poor lady--"that's much better."

"Come, then, at once," said Dorothy. She held out her hand. Mrs. Harvey
crossed the room. She and Dorothy disappeared into the dressing-room.

In ten minutes the nurse came back to Dr. Staunton. "I have undressed
her, and she is in bed," she said. "She is very weak, and in a terribly
nervous condition; she ought to sleep for hours. Will you prepare a
composing draught for her it once?"

"Yes," said the doctor; "I have brought some medicines with me."

He went out of the room, and returned in a minute or two with a small
dose in a glass.

Dorothy took it into the dressing-room. Mrs. Harvey's tired eyes were
shut already.

"Now, you're to drink this," said Dorothy, raising her head slightly.
"Drink this--don't open your eyes. Trust. Lean on me, if you like.
Believe me, that nothing would induce me not to call you if your child
were in real danger, but you must sleep now--sleep, and try to believe
that all will be well."

