with an easy mind."




CHAPTER XIX.

KITTY TELLS THE TRUTH.


Early the next morning Kitty received her telegram. It certainly was not
at all calculated to soothe her. She was restless and miserable before;
now her hands shook so violently that she could scarcely eat her
breakfast.

Alice acted somewhat the part of a jailer; she had to convey the
disgraced girl to Middleton School.

"I am ill; I won't go," said Kitty, bursting into tears.

"You had much better come, Kitty," said Alice, speaking almost kindly
for the first time in her life; she really pitied poor Kitty at that
moment. "If you will only take your punishment patiently it will soon be
over, and I know for a fact," she continued, "that many of the girls are
only too anxious to make it up to you by and by."

"Oh, it's not that," said Kitty; "it is because I am so wretched. I have
a great trouble at home; but there, there's no use in talking to you
about it, Alice."

"So you always say," answered Alice. "Whenever I want to be the least
bit good to you, you put me off; but never mind, I am sure I can do
without your friendship. Anyhow, I think you must come to school unless
you are so ill that mother will be obliged to send for the doctor."

"Oh, I don't want that," said Kitty, "I never had a doctor in my life.
If you'll wait for me, Alice, I'll go upstairs and put on my hat."

She rushed to her room, flung herself on her knees for a moment by her
bedside, and uttered a frantic prayer to Heaven.

"Oh! God, in your mercy, keep Laurie from doing anything desperate,"
cried the unhappy girl. She then joined Alice downstairs. Her face was
white; there were heavy black lines under her eyes; she had never looked
prettier, more pathetic, more likely to win sympathy from the other
girls.

At prayers that morning all eyes were directed to Kitty Malone. She was
not allowed to sit with the others, but was given, a place on the bench
with the teachers. Here she faced the rest of the school. It would have
been a cruel position for another girl; but it did not matter to Kitty,
for she saw no one present. Her eyes, with that queer inward look in
them, were gazing straight, not at the scene before her, but at the old
home in Ireland. The squire, whom she so passionately loved, roused to
the last extremity of anger; the boy, whose heart was hers, crushed,
trapped, imprisoned, his liberty taken from him. Kitty trembled from
head to foot; she could scarcely restrain her terrible emotion.

After school she accompanied the others to the classroom, but in
absolute silence. She was given her usual lessons to do, but at a table
by herself. Her punishment was to be carried out in all its fullness;
but, dreadful as it would seem to most, it did not touch her at all
to-day. Her head ached, her eyes felt dim. Laurie's telegram, which lay
in her pocket, seemed to scorch into the very depths of her heart. She
had not even been allowed to answer it; the whole weight of her trouble
lay unrelieved upon her. The poor child was unaccustomed to such
anguish, and her self-control was in danger moment by moment of giving
way.

As she strove to get that dull piece of English history into her head,
as she endeavored to follow the rules of syntax, as the knowledge that
she never, never to the longest day of her life, would understand what
was meant by the possessive case, alongside with these feeble little
efforts to follow her lessons, ran the dark thought of how, by what
possible means, she could help Laurie. And more and more as the time
went on she felt that she could not keep her promise to Elma. Elma had
been cruel to her; she had borrowed her money when she knew she had not
the most remote chance of paying it back; she had spent it according to
her own saying in the most frivolous way. Now, for the first time, Kitty
learned to despise dress. How could Elma spend the money which was to
save Laurie in anything so contemptible as ribbons and finery? Kitty
looked down at her own neatly-appointed clothes; her perfect little
shoes peeped out from beneath the frill of her dress. Notwithstanding
her misery she was as neat as usual in her attire; but now she had no
heart to appreciate gay clothes, good looks, pretty ribbons--any of the
things which usually delighted her. Laurie seemed to cry to her; she
fancied she could hear his voice coming across the waters to her
ears--Laurie, who had always trusted to her, who, strong as he was, was
not quite so strong as Kitty when scrapes and troubles were about. Oh!
if only she could go to him! If only she might relieve her feelings and
tell the exact truth to Miss Sherrard! What kept her back? Nothing
whatever but the thought of Elma. She had given Elma a promise, and,
tempted as she was, she must not break it.

As this thought came to her she remembered that she had only promised
Elma to keep the secret until after morning school. That time would soon
be up.

"Once Miss Sherrard knows I am certain she will help me," thought Kitty,
"though I don't want to excuse myself; yet I know that a great deal of
the blame of my proceedings will be lifted from my shoulders to Elma's.
Why should I go through all the suffering, and Elma sit there looking so
calm, and quiet, and still?"

As these thoughts rushed through Kitty's mind she glanced up for the
first time, and calmly surveyed the great room full of her
fellow-students. As if with one impulse all the girls raised their eyes
and looked back at her. There was pity on most of the faces, amusement
on a few, curiosity on a few others; but on Elma's face alone was an
expression of intense anxiety and misery. Kitty had the kindest heart in
the world. The moment she saw this expression the idea of betraying Elma
melted from her mind.

"She does look wretched," she said to herself. "I must not speak to her;
I dare not, and yet--yet--I should like her to know that I am not going
to be hard on her."

Kitty tore off a piece of her exercise book and managed, when she
thought no one would see, to write a little note to Elma. In this she
said, "Don't be afraid, Elma; I have made up my mind not to tell."

This note she twisted up, and, as the girls were going to the playground
for recess, managed to flash an intelligent glance toward Elma. Elma
approached close to her table, Kitty stretched out her hand, and Elma's
fingers were just about to close over the note, when, by an unlucky
chance, there came a breeze through the window, and the note, for some
inconceivable reason, fluttered from Kitty's hand to the floor. In an
instant Miss Worrick had seen it. She was just stepping forward when
Elma like a flash caught it up and tore it into fragments. She would not
for the world have the note seen. Miss Worrick, filled with anger, came
up to Kitty.

"You are a bad girl, the worst girl I know," she said. "You are not even
honorable. Did you not give your parole that you would not hold
communication with another girl in the school, and yet you have been
trying to communicate with Elma Lewis by means of writing?"

"Writing is not speaking," said Kitty, now standing up very erect and
proud, and replying to Miss Worrick as pertly as she could.

"Don't answer me, miss; you grow worse and worse. Elma Lewis, do you
know anything about that note?"

Kitty looked full at Elma. If she was going to be true to Elma, would
Elma be equally true to her?"

"I know nothing about it," said Elma promptly.

Kitty's eyes filled with withering scorn; an expression of disdain
curled her pretty lips.

"You are quite certain, Elma? Kitty Malone seems to have a great anxiety
to communicate with you. Can you throw any light on the scrape she has
got into?"

"I know nothing whatever about her secrets; I--I have nothing to do with
them," said Elma in an agitated voice, which she endeavored in vain to
render calm.

Gwin Harley, who had stopped on her way out of the classroom, paused to
listen to Elma's words.

Kitty's face was now white as death. She did not glance at Elma; she was
looking the other way.

"Leave us, girls," said Miss Worrick.

The next moment the great classroom was empty, with the exception of
Miss Worrick and Kitty Malone. Kitty was standing upright as a dart.

"Take me to Miss Sherrard; I want to speak to her," she said.

"I am certainly going to take you to her. You are a very, very wicked
girl. I doubt not you will be expelled."

"Oh, I hope I shall," said Kitty. "I should like nothing in all the
world better."

"You would? You are quite incorrigible. Do you know, you wretched girl,
what it means?"

"No," answered Kitty; "I wait for you to tell me. What does it mean,
Miss Worrick?"

"That you are tainted for life, disgraced for life. Wherever you go it
will be always remembered to you that your conduct was so bad at school
that you were obliged to be expelled."

"But that won't matter in old Ireland," said Kitty with a hollow,
forced laugh.

"Yes, it will; it will break your father's heart. There are no people so
proud as the Irish. They can stand a good deal; but any cloud on their
honor----"

"Ah, you are right," cried Kitty, standing still, and a queer change
coming over her face. "Our honor--no one ever touched that yet."

"It will have a nice blow when you are dismissed from Middleton School,"
said Miss Worrick, glad to find a point in Kitty's hitherto invulnerable
armor. "Come with me at once, you bad girl. I must explain your conduct
to Miss Sherrard."

"I have something on my own account to say to Miss Sherrard," answered
Kitty in a proud voice; "something which will explain a good deal."

"I am glad to hear it; but I scarcely think any words of yours can
remove the stigma on your character. But come; I have no time to argue
with you further."

Miss Worrick now led the way into Miss Sherrard's little sitting-room.
Miss Sherrard was standing near the window; she turned quickly when she
saw Miss Worrick, and a displeased and withal a troubled glance filled
her eyes as they rested upon Kitty."

"Anything fresh?" she said, turning to the teacher with a weary
expression in her voice.

"Only just what I expected," said Miss Worrick with bitterness. "Kitty
Malone is not to be trusted. Yesterday she gave her word of honor----"

"I didn't," interrupted Kitty.

"Kitty my dear, allow your teacher to speak."

"She gave her word of honor, or equivalent to it, that she would submit
to the punishment which you rightly inflicted upon her. Well, I found
her just now in the act of smuggling a note into Elma Lewis' hand."

"Oh, but this is very bad, Kitty," said Miss Sherrard. "Did you not know
what your word of honor meant?"

"I never promised anything," replied Kitty. "You spoke; but I was
silent."

"Pardon me, my dear; that is begging the question. You were told that
you were not to communicate with any of your fellow-pupils. Your silence
signified consent. Kitty, I am ashamed of you."

"As you know so much you may as well know all," said Kitty, desperation
in her tone. "I did far worse than you think. Last night I went out
again after dark by myself to see Elma Lewis. I had an interview with
her. I talked to her, and she talked to me. That was not exactly her
fault; for I forced her to speak. Now, you know how very bad I am. Expel
me if you wish. I know you will after this. I am in dreadful disgrace. I
only wish I were dead."

"Leave us, Miss Worrick," said Miss Sherrard.

The door was closed behind the governess; and the head-mistress, taking
one of Kitty's cold hands, led her to a seat near herself on the sofa.

"There is more behind," she said. "Kitty, you must tell me the truth."

"I long to tell you," answered Kitty. "A short time back I had made up
my mind to conceal it because the telling would make another girl
miserable--miserable for life. Now my feelings are changed."

"I am glad that you are at last willing to confide in me," said Miss
Sherrard in a kinder tone. "Tell me everything, Kitty, and as quickly as
you can."

Thus counseled, Kitty's reserve absolutely gave way. The whole miserable
story was quickly revealed: Elma Lewis' request for money; Kitty's
generous response; Laurie's passionate and anguished letter; Kitty's
desire to help him; her reasons, which had almost driven her mad, for
seeking Elma; her desperate resolve at last to go to her late at night;
then Elma's passionate beseeching of her to keep the secret; Kitty's
promise that she would do so until after morning school that day; then
her further resolve, when she saw the look of misery on Elma's face, to
keep it altogether even at the cost of breaking Laurie's heart; then
Elma's conduct when the note was discovered.

"I scorn her now," said Kitty. "I don't regard any promise I ever made
to her. I am glad to tell. She is false, cowardly, and I scorn her. Miss
Sherrard, you know everything; expel me if you must."

"Yes, I know everything," replied Miss Sherrard. She sat still for a few
moments, lost in anxious thought. She blamed Kitty still, but she also
deeply pitied her. Her feelings toward Elma were so strong that she
could scarcely trust herself to speak of them at the present moment.

"My honor is gone, and my heart is broken," continued Kitty. "Of course
you will expel me after this; and, indeed, I want to go home. Please,
Miss Sherrard, let me go home; I cannot stay any longer at school."

"My dear Kitty," said Miss Sherrard, "I am very sorry for you. I am
certainly glad at last to know the truth. You, poor child, have been
more sinned against than sinning. I cannot tell you what I think about
Elma. Such a girl does more mischief in a school than twenty like you.
Stay, my dear; stop crying. Kitty, Kitty, what is it?"

"I feel nearly mad--Laurie is in such trouble. May I not at least answer
his telegram?"

"Yes, here is a telegraph form. Fill in what you like; I will send it at
once to the post office."

"Miss Sherrard, would it be possible for you to lend me the money?"

Miss Sherrard shook her head.

"I could not do it, Kitty; nor would it be right. Your brother has done
distinctly wrong; and if you telegraph to him now I hope you will
counsel him to go straight to your father and confess everything. There
is never the least use in concealment where wrong-doing is concerned, my
dear."

But Kitty's eyes had now blazed again with renewed passion.

"You are not a Malone nor an Irishwoman," she cried. "You do not know
Ireland, or you would not speak in that tone. I counsel Laurie to tell
father what he did to poor Paddy Wheel-about! I counsel him to say that
he took the old man's coat--stole it from him! Miss Sherrard, you don't
know father. Laurie did it, it is true, in a fit of bravado; but father
would never understand. He would be furious, wild; Le would punish him
severely. Oh, I must get that money somehow, in some fashion!"

"Kitty, you are speaking disrespectfully," said Miss Sherrard, "and I
cannot allow it. I am sorry for you, my dear; you are dreadfully
overcome at present. Go home now; I will see you again in the
afternoon."

Poor Kitty left the room without even bidding her teacher good-by.




CHAPTER XX.

AN EYE-OPENER.


In her own room the miserable child fell on her knees, and gave way to a
burst of passionate weeping. She cried as she had never cried in the
whole course of her life before; her tears seemed as though they could
not cease. She was so exhausted at last that, kneeling by her little
bed, she fell into a sound sleep. In her sleep she dreamed that she was
home again; but all was confusion, worry, distress. Laurie was going to
a school in England; Laurie's heart was broken. Old Paddy Wheel-about
was dead; the squire was so upset and so angry that he would not even
allow Kitty herself to comfort him. Aunt Honora was grumbling and going
from room to room in the old Castle. Aunt Bridget was talking about
dress, and scolding Kitty with regard to the state of her wardrobe.
Kitty's head ached, and she felt a sense of irritation.

"And it's so pretty," said Aunt Honora. "Those ruffles round the skirt
are done in such a dainty manner, and--oh, I won't disturb you if you'll
allow me just to take the pattern. I can in a moment--don't move, don't
move!"

Kitty opened her eyes in some bewilderment, and gazed full into the fat
and somewhat red face of Carrie Lewis. It was Carrie's voice she had
heard, piercing through her dreams. It was Carrie who was bending by
her side and holding up a length of her skirt in her hand.
