
"I'm Priscilla Proctor, called Peachy for short. Oh, yes, I knew all
about you beforehand, although you happen to be the newest girl. Dad
wrote me a whole page--wonderful for him!--and said he'd stayed at your
house in London, and I was to tack myself on to you and show you round,
and see you didn't fret and all the rest of it. Are you wanting a crony,
temporary or otherwise? Then here I am at your service. Link an arm and
we'll parade the place. I guess by the time we've finished there's not
much you won't know about the Villa Camellia."

"Have you been here long?" asked Irene, accepting the proffered arm with
alacrity, and submitting to be led away by her cicerone.

"Just a year. Cried myself to a puddle when I first came, but I like it
now. I didn't realize who you were when you first arrived, or I'd have
given you a tip or two straight away. Thank goodness you're fairly in
favor with Rachel at any rate. Any one who starts by offending her has a
bad term. I don't envy Mabel Hughes. That girl will get a few
eye-openers before she's much older, and serve her right. She rooms with
you? Well, I'm sorry for you. I wish there was a spare bed in our
dormitory, but we're full up to overflowing. Now then, I've brought you
out by the side door to show you what we consider the best view of the
garden. Ah, I thought it would make your eyes pop out! It's _some_ view,
isn't it?"

The garden of the Villa Camellia was certainly one of the greatest
assets of the school, and to Irene, who had been transported straight
from the desolation of a London suburb in January, it seemed like a
vision of a different world. The long terrace, with its marble
balustrade, edged a high cliff that overtopped the sea, while at present
the setting sun was lighting up the white houses of the distant outline
of Naples, and was touching the purple slopes of Vesuvius with gold.
Pillars and archways formed a pergola, from which hung roses and
festoons of the trumpetflower; from the groves near at hand came the
sweet strong scent of orange blossoms, and the little favorites of an
English spring, forget-me-nots, pink daisies, and pansies, lifted
contented heads from the border below. In the basin of the great marble
fountain white arum lilies were blooming, geraniums trailed from tall
vases, and palms, bamboos, and other exotics backed the row of lemon
trees at the end of the paved walk. Here and there marble benches were
arranged round tables in specially constructed arbors.

"These are our summer classrooms," explained Peachy. "When it's
blazingly hot we do lessons here early in the mornings, and it's
ripping. No, we don't use them at this time of the year, because the
marble is cold to sit upon, and the garden is damp really, although it
looks so jolly. You should see it in a sirocco wind! You wouldn't want
to have classes outside then, you bet! It's luck you're in the
Transition form. If you'd been one of Miss Rodger's elect eleven, or one
of Miss Brewster's lambs, I'd have had to chum with you by stealth. I'd
have managed it somehow, of course, to please Dad, but it isn't done
here openly. School etiquette is like the law of the Medes and Persians.
We keep to our own forms. Hello! There's Sheila Yonge. Sheila! If you
can find any Camellia Buds that aren't playing tennis bring them along
right here for a little powwow with Irene."

"Is she a 'buddy' yet?" whispered Sheila.

"Of course not! She's only been here a few hours. What a dear old silly
you are. Hunt up some of that crew all the same, and I'm yours forever.
Don't you understand the situation? Well, Irene's folks entertained Dad
in London and were just lovely to him--nursed him when he was sick and
took him round the shows when he got well. He's been bursting with
gratitude ever since, and he wrote and told me Irene was coming here and
I must pay her out--no, pay her back--pour coals of fire on her
head--Great Scott, I'm getting my similes mixed! I mean give her a right
down good time as far as I can, and make her think the Villa Camellia is
a dandy place. Twiggez-vous, cherie?"

"I twig!" laughed Sheila. "I'll beat up all I can muster," and she ran
lightly away along the terrace.

"A decent girl, though a little hard of comprehension," Peachy nodded
after her. "Doesn't she look adorable in that blue tam-o'-shanter?"

"She's awfully pretty!" agreed Irene readily.

"She'd be the beauty of the school if she'd any idea how to use her
advantages," sighed Peachy. "Give me her complexion and that classical
nose and--well, I guess I'd blaze out into a cinema star before I'd done
with life. I hope she won't be all day raking a few girls together.
She's not what you'd call quick. I've misjudged her. Here she comes with
half a dozen at least--and, oh, no, Sheila! You don't mean to say you've
brought candy? Well, you _are_ a sport! Let's squat under the mimosa
tree and hand it round."

The little group of Peachy's favorite friends who settled themselves
under the yellow mimosa bush to suck taffy and watch the flaming sunset
were all afterwards intimately bound up with Irene's school career. Each
was such a distinct personality that she sorted them out fairly
accurately on that first evening, and decided the particular order in
which they would rank in her affections.

There was Jess Cameron, a jolly Scottish lassie. She rolled her r's
when she spoke, and was a trifle matter-of-fact and practical, but was
evidently the dependable anchor of the rest of the scatter-brained crew,
the one who made the most sensible suggestions, and to whom--though they
teased her a little and called her "Grannie"--they all turned in the end
for help and advice. Jess was slightly out of her element in a southern
setting. Her appropriate background was moorland and heather and gray
loch, and driving clouds and a breeze with fine mist in it, that would
make you want to wrap a plaid round your shoulders and turn to the
luxury of a peat fire. Quite unconsciously she suggested all these
things. Peachy once described her as a living incarnation of one of
Scott's novels, for she was steeped in old traditions and legends and
superstitions, and could tell tales in the gloaming that sent eerie
shivers down the spines of her listeners, or would recite ballads with a
swing that took one back to the days of wandering minstrels. She was not
a girl to make a fuss over anybody, and she did not greet Irene with the
least effusion, but her plain "If you're a friend of Peachy's I'm glad
to see you," was genuine, and better than any amount of gush. Jess
undoubtedly had her faults; she was what her chums called "too
cock-sure," and she was apt to be severe in her judgments, flashing into
the righteous wrath of one whose standards are high, but her very
imperfections were "virtues gane a-gley," and she was a considerable
force in the molding of public opinion at the Villa Camellia.

If Jess, calm, canny, and reliable, stood for the spirit of the North,
attractive, persuasive, fascinating little Delia Watts represented the
South. She came from California, and was as quick and bright as a
humming-bird, constantly in harmless mischief, but seldom getting into
any serious trouble. Her highly strung temperament found school
restrictions irksome, and she was apt to blaze out into odd pranks which
in other girls might have met with sterner punishment. But Miss Morley
had a soft corner for Delia, and, though she did not exactly favor her,
she certainly made allowances for her excitability and her strongly
emotional disposition.

"Delia's like a marionette--always dancing to some hidden string," the
teacher remarked once to Miss Rodgers. "She mayn't be strong-minded but
she's immensely warm-hearted, and if we can only pull the love-string
she'll act the part we want. You can't force her into prim behavior;
she's as much a child of nature as the birds, and if you clip her wings
altogether you take away from her the very gift that perhaps God meant
her to use. Let me have the handling of the little sky-rocket, and I'll
do my best to keep her within bounds, but she's not the disposition to
'be made an example of' or to be set on the 'stool of repentance.' Five
minutes with Delia in private is worth more than a long public
admonition. You've only to look at her face to know her type."

And Miss Rodgers, who stood no nonsense from really naughty and
turbulent girls, yielded in this case, and left the exclusive management
of Delia in the hands of her partner.

Of the seven damsels who sat under the yellow feathery flowers of the
mimosa bush, three of them--Peachy, Jess, and Delia--talked so hard and
continuously that none of the others had a chance to chip in with
anything more than an occasional yes or no. Irene realized in a vague
way that Esther Cartmel was plain and stodgy looking, but that every now
and then a world of light suddenly flashed into her eyes, and
transfigured her for the brief moment; that Sheila Yonge giggled at all
Peachy's remarks, and that Mary Fergusson was a pale and weak copy of
Jess, and slavishly followed her lead in everything. It was the seventh
member of the little party, however, who particularly attracted her
attention. Lorna Carson was quiet, probably from sheer lack of
opportunity to speak, but her pale face was interesting and her dark
eyes met Irene's with a curious questioning glance. It was almost as if
she were asking "Have we known each other before?" Irene could not help
looking at her, and ransacking the side cupboards of her memory to try
to light upon some forgotten clew as to why the face should seem half
familiar.

"Have I seen her in London? Or is she like some one else? No, I can't
fix her at all. Surely I must have dreamed about her," mused Irene,
while aloud she said, almost as if compelled to speak:

"Have you been long at school here? Are you English, or American, or
colonial, or what?"

"A little bit of anything you like," smiled Lorna. "Rachel gets very
muddled about me. I've such a sneaking weakness for Naples that I
believe she thinks I'm an Italian at heart. That's a crime Rachel
absolutely can't forgive. 'Foreign' is the last word in her vocabulary."

"So I gathered when she made me take that oath. I suppose she's head
girl and that's why she rules the roost? Is she decent or does she keep
you petrified? I don't know whether I'm expected to say 'Bow-wow,' or to
listen in respectful humility when she deigns to notice me."

"You'd better not have any 'bow-wows' with Rachel," broke in Peachy,
"though you just jolly well have to wag your tail the way she wants.
She's not bad on the whole, but rather a tyrant, and it would do her all
the good in the world if some day somebody had the courage to knock
sparks out of her. We do what we can in a mild way," (here the other
chuckled) "but she's got the ears of both Miss Rodgers and Miss Morley,
and if you go on the rampage against her you only land yourself in a
scrape. Of course, for purposes of protection the Transition girls have
to unite and----"

"Peachy! Take care!" exclaimed Jess warningly.

Peachy blushed crimson under her freckles.

"I wasn't telling anything!" she retorted. "I suppose Irene----"

"_Do_ shut up!"

"Well Agnes said herself----"

"It doesn't matter what Agnes said."

"She's fixed----"

"Peachy Proctor, if you blab like this you'll be tarred and feathered.
Girl alive, can't you keep a still tongue in your head? If you'd lived
in the Middle Ages you'd have ended your days in a dungeon!"

Jess spoke hotly, and, by the general scandalized look on the faces of
the others, Irene judged that luckless Peachy must have been on the
verge of betraying some secret. She tactfully turned the conversation
with a remark upon the beauty of the sunset, and the clanging of the
garden bell opportunely broke up the gathering, and sent the girls
hurrying helter-skelter along the terrace in the direction of the house.
Irene paused for a moment to look back at the sea and the sky, and the
distant twinkling lights, and to curtsy to the crescent moon that hung
like a good omen in the dome of blue. There was a scent of fragrant
lemon blossoms in the air, and she trod fallen rose petals under her
feet. Suddenly a remembrance of the desolation of Miss Gordon's garden
in a February fog swept across her mental vision. Whatever trials she
might encounter here--and she did not expect her new life to be absolute
Paradise--the environment of this school in the south was perfect and
would make up for many disadvantages.

"Give me sunshine and flowers and I'll always worry on somehow," she
murmured, plucking a little crimson rose, and tucking it into her dress
for a mascot, then ran with flying footsteps under the orange trees to
catch up with her companions, who were already mounting the marble steps
that led to the Villa Camellia.




CHAPTER IV

A Secret Sorority

The dormitories at the Villa Camellia were among the main features of
the establishment, and were a source of considerable pride and
satisfaction to the principals, Miss Rodgers and Miss Morley. They were
always shown to parents as the very latest and newest development of
school arrangements. Some of them were on the second story and some were
on the third, but all had French windows opening onto long verandas on
which were placed large pots of geraniums or oleanders. The walls were
covered with striped Italian papers, the frieze being color-washed and
decorated with designs of flowers or birds, the woodwork was white, the
beds were enameled white, and the blankets, instead of being cream or
yellow as they are in England, were all of a uniform shade of pale blue,
with blue eider-downs to match. The whole of the house was heated by
radiators, so that the dormitories were always warm, and were used as
studies by the older girls, who did most of their preparation there. A
table with ink-pots stood in the middle of each room, and a large notice
enjoining, "Silence during study hours" hung as a warning over every
fireplace.

Irene was given a vacant bed in No. 3 on the second floor, and found
herself in company with Elsie Craig, Mabel Hughes, and Lorna Carson. For
the first two she felt no attraction, but the last excited her interest
and curiosity. There was an air of mystery about Lorna; she asked
questions but gave little information in return on the subject of her
own concerns. Her bright dark eyes were unfathomable, and she "kept
herself to herself" with a reserved dignity not very common among
schoolgirls of her age. Irene, who loved to chatter, found Lorna a ready
listener, and, although the confidence was not reciprocated and in
consequence the friendship seemed likely to be rather one-sided, it was
a friendship all the same from the very start. At the end of the week,
moreover, something important happened to cement it.

For the first seven days of her residence at the Villa Camellia Irene
had felt herself "goods on approval." Peachy Proctor and her chums had
indeed given her a welcome, but afterwards they had held back a little
as if testing her before offering further intimacy. There seemed to be
some secret bond amongst them, some alliance carefully hidden from the
general public. She caught nods, signs, mysterious words, and veiled
allusions, all of which were instantly suppressed when her presence was
noticed. On the eighth day after arrival she found a note inside her
desk. It was marked--

                           PRIVATE

          This must be opened in _absolute seclusion_

                             and

             its contents must be treated with the

                  _Strictest Confidence_

A crowded classroom, with inquisitive form-mates ready to peep over her
shoulder, did not seem the congenial atmosphere for the opening of the
missive, so Irene was obliged to curb her curiosity until mid-morning
"interval," when she gulped her glass of milk hastily, took her portion
of biscuits, and, avoiding conversation, hurried down the garden to the
seclusion of a stone arbor. Here she tore open the envelope, and drew
forth a large sheet of exercise paper. On it was printed in bold black
letters:

"You are elected a member of the Sorority of Camellia Buds. Please
present yourself for initiation to-night at 8.10 prompt in No. 13.
Strictest secrecy enjoined."

There was no signature, but Irene gave a smile of comprehension.
Dormitory No. 13 was shared by Peachy Proctor, Jess Cameron, Delia
Watts, and Mary Fergusson. There was, therefore, little doubt but that
she was to be received into the secret society of whose existence she
had already gathered some hints.

"I'll be there at 8.10," she whispered to Peachy, as they trooped into
the French class.

"Right-o!" replied that light-hearted damsel. "Just one warning--don't
be scared at anything that happens; it's all in fun! Don't say I told
you, though. No, I can't explain. I'm not allowed. You'll soon find
out."

Peachy shook off Irene's company as if in a hurry to get rid of her
before she asked any more questions, so there was nothing to be done but
wait in patience until the evening. Supper was at 7.30, and from 8 till
half past the girls did as they chose. Those who wished to study might
take the extra time for preparation, but work was not obligatory, and it
was an understood thing that in the interval between supper and "set
recreation" visits might be paid to other dormitories, and that so long
as no noise reached the ears of the prefects, anybody disposed to be
frivolous might indulge in a little harmless fun.

Irene's wrist-watch was not a reliable timepiece, having bad habits of
galloping and then suddenly losing, so to-night she did not trust to it,
but sat in the hall with her eyes on the big white-faced clock. At
exactly nine and a half minutes past eight she ran upstairs and tapped
at the door of dormitory 13. There were sounds of scuffling inside and
an agitated voice squealed:

"Wait a minute."

But after a few moments quiet reigned and somebody else called:

"Come in!"

Feeling rather as if she were awaiting initiation into some Nihilist
association Irene entered the room. As she did so a bandage was clapped
over her eyes and she was led forward blindfolded. It was only after an
impressive pause that the handkerchief was removed.

It was well she had been warned beforehand, or the sight which met her
gaze might have caused her to emit a yell loud enough to attract the
attention of a passing prefect. The Villa Camellia was admirably
supplied with electric light, but on this historic occasion the
apartment was illuminated solely by a couple of candle-ends stuck in a
pair of vases. Their flickering flame revealed a solemn row of nine
dressing-gowned figures, each of which wore a black paper mask with
holes for her eyes. The general effect was most startling and horrible,
and resembled a meeting of the Inquisition, or some other society bent
on torture and dark doings. Repressing her first gasp, however, Irene
bore the vision with remarkable equanimity, and advancing towards the
dread figures waited obediently until she was addressed. Evidently she
had done the right thing, for the spokeswoman, clearing her throat,
began in impressive accents:

"Sister Irene Beverley, you are admitted here to-night to be made a
member of our Sorority. Are you willing to join and to take the
pledges?"

"Yes, thanks, but please what's a sorority?" ventured Irene meekly.

Two or three distinct snickers were heard from underneath the black
masks, but a voice murmured, "Order!" and the sounds promptly ceased.

"A sorority is a secret sisterhood," explained the President, "just the
same as a fraternity is a brotherhood. We call ourselves 'The Camellia
Buds,' and we're members of the Transition who have banded ourselves
together for the purposes of mutual protection. It's a great honor to be
elected. There are only nine of us so far, and we've waited ever so long
to choose a tenth. I hope you appreciate the privilege?"

"I do indeed!"

"You're ready to take the vow? Then the initiation may proceed.
Sword-bearers, guard the door, please."

There was a Masonic quality about the proceedings. Two dark figures,
armed with rulers, placed themselves at the threshold, prepared to
settle all intruders, and to preserve the absolute secrecy of the
ceremony.

"Will you give your word of honor to be a loyal member of the Sorority
of Camellia Buds, and never to do a dirty trick so long as you remain at
this school?" asked the President.

"I promise!" replied Irene.

At that somebody switched on the electric light, and the members,
pulling off their black masks, disclosed their laughing faces.

"You stood it A-1. I was quite prepared for you to start hysterics and
had the sal volatile bottle ready right here," chirruped Delia gayly.

"We call it our 'strength of mind' test," explained President Agnes,
blowing out the guttering candles.

"If I _had_ screamed what would have happened?" inquired Irene.

"Probation for another week till you got your nerves. We'd a business
with Sheila just at first; she's rather fluttersome. Well, anyway,
you've got through the ordeal, and now you're a full-fledged 'bud.'
Aren't you proud?"

"Rather! Is the society limited to ten?"

"Sorority, please, not society. It's limited because there isn't anybody
else in the Transition who's worth asking to join. Most of them are a
set of utter sneaks. They may take Rachel's oath about preserving their
nationality and all the rest of it, but if they're to be counted
specimens of Anglo-American honor it makes one blush for one's mother
country whichever side of the ocean it happens to be on. Oh, you don't
know most of them yet! Wait till you find them out."

"You'll be glad then you belong to us."

"Not that we're perfect, of course."

"We don't set up as Pharisees."

"On the whole we're rather a lot of lunatics."

"We just have a little sport among ourselves to keep things humming."

"Well, now Irene understands, we'd best get her fixed up with a 'buddy'
and close the meeting."

"But I _don't_ understand. What, for goodness' sake, is a buddy, and why
must I have one?" demanded Irene tragically.

"Sit down there, child, and let Grannie talk to you," replied President
Agnes. "If you haven't heard of a buddy yet it's time you did. They're
the latest out. They had them at all the camps last summer, in England
as well as in America. A buddy is a chum with whom you're pledged to do
everything, and who's bound to support you. For instance, when the
bathing season is on you must never swim unless your buddy is swimming
with you; if you go on an excursion you stick to each other tight as
glue, and if one of you is lost the other is held responsible. You're as
inseparable as a box and its lid, or the two blades of a pair of
scissors, or a bottle and its cork, or any other things you happen to
think of that ought to go together, and aren't any use apart."

"We only realized buddies last term," explained Peachy, "but the idea
caught on no end. We all went simply crazy over it. I don't mind
guessing that every girl in this school who's worth her salt has got her
