his being such an absolute little fool, and I can't worry the kid
himself about it just at present."

So saying, Escombe swam off once more.

Armitage was the next to approach Jack. He looked rather pale, but began
by talking rapidly about a paper-chase that was being planned. Jack knew
well enough that this was not what he wanted to talk about, but he
walked away from the bath with him, still pleasantly discussing starts
and times, till they found themselves alone on the stone stairs. Then
Armitage came to a stand-still, and his tone changed.

"Brady, I want to speak to you; I want to explain, you know, about
Toppin."

"Oh, I saw you push!" remarked Jack bluntly.

"I'm not going to deny it, but do you know that he begged me to? You
came in too late to hear that."

"If I hand you a pistol and ask you to shoot me, will you do it?"

"Don't be a fool, Brady. There was no danger. I shouldn't have let him
drown."

"He precious nearly did."

"That was the March Hare's fault. I shouldn't have let him sink again."

"Then you think you were right to push him in, Armitage? I don't. Shall
we ask Anderson's opinion?"

"No, Jack, I beg and implore you to keep it dark. Of course I should
never do it again. But Simmons and Bacon have sworn not to bring me into
the affair. Toppin knows it was his own fault, and is a bit ashamed of
it. There's only the March Hare besides yourself. I thought perhaps you
might persuade him--"

A shadow darkened the open entrance. There was a stamping on the
door-mat, and then Mr. Anderson appeared on the stairs. Jack advanced to
meet him.

"Finished your bath, Brady?"

"Yes, sir. I mean, I haven't had one. All the rest have. I wanted to
tell you there's been a little--a little commotion, sir."

"What on earth do you mean? Not an accident?"

"No, sir; only it might have been. Toppin--little Trevelyan, that
is--got into the deep end, and the March Hare--you know the boy I mean,
sir--he thought he was drowning, and jumped in after him with his things
on, and so they had to haul them both out. Toppin's as right as a trivet
again, and as warm as a toast. And the Hare isn't hurt either, but he
has to sit in a blanket and wait for his clothes to dry."

Mr. Anderson looked very agitated, and his voice betrayed his feelings.

"Why couldn't you behave as if I was with you? Really, it is absurd to
think that all you elder lads can't manage to keep an eye on the juniors
for twenty minutes. Where are these two boys? Take me to them directly!
What do you suppose Mr. West will say? He'll certainly be extremely
angry with you all. I shouldn't be surprised if he stops your coming
here."

"We wondered whether you would feel obliged to tell him, sir," said Jack
thoughtfully. "Of course, if you must, you must; but it doesn't seem as
if there was much to be gained by it, does there? The March Hare and
Toppin have learnt their lesson pretty thoroughly."

Mr. Anderson frowned and bit his finger, and the toe of his boot
tap-tapped on the ground. It was evident he was undecided. Presently he
looked at Jack.

"You mean that, provided I find these two lads absolutely none the worse
for their ducking, you beg me, as a great favour, not to carry a report
to Mr. West?"

"Yes, sir," Jack responded briskly.

"Well, I won't promise, but I'll think it over."

Mr. Anderson's thought ended in a decision which he announced to the
boys when they were gathered together.

"For once, and once only, I have consented to spare you all from certain
punishment by not reporting to Mr. West this accident, which you ought
to have prevented. But you must never ask or expect to be shielded by me
again. Now we will go for a brisk walk as usual, and call for Graglia
and Trevelyan minor on the way back. I dare say they will be ready for
us by that time."

Now, none of the boys, except those immediately concerned in the
accident, had realized that they were in any danger of punishment; but
when the matter was set before them in this light, their gratitude to
Mr. Anderson was profound.

"Oh, thank you!"

"Thank you, sir, very much!"

"It sha'n't happen again, sir!"

"Thank you awfully, sir!"

Pleasure and surprise were equally mingled in the boys' expressions. But
Jack caught a murmur from Cadbury, very soft and low,

"It's six for us, and half a dozen for yourself, eh, Andy?"




CHAPTER III

THE CHICKEN AND THE BICYCLE


Mr. West, the master of Brincliffe, was a man of independent mind, and
though the boys liked him well enough, there was a difference of opinion
regarding his regulations. For example, the same term in which the door
was opened to day-pupils, it was shut to hampers, even birthday ones.
Cadbury suggested reporting this high-handed act to the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children, but decided to let him off when a
permission was announced which almost atoned for the loss of cakes and
preserves. Bicycles were allowed!

Every boy who had one might bring it to school, although, of course,
there were strict limits to its uses, and he who misused the privilege
laid himself open to the heavy penalty of leaving it at home the next
term. The plan worked well, and gave huge pleasure to the pupils.

With the exception of such small fry as the March Hare and Toppin,
nearly every boy managed to possess himself of a machine of some kind.
Many were old, one was originally a lady's, and another had a solid
tyre, but so long as the wheels would go round nothing mattered. And the
wheel must be in a sorry condition indeed which a boy can't work.

The season was still early when the Bicycle Paper-chase was proposed and
arranged. It was Jack Brady's suggestion, and every boy to whom it was
named jumped at the idea. Mr. West granted permission, provided that a
master accompanied them, and Norman Hallett drifted into the post of
captain.

It was agreed, after much consultation, that Hallett and Jack should be
the hares, that three minutes' start should be allowed, and that
everyone who liked to should be a hound. Simmons was to carry the horn
and "blow the true trail" whenever it was lighted upon. Half a dozen
more were selected to test the side tracks, as there were certain to be
plenty of false scents started.

The Saturday fixed for the chase proved a fine one, and the whole pack
was assembled outside the school gates at the hour appointed. Mr.
Anderson was once more in charge of the party. Little duties like these
fell naturally to his lot as the junior master.

One or two youngsters, who had not got machines of their own yet, had
begged leave to hire for the afternoon, so it happened that the March
Hare and Toppin were the only boarders left behind. Mournfully they
swung upon the gate, and watched the pack ride gaily away at the word
"Time!" from Mr. Anderson.

"I wish that they should have tooken us, eh, Top-peen?" said the March
Hare.

"You ought to say 'took', not 'tooken'," corrected Toppin. He felt
rather cross, and disinclined to dwell on the subject of his wrongs.

"Ah, I am--what is your one word?--non-grammar-eesh?"

"No,--stupid," said Toppin.

_"Uhei!"_ This sorrowfully. Then, drawing nearer, "But no mind! I love
you--oh, yes, I love you a great well, Top-peen! Shall we--shall we
keess?"

Toppin shook his head decidedly, and jumped off the gate in a hurry.

"That's the second time since Sunday you've wanted to kiss, and I've
told you over and over again I hate it, I don't like it! I never want to
kiss! Now, do you understand?"

The March Hare was sadly afraid he did.

[Illustration]

"If you were an English boy you'd never think of asking such a thing,"
Toppin went on, tramping up and down as he talked. He really did not
want to be unkind to the Hare, but requests like this vexed him sorely.
"Don't you see, Harey, there are some people who will kiss me, and I
can't stop them--like Miss Turner, f'r instance." Miss Turner was the
matron. "And then there are some I've got to kiss, like aunts and
people. But one doesn't put in any extra, if one can help it. When I'm
grown-up I sha'n't have to kiss anybody, and that'll be jolly. I shall
never, never kiss at all, only shake hands or bow, like Escombe does."

"Top-peen, you did keess me once time, last week!" The Hare was timidly
reproachful now.

Toppin stood still and coloured.

"Yes, I did. Because you bovvered me to, and--and you'd jumped in after
me!"

"And shallent you--not ever--keess me once time more?"

"Oh--well--look here! Perhaps when it's your birthday, if we get
somewhere quite secret, where nobody can possibly see us, I--I'll let
you have one--a quick one!"

"T-thanks you!" said the grateful Hare.

"It's 'thanks', or else 'thank you'," corrected Toppin.

The Hare took no notice. He only tucked his arm affectionately into
Toppin's, knowing that he was keeping within his rights in doing so.
Toppin could say nothing. Arm-in-arm is quite correct and English!

"I have som-ting to say. Zat Armitage--he did not ought to be gone
chasing paper. He is bad! I hate him, don' like him!"

"Why?" enquired Toppin, with wide-open eyes.

"Be-cause he try to drown you. I am--what is it?--to re-venge it!"

"What awful rot you talk!" said Toppin. "He only did what I told him,
same as you would have done."

"Oh no, he had ver' wickedness. Ever'body say he had. I am telling
many--one after one, by secret! And he is a debboy. Zey are more angry
for zat. So much better!"

"Rubbish!" cried Toppin impatiently. "You've no business to tell anyone
anything. And you're looking fierce and ugly, Hare. Do put Armitage out
of your head, and come and have a see-saw!"

The chase, meanwhile, had opened well. The track was unmistakable to
begin with, and it led right away from the town into the free country.
The pack of hounds spun gaily along at full tilt, and many a machine was
travelling at a pace it had not known for years. Every now and then
there was a small collision, ending generally in a tumble; but if anyone
was hurt, he kept it to himself, for all remounted and rode on, and
nobody waited behind to make enquiries.

Of course there were any amount of false alarms, shouts and shrieks,
wavings and ringings, and Simmons's toot-toot sometimes went unheard in
the hubbub. Mr. Anderson grew quite boyishly excited, and kept bawling,
"Come on, you fellows, come on! Buck up! We'll run them down yet!" And
it is probable that Mr. West might have had a word to say had he seen
the pace at which the willing hounds obeyed.

After one of the collisions above-mentioned, Grey, who was not a good
rider, and happened to be the last of the pack, came upon Cadbury,
dismounted, by the roadside.

"What's up?" he cried, as he swayed laboriously past.

"Oh, that you, Grey? Get down, there's a good fellow, and hold my bike a
jiffey. I'll tow you up the next hill, if you will. Thanks so much! I
had a spill just now, and my handlebar's got slewed round, and I can't
keep it straight and right it at the same time."

The spanner had to be hunted out, the screw loosened, and the bar
straightened; and thus a little time was occupied.

"Bother it! They're out of sight!" cried Cadbury when both were once
more ready to mount. "I suppose we shall see Andy tooling back soon, to
whip in the lazy pups! Never mind, I'll keep you company. Don't you
burst your wind! We'll take it quietly."

"How they do yell! They've lost the trail," remarked Grey. "Hi! I say,
there's paper down this lane; look--and it has a bit of Green's writing
on it. You bet this is the true trail, and that the hares only scooted
along the main road a bit farther, on purpose to mislead."

"You may be right. Anyhow, let's try our luck. It's downhill, so we can
put on steam. What sport if they all have to turn round, and find we're
in front instead of behind! Mind, old chappie, I'm passing on your right
... wait for you ... below!"

The last words came faintly back; Cadbury had passed Grey like a streak
of lightning, his feet up, and his hands in his pockets.

There was a turn in the lane farther down, so that Grey for a minute
lost sight of his comrade. He looked carefully ahead as he rounded it,
to see if the end of the descent were near. The hill only grew steeper,
but the end was a good deal nearer than he thought.

A half-grown chicken, startled by his silent approach, sprang out of the
hedge and fluttered in front of his wheel, clucking madly. Grey pealed
his bell, but it had no effect on the distracted chicken, which seemed
bent on destruction. He clutched his brake; it would not work. There
came a stifled squawk, and a slight bump!

In affright and agitation, Grey turned his machine into the hedge, and
tumbled off, somehow, anyhow, into the road.

Five minutes later, Cadbury was toiling back up the hill in quest of his
school-fellow, when he came upon a very unexpected sight. A prostrate
bicycle beside a live, but bruised and dusty boy, who was sadly gazing
upon the body of a chicken.

"My good Grey! Good gracious! What has happened? How did you manage it?"

"Oh, Cadbury, I'm so glad to see you! Isn't it awful? I wouldn't have
run over it for worlds if I could have helped it, but it simply insisted
on it!"

"Suicide while temporarily insane," put in Cadbury, covering his mouth
with his hand.

"Well, it did look just as if it wanted to die! But what shall I have to
fork out, do you suppose? Five bob? I've got no more on me. Say, they
aren't likely to prosecute, are they?"

Grey was really frightened. Cadbury looked at the picture again, tried
to take it seriously, failed, and burst into a fit of laughter.
