always went up the village as far as the _George and Dragon_, for air
and exercise, when the London Mail[2] came in.

[Footnote 2: The Mail Coach it was that distributed over the face of
the land, like the opening of apocalyptic vials, the heart-shaking
news of Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of Waterloo.... The
grandest chapter of our experience, within the whole Mail Coach
service, was on those occasions when we went down from London with the
news of Victory. Five years of life it was worth paying down for the
privilege of an outside place.

DE QUINCEY.]

One day (it was a day in the following June) it came in earlier than
usual, and the young lady was not there to meet it.

But a crowd soon gathered round the _George and Dragon_, gaping to see
the Mail Coach dressed with flowers and oak-leaves, and the guard
wearing a laurel wreath over and above his royal livery. The ribbons
that decked the horses were stained and flecked with the warmth and
foam of the pace at which they had come, for they had pressed on with
the news of Victory.

Miss Jessamine was sitting with her niece under the oak-tree on the
Green, when the Postman put a newspaper silently into her hand. Her
niece turned quickly--"Is there news?"

"Don't agitate yourself, my dear," said her aunt. "I will read it
aloud, and then we can enjoy it together; a far more comfortable
method, my love, than when you go up the village, and come home out of
breath, having snatched half the news as you run."

"I am all attention, dear aunt," said the little lady, clasping her
hands tightly on her lap.

Then Miss Jessamine read aloud--she was proud of her reading--and the
old soldier stood at attention behind her, with such a blending of
pride and pity on his face as it was strange to see:--

"DOWNING STREET,

"_June_ 22, 1815, 1 A.M."

"That's one in the morning," gasped the Postman; "beg your pardon,
mum."

But though he apologized, he could not refrain from echoing here and
there a weighty word. "Glorious victory,"--"Two hundred pieces of
artillery,"--"Immense quantity of ammunition,"--and so forth.

     "The loss of the British Army upon this occasion has
     unfortunately been most severe. It had not been possible to
     make out a return of the killed and wounded when Major Percy
     left headquarters. The names of the officers killed and
     wounded, as far as they can be collected, are annexed.

"I have the honor ----"

"The list, aunt! Read the list!"

"My love--my darling--let us go in and--"

"No. Now! now!"

To one thing the supremely afflicted are entitled in their sorrow--to
be obeyed--and yet it is the last kindness that people commonly will
do them. But Miss Jessamine did. Steadying her voice, as best she
might, she read on, and the old soldier stood bareheaded to hear that
first Roll of the Dead at Waterloo, which began with the Duke of
Brunswick, and ended with Ensign Brown.[3] Five-and-thirty British
Captains fell asleep that day on the bed of Honor, and the Black
Captain slept among them.

[Footnote 3: "Brunswick's fated chieftain" fell at Quatre Bras, the
day before Waterloo, but this first (very imperfect) list, as it
appeared in the newspapers of the day, did begin with his name, and
end with that of an Ensign Brown.]

       *       *       *       *       *

There are killed and wounded by war, of whom no returns reach Downing
Street.

Three days later, the Captain's wife had joined him, and Miss
Jessamine was kneeling by the cradle of their orphan son, a purple-red
morsel of humanity, with conspicuously golden hair.

"Will he live, Doctor?"

"Live? GOD bless my soul, ma'am! Look at him! The young Jackanapes!"




CHAPTER II.

    And he wandered away and away
    With Nature, the dear old Nurse.

LONGFELLOW.


The Grey Goose remembered quite well the year that Jackanapes began
to walk, for it was the year that the speckled hen for the first time
in all her motherly life got out of patience when she was sitting. She
had been rather proud of the eggs--they are unusually large--but she
never felt quite comfortable on them; and whether it was because she
used to get cramp, and got off the nest, or because the season was
bad, or what, she never could tell, but every egg was addled but one,
and the one that did hatch gave her more trouble than any chick she
had ever reared.

It was a fine, downy, bright yellow little thing, but it had a
monstrous big nose and feet, and such an ungainly walk as she knew no
other instance of in her well-bred and high-stepping family. And as to
behavior, it was not that it was either quarrelsome or moping, but
simply unlike the rest. When the other chicks hopped and cheeped on
the Green all at their mother's feet, this solitary yellow one went
waddling off on its own responsibility, and do or cluck what the
spreckled hen would, it went to play in the pond.

It was off one day as usual, and the hen was fussing and fuming after
it, when the Postman, going to deliver a letter at Miss Jessamine's
door, was nearly knocked over by the good lady herself, who, bursting
out of the house with her cap just off and her bonnet just not on,
fell into his arms, crying--

"Baby! Baby! Jackanapes! Jackanapes!"

If the Postman loved anything on earth, he loved the Captain's
yellow-haired child, so propping Miss Jessamine against her own
door-post, he followed the direction of her trembling fingers and made
for the Green.

Jackanapes had had the start of the Postman by nearly ten minutes. The
world--the round green world with an oak tree on it--was just becoming
very interesting to him. He had tried, vigorously but ineffectually,
to mount a passing pig the last time he was taken out walking; but
then he was encumbered with a nurse. Now he was his own master, and
might, by courage and energy, become the master of that delightful,
downy, dumpy, yellow thing, that was bobbing along over the green
grass in front of him. Forward! Charge! He aimed well, and grabbed it,
but only to feel the delicious downiness and dumpiness slipping
through his fingers as he fell upon his face. "Quawk!" said the yellow
thing, and wobbled off sideways. It was this oblique movement that
enabled Jackanapes to come up with it, for it was bound for the Pond,
and therefore obliged to come back into line. He failed again from
top-heaviness, and his prey escaped sideways as before, and, as
before, lost ground in getting back to the direct road to the Pond.

[Illustration]

And at the Pond the Postman found them both, one yellow thing rocking
safely on the ripples that lie beyond duck-weed, and the other washing
his draggled frock with tears, because he too had tried to sit upon
the Pond, and it wouldn't hold him.




CHAPTER III.

    ... If studious, copie fair what time hath blurred,
    Redeem truth from his jawes; if souldier,
    Chase brave employments with a naked sword
    Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
    If they dare try, a glorious life, or grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In brief, acquit thee bravely: play the man. Look not on
    pleasures as they come, but go. Defer not the least vertue:
    life's poore span Make not an ell, by trifling in thy woe. If
    thou do ill, the joy fades, not the pains. If well, the pain
    doth fade, the joy remains.

GEORGE HERBERT.


Young Mrs. Johnson, who was a mother of many, hardly knew which to
pity more; Miss Jessamine for having her little ways and her
