something first, Poe's 'Raven,' for instance."

Grace flushed angrily and was about to interfere when, to her surprise,
Anne herself replied:

"I shall be glad to if that is the poem you like best. I always
preferred 'Annabel Lee.'"

Miriam was too amazed to answer. She could never form an idea of what it
cost Anne in self-control to acquiesce; but the young girl had gained a
new strength that day. So many people had been kind to her, and what is
more, interested in her welfare. She rose quietly and walked to the
middle of the semicircle.

Grace and her chums were in an agony of fear lest poor Anne should break
down, and so distress them all except the unkind Miriam. However, they
need not have troubled themselves. Anne fixed her eyes on the far wall
of the dining room and commenced to recite "The Raven" in a clear,
musical voice that deepened as she repeated the stanzas. The girls
forgot the shabby little figure in its ill-fitting black silk and saw
only Anne's small, white face and glowing eyes. Not Miss Tebbs, herself,
teacher of English and elocution at the High School, could have improved
upon the performance.

"It was perfectly done," said Grace afterwards, telling the story to her
mother. "It was almost uncanny and quite creepy toward the last."

When the performance was over the girls crowded around little Anne with
eager congratulations; but, strange to say, everyone forgot that Miriam
had given her promise to sing.

What the crestfallen Miriam kept wondering was: "Wherever did she learn
to do it?"




CHAPTER III

MRS. GRAY ENGAGES A SECRETARY


Grace and her two friends, Jessica and Nora, were also invited to Mrs.
Gray's luncheon the next day, after church. Grace had often taken meals
in the beautiful house on Chapel Hill, but the other girls had never
been privileged to do more than sit in the large, shady parlors while
their mothers paid an afternoon call.

It was with some excitement, therefore, that the three girls met in
front of the Catholic Church, of which Nora was a member, and strolled
up the broad street together. As they passed the little Episcopal
Chapel, which had given the hill its name, Anne Pierson joined them. She
looked grave and excited, and there was a feverish glow in her eyes.

"Anne, my child," exclaimed Grace, who always seemed much older than the
others, "how late do you study at night? I believe you are working too
hard. You look tired out."

"I'm not tired," replied Anne. "I don't mind studying. Only so much has
happened in the last few days! And now we're going to luncheon with Mrs.
Gray. I've seen her house. It's very beautiful from the outside, more
beautiful than the Nesbits', I think, because it is older and there is
such a pretty garden at the side."

"Anne," said Jessica, "we're counting on you to win the prize. There is
no reason why a rich girl like Miriam Nesbit should get it. She doesn't
need the money, in the first place; and, in the second, she's already
had enough glory to turn her head. Being beaten won't hurt her at all."

"I would rather win it," answered Anne, with passionate fervor, "than
almost anything in the world. And think of the big prize of $100! If I
could win that----" Words failed to express her enthusiasm and she
paused and clasped her hands.

"Oh, well, we won't expect that of you," replied Grace, "Nobody could be
expected to pass a perfect examination. That's an impossible
achievement."

"_I_ shall try, anyway," said Anne in a low voice.

Just then they were joined by a young man of about eighteen, who lifted
his hat politely to them.

"May I walk with you?" he asked of Grace. "You seem to be going my way
this morning."

"Certainly, David, we are going your way. We are lunching with your next
door neighbor, Mrs. Gray. But you must let me introduce you to Miss
Pierson. Anne, this is Mr. Nesbit, Miriam's brother."

Anne flushed at the mention of Miriam's name and bowed distantly to the
newcomer, who was a junior at the High School and quite grown-up to the
young freshmen.

David Nesbit, like his sister, was tall, dark and handsome; but unlike
her, he was quiet and unassuming. He, too, stood at the head of his
classes, but he was not athletic, as Miriam was, and spent most of his
time in the school laboratory, experimenting, or working at home on
engines and machinery of his own contriving.

However, there was nothing snobbish in David's attitude. He greeted Anne
as cordially as he had the others.

"We never see you now, David," continued Grace. "You are always so busy
with your inventions and contrivances. What is the latest? A flying
machine?"

"You guessed right the very first time," replied David. "It is just
that."

"Really?" laughed the girls, incredulously, while Anne's eyes grew large
with interest.

"Shall you fly around Oakdale in it?" asked Jessica.

"Oh, we are not building big ones yet," answered David. "These are
little fellows. Models, you know. The big ones may come later. Six of
the junior and senior fellows have been working on them all summer. We
started it in the manual training course. After we had learned to hammer
things out of silver, and do wood carving and a few other little useful
accomplishments, I suggested a flying machine to Professor Blitz and he
fell to it like a ripe peach. It was too late to do anything last spring
except talk, however. But we are almost ready now, after our labors this
summer."

"Ready for what?" demanded Grace. "If you are not going to fly
yourselves."

"For our exhibition. Why don't you come and see it at the gym. next
Friday night?"

"We can't. We aren't invited," answered Nora, tossing back her saucy
little curls.

"I'll invite you," said David. "This will admit four young ladies to the
High School gym.," he continued, taking out a card and writing on it,
"At 7.30 Thursday evening."

"Then everybody isn't invited?" demanded Jessica.

"No, not everybody," replied David. "Just a chosen few. And you must be
sure to come, too, Miss Pierson," he added, turning to Anne, who, all
this time, had been silently listening to the conversation.

"I should love to," she answered, giving him a grateful glance.

"I'll leave you here," said David, turning in at a graveled driveway
that led to the Nesbit house, a very large and ornate building standing
far back from the street in the midst of a well-kept lawn.

"I wish Miriam would take a few lessons in manners from her brother,"
murmured Grace, when they were out of hearing distance.

"He is certainly one of the nicest boys in High School," said Jessica.

"If he only played football!" said Grace, with a sigh.

"And danced," added Nora.

"I don't know how to dance, nor did I ever see a game of football," said
Anne.

"Meaning that Mr. David suits you, Miss Anne," said Grace teasingly.

"It was nice of him to ask me, too," was all Anne said in reply.

"How do you do, my dears?" said Mrs. Gray, a few moments later, when
John, the aged butler, ushered the girls into the long, old-fashioned
parlor. "You are most kind to come and cheer up a lonely old woman. I
shall expect you to be very gay and tell me all the gossip of the
Oakdale High School, the four of you."

"Luncheon is served, ma'am," announced John, whereat the sprightly old
lady led the way to the dining room.

Over the delicious broiled chicken and other good things they discussed
the affairs of the school, the new teacher in mathematics, Miss Leece,
who was so unpopular; the girls' principal, Miss Thompson, beloved by
all the pupils; the merits of the Freshman Basketball Team and a dozen
other schoolgirl topics that seemed to delight the ears of Mrs. Gray.

"The truth is," she said, "I believe this freshman class is going to be
one of the finest Oakdale High School has ever turned out. I have a
feeling that I shall be very proud of my new girls, and at Christmas
time I mean to do something I have never done before, if all goes well."

"Oh, do tell us what it is, Mrs. Gray," cried the girls in great
excitement.

"I mean to celebrate with the largest Christmas party that's been given
in Oakdale for many a long year. Grace, you shall manage it for me, and
all of you shall help me decorate the tree and the house. We'll invite
the freshmen boys and have a real dance with Ohlson's band for the
music."

"Oh, oh!" cried the girls ecstatically, even quiet Anne joining in the
chorus.

"By the way," went on Mrs. Gray, "do you know any girl who would like to
come up and read to me twice a week, and write my notes for me? I'm
getting to be an old woman. My eyesight is growing dim. Is there any
girl who would like to earn a little pocket money? But she must have a
sweet, soft voice, like Anne's here."

"Anne would be the very girl herself, Mrs. Gray," suggested Grace. "She
reads and recites beautifully."

"You are not sure it would trespass on your time too much, Anne?"
observed the wily old lady. "I don't want to impose on you."

Anne's face fairly radiated with happiness. Could those girls possibly
guess how much it meant to her to earn a little money! Five dollars was
to her an enormous sum, and perhaps she might earn as much as that in
time.

"Might I do it?" she exclaimed, beside herself with joy.

Grace turned her face away a moment. She felt almost ashamed of her own
comfortable prosperity. And how like Mrs. Gray it was to do a kind thing
in that way, as if Anne would be conferring a favor by accepting the
position.

"Indeed, you might, my dear. And I feel myself lucky to get the
brightest girl in her class, and maybe in Oakdale High School, to come
and entertain me twice a week."




CHAPTER IV

THE BLACK MONKS OF ASIA


"Who wants to go nutting?" demanded Grace Harlowe in the basement
cloakroom a few afternoons later.

"We do," came a chorus of voices.

"I don't," answered one.

"Don't you like nutting parties, Miriam?" asked Grace.

"She's too old," put in a sophomore. "This is a young people's party, I
presume?"

"Well, it's not a sophomore party, at any rate," retorted Nora.

"Ma-ma, ma-ma," cried a number of other sophomores, imitating the cries
of a baby.

The freshmen were nettled by the superior attitude of the older class,
but they knew better than to say anything more just then.

"Never mind, girls," said Grace in a low voice, after the sophomores had
strolled away, "we'll be sophomores ourselves next year. Now, all who
want to join the party, meet Nora and Jessica and me at the old Omnibus
House at three-thirty. And, above all, don't give the meeting place
away."

"Not in a thousand years," said Marian Barber.

It was evident that Miriam Nesbit had hoped to break up the party by
declining to go herself. But she was not quite strong enough in the
class to divide it utterly, and she went off in a huff, with the secret
wish to take revenge on somebody. As she started up Chapel Hill to her
home she was joined by one of the sophomore girls, who lived across the
street.

"Your plebes are getting away from you, Miriam," exclaimed the older
girl in a bantering tone. "You haven't got them well in hand yet.
Nutting parties should be left behind for the Grammar School pupils."

"They certainly should," replied Miriam in a disgusted tone. "It's Grace
Harlowe who gets up all these foolish children's games. She's nothing
but a tomboy, anyhow."

"She's the captain of the basketball team, isn't she?" asked the other
dryly.

"Yes," admitted Miriam reluctantly, "but she never would have been if
she hadn't brought along all her friends to vote for her."

"Whew-w-w!" whistled the sophomore. "You don't mean to say it wasn't a
fair election?"

"Oh, fair enough," said Miriam, "except that I didn't bother to bring
any of my special friends, and she did. I don't call that exactly fair."

"Oh, well," consoled the other, "you have a few things coming to you
anyway, Miriam. You're at the head of your class, as usual, I suppose?"

Miriam nodded her head without answering. She was thinking of little
Anne Pierson and what a close race they were running together. Even
studying harder than she had ever had to do before, Miriam found it
difficult to keep up with Anne.

"Where are they going?" asked the other girl suddenly, after they had
walked along a few minutes in silence.

"Where are who going?" asked Miriam.

"Why, the nutting party, of course."

Here was Miriam's chance for revenge. The sophomores were a famously
mischievous class, and this girl was one of its ringleaders. Back in
Grammar School days they had played many pranks on their school fellows,
and even in their freshman year they had dared to turn off all lights,
one night at a dance of older schoolmates.

"If I tell, you won't give me away, will you?" asked Miriam.

"I promise," said the older girl.

"Very well, then. They meet at three-thirty at the Omnibus House on the
River road."

"Good," said the sophomore. "Don't you want to come along and see the
fun?"

"Don't count on me," answered Miriam, turning in at her gate, with mixed
feelings of shame and triumph.

The Omnibus House, which had been chosen by Grace as the class meeting
place, was an old stone building standing in the middle of an orchard.
It was now in ruins, but tradition set it down as a former inn and stage
coach station built before the days of railroads, and finally burned by
the Indians. There was a curious hieroglyphic sign cut in a stone slab
in the front wall which one of the High School professors interested in
archaeology had deciphered as follows: "Peace and Justice Reign Over
Mount Asia Tavern."

Here the crowd of High School "plebes," as the sophomores scornfully
dubbed them, met in conclave, partly to gather nuts in the woods near
by, partly to discuss class matters, but chiefly to enjoy the crisp
autumn weather. The woods were still gorgeous in russets and reds, in
spite of the recent heavy frosts, and there was a smell of burning
leaves and dry bracken in the air. The girls skipped about like young
ponies.

"If this is childish," cried Grace, "then I'd like to be a child always,
for I shall play in the woods when the notion strikes me, even if I'm a
grandmother."

There was a smothered snicker at this from the inside of the old stone
house, but the girls were too intent on their enjoyment to notice it.

"Young ladies," exclaimed Nora O'Malley, trailing her cape after her to
make her skirts look longer, and twisting her mouth down to give her
face a severe expression, "you are not in your usual form to-day. I must
ask for better preparation hereafter."

There was a peal of joyous laughter from the other girls.

"Miss Leece to a dot," cried Jessica.

"Miss Bright," went on Nora, "you will please pay attention to the
lesson. If you do not, young woman, I shall have to punish you in the
old-fashioned way."

"You will, will you?" cried Jessica, rushing gayly upon her friend.
"Come on and try it then!"

The other girls followed, and there was a tussle to pull Nora down from
the stone upon which she had clambered to protect herself.

Shrieks, struggles and wild laughter followed, while Nora fought
desperately to hold her position. So absorbed were they in friendly
battle that they had not noticed a troop of black-robed figures leaving
the ruined Omnibus House and stealthily approaching.

Nora was the first to see the ominous circle. She stopped short, and
pointed with unmistakable terror at the masked and hooded persons, who
were watching them silently. There was a moment of frozen horror when
