life in the backwoods.

"Didn't you even have a governess in New Zealand?" she ventured one day.
She did not encourage Rona to talk, but for once her curiosity overcame
her dislike of the high-pitched voice.

"Couldn't get one to stop up-country, where we were. Mrs. Barker, our
cowman's wife, looked after me ever since Mother died. She was the only
woman about the place. One of our farm helps taught me lessons. He was a
B.A. of Oxford, but down on his luck. Dad said I'd seem queer to English
girls. I don't know that I care."

Though Rona might not be possessed of the most delicate perceptions, she
nevertheless had common sense enough to realize that Ulyth did not
receive her with enthusiasm.

"I suppose you're disappointed in me?" she queried. "Dad said you would
be, but I laughed at him. Pity if our ready-made friendship turned out a
misfit! I think you're no end! Dad said I'd got to copy you; it'll take
me all my time, I expect. Things are so different here from home."

Was there a suspicion of a choke in the words?

Ulyth had a sudden pang of compunction. Unwelcome as her companion was
to her, she did not wish to be brutal.

"You mustn't get home-sick," she said hastily. "You'll shake down here
in time. Everyone finds things strange at school just at first. I did
myself."

"I guess you were never as much a fish out of water as me, though,"
returned Rona, and went whistling down the passage.

Ulyth tried to dismiss her from her thoughts. She did not intend to
worry over Rona more than she could possibly help. Fortunately they were
not together in class, for Rona's entrance-examination papers had not
reached the standard of the Lower Fifth, and she had been placed in IV
B.

Ulyth was interested in her school-work. She stood well with her
teachers, and was an acknowledged force in her form. She came from a
very refined and cultured home, where intellectual interests were
cultivated both by father and mother. Her temperament was naturally
artistic; she was an omnivorous reader, and could devour anything in the
shape of literature that came her way. The bookcase in her dormitory was
filled with beautiful volumes, mostly Christmas and birthday gifts. She
rejoiced in their soft leather bindings or fine illustrations with a
true book-lover's enthusiasm. It was her pride to keep them in daintiest
condition. Dog-ears or thumb-marks were in her opinion the depths of
degradation. Ulyth had ambitions also, ambitions which she would not
reveal to anybody. Some day she planned to write a book of her own. She
had not yet fixed on a subject, but she had decided just what the cover
was to be like, with her name on it in gilt letters. Perhaps she might
even illustrate it herself, for her love of art almost equalled her love
of literature; but that was still in the clouds, and must wait till she
had chosen her plot. In the interim she wrote verses and short stories
for the school magazine, and her essays for Miss Teddington were
generally returned marked "highly creditable".

This term Ulyth intended to study hard. It was a promotion to be in the
Upper School; she was beginning several new subjects, and her interest
in many things was aroused. It would be a delightful autumn as soon as
she had got rid of this dreadful problem, at present the one serious
obstacle to her comfort. But in the meantime it was only Friday, and
till at least the following Monday she would be obliged to endure her
uncongenial presence in her bedroom.




CHAPTER III

Round the Camp-fire


It was the first Saturday of the term. So far the girls had been kept
busily occupied settling down to work in their fresh forms, and trying
to grow accustomed to Miss Teddington's new time-tables. Now, however,
they were free to relax and enjoy themselves in any way they chose. Some
were playing tennis, some had gone for a walk with Miss Moseley, a few
were squatting frog-like on boulders in the midst of the stream, and
others strolled under the trees in the grove.

"Thank goodness the weather's behaving itself!" said Mary Acton, who,
with a few other members of the Lower Fifth, was sitting on the trunk of
a fallen oak. "Do you remember last council? It simply poured. The
thing's no fun if one can't have a real fire."

"It'll burn first-rate to-night," returned Lizzie Lonsdale. "There's a
little wind, and the wood'll be dry."

"That reminds me I haven't found my faggot yet," said Beth Broadway
easily.

"Girl alive! Then you'd better go and look for one, or you'll be all in
a scramble at the last!"

"Bother! I'm too comfy to move."

"Nice Wood-gatherer you'll look if you come empty-handed!"

"I'd appropriate half your lot first, Lizzikins!"

"Would you, indeed? I'd denounce you, and you'd lose your rank and be
degraded to a candidate again."

"Oh, you mean, stingy miser!"

"Not at all. It's the wise and foolish virgins over again. I shan't have
enough for myself and you. I've a lovely little stack--just enough for
one--reposing--no, I'd better not tell you where. Don't look so hopeful.
You're not to be trusted."

"What are you talking about?" asked Rona Mitchell, who had wandered up
to the group. "Why are some of you picking up sticks? I saw a girl over
there with quite a bundle just now. You might tell me."

So far Rona had not been well received in her own form, IV B. She was
older than her class-mates, and they, instead of attempting to initiate
her into the ways of the Woodlands girls on this holiday afternoon, had
scuttled off and left her to fend for herself. She looked such an odd,
wistful, lonely figure that Lizzie Lonsdale's kind heart smote her. She
pushed the other girls farther along the tree-trunk till they made a
grudging space for the new-comer.

"I'm a good hand at camp-fires, if you want any help," continued Rona,
seating herself with alacrity. "I've made 'em by the dozen at home, and
cooked by them too. Just let me know where you want it, and I'll set to
work."

"You wouldn't be allowed," said Beth bluntly. "This fire is a very
special thing. Only Wood-gatherers may bring the fuel. No one else is
eligible."

"Why on earth not?"

"Oh, I can't bother to explain now! It would take too long. You'll find
out to-night. Girls, I'm going in!"

"Turn up here at dusk if you want to know, and bring a cup with you,"
suggested Lizzie, with a half-ashamed effort at friendliness, as she
followed her chums.

"You bet I'll turn up! Rather!"

That evening, just after sunset, little groups of girls began to collect
round an open green space in the glade. They came quietly and with a
certain sense of discipline. A stranger would have noticed that if any
loud tone or undue hilarity made itself heard, it was instantly and
firmly repressed by one or two who seemed in authority. That the meeting
was more in the nature of a convention than a mere pleasure-gathering
was evident both from the demeanour of the assemblage and from the
various badges pinned on the girls' coats. No teacher was present, but
there was an air of general expectancy, as if the coming of somebody
were awaited. To the pupils at The Woodlands this night's ceremony was a
very special occasion, for it was the autumn reunion of the Camp-fire
League, an organization which, originally of American birth, had been
introduced at the instigation of Miss Teddington, and had taken great
root in the school. Any girl was eligible as a candidate, but before she
could gain admission to even the initial rank she had to prove herself
worthy of the honour of membership, and pass successfully through her
novitiate.

The organizer and leader of the branch which to-night was to celebrate
its third anniversary was a certain Mrs. Arnold, a charming young
American lady who lived in the neighbourhood. She had been an
enthusiastic supporter of the League in Pennsylvania before her
marriage, and was delighted to pass on its traditions to British
schoolgirls. Her winsome personality made her a prime favourite at The
Woodlands, where her influence was stronger even than she imagined. Miss
Teddington, though it was she who had asked Mrs. Arnold to institute and
take charge of the meetings, had the discretion to keep out of the
League herself, realizing that the presence of teachers might be a
restraint, and that the management was better left in the hands of a
trustworthy outsider.

To become an authorized Camp-fire member was an ambition with most of
the girls, and spurred many on to greater efforts than they would
otherwise have attempted. All looked forward to the meetings, and there
could be no greater punishment for certain offences than a temporary
withdrawal of League privileges.

This September, after the long summer holiday, the reunion seemed of
even more than ordinary importance.

The sun had set, the last gleam of the afterglow had faded, and the
glade had grown full of dim shadows by the time everybody was present in
the grove. The gentle rustle of the leafy boughs overhead, and the
persistent tumbling rush of the stream, seemed like a faint orchestral
accompaniment of Nature for the ceremonial.

"Is it a Quakers' Meeting or a Freemasons' Lodge? You're all very mum,"
asked Rona, whom curiosity had led out with the others.

"Sh-sh! We're waiting for our 'Guardian of the Fire'," returned Ulyth,
trying to suppress the loudness of the high-pitched voice. "Mrs.
Arnold's generally very punctual. Oh, there! I believe I hear her
ringing her bicycle bell now. I'm going down the field to meet her."

Ulyth regarded Mrs. Arnold with that intense adoration which a girl of
fifteen often bestows on a woman older than herself. She ran now through
the wood, hoping she might be in time to catch her idol on the drive and
have just a few precious moments with her before she was joined by the
others. There were many things she wanted to pour into her friend's
ready ears, but she knew it would be impossible to monopolize her as
soon as the rest of the girls knew of her arrival. She fled as on wings,
therefore, and had the supreme satisfaction of being the first in the
field. Mrs. Arnold, young, very fair, graceful, and golden-haired,
looked a picture in her blue cycling costume as she leaned her machine
against a tree and greeted her enthusiastic admirer.

"Oh, you darling! I've such heaps to tell you!" began Ulyth, clasping
her tightly by the arm. "Rona Mitchell has come, and she's the most
awful creature! I never was so disappointed in my life. Don't you
sympathize with me, when I expected her to be so ripping? She's absolute
backwoods!"

"Yes, I've heard all about her. Poor child! She must have had a strange
training. It's time indeed she began to learn something."

"She's not learned anything in New Zealand. Oh, her voice will just
grate on you! And her manners! She's hopeless! Everything she does and
says is wrong. And to think she's been foisted on to me, of all people!"

"Poor child!" repeated Mrs. Arnold. ("Which of us does she mean?"
thought Ulyth.) "She's evidently raw material. Every diamond needs
polishing. What an opportunity for a Torch-bearer!"

Ulyth dropped her friend's arm suddenly. It was not at all the answer
she had expected. Moreover, at least a dozen girls had come running up
and were claiming their chief's attention. In a species of triumphant
procession Mrs. Arnold was escorted into the glade and installed on her
throne of state, a seat made of logs and decorated with ferns. Everyone
clustered round to welcome her, and for the moment she was the centre of
an enthusiastic crowd. Ulyth followed more slowly. She was feeling
disturbed and put out. What did Mrs. Arnold mean? Surely not----? A
sudden thought had flashed into her mind but she thrust it away
indignantly. Oh no, that was quite impossible! It was outrageous of
anybody to make the suggestion. And yet--and yet--the uneasy voice that
had been haunting her for the last four days began to speak with even
more vehemence. With a sigh of relief she heard the signal given for
"Attention", and cast the matter away from her for the moment. Every eye
was fixed on their leader. The ceremony was about to begin.

Mrs. Arnold rose, and in her clear, sweet voice proclaimed:

"The Guardian of the Fire calls on the Wood-gatherers to bring their
fuel."

At once a dozen girls came forward, each dragging a tolerably large
bundle of brushwood. They deposited these in a circle, saluted, and
retired.

"Fire-makers, do your work!" commanded the leader.

Eight girls responded, Ulyth among the number, and seizing the
brushwood, they built it deftly into a pile. All stood round, waiting in
silence while their chief struck a match and applied a light to some
dried leaves and bracken that had been placed beneath. The flame rose up
like a scarlet ribbon, and in a few moments the dry fuel was ablaze and
crackling. The gleam lighting up the glade displayed a picturesque
scene. The boles of the trees might have been the pillars in some
ancient temple, with the branches for roof. Close by the cascade of the
stream leapt white against a background of dim darkness. The harvest
moon, full and golden, was rising behind the crest of Cwm Dinas. An owl
flew hooting from the wood higher up the glen. Mrs. Arnold stood waiting
until the bonfire was well alight, then she turned to the expectant
girls.

"I've no need to tell most of you why we have met here to-night; but for
the benefit of a few who are new-comers to The Woodlands I should like
briefly to explain the objects of the Camp-fire League. The purpose of
the organization is to show that the common things of daily life are the
chief means of beauty, romance, and adventure, to cultivate the outdoor
habit, and to help girls to serve the community--the larger home--as
well as the individual home. In these ultra-modern times we must
especially devote ourselves to the service of the country, and try by
every means in our power to make our League of some national use. First
let us repeat together the rules of the Camp-fire League:

    "'1. Seek beauty.
      2. Give service.
      3. Pursue knowledge.
      4. Be trustworthy.
      5. Hold on to health.
      6. Glorify work.
      7. Be happy.'

"Seeking beauty includes more than looking for superficial adornment.
Beauty is in all life, in Nature, in people, in the love of one's heart,
in virtue and a radiant disposition. The value of service depends
largely upon the attitude of mind of the one rendering it. Joy in the
performance of some needed service in behalf of parent, teacher,
friend, or country constitutes a part of the very essence of goodness,
and multiplies the good already abiding in the heart. This is the third
anniversary of the founding of a branch of the League at The Woodlands.
So far the work has been very encouraging, and I am glad to say that
to-night we have candidates eligible for all three ranks. It shall now
be the business of the meeting formally to admit them. Candidates for
Wood-gatherers, present yourselves!"

Six of the younger girls came forward and saluted.

"Can you repeat, and will you promise to obey, the seven rules of the
Camp-fire law?"

Each responded audibly in the affirmative.

"Then you are admitted to the initial rank of Wood-gatherers, you are
awarded the white badge of service, and may sign your names as accepted
members of the League."

The six retired to make way for a higher grade, and eight other girls
stepped into the firelight.

"Candidates for Fire-makers, you have passed three months with good
characters as Wood-gatherers, and you have proved your ability to render
first aid, keep accounts, tie knots, and prepare and serve a simple
meal; you have each committed to memory some good poem, and have
acquainted yourself with the career of some able, public-spirited woman.
Having thus shown your wish to serve the community, repeat the
Fire-maker's desire."

And all together the eight girls chanted:

    "As fuel is brought to the fire
     So I purpose to bring
     My strength,
     My ambition,
     My heart's desire,
     My joy,
     And my sorrow
     To the fire
     Of human kind.
     For I will tend
     As my fathers have tended
     And my fathers' fathers
     Since time began,
     The fire that is called
     The love of man for man,
     The love of man for God."

Mrs. Arnold said a few kind words to each as she pinned on their red
badges. Only novices who had stood the various tests with credit were
raised to the honour of the second rank. Those who had failed must
perforce continue as Wood-gatherers for another period of three months.

There remained one further and higher rank, only attainable after six
months' ardent and trustworthy service as Fire-makers. To-night three
girls were to be admitted to its privileges, and Helen Cooper, Doris
Deane, and Ulyth Stanton presented themselves. With grave faces they
repeated the Torch-bearer's desire:

     "That light which has been given to me I desire to pass undimmed to
     others."

Ulyth kissed Mrs. Arnold's pretty hand as the long-coveted yellow badge
was fastened on to her dress, side by side with the Union Jack. She was
so glad to be a Torch-bearer at last. She had become a candidate when
the League was first founded three years ago, and all that time she had
been slowly working towards the desired end of the third rank. One or
two slips had hindered her progress, but last term she had made a very
special effort, and it was sweet to meet with her reward. Torch-bearers
were mostly to be found among the Sixth and Upper Fifth; she was the
only girl in V B who had won so high a place. She touched the yellow
ribbon tenderly. It meant so much to her.

Now that the serious business of the meeting was over, the fun was about
to begin. The big camp-kettle was produced and filled at the stream, and
then set to boil upon the embers. Cups and spoons made their appearance.
Cocoa and biscuits were to be the order of the evening, followed by as
many songs, dances, and games as time permitted. Squatting on the grass,
the girls made a circle round their council-fire. Marjorie Earnshaw, one
of the Sixth, had brought her guitar, and struck the strings every now
and then as an earnest of the music she intended to bring from it later
on. Everybody was in a jolly mood, and inclined to laugh at any pun,
however feeble. Mrs. Arnold, always bright and animated, surpassed
herself, and waxed so amusing that the circle grew almost hysterical.
The Wood-gatherers, whose office it was to mix the cocoa, supplied cup
after cup, and refilled the kettle so often that they ventured to air
the time-honoured joke that the stream would run dry, for which ancient
chestnut they were pelted with pebbles.

When at last nobody could even pretend to be thirsty any longer, the
cups were rinsed in the pool and stacked under a tree, and the concert
commenced. Part-songs and catches sounded delightful in the open air,
and solos, sung to the accompaniment of Marjorie's guitar, were equally
