
"It's not fair to keep us in all the term," said Dick, his cheeks
mounting colour with the desperateness of his boldness.

Mr Ashford changed colour, too, but his cheeks turned pale.

"Leave my sight, sir, instantly!  How do you dare to use language like
that to me!"

Fortunately for the dignity, as well as for the comfort, of the three
boys, Dick made no attempt to prolong the argument.  He turned and left
the room, followed by his two faithful henchmen, little imagining that,
if any one had scored in this unsatisfactory interview, he had.

Don't let the reader imagine that any mystical glory belongs to the
schoolboy who happens to "score one" off his master.  If he does it
consciously, the chances are he is a snob for doing it.  If he does it
unconsciously, as Dick did here, then the misfortune of the master by no
means means the bliss of the boy.

Dick felt anything but blissful as he stalked moodily to the schoolroom
that morning and growled his injuries to his allies.

But Mr Ashford, as soon as his first burst of temper had evaporated,
like an honest, sensible man, sat down and reviewed the situation; and
it occurred to him, on reviewing it, that he had made a mistake.  It
was, of course, extremely painful and humiliating to have to acknowledge
it; but, once acknowledged, it would have been far more humiliating to
Mr Ashford's sense of honour to persist in it.

He summoned the boys once more to his presence, and they trooped in like
three prisoners brought up on remand to hear their final sentence.

The master's mouth twitched nervously, and he half repented of the
ordeal he had set before himself.

"You said just now, Richardson, that the punishment I proposed to
inflict on you was not fair?"

"Yes, sir, we think so," replied Dick, simply.

"I think so, too," said Mr Ashford, equally simply, "and I shall say no
more about it.  Now you can go."

The boys gaped at him in mingled admiration and bewilderment.

"You can go," repeated the master.

Richardson took a hasty survey of his companions' countenances, and
said--

"Will you cane us instead, please sir?"

"No, Richardson, that would not be fair either."

Richardson made one more effort.

"Please, sir, we think we deserve something."

"People don't always get their deserts in this world, my boy," said the
master, with a smile.  "Now please go when I tell you."

Mr Ashford rallied three waverers to his standard that morning.  They
didn't profess to understand the meaning of it all, but they could see
that the master had sacrificed something to do them justice, and with
the native chivalry of boys, they made his cause theirs, and did all
they could to cover his retreat.

Two days later, a letter by the post was brought in to Mr Ashford in
the middle of school.

Coote's face grew crimson as he saw it, and the faces of his companions
grew long and solemn.  A sudden silence fell on the room, broken only by
the rustle of the paper as the master tore open the envelope and
produced the printed document.  His eyes glanced hurriedly down it, and
a shade of trouble crossed his brow.

"We're gone coons," groaned Heathcote.

"Don't speak to me," said Dick.

Coote said nothing, but wished one of the windows was open on a hot day
like this.

"This paper contains the result of the entrance examination at
Templeton," said Mr Ashford.  "Out of thirty-six candidates, Heathcote
has passed fifteenth, and Richardson twenty-first.  Coote, I am sorry to
say, has not passed."



CHAPTER THREE.

HOW OUR HEROES GIRD ON THEIR ARMOUR.

Our heroes, each in the bosom of his own family, spent a somewhat
anxious Easter holiday.

Of the three, Coote's prospects were decidedly the least cheery.
Mountjoy House without Richardson and Heathcote would be desolation
itself, and the heart of our hero quailed within him as he thought of
the long dull evenings and the dreary classes of the coming friendless
term.

"Never mind, old man," Dick had said, cheerily, as the "Firm" talked
their prospects over on the day before the holidays, "you're bound to
scrape through the July exam.; and then won't we have a jollification
when you turn up?"

But all this was sorry comfort for the dejected Coote, who retired home
and spent half his holidays learning dates, so determined was he not to
be "out of it" next time.

As for Heathcote and Richardson, they were neither of them without their
perturbations of spirit.  Not that either of them realised--who ever
does?--the momentous epoch in their lives which had just arrived, when
childhood like a pleasant familiar landscape lies behind, and the hill
of life clouded in mist and haze rises before, all unknown and
unexplored.

Heathcote, who was his grandmother's only joy, and had no nearer
relatives, did hear some remarks to this effect as he girded himself for
the coming campaign.  But he evaded them with an "Oh, yes, I know, all
serene," and was far more interested in the prospect of a new Eton
jacket and Sunday surplice than in a detailed examination of his past
personal history.

The feeling uppermost in his mind was that Dick was going to Templeton
too, and beyond that his anxieties and trepidations extended no further
than the possibility of being called green by his new schoolfellows.

Richardson had the great advantage of being one of a real family circle.

He was the eldest of a large family, the heads of which feared God, and
tried to train their children to become honest men and women.

How far they had succeeded with Dick, or--to give him his real Christian
name, now we have him at home--with Basil, the reader may have already
formed an opinion.  He had his faults--what boy hasn't?--and he wasn't
specially clever.  But he had pluck and hope, and resolution, and
without being hopelessly conceited, had confidence enough in himself to
carry him through most things.

"Don't be in too great a hurry to choose your friends, my boy," said his
father, as the two walked up and down the London platform.  "You'll find
plenty ready enough, but give them a week or two before you swear
eternal friendship with any of them."

Dick thought this rather strange advice, and got out of it by saying--

"Oh, I shall have Georgie Heathcote, you know.  I shan't much care about
the other fellows."

"Don't be too sure.  And, remember this, my boy, be specially on your
guard with any of them that flatter you.  They'll soon find out your
weak point and that's where they'll have you."

Dick certainly considered this a little strong even for a parent.  But
somehow the advice stuck, for all that, and he remembered it afterwards.

"As to other matters," said the father, "your mother, I know, has spoken
for us both.  Be honest to everybody, most of all yourself, and remember
a boy can fear God without being a prig-- Ah, here's the train."

It was a dismal farewell, that between father and son, when the moment
of parting really came.  Neither of them had expected it would be so
hard, and when at last the whistle blew, and their hands parted, both
were thankful the train slipped swiftly from the station and turned a
corner at once.

After the bustle and excitement of the last few days, Dick found the
loneliness of the empty carriage decidedly unpleasant, and for a short
time after leaving town, was nearer moping than he had ever been before.

It would be an hour before the train reached X---, where Heathcote would
get in.  It would be all right then, but meanwhile he wished he had
something to do.

So he fell to devouring the provisions his mother and sisters had put up
for his special benefit, and felt in decidedly better heart when the
meal was done.

Then he hauled down his hat-box, and tried on his new "pot," and felt
still more soothed.

Then he extricated his new dressing-case from his travelling-bag, and
examined, with increasing comfort, each several weapon it contained,
until the discovery of a razor in an unsuspected corner completed his
good cheer, and he began to whistle.

In the midst of this occupation the train pulled up, and Heathcote, with
_his_ hat-box and bag invaded the carriage.

"Hallo, old man," said Dick with a nod, "you've turned up, then?  Look
here, isn't this a stunning turnout?  Don't go sitting down on my razor,
I say."

"Excuse me a second," said Heathcote, putting down his traps and turning
to the window, "grandma's here, and I've got to say good-bye."

"Good-bye, grandma," added the dutiful youth, holding out his hand to a
venerable lady who stood by the window.

"Good-bye, Georgie.  Give me a kiss, my dear boy."

Georgie didn't like kissing in public, especially when the public
consisted of Dick.  And, yet, he couldn't well get out of it.  So he
hurried through the operation as quickly as possible, and stood with his
duty towards his relative and his interest towards the razor, wondering
why the train didn't start.

It started at last, and after a few random flickings of his handkerchief
out of the window, he was able to devote his entire attention to his
friend's cutlery.

One exhibition provoked another.  Heathcote's "pot" was produced and
critically compared with Dick's.  He had no dressing-case, certainly,
but he had a silver watch and a steel chain, also a pocket inkpot, and a
railway key.  And by the way, he thought, the sooner that railway key
was brought into play the better.

By its aid they successfully resisted invasion at the different stations
as they went along, until at length Heathcote's watch told them that the
next station would be Templeton.  Whereat they became grave and packed
up their bags, and looked rather wistfully out of the window.

"Father says," remarked Dick, "only the new boys go up to-day.  The rest
come to-morrow."

"Rather a good job," said Heathcote.

A long silence followed.

"Think there'll be any one to meet us?" said Dick.  "Don't know.  I wish
Coote was to be there too."

Another pause.

"I expect they'll be jolly enough fellows," said Dick.

"Oh yes.  They don't bully now in schools, I believe."

"No; they say it's going out.  Perhaps it's as well."

"We shall be pretty well used to the place by to-morrow, I fancy."

"Yes.  It'll be rather nice to see them all turn up."

"I expect, you know, they'll have such a lot to do, they won't bother
about new fellows.  I know I shouldn't."

"They might about the awful green ones, perhaps.  Ha, ha!  Wouldn't it
be fun if old Coote was here!"

"Yes, poor old Coote!  You know I'm half sorry to leave Mountjoy.  It
was a jolly old school, wasn't it?"

The shrieking of the whistle and the grinding of the brake put an end to
further conversation for the present.

As they alighted, each with his hat-box and bag and umbrella, and stood
on the platform, they felt moved by a sincere affection for the carriage
they were leaving.  Indeed, there is no saying what little encouragement
would not have sufficed to send them back into its hospitable shelter.

"Here you are, sir--this way for the school--this cab, sir!"--cried half
a dozen cabmen, darting whip in hand upon our heroes, as they stood
looking about them.

"Don't you go along with them," said one confidentially.  "They'll
charge you half-a-crown.  Come along, young gentlemen, I'll take you for
two bob."

"Go on.  You think the young gentlemen are greenhorns.  No fear.  They
know what's what.  They ain't agoin' to be _seen_ drivin' up the Quad in
a Noah's Ark like that.  Come along, young gents; leave him for the
milksops.  The like of you rides in a hansom, I know."

Of course, this artful student of juvenile nature carried the day, and
there was great cheering and crowing and chaffing, when the hansom, with
the two trunks on the top, and the two anxious faces inside, peering
over the top of their hat-boxes and bags rattled triumphantly out of the
station.

As Templeton school was barely three minutes' drive from the station,
there was very little leisure either for conversation or the recovery of
their composure, before the gallant steed was clattering over the
cobbles of the great Quadrangle.

They pulled up at a door which appeared to belong to a bell of imposing
magnitude, which the cabman, alighting, proceeded to pull with an energy
that awoke the echoes of that solemn square, and made our two heroes
draw their breath short and sharp.

"Hop out, young gentlemen," said the cabman, helping his passengers and
their luggage out.  "It's a busy time, and I'm in a hurry.  A shilling
each, and sixpence a piece for the traps; that's two and three makes
five, and leave the driver to you."

Considering the distance they had come, it seemed rather a long price,
and Heathcote ventured very mildly to ask--

"The other man at the station said two shillings."

"Bah!" said the cabman in tones of unfeigned disgust, "you are green
ones after all!  He'd have charged a bob a piece for the traps, and
landed you up to eight bob, and stood no nonsense too about it.  Come,
settle up, young gentlemen, please.  The Templeton boys I'm used to
always fork out like gentlemen."

Dick took out his purse, and produced five-and-sixpence, which he gave
the driver, just as the door opened and the school matron presented
herself.

"Is that your cab?" said she, pointing to the receding hansom.

"Yes, ma'am."

"How much did he charge you?"

"Five shillings, ma'am."

The lady uttered an exclamation of mingled wrath and contempt.  "It's
double his right fare.  Run quick, and you'll catch him."

Heathcote started to run, shouting meekly, and waving his hand to the
man to stop.

But the man good-humouredly declined the invitation, raising his hat
gallantly to the lady, and putting his tongue into his cheek, as he
touched the horse up into a trot, and rattled out of the square.

Heathcote returned rather sheepishly, and the two friends followed the
lady indoors feeling that their entry into Templeton had been anything
but triumphant.

"The idea!" said the matron, partly to herself and partly to the boys,
"of his landing you and all your luggage on the pavement like that, and
then going off, before I came.  He knew well enough I should have seen
he only got his right fare.  The wretch!"

The boys did not know at the time, but they discovered it afterwards,
that Mrs Partlett, the matron, had a standing feud with all the cabmen
of Templeton, whose delight it was to enjoy themselves at her expense--a
pastime they could not more effectively achieve than by fleecing her
young charges, so to speak, under her very nose.

"Now," said she, when presently she had recovered her equanimity, "if
you'll unlock these things, you can go and take a walk round the
Quadrangle and look about you, while I unpack.  The bell will ring for
new boys' tea in half an hour."

They obeyed, and took a melancholy, but interested stroll round the
great court.  They read all the Latin mottoes, and were horrified to
find one or two which they could not translate.

Fancy a Templeton boy not being able to understand his own mottoes!

They read the names on the different masters' doors; and dwelt with
special reverence on the door-plate of Mr Westover, in whose house they
were to reside.  They deciphered the carvings on the great gate, and
shuddered as they saw the name of one "Joe Bolt" cut rude and deep
across the forehead of the cherub who stood sentinel at the chapel
portal.

All was wonder in that strange walk.  The wonder of untasted
proprietorship.  It was _their_ school, _their_ quadrangle, _their_
chapel, _their_ elm-trees; and yet they scarcely liked to inspect them
too closely, or behave themselves towards them too familiarly.

One or two boys were taking solitary strolls, like themselves.  They
were new boys too--nearly all of them afflicted with the same
uneasiness, some more, some less.

It was amusing to see the way these new boys held themselves one to
another as they crossed and passed one another in that afternoon's
promenade.  There was no falling into one another's arms in bursts of
mutual sympathy.  There was no forced gaiety and indifference, as though
one would say "I don't think much of the place after all."  No.  With
blunt English pride, each boy bridled up a bit as a stranger drew near,
and looked straight in front of him, till the coast was clear.

At length the bell above the matron's door began to toll, and there was
a general movement among the stragglers in its direction.

About twenty boys, mostly of our heroes' age, assembled in the tea room.
Their small band looked almost lost in that great hall, as they
clustered, of one accord, for warmth and comfort, at one end of the long
table.

The matron entered and said grace, and then proceeded to pour out tea
for her hungry family, while the boys themselves, at her injunction,
passed round the bread-and-butter and eggs.

A meal is one of the most civilising institutions going; and Dick, after
two cups of Templeton tea, and several cubic inches of Templeton bread-
and-butter, felt amiably inclined towards his left-hand neighbour, a
little timorous-looking boy, who blushed when anybody looked at him, and
nearly fainted when he heard his own voice answering Mrs Partlett's
enquiry whether he wanted another cup.

Apart from a friendly motive, it seemed to Dick it would be good
practice to begin talking to a youth of this unalarming aspect.  He
therefore enquired, "Are you a new boy?"

The boy started to hear himself addressed; then looking shyly up in the
speaker's face, and divining that no mischief lurked there, he replied--

"Yes."

Dick took another gulp of tea, and continued, "Where do you live--in
London?"

"No--I live in Devonshire."

Dick returned to his meal again, and exchanged some sentences with
Heathcote before he resumed.

"What school were you at before?"

"I wasn't at any--I had lessons at home."

"A tutor?"

The boy blushed very much, and looked appealingly at Dick, as though to
beg him to receive the disclosure he was about to make kindly.

"No--my mother taught me."

Dick did receive it kindly.  That is, he didn't laugh.  He felt sorry
for the boy and what was in store for him when the news got abroad.  He
also felt much less reserved in continuing the conversation.

"Heathcote here and I were at Mountjoy; so we're pretty well used to
kicking about," said he, patronisingly.  "I suppose you didn't go in for
the entrance exam, then?"

"Yes, I did," said the boy.

"Poor chap," thought Dick, "fancy a fellow who's never left his mammy's
apron-strings going in for an exam.  How did you get on?" he added,
turning to his companion.

