not noticed?  At any rate he would try the next verse, which was certain
to amuse them.  He looked as droll as he could, and by way of
heightening the effect, stuck his two thumbs into the armholes of his
waistcoat and wagged his hands in time with the song.

Do you think I lie abed all day?

Oh no!  Do you guess I skate on ice in May?

Oh no!  Do you think I can't tell what is what?  Do you think I don't
know pepper's hot?  Or whereabouts my i's to dot?

Oh no, no rot!

As he concluded, Fisher minor summoned up enough resolution to shake his
head and lay one finger to his nose in the most approved style of
comedy, and then awaited the result.

Fellows apparently did not take in that the song was at an end, for they
neither cheered nor smiled.  So Fisher minor made an elaborate bow to
show it was all over.  The result was the same.  A gloomy silence
prevailed, in the midst of which the singer, never more perplexed in his
life, descended from the table and proceeded to look out for the
congratulations of his admirers.

"Beautiful song," said Wally, still mopping his face.

"I never thought I could be so touched by anything.  We generally get
comic songs on first-night."

"This _is_ a comic one," said Fisher minor.

"Go on," said Wheatfield; "tell that to D'Arcy here--he'll believe you--
eh, D'Arcy?"  D'Arcy looked mysterious.

"It's no laughing matter, young Wheatfield," said he, in a loud whisper,
evidently intended for the eager ears of Fisher minor.  "I heard Yorke
just now ask Denton if he thought Fisher's minor was all there.  Denton
seemed quite cut up, and said he hadn't known it before, but it must be
a great family trouble to the Fishers.  It accounted for Fisher major's
frequent low spirits.  You know," continued D'Arcy confidentially, "I
can't help myself thinking it's a little rough on Fisher major for his
people to send a minor who's afflicted like this to Fellsgarth.  They
might at least have put him on the Modern side.  He'd have been better
understood there."

This speech Fisher minor listened to with growing perplexity.  Was
D'Arcy in jest or earnest?  He seemed to be in earnest, and the serious
faces of his listeners looked like it too.  Had the captain really made
that remark to Denton?  Suppose there _was_ something in it!  Suppose,
without his knowing, he was really a little queer in his head!  His
people might have told him of it.  And Fisher major, his brother--even
he hadn't heard of it!  Oh dear! oh dear!  How was he ever to recover
his reputation for sanity?  Whatever induced him to sing that song?

Poor Fisher minor devoutly wished himself home again, within reach of
his mother's soothing voice and his sisters' smiles.  _They_ understood
him.  These fellows didn't.  _They_ knew he was not an idiot.  These
fellows didn't.

Further reflection was cut short by a loud call to order and cheers, as
Yorke, the captain, rose to his feet.

Every one liked Yorke.  As captain of the School even the Moderns looked
up to him, and were forced to admit that he was a credit to Fellsgarth.
In Wakefield's, his own house, he was naturally an idol.  Prodigious
stories were afloat as to his wisdom and his prowess.  Examiners were
reported to have rent their clothes in despair at his answers; and at
football, rumour had it that once, in one of the out-matches against
Ridgmoor, he had run the ball down the field with six of the other side
on his back, and finished up with a drop at the goal from thirty yards.

But his popularity in his own house depended less on these exploits than
on his general good-nature and incorruptible fairness.  He scorned to
hit an opponent when he was down, and yet he would knock down a friend
as soon as a foe if the credit of the School required it.  A few,
indeed, there were whose habit it was to sneer at Yorke for being what
they called "a saint."  The captain of Fellsgarth would have been the
last to claim such a title for himself; yet those who knew him best knew
that in all he did, even in the common concerns of daily school life, he
relied on the guidance and help of a Divine Friend, and was not ashamed
to own his faith.

The one drawback to his character in the eyes of certain of his fellow-
prefects and others at Wakefield's was that in the standing feud between
Classics and Moderns he would take no part.  He demanded the allegiance
of all parties on behalf of the School, and if any man refused it, Yorke
was the sort of person who would make it his business to know the reason
why.

Now as he got up and waited for the cheers to cease, no one could deny
that he wasn't as fine a captain as Wakefield's could expect to see for
many a day.  And for the first time some of those who even feared him
realised with a qualm that this was the last "first-night" on which he
would be there to make the usual speech.

"Gentlemen," he said, "we are all glad to be back in the old place,"
(cheers).  "At any rate I am," (loud cheers).  "On first-night, as you
know, we always combine business with pleasure.  We have just had the
pleasure," (laughter, in the midst of which Fisher minor pricked up his
ears and wondered if his song wasn't going to be appreciated after all).
"The lambs have bleated and done their level best, I'm sure," (renewed
laughter, and cries of "How now?").  "Now for the business.  Gentlemen,
the house clubs demand your support."  (Fisher minor turned deadly green
as he remembered the Modern boy and his half-crown.  He looked round
wildly for Ashby, but Ashby was standing between Wally and D'Arcy, and
the proximity was not encouraging for Fisher's purpose.  The idea
occurred to him of appealing to his brother.  But Fisher major, pen in
hand, sat at the receipt of custom, and he dare not approach).  "We hope
there will be no shirking.  Every fellow in the house is expected to
back up the clubs.  If the House clubs are not kept up to the mark, the
School clubs are sure to go down," (cheers).  "We don't ask much.  The
seniors pay 5 shillings, the middle-boys 3 shillings 6 pence, and the
juniors 2 shillings 6 pence."  (Fisher minor glanced frantically in the
direction of the door, and began to edge that way.) "Now, gentlemen, one
word more.  You know, last term, there was a lot of bad blood between
Classics and Moderns," (great cheers and three groans for the Moderns).
"Of course it's open to any idiot who likes to make a fool of himself,
and quarrel with anybody he likes.  He's welcome to do it up to a
certain point, if it gives him pleasure.  But I want to say this--and
I'd say it if the whole of the school was here--that if these rows once
begin to interfere with the honour of the School in sports or anything
else, as they nearly did last term, the fellows who indulge in them will
be dropped on pretty heavily, no matter what side or what house they
belong to."

The captain looked so uncommonly like meaning what he said, that D'Arcy,
who had already made an appointment to fight Lickford, a Modern boy, at
the Three Oaks before breakfast to-morrow, quailed under his eye, and
wondered if he could with dignity "scratch" the engagement.

A general movement towards the table at which Fisher major sat with his
pen and account-book followed the captain's speech.  Of all the company
present, only one failed to enrol himself.  He was a new boy called
Fisher minor, who, evidently worn out by the fatigues of the day and
unversed in the etiquette of first-night, had sought the dame at a
somewhat early hour, and received her permission to go to bed.

Such at least was that lady's version when Fisher major, having missed
his minor, made inquiries respecting his absence.

"Best thing he could do, to make himself scarce, after such a
performance," said the elder brother to Denton, who accompanied him.

"Yes, indeed, I envy Ranger his fag.  It's a lucky thing we bagged the
other one in time."

"The young donkey couldn't be in better hands," said Fisher; "but I say,
Den, didn't the captain come down rather heavy with his thunder to-
night?  What does it all mean?"

"Bows, I expect," said Denton.  "He's not going to stand what went on
last term, and I'm jolly glad of it.  We must back him up."

"If he means I'm not to feel inclined to kick Dangle whenever I see him,
I can't promise him much."

"Dangle's a good quarter-mile man, and a good long-stop.  If your
kicking him prevents his playing for the School, you'll have to mind
your eye, my boy.  That's what he means."

"Oh!" grunted Fisher major, "I suppose the rows will begin to-morrow,
when we elect the officers for the School clubs.  Those fellows are sure
to want to stick their own men in."

"At any rate you're safe enough for treasurer, old man.  But come, I'm
dead sleepy to-night.  Time enough for rows to-morrow and the next day."



CHAPTER THREE.

CANVASSING.

When Fisher major woke early next morning he had the curious sensation
of something on his mind without knowing what it was.

He was not out of sorts.  The private supper of which he and Denton and
Ridgway had partaken last night in Ranger's study had been wholesome, if
miscellaneous.  Ranger's people had given him a hamper to bring back,
containing a good many good things--cake, biscuits, potted meats, jam,
Worcester sauce, pickles, coffee, and other groceries intended to
diversify the breakfasts of the half.  By some error of judgment this
valuable article of luggage had come from town in the van, where it had
apparently been placed at the very bottom of the baggage.  The
consequence was, that when it came to be opened, its several ingredients
were found to have got loose, and fused together in a most hopeless way.
Jam, and pickles, and Liebig's extract, and moist sugar were
indistinguishable.  The only thing seemed to be to attack the concoction
_en masse_, without needless delay, and to that end Ranger had summoned
the assistance of his friends and neighbours.  Fisher major was unable
to attribute any part of the weight on his mind to this perfectly
wholesome and homely refreshment.

What was it?  It was not Denton.  He had come back as loyal and festive
as ever, threatening to work hard this half, and determined to have
Fisher major as his guest at the rectory on the lake for the Christmas
vac.

Nor was it the captain's speech last night that bothered him.  True, it
was not altogether conciliatory to those, who, like Fisher major, were
resolved to have no truce with the enemy.  Of course it was the right
thing for Yorke to say.  But Yorke knew, as well as anybody, that the
Classics meant to keep their house Cock-House at Fellsgarth.

Nor was it the accounts; although Fisher minor had to own to himself he
was not a grand hand at finance, and that if he was appointed treasurer
of the School clubs, as well as of his House clubs, he would have his
work cut out for him to keep both funds clear and solvent.

What then was it?  His young brother?  He supposed it must be.  The
young donkey had made a bad beginning at Fellsgarth--which was bad
enough.  But had the elder brother done quite the decent thing in half
disowning him, and letting him run on his fate in the way he had?  A
little brotherly backing up, a word or two of warning, and, if needs be,
a little timely intimidation, might have made all the difference to the
youngster, and would not have done the senior much harm.

Yes; it was this precious minor of his who was on Fisher major's mind.
It was too late, of course, to pick up the milk already spilled.  But it
might be worth while to give him a word of admonition as to his future
conduct.

With this view he sent Ashby (who, with all the alacrity of a brand-new
fag, punctually presented himself for orders before getting-up bell had
ceased ringing) to summon Fisher minor to his brother's room.

"Well, kid," said the elder brother, commencing his toilet, "how did you
get on?  Sleep well?"

"Middling," said Fisher minor.  "Some of the fellows had put pepper on
the blankets, and it got into my eyes--that's all."

"It's a good job they did nothing worse."

"Well," said Fisher minor, who was evidently in a limp state, and had
not at all enjoyed his night, "they _did_ tease a good deal."

"Humph--who did!"

"Well, there was that boy they call--"

"Stop," said Fisher major, turning round fiercely in the middle of
brushing his hair; "do you mean to say you don't know that it's only
cads who sneak about one another?"

"But you asked me."

"Of course I did, and made sure you wouldn't let out.  I hope they'll
give you a few more lively nights, to teach you better."

The young brother's lips gave an ominous quiver at this unfeeling
speech, and he horrified Fisher major by betraying imminent symptoms of
tears.

"Look here, Joey," said the senior, rather more soothingly, "you've made
a jolly bad start, and that can't be helped.  The mistake you made is in
thinking you know everything, whereas you're about as green as they make
them.  Why ever do you pretend not to be?  Look at that other new kid--
the other one who sang.  He's green too; but, bless you, it's no crime,
and all the fellows take to him because he doesn't put on side like you.
Why, that song you sang--oh, my stars!--what on _earth_ put that rot
into your head?"

This finished up poor Fisher minor.  The recollection of his performance
last night was more than he could stand, and he began to whimper.

"Come, old chap," said Fisher major, kindly, patting him on the
shoulder; "perhaps it's not all your fault.  I suppose I ought to have
given you a leg-up, and prevented you making a fool of yourself.  You'll
get on right enough if you don't swagger.  And in any case, don't
blubber."

"I shall never get on here," said the new boy.  "All the fellows are
against me.  Besides--I didn't know it was wrong; and--oh, Tom?--I lent
a fellow half a crown, and now I've nothing to pay for the clubs!"

Fisher major laughed.

"I thought from your tones you were going to confess a murder, at least.
You'd better look alive and get the half-crown back."

"That's just it.  I lent it in the dark to a--a Modern chap; and I don't
know his name."

"Upon my honour, Joey, you are a-- Well, it's no good saying what you
are.  I hope you'll see your money again, that's all."

Fisher minor groaned.

"Would you ever mind lending me half-a-crown for the clubs, just this
once?" he pleaded.

"Very convenient arrangement.  I suppose I shall have to.  At least I'll
mark you as paid; and if you've not got back what you've lent your
friend before I have to shell out, I shall have to pay it for you."

"Thanks, Tom; you're an awful brick," said the younger brother,
brightening up rapidly.  "I say, I wish I could be your fag.  Couldn't
I?"

"Ranger's bagged you--you'll get on better with him than me.  He won't
stand as much nonsense as I might.  There! he is calling.  Cut along,
and don't go making such an ass of yourself again.  You'll have to get
on the best you can with your fellows; I can't interfere with them
unless they break rules, you know.  You can come in here, of course, any
time you like, and if you want a leg-up with preparation, and Ranger's
busy, you may as well do your work here."

After this Fisher major felt a little easier in his conscience, and was
able to face the tasks of the day with a lighter mind than if he had had
the care of his minor upon it all the time.

The school work of the day was not particularly onerous.  Dr Ringwood,
the head-master, held a sort of reception of the Sixth, and delivered,
as was his wont, a little lecture on the work to be taken up during the
ensuing half, interspersed with a few sarcastic references to the work
of the previous half, and one or two jokes, which scoffers like Ridgway
used to say must have cost him many serious hours during the holidays to
develop.

"Aristophanes," said the head-master, after calling attention to the
particular merits of the Greek play to be undertaken, "did not write
solely for the Sixth form of a public school.  I am afraid some of you,
last term, thought that Euripides did.  He will require more than usual
attention.  I am sure he can easily receive it.  I would not, if I were
you boys, be too chary this term of extra work.  Some of you are almost
painfully conscientious in your objection to overdo a particular study.
Aristophanes is an author with whom liberties may safely be taken in
this respect.  The test of a good classical scholar, remember, is not
the work he is obliged to do, but what he is not obliged to do--his
extra work; I advise you not to be afraid to try it.  The Sanatorium has
been unusually free of cases of over-pressure lately.  A quarter of an
hour's extra work a day by the Sixth is not at all likely to tax its
capacity," etcetera.

This was the doctor's pleasant style, delivered with a severe face and
downcast eyes.

Then ensued a little lecture to the prefects on their duties and
responsibilities, which was respectfully listened to.  To judge by it,
such a thing as any rumour of dissensions between rival sides and houses
in the school had never reached his ears.  And yet the knowing ones said
the doctor knew better than the captain himself everything that went on
in Fellsgarth, and could at any moment lay his hand on an offender.  But
he preferred to leave the police of the place to his head boys; and on
the whole it was perhaps better for the School that he did.

To a larger or less degree the other forms, Classic and Modern, were
lectured in similar strains by their respective masters.  The new boys
among the junior division were, perhaps, the only ones who listened
attentively to what Mr Stratton, the young, cheery athlete who presided
over their studies, had to say.  And even the irrespectful admiration
was a good deal distracted by the babel of voices which was going on all
round them.

"Never mind him," said D'Arcy; "he's a kid of a master, and don't know
any better.  It's all rot.  Bless you, we get the same thing--"

"D'Arcy," said the master, suddenly, "I was recommending the value of
extra work, especially for clever boys.  Perhaps you will try the
experiment with fifty lines of Virgil by this time to-morrow."

"There you are," said D'Arcy, appealing to his neighbours; "didn't I
tell you he talked rot?  Did you ever hear such a stale joke as that?"

The two new boys were tremendously impressed by this sudden swoop of
vengeance, and gazed open-mouthed at the master for the rest of the
class, stealing only now and again a hasty glance at D'Arcy to see how
he was bearing up against his sore afflictions.

D'Arcy, to do him justice, appeared to be bearing up very well.  He was,
in truth, engaged in a mental calculation as to how, during the coming
term, he could most economically "job" out the impositions which usually
fell to his share.  If his countenance now and then brightened as he met
the awe-struck gaze of the two new boys, it was because in them he
thought he discerned a lively hope of solving the problem creditably to
himself and not unprofitably to them.

"Come along," said he as soon as the class was released; "let's get out
into the fresh air and have a cool.  Hullo, Wally," as the owner of that
name trotted up, "what's up?"

"Up?" said Wally in tones of injured innocence; "one would think you
didn't know it was School club elections on in an hour, and all the
chaps to whip up!  If the Moderns turn up in force, it'll be touch-and-
go if they don't carry every man.  I can't stop now--mind you bring
those kids."

And off he went with all the importance of captain's fag on his
electioneering tour.

