meanwhile he kept it on, because one would freeze without it in the
icy wind.

He heard presently the roaring of the breakers mingled with the
roaring of the wind, and, shutting his eyes, he prayed for a miracle.

He felt the foam beating upon his face, and believing it must come
from the rocks, he clung with all his might to the stump of the mast,
because the shock must occur within a few moments. He felt the
schooner shivering under him, and rising and falling heavily, and then
he opened his eyes to see where best to leap when the shock did come.

He beheld the thick white foam to right and left, but he had not
prayed in vain. The miracle had happened. Here was a narrow opening
in the breakers, and, with but one chance in a hundred to guide it,
the schooner had driven directly through, ceasing almost at once to
rock so violently. But there was enough power left in the waves even
behind the rocks to send the schooner upon a sandy beach, where she
must soon break up.

But Robert was saved. He knew it and he murmured devout thanks. When
the schooner struck in the sand he was thrown roughly forward, but he
managed to regain his feet for an instant, and he leaped outward as
far as he could, forgetting to take off his greatcoat. A returning
wave threw him down and passed over his head, but exerting all his
will, and all his strength he rose when it had passed, and ran for the
land as hard as he could. The wave returned, picked him up, and
hurried him on his way. When it started back again its force was too
much spent and the water was too shallow to have much effect on
Robert. He continued running through the yielding sand, and, when the
wave came in again and snatched at him, it was not able to touch his
feet.

He reached weeds, then bushes, and clutched them with both hands, lest
some wave higher and more daring than all the rest should yet come for
him and seize him. But, in a moment, he let them go, knowing that he
was safe, and laughing rather giddily, sank down in a faint.




CHAPTER XIII

THE MEETING


When Robert revived the wind was still blowing hard, although there
had been some decrease in its violence, and it was yet night. He was
wet and very cold, and, as he arose, he shivered in a chill. The
greatcoat was still wrapped about his body, and although it was soaked
he always believed, nevertheless, that in some measure it had
protected him while he slept. The pistols, the ammunition and the
sword were in his belt, and he believed that the ammunition, fastened
securely in a pouch, was dry, though he would look into that later.

He was quite sure that he had not been unconscious long, as the
appearance of the sky was unchanged. The bushes among which he had
lain were short but tough, and had run their roots down deeply into
the sand. They were friendly bushes. He remembered how glad he had
been to grasp them when he made that run from the surf, and to some
extent they had protected him from the cold wind when he lay among
them like one dead.

The big rollers, white at the top, were still thundering on the beach,
and directly in front of him he saw a lowering hulk, that of the
schooner. The slaver's wicked days were done, as every wave drove it
deeper into the sand, and before long it must break up. Robert felt
that it had been overtaken by retributive justice, and, despite the
chill that was shaking him, he was shaken also by a great thrill of
joy. Wet and cold and on a desolate shore, he was, nevertheless, free.

He began to run back and forth with great vigor, until he felt the
blood flowing in a warm, strong current through his veins again, and
he believed that in time his clothes would dry upon him. He took off
the greatcoat, and hung it upon the bushes where the wind would have a
fair chance at it, and he believed that in the morning it would be
dry, too. Then, finding his powder untouched by the water, he withdrew
the wet charges from the pistols and reloaded them.

If he had not been seasoned by a life in the wilderness and countless
hardships he probably would have perished from exhaustion and cold,
but his strong, enduring frame threw off the chill, and he did not
pause for three full hours until he had made a successful fight for
his life. Then very tired but fairly warm he stopped for a while, and
became conscious that the wind had died to a great extent. The rollers
were not half so high and the hulk of the ship showed larger and
clearer than ever. He believed that when the storm ceased he could
board her and find food, if he did not find it elsewhere. Meanwhile he
would explore.

Buckling on his pistols and sword, but leaving the greatcoat to
continue its process of drying, he walked inland, finding only a
desolate region of sand, bushes and salt marshes, without any sign of
human habitation. He believed it was the Jersey coast, and that he
could not be any vast distance from New York. But it seemed hopeless
to continue in that direction and being worn to the bone he returned
to his greatcoat, which had become almost dry in the wind.

Now he felt that he must address himself to the need of the moment,
which was sleep, and he hunted a long time for a suitable lair. A high
bank of sand was covered with bushes larger and thicker than the
others, and at the back of the bank grew a tree of considerable size
with two spreading roots partly above ground. The sand was quite dry,
and he heaped it much higher along the roots. Then he lay down between
them, being amply protected on three sides, while the bushes waved
over his head. He was not only sheltered, he was hidden also, and
feeling safe, with the greatcoat, now wholly dry, wrapped around him,
and the pistols and sword beside him, he closed his eyes and fell
asleep.

The kindly fortune that had taken the lad out of such desperate
circumstances remained benevolent. The wind ceased entirely and the
air turned much warmer. Day soon came, and with it a bright cheerful
sun, that gilded the great expanse of low and desolate shore. The boy
slept peacefully while the morning passed and the high sun marked the
coming of the afternoon.

He had been asleep about ten hours when he awoke, turned once or twice
in his lair and then stood up. It was a beautiful day, in striking
contrast with the black night of storm, and he knew by the position of
the sun that it was within about three hours of its setting. He
tested his body, but there was no soreness. He was not conscious of
anything but a ravening hunger, and he believed that he knew where he
could satisfy it.

There was no wind and the sea was calm, save for a slight swell. The
schooner, its prow out of the water, was in plain view. It was so
deeply imbedded in the sand that Robert considered it a firm house of
shelter, until it should be broken to pieces by successive storms. But
at present he looked upon it as a storehouse of provisions, and he
hurried down the beach.

His foot struck against something, and he stopped, shuddering. It was
the body of one of the slavers and presently he passed another. The
sea was giving up its dead. He reached the schooner, glad to leave
these ghastly objects behind him, and, with some difficulty, climbed
aboard. The vessel had shipped much water, but she was not as great a
wreck as he had expected, and he instantly descended to the cook's
galley, where he had given his brief service. In the lockers he found
an abundance of food of all kinds, as the ship had been equipped for a
long voyage, and he ate hungrily, though sparingly at first. Then he
went into the captain's cabin, lay down on a couch, and took a long
and luxurious rest.

Robert was happy. He felt that he had won, or rather that Providence
had won for him, a most wonderful victory over adverse fate. His
brilliant imagination at once leaped up and painted all things in
vivid colors. Tayoga, Willet and the others must be terribly alarmed
about him as they had full right to be, but he would soon be back in
New York, telling them of his marvelous risk and adventure.

Then he deliberated about taking a supply of provisions to his den in
the bushes, but when he went on deck the sun was already setting, and
it was becoming so cold again that he decided to remain on the
schooner. Why not? It seemed strange to him that he had not thought of
it at first. The skies were perfectly clear, and he did not think
there was any danger of a storm.

He rummaged about, discovered plenty of blankets and made a bed for
himself in the captain's cabin, finding a grim humor in the fact that
he should take that sinister man's place. But as it was only three or
four hours since he had awakened he was not at all sleepy and he
returned to the deck, where he wrapped his treasure, the huge
greatcoat, about his body and sat and watched. He saw the big red sun
set and the darkness come down again, the air still and very cold.

But he was snug and warm, and bethought himself of what he must
undertake on the morrow. If he continued inland long enough he would
surely come to somebody, and at dawn, taking an ample supply of
provisions, he would start. That purpose settled, he let his mind
rest, and remained in a luxurious position on the deck. The rebound
from the hopeless case in which he had seemed to be was so great that
he was not lonely. He had instead a wholly pervading sense of ease and
security. His imagination was able to find beauty in the sand and the
bushes and the salt marshes, and he did not need imagination at all to
discover it in the great, mysterious ocean, which the moon was now
tinting with silver. It was a fine full moon, shedding its largest
supply of beams, and swarms of bright stars sparkled in the cold, blue
skies. A fine night, thought Robert, suited to his fine future.

It was very late, when he went down to the captain's cabin, ate a
little more food and turned in. He soon slept, but not needing sleep
much now, he awoke at dawn. His awakening may have been hastened by
the footsteps and voices he heard, but in any event he rose softly and
buckled on his sword and pistols. One of the voices, high and sharp,
he recognized, and he believed that once more he was the child of good
fortune, because he had been awakened in time.

He sat on the couch, facing the door, put the sword by his side and
held one of the pistols, cocked and resting on his knee. The footsteps
and voices came nearer, and then the keen, cruel face appeared at the
door.

"Good morning, captain," said Robert, equably. "You left me in
command of the ship and I did my best with her. I couldn't keep her
afloat, and so I ran her up here on the beach, where, as you see, she
is still habitable."

"You're a good seaman, Peter," said the captain, hiding any surprise
that he may have felt, "but you haven't obeyed my orders in full. I
expected you to keep the ship afloat, and you haven't done so."

"That was too much to expect. I see that you have two men with
you. Tell them to step forward where I can cover them as well as you
with the muzzle of this pistol. That's right. Now, I'm going to
confide in you."

"Go ahead, Peter."

"I haven't liked your manner for a long time, captain. I'm only Peter
Smith, a humble seaman, but since you left me in command of the ship
last night I mean to keep the place, with all the responsibilities,
duties and honors appertaining to it. Take your hands away from your
belt. This is a lone coast, and I'm the law, the judge and the
executioner. Now, you and the two men back away from the door, and as
sure as there's a God in Heaven, if any one of you tries to draw a
weapon I'll shoot him. You'll observe that I've two pistols and also a
sword. A sailor engaged in a hazardous trade like ours, catching and
selling slaves, usually learns how to use firearms, but I'm pretty
good with the sword, too, captain, though I've hid the knowledge from
you before. Now, just kindly back into the cook's galley there, and
you and your comrades make up a good big bag of food for me. I'll tell
you what to choose. I warn you a second time to keep your hands away
from your belt. I'll really have to shoot off a finger or two as a
warning, if you don't restrain your murderous instincts. Murder is
always a bad trade, captain. Put in some of those hard biscuits, and
some of the cured meats. No, none of the liquors, I have no use for
them. By the way, what became of Miguel, with whom I worked so often?"

"He's drowned," replied the captain.

"I'm sorry," said Robert, and he meant it. Miguel was the only one on
board the slaver who had shown a ray of human sympathy.

"What do you mean to do?" asked the captain, his face contorted with
rage and chagrin.

"First, I'll see that you finish filling that bag as I direct. Put in
the packages yourself. I like to watch you work, captain, it's good
for you, and after you fill the bag and pass it to me I'm going to
hand the ship back to you. I've never really liked her, and I mean to
resign the command. I think Peter Smith is fit for better things."

"So, you intend to leave the schooner?"

"Yes, but you won't see me do it. Pass me the bag now. Be careful with
your hands. In truth, I think you'd better raise them above your head,
and your comrades can do the same. Quick, up with them, or I shoot!
That's right. Now, I'll back away. I'm going up the ladder backward,
and when I go out I intend to shove in place the grating that covers
the entrance to the deck there. You can escape in five minutes, of
course, but by that time I'll be off the ship and among the bushes out
of your reach. Oh, I know it's humiliating, captain, but you've had
your way a long time, and the slaver's trade is not a nice one. The
ghosts of the blacks whom you have caused to die must haunt you some
time, captain, and since your schooner is lost you'll now have a
chance to turn to a better business. For the last time I tell you to
be careful with your hands. A sailor man would miss his fingers."

He backed cautiously until his heels touched the ladder, meanwhile
watching the eyes of the man. He knew that the captain was consumed
with rage, but angry and reckless as he was he would not dare to reach
for a weapon of his own, while the pistol confronting him was held
with such a steady hand. He also listened for sounds made by other men
on the ship, but heard none. Then he began to back slowly up the
stairway, continuing his running address.

"I know that your arms must be growing weary, captain," he said, and
he enjoyed it as he said it, "but you won't have to keep 'em up much
longer. Two more steps will take me out upon the deck, and then you'll
be free to do as you please."

It was the last two steps that troubled him most. In order to keep
the men covered with the pistol he had to bend far down, and he knew
that when he could no longer bend far enough the danger would come.
But he solved it by straightening up suddenly and taking two steps at
a leap. He heard shouts and oaths, and the report of a pistol, but the
bullet was as futile as the cries. He slammed down the grating,
fastened it in an instant, ran to the low rail and swiftly lowered
himself and his pack over it and into the sand. Then he ran for the
bushes.

Robert did not waste his breath. Having managed the affair of the
grating, he knew that he was safe for the present. So, when he reached
the higher bushes, he stopped, well hidden by them, and looked
back. In two or three minutes the captain and the two men appeared on
the deck, and he laughed quietly to himself. He could see that their
faces were contorted by rage. They could follow his trail some
distance at least in the sand, but he knew that they would be
cautious. He had shown them his quality and they would fear an
ambush.

He was justified in his opinion, as they remained on the deck,
evidently searching for a glimpse of him among the bushes, and, after
watching them a little while, he set out inland, bearing his burden of
weapons and food, and laughing to himself at the manner in which he
had made the captain serve him. He felt now that the score between
them was even, and he was willing to part company forever.

Youth and success had an enormous effect upon him. When one triumph
was achieved his vivid temperament always foresaw others. Willet had
often called him the child of hope, and hope is a powerful factor in
victory. Now it seemed to him for a little while that his own rescue,
achieved by himself, was complete. He had nothing to do but to return
to New York and his friends, and that was just detail.

He swung along through the bushes, forgetting the burden of his
weapons and his pack of food. In truth, he swaggered a bit, but it was
a gay and gallant swagger, and it became him. He walked for some
distance, feeling that he had been changed from a seaman into a
warrior, and then from a warrior into an explorer, which was his
present character. But he did not see at present the variety and
majesty that all explorers wish to find. The country continued low,
the same alternation of sand and salt marsh, although the bushes were
increasing in size, and they were interspersed here and there with
trees of some height.

Reaching the crest of a low hill he took his last look backward, and
was barely able to see the upper works of the stranded schooner. Then
he thought of the captain and his exuberant spirits compelled him to
laugh aloud. With the chances a hundred to one against him he had
evened the score. While he had been compelled to serve the captain,
the captain in turn had been forced to serve him. It was enough to
make a sick man well, and to turn despair into confidence. He was in
very truth and essence the child of hope.

Another low hill and from its summit he saw nothing but the bushy
wilderness, with a strip of forest appearing on the sunken horizon. He
searched the sky for a wisp of smoke that might tell of a human
habitation, below, but saw none. Yet people might live beyond the
strip of forest, where the land would be less sandy and more fertile,
and, after a brief rest, he pushed on with the same vigor of the body
and elation of the spirit, coming soon to firmer ground, of which he
was glad, as he now left no trail, at least none that an ordinary
white man could follow.

He trudged bravely on for hours through a wilderness that seemed to be
complete so far as man was concerned, although its character steadily
changed, merging into a region of forest and good soil. When he came
into a real wood, of trees large and many, it was about noon, and
finding a comfortable place with his back to a tree he ate from the
precious pack.

The day was still brilliant but cold and he wisely kept himself
thoroughly wrapped in the greatcoat. As he ate he saw a large black
bear walk leisurely through the forest, look at him a moment or two,
and then waddle on in the same grave, unalarmed manner. The incident
troubled Robert, and his high spirits came down a notch or two.

If a black bear cared so little for the presence of an armed human
being then he could not be as near to New York as he had
thought. Perhaps he had been unconscious on the schooner a long
time. He felt of the lump which was not yet wholly gone from his head,
and tried his best to tell how old it was, but he could not do it.

The little cloud in his golden sky disappeared when he rose and
started again through a fine forest. His spirits became as high as
ever. Looking westward he saw the dim blue line of distant hills, and
he turned northward, inferring that New York must lie in that
direction. In two hours his progress was barred by a river running
swiftly between high banks, and with ice at the edges. He could have
waded it as the water would not rise past his waist, but he did not
like the look of the chill current, and he did not want another
wetting on a winter day.

He followed the stream a long distance, until he came to shallows,
where he was able to cross it on stones. His search for a dry ford had
caused much delay, but he drew comfort from his observation that the
stones making his pathway through the water were large and almost
round. He had seen many such about New York, and he had often marveled
at their smoothness and roundness, although he did not yet know the
geological reason. But the stones in the river seemed to him to be
close kin to the stones about New York, and he inferred, or at least
he hoped, that it indicated the proximity of the city.

But he believed that he would have to spend another night in the
