morrow that you couldn't be a soldier, but must go into an office and
try to earn money for yourself...  Suppose he took you away from Eton,
Gurth, and sent you to a cheap school!  How would you like that?"

Silence...  The two lads sat staring into the fire with dogged faces.
They scorned to cry aloud, but the horror of the prospect had for a
moment a so paralysing effect that they could not reply.  Leave
Sandhurst in the middle of one's course, and become--a _clerk_!  Leave
Eton and the fellows, and go to one of those miserable, second-rate
shows which all good Etonians regarded with ineffable contempt!  Was it
possible to suffer such degradation and live?

Rowena was touched to compunction by the sight of the stricken faces,
for though at the moment the worst side of her character was in the
ascendant, she was by no means hard-hearted, and, moreover, Hereward was
her especial friend and companion.  She laughed again, and gave an
impatient shrug to her shoulders.

"Oh, don't be afraid ...  He never _will_!  Whatever happens, nothing
will be allowed to interfere with `the boys' and their careers!  We
shall all pinch and screw and live on twopence-halfpenny a week, so as
to be able to pay your bills.  It's always the same story.  Everything
is sacrificed for the sons."

"Quite right, too," maintained the eldest son, stoutly.  "How are you
going to keep up the honour of a family if you don't give the boys a
chance?  It doesn't matter a fig whether a girl is educated or not, so
long as she can read and write.  She'll marry, of course, and then she
has nothing to do but add up the bills."

At this truly masculine distinction, Rowena and Dreda tossed scornful
heads and rolled indignant eyes to the ceiling.

"I shall never marry!" announced the former, thinking ruefully of the
bare countryside, with never a house of consequence within a radius of
miles ...  "I am a suffragette.  I believe in the high, lofty mission of
women!" cried the second, who had been converted to the movement the day
before by the sight of some sketches in the _Daily Graphic_.  Only nine-
year-old Maud sniffed, and opined, "I shall marry a lord!  Then he'll
have lots of money, and I'll give it to father, and we'll live happily
ever after."

Poor Maud!  Her millennium was not to begin just yet, at least; for
Nannie, her immaculate but austere attendant, rapped at the door at that
moment, and summoned her nursling to be bathed and put to bed.  Maud was
every evening enraged afresh at being called at such a ridiculously
early hour, and to-night her annoyance was increased by the fact that
she was torn ruthlessly from the rare treat of a conference with her
elders, in which she had really been and truly on the level of a "grown-
up."  She fumed with anger, but presently consolation came with the idea
of a dramatic disclosure upstairs.  She waited until she and her
attendant were alone together in the bedroom, and then sprung the bolt
in her most impressive fashion.

"Nannie, we're ruined!"

"Indeed, miss.  Sorry to hear it, I'm sure," returned Nannie,
unperturbed.  It is safe to predict that any important family news will
be known as soon in the servants' hall as in the drawing-room, and
Nannie had the air of listening to a very stale piece of information.

Maud was distinctly disappointed, but nerved herself for fresh efforts.
"Yes.  Bankrup'!  There's nothing left.  I'm going to give up all my
savings.  What will you do, Nannie--leave?"

"I shall be pleased to stay on, miss, as long as your mother can afford
to give me my wages and a nursery maid."

"Oh, Nannie, how _mean_!  The Pharisees likewise do as much as that!  In
storybooks the nurses always stay on, whether they are ruined or not,
and give their money to help.  You _are_ mean!"

"No impertinence, please," said Nannie sharply.  She was just beginning
to comb out Maud's hair, and it was astonishing how many knots there
appeared to be that evening.  "I'm sorry I spoke," reflected poor Maud.



CHAPTER FOUR.

In the next week future plans were practically settled so far as the
young people were concerned.  Rowena had been right in her surmise about
the boys, for, like most fathers, Mr Saxon was prepared to retrench in
any and every direction rather than interfere with the education of his
sons.  It was a family tradition that the eldest son should go into the
army; therefore, at all costs, Hereward must continue that tradition.
The Saxons had for generations been Eton boys, therefore it was
impossible that Gurth could attend another school.  As to the girls--
well, Mr Saxon dearly loved his three daughters, and was proud of their
grace and beauty, but in effect he held much the same ideas with regard
to their education as those which Hereward had expounded to his sisters'
indignation.  He thought it quite unnecessary to spend large sums on
schooling for girls, and for his own part frankly preferred a woman who
had no pretensions to being a blue-stocking.

The boys received the intelligence with a complacent sense that all was
as it should be, and the one great anxiety being relieved, were disposed
to make light of minor privations.  What though the manner of living at
home must necessarily be less luxurious than of yore, holidays occupied,
after all, a small portion of the year, and in a few years' time they
would be launching out for themselves.  Hereward had an ambition to join
an Indian regiment.  Gurth was destined for the Civil Service.  The
Meads would be quite a good old place in which to spend an occasional
furlough.  But the girls!  The girls were by no means reconciled to
being sacrificed on the altar of masculine ambition.  When the programme
for their own future was announced by the nervously anxious mother,
Rowena, Etheldreda, and Maud were alike consumed with indignation and
dismay.  They could hardly believe the evidence of their own ears as
they listened to her words:

"Father thought I had better have a little talk with you, dear girls,
and explain to you what we have decided about your future.  It has been
a difficult question--very difficult, and we have had to face
alterations which we would thankfully have avoided, for in the end it
simply comes down to the bare question of what we can or cannot afford.
The boys' education is unfortunately very costly, and those expenses
cannot be reduced."

"Why?" demanded Dreda.  The crisp, sharp question cut like a lash across
Mrs Saxon's soft-toned explanation, and she started, and faced her
young daughter with a shrinking almost of dismay.  Perhaps in her heart
of hearts she, too, doubted the justice of the masculine mandate that
girls should invariably be sacrificed for boys, but she was too loyal to
admit any dissension when her husband had laid down his commands.

"Why, Dreda?" she repeated, gently.  "Because the boys have their way to
make in the world ...  If we have not much money to leave them, we must
at least give them every chance of success.  Their education will be
their capital."

"An officer in the army needs a large private allowance.  Father has
always said so.  Hereward will need to be helped all his life, instead
of being able to help the family as an eldest son should do ...  He
could go into business."

"Oh, Dreda dear!  You, who are so sympathetic and kind-hearted.  Think
of the terrible disappointment!  There always has been a soldier in the
family."

"The family has always been rich.  Of course I don't want him to be
disappointed.  I don't want _anyone_ to be disappointed," declared Dreda
with an emphasis which brought the colour into her mother's thin cheeks.
"I suppose I can go to Madame Clerc's at Easter, just the same?"

"I--I am afraid ...  Madame Clerc's is a very expensive school, darling.
I am afraid it is out of the question!  We will do all we can for you.
That is one of the principal things which we have had on our minds the
last week, and I trust--I believe we have made satisfactory
arrangements.  Miss Bruce does not feel able to give you finishing
lessons, but Mrs Webster, of Swithin, tells me that she is quite
satisfied with the school to which she has sent her three daughters.
The education is all that could be desired, and the fees much more
moderate than Madame Clerc's.  We should see more of you, too, darling,
for you would be able to come home for the exeats in the middle of the
term--"

"Mother!  What are you saying?  You can't possibly be in earnest.
Please, please don't frighten me!  It's a hateful school.  I have always
looked down upon it and detested it, and thanked goodness _I_ should
never have to go to it!"

Dreda's face was aflame with colour; her eyes had widened until they
looked about twice their natural size, in her voice there sounded a
quiver of so real a distress that the mother flushed painfully in
response.

"Dear! why be so prejudiced?  It may not be so fashionable a school as
Madame Clerc's, but it is admirable in every way, and you will meet
friends there whom you already know--the Websters..."

"Know them!  We don't!  We have met now and then, but we always
determine not to know them.  We christened them `The Currant Buns,' and
hated them from the first moment.  Round, white faces and little
curranty eyes!"

"Dreda!  Dreda!  What has appearance to do with it?  You confess
yourself that you are prejudiced, so you cannot possibly judge...  They
are said to be clever and industrious, and exceptionally well brought
up, but there will be other girls, plenty of other girls from whom to
choose friends."

"It is settled, then?  Really _settled_.  You have seen the mistress?"

"Yes, dear, it is settled.  You are to begin work at the beginning of
the term.  The Websters are delighted to think of having you as a
companion."

Dreda flung out her arms with a gesture of passionate despair, stood for
a moment confronting her mother with flashing eyes and quivering lips,
then suddenly wheeled round, and rushed headlong from the room.

Her first overwhelming impulse was to get out into the air.  The house
suffocated her, and besides, she was going to do something ... something
desperate ... and there was no scope indoors.  She thought of the lake,
lying dull and grey within its reedy bank, and saw a vision of herself
floating on the surface, with her unbound hair streaming round her face.
In the Academy a year before she had been much attracted by a picture
of the dead Elaine, and her own hair was exactly the same shade...  But
it was wicked to commit suicide, and, miserable though she was, life
held too many attractions to be lightly abandoned.  She would just run
away into the darkness and the silence, with her sore, sore heart--to
commune with nature, and face the future alone with her own soul!  Dreda
sobbed aloud at the pathos of the thought, and, racing down the passage,
threw open the side door leading into the garden.

A gust of wind blew into her face, a dash of cold sleety rain.  The sky
was inky black, so black that it was impossible to distinguish even the
outline of the trees: the air was soaking with moisture.  To one longing
for darkness and loneliness, the prospect should have been all that
could be desired; yet Dreda drew back shuddering, and shut the door with
a hasty hand.  It was wet.  She hated to get wet, yet she could not take
an umbrella.  When your heart was breaking, and you were face to face
with one of the tragic moments of life, to walk abroad sheltered by an
umbrella was too calm and commonplace a proceeding to be contemplated
for a moment!  Dreda decided that on the whole it would be better to do
her wrestling in her own room; but the noise of the opening and shutting
of the door had attracted attention, and as she slowly retraced her
steps the pantry door opened, and Martin the parlourmaid thrust her head
inquiringly outward.

Martin was a pleasant middle-aged woman, an old retainer in the family,
and the pantry at The Meads was quite a good-sized room, and a
comfortable one at that, boasting a fireplace in which blazed the
cheeriest of fires, for Martin was fond of comfort, and took a pride in
keeping her domain spick and span.  Her face brightened as she saw the
girl standing in the passage, for Dreda was a favourite with all the
servants.  Miss Rowena, they agreed, was "high;" but Miss Dreda was
"feelin'."

"Very feelin' was Miss Dreda!"  She was always sorry for you, and wanted
to help.  They bore her no grudge because the "wanting" frequently went
no farther than words.  She was but young.  Young things did forget.  It
was entered to her abiding credit that she was "feelin'."

This afternoon one glimpse at the flushed, excited face was sufficient
to show that the girl herself was in trouble, and Martin threw open the
door to show the hospitable glow of the fire.

"Miss Dreda!  Was that you standing by that door in the cold?  You'll be
catching cold; that's what you'll be doing!  I'm having a snack of cocoa
and buttered toast.  Come in and have a bite by the fire."

Dreda hesitated.  Buttered toast was incongruous--painfully incongruous;
for among the other desperate resolutions which had rushed through her
brain, a slow, determined starvation had held a foremost place.  She
would turn with a sick distaste from the pleasures of the table; would
eat only the plainest of viands, and of them barely enough to keep
herself in life.  She would grow thin and hollow-eyed, and her parents,
looking on, would repent their cruelty in sackcloth and ashes.  But--the
buttered toast smelt wonderfully good!

"I'll come in and warm myself, but--I'm not hungry," said Dreda,
hesitating.  But Martin did not appear to have heard.  As her young
mistress seated herself by the fire, a stool was quietly placed by her
side, and on the stool appeared, as if by magic, a plate of toast and a
cup of cocoa.

Dreda's hand stretched out involuntarily; she ate and drank, and
reflected that, after all, as her father had lost money so unexpectedly,
it was only reasonable to suppose that he would recover it in a manner
equally rapid.  She was sorry she had been cross.  She would never be
cross any more.  In the recovered days of prosperity it would be so
pleasant to remember how nobly she had borne herself in the hour of
trial!



CHAPTER FIVE.

Meantime in the schoolroom upstairs another blow had fallen, and Rowena
was quivering beneath the shock of discovering that in Miss Bruce's
absence it was she and not Etheldreda who was expected to carry on
Maud's education.

"I am sure you will be a conscientious teacher, dear; and I hope that
the regular occupation, and the consciousness that you are being of real
use will make life brighter for you.  Maud will promise to be an
industrious pupil, won't you, darling?"

Maud eyed Rowena's tragic countenance, and felt it wise to refrain from
rash protestations.  She was longing to rush after Dreda to declaim
against this last injustice, and as her mother continued to address
herself pointedly to Rowena, taking no more notice of her own important
presence, she slipped softly from the room.

The two who were left, felt, the one a throb of relief, the other a
chill of acute discomfort, at finding themselves alone.  The tie between
this mother and her eldest daughter was a very tender one, and in the
shock of the recent losses Mrs Saxon had unconsciously built much on
Rowena's sympathy and love.  Rowena would help.  Rowena would
sympathise; Rowena--herself a woman--would understand some things which
even the good husband could not grasp.  In the happy, easy days of
prosperity, Rowena could always be relied on to be loving, dutiful, and
considerate--it was a shock to discover that these good qualities had
not enough foundation to withstand the test of adversity.  Mrs Saxon
was not angry; only distressed and troubled afresh, and overwhelmingly
anxious to find the right way to her daughter's heart.

"Mother!" cried Rowena sharply.  "_How_ did father lose his money?  It
seems so strange that it should disappear all of a sudden like this.  We
have always had plenty until now.  Has he been speculating, or doing
something rash?"

The momentary pause before Mrs Saxon replied and the dignified lifting
of her gentle head were more eloquent than a spoken reproof.

"No, Rowena; there is no blame attaching to your father.  There has been
a great failure in America, which has affected many of his investments.
We cannot reproach ourselves for any want of care, and that being so, we
must look upon this change of circumstances as coming to us from God's
hands, and try to learn the lessons which it is intended to teach.  To
each of us, perhaps, our own task appears especially hard.  You,
darling, have looked forward to a time of pleasure and gaiety, and it is
difficult to give it up cheerfully, and face living quietly in the
country and helping in the house.  I understand; I've been a girl
myself, and I remember how I felt; but, darling, I am a woman now--
getting quite an old woman--and I have learnt my lessons.  There is more
real joy and contentment to be gained by simply doing one's duty than in
all the balls and receptions of a London season, Rowena!"

Rowena sat dumb, her eyes fixed on the tablecloth, her long dark lashes
resting on her cheeks.  Those were the sentiments you read in books, and
heard in sermons, but it was always grown-up people who voiced them;
grown-up people who, like mother, had had a good time in their own
youth, and were afterwards unreasonable enough to expect their children
to be resigned and middle-aged when they had just emerged from the
schoolroom.  Rowena thought of the prospect which had stretched
dazzlingly before her but a week before; of the gaiety and variety of
amusement which had made so fair a dream, and contrasted it with the
prospect of an uneventful domestic life at the Manor--teaching Maud!
She pressed her lips together, and sat silent, feeling her mother's eyes
on her face; dreading to meet their tenderly reproaching gaze.

"That sounds strange to you, dear, and perhaps a little hard, but all
the same it is _true_.  I do not minimise your disappointment, but for
the time being it is inevitable, and nothing remains but to face the
situation bravely.  As the eldest daughter of the house more depends
upon you than upon any of the rest, and your opportunities will be
endless.  You can be a great comfort to us, darling, or a great
additional care.  It all depends upon the spirit in which you start the
new life--upon whether you look in or out--put yourself first, or think
of others."

Mrs Saxon paused again, and within Rowena's still form two contending
forces fought for victory.  While one sullen spirit held her dumb, the
real self seemed to stand apart, reviewing her own conduct, and uttering
words of exhortation and appeal: "How hateful of you never to say a word
in reply!  Poor mother! her voice trembled...  It's hard on her, too.
If you could just put your arms round her neck and kiss her, and promise
to be good, it would comfort her ever so much.  And you'd be happier
yourself.  It only makes you more miserable to sulk, and be unkind.
Look up and smile, and promise to be nice."  So urged the inner voice,
but alas, the fleshy eyelids seemed heavy as lead, and the lips remained
