tuck. The time-keeper is chosen, a large ring made, and the two stand
up opposite one another for a moment, giving us time just to make our
little observations.

"If Tom'll only condescend to fight with his head and heels," as East
mutters to Martin, "we shall do."

But seemingly he won't, for there he goes in, making play with both
hands. Hard all is the word; the two stand to one another like men;
rally follows rally in quick succession, each fighting as if he thought
to finish the whole thing out of hand. "Can't last at this rate," say
the knowing ones, while the partisans of each make the air ring
with their shouts and counter-shouts of encouragement, approval, and
defiance.

"Take it easy, take it easy; keep away; let him come after you,"
implores East, as he wipes Tom's face after the first round with a wet
sponge, while he sits back on Martin's knee, supported by the Madman's
long arms which tremble a little from excitement.

"Time's up," calls the time-keeper.

"There he goes again, hang it all!" growls East, as his man is at it
again, as hard as ever. A very severe round follows, in which Tom gets
out and out the worst of it, and is at last hit clean off his legs, and
deposited on the grass by a right-hander from the Slogger.

Loud shouts rise from the boys of Slogger's house, and the School-house
are silent and vicious, ready to pick quarrels anywhere.

"Two to one in half-crowns on the big un," says Rattle, one of the
amateurs, a tall fellow, in thunder-and-lightning waistcoat, and puffy,
good-natured face.

"Done!" says Groove, another amateur of quieter look, taking out his
notebook to enter it, for our friend Rattle sometimes forgets these
little things.

Meantime East is freshening up Tom with the sponges for next round, and
has set two other boys to rub his hands.

"Tom, old boy," whispers he, "this may be fun for you, but it's death to
me. He'll hit all the fight out of you in another five minutes, and then
I shall go and drown myself in the island ditch. Feint him; use your
legs; draw him about. He'll lose his wind then in no time, and you can
go into him. Hit at his body too; we'll take care of his frontispiece
by-and-by."

Tom felt the wisdom of the counsel, and saw already that he couldn't go
in and finish the Slogger off at mere hammer and tongs, so changed his
tactics completely in the third round. He now fights cautiously, getting
away from and parrying the Slogger's lunging hits, instead of trying
to counter, and leading his enemy a dance all round the ring after
him. "He's funking; go in, Williams," "Catch him up," "Finish him off,"
scream the small boys of the Slogger party.

"Just what we want," thinks East, chuckling to himself, as he sees
Williams, excited by these shouts, and thinking the game in his own
hands, blowing himself in his exertions to get to close quarters again,
while Tom is keeping away with perfect ease.

They quarter over the ground again and again, Tom always on the
defensive.

The Slogger pulls up at last for a moment, fairly blown.

"Now, then, Tom," sings out East, dancing with delight. Tom goes in in a
twinkling, and hits two heavy body blows, and gets away again before the
Slogger can catch his wind, which when he does he rushes with blind fury
at Tom, and being skilfully parried and avoided, overreaches himself and
falls on his face, amidst terrific cheers from the School-house boys.

"Double your two to one?" says Groove to Rattle, notebook in hand.

"Stop a bit," says that hero, looking uncomfortably at Williams, who is
puffing away on his second's knee, winded enough, but little the worse
in any other way.

After another round the Slogger too seems to see that he can't go in and
win right off, and has met his match or thereabouts. So he too begins
to use his head, and tries to make Tom lose his patience, and come in
before his time. And so the fight sways on, now one and now the other
getting a trifling pull.

Tom's face begins to look very one-sided--there are little queer bumps
on his forehead, and his mouth is bleeding; but East keeps the wet
sponge going so scientifically that he comes up looking as fresh and
bright as ever. Williams is only slightly marked in the face, but by
the nervous movement of his elbows you can see that Tom's body blows are
telling. In fact, half the vice of the Slogger's hitting is neutralized,
for he daren't lunge out freely for fear of exposing his sides. It is
too interesting by this time for much shouting, and the whole ring is
very quiet.

"All right, Tommy," whispers East; "hold on's the horse that's to win.
We've got the last. Keep your head, old boy."

But where is Arthur all this time? Words cannot paint the poor little
fellow's distress. He couldn't muster courage to come up to the ring,
but wandered up and down from the great fives court to the corner of the
chapel rails, now trying to make up his mind to throw himself between
them, and try to stop them; then thinking of running in and telling his
friend Mary, who, he knew, would instantly report to the Doctor.
The stories he had heard of men being killed in prize-fights rose up
horribly before him.

Once only, when the shouts of "Well done, Brown!" "Huzza for the
School-house!" rose higher than ever, he ventured up to the ring,
thinking the victory was won. Catching sight of Tom's face in the state
I have described, all fear of consequences vanishing out of his mind;
he rushed straight off to the matron's room, beseeching her to get the
fight stopped, or he should die.

But it's time for us to get back to the close. What is this fierce
tumult and confusion? The ring is broken, and high and angry words are
being bandied about. "It's all fair"--"It isn't"--"No hugging!" The
fight is stopped. The combatants, however, sit there quietly, tended by
their seconds, while their adherents wrangle in the middle. East can't
help shouting challenges to two or three of the other side, though he
never leaves Tom for a moment, and plies the sponges as fast as ever.

The fact is, that at the end of the last round, Tom, seeing a good
opening, had closed with his opponent, and after a moment's struggle,
had thrown him heavily, by help of the fall he had learnt from his
village rival in the Vale of White Horse. Williams hadn't the ghost of
a chance with Tom at wrestling; and the conviction broke at once on
the Slogger faction that if this were allowed their man must be licked.
There was a strong feeling in the School against catching hold and
throwing, though it was generally ruled all fair within limits; so the
ring was broken and the fight stopped.

The School-house are overruled--the fight is on again, but there is to
be no throwing; and East, in high wrath, threatens to take his man away
after next round (which he don't mean to do, by the way), when suddenly
young Brooke comes through the small gate at the end of the chapel. The
School-house faction rush to him. "Oh, hurrah! now we shall get fair
play."

"Please, Brooke, come up. They won't let Tom Brown throw him."

"Throw whom?" says Brooke, coming up to the ring. "Oh! Williams, I see.
Nonsense! Of course he may throw him, if he catches him fairly above the
waist."

Now, young Brooke, you're in the sixth, you know, and you ought to stop
all fights. He looks hard at both boys. "Anything wrong?" says he to
East, nodding at Tom.

"Not a bit."

"Not beat at all?"

"Bless you, no! Heaps of fight in him.--Ain't there, Tom?"

Tom looks at Brooke and grins.

"How's he?" nodding at Williams.

"So so; rather done, I think, since his last fall. He won't stand above
two more."

"Time's up!" The boys rise again and face one another. Brooke can't find
it in his heart to stop them just yet, so the round goes on, the Slogger
waiting for Tom, and reserving all his strength to hit him out should
he come in for the wrestling dodge again, for he feels that that must be
stopped, or his sponge will soon go up in the air.

And now another newcomer appears on the field, to wit, the under-porter,
with his long brush and great wooden receptacle for dust under his arm.
He has been sweeping out the schools.

"You'd better stop, gentlemen," he says; "the Doctor knows that Brown's
fighting--he'll be out in a minute."

"You go to Bath, Bill," is all that that excellent servitor gets by
his advice; and being a man of his hands, and a stanch upholder of the
School-house, can't help stopping to look on for a bit, and see Tom
Brown, their pet craftsman, fight a round.

It is grim earnest now, and no mistake. Both boys feel this, and summon
every power of head, hand, and eye to their aid. A piece of luck on
either side, a foot slipping, a blow getting well home, or another fall,
may decide it. Tom works slowly round for an opening; he has all the
legs, and can choose his own time. The Slogger waits for the attack,
and hopes to finish it by some heavy right-handed blow. As they quarter
slowly over the ground, the evening sun comes out from behind a cloud
and falls full on Williams's face. Tom darts in; the heavy right hand
is delivered, but only grazes his head. A short rally at close quarters,
and they close; in another moment the Slogger is thrown again heavily
for the third time.

"I'll give you three or two on the little one in half-crowns," said
Groove to Rattle.

"No, thank 'ee," answers the other, diving his hands farther into his
coat-tails.

Just at this stage of the proceedings, the door of the turret which
leads to the Doctor's library suddenly opens, and he steps into the
close, and makes straight for the ring, in which Brown and the Slogger
are both seated on their seconds' knees for the last time.

"The Doctor! the Doctor!" shouts some small boy who catches sight of
him, and the ring melts away in a few seconds, the small boys tearing
off, Tom collaring his jacket and waistcoat, and slipping through the
little gate by the chapel, and round the corner to Harrowell's with his
backers, as lively as need be; Williams and his backers making off not
quite so fast across the close; Groove, Rattle, and the other bigger
fellows trying to combine dignity and prudence in a comical manner, and
walking off fast enough, they hope, not to be recognized, and not fast
enough to look like running away.

Young Brooke alone remains on the ground by the time the Doctor gets
there, and touches his hat, not without a slight inward qualm.

"Hah! Brooke. I am surprised to see you here. Don't you know that I
expect the sixth to stop fighting?"

Brooke felt much more uncomfortable than he had expected, but he was
rather a favourite with the Doctor for his openness and plainness of
speech, so blurted out, as he walked by the Doctor's side, who had
already turned back,--

"Yes, sir, generally. But I thought you wished us to exercise a
discretion in the matter too--not to interfere too soon."

"But they have been fighting this half-hour and more," said the Doctor.

"Yes, sir; but neither was hurt. And they're the sort of boys who'll be
all the better friends now, which they wouldn't have been if they had
been stopped, any earlier--before it was so equal."

"Who was fighting with Brown?" said the Doctor.

"Williams, sir, of Thompson's. He is bigger than Brown, and had the best
of it at first, but not when you came up, sir. There's a good deal of
jealousy between our house and Thompson's, and there would have been
more fights if this hadn't been let go on, or if either of them had had
much the worst of it."

"Well but, Brooke," said the Doctor, "doesn't this look a little as
if you exercised your discretion by only stopping a fight when the
School-house boy is getting the worst of it?"

Brooke, it must be confessed, felt rather gravelled.

"Now remember," added the Doctor, as he stopped at the turret-door,
"this fight is not to go on; you'll see to that. And I expect you to
stop all fights in future at once."

"Very well, sir," said young Brooke, touching his hat, and not sorry to
see the turret-door close behind the Doctor's back.

Meantime Tom and the stanchest of his adherents had reached Harrowell's,
and Sally was bustling about to get them a late tea, while Stumps had
been sent off to Tew, the butcher, to get a piece of raw beef for Tom's
eye, which was to be healed off-hand, so that he might show well in the
morning. He was not a bit the worse, except a slight difficulty in his
vision, a singing in his ears, and a sprained thumb, which he kept in
a cold-water bandage, while he drank lots of tea, and listened to the
babel of voices talking and speculating of nothing but the fight, and
how Williams would have given in after another fall (which he didn't in
the least believe), and how on earth the Doctor could have got to know
of it--such bad luck! He couldn't help thinking to himself that he was
glad he hadn't won; he liked it better as it was, and felt very friendly
to the Slogger. And then poor little Arthur crept in and sat down
quietly near him, and kept looking at him and the raw beef with such
plaintive looks that Tom at last burst out laughing.

"Don't make such eyes, young un," said he; "there's nothing the matter."

"Oh, but, Tom, are you much hurt? I can't bear thinking it was all for
me."

"Not a bit of it; don't flatter yourself. We were sure to have had it
out sooner or later."

"Well, but you won't go on, will you? You'll promise me you won't go
on?"

"Can't tell about that--all depends on the houses. We're in the hands
of our countrymen, you know. Must fight for the School-house flag, if so
be."

However, the lovers of the science were doomed to disappointment this
time. Directly after locking-up, one of the night-fags knocked at Tom's
door.

"Brown, young Brooke wants you in the sixth-form room."

Up went Tom to the summons, and found the magnates sitting at their
supper.

"Well, Brown," said young Brooke, nodding to him, "how do you feel?"

"Oh, very well, thank you, only I've sprained my thumb, I think."

"Sure to do that in a fight. Well, you hadn't the worst of it, I could
see. Where did you learn that throw?"

"Down in the country when I was a boy."

"Hullo! why, what are you now? Well, never mind, you're a plucky fellow.
Sit down and have some supper."

Tom obeyed, by no means loath. And the fifth-form boy next filled him a
tumbler of bottled beer, and he ate and drank, listening to the pleasant
talk, and wondering how soon he should be in the fifth, and one of that
much-envied society.

As he got up to leave, Brooke said, "You must shake hands to-morrow
morning; I shall come and see that done after first lesson."

And so he did. And Tom and the Slogger shook hands with great
satisfaction and mutual respect. And for the next year or two, whenever
fights were being talked of, the small boys who had been present shook
their heads wisely, saying, "Ah! but you should just have seen the fight
between Slogger Williams and Tom Brown!"

And now, boys all, three words before we quit the subject. I have put
in this chapter on fighting of malice prepense, partly because I want to
give you a true picture of what everyday school life was in my time, and
not a kid-glove and go-to-meeting-coat picture, and partly because of
the cant and twaddle that's talked of boxing and fighting with fists
nowadays. Even Thackeray has given in to it; and only a few weeks ago
there was some rampant stuff in the Times on the subject, in an article
on field sports.

Boys will quarrel, and when they quarrel will sometimes fight. Fighting
with fists is the natural and English way for English boys to settle
their quarrels. What substitute for it is there, or ever was there,
amongst any nation under the sun? What would you like to see take its
place?

Learn to box, then, as you learn to play cricket and football. Not one
of you will be the worse, but very much the better, for learning to box
well. Should you never have to use it in earnest, there's no exercise
in the world so good for the temper and for the muscles of the back and
legs.

As to fighting, keep out of it if you can, by all means. When the
time comes, if it ever should, that you have to say "Yes" or "No" to
a challenge to fight, say "No" if you can--only take care you make
it clear to yourselves why you say "No." It's a proof of the highest
courage, if done from true Christian motives. It's quite right and
justifiable, if done from a simple aversion to physical pain and danger.
But don't say "No" because you fear a licking, and say or think it's
because you fear God, for that's neither Christian nor honest. And if
you do fight, fight it out; and don't give in while you can stand and
see.



CHAPTER VI--FEVER IN THE SCHOOL.

     "This our hope for all that's mortal
     And we too shall burst the bond;
