"I am very glad to hear it," said Valentine, with an air of relief.
"Even if I didn't like your family, I wouldn't like to see Conrad
triumph over you."

"Come around this evening, Val. We shall have plenty to talk about."

"I will."

When Andy entered the farmhouse he received a warm welcome from his
mother, and a cordial grasp of the hand from his father, who was less
demonstrative. But there was an air of grave anxiety on the faces of
both.

"I am glad to see you, Andy," said Sterling Grant, "but I wish you had
come under more cheerful circumstances. We are in a good deal of
trouble."

"I have come to get you out of it."

"Can you?" asked the farmer, in surprise.

"Yes. How much have you got toward the interest?"

"Only twenty dollars."

"And the whole sum is--"

"Ninety dollars."

"I can give you the seventy dollars you require."

"Where did you get the money? Have you borrowed it?"

"No. It belongs to me. I will explain later. Now I am hungry, and while
mother is looking for some lunch for me we will talk about other
matters."

"I am very much relieved, Andy. I will go and tell the squire I shall be
able to meet the interest."

"Don't do it, father. We will leave him to suppose it will not be paid,
and see what course he intends to pursue. Don't breathe a word to
undeceive him."

"I will do as you say, Andy, though I don't know your object. Do you
still like your place in New York?"

"Yes; I am learning the business fast, and have good hopes for the
future. Mr. Crawford is an excellent man, and takes an interest in me."

"That is good. After all, things are brightening. When I got up this
morning I felt about discouraged."

"I telegraphed you not to worry, father."

Meanwhile Mrs. Grant was preparing an appetizing lunch for her son. She
knew just what he liked. When it was placed on the table, he did full
justice to it.

"It tastes better than anything I get in the city, mother," he said.

"I didn't suppose our plain table would compare with city meals."

"They're not in it with you," said Andy. "I am only afraid I shall make
myself sick by overeating."

Mrs. Grant was greatly pleased that Andy had not lost his taste for home
fare.

"How you have grown, Andy!" she said. "And you are looking so well, too!
Do you have to work very hard?"

"Hard work agrees with me, mother. No; I don't hurt myself."

"I wish I could be here when the squire comes for the interest," Andy
said, later.

"He will call this evening. You will see him," said Sterling Grant.

"Then I shall be sure to stay at home."

Meanwhile, at the house of Squire Carter, there was a conference between
father and son.

Conrad had a new and bright idea. He had always coveted Andy's boat,
which, as we know, was much better than his own had been. It occurred to
him that here would be a good opportunity to get it for a trifle.

"Pa," he said, "will you do me a favor?"

"What is it?" asked his father, suspiciously.

"You know I haven't got a boat now. Won't you let Mr. Grant pay part of
the interest in Andy's boat?"

"What do I want with the boat?" asked the squire, impatiently.

"Pa, you can make a great bargain. I hear that it cost seventy-five
dollars. You can allow the farmer twenty dollars, and sell it for forty
dollars cash."

"I don't know about that."

But the squire's tone was less decided. He liked a bargain, and he knew
that there was some reason in what Conrad said.

"Mr. Grant might not feel at liberty to sell his son's boat," he argued.

"Andy would let him. He thinks a good deal of his family."

"I'll think of it; but I intended to propose taking two of his cows."

"That you can do next time. Probably he won't have the interest six
months from now."

"I'll see about it."

"There is one other thing; you would have a better chance to sell the
boat for a profit than the cows."

"Well, Conrad, I will think of it, as I said. I am going around to
Farmer Grant's this evening, and I will broach the subject."

Later in the day Conrad met Jimmy Morris.

"Have you heard the news, Conrad?" asked Jimmy.

"What is it?"

"Andy Grant is in Arden. He arrived from the city this morning."

"I am glad to hear it."

"Why? Are you and Andy such great friends?"

"It isn't on account of friendship; it's on account of business."

"What business?"

"I can't tell you, but you will very likely hear soon."

Conrad hoped to meet Andy and broach the subject of buying the boat. He
decided from his knowledge of the farmer's son that, much as he valued
his boat, he would be willing to sacrifice it for the sake of his
father. In this thought he paid an unconscious tribute to Andy, for in
similar circumstances he would have been incapable of anything so
unselfish.

About half-past seven, Andy, looking out of the window, saw the stately
and dignified figure of Squire Carter coming up the front path.

"The squire is coming, father," he said. "I want you to look sober, just
as if you were unprepared to pay the interest."

Squire Carter had already been informed by Conrad that Andy was in the
village. He showed no surprise, therefore, when he saw him.

He had also been down to the river and taken a look at Andy's boat. He
could see that it was a very handsome one, and doubtless worth as much
as Conrad reported.

"So you have come home, Andrew?" he said.

"Yes, Squire Carter."

"You haven't lost your place, have you?"

"No, sir. I have come home on a visit."

"Ahem! You arrived at an unfortunate time for your father. He has had
bad luck. Things seem to have gone against him."

"So I heard, sir."

"If you had been at home to help him on the farm, things would have been
different, maybe."

"I hope to help him by staying in the city."

"That isn't very likely. I don't approve, for my part, of boys leaving
home to work."

"I think I shall succeed in the end, sir."

"Ahem! I have no doubt you think so, but boys like you haven't much
judgment. I suppose you know that interest is due on the mortgage for
the first six months, and that your father can't meet it."

"I have heard so, Squire Carter."

"As a friend of your father I have a plan to propose that may make
things easy for him. I am glad to see you, for a part of my business is
with you."




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE INTEREST IS PAID.


Andy was surprised by the squire's words. He could not conjecture what
business Squire Carter could have with him.

"First," said the squire, "may I ask, Mr. Grant, whether you can pay the
interest on the mortgage which I hold when it comes due?"

"I have only twenty-five dollars at my command now, Squire Carter.
Perhaps something may turn up between now and next Tuesday."

"That is extremely likely," said the squire, in a tone of sarcasm.

"Have you anything to propose? Are you willing to wait a month?"

"No, sir; I am not. It will be extreme folly on my part. Do you expect
to come into a fortune within thirty days?"

"No, sir."

"So I presume. However, I have a plan to propose. I did intend to say
that I would allow you fifty dollars for your two best cows. But even
that would not pay the deficit. I believe your son owns a boat."

"I do," said Andy, looking up. He began to understand the squire's plan.

"I am willing to allow twenty dollars for it, as my son has taken a
fancy to it, and his own boat was destroyed through the malice of a
tramp. This, with fifty dollars for your two cows, would pay the
interest all but twenty dollars, which you say you are able to pay in
cash."

"Squire Carter, my cows are of a choice breed, and are worth fifty
dollars each."

"They would not fetch that sum. Indeed, twenty-five dollars each is all
that you would have any chance of getting. If you doubt it, you may try
to get an offer elsewhere."

"What should I do without the cows? I depend on the butter and milk I
obtain from them for a good part of my cash income."

"That is your lookout," said the squire, shrugging his shoulders.

"You don't appear to have much consideration for me."

"Business is business, Mr. Grant. You owe me ninety dollars. If you
can't pay me in one form, you must in another."

"I would like to say a word, Squire Carter," said Andy. "The boat for
which you offer twenty dollars cost Mr. Gate seventy-five."

"I don't believe it."

"I have his word for it."

"Very likely, but it wouldn't be the first case where a man overstated
the price of his purchase."

"Mr. Gale would not deceive me in that way."

"Have it as you like. The boat is second-hand now, and worth far less
than when it was new," persisted the squire.

"There is considerable difference between twenty dollars and
seventy-five."

"Well, I might stretch a point and call it twenty-five, as Conrad is
desirous of having the boat. In that case there would be five dollars
coming to you, which you would doubtless find very handy."

"I think I shall have to decline your offer, Squire Carter."

"And leave your poor father in trouble? I thought better of you."

Squire Carter was surprised to find that both Andy and his father were
cool, and apparently not suffering anxiety. He had thought they would be
sad, and would resort to entreaties.

"Does it strike you, Squire Carter, that you are trying to drive a very
hard bargain with my father and myself? You offer a very low sum for the
cows and for my boat."

"If you can get more anywhere else, you are quite at liberty to do so,"
said the squire, in a tone of indifference.

He felt that father and son were in his power, and that he would have
his own way in the end.

"I don't think we shall sell at all," said Andy, calmly.

"What!" ejaculated the squire. "Not sell at all? Do you think I will
allow the interest to remain unpaid?"

"The interest will be paid."

"How? Where will you get the money?"

"I will supply my father with what he needs."

"You talk like a fool!" said the squire, sharply. "Do you think I will
allow myself to be humbugged by a boy?"

"No, sir; but you can rely upon what I say."

"Have you borrowed the money from Mr. Gale?"

"I have not seen Mr. Gale for several months. He does not know of my
