
John smiled once more and was silent, but when Carstairs held out his
hand he could not keep from shaking it. Then Paris, the modest house
beyond the Seine, and the girl within it, floated away like an illusion,
driven from thought in an instant by a giant shell that struck within a
few hundred yards of them, exploding with a terrible crash and filling
the air with deadly bits of flying shell.

There was such a whistling in his ears that John thought at first he had
been hit, but when he shook himself a little he found he was unhurt, and
his heart resumed its normal beat. Other shells coming out of space
began to strike, but none so near, and the Strangers went calmly on. On
their right was a Paris regiment made up mostly of short, but
thick-chested men, all very dark. Its numbers were only one-third what
they had been a week before, and its colonel was Pierre Louis
Bougainville, late Apache, late of the Butte Montmartre. All the
colonels, majors and captains of this regiment had been killed and he
now led it, earning his promotion by the divine right of genius. He, at
least, could look into his knapsack and see there the shadow of a
marshal's baton, a shadow that might grow more material.

John watched him and he wondered at this transformation of a rat of
Montmartre into a man. And yet there had been many such transformations
in the French Revolution. What had happened once could always happen
again. Napoleon himself had been the son of a poor little lawyer in a
distant and half-savage island, not even French in blood, but an Italian
and an alien.

Crash! Another shell burst near, and told him to quit thinking of old
times and attend to the business before him. The past had nothing more
mighty than the present. The speed of the Strangers was increased a
little, and the French regiments on either side kept pace with them.
More shells fell. They came, shrieking through the air like hideous
birds of remote ages. Some passed entirely over the advancing troops,
but one fell among the French on John's right, and the column opening
out, passed shudderingly around the spot where death had struck.

Two or three of the Strangers were blown away presently. It seemed to
John's horrified eyes that one of them entirely vanished in minute
fragments. He knew now what annihilation meant.

The heavy French field guns behind them were firing over their heads,
but there was still nothing in front, merely the low green hills and not
even a flash of flame nor a puff of smoke. The whistling death came out
of space.

The French went on, a wide shallow valley opened out before them, and
they descended by the easy slope into it. Here the German shells and
shrapnel ceased to fall among them, but, as the heavy thunder
continued, John knew the guns had merely turned aside their fire for
other points on the French line. Carstairs by his side gave an immense
sigh of relief.

"I can never get used to the horrible roaring and groaning of those
shells," he said. "If I get killed I'd like it to be done without the
thing that does it shrieking and gloating over me."

They were well in the valley now, and John noticed that along its right
ran a dense wood, fresh and green despite the lateness of the season.
But as he looked he heard the shrill snarling of many trumpets, and, for
a moment or two, his heart stood still, as a vast body of German cavalry
burst from the screen of the wood and rushed down upon them.

It was not often in this war that cavalry had a great chance, but here
it had come. The ambush was complete. The German signals, either from
the sky or the hills, had told when the French were in the valley, and
then the German guns had turned aside their fire for the very good
reason that they did not wish to send shells among their own men.

John's feeling was one of horrified surprise. The German cavalry
extending across a mile of front seemed countless. Imagination in that
terrific moment magnified them into millions. He saw the foaming mouths,
the white teeth and the flashing eyes of the horses, and then the tense
faces and eyes of their riders. Lances and sabers were held aloft, and
the earth thundered with the tread of the mounted legions.

"Good God!" cried Wharton.

"Wheel, men, wheel!" shouted Captain Colton.

As they turned to face the rushing tide of steel, the regiment of
Bougainville whirled on their flank and then Bougainville was almost at
his side. He saw fire leap from the little man's eye. He saw him shout
commands, rapid incisive, and correct and he saw clearly that if this
were Napoleon's day that marshal's baton in the knapsack would indeed
become a reality.

The Paris regiment, kneeling, was the first to fire, and the next
instant flame burst from the rifles of the Strangers. It was not a
moment too soon. It seemed to many of the young Americans and Englishmen
that they had been ridden down already, but sheet after sheet of bullets
fired by men, fighting for their lives, formed a wall of death.

The Uhlans, the hussars and the cuirassiers reeled back in the very
moment of triumph. Horses with their riders crashed to the ground, and
others, mad with terror, rushed wildly through the French ranks.

John, Carstairs and Wharton snatched up rifles, all three, and began to
fire with the men as fast as they could. A vast turmoil, frightful in
its fury, followed. The German cavalry reeled back, but it did not
retreat. The shrill clamor of many trumpets came again, and once more
the horsemen charged. The sheet of death blazed in their faces again,
and then the French met them with bayonet.

The Strangers had closed in to meet the shock. John felt rather than saw
Carstairs and Wharton on either side of him, and the three of them were
firing cartridge after cartridge into the light whitish smoke that hung
between them and the charging horsemen. He was devoutly thankful that
the Paris regiment was immediately on their right, and that it was led
by such a man as Bougainville. General Vaugirard, he knew, was farther
to their left, and now he began to hear the rapid firers, pouring a rain
of death upon the cavalry.

"We win! we win!" cried Carstairs. "If they couldn't beat us down in the
first rush they can't beat us down at all!"

Carstairs was right. The French had broken into no panic, and, when,
infantry standing firm, pour forth the incessant and deadly stream of
death, that modern arms make possible, no cavalry can live before them.
Yet the Germans charged again and again into the hurricane of fire and
steel. The tumult of the battle face to face became terrific.

John could no longer hear the words of his comrades. He saw dimly
through the whitish smoke in front, but he continued to fire. Once he
leaped aside to let a wounded and riderless horse gallop past, and
thrice he sprang over the bodies of the dead.

The infantry were advancing now, driving the cavalry before them, and
the French were able to bring their lighter field guns into action. John
heard the rapid crashes, and he saw the line of cavalry drawing back.
He, too, was shouting with triumph, although nobody heard him. But all
the Strangers were filled with fiery zeal. Without orders they rushed
forward, driving the horsemen yet further. John saw through the whitish
mist a fierce face and a powerful arm swinging aloft a saber.

He recognized von Boehlen and von Boehlen recognized him. Shouting, the
Prussian urged his horse at him and struck him with the saber. John,
under impulse, dropped to his knees, and the heavy blade whistled above
him. But something else struck him on the head and he fell senseless to
the earth.




CHAPTER XII

JULIE LANNES


John Scott came slowly out of the darkness and hovered for a while
between dusk and light. It was not an unpleasant world in which he
lingered. It seemed full of rest and peace. His mind and body were
relaxed, and there was no urgent call for him to march and to fight. The
insistent drumming of the great guns which could play upon the nervous
system until it was wholly out of tune was gone. The only sound he heard
was that of a voice, a fresh young voice, singing a French song in a
tone low and soft. He had always liked these little love songs of the
kind that were sung in a subdued way. They were pathetic and pure as a
rose leaf.

He might have opened his eyes and looked for the singer, but he did not.
The twilight region between sleep and consciousness was too pleasant. He
had no responsibilities, nothing to do. He had a dim memory that he had
belonged to an army, that it was his business to try to kill some one,
and to try to keep from getting killed, but all that was gone now. He
could lie there, without pain of body or anxiety of mind, and let vague
but bright visions pass through his soul.

His eyes still closed, he listened to the voice. It was very low,
scarcely more than a murmur, yet it was thrillingly sweet. It might not
be a human voice, after all, just the distant note of a bird in the
forest, or the murmur of a brave little stream, or a summer wind among
green leaves.

He moved a little and became conscious that he was not going back into
that winter region of dusk. His soul instead was steadily moving toward
the light. The beat of his heart grew normal, and then memory in a full
tide rushed upon him. He saw the great cavalry battle with all its red
turmoil, the savage swing of von Boehlen's saber and himself drifting
out into the darkness.

He opened his eyes, the battle vanished, and he saw himself lying upon a
low, wooden platform. His head rested upon a small pillow, a blanket was
under him, and another above him. Turning slowly he saw other men
wrapped in blankets like himself on the platform in a row that stretched
far to right and left. Above was a low roof, but both sides of the
structure were open.

He understood it all in a moment. He had come back to a world of battle
and wounds, and he was one of the wounded. But he listened for the soft,
musical note which he believed now, in his imaginative state, had drawn
him from the mid-region between life and death.

The stalwart figure of a woman in a somber dress with a red cross sewed
upon it passed between him and the light, but he knew that it was not
she who had been singing. He closed his eyes in disappointment, but
reopened them. A man wearing a white jacket and radiating an atmosphere
of drugs now walked before him. He must be a surgeon. At home, surgeons
wore white jackets. Beyond doubt he was one and maybe he was going to
stop at John's cot to treat some terrible wound of which he was not yet
conscious. He shivered a little, but the man passed on, and his heart
beat its relief.

Then a soldier took his place in the bar of light. He was a short, thick
man in a ridiculous, long blue coat, and equally ridiculous, baggy, red
trousers. An obscure cap was cocked in an obscure manner over his ears,
and his face was covered with a beard, black, thick and untrimmed. He
carried a rifle over his shoulder and nobody could mistake him for
anything but a Frenchman. Then he was not a prisoner again, but was in
French hands. That, at least, was a consolation.

It was amusing to lie there and see the people, one by one, pass between
him and the light. He could easily imagine that he was an inspection
officer and that they walked by under orders from him. Two more women in
those somber dresses with the red crosses embroidered upon them, were
silhouetted for a moment against the glow and then were gone. Then a man
with his arm in a sling and his face very pale walked slowly by. A
wounded soldier! There must be many, very many of them!

The musical murmur ceased and he was growing weary. He closed his eyes
and then he opened them again because he felt for a moment on his face a
fragrant breath, fleeting and very light. He looked up into the eyes of
Julie Lannes. They were blue, very blue, but with infinite wistful
depths in them, and he noticed that her golden hair had faint touches of
the sun in it. It was a crown of glory. He remembered that he had seen
something like it in the best pictures of the old masters.

"Mademoiselle Julie!" he said.

"You have come back," she said gently. "We have been anxious about you.
Philip has been to see you three times."

He noticed that she, too, wore the somber dress with the red cross, and
he began to comprehend.

"A nurse," he said. "Why, you are too young for such work!"

"But I am strong, and the wounded are so many, hundreds of thousands,
they say. Is it not a time for the women of France to help as much as
they can?"

"I suppose so. I've heard that in our civil war the women passed over
the battle fields, seeking the wounded and nursed them afterward. But
you didn't come here alone, did you, Mademoiselle Julie?"

"Antoine Picard--you remember him--and his daughter Suzanne, are with
me. My mother would have come too, but she is ill. She will come later."

"How long have I been here?"

"Four days."

John thought a little. Many and mighty events had happened in four days
before he was wounded and many and mighty events may have occurred
since.

"Would you mind telling me where we are, Mademoiselle Julie?" he asked.

"I do not know exactly myself, but we are somewhere near the river,
Aisne. The German army has turned and is fortifying against us. When the
wind blows this way you can hear the rumble of the guns. Ah, there it is
now, Mr. Scott!"

John distinctly heard that low, sinister menace, coming from the east,
and he knew what it was. Why should he not? He had listened to it for
days and days. It was easy enough now to tell the thunder of the
artillery from real thunder. He was quite sure that it had never ceased
while he was unconscious. It had been going on so long now, as steady as
the flowing of a river.

"I've been asking you a lot of questions, Mademoiselle Julie, but I want
to ask you one more."

"What is it, Mr. Scott?"

"What happened to me?"

"They say that you were knocked down by a horse, and that when you were
falling his knee struck your head. There was a concussion but the
surgeon says that when you come out of it you will recover very fast."

"Is the man who says it a good surgeon, one upon whom a fellow can rely,
one of the very best surgeons that ever worked on a hurt head?"

"Yes, Mr. Scott. But why do you ask such a question? Is it your odd
American way?"

"Not at all. Mademoiselle Julie. I merely wanted to satisfy myself. He
knows that I'm not likely to be insane or weak-minded or anything of the
kind, because I got in the way of that horse's knee?"

"Oh, no, Mr. Scott, there is not the least danger in the world. Your
mind will be as sound as your body. Don't trouble yourself."

She laughed and now John knew that it was she whom he had heard singing
the chansonette in that low murmuring tone. What was that little song?
Well, it did not matter about the words. The music was that of a soft
breeze from the south blowing among roses. John's imaginings were
growing poetical. Perhaps there were yet some lingering effects from the
concussion.

"Here is the surgeon now," said Mademoiselle Julie. "He will take a look
at you and he will be glad to find that what he has predicted has come
true."

It was the man in the white jacket, and with that wonderful tangle of
black whiskers, like a patch cut out of a scrub forest.

"Well, my young Yankee," he said, "I see that you've come around. You've
raised an interesting question in my mind. Since a cavalry horse wasn't
able to break it, is the American skull thicker than the skulls of other
people?"

"A lot of you Europeans don't seem to think we're civilized."

"But when you fight for us we do. Isn't that so, Mademoiselle Lannes?"

"I think it is."

"War is a curious thing. While it drives people apart it also brings
them together. We learn in battle, and its aftermath, that we're very
much alike. And now, my young Yankee, I'll be here again in two hours to
change that bandage for the last time. I'll be through with you then,
and in another day you can go forward to meet the German shells."

"I prefer to run against a horse's knee," said John with spirit.

Surgeon Lucien Delorme laughed heartily.

"I'm confirmed in my opinion that you won't need me after another change
of bandages," he said. "We've a couple of hundred thousand cases much
