"Hurry with the soup, steward," roared the captain. "Coming, sir," replied
the steward. In a few moments the cook opened the door of his galley, and
out came the delicious steam of the turtle.

7. Then came the steward with a large covered tureen in his hand, towards
the cabin gangway. I forgot the ship for a moment in looking at this
precious cargo, the wheel slipped from my hands, the ship broached to with
a sudden jerk; the steward had got only one foot upon the stairs, when
this unexpected motion threw him off his balance, and down he went by the
run, the tureen slipped from his hands, and part of its contents flew into
the lee scuppers, and the balance followed him in his fall.

8. I laughed outright. I enjoyed the turtle a thousand times more than I
should have done if I had eaten the whole of it. But I was forced to
restrain my mirth, for the next moment the steward ran upon deck, followed
by the captain, in a furious rage, threatening if he caught him to throw
him overboard. Not a spoonful of the soup had been left in the coppers,
for the steward had taken it all away at once to keep it warm. In about an
hour afterwards the passengers came upon deck, looking more sober than I
had seen them since we left Liverpool. They had dined upon cold ham.


DEFINTIONS.--1. Re-served', kept back, retained. 2. Lick'er. ish, eager or
greedy to swallow. Aft, toward the stern of a vessel. Pro-spec'tive,
relating to the future. Force'meat, meat chopped fine and highly seasoned.
Unc'tu-ous, fat. 5. Glaz'ing, glass or glass-like substance. Bin'na-cle, a
box containing the compass of a ship. 6. Gal'ley, the kitchen of a ship.
7. Tu-reen', a large deep vessel for holding soup. Gang'way, a passageway.
Lee, pertaining to the side opposite that against which the wind blows.
Scup'pers, channels cut through the side of a ship for carrying off water
from the deck. Cop'pers, large copper boilers.


NOTE.--6. Four bells; i.e., two o'clock.



LXXXV. THE BEST KIND OF REVENGE.

1. Some years ago a warehouseman in Manchester, England, published a
scurrilous pamphlet, in which he endeavored to hold up the house of Grant
Brothers to ridicule. William Grant remarked upon the occurrence that the
man would live to repent of what he had done; and this was conveyed by
some talebearer to the libeler, who said, "Oh, I suppose he thinks I shall
some time or other be in his debt; but I will take good care of that." It
happens, however, that a man in business can not always choose who shall
be his creditors. The pamphleteer became a bankrupt, and the brothers held
an acceptance of his which had been indorsed to them by the drawer, who
had also become a bankrupt.

2. The wantonly libeled men had thus become creditors of the libeler! They
now had it in their power to make him repent of his audacity. He could not
obtain his certificate without their signature, and without it he could
not enter into business again. He had obtained the number of signatures
required by the bankrupt law except one. It seemed folly to hope that the
firm of "the brothers" would supply the deficiency. What! they who had
cruelly been made the laughingstock of the public, forget the wrong and
favor the wrongdoer? He despaired. But the claims of a wife and children
forced him at last to make the application. Humbled by misery, he
presented himself at the countinghouse of the wronged.

3. Mr. William Grant was there alone, and his first words to the
delinquent were, "Shut the door, sir!" sternly uttered. The door was shut,
and the libeler stood trembling before the libeled. He  told his tale and
produced his certificate, which was instantly clutched by the injured
merchant. "You wrote a pamphlet against us once!" exclaimed Mr. Grant. The
suppliant expected to see his parchment thrown into the fire. But this was
not its destination. Mr. Grant took a pen, and writing something upon the
document, handed it back to the bankrupt. He, poor wretch, expected to see
"rogue, scoundrel, libeler," inscribed; but there was, in fair round
characters, the signature of the firm.

4. "We make it a rule," said Mr. Grant, "never to refuse signing the
certificate of an honest tradesman, and we have never heard that you were
anything else." The tears started into the poor man's eyes. "Ah," said Mr.
Grant, "my saying was true! I said you would live to repent writing that
pamphlet. I did not mean it as a threat. I only meant that some day you
would know us better, and be sorry you had tried to injure us. I see you
repent of it now." "I do, I do!" said the grateful man; "I bitterly repent
it." "Well, well, my dear fellow, you know us now. How do you get on? What
are you going to do?" The poor man stated he had friends who could assist
him when his certificate was obtained. "But how are you off in the
meantime?"

5. And the answer was, that, having given up every farthing to his
creditors, he had been compelled to stint his family of even common
necessaries, that he might be enabled to pay the cost of his certificate.
"My dear fellow, this will not do; your family must not suffer. Be kind
enough to take this ten-pound note to your wife from me. There, there, my
dear fellow! Nay, do not cry; it will all be well with you yet. Keep up
your spirits, set to work like a man, and you will raise your head among
us yet." The overpowered man endeavored in vain to express his thanks; the
swelling in his throat forbade words. He put his handkerchief to his face
and went out of the door, crying like a child.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ware'house-man (English usage), one who keeps a wholesale
store for woolen goods. Scur'ril-ous, low, mean. Li'bel-er, one who
defames another maliciously by a writing, etc 2. Au-dac'i-ty, bold
impudence. Sig'na-ture, the name of a person written with his own hand,
the name of a firm signed officially. De--fi'cien-cy, want. 3.
De-lin'quent, an offender. Parch'ment, sheep or goat skin prepared for
writing upon. 5. Stint, to limit.


NOTE.--l. Acceptance. When a person upon whom a draft has been made,
writes his name across the face of it, the draft then becomes "an
acceptance." The person who makes the draft is called "the drawer;" the
person to whom the money is ordered paid writes his name on the back of
the draft and is called "an indorser." Paper of this kind frequently
passes from hand to hand, so that there are several indorsers.



LXXXVI. THE SOLDIER OF THE RHINE.

Caroline Elizabeth Sarah Norton (b. 1808, d. 1877) was the grand-daughter
of Richard Brinsley Sheridan. She wrote verses and plays at a very early
age. "The Sorrows of Rosalie," published in 1829, was written before she
was seventeen years old. In 1827 she was married to the Hon. George
Chapple Norton. The marriage was an unhappy one, and they were divorced in
1836. Her principal works are "The Undying One," "The Dream, and Other
Poems," "The Child of the Islands," "Stuart of Dunleith, a Romance," and
"English Laws for English Women of the 19th Century." She contributed
extensively to the magazines and other periodicals.

1.
A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers,
There was lack of woman's nursing, there was dearth of woman's tears;
But a comrade stood beside him, while his lifeblood ebbed away,
And bent, with pitying glances, to hear what he might say.
The dying soldier faltered, as he took that comrade's hand,
And he said: "I nevermore shall see my own, my native land;
Take a message and a token to some distant friends of mine,
For I was born at Bingen,--at Bingen on the Rhine.

2.
"Tell my brothers and companions, when they meet and crowd around
To hear my mournful story in the pleasant vineyard ground,
That we fought the battle bravely, and when the day was done,
Full many a corse lay ghastly pale beneath the setting sun;
And, 'mid the dead and dying, were some grown old in wars,--
The death wound on their gallant breasts, the last of many scars;
But some were young, and suddenly beheld life's morn decline,--
And one had come from Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.

3.
"Tell my mother that her other sons shall comfort her old age,
For I was aye a truant bird, that thought his home a cage.
For my father was a soldier, and, even when a child,
My heart leaped forth to hear him tell of struggles fierce and wild;
And when he died, and left us to divide his scanty hoard,
I let them take whate'er they would, but kept my father's sword;
And with boyish love I hung it where the bright light used to shine,
On the cottage wall at Bingen,--calm Bingen on the Rhine.

4.
"Tell my sister not to weep for me, and sob with drooping head,
When the troops come marching home again, with glad and gallant tread,
But to look upon them proudly, with a calm and steadfast eye,
For her brother was a soldier, too, and not afraid to die;
And if a comrade seek her love, I ask her in my name
To listen to him kindly, without regret or shame,
And to hang the old sword in its place (my father's sword and mine),
For the honor of old Bingen,--dear Bingen on the Rhine.

5.
"There's another,--not a sister; in the happy days gone by,
You'd have known her by the merriment that sparkled in her eye;
Too innocent for coquetry,--too fond for idle scorning,--
O friend! I fear the lightest heart makes sometimes heaviest mourning!
Tell her the last night of my life--(for, ere the moon be risen,
My body will be out of pain, my soul be out of prison),
I dreamed I stood with her, and saw the yellow sunlight shine
On the vine-clad hills of Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.

6.
"I saw the blue Rhine sweep along: I heard, or seemed to hear,
The German songs we used to sing, in chorus sweet and clear;
And down the pleasant river, and up the slanting hill,
The echoing chorus sounded, through the evening calm and still;
And her glad blue eyes were on me, as we passed, with friendly talk,
Down many a path beloved of yore, and well-remembered walk;
And her little hand lay lightly, confidingly in mine,--
But we'll meet no more at Bingen,--loved Bingen all the Rhine."

7.
His trembling voice grew faint and hoarse; his grasp was childish weak,
His eyes put on a dying look,--he sighed and ceased to speak.
His comrade bent to lift him, but the spark of life had fled,--
The soldier of the Legion in a foreign land was dead!
And the soft moon rose up slowly, and calmly she looked down
On the red sand of the battlefield, with bloody corses strewn;
Yes, calmly on that dreadful scene, her pale light seemed to shine,
As it shone on distant Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Le'gion (pro. le'jun), division of an army. Dearth (pro.
derth), scarcity. Ebbed, flowed out. 2. Corse, a dead body. 4. Stead'fast,
firm, resolute. 5. Co-quet'ry, trifling in love. 6. Cho'rus, music in
which all join. Yore, old times.


NOTE.--l. Bingen is pronounced Bing'en, not Bin'gen, nor Bin'jen.



LXXXVII. THE WINGED WORSHIPERS.

Charles Sprague (b. 1791, d. 1875) was born in Boston, Mass. He engaged in
mercantile business when quite young, leaving school for that purpose. In
1825, he was elected cashier of the Globe Bank of Boston, which position
he held until 1864. Mr. Sprague has not been a prolific writer; but his
poems, though few in number, are deservedly classed among the best
productions of American poets. His chief poem is entitled "Curiosity."

1.   Gay, guiltless pair,
   What seek ye from the fields of heaven?
     Ye have no need of prayer,
   Ye have no sins to be forgiven.

272    ECLECTIC SERIES.

2.   Why perch ye here,
   Where mortals to their Maker bend?
     Can your pure spirits fear
   The God ye never could offend?

3.   Ye never knew
   The crimes for which we come to weep;
     Penance is not for you,
   Blessed wanderers of the upper deep.

4.   To you 't is given
   To wake sweet Nature's untaught lays;
     Beneath the arch of heaven
   To chirp away a life of praise.

5.   Then spread each wing,
   Far, far above, o'er lakes and lands,
     And join the choirs that sing
   In yon blue dome not reared with hands.

6.   Or, if ye stay
   To note the consecrated hour,
     Teach me the airy way,
   And let me try your envied power.

7.   Above the crowd,
   On upward wings could I but fly,
     I'd bathe in yon bright cloud,
   And seek the stars that gem the sky.

8.   'T were Heaven indeed,
   Through fields of trackless light to soar,
     On Nature's charms to feed,
   And Nature's own great God adore.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Perch, to light or settle on anything. 3. Pen'-ance,
suffering for sin. 4. Lays, songs. 5. Choir (pro. kwir), a collection of
singers. Dome, an arched structure above a roof; hence, figuratively, the
heavens. 6. Con'se-crat-ed, set apart for the service of God. 8.
Track'less, having no path.


NOTE.--This little poem was addressed to two swallows that flew into
church during service.




LXXXVIII. THE PEEVISH WIFE.

Maria Edgeworth (b. 1767, d. 1849) was born near Reading. Berkshire,
England. In 1782 her father removed with his family to Edgeworthtown,
Ireland, to reside on his estate. She lived here during the remainder of
her life, with the exception of occasional short visits to England,
Scotland, and France. She was educated principally by her father, and they
were colaborers in literary productions, among which were "Essays on
Practical Education," and the "Parent's Assistant." Her novels and tales
were written without assistance, and her fame as a writer rests on them.
The best known of these are "Castle Rackrent," "Moral Tales," "Tales of
Fashionable Life," "Frank," "The Modern Griselda," and "Helen." Miss
Edgeworth excels in the truthful delineation of character, and her works
are full of practical good sense and genuine humor.

Mrs. Bollingbroke. I wish I knew what was the matter with me this morning.
Why do you keep the newspaper all to yourself, my dear?

Mr. Bolingbroke. Here it is for you, my dear; I have finished it. Mrs. B.
I humbly thank you for giving it to me when you have done with it. I hate
stale news. Is there anything in the paper? for I can not be at the
trouble of hunting it.

Mr. B. Yes, my dear; there are the marriages of two of our friends.

Mrs.B. Who? Who?

Mr. B. Your friend, the widow Nettleby, to her cousin John Nettleby.

Mrs. B. Mrs. Nettleby? Dear! But why did you tell me?

Mr. B. Because you asked me, my dear.

Mrs. B. Oh, but it is a hundred times pleasanter to read the paragraph
one's self. One loses all the pleasure of the surprise by being told.
Well, whose was the other marriage?

Mr. B. Oh, my dear, I will not tell you; I will leave you the pleasure of
the surprise.

Mrs. B. But you see I can not find it. How provoking you are, my dear! Do
pray tell me.

Mr. B. Our friend Mr. Granby.

Mrs. B. Mr. Granby? Dear! Why did you not make me guess? I should have
guessed him directly. But why do you call him our friend? I am sure he is
no friend of mine, nor ever was. I took an aversion to him, as you
remember, the very first day I saw him. I am sure he is no friend of mine.


Mr. B. I am sorry for it, my dear; but I hope you will go and see Mrs.
Granby.

Mrs. B. Not I, indeed, my dear. Who was she?

Mr. B. Miss Cooke.

Mrs. B. Cooke? But, there are so many Cookes. Can't you distinguish her
any way? Has she no Christian name?

Mr. B. Emma, I think. Yes, Emma.

Mrs. B. Emma Cooke? No; it can not be my friend Emma Cooke; for I am sure
she was cut out for an old maid.

Mr. B. This lady seems to me to be cut out for a good wife.

Mrs. B. Maybe so. I am sure I'll never go to see her. Pray, my dear, how
came you to see so much of her?

Mr. B. I have seen very little of her, my dear. I only saw her two or
three times before she was married.

Mrs. B. Then, my dear, how could you decide that she was cut out for a
good wife? I am sure you could not judge of her by seeing her only two or
three times, and before she was married.

Mr. B. Indeed, my love, that is a very just observation.

Mrs. B. I understand that compliment perfectly, and thank you for it, my
dear. I must own I can bear anything better than irony.

Mr. B. Irony? my dear, I was perfectly in earnest.

Mrs. B. Yes, yes; in earnest; so I perceive; I may naturally be dull of
apprehension, but my feelings are quick enough; I comprehend too well.
Yes, it is impossible to judge of a woman before marriage, or to guess
what sort of a wife she will make. I presume you speak from experience;
you have been disappointed yourself, and repent your choice.

Mr. B. My dear, what did I say that was like this? Upon my word, I meant
no such thing. I really was not thinking of you in the least.

Mrs. B. No, you never think of me now. I can easily believe that you were
not thinking of me in the least.

Mr. B. But I said that only to prove to you that I could not be thinking
ill of you, my dear.

Mrs. B. But I would rather that you thought ill of me than that you should
not think of me at all.

Mr. B. Well, my dear, I will even think ill of you if that will please
you.

Mrs. B. Do you laugh at me? When it comes to this I am wretched indeed.
Never man laughed at the woman he loved. As long as you had the slightest
remains of love for me you could not make me an object of derision;
ridicule and love are incompatible, absolutely incompatible. Well, I have
done my best, my very best, to make you happy, but in vain. I see I am not
cut out to be a good wife. Happy, happy Mrs. Granby!

Mr. B. Happy, I hope sincerely, that she will be with my friend; but my
happiness must depend on you, my love; so, for my sake, if not for your
own, be composed, and do not torment yourself with such fancies.

Mrs. B. I do wonder whether this Mrs. Granby is really that Miss Emma
Cooke. I'll go and see her directly; see her I must.

Mr. B. I am heartily glad of it, my dear; for I am sure a visit to his
wife will give my friend Granby real pleasure.

Mrs. B. I promise you, my dear, I do not go to give him pleasure, or you
either, but to satisfy my own curiosity.


DEFINITIONS.--I'ron-y, language intended to convey a meaning contrary to
its literal signification. De-ri'sion, the act of laughing at in contempt.
In-com-pat'i-ble, that can not exist together.



LXXXIX. THE RAINY DAY.

1. The day is cold, and dark, and dreary;
   It rains, and the wind is never weary;
   The vine still clings to the moldering wall,
   But at every gust the dead leaves fall.
     And the day is dark and dreary.

2. My life is cold, and dark, and dreary;
   It rains, and the wind is never weary;
   My thoughts still cling to the moldering Past,
   But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast,
     And the days are dark and dreary.

3. Be still, sad heart! and cease repining;
   Behind the clouds is the sun still shining;
   Thy fate is the common fate of all,
   Into each life some rain must fall,
     Some days must be dark and dreary.
                                         --Longfellow.



XC. BREAK, BREAK, BREAK.

Alfred Tennyson (b. 1809, d. 1892) was born in Somersby, Lincolnshire,
England. He graduated at Trinity College, Cambridge. His first volume of
poems was published in 1830, but it made little impression and was
severely criticised. On the publication of his third series in 1842, his
poetic genius began to receive general recognition. Mr. Tennyson was made
poet laureate in 1850, and was regarded as the foremost living poet of
England. For several years his residence was on the Isle of Wight. In
1884, he was raised to the peerage.

1. Break, break, break,
     On thy cold gray stones, O sea!
   And I would that my tongue could utter
     The thoughts that arise in me.

