to, and in smiling pleasantly at all times; but this was sufficient to
satisfy the moderate demands of her male friends upon her intellectual
resources.

"Fort Chipewyan at _last_," said Reuben, resting his paddle across the
canoe and looking earnestly towards the horizon; "I hope we ain't too
late after all our pushin' on.  It would be hard to find that Monsieur
Mackenzie had started."

"Too much ice in the lake," said Swiftarrow.  "He has not gone yet."

"I'm not so sure o' that," observed Lawrence.  "If reports be true,
Monsieur Mackenzie is not the man to wait until the ice is all off the
lakes and nothin' but plain sailin' lies before him."

"That's true, lad," replied Reuben, resuming his paddle.  "I wonder," he
murmured to himself, as he gazed wistfully towards the unknown north, "I
wonder if the big river is really there, an' if it _do_ jine the sea?"

That same question was put to himself that same evening--though not for
the first time--by one of the inhabitants of Fort Chipewyan.  The fort
was a mere group of two or three log-huts.  In the largest of these huts
sat a man whose strongly-marked handsome countenance gave evidence of a
bold enterprising spirit and a resolute will.  He pored over a map for
some time, carefully tracing a few pencil-lines into the blank spaces on
the paper, and then murmured, in words which were almost identical with
those of Reuben Guff, "I wonder if it joins the Polar Sea?"

This man was the true pioneer, or, rather, the king of pioneers, to whom
Guff gave place without a murmur, for Reuben was a modest man; and the
moment he heard that one of the gentlemen of the Canadian fur-trading
company had taken up his favourite hobby, and meant to work out the
problem, he resolved, as he said, "to play second fiddle," all the more
that the man who thus unwittingly supplanted him was a mountaineer of
the Scottish Highlands.

"It's of no manner of use, you see," he said to Swiftarrow, when
conversing on the subject, "for me to go off on a v'yage o' diskivery
w'en a gentleman like Monsieur Mackenzie, with a good edication an'
scienteefic knowledge and the wealth of a fur company at his back, is
goin' to take it in hand.  No; the right thing for Reuben Guff to do in
the circumstances is to jine him an' play second fiddle--or third, if
need be."

Alexander Mackenzie--while seated in the lowly hut of that solitary
outpost poring over his map, trying to penetrate mentally into those
mysterious and unknown lands which lay just beyond him--saw, in
imagination, a great river winding its course among majestic mountains
towards the shores of the ice-laden polar seas.  He also saw the lofty
peaks and snow-clad ridges of that mighty range which forms the
back-bone of the American continent, and--again in imagination--passed
beyond it and penetrated the vast wilderness to the Pacific, thus adding
new lands to the British Crown, and opening up new sources of wealth to
the fur company of which he was one of the most energetic members.  He
saw all this in imagination, we say, but he did _not_, at that time, see
his name attached to one of the largest American rivers, classed with
the names of the most noted discoverers of the world, and himself
knighted.  Still less, if possible, did he see, even in his wildest
flights of fancy, that the book of travels which he was destined to
write, would be translated into French by the order of Napoleon the
First, for the express purpose of being studied by Marshal Bernadotte,
with the view of enabling that warrior to devise a roundabout and
unlooked-for attack on Canada--in rear, as it were--from the region of
the northern wilderness--a fact which is well worthy of record!  [See
Appendix for an interesting letter on the subject.]

None of these things loomed on the mind of the modest though romantic
and enterprising man, for at that time he was only at the beginning of
his career of discovery.

It may not be out of place here to say a word or two as to the early
career of the hero whose footsteps we are about to follow.

He was a Highlander, to begin with; and possessed all the fire and
determination peculiar to that race.  At an early period of life he was
led to engage in commercial enterprises in the country north-west of
Lake Superior, joined the North-West Fur Company of Canada in 1784, and
went into the Indian country the following spring.  It is not necessary
to say more than that Alexander Mackenzie proved himself to be a
first-rate fur-trader at a time when the fur-trade was carried on under
great difficulties and amid severe privations.  For many years he was in
charge of Fort Chipewyan, the remote establishment to which we have just
conducted our reader.  Seven years before his coming on the scene, the
Lake of the Hills had not been visited by white men, and was known only
through Indian report.  When Mackenzie became ruler of the district, all
beyond the lake was _terra incognita_.  His spirit was one which
thirsted to explore the unknown.  He was eminently fitted both to hold
an advanced post and to invade new regions, being robust in
constitution, powerful in frame, inquisitive in mind, and enterprising
in spirit.  Frequently had he arrived at Fort Chipewyan with ninety or a
hundred men without any provision for their sustenance for the winter
save their fishing-nets and guns.  He was therefore accustomed to live
from hand to mouth, and to depend on his own exertions and resources in
a country where the winter is upwards of eight months long and the
severity of the climate extreme.

It was in June 1789 that he made preparations to start on his first
voyage of discovery.

Rising from the table at which he had been studying his projected route,
Mackenzie turned, with the air of a man who has made up his mind, and
said to a clerk who was smoking beside the fireplace--

"Le Roux, if we cannot prevail on these Indians to accompany us, I have
determined to start without them.  Has the small canoe been gummed?"

"It has," answered Le Roux, "but I would advise delay for a day or two.
If we give them time, the Indians may change their minds; besides, the
ice has not yet sufficiently cleared away."

Mackenzie paced the room impatiently, and his eyes flashed for one
moment with impatience.  They were deep blue eyes that could beam with
melting tenderness or sparkle with suppressed passion--it is but just to
add that passion in his case was usually suppressed, for he was a lover
of peace, as most truly great and powerful men usually are:

"Let us see now," he said, sitting down in front of Le Roux, "how our
resources stand.  In my canoe there will be the four Canadians and the
German.  Then there's our Indian friend, English Chief and his two
wives, who will embark in the second-sized canoe.  The two young Indians
whom we want to accompany us with their wives must make up their minds
to-night, else I will start without them.  Your own canoe with goods for
trade and provisions, will not be fully loaded; I shall therefore place
in it the provisions that we can't carry, and when we come to the place
where you are to stop and trade, and where I shall bid you farewell, we
shall doubtless have eaten our lading down sufficiently to take the
whole on board.  See, by the way, that the goods and trinkets to be
given in presents as we go along are not placed in the wrong canoe."

"They are already laid with the other goods, and also the nets and
ammunition by themselves," said Le Roux, rising and laying down his
pipe.

At that moment Reuben Guff entered with his friends.  The surprise of
Mackenzie was great on beholding them, but greater still was his delight
when he learned their errand.  The young Indians were forthwith told
that their services would not now be required, and our friends--
including Swiftarrow's wife, Darkeye--were at once added to the
exploring party.

Next day the expedition set forth from Fort Chipewyan and swept over the
broad breast of the Lake of the Hills.

We will not trace their course over known ground.  Suffice it to say
that their troubles began at once.  Soon after leaving the lake they
came to a rapid part of the river which flows out of it, where they were
obliged to land and carry canoes and goods to the still water further
down, but here the ice was still unthawed on the banks, rendering the
process of reloading difficult.  Soon after they came to a place called
the _Portage_ _d'Embarras_, which is occasioned by driftwood filling up
the channel of the river.  There they entered the Slave River, where
there is a portage or carrying-place named the Mountain, the landing at
which is very steep and close to the fall.  Below this fall there is a
mile of dangerous rapids--and here they met with their first disaster.

Reuben and Swiftarrow having landed with part of the cargo of the small
canoe, had left it in charge of Darkeye,--so named because of her large
and lustrous eyes, which, however, were the only good points about her,
for she was ill-favoured and clumsy, though strong of frame and a
diligent worker.  While she was moving from one point of rock to another
that appeared to her more convenient for landing, the canoe was caught
by an eddy and swept in a moment out into the strong current, down which
it sped with fearful velocity towards the falls.  Darkeye was quite
collected and cool, but she happened to dip her paddle on the edge of a
sunk rock with such vigour that the canoe overturned.  Upon the heights
above her husband saw the accident, and stood rooted for a moment in
helpless dismay to the spot.  It chanced that Lawrence Guff was at the
time the only man near the unfortunate woman, who, although she swam
like an otter, could not gain the bank.  Seeing this, the youth sprang
towards a jutting rock that almost overhung the fall, and entering the
rushing stream so deeply that he could barely retain his foothold,
caught the woman by the hair of the head as she was sweeping towards the
edge of the fall.  The two swayed for a few seconds on the verge of
destruction; then Swiftarrow came bounding down the bank like a deer,
and, catching Lawrence by the hand, dragged them both out of danger; but
before they were fairly landed the canoe was carried over the falls,
dashed to pieces, and in a few seconds its shreds were tossed wildly on
the surging rapids far down the river.

This accident caused them little loss beyond the canoe, which was soon
replaced by another, purchased from a party of Indians, with whom they
fell in that same evening.

Passing through Slave River, they swept out on the bright waters of
Great Slave Lake.  Over these they sped during several days.  This lake
is one of the largest fresh-water oceans of the continent, about 250
miles long and 50 broad.

And here the work of exploration fairly began.  Great Slave Lake was at
that time imperfectly known from Indian report; and the river of which
they were in search flowed, it was supposed, out of its western
extremity.  Here also Monsieur Le Roux was to be left behind with a
party of men to prosecute the fur-trade.



CHAPTER FOUR.

VICISSITUDES OF THE VOYAGE--INDIANS MET WITH, ETCETERA.

We have passed over the first three weeks of the voyage rapidly, but it
must not be supposed that therefore it was all plain sailing.  On the
contrary, the travellers were delayed by thunderstorms, and heavy rains,
and gales, and impeded by ice, which, even in the middle of June lay
thick on the waters in some parts.  They were also tormented by hosts of
mosquitoes, and at times they found difficulty in procuring food--
despite the ability of our friends Reuben, Swiftarrow, and Lawrence, who
were constituted hunters to the expedition.  At other times, however,
the supply of food was abundant and varied.  On one occasion the hunters
brought in seven geese, a beaver, and four ducks, besides which a large
supply of excellent trout and other fish was obtained from the nets; and
on another occasion they procured two swans, ten beavers, and a goose.
But sometimes they returned empty-handed, or with a single bird or so,
while the nets produced nothing at all.  Deer were also shot
occasionally, and they found immense numbers of wild cranberries,
strawberries, rasps, and other berries, besides small spring onions; so
that, upon the whole, they fared well, and days of abstinence were more
than compensated by days of superabundance.

One evening while they were coasting along this great lake, some Indians
were discovered on the shore, and the travellers landed to make
inquiries of them as to the nature of the country beyond.  There were
three lodges belonging to the Red-knife Indians, who were so named
because their knifes were made of the copper found in that region.  To
the leading man of these, English Chief, being interpreter, addressed
himself.

English Chief, we may remark in passing, was one of the followers of the
chief who conducted Hearne on his expedition to the Coppermine River;
since which event he had been a principal leader of his countrymen who
were in the habit of carrying furs to the English fur-traders at
Churchill, on Hudson's Bay, and was much attached to the interest of the
Hudson Bay Company, which, at that time, was in opposition to the
Canadian or Nor'-West Company.  These circumstances procured him the
title of the English Chief.  An able, active, but self-sufficient and
somewhat obstinate chief he was, and caused Mackenzie a good deal of
anxiety and much trouble to keep him with the party.

In answer to his queries, the principal man of the Red-knife Indians
said that there were many more of his tribe a short distance off, and
that he would send a man to fetch them.  He also said that the explorers
should see no more of them at that time, because the Slave and Beaver
Indians, as well as others of the tribe, were about to depart, and would
not be in that region again till the time when the swans cast their
feathers.

"Ask him," said Mackenzie, "if he and his friends have many furs to
dispose of."

To this the Indian replied by at once producing upwards of eight large
packs of good beaver and marten skins; and added the information that
his friends had plenty more.

"Now, then, Le Roux," said Mackenzie, turning to his clerk, "here you
and I shall part.  This seems a good spot and a good opportunity for
opening up the trade with these Indians.  When the rest of them arrive
we shall have a palaver, and then you shall remain to look after them,
so, open up your packs, and get ready a few small presents without
delay."

That day was spent in considerable bustle and excitement; the Indians
being overjoyed that the white traders had at last penetrated into their
country; and their joy being increased by the distribution of such
trifling, but much-prized, gifts as glass beads, knives, small
looking-glasses, etcetera.  It rained in torrents all the time but this
did not damp their spirits; and as for their bodies--they were used to
it!  In the afternoon Mackenzie assembled the whole tribe, and made them
the following speech, which was translated by English Chief in a very
pompous manner, for that excellent red-skin was fully alive to the
dignity of his position.

"My friends," began our explorer, "I am glad to meet with you.  The
white man and the Indians are always glad to meet--they can benefit each
other mutually.  Each has got what the other requires.  I have come for
the purpose of opening up trade with you.  It is true that I myself will
take my departure to-morrow, because I am in search of new lands; but
some of my people will remain on the spot, and if you bring in a
sufficient quantity of furs to make it answer, my men will return to
Fort Chipewyan for more goods, and will spend the winter here.  They
will build a fort and continue to dwell among you as long as you shall
be found to deserve it."

At this point the speaker paused, and the dark-skinned audience gave
vent to a loud "Ho!" which was equivalent to the British "Hear, hear!"

"In regard to my own work," continued Mackenzie, "I intend to search
for, and find the great river, which, it is said, flows out of this
lake, and follow its current to the sea--or, as you call it, the great
salt lake.  Do my brothers know anything about this river?  If so, let
them speak."

Hereupon an old chief, with hair like small iron wire, and a skin like
shoe-leather, got up, and delivered himself as follows--

"We are glad to hear what our white brother says.  It encourages us to
know that you will make a trading fort in our country, for we have need
of one.  Hitherto we have had to travel far--very far--with our furs; or
if, to save trouble, we intrusted our furs to the Chipewyans, they often
pillaged us, or, at most, gave us very little for the fruits of our
toil.  For a long time we have been so discouraged that we had no motive
to pursue the beaver, except to obtain a sufficiency of food and
clothing.  Now if you come to us, we shall be happy--wauch!"

The last word was equivalent to the expression--"There, think o' that!"
The old man paused as if to give his audience time for reflection.

"As to the great river," he continued sententiously, "we know of its
existence; but none of our tribe has ever followed its course down to
the great salt lake.  We earnestly advise our brother not to go there,
