"Ay, that is true, as I know to my cost," returned the captain, "for
this is not my first venture.  A long time ago I loaded a ship about the
size of this one, and sent her under command of one of my best friends
to the Euxine sea for gold.  I now think that that old story about Jason
and his ship _Argo_ sailing in search of the golden fleece was running
too strong in my youthful brain.  Besides that, of course I had heard
the report that there is much gold in that direction, and my hopes were
strong, for you know all the world runs after gold.  Anyhow, my ship
sailed and I never saw her or my friend again.  Since then I have
contented myself with copper and tin."

A slight increase in the wind at that moment caused the captain to
dismiss his golden and other memories, and look inquiringly to windward.

"A squall, methinks?" said Bladud.

"No, only a puff," replied his friend, ordering the steersman to alter
the course a little.

The squall or puff was only strong enough to cause the _Penelope_ to
make a graceful bow to the controlling element and cleave the sparkling
water with her prow so swiftly that she left a gleaming wake as of
lambent fire astern.  It was short-lived, however, and was followed by a
calm which obliged little Maikar and his comrades to cease their
story-telling and ply their fifty oars.  Thus the pace was kept going,
though not quite so swiftly as if they were running before a stiff
breeze.

"The gods are propitious," said the captain; "we are going to have a
prosperous voyage."

"How many gods are propitious?" asked Bladud.

"That is a question much too deep for me to answer."

"But not too deep to think of--is it?"

"Of what use would be my thinking?" returned the captain, lightly.  "I
leave such matters to the learned."

"Now, mate," he added, turning to his subordinate, "I'm going to rest a
while.  See that you keep an open eye for squalls and pirates.  Both are
apt to come down on you when you least expect them."

But neither squalls nor pirates were destined to interfere with the
_Penelope_ during the greater part of that voyage.  Day after day the
skies were clear, the sea comparatively smooth, and the winds
favourable.  Sometimes they put ashore, when the weather became stormy
and circumstances were favourable.  On such occasions they lighted
camp-fires under the trees, the ruddy light of which glowed with a grand
effect on the picturesque sailors as they sat, stood, or reclined around
them.

At other times they were obliged to keep more in the open sea, and
occasionally met with traders like themselves returning home, with whom,
of course, they were glad to fraternise for a time and exchange views.

Once only did they meet with anything like a piratical vessel, but as
that happened to be late in the evening, they managed, by plying the
oars vigorously, and under the shade of night, to escape a second
encounter with those robbers of the sea.

Thus, in course of time, the length of the great inland sea was
traversed, the southern coast of what is now known as France was
reached, and the captain's prophecy with regard to a prosperous voyage
was thus far fulfilled.

CHAPTER FOUR.

THE STORM AND WRECK.

It was near daybreak on the morning of a night of unclouded splendour
when the mate of the _Penelope_ aroused his chief with the information
that appearances to windward betokened a change of some sort in the
weather.

"If there is a change at all it must be for the worse," said Arkal,
raising himself on one elbow, rubbing his eyes, yawning, and then
casting a glance over the side where the rippling foam told that the
wind was increasing.  Raising his eyes to the windward horizon, he threw
aside the sheepskin blanket that covered him and rose up quickly.

"There is indeed a change coming.  Rouse the men and reduce the sail,
mate.  Bestir you!  The squalls are sudden here."

The orders were obeyed with promptitude.  In a few minutes the sail was
reduced to its smallest size, and all loose articles about the vessel
were made fast.

"You expect a gale, captain?" asked Bladud, who was aroused by the noise
of the preparations.

"Ay--or something like one.  When a cloud like that rises up on the
horizon there is usually something more than a puff coming.  You had
better keep well under the lee of the bulwarks when it strikes us."

Bladud's nautical experience had already taught him what to expect and
how to act in the circumstance that threatened.  Standing close to the
side of the ship, he laid hold of a stanchion and looked out to
windward, as most of the crew were by that time doing.  Captain Arkal
himself took the helm.

The increasing daylight showed them that the bank of cloud was spreading
quickly over the sky towards the zenith, while a soft hissing sound told
of the approaching wind.  Soon the blackness on the sea intensified, and
white gleams as of flashing light showed where the waves were torn into
foam by the rushing wind.

With a warning to "hold on fast!" the captain turned the vessel's head
so as to meet the blast.  So fierce was it that it cut off the crests of
the wavelets, blowing the sea almost flat for a time, and producing what
is known as a white squall.  The sail was kept fluttering until the fury
of the onset was over, then the wind was allowed to fill it; the
_Penelope_ bent down until the sea began to bubble over the lee
bulwarks, and in a few moments more she was springing over the fast
rising waves like a nautical racehorse.

Every moment the gale increased, obliging the mariners to show but a
corner of the sail.  Even this had at last to be taken in, and, during
the whole of that dismal day and of the black night which followed, the
_Penelope_ drove helplessly before the wind under a bare pole.
Fortunately the gale was favourable, so that they were enabled to lay
their course, but it required all the skill and seamanship of Captain
Arkal to prevent their being pooped and swamped by the waves that rolled
hissing after them as if hungering mightily to swallow them up.

To have the right man in the right place at such times of imminent
danger is all-important, not only to the safety of the craft, but to the
peace of mind of those whose lives are in jeopardy.  All on board the
little vessel during that hurricane felt much comforted by the knowledge
that their captain was in the right place.  Although a "square man," he
had by no means been fitted into a round hole!  Knowing this, Prince
Bladud felt no anxiety as to the management of the craft, and gave
himself up to contemplate the grandeur of the storm, for the howling
blast, creaking spars, and bursts of rattling thunder, rendered
conversation out of the question.

During a slight lull, however, Bladud asked the question whether the
captain knew on what part of the coast they were running.

"Not exactly," he replied, "we have been running so long in darkness
that I can only guess.  If it holds on much longer like this I shall
have to put her head to wind and wait for more light.  It may be that we
have been driven too far to the left, and there are islands hereabouts
that we must keep well clear of.  I would that we had put into some bay
for shelter before this befell us.  Ho! mate."

"Ay, captain."

"See that you put our sharpest pair of eyes in the bow, and let a second
pair watch the first, lest the owner of them should go to sleep."

"Little Maikar is there, sir," shouted the mate, "and I am watching him
myself."

"We shall do well with Maikar in the bow, for he sees like a weasel, and
is trustworthy," muttered the captain as he glanced uneasily over the
stern, where the hungry waves were still hissing tumultuously after
them, as if rendered furious by the delayed meal.

At daybreak on the second day the gale moderated a little, and they were
enabled once more to show a corner of their sail, and to encourage the
hope that the worst was over.  But a fresh outburst, of greater fury
than before, soon dashed these hopes, and obliged the captain to throw
overboard all the spare spars and some of the heaviest part of the
cargo.  Still the gale increased, and the impatient waves began to lip
over the poop occasionally as if unable to refrain from tasting!

"More cargo must go," muttered the captain, with a gloomy frown.  Being
resolute, he gave orders to that effect.

Presently the order was given to take soundings.  When this was done it
was found that they were in twenty fathoms water.  On taking another
cast, the depth reported was fifteen fathoms.

There were no charts covered with soundings to guide the mariner in
those days, but it did not require much experience to convince a seaman
that land was probably too near, with such a sudden change from twenty
to fifteen fathoms.  Arkal was, however, not unprepared for it, and
quickly gave orders to stand by to let go the anchors.  At that moment
the voice of little Maikar was heard shouting, in stentorian tones,
"Land ahead!"

The captain replied with a sharp "let go!" and four anchors were
promptly dropped from the stern.  At the same moment he placed the helm
fair amidships, and made it fast with rudder-bands.  As the stern of the
_Penelope_ was formed like the bow, a sharp cut-water was by this means
instantly presented to the sea, thus avoiding the necessity and danger
incurred by modern ships, in similar circumstances, of anchoring by the
head and swinging round.

The hungry waves hissed tumultuously on, but were cleft and passed under
the ship disappointed, for there was still enough of water beneath to
permit of her tossing to and fro and rising to them like a duck, as she
strained and tugged at the anchors.

Just as these operations had been performed, the mists of darkness
seemed to lift a little and revealed a wild rocky line of coast, against
which the waves were breaking madly.

"Now all hope is over; pray to your gods, men," said the mate, whose
courage was not quite equal to his position.

"There are no gods!" growled the captain bitterly, for he saw that he
was now a ruined man, even though he should escape with life.

"There is _one_ God," said Bladud quietly, "and He does all things
well."

As he spoke, the captain, whose eyes had not ceased to look searchingly
along the coast, observed something like a bay a short way to the left
of the place where they lay.

"It looks like a sandy bay," he said.

"It _is_ a sandy bay," exclaimed the anxious mate; "let us up anchors
and run into it."

"Have an easy mind and keep your advice till asked for," returned the
captain with a look of scorn.  "If we are destined to escape, we _shall_
escape without making haste.  If we are doomed to die, nothing can save
us, and it is more manly to die in a leisurely way than in a hurry.
When we can see clearly we shall know better how to act."

Although this manner of submitting to the inevitable did not quite suit
the mate, he felt constrained to repress his impatience, while the
coolness of the captain had a quieting effect on some of the men who
were inclined to give way to panic.  The sight of Bladud--as he sat
there leaning on the hilt of his sword with an expression of what
appeared to be serene contentment--had also a quieting effect on the
men.

When the increasing light showed that the sandy bay was a spot that
might possibly be reached in safety, orders were given to cut the
cables, loose the rudder-bands and hoist the sail.  For a few minutes
the vessel ran swiftly towards the bay, but before reaching the shore
she struck with violence.  The fore part of the _Penelope_ stuck fast
immovably, and then, at last, the ravenous waves attained their
longed-for meal.  They burst over the stern, swept the decks, tore up
the fastenings, revelled among the tackling and began tumultuously to
break up the ship.

"Launch the skiff," shouted the captain, hastening to lend a hand in the
operation.

The men were not slow to obey, and when it touched the water they
swarmed into it, so that, being overloaded, it upset and left its
occupants struggling in the water.  A number of the men who could swim,
immediately jumped overboard and tried to right the skiff, but they
failed, and, in the effort to do so, broke the rope that held it.  Some
clung to it.  Others turned and swam for the shore.

A good many of the men, however, still remained in the wreck, which was
fast breaking up.  To these the captain turned.

"Now, men," he said, "those of you who can swim would do well to take to
the water at once, for it is clear that we shall not have a plank left
to stand on soon.  Come, mate, show them an example."

The man, though not very courageous, as his pale face betrayed, happened
to be a good swimmer, and at once leaped into the sea.  He was followed
by all who could swim.  Those who could not, were encouraged to make the
attempt with planks and oars to aid them.  As for Bladud, he busied
himself like the captain in giving heart to the non-swimmers and showing
them how best to use their floats.

The last of the men to leave was little Maikar.

He stood at the bow with his arms crossed on his chest and a look of
melancholy interest on his countenance.

"What! not gone yet?" exclaimed the captain, turning to him.

"I cannot swim," said the man.

"But neither can these," returned the captain, pointing to the men who
had left last.

"My father used to say," rejoined Maikar, as if murmuring to himself,
"that I was born to be drowned, and I'm inclined to think he was right."

"Surely you are not afraid," said Arkal.

"Afraid!" exclaimed Maikar, with a sarcastic laugh.  "No, captain, but
I'm sorry to part with you, because you've been a good captain to me."

"An' I bear no ill-will to you, Bladud, though you _did_ squeeze most of
the life out of me once.  Farewell, both."

As he spoke the little man seized an oar, leaped overboard, and, after
some trouble in steadying himself and pointing the oar in the right
direction, struck out for the shore.

It was a long way off, and often, while this scene was being enacted,
was heard the bubbling cry of men whose powers were failing them.  Some
were carried by currents against a point to the westward and,
apparently, dashed against the rocks.  Others sank before half the
distance had been traversed.

Bladud and the captain looked at each other when Maikar had left them.

"Can you swim?" asked the captain.  "Like a duck," returned the prince,
"and I can help you if required."

"I swim like a fish," returned the captain, "but it is hard to part from
my _Penelope_!  She has never failed me till now, and as this venture
contains all my goods, I am a ruined man."

"But your life still remains," said the prince.  "Be of good cheer,
captain.  A stout man can make his fortune more than once.  Come, let us
go."

A loud cry from Maikar at that moment hastened their deliberations.

"Are you going to cumber yourself with your weapons?" asked Arkal, as
they were about to spring from the side, observing that his friend took
up his sword and shield.

"Ay--that am I.  It is not a small matter that will part my good sword
and me."

Both men sprang overboard at the same moment, and made for the spot
where little Maikar was still giving vent to bubbling yells and
struggling with his oar.

Bladud was soon alongside of him, and, seizing his hair, raised him out
of the water.

"Got the cramp," he shouted.

"Keep still, then, and do what I tell ye," said the prince, in a tone of
stern command.

He caught the poor man under the armpits with both hands, turned on his
back and drew him on to his chest.  Swimming thus on his back, with
Captain Arkal leading so as to keep them in the right direction, the
three were ultimately cast, in a rather exhausted condition, on the
shore of the little bay.

CHAPTER FIVE.

AFTER THE WRECK.

It was on the southern shore of what is now known as France that our
hero and his comrades in misfortune were cast.

At the time we write of, we need hardly say, the land was nameless.
Even her old Roman name of Gaul had not yet been given to her, for Rome
itself had not been founded.  The fair land was a vast wilderness, known
