again sent them violently towards the bank.  This time Robin caught a
rock with both hands and held on.  Slowly, while almost choked with the
water that splashed up into his face, he worked his right knee into a
crevice, then made a wild grasp with the left hand at a higher
projection of the rock.  At the same moment his left foot struck the
bottom.  Another effort and he was out of danger, but it was several
minutes ere he succeeded in dragging Madge from the hissing water of the
shallows to the green sward above, and after this was accomplished he
found it almost impossible to tear himself from the grasp of the now
unconscious girl.

At first poor Robin thought that his companion was dead, but by degrees
consciousness returned, and at last she was able to rise and walk.

Drenched, dishevelled, and depressed, these unfortunate electricians
returned home.

Of course they were received with mingled joy and reproof.  Of course,
also, they were forbidden to go near the pool again--though this
prohibition was afterwards removed, and our hero ultimately became a
first-rate swimmer and diver.

Thus was frustrated the laying of the first submarine cable between
England and Denmark!



CHAPTER FIVE.

PROSPECTS OF REAL CABLE-LAYING--ROBIN MEETS WITH HIS FIRST ELECTRICAL
ACQUAINTANCES.

Circumstances require that we should shift the scene and the date pretty
frequently in this tale.  We solicit the reader's attendance at an
office in London.

The office is dingy.  Many offices are so.  Two clerks are sitting in it
making faces at each other across their desk.  They are not lunatics.
They are not imbeciles or idlers.  On the contrary, they have frequent
spells of work that might throw the toils of an Arab ass into the shade.
They are fine strapping young fellows, with pent-up energies equal to
anything, but afflicted with occasional periods of having nothing
particular to do.  These two have been sitting all morning in busy
idleness.  Their muscular and nervous systems rebelling, have induced
much fidgeting and many wry faces.  Being original, they have turned
their sorrows into a game, and their little game at present is to see
which can make a face so hideous that the other shall be compelled to
laugh!  We have deep sympathy with clerks.  We have been a clerk, and
know what it is to have the fires of Vesuvius raging within, while under
the necessity of exhibiting the cool aspect of Spitzbergen without.

But these clerks were not utterly miserable.  On the contrary, they
were, to use one of their own familiar phrases, rather jolly than
otherwise.  Evening was before them in far-off but attainable
perspective.  Home, lawn-tennis, in connection with bright eyes and
pretty faces, would compensate for the labours of the day and let off
the steam.  They were deep in their game when a rap at the door brought
their faces suddenly to a state of nature.

"Come in," said the _first_ clerk.

"And wipe your feet," murmured the second, in a low tone.

A gentleman, with an earnest countenance, entered.

"Is Mr Lowstoft in his office?"

"He is, sir," said the first clerk, descending from his perch with an
air of good-will, and requesting the visitor's name and business.

The visitor handed his card, on which the name Cyrus Field was written,
and the clerk, observing it, admitted the owner at once to the inner
sanctum where Mr Lowstoft transacted business.

"There's _something_ up," murmured the clerk, with a mysterious look at
his comrade, on resuming his perch.

"Time's up, or nearly so," replied the comrade, with an anxious look at
the clock:

  "The witching hour which sets us free
  To saunter home and have our tea--

"approaches."

"D'you know that that is Cyrus Field?" said the first clerk.

"And who is Cyrus Field?" demanded the second clerk.

"O ignoramus!  Thy name is Bob, and thou art not worth a `bob'--
miserable snob!  Don't you know that Cyrus Field is the man who brought
about the laying of the great Atlantic Cable in 1858?"

"No, most learned Fred, I did not know that, but I am very glad to know
it now.  Moreover, I know nothing whatever about cables--Atlantic or
otherwise.  I am as blind as a bat, as ignorant as a bigot, as empty as
a soap-bubble, and as wise as Solomon, because I'm willing to be
taught."

"What a delicious subject to work upon!" said Fred.

"Well then, work away," returned Bob; "suppose you give _me_ a discourse
on Cables.  But, I say--be merciful.  Don't overdo it, Frederick.
Remember that my capacity is feeble."

"I'll be careful, Bob.--Well then, you must know that from the year 1840
submarine cables had been tried and laid, and worked with more or less
success, in various parts of the world.  Sir W. O'Shaughnessy, I
believe, began it.  Irishmen are frequently at the root of mischief!
Anyhow, he, being Superintendent of Electric Telegraphs in India in
1839, hauled an insulated wire across the Hooghly at Calcutta, and
produced what they call `electrical phenomena' at the other side of the
river.  In 1840 Mr Wheatstone brought before the House of Commons the
project of a cable from Dover to Calais.  In 1842 Professor Morse of
America laid a cable in New York harbour, and another across the canal
at Washington.  He also suggested the possibility of laying a cable
across the Atlantic Ocean.  In 1846 Colonel Colt, of revolver notoriety,
and Mr Robinson, laid a wire from New York to Brooklyn, and from Long
Island to Correy Island.  In 1849--"

"I say, Fred," interrupted Bob, with an anxious look, "you are a walking
dictionary of dates.  Haydn was nothing to you.  But--couldn't you give
it me without dates?  I've got no head for dates; never could stomach
them--except when fresh off the palm-tree.  Don't you think that a
lecture without dates would be pleasantly original as well as
instructive?"

"No, Bob, I don't, and I won't be guilty of any such gross innovation on
time-honoured custom.  You must swallow my dates whether you like them
or not.  In 1849, I say, a Mr Walker--"

"Any relation to Hookey?"

"No, sir, none whatever--he laid a wire from Folkestone to a steamer two
miles off the shore, and sent messages to it.  At last, in 1851.  Mr
Brett laid down and successfully wrought the cable between Dover and
Calais which had been suggested by Wheatstone eleven years before.  It
is true it did not work long, but this may be said to have been the
beginning of submarine telegraphy, which, you see, like your own
education, Bob, has been a thing of slow growth."

"Have you done with dates, now, my learned friend?" asked Bob,
attempting to balance a ruler on the point of his nose.

"Not quite, my ignorant chum, but nearly.  That same year--1851,
remember--a Mr Frederick N. Gisborne, an English electrician, made the
first attempt to connect Newfoundland with the American continent by
cable.  He also started a company to facilitate intercourse between
America and ireland by means of steamers and telegraph-cables.  Gisborne
was very energetic and successful, but got into pecuniary difficulties,
and went to New York to raise the wind.  There he met with Cyrus Field,
who took the matter up with tremendous enthusiasm.  He expanded
Gisborne's idea, and resolved to get up a company to connect
Newfoundland with Ireland by electric cable.  Field was rich and
influential, and ultimately successful--"

"Ah! would that you and I were rich, Fred," interrupted Bob, as he let
fall the ruler with a crash on the red-ink bottle, and overturned it;
"but go on, Fred, I'm getting interested; pardon the interruption, and
never mind the ink, I'll swab it up.--He was successful, was he?"

"Yes, he was; eminently so.  He first of all roused his friends in the
States, and got up, in 1856, the `New York, Newfoundland, and London
Telegraph Company,' which carried a line of telegraph through the
British Provinces, and across the Gulf of Saint Lawrence to Saint
John's, Newfoundland--more than 1000 miles--at a cost of about 500,000
pounds.  Then he came over to England and roused the British Lion, with
whose aid he started the `Atlantic Telegraph Company,' and fairly began
the work, backed by such men as Brett, Bidden, Stephenson, Brunel,
Glass, Eliot, Morse, Bright, Whitehouse, and a host of others.  But all
this was not done in a day.  Cyrus Field laboured for years among
preliminaries, and it was not until 1857 that a regular attempt was made
to lay an Atlantic cable.  It failed, because the cable broke and was
lost.  A second attempt was made in 1858, and was successful.  In that
year, my boy, Ireland and Newfoundland were married, and on the 5th of
August the first electric message passed between the Old World and the
New, through a small wire, over a distance of above 2000 miles.  But the
triumph of Field and his friends was short-lived, for, soon after,
something went wrong with the cable, and on the 6th September it ceased
to work."

"What a pity!" exclaimed Bob; "so it all went off in smoke."

"Not quite that, Bob.  Before the cable struck work about 400 messages
had been sent, which proved its value in a financial point of view, and
one of these messages--sent from London in the morning and reaching
Halifax the same day--directed that `the 62nd Regiment was not to return
to England,' and it is said that this timely warning saved the country
an expenditure of 50,000 pounds.  But the failure, instead of damping,
has evidently stimulated the energies of Mr Field, who has been going
about between America and England ever since, stirring people up far and
near, to raise the funds necessary for another attempt.  He gives
himself no rest; has embarked his own fortune in the affair, and now, at
this moment, in this year of grace 1865, is doing his best, I have no
doubt, to induce our governor, Mr Lowstoft, to embark in the same boat
with himself."

It would seem as if Fred had been suddenly endowed with the gift of
second-sight, for at that moment the door of his employer's room opened,
and Mr Lowstoft came out, saying to his visitor, in the most friendly
tones, that he had the deepest sympathy with his self-sacrificing
efforts, and with the noble work to which he had devoted himself.

Bob, in a burst of sudden enthusiasm, leaped off his stool, opened the
office-door, and muttered something as the distinguished visitor passed
him.

"I beg pardon," said Mr Field, checking himself, "what did you say?"

"I--I wish you good luck, sir, with--with the new cable," stammered the
clerk, blushing deeply.

"Thank you, lad--thank you," said Mr Field, with a pleasant smile and
nod, as he went away.

"Mr Sime," said Mr Lowstoft to Bob, turning at the door of his room,
"send young Wright to me."

"Yes, sir," replied the obedient Bob, going to a corner of the room and
applying his lips to a speaking-tube.

Now young Wright was none other than our hero Robin grown up to the
mature age of fifteen.

He was perched on the top of a three-legged stool, and, from the slow
and intensely earnest manner in which his head turned from side to side
as he wrote, it was quite evident that he dotted all his _i's_ and
stroked all his _t's_ with conscientious care.  As he sat there--a
sturdy little broad-shouldered fellow, so deeply engrossed with his work
that he was oblivious of all around--he seemed the very _beau-ideal_ of
a painstaking, hard-working clerk.  So deeply was he engrossed in his
subject--the copying of an invoice--that he failed to hear the voice of
his fellow-clerk, although the end of the speaking-tube was not far,
from where he sat.  After listening a few seconds at the other end of
the tube, Bob Sime repeated the summons with such vigour that Robin
leaped from his stool as though he had received one of his favourite
electric shocks.  A minute later he stood in the presence of the Head of
the House.

"Robert Wright," said the Head, pushing his spectacles up on his brow,
"I shall be sorry to lose your services, but--"

He paused and turned over the papers before him, as if searching for
something, and Robin's heart sank.  Was he going to be dismissed?  Had
he done anything wrong, or had he unwittingly neglected some duty?

"Ah! here it is," resumed Mr Lowstoft, "a letter from a friend who has
come by a slight injury to his right hand, and wants a smart amanuensis
and general assistant.  Now I think of sending _you_ to him, if you have
no objection."

As the Head again paused while glancing over the letter, Robin ventured
timidly to state that he had very strong objections; that he was very
much satisfied with his situation and work, and had no desire to change.

Mr Lowstoft did not appear to listen to his remarks, but said
suddenly--"You've studied the science of electricity, I believe?"

"Yes, sir--to some extent," answered the lad, with a look of surprise.

"I know you have.  Your father has told me about your tastes and
studies.  You've heard of Mr Cyrus Field, I presume?"

"Indeed I have," said Robin, brightening up, "it was through his efforts
that the Atlantic Cable was laid in 1858--which unfortunately went
wrong."

"Well, my boy, it is through his efforts that another cable is to be
laid in this year 1865, which we all hope sincerely won't go wrong, and
my friend, who wants an assistant, is one of the electricians connected
with the new expedition.  Would you like to go?"

Robin's eyes blazed, and he could scarcely find breath or words to
express his willingness--if his father did not object.

"Go home at once, then, and ask leave, for the Great Eastern is almost
ready for sea, and you have to hasten your preparations."

Robin stroked no more _t's_ and dotted no more _i's_ that day.  We fear,
indeed, that he even left the invoice on his desk unfinished, with the
last _i_ imperfect.

Bursting into his father's house, he found Madge--now become a pretty
little slip of feminine thread-paper--seated at the piano agonising over
a chord which her hand was too small to compass.

"Madge, Madge, cousin Madge!" he shouted, seizing both the extended
little hands and kissing the musical wrinkles from her brow, "why am I
like a magnet?  You'll never guess."

"Because you attract everybody to you," said Madge promptly.

"Pooh! not at all.  A magnet doesn't attract _every_ body.  It has two
poles, don't you know, and repels some bodies.  No, Madge, it's because
I have been electrified."

"Indeed? and what has electrified you, Robin?"

"The Atlantic Cable, Madge."

"Well, that ought to be able to do it powerfully," returned Madge, with
a laugh; "but tell me all about it, and don't make more bad conundrums.
I'm sure something has happened.  What is it?"

Mrs Wright, entering at the moment, her son calmed himself as well as
he could, and sat down to tell his tale and talk the matter over.

"Now, what think you, mother?  Will father consent?"

"I think he will, Robin, but before going into the matter further, I
will lay it before our Father in heaven.  He must show us the way, if we
are to go right."

According to invariable custom, Robin's mother retired to her own room
to consider the proposal.  Thereafter she had a long talk with her
husband, and the result was that on the following day our hero found
himself in a train with a small new portmanteau by his side, a new
billy-cock hat on his head, a very small new purse in his pocket, with a
remarkably small sum of money therein, and a light yet full heart in his
breast.  He was on his way to the Nore, where the Great Eastern lay,
like an antediluvian macaroni-eater, gorging itself with innumerable
miles of Atlantic Cable.

To say truth, Robin's breast--capacious though it was for his size--
could hardly contain his heart that day.  The dream of his childhood was
about to be realised!  He had thirsted for knowledge.  He had acquired
all that was possible in his father's limited circumstances.  He had,
moreover, with the valuable assistance of Sam Shipton, become deeply
learned in electrical science.  He had longed with all his heart to
become an electrician--quite ready, if need were, to commence as sweeper
of a telegraph-office, but he had come to regard his desires as too
ambitious, and, accepting his lot in life with the quiet contentment
taught him by his mother, had entered on a clerkship in a mercantile
house, and had perched himself, with a little sigh no doubt, yet
cheerfully, on the top of a three-legged stool.  To this stool he had
been so long attached--physically--that he had begun to regard it almost
as part and parcel of himself, and had made up his mind that he would
have to stick to it through life.  He even sometimes took a quaint view
of the matter, and tried to imagine that through long habit it would
stick to him at last, and oblige him to carry it about sticking straight
out behind him; perhaps even require him to take it to bed with him, in
which case he sometimes tried to imagine what would be the precise
effect on the bedclothes if he were to turn from one side to the other.
Thus had his life been projected in grey perspective to his mental eye.

But now--he actually was an electrician-elect on his way to join the
biggest ship in the world, to aid in laying the greatest telegraph cable
in the world, in company with some of the greatest men in the universe!
It was almost too much for him.  He thirsted for sympathy.  He wanted to
let off his feelings in a cheer, but life in a lunatic asylum presented
itself, and he refrained.  There was a rough-looking sailor lad about
his own age, but much bigger, on the seat opposite, (it was a third
class).  He thought of pouring out his feelings on him--but prudence
prevented.  There is no saying what might have been the result,
figuratively speaking, to his boiler if the sailor lad had not of his
own accord opened a safety-valve.
