


CHAPTER SIX.

THE CAMP, THE ATTACK, AND THE ESCAPE.

It were vain to attempt a description of the varied condition of mind
into which the brother and sister fell when they found themselves
actually reduced to a state of slavery in an Indian camp, and separated
from their parents, as they firmly believed, for ever.

Nelly wept her eyes almost out of their sockets at first.  Then she fell
into a sort of apathetic state, in which, for several days, she went
about her duties almost mechanically, feeling as if it were all a
horrible dream, out of which she would soon awake, and find herself at
home with her "darling mother" beside her.  This passed, however, and
she had another fit of heart-breaking sorrow, from which she found
relief by recalling some of the passages in God's Word, which her mother
had taught her to repeat by heart; especially that verse in which it is
said, "that Jesus is a friend who sticketh closer than a brother."  And
this came to the poor child's mind with peculiar power, because her own
brother Roy was so kind, and took such pains to comfort her, and to
enter into all her girlish feelings and sympathies, that she could
scarcely imagine it possible for anyone to stick closer to her in all
her distress than he did.

As for Roy, he was not given to the melting mood.  His nature was bold
and manly.  Whatever he felt, he kept it to himself, and he forgot more
than half his own sorrow in his brotherly efforts to assuage that of
Nelly.

Both of them were active and willing to oblige, so that they did not
allow their grief to interfere with their work, a circumstance which
induced their captors to treat them with forbearance, and even kindness.
Nelly sobbed and worked; gradually, the sobbing decreased, and the work
was carried on with vigour, so that she soon became quite expert at
skinning rabbits, boiling meat, embroidering mocassins, smoking
deerskins, chopping firewood into small pieces, and many other details
of Indian household economy; while Roy went out with the hunters, and
became a very Nimrod, insomuch that he soon excelled all the lads of his
own age, and many of those who were older, in the use of the bow, the
snow-shoes, the spear, the axe, and the gun.  But all this, and what
they did and said in the Indian camp during that winter, and what was
said and done to them, we do not mean to write about, having matter of
deeper interest to tell.

Winter passed away, and spring came.  But little do those who dwell in
England know of the enchantment of returning spring in the frozen
wilderness of North America.  The long, long winter, seems as though it
would _never_ pass away.  The intense frost seals up all the sweet
odours of the woods for so many months, that the nostrils become
powerfully sensitive, and, as it were, yearn for something to smell.
The skin gets so used to frost, that a balmy breeze is thought of as a
thing of the past, or well-nigh forgotten.

Spring in those regions comes suddenly.  It came on our wanderers with a
gush.  One night the temperature rose high above the freezing point;
next day all the sights and sounds of Nature's great awakening were in
full play.  The air fanned their cheeks like a summer breeze; the
strange unwonted sound of tinkling and dropping water was heard; scents,
as of green things, were met and inhaled greedily.  As the thirsty
Bedouin drinks from the well in the oasis, so did Roy and Nelly drink in
the delicious influences of melting nature.  And they thought of those
words which say, that the wilderness shall rejoice and blossom as the
rose.  The rejoicing had commenced, the blossoming would soon follow.

But warlike and wicked men were even then preparing to desecrate the
beautiful land.  A war-party of enemies had come down upon the tribe,
with whom they dwelt.  Scouts had brought in the news.  All was
commotion and excitement in the camp.  Goods and chattels were being
packed up.  The women and children were to be sent off with these, under
an escort, to a place of greater security, while the Braves armed for
the fight.

In the middle of all the confusion, Roy took Nelly aside, and, with a
look of mystery, said--

"Nell, dear, I'm goin' to run away.  Stay, now, don't stare so like an
owl, but hold your sweet tongue until I have explained what I mean to
do.  You and I have picked up a good deal of useful knowledge of one
sort or another since we came here, and I'm inclined to think we are
quite fit to take to the woods and work our way back to Fort
Enterprise."

"But isn't it an _awful_ long way?" said Nelly.

"It is, but we have an _awful_ long time to travel; haven't we all our
lives before us?  If our lives are long, we'll manage it; if they are
short, why, we won't want to manage it, so we need not bother our heads
about that?"

"But the way home," suggested Nelly, "do you know it?"

"Of course I know it; that is to say, I know, from that ugly thief Hawk,
that it lies somewhere or other to the south-west o' this place, some
hundreds of miles off; how many hundreds does not much matter, for we
have got the whole of the spring, summer, and fall before us."

"But what if we don't get home in the fall?"

"Then we shall spend the winter in the woods, that's all."

Nelly laughed, in spite of her anxieties, at the confident tone in which
her brother spoke; and, being quite unable to argue the matter farther,
she said that she was ready to do whatever Roy pleased, having perfect
confidence in his wisdom.

"That's right, Nell; now, you get ready to start at a moment's notice.
When the Injuns attack the camp, we'll give 'em the slip.  Put all you
want to take with you on a toboggan, [see note 1] and meet me at the
crooked tree when the camp moves."

That night the camp was struck, and the women and children departed,
under a strong escort.  Almost at the same time the enemy came down on
their prey, but they met men prepared for them.  In the dark, Nelly
crept to the crooked tree, dragging the toboggan after her.  She was met
by Roy, who took the sledge-line and her hand and led her into the dark
forest, while the savages were fighting and yelling like fiends in the
camp.  There let us leave them to fight it out.  Enough for us to know
that their warfare prevented any pursuit of the young fugitives.

Weeks passed, and Roy and Nelly wandered on; all fear of pursuit soon
left them.  Ducks, geese, and other waterfowl, came in myriads with the
spring.  Roy had brought with him his gun (the one he was wont to use in
hunting), and bow and quiver.  They fed on the fat of the land.  Summer
advanced, and game became less plentiful; still, there was more than
sufficient to supply them with abundance of food.  Autumn approached;
the wild fowl that had passed northward in spring, began to return
southward, and again the wants of the young wanderers were
superabundantly supplied.

The pole-star was Roy's guide.  At night he laid his course by it; and
by the sun during the day, making constant allowance, of course, for the
sun's rate of travelling through the sky, and taking advantage of all
prominent landmarks on the way.

Time sped on; many weary miles were travelled, but no sign of Fort
Enterprise was to be seen.  Day after day, week after week, month after
month they wandered, and still found themselves in the heart of an
unknown wilderness.  Occasionally they observed signs of Indians, and
carefully kept out of sight at such times, as you may easily believe.

At last there came a day when hard frost set in.  It was the first touch
of another winter.  Roy and Nelly did not betray their feelings to each
other, but their hearts sank as they thought of what lay before them.
The frost was short-lived, however; towards noon the air became
delightfully warm, and their spirits revived.

On reaching the summit of an eminence, up which they had toiled for
several hours, they beheld a small lake, in which the silvery clouds
were clearly reflected.  The day was calm; the sun unusually brilliant;
the autumnal foliage most gorgeous in colour.  It was like a scene in
fairy-land!

"Splendid!" exclaimed Roy, sitting down beside his sister on the trunk
of a fallen tree.

"Oh! _how_ beautiful," cried Nelly.

"It's so like silver," said Roy.

"Silver Lake," murmured Nelly.

Roy seemed to think the name appropriate, for he echoed the words, "Yes,
Silver Lake."  And there brother and sister sat, for a long time, on the
fallen tree, in silent admiration of the scene.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  A small Indian sledge, dragged on the snow, either by hand or
by dog with loops at the sides for lashing the loading of the sledge
upon it.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE ENCAMPMENT ON SILVER LAKE.

When Roy and Nelly sat down to gaze in admiration on Silver Lake, they
little thought how long a period they should have to spend on its
shores.

The lake was a small sheet of water not more than half a mile broad,
embosomed among low hills, which, though not grand, were picturesque in
outline, and wooded to their tops.  It occupied the summit of an
elevated region or height-of-land--a water-shed, in fact--and Roy
afterwards discovered that water flowed from both the north-east and
south-west sides of the table-land, in the midst of which it lay.  These
fountain-heads, separated by little more than half a mile from each
other, were the sources of streams, which, flowing in opposite
directions through hundreds of miles of wild, beautiful, and
uncultivated wilderness, found their way, on the one hand, into Hudson's
Bay, on the other hand, into the Atlantic through the great rivers and
lakes of Canada.

The waters of the lake were strikingly clear and pellucid.  When the
young wanderer first came upon the scene, not a zephyr stirred the
leaves of the forest; the blue sky was studded with towering masses of
white clouds which glowed in sunshine, and these reflected in the glassy
water--as if far, far down in its unfathomable depths--produced that
silvery effect which prompted Nelly to utter the name which we have
adopted.

Small though the Silver Lake was, it boasted two islets, which like twin
babes lay side by side on their mother's fair breast, their reflected
images stretching down into that breast as if striving to reach and
grasp its heart!

"Couldn't we stay here a short time?" asked Nelly, breaking the silence
in a tone that indicated anxiety, hope, and enthusiasm, "only for a very
_little_ time," she added, coaxingly.

Roy looked grave and sagacious.  Boys, as well as men, like to be leant
upon and trusted by the fair sex--at least in things masculine--and
Nelly had such boundless faith in her brother's capacity to protect her
and guide her through the forest, that she unwittingly inspired him with
an exuberant amount of courage and self-reliance.  The lad was bold and
fearless enough by nature.  His sister's confidence in him had the
effect of inducing him to think himself fit for anything!  He affected,
therefore, at times, a look of grave sagacity, befitting, as he thought,
so important and responsible a character.

"I've just been thinking," said he--

"Oh! don't _think_, but say yes!" interrupted Nelly.

"Well, I'm going to say yes, but I meant to give you my reasons for
sayin' so.  In the first place, my powder and shot is gettin' low.  You
see I did not bring away very much from the Injun camp, and we've been
using it for so many months now that it won't last much longer, so I
think it would not be a bad plan to stop here awhile and fish and shoot
and feed up--for you need rest, Nelly--and then start fresh with a
well-loaded sledge.  I'll save some powder by using the bow we made the
other day."

"But you forget it's broken."

"So it is--never mind, we can make another--there's a tree that will
make a first-rater down in the hollow, d'ye see it, Nell?"

"Where--oh yes--just by the grassy place where the rock juts out into
the water with the sun shining on it? what a _nice_ place to build a
hut!"

"Just so," said Roy, smiling at the girl's enthusiasm, "that's the spot,
and that's the very thought that jumped bang into my brain as you spoke.
By the way, does a thought jump _into_ a man's brain or _out_ of it, I
wonder?"

"Out of it, of course," cried Nelly, with a laugh.

"I'm not so sure of that, Nell.  I send it rather slowly out through my
mouth, but I think it jumps _into_ my brain.  I wonder how it gets in;
whether by the eyes, or ears, or mouth--perhaps it goes up the nose."

"What stuff you do talk!" cried Nelly.

"D'ye think so," said Roy with a grin, "well, that bein' the case, let's
go and fix our camp, for the sun is not given to sitting up all night in
these parts, so we must work while it shines."

With hurried steps and eager looks, (for Roy, despite his affected
coolness, was as enthusiastic about the new plan as his sister,) they
descended to the margin of Silver Lake, and began to make their
encampment on the sunny spot before referred to.

It turned out to be most suitable for their purpose, having a gentle
slope towards the margin of the lake, which was fringed with a beach of
pure white pebbles, and being well sheltered in the rear by umbrageous
trees.  The point of rocks close at hand formed a natural jetty, which,
Roy observed, would be useful as a landing-place when he got his raft
under way; the turf was soft, a matter of some importance, as it was to
form their couch at night, and a small stream trickled down from one of
the numerous springs which welled up at the foot of the nearest hill.

Solitary and remote from the usual haunts of men as this lake was, there
was no feeling of solitude about it at the time we write of.  The entire
region was alive with wild fowl of many kinds.  Wild geese trumpeted
their advent as they came from the far north, _en route_ for the far
south, and settled on the bosom of Silver Lake to take a night's lodging
there.  Ducks, from the same region, and bound for the same goal--though
with less stately and regular flight--flew hither and thither with
whistling wings, ever and anon going swash into the water as a tempting
patch of reeds invited them to feed, or a whim of fancy induced them to
rest.  Wild swans occasionally sailed in all their majesty on its
waters, while plover of every length of limb and bill, and every species
of plaintive cry, waded round its margin, or swept in clouds over the
neighbouring swamps.  Sometimes deer would trot out of the woods and
slake their thirst on its shore, and the frequent rings that broke its
smooth surface told of life in the watery depths below.

The whole air was filled with gushing sounds of wild melody, as though
bird and beast were uniting in a hymn of praise to the beneficent
Creator who had provided the means of, and given the capacity for, so
much enjoyment.

Having decided on a suitable spot for their temporary resting-place,
Roy's first care was to construct a hut.  This was neither a work of
time nor difficulty.  In a couple of hours it was finished.  He
commenced the work by felling about a dozen young fir-trees not much
thicker than a man's wrist, from which he chopped the branches, thus
leaving them bare poles about nine feet long.  While he was thus
employed, his sister cleared the spot on which their dwelling was to
stand, and, having an eye to the picturesque, so arranged that the
opening of the hut should command an uninterrupted view of the lake.  On
going into the "bush" to the place where Roy was at work, she found him
cutting down his sixth tree, and the ground was strewn with the flat
branches of those already cut.

"Come along, Nelly--how hot I am--carry these branches into camp, lass,
an' go ahead, for I've got supper to kill yet."

Nelly made no direct reply, but muttered to herself something that
sounded very like, "Oh, what fun!" as she filled her tiny arms with pine
branches, and, hugging them to her heaving breast, staggered to the
camp.  When she had carried all the branches, Roy had cut all the poles,
so he proceeded to set them up.  Tying three poles together at the top,
and using the pliant roots of a tree for the purpose, he set them up in
the form of a tripod.  Against these three all the other poles were
piled, crossing each other at the top, and spreading out at the base so
as to enclose a circle of about six feet in diameter.  Being numerous,
the poles were pretty close together, thus affording good support to the
branches which were afterwards piled on them.  Pine branches are flat,
spreading, and thick, so that when laid above each other to a depth of
several inches they form a very good shelter from dew and light rain.
The hut was entirely covered with such branches, which were kept in
their places by other poles leaning upon and pressing them down.  The
floor of the hut was also covered with pine "brush."

"Now for supper, Nelly," said Roy, seizing his bow, when the hut was
completed, and splicing its broken part with a strip of deerskin cut
from the lines of the sledge.

"Get a goose, Roy, and pick out a nice fat one," cried Nelly, laughing,
"I'll have the fire ready when you come back."

"I'll try," said Roy, and he did try, but tried in vain.  Although a
good shot, he was not sufficiently expert with the bow to shoot wild
fowl on the wing, so he returned to the hut empty-handed.

"We must make a new bow, Nell," said he, sitting down by the fire, "I
can do nothin' wi' this, and it won't do to use the gun for anythin' but
deer.  Meanwhile let's have the remains of our dinner for supper.  Come,
cheer up, old 'ooman; we shall feast on the fat of the land to-morrow!"

The stars were shining in the sky, and winking at their reflections down
in the depths of Silver Lake, and the lake itself lay, as black as ink,
under the shadow of the hills, when the brother and sister spread their
blanket above them that night, and sank, almost immediately, into
profound slumber.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

HUNTING, AND OTHER MATTERS, ON SILVER LAKE.

Sunrise is a gladsome event almost at all times; we say "almost,"
because there are times when sunrise is _not_ particularly gladsome.  In
the arctic regions of Norway, for instance, we have seen it rise only
twenty minutes after it set, and the rising and setting were so much
mingled, that no very strong feelings of any kind were awakened.
Moreover, we were somewhat depressed at the time, in consequence of
having failed to reach those latitudes where the sun does not set at all
for several weeks in summer, but shines night and day.  To the sick,
sunrise brings little comfort; too often it is watched for with
weariness, and beheld, at last, with a feeling of depression at the
thought that another day of pain has begun.  But to the healthy, and
especially to the young, sunrise is undoubtedly, on most occasions, a
gladsome event.

At least Nelly Gore thought so when she awoke and beheld, from the floor
of the hut where she lay, a flood of yellow glory gushing through a
valley, turning Silver Lake into gold, tipping the trees with fire, and
blazing full in Roy's face, which was at that moment turned up to the
sky with the mouth open, and the nose snoring.

"Oh, _how_ beautiful!" screamed Nelly, in the exuberance of her delight.

"Hallo! murder! come on, ye black varmints," shouted Roy, as he sprang
up and seized the axe which lay at his side.  "Oh, it's only _you_, what
a yell you do give, Nelly! why, one would think you were a born Injun;
what is't all about, lass?  Ye-a-ow! how sleepy I am--too late to have
another nap, I suppose, eh?"

"Oh yes, lazy thing! get up and come out quick!" cried the other, as she
sprang up and ran out of the hut to enjoy the full blaze of the
sunshine, and the fresh morning air.

That morning Nelly could do little but ramble about in a wild sort of
fashion, trying to imagine that she was queen of the world around her!
She sobered down, however, towards noon, and went diligently about the
work which Roy had given her to do.  She had the internal arrangements
of the hut to complete and improve, some pairs of mocassins to mend, and
several arrows to feather, besides other matters.

Meanwhile Roy went out to hunt.

Determined not to use his fast-diminishing ammunition, except on large
game, and anxious to become more expert with the bow, he set to work the
first thing that day, and made a new bow.  Armed with this and a dozen
arrows, he sallied forth.

Some of his arrows were pointed with ivory, some with iron, and some had
no points at all, but blunt heavy heads instead.  These latter were, and
still are, used by Indians in shooting game that is tame and easily
killed.  Grouse of various kinds, for instance, if hit with full force
from a short range by a blunt-headed arrow, will be effectually stunned,
especially if hit on the head.

At first Roy walked along the shores of the lake, but was not very
successful, because the ducks and geese were hid among reeds, and rose
suddenly with a distracting _whirr_, usually flying off over the water.
To have let fly at these would have cost him an arrow every shot, so,
after losing one, he wisely restrained himself.

After a time, he turned into the woods, resolving to try his fortune
where his arrows were not so likely to be lost.  He had not gone far,
when a tree-grouse sprang into the air and settled on a neighbouring
pine.

Roy became excited, for he was anxious not to return to the hut
empty-handed a second time.  He fitted a sharp-headed arrow to the
string, and advanced towards the bird cautiously.  His anxiety to make
little noise was so great, that he tripped over a root and fell with a
hideous crash into the middle of a dead bush, the branches of which
snapped like a discharge of little crackers.  Poor Roy got up disgusted,
but on looking up found that the grouse was still sitting there, filled
apparently with more curiosity than alarm.  Seeing this he advanced to
within a few yards of the bird, and, substituting a blunt arrow for the
sharp one, discharged it with vigour.  It hit the grouse on the left
eye, and brought it to the ground like a stone.

"Good, that's `number one,'" muttered the lad as he fastened the bird to
his belt; "hope `number two' is not far off."

"Number two" was nearer than he imagined, for four other birds of the
same kind rose a few yards ahead of him, with all the noise and flurry
that is characteristic of the species.

They settled on a tree not far off, and looked about them.

"Sit there, my fine fellows, till I come up," muttered Roy.  (The lad
had a habit of speaking to himself while out hunting.)

They obeyed the order, and sat until he was close to them.  Again was
the blunt arrow fitted to the string; once more it sped true to its
mark, and "number two" fell fluttering to the ground.

Now, the grouse of North America is sometimes a very stupid creature.
It literally sits still to be shot, if the hunter is only careful to
fire first at the lowest bird of the group.  If he were to fire at the
topmost one, its fluttering down amongst the others would start them
off.

Roy was aware of this fact, and had aimed at the bird that sat lowest on
