"I expect he heard the pistol shots," Jackson said, "and sheered
off a bit, so as to be able to cut and run if he found his consorts
were in trouble. Well, we cannot help it; we have taken four prizes
out of the five, and I call that pretty fair."

"I think we had better go, now," Bob said. "We have got a friend
waiting for us."

"Then he must wait a bit longer," Jackson said. "The admiral will
want to ask you some more questions. But if your friend is anywhere
near, one of you might run and tell him to back and fill a bit,
till you come to him."

"Tell him to do what?" Jim Sankey asked.

"Tell him to wait a bit, lad."

"I will run up," Wharton said.

"Shall I tell him we shan't want him at all, today, Bob?"

"I think so, Wharton. You see it is four o'clock, now; and we
mayn't be able to get away for half an hour, and it will be too
late, then. Besides, Jim and I have been knocked about too much to
care for rabbit hunting, now. You tell him we will go some other
day."

"You needn't tell him that, Wharton," Fullarton put in. "It will be
some time before we get a chance, you may be sure."

"All right! Tell him to go home then, Wharton. Tell him I will make
it all right with him, for losing his morning's work. Of course,
you will come in here, when you come down the hill again."

Wharton nodded, and started at a run up the hill; while his
companions accompanied the two men into the house. The admiral was
down in the hall again. He had now had time to add to his former,
scanty costume.

"Get the shutters of the drawing room open, Jackson," he said,
after hearing the report of the man's escape, "and tell the
maids--I suppose they are all up--to light a fire and get some
coffee ready, at once, and something to eat.

"Now, young gentlemen, sit down and tell me all about this
business. Now, which of you will be spokesman?"

Jim nodded to Bob.

"It's his doing, sir. I mean about our coming in here. We should
never have thought anything about the cart, if it hadn't been for
Bob; and we didn't much like coming, only he pretty well made us,
and he arranged it all."

"That's all rot," Bob said. "We were just all in it together, sir,
and this is how it was."

And he told the whole story of what had taken place.

"Well, you couldn't have done better, if you had been officers in
His Majesty's service," the admiral said. "You have saved me the
loss of my two plate chests, of all the plate in this room--and
that couldn't be counted in money, for they were most of the things
given me, at different times, on service--and of 500 pounds I had
in that box upstairs--altogether, at least 2000 pounds in money
value. More than that, you prevented my being captured; and it
would have been a sorer blow, to me, than the loss of the money, if
those scoundrels had had their way, and had got off scot free.

"But you haven't told me, yet, how you happened to be going up the
hill, at half past three o'clock in the morning. What on earth were
you doing there? Surely your master does not allow you to ramble
about, in the middle of the night."

"Well, no, sir, that is the worst of it," Bob said. "You see, I had
arranged with one of the fishermen's boys, who has got a first-rate
dog, that we could meet him upon the Common, and do some rabbit
hunting. We slipped out from Tulloch's, and meant to have been back
before anyone was up. And now I expect we shall get it nicely,
because I suppose it must all come out."

The admiral laughed.

"You are four nice young scamps!" he said--for Wharton had rejoined
them, before Bob had finished the story--"but it is not for me to
blame you. It will certainly have to be told, lads, because you
will have to appear as witnesses at the trial of these fellows; but
I will go down myself, the first thing in the morning, and speak to
your master."

"Thank you, sir," Bob said. "It won't make any difference about the
thrashing; we are bound to get that. But we shan't mind that, we
are pretty well accustomed to it. Still, if you speak for us, I
expect we shall get off with that; otherwise I don't know what
Tulloch would have done, when he found out that we had been
slipping out at night."

"I expect it is not the first time you have done it?"

"Well, no, it is not, sir. We have been out two or three times,
with one of the fishermen, in his boat."

"I expect you are nice young pickles," the admiral said. "Well,
what time does school begin?"

"Half past seven, sir."

"Very well, then. I will be there at that hour, lads, and do my
best for you. You see, with those faces of yours, you would be sure
to be noticed, anyhow; and I hope you wouldn't, in any case, have
been mean enough to screen yourselves by lying."

"That we shouldn't," Bob said. "I don't think there is a boy in the
school who would tell a lie to Tulloch."

"That is right, lads. A gentleman will never tell a lie to screen
himself, when he has got into a scrape. I wouldn't keep the
smartest young officer in the service on board a ship of mine, if I
caught him telling a lie; for I should know that he would not only
be a blackguard, but a coward. Cowardice is at the bottom of half
the lying of the world. I would overlook anything, except lying.
Upon my word, I would rather that a boy were a thief than a liar.

"Well, here is breakfast. Now sit down and make yourselves at home,
while I go up and see how my daughter is, after the fright she has
had."

Half an hour later, after eating a hearty breakfast, the four boys
started for school.



Chapter 2: A Great Change.


It was just striking six when they again climbed over the wall, and
descended by the tree. They had had a discussion whether they
should wait until the doors were opened, and walk quietly in, or
return as they left. They adopted the latter plan, because they
thought that, if the matter was reported to Mr. Tulloch, he might
proceed to administer punishment before the admiral arrived to give
his version of the affair.

The door was still ajar. As they opened it, they gave an
exclamation of surprise--for there, sitting on a chair in the
passage, was Mr. Purfleet. He smiled unpleasantly.

"So here you are. You have had a pleasant ramble, no doubt; but I
don't quite know what view Mr. Tulloch may take of it."

"It was very good of you to sit up for us, Mr. Purfleet," Bob said,
quietly; "but you see, we had left the door open, and could have
got in by ourselves. I hope you will not have caught cold, sitting
there only in a dressing gown."

"You are an impudent young scamp!" Mr. Purfleet said, in a rage.
"You will laugh with the other side of your mouth, presently. You
and Sankey are nice-looking figures, ain't you, with your faces all
cut and swollen?"

"We have been a little in the wars," Bob replied.

"I don't want to hear anything about it," the usher replied. "You
will have to explain matters to Mr. Tulloch."

"So I suppose, Mr. Purfleet.

"Well, Jim, we'll go and have a good wash. The bell will be
ringing, in half an hour."

So saying, Bob went into the lavatory, followed by his companions;
while the usher returned upstairs. He was certainly disappointed.
Quietly as the boys had dressed, the slight noise they had made in
closing the door had woke him. He thought little of it but, just as
he was going off to sleep again, he heard the bolts of the door
below withdrawn. He at once got up and walked to the other end of
the dormitory, and discovered that the four boys were missing.

Chuckling to himself that he should now be able to repay the grudge
he owed to Bob, he put on his dressing gown and went downstairs;
and had sat there for three hours, momentarily expecting their
return. He had certainly felt chilly, but had borne it patiently;
comforted by the joyful expectation of the utter dismay that would
be felt, by the culprits, when they saw him. The meeting had not
passed off at all as he had anticipated, and he could only console
himself by thinking that his turn would come when he made his
report to Mr. Tulloch.

The four boys did not return to the dormitory but, after they had
washed, strolled about in the playground. There was quite a
ferment, in the dormitory, when their absence was perceived, and
the others noticed the four made-up figures in their place. The
operation of dressing was got through with much greater alacrity
than usual and, when they went downstairs and saw the four missing
boys in the playground, these were at once surrounded by an excited
throng. They refused, however, to answer any questions.

"You will hear it all, in good time," Bob said. "We have been out,
and we have been caught. That is all I am going to tell you."

At the usual hour the bell rang, and the boys assembled in the
schoolroom. The two ushers were in their places. They waited three
or four minutes for Mr. Tulloch to appear; then the door opened,
and the manservant entered and, walking up to Mr. Moffat, said a
word or two. The latter nodded.

"Lessons will begin at once," he said, in a loud voice. "The first
class will come up to me."

The boys of this class, who occupied the senior dormitory, at once
began their lessons; while Mr. Purfleet took the lower class. The
second class, including Bob and his friends, remained in their
places. In a quarter of an hour the door opened, and Mr. Tulloch
entered, accompanied by Admiral Langton. Mr. Tulloch was looking
very serious, while the admiral looked hot and angry.

"We are going to catch it," Bob whispered, to Jim Sankey. "I knew
the admiral wouldn't be able to get us off."

"I wish all the boys to return to their places, Mr. Moffat. I have
something to say," Mr. Tulloch said, in a loud voice.

When the boys were all seated, he went on:

"Admiral Langton has been telling me that four of my boys were out
and about, soon after three o'clock this morning. The four boys in
question will stand up.

"I do not say that this is the first time that such a serious
infraction of the rules of the school has taken place. It has
happened before. It may, for aught I know, have happened many
times, without my knowledge; but upon the occasions when it has
come to my knowledge, the offenders have been most severely
punished. They must be punished, now.

"Admiral Langton has been telling me that the boys in question have
behaved with very great courage, and have been the means of saving
him from the loss of a large sum of money and plate, and of
capturing four burglars."

A buzz of surprise passed round the school.

"That this conduct does them great credit I am fully prepared to
admit. Had they been aware that this burglary was about to be
committed, and had they broken out of the house in the middle of
the night for the purpose of preventing it, I allow that it might
have been pleaded as an excuse for their offence; but this was not
so. It was an accident, that occurred to them when they were
engaged in breaking the rules, and cannot be pleaded as a set-off
against punishment.

"Admiral Langton has pleaded with me, very strongly, for a pardon
for them; but I regret that I am unable to comply with his request.
The admiral, as a sailor, is well aware that discipline must be
maintained; and I am quite sure that, when he was in command of a
ship, he would not have permitted his judgment to be biased, by
anyone. I have put it to him in that way, and he acknowledges that
to be so. The two matters stand distinct. The boys must be punished
for this gross breach of the rules. They may be thanked, and
applauded, for the courage they have shown, and the valuable
service they have rendered to Admiral Langton.

"I have, however, so far yielded to his entreaties that, while I
must administer a severe caning for the gross breach of the rules,
I shall abstain from taking any further steps in the matter; and
from writing to the boys' parents and guardians, requesting them to
remove their sons from the school, at once, as I certainly
otherwise would have done. At the same time, I am willing to hear
anything that these boys may have to urge, in explanation or
defence of their conduct. I have already been informed, by Admiral
Langton, that their object, in so breaking out, was to hunt rabbits
up on the Common."

"I wish to say, sir," Bob said, in a steady voice, "that it was
entirely my doing. I made the arrangements, and persuaded the
others to go; and I think it is only right that they should not be
punished as severely as I am."

"We were all in it together, sir," Jim Sankey broke in. "I was just
as keen on it as Bob was."

"So was I," Fullarton and Wharton said, together.

"Well, lads," Admiral Langton said, taking a step forward, and
addressing the boys, in general, "as your master says, discipline is
discipline; this is his ship, and he is on his own quarterdeck--but
I wish to tell you all that, in my opinion, you have every reason to
be proud of your schoolfellows. They behaved with the greatest pluck
and gallantry and, were I again in command of a ship, I should be
glad to have them serving me. I am only sorry that I cannot persuade
Mr. Tulloch to see the matter in the same light as I do.

"Goodbye, lads!" and he walked across, and shook hands with the
four boys. "I shall see you again, soon," and the admiral turned
abruptly, and walked out of the schoolroom.

Mr. Tulloch at once proceeded to carry his sentence into effect,
and the four boys received as severe a caning as ever they had had
in their lives; and even Bob, case hardened as he was, had as much
as he could do to prevent himself from uttering a sound, while it
was being inflicted. Lessons were then continued, as usual, until
eight o'clock, when the boys went in to breakfast. After that was
over, they went into the playground, until nine; and the four
culprits gave the rest a full account of the events of the night.

"I don't mind the thrashing," Bob said, "although Tulloch did lay
it on hot. It was well worth it, if it had only been to see that
sneak Purfleet's face, when the admiral told the story. I was
watching him, when Tulloch came in; and saw how delighted he was,
at the tale he was going to tell; and how satisfied he was that he
should get no end of credit, for sitting three hours in his
dressing gown, in order to catch us when we came in. It was an
awful sell for him, when he saw that the admiral had come out with
the whole story, and there was nothing, whatever, for him to tell."

When they went into school again, Mr. Tulloch said:

"Boys, I hear that four of your number have behaved with great
gallantry. They have prevented a serious robbery, and arrested the
men engaged in it. I shall therefore give you a holiday, for the
remainder of the day. The four boys in question will proceed, at
once, to Admiral Langton's, as they will be required to accompany
him to Kingston, where the prisoners will be brought up before the
magistrates."

There was a general cheer from the boys, and then Bob and his
companions hurried upstairs to put on their best clothes, and ran
off to the admiral's.

"Well, boys, is it all over?" he asked, as they entered.

"All over, sir," they replied together.

"Well, boys, I think it was a shame; but I suppose discipline must
be maintained in school, as well as on board a ship; but it vexes
me, amazingly, to think that I have been the means of bringing you
into it."

"It is just the other way, sir," Bob said, "and it is very lucky
for us that we came in here, sir, instead of going up to the
Common, as we intended. One of the ushers found out that we had
gone, and sat up until we came back and, if it had not been for
you, we should not only have got a thrashing, but should all have
been expelled; so it is the luckiest thing possible that we came in
here."

"Well, I am very glad to hear that, boys. It has taken a load off
my mind, for I have been thinking that, if you had not come in to
help me, you would have got back without being noticed.

"Emma, these are the four lads who did us such good service, last
night. They caught sight of you, before, but you were hardly in a
state to receive them formally."

The young lady laughed, as she came forward and shook hands with
them.

"You need not have mentioned that, papa.

"Well, I am very much obliged to you all; for I have no doubt they
meant to have my watch and jewels, as well as papa's money."

"Now, it is time for us to be off," the admiral said. "My carriage
is at the door, and a fly. You two, who have been knocked about,
had better come with my daughter and myself. The others can either
ride inside the fly, or one can go on the box of each vehicle, as
you like."

Wharton and Fullarton both said that they should prefer going
outside; and in a few minutes they were on their way, the three
menservants riding inside the fly. The prisoners had been sent off,
two hours before, in a cart; under the charge of the two local
constables.

The case lasted but an hour, the four men being all committed for
trial. The party then returned to Putney, the admiral insisting
upon the boys stopping to lunch with him. After the meal was over,
he inquired what they were going to do, on leaving school, and what
profession they intended to adopt.

Bob was the first questioned.

"I am going to be a wine merchant, sir," he said. "I have got no
choice about it. I lost my father and mother, years ago; and my
guardian, who is an uncle of mine, is in the wine trade, and he
says I have got to go in, too. I think it is horrid, but there is
no good talking to him. He is an awfully crusty old chap. I should
like to be a soldier, or a sailor; but of course it is of no use
thinking of it. My guardian has been very kind to me, even though
he is so crusty, and it wouldn't be right not to do as he tells me;
and I don't suppose the wine business is so very bad, when one is
accustomed to it."

"Has your uncle any sons, lad?"

"No, sir, he is an old bachelor; and he says that, some day, I am
to have his business."

"Then you can't do better than stick to it, lad," the admiral said.
"A boy who has before him the prospect of a solid, substantial
living, on shore, is simply a fool if he goes to sea. It is a rough
life, and a hard one; and if you don't get shot, or drowned, you
may get laid on the shelf with the loss of a limb, and a pension
that won't find you in grog and tobacco.

"It is a pity, for you would have made a good officer, but you will
be vastly better off, in all respects, at home; and I can tell you
there is not one sailor out of five who would not jump at a berth
on shore, if he could get the chance."

Sankey's father was a country clergyman and, at present, Jim had no
particular prospect.

"Would you like to go to sea, boy?"

"Yes, sir, I should like it of all things."

"Very well; give me your father's name and address, and I will
write to him about it."

Fullarton's father was a landed proprietor in Somersetshire, and he
was the eldest son. Wharton was to be a lawyer, and was to begin in
his father's office, in a year or two. Admiral Langton took notes
of the addresses of the boys' relatives.

When he had done that, he said to them:

"Now, lads, I know you would rather be off. I remember, when I was
a midshipman, I was always glad enough to escape, when I had to
dine with the captain."

A week later, a young man came down from a city watchmaker's, with
four handsome gold watches and chains for the boys; with an
inscription stating that they had been presented to them by Admiral
Langton, in remembrance of their gallant conduct on the night of
August 6th, 1778. They were immensely delighted with the gift; for
watches were, in those days, far more expensive luxuries than at
present, and their use was comparatively rare. With the watches
were four short notes from the admiral, inviting them to come up on
the following Saturday afternoon.

They had, by this time, received letters from their families, who
had each received a communication from the admiral, expressing his
warm commendation of their conduct, and his thanks for the services
that the boys had rendered.

Jim Sankey's father wrote saying that the admiral had offered to
procure him a berth as a midshipman, at once; and that he had
written, thankfully accepting the offer, as he knew that it was
what Jim had been most earnestly wishing--though, as he had no
interest, whatever, among naval men, he had hitherto seen no chance
of his being able to obtain such an appointment. This communication
put Jim into a state of the wildest delight, and rendered him an
object of envy to his schoolfellows.

Fullarton's father wrote his son a hearty letter, congratulating
him on what he had done, and saying that he felt proud of the
letter he had received from the admiral.

Wharton's father wrote to him sharply, saying that thief-taking was
a business that had better be left to constables, and that he did
not approve of freaks of that kind.

Mr. Bale wrote an irascible letter to Bob.

"My dear nephew," he began, "I am astonished, and most seriously
displeased, at contents of communication I have received from a
person signing himself J. Langton, admiral. I gather from it that,
instead of pursuing your studies, you are wandering about at night,
engaged in pursuits akin to poaching. I say akin, because I am not
aware whether the wild animals upon the common are the property of
the lord of the manor, or whether they are at the mercy of
vagabonds. It appears to me that there can be no proper supervision
exercised by your masters.

