After a few minutes' further observation, the old man with the glass
murmured, as if speaking to himself, "I do believe she's chock-full o'
people."

When this was repeated, the suppressed cheer broke forth, and the
excitement increased.  Soon the people with good eyes could see for
themselves that the swiftly approaching boat was as full as she could
hold, of human beings.  At the same time, those who were in the boat
could see the swarms of sympathisers on the pier who awaited their
arrival.

But there was one man who took no note of these things, and seemed
indifferent to everything around him.  The coxswain of the lifeboat was
spiritually absent from the scene.

"You seem to've got the fidgets, Bob," remarked Joe Slag, looking
earnestly at his friend.  "That swim has been too much for 'ee."

"'Taint that, Joe," replied Bob, quickly.  "What's the time now, lad?"

Pulling out the antique warming-pan again, Slag said it was nigh a
quarter past ten, and added that he, (Bob), seemed to be "uncommon
consarned about the time o' day that mornin'."

"And so would you be, lad," returned the coxswain, in a low voice, as he
advanced his mouth to his comrade's ear, "if you was in my fix.  I've
got to be spliced this day before twelve, an' the church is more'n two
miles inland!"

"That's awk'ard," returned Slag, with a troubled look.  "But, I say,
Bob, you've kep' this uncommon close from us all--eh?  I never heerd ye
was to be spliced so soon."

"Of course I kep' it close, 'cos I wanted to give you an' my mates a
surprise, but it strikes me I'll give some other people a surprise
to-day, for there's no time to put on clean toggery."

"You'll never manage it," said Slag, in a sympathetic tone, as he once
more consulted the warming-pan.  "It's gettin' on for half arter ten
now, an' it takes a mortal time to rig out in them go-to-meetin' slops."

"Do I look anything like a bridegroom as I am?" asked the coxswain with
a curious glance.

"Sca'cely," replied Slag, surveying his friend with a grim smile--"(mind
your helm, Bob, there's a awk'ard run on the tide round the pier-head,
you know.)  No; you're not wery much like one.  Even if your toggery was
all ship-shape--which it ain't--it would stand dryin', and your hair
would be the better o' brushin'--to say nothin' o' your beard--an' it do
seem, too, as if a bit o' soap might improve your hands an' face arter
last night's work.  No, Bob, I couldn't honestly say as you're exactly
ship-shape as you stand."

"Listen, Joe Slag," said Bob Massey, with sudden earnestness.  "I've
never yet come in after a rescue without seein' the boat hauled up an'
made snug.  `Dooty first, an' pleasure arter,' that's bin my motto, as
_you_ know.  But dooty lies in another direction _this_ day, so you
promise to see her hauled up, an' cleaned, an' properly housed, won't
you?"

"In coorse I does."

"Well, then," continued Bob, in the same low, earnest tone, "arter
that's done, you'll go an' invite all our mates an' friends to a jolly
blow-out in the big shed alongside o' my old mother's house.  Don't tell
who invites 'em, or anything about it, an' ask as many as like to come--
the shed's big enough to hold 'em all.  Only be sure to make 'em
understand that they'll get no drink stronger than coffee an' tea.  If
they can't enjoy themselves on that, they may go to the grog-shop, but
they needn't come to _me_.  My mother will be there, and she'll keep 'em
in order!"

"What!" exclaimed Slag, with a look of slight surprise.  "Your mother!
Her what's bin bed-ridden for years, an' hasn't got no legs at all--
leastwise not to speak of?"

"Just so, lad.  We'll lift her in, bed an' all.  Now you be off to the
bow.  Oars out, lads; stand by the halyards!"

They were by that time close to the pier-head, where the people were
shouting and cheering, some of them even weeping, and waving hats,
'kerchiefs, sticks, and umbrellas, almost wild with joy at seeing so
many fellow-creatures rescued from the maw of the hungry sea.

The first man who leaped out when the lifeboat touched the pier was the
coxswain, dripping, dirty, and dishevelled.

"Bless you, my gallant fellow!" exclaimed an irrepressible old
enthusiast, stepping forward and attempting to grasp the coxswain's
hand.

But Bob Massey, brushing past him, ran along the pier, leaped a fence,
and sprang up the steep path that led to the cliffs, over the top of
which he was finally seen to bound and disappear.

"Poor fellow!" exclaimed the irrepressible enthusiast, looking aghast at
Slag, "exposure and excitement have driven him mad!"

"Looks like it!" replied Slag, with a quiet grin, as he stooped to
assist the widow and little Lizzie to land, while ready hands were
out-stretched to aid and congratulate the old grandfather, and the rest
of the rescued people.

The coxswain ran--ay, he ran as he had been wont to run when he was a
wild little fisher-boy--regardless alike of appearances and
consequences.  The clock of the village steeple told him that the
appointed hour had almost arrived.  Two miles was a long way to run in
heavy woollen garments and sea-boots, all soaked in sea-water.  But Bob
was young, and strong, and active, and--you understand the rest, good
reader!

The church had purposely been selected at that distance from the village
to prevent Bob's comrades from knowing anything about the wedding until
it should be over.  It was a somewhat strange fancy, but the coxswain
was a man who, having taken a fancy, was not easily turned from it.

In order to her being got comfortably ready in good time, Nellie Carr
had slept the night before at the house of an uncle, who was a farmer,
and lived near the church.  The house was in a sheltered hollow, so that
the bride was scarcely aware of the gale that had been blowing so
fiercely out at sea.  Besides, being much taken up with
cousin-bridesmaids and other matters, the thought of the lifeboat never
once entered her pretty head.

At the appointed hour, arrayed in all the splendour of a fisherman's
bride, she was led to the church, but no bridegroom was there!

"He won't be long.  He's _never_ late," whispered a bridesmaid to
anxious Nellie.

Minutes flew by, and Nellie became alarmed.  The clergyman also looked
perplexed.

"Something must have happened," said the farmer-uncle, apologetically.

Watches were consulted and compared.

At that moment a heavy rapid tread was heard outside.  Another moment,
and Bob Massey sprang into the church, panting, flushed, dirty, wet,
wild, and, withal, grandly savage.

"Nellie!" he exclaimed, stopping short, with a joyful gaze of
admiration, for he had never seen her so like an angel before.

"Bob!" she cried in alarm, for she had never before seen him so like a
reprobate.

"Young man," began the clergyman, sternly, but he got no further; for,
without paying any attention to him whatever, Bob strode forward and
seized Nellie's hands.

"I dursen't kiss ye, Nell, for I'm all wet; but I hadn't one moment to
change.  Bin out all night i' the lifeboat an' saved over thirty souls.
The Brentley boat's done as much.  I'm ashamed, sir," he added, turning
to the clergyman, "for comin' here like this; but I couldn't help it.  I
hope there's nothin' in Scriptur' agin' a man bein' spliced in wet
toggery?"

Whether the clergyman consulted his Cruden's Concordance with a view to
clear up that theological question, we have never been able to
ascertain; but it is abundantly clear that he did not allow the
coxswain's condition to interfere with the ceremony, for in the _Greyton
Journal_, of next day, there appeared a paragraph to the following
effect:

  "The marriage of Robert Massey, the heroic coxswain of our lifeboat,
  (which, with all its peculiar attendant circumstances, and the gallant
  rescue that preceded it, will be found in another part of this day's
  issue), was followed up in the afternoon by a feast, and what we may
  style a jollification, which will live long in the memory of our
  fisher-folk.

  "Several circumstances combined to render this wedding-feast unique.
  To say nothing of the singular beauty of the bride, who is well known
  as one of the most thrifty and modest girls in the town, and the
  stalwart appearance of our coxswain, who, although so young, has
  already helped to save hundreds of human lives from the raging sea,
  the gathering was graced by the presence of the bridegroom's
  bed-ridden mother.  Old Mrs Massey had been carried in, bed and all,
  to the scene of festivity; and it is due to the invalid to state that,
  despite rheumatics and the singularity of her position, she seemed to
  enjoy herself exceedingly.  Besides this, the friends and comrades of
  the coxswain--backed by the enthusiastic groomsman, Joe Slag--would
  not permit Massey to don wedding garments, but insisted on his dancing
  himself dry, in the rough garb in which he had effected the rescue.
  This he had no difficulty in doing, having already run himself more
  than half dry in hastening from the lifeboat to the church, which
  latter he reached only just in time.

  "The little girl whom Massey personally saved was also present, with
  her mother and grandfather; and one interesting episode of the evening
  was the presentation to our coxswain of a gold watch and a purse of
  fifty sovereigns by the grateful old grandfather.  Another peculiarity
  of the proceedings was that Massey insisted--although the clergyman
  was present--on his old mother asking God's blessing on the feast
  before it began.  All who are acquainted with our liberal-minded vicar
  will easily understand that he highly approved of the arrangement.

  "To crown all, the feast was conducted on strictly teetotal
  principles.  We have frequently advocated the principles of total
  abstinence in these columns--at least for the young, the healthy, and
  the strong--and we are glad to acknowledge that this wedding has
  greatly helped our cause; for the fun and hilarity in all, the vigour
  of limb in dancing, and of lung in singing--in short, the general
  jollity--could not have been surpassed if the guests had been swilling
  rivers of beer and brandy, instead of oceans of tea.  Yes, as one of
  the Irish guests remarked, `It was a great occasion intoirely,' and it
  will be long before the event is forgotten, for the noble deeds of our
  Greyton lifeboat are, from this day forward, intimately and
  inseparably connected with her coxswain's wedding!"

Thus spake the Greyton oracle; but, prophet though that journal
professed to be, the oracle failed to discern that from that time
forward the names of Robert Massey and Joe Slag would very soon cease to
be connected with the Greyton lifeboat.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 3.

Soon after the wedding recorded in the last chapter an event occurred
which entirely altered the character and current of our coxswain's
career, at least for a time.  This was the sudden death of the
bed-ridden old mother, who had played such an interesting part at the
wedding-feast.

To our hero, who was a tender-hearted man, and a most affectionate son,
the blow was almost overwhelming, although long expected.

"I don't think I can stay here much longer," he said one evening to his
pretty wife, as they sat together outside their door and watched the
village children romping on the sands; "everything minds me o' the dear
old woman, an' takes the heart out me.  If it wasn't for you, Nell, I'd
have been off to the other side o' the world long before now, but I find
it hard to think o' takin' you away from all your old friends and
playmates--and your Aunt Betty."

A peculiar smile lit up Nellie's face as her husband concluded.

"I should be sorry to leave the old friends here," she replied, "but
don't let that hinder you if ye want to go away.  I'd leave everything
to please you, Bob.  And as to Aunt Betty--well, I'm not ungrateful, I
hope, but--but _she_ wouldn't break her heart at partin' wi' _me_."

"Right you are, Nell, as you always was, and always will be," said
Massey.  He laughed a short, dry laugh, and was grave again.

It was quite evident that Aunt Betty would not be a hindrance to the
departure of either of them and no wonder, for Betty had received Nellie
Carr into her family with a bad grace when her widowed brother, "old
Carr," died, leaving his only child without a home.  From that day Betty
had brought the poor little orphan up--or, rather, had scolded and
banged her up--until Bob Massey relieved her of the charge.  To do Aunt
Betty justice, she scolded and banged up her own children in the same
way; but for these--her own young ones--she entertained and expressed a
species of affection which mankind shares in common with cats, while for
Nellie Carr she had no such affection, and contrived to make the fact
abundantly plain.  As we not infrequently find in such circumstances,
the favoured children--which numbered seven--became heart-breakers,
while the snubbed one turned out the flower of the flock.

"Then you're sure you won't think it hard, Nell, if I ask you to leave
home and friends and go wi' me over the sea?"

"Yes, Bob, I'm quite sure.  I'm willin' to follow you to the end o' the
world, or further if that's possible!"

"Then the thing's settled," said Massey, with decision, rising and
thrusting his short pipe into his vest pocket, the lining of which had
already been twice renewed in consequence of the inroads of that
half-extinguished implement.

In pursuance of his "settled" purpose, our coxswain proceeded to the
lifeboat-shed in search of his bowman, Joe Slag, and found him there.

"Joe," said he, in the quiet tone that was habitual to him, "Nell and I
have made up our minds to go to Australia."

"To Austrailly!" exclaimed Slag, leaning his arms on the mop with which
he had been washing down the lifeboat.

"Ay; I can't settle to work nohow since the dear old woman went away;
so, as Nell is agreeable, and there's nothin' to keep me here, I've
decided to up anchor and bear away for the southern seas."

The bowman had seated himself on a cask while his friend was speaking,
and gazed at him with a bewildered air.

"Are 'ee in arnest, Bob?"

"Ay, Joe, in dead earnest."

"An' you say that you've nothin' to keep you here!  What's this?" said
Slag, laying his strong hand tenderly on the blue side of the boat.

"Well, I'll be sorry to leave _her_, of course, an all my friends in
Greyton, but friends will get along well enough without me, an' as for
the boat, she'll never want a good coxswain while Joe Slag's alive an'
well."

"You're wrong there, mate," returned the bowman, quickly, while a look
of decision overspread his bluff countenance, "there'll be both a noo
cox'n and a noo bowman wanted for her before long, for as sure as the
