devoting himself assiduously to egg Number 5.

It fared ill with Tim Rokens that evening that he had rashly entered
into ladies' society, for he was a nervous man in refined company,
though cool and firm as a grounded iceberg when in the society of his
messmates, or when towing with the speed of a steamboat in the wake of a
sperm-whale.

Egg Number 5 proved to be a bad one.  Worse than that, egg Number 5
happened to belong to that peculiar class of bad eggs which "go off"
with a little crack when hit with a spoon, and sputter their unsavoury
contents around them.  Thus it happened, that when Mr Rokens, feeling
confused, and seeking relief in attention to the business then in hand,
hit egg Number 5 a smart blow on the top, a large portion of its
contents spurted over the fair white tablecloth, a small portion fell on
Mr Rokens' vest, and a minute yellow globule thereof alighted on the
fair Martha's hand, eliciting from that lady a scream, and as a matter
of course, an echo from Jane in the shape of a screamlet.

Mr Rokens flushed a deep Indian-red, and his nose assumed a warm blue
colour instantly.

"Oh! ma'am, I ax yer parding."

"Pray don't mention it--a mere accident.  I'm so sorry you have got a
bad--Oh!"

The little scream with which Miss Martha interrupted her remark was
caused by Mr Rokens (who had just observed the little yellow globule
above referred to) seizing her hand, and wiping away the speck with the
identical handkerchief that had floored the cat and swept away the pat
of butter.  Immediately thereafter, feeling heated, he wiped the
perspiration from his forehead, and unwittingly transferred the spot
thereto in the form of a yellow streak, whereat Ailie and the first mate
burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.  Even Miss Martha smiled,
although she rather objected to jesting, as being a dangerous amusement,
and never laughed at the weaknesses or misfortunes of others, however
ludicrous they might be, when she could help it.

"How can you, brother?" she said, reproachfully, shaking her head at the
captain, who was winking at the doctor with one eye in a most
obstreperous manner.  "Do try another egg, Mr Rokens; the others, I am
sure, are fresh.  I cannot imagine how a bad one came to be amongst
them."

"Ah, try another, my lad," echoed the captain.  "Pass 'em up this way,
Mr Millons."

"By no manner o' means; I'll eat this 'un!" replied the harpooner,
commencing to eat the bad egg with apparent relish.  "I like 'em this
way--better than nothin', anyhow.  Bless ye, marm, ye've no notion wot
sort o' things I've lived on aboard ship--"

Rokens came to an abrupt pause in consequence of the servant-girl, at a
sign from her mistresses (for she always received duplicate orders),
seizing his plate and carrying it off bodily.  It was immediately
replaced by a clean one and a fresh egg.  While Rokens somewhat
nervously tapped the head of Number 6, Miss Martha, in order to divert
attention from him, asked Mr Millons if sea-fare was always salt junk
and hard biscuit?

"Oh, no, madam," answered the first mate.  "We've sometimes salt pork,
and vegetables now and agin; and pea-soup, and plum-duff--"

"Plum-duff, Ailie," interrupted the captain, in order to explain, "is
just a puddin' with few plums and fewer spices in it.  Something like a
white-painted cannon-shot, with brown spots on it here and there."

"Is it good?" inquired Ailie.

"Oh, ain't it!" remarked Mr Rokens, who had just concluded Number 6,
and felt his self-possession somewhat restored.  "Yes, miss, it is; but
it ain't equal to whale's-brain fritters, it ain't; them's first-chop."

"Have whales got brains?" inquired Miss Martha, in surprise.

"Brains!" echoed Miss Jane, in amazement.

"Yes, madam, they 'ave," answered the first mate, who had hitherto
maintained silence, but having finished tea was now ready for any amount
of talk; "and what's more remarkable still, they've got several barrels
of oil in their skulls besides."

"Dear me!" exclaimed the sisters.

"Yes, ladies, capital oil it is, too; fetches a 'igher price hin the
markit than the other sort."

"By the bye, Millons, didn't you once fall into a whale's skull, and get
nearly drowned in oil?" inquired the doctor.

"I did," answered the first mate, with the air of a man who regarded
such an event as a mere trifle, that, upon consideration, might almost
be considered as rather a pleasant incident than otherwise in one's
history.

"Nearly drowned in oil!" exclaimed the sisters, while Ailie opened her
eyes in amazement, and Mr Rokens became alarmingly purple in the face
with suppressed chuckling.

"It's true," remarked Rokens, in a hoarse whisper to Miss Martha,
putting his hand up to his mouth, the better to convey the sound to her
ears; "I seed him tumble in, and helped to haul him out."

"Let's have the story, Millons," cried the captain, pushing forward his
cup to be replenished; "It's so long since I heard it, that I've almost
forgotten it.  Another cup o' tea, Martha, my dear--not quite so strong
as the last, and three times as sweet.  I'll drink `Success to the cup
that cheers, but don't inebriate.'  Go ahead, Millons."

Nothing rejoiced the heart of Mr Millons more than being asked to tell
a story.  Like most men who are excessively addicted to the habit, his
stories were usually very long and very dry; but he had a bluff
good-natured way of telling them, that rendered his yarns endurable on
shore, and positively desirable at sea.  Fortunately for the reader, the
story he was now requested to relate was not a long one.

"It ain't quite a _story_," he began--and in beginning he cleared his
throat with emphasis, thrust his thumbs into the arm-holes of his vest,
and tilted his chair on its hind-legs--"it ain't quite a story; it's a
hanecdote, a sort of hincident, so to speak, and this is 'ow it
'appened:--

"Many years ago, w'en I was a very young man, or a big boy, I was on a
voyage to the South Seas after whales.  Tim Rokens was my messmate then,
and has bin so almost ever since, off, and on."  (Mr Rokens nodded
assent to this statement.) "Well, we came up with a big whale, and fixed
an iron cleverly in him at the first throw--"

"An iron?" inquired Miss Martha, to whose mind flat and Italian irons
naturally occurred.

"Yes, madam, an iron; we call the 'arpoons irons.  Well, away went the
fish, like all alive! not down, but straight for'ard, takin' out the
line at a rate that nearly set the boat on fire, and away we went along
with it.  It _was_ a chase, that.  For six hours, off and on, we stuck
to that whale, and pitched into 'im with 'arpoons and lances; but he
seemed to have the lives of a cat--nothin' would kill 'im.  At last the
'arpooner gave him a thrust in the life, an' up went the blood and
water, and the fish went into the flurries, and came nigh capsizin' the
boat with its tail as it lashed the water into foam.  At last it gave
in, and we had a four hours' pull after that, to tow the carcase to the
ship, for there wasn't a cat's-paw of wind on the water.

"W'en we came alongside, we got out the tackles, and before beginning to
flense (that means, ma'am, to strip off the blubber), we cut a hole in
the top o' the skull to get out the oil that was there; for you must
know that the sperm-whale has got a sort of 'ollow or big cavern in its
'ead, w'ich is full o' the best oil, quite pure, that don't need to be
cleared, but is all ready to be baled out and stowed away in casks.
Well, w'en the 'ole was cut in its skull I went down on my knees on the
edge of it to peep in, when my knees they slipped on the blubber, and in
I went 'ead-foremost, souse into the whale's skull, and began to swim
for life in the oil.

"Of course I began to roar for 'elp like a bull, and Rokens there, 'oo
'appened to be near, 'e let down the hend of a rope, but my 'ands was so
slippy with oil I couldn't ketch 'old of it; so 'e 'auls it up agin, and
lets down a rope with a 'ook at the hend, and I got 'old of this and
stuck it into the waistband o' my trousers, and gave the word, `'Eave
away, my 'earties;' and sure enough so they did, and pulled me out in a
trice.  And that's 'ow it was; and I lost a suit o' clo's, for nothing
on 'arth would take the oil out, and I didn't need to use pomatum for
six months after."

"No more you did," cried Rokens, who had listened to the narrative with
suppressed delight; "no more you did.  I never see sich a glazed rat as
you wos when you comed out o' that hole, in all my life; an' he wos jist
like a eel; it wos all we could do to keep 'old on 'im, marm, he was so
slippery."

While the captain was laughing at the incident, and Rokens was narrating
some of the minute details in the half-unwilling yet half-willing ears
of the sisters, the door opened, and a young man entered hastily and
apologised for being late.

"The fact is, Miss Dunning, had I not promised faithfully to come, I
should not have made my appearance at all to-night."

"Why, Glynn, what has kept you, lad?" interrupted the captain.  "I
thought you were a man of your word."

"Ay, that's the question, capting," said Rokens, who evidently regarded
the new arrival with no favourable feelings; "it's always the way with
them _gentlemen_ sailors till they're got into blue water and brought to
their bearin's."

Mr Rokens had wisdom enough to give forth the last part of his speech
in a muttered tone, for the youth was evidently a favourite with the
captain, as was shown by the hearty manner in which he shook him by the
hand.

"Messmates, this is Glynn Proctor, a friend o' mine," said Captain
Dunning, in explanation: "he is going with us this voyage _before_ the
mast, so you'll have to make the most of him as an equal to-night, for I
intend to keep him in his proper place when afloat.  He chooses to go as
an ordinary seaman, against my advice, the scamp; so I'll make him keep
his head as low as the rest when aboard.  You'll to keep your time
better, too, than you have done to-night, lad," continued the captain,
giving his young friend a slap on the shoulder.  "What has detained you,
eh?"

"Necessity, captain," replied the youth, with a smile, as he sat down to
table with an off-hand easy air that savoured of recklessness; "and I am
prepared to state, upon oath if need be, that necessity is not `the
mother of invention.'  If she had been, she would have enabled me to
invent a way of escape from my persecutors in time to keep my promise to
Miss Dunning."

"Persecutors, Glynn!" exclaimed Martha; "to whom do you refer?"

"To the police of this good city."

"Police!" echoed the captain, regarding his young friend seriously,
while the doctor and the first mate and Tim Rokens listened in some
surprise.

"Why, the fact is," said Glynn, "that I have just escaped from the hands
of the police, and if it had not been that I was obliged to make a very
wide detour, in order to reach this house without being observed, I
should have been here long ago."

"Boy, boy, your hasty disposition will bring you into serious trouble
one of these days," said the captain, shaking his head.  "What mischief
have you been about?"

"Ay, there you go--it's my usual fate," cried Glynn, laughing.  "If I
chance to get into a scrape, you never think of inquiring whether it was
my fault or my misfortune.  This time, however, it _was_ my misfortune,
and if Miss Dunning will oblige me with a cup of tea, I'll explain how
it happened.

"Little more than two hours ago I left the ship to come here to tea, as
I had promised to do.  Nikel Sling, the long-legged cook you engaged
this morning, went ashore with me.  As we walked up the street together,
I observed a big porter passing along with a heavy deal plank on his
shoulder.  The street was somewhat narrow and crowded at that part, and
Sling had turned to look in at a shop-window just as the big fellow came
up.  The man shouted to my shipmate to get out o' the way, but the noise
in the street prevented him from hearing.  Before I could turn to touch
the cook's arm, the fellow uttered an oath and ran the end of the plank
against his head.  Poor Sling was down in an instant.  Before I well
knew what I was about, I hit the porter between the eyes and down he
went with a clatter, and the plank above him.  In a moment three
policemen had me by the collar.  I tried to explain, but they wouldn't
listen.  As I was being hurried away to the lock-up, it flashed across
me that I should not only lose my tea and your pleasant society this
evening, but be prevented from sailing to-morrow, so I gave a sudden
twist, tripped up the man on my left, overturned the one on my right,
and bolted."

"They ran well, the rascals, and shouted like maniacs, but I got the
start of 'em, dived down one street, up another, into a by-lane, over a
back-garden wall, in at the back-door of a house and out at the front,
took a round of two or three miles, and came in here from the west; and
whatever other objections there may be to the whole proceeding, I cannot
say that it has spoiled my appetite."

"And so, sir," said Captain Dunning, "you call this your `misfortune?'"

"Surely, captain," said Glynn, putting down his cup and looking up in
some surprise--"surely, you cannot blame me for punishing the rascal who
behaved so brutally, without the slightest provocation, to my shipmate!"

"Hear, hear!" cried Rokens involuntarily.

"I do blame you, lad," replied the captain seriously.  "In the first
place, you had no right to take the law into your own hands.  In the
second place, your knocking down the man did no good whatever to your
shipmate; and in the third place, you've got yourself and me and the
ship into a very unsatisfactory scrape."

Rokens' face, which had hitherto expressed approval of Glynn's conduct,
began to elongate as the captain went on in this strain; and the youth's
recklessness of manner altogether disappeared as inquired, "How so,
captain?  I have escaped, as you see; and poor Sling, of course, was not
to blame, so he'll be all safe aboard, and well, I hope, by this time."

"There you're mistaken, boy.  They will have secured Sling and made him
tell the name of his ship, and also the name of his pugnacious comrade."

"And do you think he'd be so mean as to tell?" asked Glynn indignantly.

"You forget that the _first_ act in this nice little melodrama was the
knocking down of Sling, so that he could not know what happened after,
and the police would not be so soft as to tell him _why_ they wanted
such information until after they had got it."

Poor Glynn looked aghast, and Rokens was overwhelmed.

"It seems to me, I'd better go and see about this," said Millons, rising
and buttoning his coat with the air of a man who had business to
transact and meant to transact it.

"Right, Millons," answered the captain.  "I'm sorry to break up our
evening so soon, but we must get this man aboard by hook or crook as
speedily as possible.  You had better go too, doctor.  Rokens and I will
take care of this young scamp, who must be made a nigger of in order to
be got on board, for his face, once seen by these sharp limbs of
justice, is not likely soon to be forgotten."

Glynn Proctor was indeed a youth whose personal appearance was
calculated to make a lasting impression on most people.  He was about
eighteen years of age, but a strong, well-developed muscular frame, a
firm mouth, a large chin, and an eagle eye, gave him the appearance of
being much older.  He was above the middle height, but not tall, and the
great breadth of his shoulders and depth of his chest made him appear
shorter than he really was.  His hair was of that beautiful hue called
nut-brown, and curled close round his well-shaped head.  He was a model
of strength and activity.

Glynn Proctor had many faults.  He was hasty and reckless.  He was
unsteady, too, and preferred a roving idle life to a busy one; but he
had redeeming qualities.  He was bold and generous.  Above all, he was
unselfish, and therefore speedily became a favourite with all who knew
him.  Glynn's history is briefly told.  He was an Englishman.  His
father and mother had died when he was a child, and left him in charge
of an uncle, who emigrated to America shortly after his brother's death.
The uncle was a good man, after a fashion, but he was austere and
unlovable.  Glynn didn't like him; so when he attained the age of
thirteen, he quietly told him that he meant to bid him good-bye, and go
seek his fortune in the world.  The uncle as quietly told Glynn that he
was quite right, and the sooner he went the better.  So Glynn went, and
never saw his uncle again, for the old man died while he was abroad.

Glynn travelled far and encountered many vicissitudes of fortune in his
early wanderings; but he was never long without occupation, because men
liked his looks, and took him on trial without much persuasion.  To say
truth, Glynn never took the trouble to persuade them.  When his services
were declined, he was wont to turn on his heel and walk away without a
word of reply; and not unfrequently he was called back and employed.  He
could turn his hand to almost anything, but when he tired of it, he
threw it up and sought other work elsewhere.

In the course of his peregrinations, he came to reside in the city in
which our story finds him.  Here he had become a compositor in the
office of a daily newspaper, and, happening to be introduced to the
Misses Dunning, soon became a favourite with them, and a constant
visitor at their house.  Thus he became acquainted with their brother.
Becoming disgusted with the constant work and late hours of the
printing-office, he resolved to join Captain Dunning's ship, and take a
voyage to southern seas as an ordinary seaman.  Glynn and little Alice
Dunning were great friends, and it was a matter of extreme delight to
both of them that they were to sail together on this their first voyage.

Having been made a nigger of--that is, having had his face and hands
blackened in order to avoid detection--Glynn sallied forth with the
captain and Rokens to return to their ship, the _Red Eric_, which lay in
the harbour, not ten minutes' walk from the house.

They passed the police on the wharf without creating suspicion, and
reached the vessel.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE ESCAPE.

"Well, Millons, what news?" inquired the captain, as he stepped on deck.

"Bad news, sir, I fear" replied the first mate.  "I found, on coming
aboard, that no one knew anything about Sling, so I went ashore at once
and 'urried up to the hospital, w'ere, sure enough, I found 'im lyin'
with his 'ead bandaged, and lookin' as if 'e were about gone.  They
asked me if I knew what ship 'e belonged to, as the police wanted to
know.  So I told 'em I knew well enough, but I wasn't going to tell if
it would get the poor fellow into a scrape.

"`Why don't you ask himself?' says I.

