above-board in your young days.  But what's the use of askin'?  It's
plain that bad company has done it, an' my only wonder is, how _you_
ever come to play the hypocrite to that extent, as to go to the
prayer-meeting and make believe you've turned religious."

There was a little bitterness mingled with the tone of remonstrance in
which this was said, which appeared to affect the young man powerfully,
for his face crimsoned as he stopped and laid his hand on his father's
shoulder.

"Whatever follies or sins I may have committed," he said, solemnly, "I
have not acted a hypocrite's part in this matter.  Did you ever yet find
me out, father, tellin' you a lie?"

"Well, I can't say I ever did," answered the mate with a relenting
smile, "'xcept that time when you skimmed all the cream off the milk and
capsized the dish and said the cat done it, although you was slobbered
with it from your nose to your toes--but you was a _very_ small fellow
at that time, you was, and hadn't got much ballast aboard nor begun to
stow your conscience."

"Well, father," resumed Jim with a half-sad smile, "you may depend upon
it I am not going to begin to deceive you now.  My dear mother's last
words to me on that dreary night when she died,--`Always stick to the
_truth_, Jim, whatever it may cost you,'--have never been forgotten, and
I pray God they never may be.  Believe me when I tell you that I never
join Morley in any of his sinful doings, especially his drinking bouts.
You know that I am a total abstainer--"

"No, you're not," cried Mr Welton, senior; "you don't abstain totally
from bad company, Jim, and it's that I complain of."

"I never join him in his drinking bouts," repeated Jim, without noticing
the interruption; "and as he never confides to me any of his business
transactions, I have no reason to say that I believe them to be unfair.
As I said before, I may suspect, but suspicion is not knowledge; we have
no right to condemn him on mere suspicion."

"True, my son; but you have a perfect right to steer clear of him on
mere suspicion."

"No doubt," replied Jim, with some hesitation in his tone, "but there
are circumstances--"

"There you go again with your `circumstances,'" exclaimed Welton senior
with some asperity; "why don't you heave circumstances overboard, rig
the pumps and make a clean breast of it?  Surely it's better to do that
than let the ship go to the bottom!"

"Because, father, the circumstances don't all belong to myself.  Other
people's affairs keep my tongue tied.  I do assure you that if it
concerned only myself, I would tell you everything; and, indeed, when
the right time comes, I promise to tell you all--but in the meantime I--
I--"

"Jim," said Mr Welton, senior, stopping suddenly and confronting his
stalwart son, "tell me honestly, now, isn't there a pretty girl mixed up
in this business?"

Jim stood speechless, but a mantling flush, which the rays of the
revolving light deepened on his sunburnt countenance, rendered speech
unnecessary.

"I knew it," exclaimed the mate, resuming his walk and thrusting his
hands deeper into the pockets of his coat, "it never was otherwise since
Adam got married to Eve.  Whatever mischief is going you're sure to find
a woman underneath the _very_ bottom of it, no matter how deep you go!
If it wasn't that the girls are at the bottom of everything good as well
as everything bad, I'd be glad to see the whole bilin of 'em made fast
to all the sinkers of all the buoys along the British coast and sent to
the bottom of the North Sea."

"I suspect that if that were done," said Jim, with a laugh, "you'd soon
have all the boys on the British coast making earnest inquiries after
their sinkers!  But after all, father, although the girls are hard upon
us sometimes, you must admit that we couldn't get on without 'em."

"True for ye, boy," observed Jerry MacGowl, who, coming up at that
moment, overheard the conclusion of the sentence.  "It's mesilf as
superscribes to that same.  Haven't the swate creeturs led me the life
of a dog; turned me inside out like an owld stockin', trod me in the
dust as if I was benaith contimpt an' riven me heart to mortial tatters,
but I couldn't get on widout 'em nohow for all that.  As the pote might
say, av he only knowd how to putt it in proper verse:--

  "`Och, woman dear, ye darlin',
  It's I would iver be
  Yer praises caterwaulin'
  In swaitest melodee!'"

"Mind your own business, Jerry," said the mate, interrupting the flow of
the poet's inspiration.

"Sure it's that same I'm doin', sir," replied the man, respectfully
touching his cap as he advanced towards the gong that surrounded the
windlass and uncovered it.  "Don't ye see the fog a-comin' down like the
wolf on the fold, an' ain't it my dooty to play a little tshune for the
benefit o' the public?"

Jerry hit the instrument as he spoke and drowned his own voice in its
sonorous roar.  He was driven from his post, however, by Dick Moy, one
of the watch, who, having observed the approaching fog had gone forward
to sound the gong, and displayed his dislike to interference by
snatching the drumstick out of Jerry's hand and hitting him a smart blow
therewith on the top of his head.

As further conversation was under the circumstances impossible, John
Welton and his son retired to the cabin, where the former detailed to
the latter the visit of the strange gentleman with the keen grey eyes,
and the conversation that had passed between them regarding Morley
Jones.  Still the youth remained unmoved, maintaining that suspicion was
not proof, although he admitted that things now looked rather worse than
they had done before.

While the father and son were thus engaged, a low moaning wail and an
unusual heave of the vessel caused them to hasten on deck, just as one
of the watch put his head down the hatch and shouted, "A squall, sir,
brewing up from the nor'-east."



CHAPTER THREE.

A DISTURBED NIGHT; A WRECK AND AN UNEXPECTED RESCUE.

The aspect of the night had completely changed.  The fog had cleared
away; heavy clouds rolled athwart the sky; a deeper darkness descended
on the shipping at anchor in the Downs, and a gradually increasing swell
caused the Gull to roll a little and tug uneasily at her cable.
Nevertheless the warning light at her mast-head retained its
perpendicular position in consequence of a clever adaptation of
mechanism on the principle of the universal joint.

With the rise of the swell came the first rush of the squall.

"If they don't send the boat at once, you'll have to spend the night
with us, Jim," said the mate, looking anxiously in the direction of the
sloop belonging to Morley Jones, the dark outlines of which could just
be seen looming of a deeper black against the black sky.

"It's too late even now," returned Jim in an anxious tone; "the boat,
like everything else about the sloop, is a rotten old thing, and would
be stove against the side in this swell, slight though it be as yet.
But my chief trouble is, that the cables are not fit to hold her if it
comes on to blow hard."

For some time the wind increased until it blew half a gale.  At that
point it continued steady, and as it gave no indication of increasing,
John Welton and his son returned to the cabin, where the latter amused
himself in glancing over some of the books in the small library with
which the ship was furnished, while the sire busied himself in posting
up the ship's log for the day.

For a considerable time they were silent, the one busily engaged
writing, the other engrossed with a book.  At last Mr Welton senior
heaved a deep sigh, and said, while he carefully dotted an _i_ and
stroked a _t_--

"It has always been my opinion, Jim, that when boys are bein' trained
for the sea, they should be taught writing in a swing or an omnibus, in
order to get 'em used to do it in difficult circumstances.  There she
goes again," he added, referring to a lurch of the vessel which caused
the tail of a _y_ to travel at least two inches out of its proper
course.  "Now, that job's done.  I'll turn in for a spell, and advise
you to do the same, lad."

"No, I'll go on deck and have a talk with Dick Moy.  If the gale don't
increase I'll perhaps turn in, but I couldn't sleep just now for
thinkin' o' the sloop."

"Please yourself, my son, an' you'll please me," replied the mate with a
smile which ended in a yawn as he opened the door of a small sleeping
berth, and disappeared into its recesses.

James Welton stood for a few minutes with his back to the small
fireplace, and stared meditatively at the cabin lamp.

The cabin of the floating light was marvellously neat and immaculately
clean.  There was evidence of a well-ordered household in the tidiness
with which everything was put away in its proper place, even although
the fair hand of woman had nothing to do with it, and clumsy man reigned
paramount and alone!  The cabin itself was very small--about ten feet or
so in length, and perhaps eight in width.  The roof was so low that Jim
could not stand quite erect because of the beams.  The grate resembled a
toy, and was of brass polished so bright that you might have used it for
a looking-glass; the fire in it was proportionately small, but large
enough for the place it had to warm.  A crumb or speck of dust could
scarce have been found on the floor with a microscope,--and no wonder,
for whenever John Welton beheld the smallest symptom of such a blemish
he seized a brush and shovel and swept it away.  The books in the little
library at the stern were neatly arranged, and so were the cups, plates,
glasses, salt-cellars, spoons, and saucers, in the little recess that
did duty as a cupboard.  In short, order and cleanliness reigned
everywhere.

And not only was this the case in the cabin, but in every department of
the ship.  The bread-lockers, the oil-room next to the cabin, the galley
where the men lived--all were scrupulously clean and everything therein
was arranged with the method and precision that one is accustomed to
expect only on board a man-of-war.  And, after all, what is a floating
light but a man-of-war?  Its duty is, like that of any three-decker, to
guard the merchant service from a dangerous foe.  It is under command of
the Trinity Corporation--which is tantamount to saying that it is well
found and handled--and it does battle continually with the storm.  What
more could be said of a man-of-war?  The only difference is that it does
its work with less fuss and no noise!

After warming himself for a short time, for the night had become
bitterly cold, Jim Welton put on one of his sire's overcoats and went on
deck, where he had a long walk and talk with Dick Moy, who gave it as
his opinion that "it was a wery cold night," and said that he "wouldn't
be surprised if it wor to come on to blow 'arder before mornin'."

Dick was a huge man with a large expanse of good-natured visage, and a
tendency to make all his statements with the solemnity of an oracle.
Big and little men, like large and small dogs, have usually a
sympathetic liking for each other.  Dick Moy's chief friend on board was
little Jack Shales, who was the life of the ship, and was particularly
expert, as were also most of his mates, in making, during hours of
leisure, beautiful workboxes and writing-desks with inlaid woods of
varied colours, which were sold at a moderate price on shore, in order
to eke out the monthly wage and add to the comforts of wives and little
ones at Ramsgate.  It may be added that Jack Shales was unquestionably
the noisiest man on board.  He had a good voice; could sing, and _did_
sing, from morning till night, and had the power of uttering a yell that
would have put to shame the wildest warrior among the Cherokee savages!

Jack Shales kept watch with Moy that night, and assisted in the
conversation until a sudden snow storm induced young Welton to bid them
good-night and retire below.

"Good-night," said Shales, as Jim's head was disappearing down the
hatchway, "stir up the fire and keep yourself warm."

"That's just what I mean to do," replied Jim; "sorry I can't communicate
some of the warmth to you."

"But you can think of us," cried Jack, looking down the hatchway, "you
can at least pity us poor babes out here in the wind and snow!"

"Shut up, Jack!" said Moy with a solemn growl, "wot a tremendous jaw
you've got w'en you let loose!  Why, wot are 'ee starin' at now?  'Ave
'ee seed a ghost?"

"No, Dick," said Shales, in a tone of voice from which every vestige of
jocularity had disappeared; "look steady in the direction of the South
sandhead light and--see! ain't that the flash of a gun?"

"It looks like it.  A wreck on the sand, I fear," muttered Dick Moy,
putting up both hands to guard his eyes from the snow-flakes that were
driven wildly about by the wind, which had by that time increased to a
furious gale.

For a few minutes the two men stood gazing intently towards the
south-west horizon.  Presently a faint flash was seen, so faint that
they could not be certain it was that of a signal-gun.  In a few
minutes, however, a thin thread of red light was seen to curve upwards
into the black sky.

"No mistake now," cried Jack, leaping towards the cabin skylight, which
he threw up, and bending down, shouted--"South sandhead light is firing,
sir, and sending up rockets!"

The mate, who was at the moment in the land of dreams, sprang out of
them and out of his bunk, and stood on the cabin floor almost before the
sentence was finished.  His son, who had just drawn the blanket over his
shoulders, and given vent to the first sigh of contentment with which a
man usually lays his head on his pillow for the night, also jumped up,
drew on coat, nether garments, and shoes, as if his life depended on his
speed, and dashed on deck.  There was unusual need for clothing that
night, for it had become bitterly cold, a coat of ice having formed even
on the salt-water spray which had blown into the boats.  They found Dick
Moy and Jack Shales already actively engaged--the one loading the lee
gun, the other adjusting a rocket to its stick.  A few hurried questions
from the mate elicited all that it was needful to know.  The flash of
the gun from the South sandhead lightship, about six miles off, had been
distinctly seen a third time, and a third rocket went up just as Welton
and his son gained the deck, indicating that a vessel had struck upon
the fatal Goodwin Sands.  The report of the gun could not be heard,
owing to the gale carrying the sound to leeward, but the bright line of
the rocket was distinctly visible.  At the same moment the flaring light
of a burning tar-barrel was observed.  It was the signal of the vessel
in distress just on the southern tail of the sands.

By this time the gun was charged and the rocket in position.

"Look alive, Jack, fetch the poker!" cried the mate as he primed the
gun.

Jack Shales dived down the companion-hatch, and in another moment
returned with a red-hot poker, which the mate had thrust into the cabin
fire at the first alarm.  He applied it in quick succession to the gun
and rocket.  A blinding flash and deafening crash were followed by the
whiz of the rocket as it sprang with a magnificent curve far away into
the surrounding darkness.

This was their answer to the South sandhead light, which, having fired
three guns and sent up three rockets to attract the attention of the
Gull, then ceased firing.  It was also their first note of warning to
the look-out on the pier of Ramsgate harbour.  Of the three light-ships
that guarded the sands, the Gull lay nearest to Ramsgate; hence,
whichever of the other two happened to send up signals, the Gull had to
reply and thenceforward to continue repeating them until the attention
of the Ramsgate look-out should be gained, and a reply given.

"That's a beauty," cried the mate, referring to the rocket; "fetch
another, Jack; sponge her well out, Dick Moy, we'll give 'em another
shot in a few minutes."

Loud and clear were both the signals, but four and a half miles of
distance and a fresh gale neutralised their influence.  The look-out on
the pier did not observe them.  In less than five minutes the gun and
rocket were fired again.  Still no answering signal came from Ramsgate.

"Load the weather gun this time," cried the mate, "they'll have a better
chance of seeing the flash of that."

Jack obeyed, and Jim Welton, having nothing to do but look on, sought
shelter under the lee of the weather bulwarks, for the wind, according
to Dick Moy, "was blowin' needles and penknives."

The third gun thundered forth and shook the floating light from stem to
stern, but the rocket struck the rigging and made a low wavering flight.
Another was therefore sent up, but it had scarcely cut its bright line
across the sky when the answering signal was observed--a rocket from
Ramsgate pier!

"That's all right now; _our_ duty's done," said the mate, as he went
below, and, divesting himself of his outer garments, quietly turned in,
while the watch, having sponged out and re-covered the guns, resumed
their active perambulation of the deck.

James Welton, however, could not calm down his feelings so easily.  This
was the first night he had ever spent in a light-ship; the scene was
therefore quite new to him, and he could not help feeling somewhat
disappointed at the sudden termination of the noise and excitement.  He
was told that the Ramsgate lifeboat could not be out in less than an
hour, and it seemed to his excited spirit a terrible thing that human
lives should be kept so long in jeopardy.  Of course he began to think,
"Is it not possible to prevent this delay?" but his better sense
whispered to him that excited spirits are not the best judges in such
matters, although it cannot be denied that they have an irresistible
