broke clean over them, several articles not properly secured were swept
off, and weak points in the main fastenings were made plain, as the
spars, beams, and planks writhed and struggled to get free.

But Captain Samson and his men were equal to the occasion; an iron clamp
here, and an extra turn of a chain or hawser there, made all fast, so
that before the squall had time to raise the sea, the raft held well
together, and yielded, without breaking, to the motions of the waves.

Of course every one was drenched, including poor little Polly, for
although the tarpaulin turned off the waves and spray above, it could
not prevent the water spirting up between the spars from below.  But
Polly was, according to Baldwin, "a true chip of the old block;" she
bore her discomforts with heroism, and quite put to shame poor Mr Luke,
whose nervous temperament caused him great suffering.

Thus was spent a night of anxiety.  The next day was little better, and
the night following was worse.  In addition to the violence of the wind
and constant breaking over them of heavy seas, the darkness became so
intense that it was difficult to see where damage to the fastenings
occurred, and repairs became almost impossible.

About midnight there was a terrible rending of wood in that part of the
raft lying farthest from Polly's bower, and a great cry of fear was
heard.  The more courageous among the men sprang, by a natural impulse,
to assist those in distress.  It was found that a large portion of the
raft had broken adrift, and was only held to it by a single rope.  On
this portion were two passengers and one of the crew.  The former were
apparently panic-stricken; the latter made frantic but futile attempts
to haul in on the rope.

"Bear a hand, boys!" cried Edwin Jack, as he laid hold of the inner end
of the rope.

Strong and willing hands were ready, but before they could lay hold the
rope parted, and Jack was dragged violently into the sea.  He rose like
a cork.  Little Wilkins lay down, and stretched out a helping hand.
Jack caught it, and would infallibly have dragged the little fellow into
the water if Ben Trench had not thrown himself on his legs and held on.
Baldwin Burr seized hold of Ben, and the captain coming up at the
moment, lent his powerful aid.  Jack was saved, but the broken part of
the raft, with its hapless occupants, was swept away and lost sight of.

This sad event had naturally a very depressing effect on every one.
True, the portion of the raft which had broken away was large enough to
sustain the unfortunates who were on it.  Moreover, some of the
provisions had also gone with them, so that there was hope of their
holding out for a time and being picked up by a passing ship, but the
hope was slight, and in the event of rougher weather, their fate would
be certain.

For six days and nights the raft was tossed about on the open sea.  It
could scarcely be said that it sailed, although as large a mast and
piece of canvas as they could set up urged it slowly though the water
when the wind was strong.  As to steering, that was next to impossible,
and in truth it did not matter much how they steered.

Constant exposure by night and by day now began to tell on the less
robust of the crew.  Little Polly, however, was not one of these.  She
possessed a naturally good constitution, and was, besides, specially
cared for by her father, who devoted all the powers of an inventive mind
to the strengthening and improving of "the bower."  In this he was ably
assisted by Philosopher Jack, whose love for the child deepened daily as
he watched the sweet contented manner with which she received every
drenching--and she got many--and the anxious way in which she inquired
for, and sought to help, those of the party whose health began to fail.

Among these latter was Ben Trench.

"Ah!  Polly," said Ben one sultry forenoon when she brought him a glass
of sweetened lime-juice and water, "you're a kind little nurse.  I
really don't know how I should get on without you."

"Upon my word," said little Wilkins, pouting, "you're a grateful fellow!
Here have I been nursing you all the morning, yet you seem to think
nothing of that in comparison with Polly's glass of lime-juice."

"Come, Watty, don't be jealous," said Ben; "it's not the glass of
lime-juice, but Polly's sympathetic face beaming behind it, that does me
so much good.  Besides, you know, Polly's a girl, and a girl is always a
better nurse than a man; you must admit that."

Watty was not at all prepared to admit that, but his being spoken of as
a man did much to mollify his hurt feelings.

"But I do hope you feel better to-day," said Polly, observing with some
anxiety the short, half-breathless manner in which the invalid spoke.

"Oh yes!  I feel better--that is to say, I think I do.  Sometimes I do,
and sometimes I don't.  You know, Polly, I came on this voyage chiefly
on account of my health, and of course I must expect to be a little
damaged by so much exposure, though your good father has indeed done his
best to shelter me.  Why, do you know, I sometimes think the berth he
has made for me between the logs here is a greater triumph of his
inventive genius than your bower.  I often think they spoiled a splendid
engineer when they made your father a sailor."

Polly laughed at this, and Watty Wilkins tried to laugh, just by way of
keeping up his friend's spirits and being what Baldwin called good
company; but poor Watty could not laugh.  He had loved and played with
Ben Trench since ever he could remember, and when he looked at his pale
face and listened to his weak voice, a dread foreboding came over him,
and brought such a rush of feeling to his heart that he was fain to leap
up and spring to the farthest end of the raft, where he fell to hauling
and tightening one of the rope-fastenings with all the energy of his
little body and soul.

"Land ho!" shouted one of the men at that moment from the top of a cask,
which formed the outlook, where, every day and all day, a man was
stationed to watch for a sail or a sign of land.

An electric shock could not have produced greater excitement than these
two words.

"Where away?" exclaimed the captain, leaping up beside the look-out.

"On the port-bow, sir,--there!" pointing eagerly.

"I don't see it--oh--yes--no.  It's only a cloud.  Who ever heard of the
port-bow of a raft?  Bah! your eyes have been squintin'.  Not a bit of
it, I see it--low lyin'; why, I see the palms--and I see the nuts--ah,
and the monkeys, no doubt a-eatin' of 'em--hip, hip, hurrah!"

Such were some of the exclamations, ending in a long, deep-toned,
British cheer, with which the discovery of land was greeted.

In a short time all uncertainty was removed, and the land was clearly
made out to be a small coral island with its narrow outlying reef, and a
few cocoa-nut palms waving thereon.

The joy of the shipwrecked crew was excessive--somewhat in proportion to
their previous depression.  They shook bands, laughed, cheered, and in
some cases wept, while a few clasped their hands, looked up, and audibly
thanked God.

"You'll soon get ashore," said Polly, laying her hand on Ben Trench's
arm.

"Ay, and the cocoa-nut milk will set you up and make you fat in no
time," added Watty Wilkins.

"So it will," returned Ben, who had not risen like the others; "we'll
have jolly times of it, won't we?  Like Robinson Crusoe.  Oh! how I wish
that sister Susan was here!  She would enjoy it so much.  It's an
island, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Edwin Jack, coming forward at the moment, "a coral island,
with plenty of vegetation on it.  So cheer up, Ben, we shall soon be
ashore."

Not so soon, however, as they expected, for the wind was light, although
favourable, the raft was heavy, and the two oars had but little
influence on it.  The sun sank and rose again before they drew near to
the reef.  Inside the reef, between it and the island-shore, there was a
lake or lagoon of calm water, but outside, on the reef itself, a heavy
swell broke with continuous roar.  To get involved in those giant
breakers would have been destruction to the raft, and probably death to
most of those on board.  One narrow opening, marked by a few shrubs and
palms on either side, formed the only portal to the calm lagoon.  The
captain himself took the steering oar, and summoned our philosopher to
his assistance.

"Give way now, lads, with a will."

As many men as could grasp the two oars laid hold of them, and bent
their backs till the strong wood cracked again.  Gradually the raft
neared the opening.  As it did so the ground-swell began to act on it.
By degrees the towering billows--which seemed to rise out of a calm sea
and rush to their destruction like walls of liquid glass--caught it,
dragged it on a little, and then let it slip.  At last one great wave
began to curl in hissing foam underneath, caught the raft fairly,
carried it forward on its boiling crest, and launched it with lightning
speed into the opening.  The space was too narrow!  One of the
projecting spars touched the reef.  Instantly the fastenings were rent
like pack-thread, and the raft was hurled forward in disconnected
fragments.  One of these turned completely over with several men on it.
Another portion passed through the opening and swung round inside.  The
steering oar was wrenched from Jack's hands, and struck the captain into
the water.  As if by instinct, Jack sprang to the "bower," caught Polly
in his arms, and leaped into the sea.  At the same moment Wilkins ran to
the rescue of his friend Ben.  These two were on the part that had swung
round to the calm side of the reef, and Watty waded to it with Ben on
his back.  The captain and all the rest were washed in a cataract of
foam and wreckage through the opening into the lagoon, and pitched by
curling eddies on the shore.  In a few minutes they all stood in safety,
panting, but uninjured, on the white sands of the coral reef.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE CORAL ISLAND--PROCEEDINGS THEREIN.

The island on which the raft with its occupants had been cast was of
small size, not more than six miles in extent, and lay low in the water.
Nevertheless it was covered with luxuriant vegetation, among which were
several groves of cocoa-nut palms, the long feathery branches of which
waved gracefully in a gentle breeze, as if beckoning an invitation to
the castaways on the reef to cross the lagoon and find shelter there.
But crossing the lagoon was not an easy matter.

"Shure it's a mile wide if it's a futt," said one of the men as they
stood in a group on the reef, dripping and gazing at the isle.

"No, Simon O'Rook," said Bob Corkey, in that flat contradictions way to
which some men are prone; "no, it's only half a mile if it's an inch."

"You're wrong, both of you," said Baldwin Burr, "it ain't more than
quarter of a mile.  Quite an easy swim for any of us."

"Except my Polly," observed the captain quietly.

"Ay, and those who are too weak to swim," said Watty Wilkins, with a
glance at his friend Ben, who had lain down on the sand and listened
with a calm untroubled look to the conversation.

"You don't seem at all anxious," whispered Polly to Ben.

"No, Polly, I'm not.  I have lately been taught how to trust in God by
your example."

"By mine!" exclaimed the child in extreme surprise.

Before Ben could reply the captain turned and called to Polly.

"Come here, my duckey; Edwin Jack offers to swim over the lagoon to the
island with you on his back.  Will you trust yourself to him?"

"Yes, father," answered the child promptly.

"But maybe there are sharks," suggested O'Rook.

There was a momentary silence.  In the excitement of the occasion every
one had forgotten sharks.  What was to be done?  The raft was utterly
destroyed.  Only a few of the logs which had formed it lay on the reef;
the rest were floating on the lagoon at various distances, none nearer
than fifty yards.

"There's nothing for it, then, but to reconstruct our raft," said the
captain, throwing off his coat and shoes; "so these logs must be
secured."

He had only taken two steps towards the water when Philosopher Jack
grasped his arm.

"Stop, sir, it is your duty to look after Polly.  Now lads, those who
can swim come along!"

Another instant and he was in the sea, regardless of sharks, and
striking out for the floating wreckage, closely followed by O'Rook,
Corkey, Burr, and Watty Wilkins.  Strange to say, eight other men of the
crew could not swim, although they had managed somehow to scramble on
the reef.  Whether it was that the sharks were not there at the time, or
that the number and energy of the swimmers frightened them, we cannot
tell, but each man reached a log or plank in safety, and began pushing
it towards the reef.  It was when they drew near to this that the trial
of their courage was most severe.  The excitement and gush of daring
with which they had plunged in was by that time expended, and the slow
motion of the logs gave them time for reflection.  O'Rook's lively fancy
troubled him much.

"If the baists would only attack a man in front," he muttered, "it's
little I'd mind 'em, but to come up behind, sneakin' like--hooroo!"

At that moment a branch of coral, which projected rather far from the
bottom, touched O'Rook's toe and drew from him an uncontrollable yell of
alarm.  Baldwin Burr, who swam close behind, was humorously inclined as
well as cool.  He pushed the plank he was guiding close to his comrade's
back, dipped the end of it, and thrust it down on O'Rook's legs.

The effect was even more powerful than he had hoped for.

"A shark!--a sha-a-a-rk!" howled O'Rook, and dived under the broken
main-yard, which he was piloting ashore.  Coming up on the other side,
he tried to clamber on it, but it rolled round and dropped him.  He went
down with a gurgling cry.  Again he rose, grasped the spar with his left
arm, glared wildly round, and clenched his right hand as if ready to hit
on the nose any creature--fish, flesh, or fowl--that should assail him.

"Take it easy, messmate," said Burr in a quiet tone; "sorry I touched
you.  Hope it didn't hurt much."

"Och! it was you, was it?  Sure, I thought it was a shark; well, well,
it's plaised I am to be let off so aisy."

With this philosophic reflection O'Rook landed with his piece of timber.
Enough of material was soon collected to form a raft sufficiently large
to ferry half of the party across the lagoon, and in two trips the whole
were landed in safety on the island.

"You don't mean to tell me, Jack," said Baldwin Burr, "that this island
was made by coral insects?"

"Yes, I do!" said Jack.

"From the top to the bottom?" asked Burr.

"From the bottom to the top," said Edwin.

Baldwin asked this question of the philosopher during a pause in their
labours.  They were, at the time, engaged in constructing a new bower
for Polly among the flowering shrubs under the cocoa-nut palms.  Polly
herself was aiding them, and the rest of the party were scattered among
the bushes, variously employed in breaking down branches, tearing up
long grass, and otherwise clearing ground for an encampment.

"How could insects make an island?" asked Polly, sitting down on a bank
to rest.

"Don't you know, Poll?" said Edwin; "why, I thought your father taught
you about almost everything."

"Oh no," replied Polly, with an innocent smile, "not everything yet, you
know, but I daresay he will in the course of time.  Tell me about the
insects."

"Well, let me see, how shall I begin?" said Jack, leaning against the
bank, and crossing his arms on his breast.  "The coral insects, Polly,
are very small, some of them not larger than a pin's head.  They are
great builders.  There is lime in sea-water.  The insects, which are
called corallines, have the power of attracting this lime to them;
drawing it away from the water, so to speak, and fixing it round their
own bodies, which is called secreting the lime.  Thus they form shells,
or houses, to themselves, which they fix at the bottom of the sea.
Having laid the basements of their houses close together, they proceed
to add upper storeys, and thus they add storey to storey, until they
reach the surface of the sea.  They work in such innumerable millions
that, in course of time, they form reefs and islands, as you see."

"But I _don't_ see!" said Polly, looking round; "at least, I don't see
corallines working."

"Ah, good," said Baldwin, with a nod of approval to the child, as if to
say, "You have him there!"

"True," returned the philosopher, "because the corallines can only work
under water.  The moment they reach the surface they die; but those that
remain continue their labours on the sides of the reef or island, and
thus widen it.  Then the waves break off masses of coral, and cast them,
with drifting sea-weed and other things, up on the reef, which makes it
higher; then sea-birds come to rest on it.  The winds carry seeds of
various plants to it, which take root, grow up, die; and thus thicken
the soil by slow degrees, till at last, after a long, long time, the
island becomes a pretty large and fertile one like this."

"Wonderful!" exclaimed Polly; "what a clever insect!"

"Clever indeed," returned Edwin; "especially when we consider that it
has got no brains."

"No brains!" echoed Baldwin.

"No, it has little more than a stomach."

"Oh! come now," remonstrated Baldwin; "we can't believe that, can we,
Miss Polly?  Even a house-builder must think, much more an
island-builder; and no fellow can think with his stomach, you know."

"Nevertheless, it is as I tell you," continued Jack, "and these little
creatures manage to create hundreds of islands in the Southern Seas, by
their perseverance, energy, and united action.  Quite an example to
man--eh, Baldwin?"

"Ha! just so--a long pull, and a strong pull, and a pull all together.
I think we'd better act on the principles of these corry-lines, else
Miss Polly's bower won't be ready afore dark."

So saying, the seaman and our philosopher resumed their work with such
united energy--aided by Polly herself--that a very comfortable
habitation of boughs and large leaves was finished before the day
closed.  It resembled a large beehive, was overshadowed by dense foliage
of a tropical kind, and carpeted with a species of fern.

Polly was profuse in her thanks, and when it was finished, called to her
father to come and admire it.  The stout mariner at once obeyed the
summons.  He quitted the pile of firewood on which he had been
labouring, and with a violently red face and perspiring brow, appeared
on the scene, bearing a mighty axe on his shoulder.

"Splendid!" he exclaimed, with beaming admiration.  "It's fit for the
queen of the coral isles."

"For whom it is intended!" said Philosopher Jack, quickly.

Polly laughed, for she understood the compliment, but suddenly became
grave, as she remembered Ben Trench, and said, "No, no; it must be used
as a shelter for Ben."

"That's kind of you, Polly," said Watty coming up with a huge bundle of
grass and foliage for bedding at the moment; "but Ben has got friends to
remember him as well as you.  Bob Corkey and I have made him a hut on
the other side of the bushes--there, you may see the top of it through
the leaves."

"Does any one know where Mr Luke is?" asked the captain.

None of those assembled at the bower had seen him for some hours, and
Captain Samson was on the point of organising a party to go in search of
him, when one of the crew came in from the bush and said he had gone off
with Simon O'Rook to the highest point of the low islet, to ascertain if
possible its extent.

"He's all right if O'Rook is with him," said the captain to Polly, in
confidence, when they went into the bower together; "but he's not to be
trusted away by himself.  I never saw a man more unfit to look after
himself."

"And yet he is a good, kind man, father," said Polly.

"True, quite true, Poll," replied the captain, musingly.  "I wonder why
it is that some men seem as if they had been meant for women; maybe it
is by way of balancing those women who seem to have been meant for men!"

Polly listened to this with a look of grave consideration, but not
having formed an opinion on the subject, wisely held her tongue.

Meanwhile O'Rook led his companion towards the highest part of the
islet, which, being clear of trees, seemed likely to afford them a good
outlook.  The sailor was a man of inquiring disposition, and, being of a
free-and-easy nature, did not hesitate to speak out his mind on all
occasions.  After walking beside his tall companion and eyeing his thin
figure and sad countenance in silence for some time, he said--

"You're a cadaverous sort o' man, Mr Luke."

"Think so?" said Mr Luke, gently.

"Of course; I can't help thinkin' so, because I see it," returned
O'Rook.  "Was it a fall, now, w'en you was a babby, that did it, or
measles?"

"Neither, that I am aware of," replied Mr Luke, with a good-natured
smile; "my father before me was cadaverous."

"Ah!" said O'Rook, with a look of sympathy, as he touched the region of
his heart with his left thumb, "p'r'aps it was somethin' o' this sort,
eh?  I've bin through that myself in the ould country, where as purty
a--well, well, it's all over now, but I've a fellow-feelin' for--"

"No," interrupted Mr Luke, with a sigh, "it wasn't a disappointment, it
was--oh! what a splendid view!"

They had reached the top of the ridge at the moment, and the view of the
verdant islet that burst upon them might well have called forth
admiration from men of coarser mould than they.

O'Rook forgot for a few minutes the subject of his curiosity, and
compared the prospect to some of the beautiful scenery of Ireland,
though there was no resemblance whatever between the two.  He soon
returned, however, to the previous subject of conversation, but Mr Luke
had ceased to be communicative.

"What is that lying on the beach there?" he said, pointing in the
direction referred to.

"It's more than I can tell," answered O'Rook; "looks like a boat, don't
it?"

"Very," said Mr Luke, "and there is something lying beside it like a
man.  Come, let's go see."

The two explorers went rapidly down the gentle slope that led to the
beach, and soon found that the object in question was indeed a boat,
old, rotten, and blistered with the sun.  Beside it lay the skeleton of
a man, with a few rags of the garments that had once formed its clothing
still clinging to it here and there.  It was a pitiful sight.  Evidently
the unfortunate man had been cast away in an open boat, and had been
thrown on that beach when too much exhausted to make a last struggle for
life, for there was no sign of his having wandered from the boat or cut
down bushes, or attempted to make a fire.  His strength had apparently
enabled him to get out of the boat, that was all, and there he had lain
down to die.

For some time the two wanderers stood contemplating the sight in
silence, and when at length they spoke it was in low, sad tones.

"Poor, poor fellow," said Mr Luke, "he must have been shipwrecked, like
ourselves, and cast adrift in the boat.  But I wonder that he is alone;
one would expect that some of his comrades must have got into the boat
along with him."

"No doubt," said O'Rook, "they was all starved at sea and throw'd
overboard.  Come, Mr Luke, let's bury him; it's all we can do for him
now."

Saying this, O'Rook threw off his jacket and, with his companion's
assistance, soon scraped a hole in the sand.  Into this they were about
to lift the skeleton, when they observed that its right hand covered a
decayed remnant of rag, under which was seen a glittering substance.  It
turned out to be the clasp of a notebook, which, however, was so decayed
and glued together that it could not be opened.  O'Rook therefore
wrapped it in his handkerchief and put it in his pocket.  Then they
buried the skeleton, and rolled a large mass of coral rock upon the
grave to mark the spot.

A careful examination was next made of the old boat and the locality
around it, but nothing whatever was found to throw light on the fate of
the vessel to which the man had belonged.

Returning to the encampment, O'Rook and his companion found their
friends busy preparing supper, which consisted of some provisions saved
from the raft, and cocoa-nuts.

In a few seconds the whole party was assembled in front of Polly's
bower, listening attentively, while O'Rook described the discovery of
the skeleton to the captain, and produced the old notebook.  Deep was
the interest of every member of that little community as the captain
attempted to open the book, and intense was the expression of
disappointment on each countenance--especially on that of Polly--when,
after a prolonged trial, he utterly failed.

"Let Philosopher Jack try it," exclaimed Watty Wilkins eagerly.

The captain at once handed the book to Jack with a smile.

"To be sure," said he, "a philosopher ought to understand the management
of books better than a skipper; but when a book is glued hard and fast
like that, it may puzzle even a philosopher to master its contents."

Jack made the attempt, however.  He went to work with the calm
deliberation of a thorough workman.  By the aid of heat and gentle
friction and a little moisture, and the judicious use of a penknife, he
succeeded at last in opening the book in one or two places.  While he
was thus engaged, the rest of the party supped and speculated on the
probable contents of the book.

"Here is a legible bit at last," said Jack, "but the writing is very
faint.  Let me see.  It refers to the state of the weather and the wind.
The poor man evidently kept a private journal.  Ah! here, in the middle
of the book, the damp has not had so much effect."

As he turned and separated the leaves with great care, Jack's audience
gazed at him intently and forgot supper.  At last he began to read:--

  "`_Saturday, 4th_.--Have been three weeks now on short allowance.  We
  are all getting perceptibly weaker.  The captain, who is not a strong
  man, is sinking.  The boat is overcrowded.  If a gale should spring up
  we shall all perish.  I don't like the looks of two of the men.  They
  are powerful fellows, and the captain and I believe them to be quite
  capable of murdering the most of us, and throwing us overboard to save
  their own lives.'

"Here there is a blank," said Jack, "and the next date is the 8th, but
there is no month or year given.  The writing continues:--

  "`I scarce know what has passed during the last few days.  It is like
  a horrible dream.  The two men made the attempt, and killed big
  George, whom they feared most, because of his courage and known
  fidelity to the captain; but, before they could do further mischief,
  the second mate shot them both.  The boat floats lighter now, and,
  through God's mercy, the weather continues fine.  Our last ration was
  served out this morning--two ounces of biscuit each, and a wine-glass
  of water.  _Sunday, 11th_.--Two days without food.  The captain read
  to us to-day some chapters out of the Bible, those describing the
  crucifixion of Jesus.  Williams and Ranger were deeply impressed, and
  for the first time seemed to lament their sins, and to speak of
  themselves as crucifiers of Jesus.  The captain's voice very weak, but
  he is cheerful and resigned.  It is evident that _his_ trust is in the
  Lord.  He exhorts us frequently.  We feel the want of water more than
  food.  _Wednesday_.--The captain and Williams died yesterday.  Ranger
  drank sea water in desperation.  He went mad soon after, and jumped
  overboard.  We tried to save him, but failed.  Only three of us are
  left.  If we don't meet with a ship, or sight an island, it will soon
  be all over with us.  _Thursday_.--I am alone now.  An island is in
  sight, but I can scarcely raise myself to look at it.  I will bind
  this book to my hand.  If any one finds me, let him send it to my
  beloved wife, Lucy.  It will comfort her to know that my last thoughts
  on earth were of her dear self, and that my soul is resting on my
  Redeemer.  I grow very cold and faint.  May God's best blessing
  rest--'"

