"But, grannie, we canna leave you here alone," remonstrated Jean with an
anxious look.

"An' I can fecht!" remarked Peter in a low voice, that betrayed neither
fear nor excitement.

"The sodgers can do nae harm to _me_," returned the old woman firmly.
"Do my bidding, bairns.  Be aff, I say!"

There was no resisting Mrs. Mitchell's word of command.  Hastening out
by the back door just as the troopers came in sight, Peter and his
companions, diving into the shrubbery of the neighbouring streamlet,
made their way to Black's farm by a circuitous route.  There the girls
took shelter in the house, locking the door and barring the windows,
while Peter, diverging to the left, made for the hills like a hunted
hare.

Andrew was standing alone at his post when the lithe runner came in
sight.  Will Wallace had left him by that time, and was listening
entranced to the fervid exhortations of Dickson of Rutherglen.

"The sodgers!" gasped Peter, as he flung himself down to rest.

"Comin' this way, lad?"

"Na.  They're at the Mitchells."

"A' safe at the ferm?" asked Andrew quickly.

"Ay, I saw the lasses into the hoose."

"Rin to the meetin' an' gie the alarm.  Tell them to send Wallace an'
Quentin here wi' sax stoot men--weel airmed--an' anither sentry, for I'm
gaun awa'."

Almost before the sentence was finished Ramblin' Peter was up and away,
and soon the alarming cry arose from the assembly, "The dragoons are
upon us!"

Instantly the Clydesdale men mounted and formed to meet the expected
onset.  The men of Nithsdale were not slow to follow their example, and
Gordon of Earlstoun, a tried and skilful soldier, put himself at the
head of a large troop of Galloway horse.  Four or five companies of
foot, also well armed, got ready for action, and videttes and single
horsemen were sent out to reconnoitre.  Thus, in a moment, was this
assembly of worshippers transformed into a band of Christian warriors,
ready to fight and die for their families and liberties.

But the alarm, as it turned out, was a false one.  Glendinning, informed
by spies of the nature of the gathering, was much too sagacious a
warrior to oppose his small force to such overwhelming odds.  He
contented himself for the present with smaller game.

After continuing in the posture of defence for a considerable time, the
assembly dispersed, those who were defenceless being escorted by armed
parties to the barns and cottages around.  As they retired from the
scene the windows of heaven were opened, and the rain, which had been
restrained all day, came down in torrents, and sent the Cairn and Cluden
red and roaring to the sea.

But long before this dispersion took place, Andrew Black, with Quentin
Dick, Will Wallace, Ramblin' Peter, and six sturdy young men, armed with
sword, gun, and pistol, had hurried down the hill to succour the
Mitchells, if need be, and see to the welfare of those who had been left
behind in the farm.

CHAPTER FOUR.

THE HUNTING AND HARRYING DISPLAYED.

Being ignorant, as we have said, of the cruel murder of old Mitchell,
Ramblin' Peter's report had not seriously alarmed Black.  He concluded
that the worst the troopers would do would be to rob the poor old couple
of what money they found in their possession, oblige them to take the
Oath of Supremacy, drink the health of King and bishops, and otherwise
insult and plunder them.  Knowing the Mitchells intimately, he had no
fear that their opposition would invite severity.  Being very fond of
them, however, he resolved, at the risk of his life, to prevent as far
as possible the threatened indignity and plunder.

"They're a douce auld pair," he remarked to Will Wallace as they strode
down the hillside together, "quiet an' peaceable, wi' naething to speak
o' in the way of opeenions--somethin' like mysel'--an' willin' to let-be
for let-be.  But since the country has been ower-run by thae Hielanders
an' sodgers, they've had little peace, and the auld man has gie'n them a
heap o' trouble, for he's as deaf as a post.  Peter says the pairty o'
dragoons is a sma' ane, so I expect the sight o' us'll scare them away
an' prevent fechtin'."

"It may be so," said Wallace, "and of course I shall not fail you in
this attempt to protect your old friends; but, to tell you the truth, I
don't quite like this readiness on the part of you Covenanters to defy
the laws, however bad they may be, and to attack the King's troops.  The
Bible, which you so often quote, inculcates longsuffering and patience."

"Hm! there speaks yer ignorance," returned the farmer with a dash of
cynicism in his tone.  "Hoo mony years, think ye, are folk to submit to
tyranny an' wrang an' fierce oppression for nae sin whatever against the
laws o' God or the land?  Are twunty, thretty, or forty years no' enough
to warrant oor claim to lang-sufferin'?  Does submission to law-brekin'
on the pairt o' Government, an' lang-continued, high-handed oppression
frae King, courtier, an' prelate, accompanied wi' barefaced plunder and
murder--does _that_ no' justifiee oor claim to patience?  To a' this the
Covenanters hae submitted for mony weary years withoot rebellion, except
maybe in the metter o' the Pentlands, when a wheen o' us were driven to
desperation.  But I understand your feelin's, lad, for I'm a man o'
peace by natur', an' would gladly submit to injustice to keep things
quiet--_if possable_; but some things are _no'_ possable, an' the Bible
itsel' says we're to live peaceably wi' a' men only `as much as in us
lies.'"

The ex-trooper was silent.  Although ignorant of the full extent of
maddening persecution to which not merely the Covenanters but the people
of Scotland generally had been subjected, his own limited experience
told him that there was much truth in what his companion said; still,
like all loyal-hearted men, he shrank from the position of antagonism to
Government.

"I agree with you," he said, after a few minutes' thought, "but I have
been born, I suppose, with a profound respect for law and legally
constituted authority."

"Div ye think, lad," returned Black, impressively, "that naebody's been
born wi' a high respec' for law but yersel'?  I suppose ye admit that
the King is bound to respec' the law as weel as the people?"

"Of course I do.  I am no advocate of despotism."

"Weel then," continued the farmer with energy, "in the year saxteen
forty-ane, an' at ither times, kings an' parliaments hae stamped the
Covenants o' Scotland as bein' pairt o' the law o' this land--whereby
freedom o' conscience an' Presbyterian worship are secured to us a'.
An' here comes Chairles the Second an' breks the law by sendin' that
scoondrel the Duke o' Lauderdale here wi' full poors to dae what he
likes--an' Middleton, a man wi' nae heart an' less conscience, that was
raised up frae naething to be a noble, nae less!  My word, nobles are
easy made, but they're no' sae easy unmade!  An' this Lauderdale maks a
cooncil wi' Airchbishop Sherp--a traiter and a turncoat--an' a wheen
mair like himsel', and they send sodgers oot ower the land to eat us up
an' cram Prelacy doon oor throats, an' curates into oor poo'pits whether
we wull or no'.  An' that though Chairles himsel' signed the Covenant at
the time he was crooned!  Ca' ye _that_ law or legally constituted
authority?"

Although deeply excited by this brief recital of his country's wrongs,
Black maintained the quiet expression of feature and tone of voice that
were habitual to him.  Further converse on the subject was interrupted
by their arrival at the farm, where they found all right save that Jean
and Aggie were in a state of tearful anxiety about their poor
neighbours.

While the farmer was seeing to the security of his house and its
arrangements, preparatory to continuing the march to the Mitchells'
cottage, the rest of the party stood about the front door conversing.
Will Wallace was contemplating Jean Black with no little admiration, as
she moved about the house.  There was something peculiarly attractive
about Jean.  A winsome air and native grace, with refinement of manner
unusual in one of her station, would have stamped her with a powerful
species of beauty even if she had not possessed in addition a modest
look and fair young face.

The ex-trooper was questioning, in a dreamy way, whether he had ever
before seen such a pretty and agreeable specimen of girlhood, when he
experienced a shock of surprise on observing that Jean had gone to a
neighbouring spring for water and was making something very like a
signal to him to follow her.

The surprise was mingled with an uncomfortable feeling of regret, for
the action seemed inconsistent with the maiden's natural modesty.

"Forgie me, sir," she said, "for being so bold, but oh! sir, if ye knew
how anxious I am about Uncle Black, ye would understand--he is wanted so
much, an' there's them in the hidy-hole that would fare ill if he was
taken to prison just now.  If--ye--would--"

"Well, Jean," said Will, sympathising with the struggle it evidently
cost the girl to speak to him--"don't hesitate to confide in me.  What
would you have me do?"

"Only to keep him back frae the sodgers if ye can.  He's such an awfu'
man to fecht when he's roosed, that he's sure to kill some o' them if
he's no' killed himsel'.  An' it'll be ruin to us a' an' to the
Mitchells too, if--"

She was interrupted at this point by Black himself calling her name.

"Trust me," said Wallace earnestly, "I understand what you wish, and
will do my best to prevent evil."

A grateful look was all the maiden's reply as she hurried away.

Our hero's perplexity as to how this promise was to be fulfilled was,
however, needless, for on reaching the Mitchells' hut it was found that
the troopers had already left the place; but the state of things they
had left behind them was enough to stir deeply the pity and the
indignation of the party.

Everything in confusion--broken furniture, meal and grain scattered on
the floor, open chests and cupboards--told that the legalised brigands
had done their worst.  Poor Mrs. Mitchell had objected to nothing that
they said or did or proposed to her.  She feebly drank the health of
King and prelates when bidden to do so, and swore whatever test-oaths
they chose to apply to her till they required her to admit that the King
was lord over the kirk and the conscience.  Then her spirit fired, and
with a firm voice she declared that no king but Christ should rule over
her kirk or conscience--to which she boldly added that she _had_
attended conventicles, and would do so again!

Having obtained all they wanted, the dragoons went away, leaving the old
woman among the ruins of her home, for they probably did not consider it
worth while carrying off a prisoner who would in all likelihood have
died on the road to prison.

In the midst of all the noise and confusion it had struck the old woman
as strange that they never once asked about her husband.  After they had
gone, however, the arrival of two neighbours bearing his dead body
revealed the terrible reason.  She uttered no cry when they laid his
corpse on the floor, but sat gazing in horror as if turned to stone.
Thus Black and his friends found her.

She could not be roused to speak, and looked, after a few minutes, like
one who had not realised the truth.

In this state she was conveyed to Black's cottage and handed over to
Jean, whom every one seemed intuitively to regard as her natural
comforter.  The poor child led her into her own room, sat down beside
her on the bed, laid the aged head on her sympathetic bosom and sobbed
as if her heart was breaking.  But no response came from the old woman,
save that once or twice she looked up feebly and said, "Jean, dear, what
ails ye?"

In the Council Chamber at Edinburgh, Lauderdale, learning on one
occasion that many persons both high and low had refused to take the
bond already referred to, which might well have been styled the bond of
slavery, bared his arm in fury, and, smiting the table with his fist,
swore with a terrific oath that he would "force them to take the bond."

What we have described is a specimen of the manner in which the force
was sometimes applied.  The heartless despot and his clerical coadjutors
had still to learn that tyranny has not yet forged the weapon that can
separate man from his God.

"What think ye noo?" asked Andrew Black, turning to Wallace with a quiet
but stern look, after old Mrs. Mitchell had been carried in, "what think
ye _noo_, lad, o' us Covenanters an' oor lack o' lang-sufferin' an' oor
defyin' the laws?  Aren't these laws we _ought_ to defy, but havena
properly defied yet, laws illegally made by a perjured King and an
upstart Cooncil?"

"Mr. Black," said the ex-trooper, seizing his companion's hand with an
iron grip, "from this day forward I am with you--heart and soul."

Little did Wallace think, when he came to this decision, that he had
still stronger reason for his course of action than he was aware of at
the moment.

It was night when Mrs. Mitchell was brought into the farm-house, and
preparations were being made for a hasty meal, when Ramblin' Peter came
in with the news that a number of people in the Lanarkshire district had
been intercommuned and driven from their homes--amongst others David
Spence, Will Wallace's uncle, with whom his mother had taken up her
abode.

The distracted looks of poor Wallace on hearing this showed the powerful
effect the news had upon him.

"Keep yersel' quiet, noo," said Black in an encouraging tone, as he took
the youth's arm and led him out of the house.  "These are no' times to
let our hearts rin awa wi' oor heids.  Yer mither must be looked after;
but i' the meantime let me tell ye that yer uncle Daavid is a douce,
cliver felly, an' fears naething i' this warld.  If he did, he wadna be
amang the intercommuned.  Be sure he's no' the man to leave his sister
Maggie in trouble.  Of course ye'll be wantin' to be aff to look after
her."

"Of course--instantly," said Wallace.

"Na.  Ye'll hae yer supper first--an' a guid ain--for ye'll need it.
Have patience, noo, an' listen to me, for I'll do the very best I can
for ye in this strait--an' it's no muckle ye can do for yersel' withoot
help."

There was something so decided yet kindly and reassuring in the farmer's
tone and manner that Wallace felt relieved in spite of his anxieties,
and submitted to his guidance in all things.  Black then explained that
he had a friend in Lanark who owed him money on lambs sold to him the
previous year; that he meant to send his man Quentin Dick first to
collect that money, and then proceed to Edinburgh, for the purpose of
making further arrangements there about cattle.

"Noo," continued Black, "I've gotten a mither as weel as you, an' she
lives in the Can'lemaker Raw, close to the Greyfriars' Kirkyaird--where
they signed the Covenants, ye ken.  Weel, I wad advise you to gang to
Lanark wi' Quentin, an' when ye find yer mither tak' her to Edinbro' an'
let her live wi' my mither i' the meantime, till we see what the Lord
has in store for this puir persecuted remnant.  I'm sorry to pairt wi'
ye, lad, sae unexpectedly, but in thae times, when folk are called on to
pairt wi' their heids unexpectedly, we mauna compleen."

"I'll take your advice gladly," said Wallace.  "When will Quentin Dick
be ready to start?"

"In less than an hour.  The moon'll be up soon after that.  It's o' nae
use startin' on sae dark a nicht till she's up, for ye'll hae to cross
some nasty grund.  Noo, lad, though I'm no a minister, my advice to ye
is, to gang doon into the hidy-hole an' pray aboot this matter.  Niver
mind the folk ye find there.  They're used to prayin'.  It's my opeenion
that if there was less preachin' an' mair prayin', we'd be a' the better
for 't.  It's a thrawn warld we live in, but we're bound to mak' the
best o't."

Although not much in the habit of engaging in prayer--save at the formal
periods of morning and evening--our ex-trooper was just then in the mood
to take his friend's advice.  He retired to the place of refuge under
Black's house, where he found several people who had evidently been at
the communion on Skeoch Hill.  These were engaged in earnest
conversation, and took little notice of him as he entered.  The place
was very dimly lighted.  One end of the low vaulted chamber was involved
in obscurity.  Thither the youth went and knelt down.  From infancy his
mother had taught him "to say his prayers," and had sought to induce him
to pray.  It is probable that the first time he really did so was in
that secret chamber where, in much anxiety of soul, he prayed for
herself.

After a hasty but hearty supper, he and Quentin Dick set out on their
night journey.  They carried nothing with them except two wallets,
filled, as Wallace could not help thinking, with a needlessly large
amount of provisions.  Of course they were unarmed, for they travelled
in the capacity of peaceful drovers, with plaids on their shoulders, and
the usual staves in their hands.

"One would think we were going to travel for a month in some wilderness,
to judge from the weight of our haversacks," observed Wallace, after
trudging along for some time in silence.

"Maybe we'll be langer than a month," returned Quentin, "ann the
wulderness hereaway is warse than the wulderness that Moses led his folk
through.  They had manna there.  Mony o' us hae _naething_ here."

Quentin Dick spoke with cynicism in his tone, for he was a stern
straightforward man, on whom injustice told with tremendous power, and
who had not yet been taught by adversity to bow his head to man and
restrain his indignation.

Before Wallace had time to make any rejoinder, something like the
appearance of a group of horsemen in front arrested them.  They were
still so far distant as to render their tramp inaudible.  Indeed they
could not have been seen at all in so dark a night but for the fact that
in passing over the crest of a hill they were for a moment or two dimly
defined against the sky.

"Dragoons--fowr o' them," muttered Quentin.  "We'll step aside here an'
let them gang by."

Clambering up the somewhat rugged side of the road, the two men
concealed themselves among the bushes, intending to wait till the
troopers should pass.

"What can they be doing in this direction, I wonder?" whispered Wallace.

"My freend," answered Quentin, "dinna whisper when ye're hidin'.  Of a'
the sounds for attractin' attention an' revealin' secrets a whisper is
the warst.  Speak low, if ye maun speak, but sometimes it's wiser no to
speak ava'.  Dootless the sodgers'll be giein' Andrew Black a ca', but
he kens brawly hoo to tak' care o' himsel'."

When the horseman approached it was seen that they were driving before
them a boy, or lad, on foot.  Evidently they were compelling him to act
as their guide.

"It's Ramblin' Peter they've gotten haud o', as sure as I'm a leevin'
man," said the shepherd with a low chuckle; "I'd ken him amang a
thoosand by the way he rins."

"Shall we not rescue him?" exclaimed Wallace, starting up.

"Wheesht! keep still, man.  Nae fear o' Peter.  He'll lead them in amang
the bogs o' some peat-moss or ither, gie them the slip there, an' leave
them to find their way oot."

Just as the troop trotted past an incident occurred which disconcerted
the hiders not a little.  A dog which the soldiers had with them scented
them, stopped, and after snuffing about for a few seconds, began to bark
furiously.  The troop halted at once and challenged.

"Tak' nae notice," remarked Quentin in a low voice, which went no
farther than his comrade's ear.

A bright flash and sharp report followed the challenge, and a ball
whistled through the thicket.

"Ay, fire away," soliloquised Quentin.  "Ye seldom hit when ye can see.
It's no' likely ye'll dae muckle better i' the dark."

The dog, however, having discovered the track of the hidden men, rushed
up the bank towards them.  The shepherd picked up a stone, and, waiting
till the animal was near enough, flung it with such a true aim that the
dog went howling back to the road.  On this a volley from the carbines
of the troopers cut up the bushes all around them.

"That'll dae noo.  Come awa', Wull," said the shepherd, rising and
proceeding farther into the thicket by a scarce visible footpath.  "The
horses canna follow us here unless they hae the legs an' airms o'
puggies.  As for the men, they'd have to cut a track to let their big
boots pass.  We may tak' it easy, for they're uncommon slow at loadin'."

In a few minutes the two friends were beyond all danger.  Returning then
to the road about a mile farther on, they continued to journey until
they had left the scene of the great communion far behind them, and when
day dawned they retired to a dense thicket in a hollow by the banks of a
little burn, and there rested till near sunset, when the journey was
resumed.  That night they experienced considerable delay owing to the
intense darkness.  Towards dawn the day following Quentin Dick led his
companion into a wild, thickly-wooded place which seemed formed by
nature as a place of refuge for a hunted creature--whether man or beast.

Entering the mouth of what seemed to be a cavern, he bade his companion
wait.  Presently a sound, as of the cry of some wild bird, was heard.
It was answered by a similar cry in the far distance.  Soon after the
shepherd returned, and, taking his companion by the hand, led him into
the cave which, a few paces from its mouth, was profoundly dark.  Almost
immediately a glimmering light appeared.  A few steps farther, and
Wallace found himself in the midst of an extraordinary scene.

The cavern at its inner extremity was an apartment of considerable size,
and the faint light of a few lanterns showed that the place was clouded
by smoke from a low fire of wood that burned at the upper end.  Here,
standing, seated, and reclining, were assembled all sorts and conditions
of men--some in the prime and vigour of life; some bowed with the weight
of years; others, both young and old, gaunt and haggard from the
influence of disease and suffering, and many giving evidence by their
aspect that their days on earth were numbered.  Some, by the stern
contraction of brow and lip, seemed to suggest that submission was the
last thought that would enter their minds, but not a few of the party
wore that look of patient endurance which is due to the influence of the
Spirit of God--not to mere human strength of mind and will.  All seemed
to be famishing for want of food, while ragged clothes, shaggy beards,
hollow cheeks, and unkempt locks told eloquently of the long years of
bodily and mental suffering which had been endured under ruthless
persecution.

CHAPTER FIVE.

RISKS AND REFUGES.

Immediately on entering the cave in which this party of Covenanters had
found a temporary shelter, Will Wallace learned the reason of the large
supply of provisions which he and his comrade had carried.

"I've brought this for ye frae Andrew Black," said Quentin, taking the
wallet from his shoulder and presenting it to a man in clerical costume
who advanced to welcome him.  "He thought ye might stand in need o'
victuals."

"Ever thoughtful of his friends; I thank him heartily," said the
minister, accepting the wallet--as also that handed to him by Wallace.
"Andrew is a true helper of the persecuted; and I thank the Lord who has
put it into his heart to supply us at a time when our provisions are
well-nigh exhausted.  Our numbers have been unexpectedly increased by
the arrival of some of the unfortunates recently expelled from Lanark."

"From Lanark!" echoed Wallace as he glanced eagerly round on the forlorn
throng.  "Can you tell me, sir, if a Mr. David Spence and a Mrs. Wallace
have arrived from that quarter?"

"I have not heard of them," returned the minister, as he emptied the
wallets and began to distribute their contents to those around
him.--"Ah, here is milk--I'm glad our friend Black thought of that, for
we have a poor dying woman here who can eat nothing solid.  Here,
Webster, take it to her."

With a sudden sinking at the heart Wallace followed the man to whom the
milk had been given.  Might not this dying woman, he thought, be his own
mother?  True, he had just been told that no one with her name had yet
sought refuge there; but, there was a bare possibility and--anxiety does
not reason!  As he crossed to a spot where several persons were bending
over a couch of straw, a tremendous clap of thunder shook the solid
walls of the cavern.  This was immediately followed by a torrent of
rain, the plashing of which outside suggested that all the windows of
heaven had been suddenly opened.  The incident was natural enough in
itself, but the anxious youth took it as a bad omen, and trembled as he
had never before trembled at the disturbances of nature.  One glance,
however, sufficed to relieve his mind.  The dying woman was young.
Delicate of constitution by nature, long exposure to damp air in caves,
and cold beds on the ground, with bad and insufficient food, had sealed
her doom.  Lying there, with hollow cheeks, eyes closed and lips deathly
pale, it seemed as if the spirit had already fled.

"Oh, my ain Lizzie!" cried a poor woman who knelt beside her.

"Wheesht, mither," whispered the dying woman, slowly opening her eyes;
"it is the Lord's doing--shall not the Judge of a' the earth do right?
We'll understand it a' some day--for ever wi' the Lord!"

The last words were audible only to the mother's ear.  Food for the
body, even if it could have availed her, came too late.  Another moment
and she was in the land where hunger and thirst are unknown--where the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.

The mourners were still standing in silence gazing on the dead, when a
loud noise and stamping of feet was heard at the entrance of the cave.
Turning round they saw several drenched and haggard persons enter, among
them a man supporting--almost carrying--a woman whose drooping figure
betokened great exhaustion.

"Thank you, O thank you; I--I'm better now," said the woman, looking up
with a weary yet grateful expression at her protector.

Will Wallace sprang forward as he heard the voice.  "Mother! mother!" he
cried, and, next moment, he had her in his arms.

The excitement coupled with extreme fatigue was almost too much for the
poor woman.  She could not speak, but, with a sigh of contentment,
allowed her head to fall upon the broad bosom of her son.

Accustomed as those hunted people were to scenes of suffering, wild
despair, and sometimes, though not often, to bursts of sudden joy, this
incident drew general attention and sympathy--except, indeed, from the
mother of the dead woman, whose poor heart was for the moment stunned.
Several women--one of whom was evidently a lady of some position--
crowded to Will's assistance, and conveyed Mrs. Wallace to a recess in
the cave which was curtained off.  Here they gave her food, and changed
her soaking garments.  Meanwhile her brother, David Spence--a
grand-looking old man of gentle manners and refined mind--gave his
nephew an account of the manner in which they had been driven from their
