Hornet each offered her an arm, and obliged her to walk between them
while they danced along, shouting, and singing, and winking waggishly to
the friends they passed on the road.  The poor Moth blushed very much at
being seen by all her friends in the company of two such wild creatures.
A Caterpillar and a Long-legged Beetle, besides one or two other
insects that chanced to be near, laughed very heartily on seeing what
had happened.  But the Moth soon recovered her spirits; and when they
arrived at the oak-tree, she was walking along with a sprightly step,
first talking to the Hornet and then chatting to the Wasp, as if they
were her dearest friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Then the sly little Dormouse peeped out of his hole,
  and led to the feast his blind cousin the Mole;
  And the Snail, with her horns peeping out from her shell,
  Came fatigued with the distance, the length of an ell.

"Come along, you lazy fellow," cried the little Dormouse, knocking with
his ivory-headed cane at the door of a mole-hill.

"Ay, ay, cousin," shouted the Mole, "I'll be there in a minute."

So the Dormouse stood impatiently tapping his boots till the Mole should
be ready.  The Dormouse was dressed in the height of fashion, and
thought himself a rather handsome fellow.  Some people said that he was
conceited, and indeed a Spider that was near at hand plainly told him
so; but, whether this was true or not, there is no doubt that he was a
very kind little fellow, because he came to lead his poor blind cousin
to the feast.

"What a time you have been, old boy," he said, as the Mole appeared,
dusting the earth off his coat and white hat.

The Mole answered that he had been very busy all morning making a new
tunnel between his bed-room and drawing-room.  He then took his friend's
arm, and away they went over the green meadows, where the cowslips and
buttercups grew, making the grass look as if it were dotted all over
with gold.  Sometimes the two friends stopped by the way to rest under a
buttercup, and sip a little morning dew; but seeing every one hastening
past them, while they wasted their time, the Dormouse jumped up again,
and cast a sly look at his blind friend as he asked him what he thought
of the fine view.

"Don't make jokes about my being blind," said the Mole, pretending to be
angry.

Just at that moment they both ran into a Spider's web.

"Oh! how stupid of me," cried the Dormouse; "I wasn't looking before me
at the time."

"You might as well be without eyes, if you don't use them," said the
Mole, as they cleared away the threads of the net, and, making a low bow
to the Spider, went on their way.

Now, all this time the Snail had been slowly creeping over the stones
and winding round the blades of grass and flowers that strewed her path
to the place of meeting.  But she was so long of getting there that the
guests began to be impatient, and said that perhaps she was not coming
at all.  She lived under the next tree, and had only about four feet to
walk, but she was so very slow that she took a long, long time to it;
and at last the Grasshopper whispered to the Butterfly that she should
go and meet her.  Away went the Butterfly on her gaudy wings, and,
alighting by the Snail's side, began to urge her to make haste.  During
the Butterfly's absence, the Wasp, who was always making spiteful
remarks, said that it was shameful in the Snail to keep them waiting;
but the Humble-bee, who was walking up and down conversing with a Midge,
turned round and said, "Remember, you Wasp, that you have not brought
your sting with you to-day, so pray do not give way to your spiteful
nature.  The poor Snail has to carry her house on her back, so we should
not be angry at her slowness."  Some of the other insects said that this
was no excuse for the Snail, because she knew that she walked very
slowly, and should therefore have set out sooner.

"Come, come," cried a young Frog, jumping forward, "no fighting to-day,
ladies and gentlemen.  We have come here to be happy; and here comes the
Snail at last."

As he spoke, the Butterfly flew towards them, and the Snail crawled in,
took off her bonnet, put on her spectacles, and sat down; while the
waiters bustled about, placed stools for the guests, and brought in the
repast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  A Mushroom the table, and on it was spread
  A Water-dock leaf, which their table-cloth made;
  The viands were various, to each of their taste,
  And the Bee brought the honey to sweeten the feast.

It was, perhaps, the strangest dinner-party that ever was seen.  There
were such a multitude of odd creatures, of all shapes and sizes and
colours; some of whom were by nature bitter enemies, and would have
fought and killed each other had they met in the woods while taking a
walk, but were quite civil and polite to one another, now that they met
as guests in Mrs Butterfly's bower.  Indeed, many of them wished that
they could be such good friends at all times as they were then.

All the party had now arrived, and there was a great deal of talking,
