the baggage room.

"Three boxes and a black bag came on here a month ago, you say, and lay
here certainly four or five days--perhaps a good deal longer. Of course
I remember them. Stood up in that corner there. They had been checked
right through. I will look at the books and see what day they went. I
don't remember what sort of men fetched them away. Maybe I was busy at
the time, and my mate gave them out. However, I will look first and see
when they went. What day do you say they got here?"

"They came by the train that left Richmond at six o'clock on the morning
of the 20th."

"Then they got in late that night or early next morning. Ah, the train
was on time that day, and got in at half-past nine at night. Here they
are--three boxes and a bag, numbered 15,020, went out on the 28th. Yes,
that's right enough. Now I will just ask my mate if he remembers about
their going out."

The other man was called. Oh, yes! he remembered quite well the three
boxes standing in the corner. They went out some time in the afternoon.
It was just after the train came in from Richmond. He noticed the man
that asked for them. He got him to help carry out the boxes and put them
into a cart. Yes, he remembered there was another man with him, and a
negress with a child. He wondered at the time what they were up to, but
supposed it was all right. Yes, he didn't mind trying to find out who
had hired out a cart for the job. Dare say he could find out by
to-morrow--at any rate he would try. Five dollars was worth earning,
anyway.

Having put the matter in train, Vincent, leaving Dan at Florence, went
down at once to Charleston. Here, after twenty-four hours' delay, he
obtained a warrant for the arrest of Jonas Pearson and others on the
charge of kidnaping, and then returned to Florence. He found that the
railway man had failed in obtaining any information as to the cart, and
concluded it must have come in from the country on purpose to meet the
train.

"At any rate," Vincent said, "it must be within a pretty limited range
of country. The railway makes a bend from Wilmington to this place and
then down to Charleston, so this is really the nearest station to only a
small extent of country."

"That's so," the railway man said. He had heard from Dan a good deal
about the case, and had got thoroughly interested in it. "Either Marion
or Kingstree would be nearer, one way or the other, to most of the
swamp country. So it can't be as far as Conwayborough on the north, or
Georgetown on the south, and it must lie somewhere between Jeffries'
Creek and Lynch's Creek; anyhow it would be in Marion County--that's
pretty nigh sure. So, if I were you, I would take rail back to Marion
Courthouse, and see the sheriff there and have a talk over the matter
with him. You haven't got much to go upon, because this man you are
after has been away from here a good many years and won't be known;
besides, likely enough he went by some other name down here. Anyhow, the
sheriff can put you up to the roads and the best way of going about the
job."

"I think that would be the best way," Vincent said. "We shall be able to
see the county map, too, and to learn all the geography of the place."

"You have got your six-shooters with you, I suppose, because you are
likely as not to have to use them?"

"Yes, we have each got a Colt; and as I have had a good deal of
practice, it would be awkward for Pearson if he gives me occasion to use
it."

"After what I hear of the matter," the man said, "I should say your best
plan is just to shoot him at sight. It's what would serve him right. You
bet there will be no fuss over it. It will save you a lot of trouble
anyway."

Vincent laughed.

"My advice is good," the man went on earnestly. "They are a rough lot
down there, and hang together. You will have to do it sudden, whatever
you do, or you will get the hull neighborhood up agin you."

On reaching Marion Courthouse they sought out the sheriff, produced the
warrant signed by the State authority, and explained the whole
circumstances.

"I am ready to aid you in any way I can," the sheriff said when he
concluded; "but the question is, where has the fellow got to? You see he
may be anywhere in this tract," and he pointed out a circle on the map
of the county that hung against the wall. "That is about fifty mile
across, and a pretty nasty spot, I can tell you. There are wide swamps
on both sides of the creek, and rice grounds and all sorts. There aint
above three or four villages altogether, but there may be two or three
hundred little plantations scattered about, some big and some little. We
haven't got anything to guide us in the slightest; not a thing, as I can
see."

"The man who was working under Pearson, when he was with us, told me he
had got the notion that he had had to leave on account of some trouble
here. Possibly that might afford a clew."

"It might do so," the sheriff said. "When did he come to you?"

"I think it was when I was six or seven years old. That would be about
twelve or thirteen years ago; but, of course, he may not have come
direct to us after leaving here."

"We can look, anyway," the sheriff said, and, opening a chest, he took
out a number of volumes containing the records of his predecessors.
"Twelve years ago! Well, this is the volume. Now, Captain Wingfield, I
have got some other business in hand that will take me a couple of
hours. I will leave you out this volume and the one before it and the
one after it, and if you like to go through them you may come across the
description of some man that agrees with that of the man you are in
search of."

It took Vincent two hours and a half to go through the volume, but he
met with no description answering to that of Pearson.

"I will go through the first six months of the next year," he said to
himself, taking up that volume, "and the last six months of the year
before."

The second volume yielded no better result, and he then turned back to
the first of the three books. Beginning in July, he read steadily on
until he came to December. Scarcely had he begun the record of that
month when he uttered an exclamation of satisfaction.

"December the 2d.--Information laid against a gang at Porter's station,
near Lynch's Creek. Charged with several robberies and murders in
different parts of the country. Long been suspected of having stills in
the swamps. Gang consists of four besides Porter himself. Names of gang,
Jack Haverley, Jim Corben, and John and James Porter. Ordered out posse
to start to-morrow."

"December 5th.--Returned from Porter's Station. Surprised the gang. They
resisted. Haverley, Corben, and Jas. Porter shot. John Porter escaped,
and took to the swamp. Four of posse wounded; one, William Hannay,
killed. Circulated description of John Porter through the country. Tall
and lean; when fifteen years old shot a man in a brawl, and went North.
Has been absent thirteen years. Assumed the appearance of a Northern man
and speaks with the Yankee twang. Father was absent at the time of
attack. Captured three hours after. Declares he knows nothing about
doings of the gang. Haverley and Corben were friends of his sons. Came
and went when they liked. Will be tried on the 15th."

On the 16th there was another entry:

"William Porter sentenced to three years' imprisonment for giving
shelter to a gang of robbers. Evidence wanting to show he took any
actual part in their crimes."

The sheriff had been in and out several times during the five hours that
Vincent's search had taken up. When he returned again Vincent pointed
out the entry he had found.

"I should not be at all surprised if that's our man," the sheriff said.
"I know old Porter well, for he is still alive and bears a pretty bad
reputation still, though we have never been able to bring him to book. I
remember all the circumstances of that affair, for I served upon the
posse. While Porter was in prison his house was kept for him by a
married daughter and her husband. There was a strong suspicion that the
man was one of the gang too, but we couldn't prove it. They have lived
there ever since. They have got five or six field hands, and are said to
be well off. We have no doubt they have got a still somewhere in the
swamps, but we have never been able to find it. I will send a man off
to-morrow to make inquiries whether any stranger has arrived there
lately. Of course, Pearson will not have kept that name, and he will not
have appeared as John Porter, for he would be arrested on a fresh
warrant at once for his share in that former business. I think, Captain
Wingfield, you had better register at the hotel here under some other
name. I don't suppose that he has any fear of being tracked here; still
it is just possible his father may have got somebody here and at
Florence to keep their eyes open and let him know if there are any
inquiries being made by strangers about a missing negress. One cannot be
too careful. If he got the least hint, his son and the woman would be
hidden away in the swamps before we could get there, and there would be
no saying when we could find him."

Vincent took the sheriff's advice, and entered his name in the hotel
books as Mr. Vincent. Late in the evening the sheriff came round to him.

"I have just sent summonses to six men. I would rather have had two or
three more, but young men are very scarce around here now; and as with
you and myself that brings it up to eight that ought to be sufficient,
as these fellows will have no time to summon any of their friends to
their assistance. Have you a rifle, Captain Wingfield?"

"No; I have a brace of revolvers."

"They are useful enough for close work," the sheriff said, "but if they
see us coming, and barricade their house and open fire upon us, you will
want something that carries further than a revolver. I can lend you a
rifle as well as a horse, if you will accept them."

Vincent accepted the offer with thanks. The next morning at daylight he
went round to the sheriff's house, where six determined-looking men,
belonging to the town or neighboring farms, were assembled. Slinging the
rifle that the sheriff handed him across his back, Vincent at once
mounted, and the party set off at a brisk trot.

"My man came back half an hour ago," the sheriff said to Vincent as they
rode along. "He found out that a man answering to your description
arrived with another at Porter's about a fortnight ago, and is staying
there still. Whether they brought a negress with them or not no one
seems to have noticed. However, there is not a shadow of doubt that it
is our man, and I shall be heartily glad to lay hold of him; for a
brother of mine was badly wounded in that last affair, and though he
lived some years afterward he was never the same man again. So I have a
personal interest in it, you see."

"How far is it to Porter's?"

"About thirty-five miles. We shall get there about two o'clock, I
reckon. We are all pretty well mounted and can keep at this pace, with a
break or two, till we get there. I propose that we dismount when we get
within half a mile of the place. We will try and get hold of someone who
knows the country well, and get him to lead three of us round through
the edge of the swamp to the back of the house. It stands within fifty
yards of the swamp. I have no doubt they put it there so that they might
escape if pressed, and also to prevent their being observed going
backward and forward to that still of theirs."

This plan was followed out. A negro lad was found who, on the promise of
a couple of dollars, agreed to act as guide. Three of the party were
then told off to follow him, and the rest, after waiting for half an
hour to allow them to make the detour, mounted their horses and rode
down at a gallop to the house. When they were within a short distance of
it they heard a shout, and a man who was lounging near the door ran
inside. Almost instantly they saw the shutters swing back across the
windows, and when they drew up, fifty yards from the door, the barrels
of four rifles were pushed out through slits in the shutters.

The sheriff held up his hand. "William Porter, I want a word with you."

A shutter in an upper room opened, and an elderly man appeared with a
rifle in his hand.

"William Porter," the sheriff said, "I have a warrant for the arrest of
two men now in your house on the charge of kidnaping a female slave, the
property of Captain Wingfield here. I have no proof that you had any
share in the matter, or that you were aware that the slave was not
honestly obtained. In the second place, I have a warrant for the arrest
of your son John Porter, now in your house and passing, recently, under
the name of Jonas Pearson, on the charge of resisting and killing the
officers of the law on the 5th of December, 1851. I counsel you to hand
over these men to me without resistance. You know what happened when
your sons defied the law before, and what will happen now if you refuse
compliance."

"Yah!" the old man shouted. "Do you suppose we are going to give in to
five men? Not if we know it. Now, I warn you, move yourself off while I
let you; else you will get a bullet in you before I count three."

"Very well, then. You must take the consequences," the sheriff replied,
and at once called the party to fall back.

"We must dismount," he said in answer to Vincent's look of surprise.
"They would riddle us here on horseback in the open. Besides, we must
dismount to break in the door."

They rode back a quarter of a mile, and then dismounted. The sheriff
took two heavy axes that hung from his saddle, and handed them to two of
the men.

"I reckon we shall have trouble," he said. "However, I hope we shan't
have to use these. My idea is to crawl up through the cornfield until we
are within shooting distance, and then to open fire at the loopholes.
They have never taken the trouble to grub up the stumps, and each man
must look out for shelter. I want to make it so hot for them that they
will try to bolt to the swamp, and in that case they will be covered by
the men there. I told them not to fire until they got quite close; so
they ought to dispose of three of them, and as they have got pistols
they will be able to master the others; besides, when we hear firing
behind, we shall jump up and make a rush round. Do you, sir, and James
Wilkins here, stop in front. Two of them might make a rush out behind,
and the others, when they have drawn us off, bolt in front."

Several shots were fired at the party as they made their way across to
the end of the field, where the tall stalks of maize were still
standing, though the corn had been gathered weeks before. As soon as
they reached the shelter they separated, each crawling through the maize
until they arrived within fifty yards of the house. There were, as the
sheriff had said, many stumps still standing, and each ensconced himself
behind one of these, and began to reply to the fire that the defenders
kept up whenever they saw a movement among the cornstalks.

At such a distance the shutters were but of slight advantage to the
defenders of the house; for the assailants were all good shots, and the
loopholes afforded excellent targets at such a distance. After a few
shots had been fired from the house the fire of the defenders ceased,
the men within not daring to protrude the rifles through the loopholes,
as every such appearance was instantly followed by a couple of shots
from the corn patch.

"Give me one of those axes," the sheriff said. "Now, Withers, do you
make a rush with me to the door. Get your rifle loaded before you start,
and have your revolver handy in your belt. Now, Captain Wingfield, do
you and the other two keep a sharp lookout at the loopholes, and see
that they don't get a shot at us as we run. Now, Withers!" and the
sheriff ran forward. Two rifles were protruded through the loopholes.
Vincent and his companions fired at once. One of the rifles gave a
sharp jerk and disappeared, the other was fired, and Withers dropped his
ax, but still ran forward. The sheriff began an onslaught at the door,
his companion's right arm being useless. A minute later the sharp crack
of rifles was heard in the rear, and the sheriff and two men rushed in
that direction, while Vincent and the other lay watching the door.
Scarcely had the sheriff's party disappeared round the house when the
door was thrown open, and Pearson ran out at full speed. Vincent leaped
to his feet.

"Surrender," he said, "or you are a dead man!"

Jonas paused for a moment with a loud imprecation, and then, leveling a
revolver, fired. Vincent felt a moment's pain in the cheek, but before
he could level his rifle his companion fired, and Pearson fell forward
dead. A minute later the sheriff and his party ran round.

"Have you got him?" he asked.

"He will give no more trouble, sheriff," the young man who fired said.
"I fancy I had him plum between the eyes. How about the others?"

"Dick Matheson is killed; he got two bullets in his body. The other man
is badly wounded. There are no signs of old Porter."

They now advanced to the door, which stood open. As the sheriff entered
there was a sharp report, and he fell back, shot through the heart. The
rest made a rush forward. Another shot was fired, but this missed them,
and before it could be repeated they had wrested the pistol from the
hand of Matheson's wife. She was firmly secured, and they then entered
the kitchen, where, crouched upon the floor, lay seven or eight negro
men and women in an agony of terror. Vincent's question, "Dinah, where
are you?" was answered by a scream of delight; and Dinah, who had been
covering her child with her body, leaped to her feet.

"It's all right, Dinah," Vincent said; "but stay here, we haven't
finished this business yet."

"I fancy the old man's upstairs," one of the men said. "It was his
rifle, I reckon, that disappeared when we fired."

It was as he expected. Porter was found dead behind the loophole, a
bullet having passed through his brain. The deputy sheriff, who was with
the party, now took the command. A cart and horse were found in an
out-building; in these the wounded man, who was one of those who had
taken part in the abduction of Dinah, was placed, together with the
female prisoner and the dead body of the sheriff. The negroes were told
to follow; and the horses having been fetched, the party mounted and
rode off to the next village, five miles on their way back. Here they
halted for the night, and the next day they went on to Marion
Courthouse, Vincent hiring a cart for the conveyance of Dinah and the
other women. It was settled that Vincent's attendance at the trial of
the two prisoners would not be necessary, as the man would be tried for
armed resistance to the law, and the woman for murdering the sheriff.
The facts could be proved by other witnesses, and as there could be no
doubt about obtaining convictions, it would be unnecessary to try the
charge against the man for kidnaping. Next day, accordingly, Vincent
started with Dinah and Dan for Richmond. Two months afterward he saw in
the paper that Jane Matheson had been sentenced to imprisonment for
life, the man to fourteen years.




CHAPTER XVII.

CHANCELLORSVILLE.


The news of the fight between the sheriff's posse and the band at
Lynch's Creek was telegraphed to the Richmond papers by their local
agent upon the day after it occurred. The report said that Captain
Wingfield, a young officer who had frequently distinguished himself, had
followed the traces of a gang one of whom was a notorious criminal who
had evaded the pursuit of the law and escaped from that section fifteen
years ago, and had, under an assumed name, been acting as overseer at
Mrs. Wingfield's estate of the Orangery. These men had carried off a
negress belonging to Mrs. Wingfield, and had taken her South. Captain
Wingfield, having obtained the assistance of the sheriff with a posse of
determined men, rode to the place which served as headquarters of the
gang. Upon being summoned to surrender, the men opened fire upon the
sheriff and his posse. A sharp fight ensued, in which the sheriff was
killed and one of his men wounded; while the four members of the gang
were either killed or taken prisoners. It was reported that a person
occupying a position as a planter in the neighborhood of Richmond is
connected with this gang.

The reporter had obtained his news from Vincent, who had purposely
refrained from mentioning the names of those who had fallen. He had
already had a conversation with the wounded prisoner. The latter had
declared that he had simply acted in the affair as he had been paid to
do by the man he knew in Richmond as Pearson, who told him that he
wanted him to aid in carrying off a slave woman, who was really his
property, but had been fraudulently taken from him. He had heard him say
that there was another interested in the affair, who had his own reasons
for getting the woman out of the way, and had paid handsomely for the
job. Who that other was Pearson had never mentioned.

Vincent saw that he had no absolute evidence against Jackson, and
therefore purposely suppressed the fact that Pearson was among the
killed in hopes that the paragraph would so alarm Jackson that he would
at once decamp. His anticipations were entirely justified; for upon the
day of his return to Richmond he saw a notice in the paper that the
Cedars, with its field hands, houses, and all belonging to it, was for
sale. He proceeded at once to the estate agent, and learned from him
that Jackson had come in two days before and had informed him that
sudden and important business had called him away, and that he was
starting at once for New York, where his presence was urgently required,
and that he should attempt to get through the lines immediately. He had
asked him what he thought the property and slaves would fetch. Being
acquainted with the estate, he had given him a rough estimate, and had,
upon Jackson's giving him full powers to sell, advanced him two-thirds
of the sum. Jackson had apparently started at once; indeed, he had told
him that he should take the next train as far North as he could get.

Vincent received the news with great satisfaction. He had little doubt
that Jackson had really made down to the South, and that he would try to
cross the lines there, his statement that he intended to go direct North
being merely intended to throw his pursuers off his track should a
warrant be issued against him. However, it mattered little which way
Jackson had gone, so that he had left the State. There was little chance
of his ever returning; for even when he learned that his confederate in
the business had been killed in the fight, he could not be certain that
the prisoner who had been taken was not aware of the share he had in the
business.

A fortnight later Vincent went down into Georgia and brought back Lucy
Kingston for a visit to his mother. She had already received a letter
from her father in reply to one she had written after reaching her
aunts' protection, saying how delighted he was to hear that she had
crossed the lines, for that he had suffered the greatest anxiety
concerning her and had continually reproached himself for not sending
her away sooner. He said he was much pleased with her engagement to
Captain Wingfield, whom he did not know personally, but of whom he heard
the most favorable reports from various Virginia gentlemen to whom he
had spoken since the receipt of her letter.
