Armageddon


Marching down to Armageddon--
  Brothers, stout and strong!
Let us cheer the way we tread on,
  With a soldier's song!
Faint we by the weary road,
  Or fall we in the rout,
Dirge or Paean, Death or Triumph!--
  Let the song ring out!

We are they who scorn the scorners--
  Love the lovers--hate
None within the world's four corners--
  All must share one fate;
We are they whose common banner
  Bears no badge nor sign,
Save the Light which dyes it white--
The Hope that makes it shine.

We are they whose bugle rings,
  That all the wars may cease;
We are they will pay the Kings
  Their cruel price for Peace;
We are they whose steadfast watchword
  Is what Christ did teach--
"Each man for his Brother first--
  And Heaven, then, for each."

We are they who will not falter--
  Many swords or few--
Till we make this Earth the altar
  Of a worship new;
We are they who will not take
  From palace, priest or code,
A meaner Law than "Brotherhood"--
  A lower Lord than God.

Marching down to Armageddon--
  Brothers, stout and strong!
Ask not why the way we tread on
  Is so rough and long!
God will tell us when our spirits
  Grow to grasp His plan!
Let us do our part to-day--
  And help Him, helping Man!

Shall we even curse the madness
  Which for "ends of State"
Dooms us to the long, long sadness
  Of this human hate?
Let us slay in perfect pity
  Those that must not live;
Vanquish, and forgive our foes--
  Or fall--and still forgive!

We are those whose unpaid legions,
  In free ranks arrayed,
Massacred in many regions--
  Never once were stayed:
We are they whose torn battalions,
  Trained to bleed, not fly,
Make our agonies a triumph,--
  Conquer, while we die!

Therefore, down to Armageddon--
  Brothers, bold and strong;
Cheer the glorious way we tread on,
  With this soldier song!
Let the armies of the old Flags
  March in silent dread!
Death and Life are one to us,
  Who fight for Quick and Dead!

    _Edwin Arnold._




Picciola


It was a sergeant old and gray,
  Well singed and bronzed from siege and pillage.
Went tramping in an army's wake
  Along the turnpike of the village.

For days and nights the winding host
  Had through the little place been marching,
And ever loud the rustics cheered,
  Till every throat was hoarse and parching.

The squire and farmer, maid and dame,
  All took the sight's electric stirring,
And hats were waved and staves were sung,
  And kerchiefs white were countless whirring.

They only saw a gallant show
  Of heroes stalwart under banners,
And, in the fierce heroic glow,
  'Twas theirs to yield but wild hosannas.

The sergeant heard the shrill hurrahs,
  Where he behind in step was keeping;
But, glancing down beside the road,
  He saw a little maid sit weeping.

"And how is this?" he gruffly said,
  A moment pausing to regard her;--
"Why weepest thou, my little chit?"
  And then she only cried the harder.

"And how is this, my little chit?"
  The sturdy trooper straight repeated,
"When all the village cheers us on,
  That you, in tears, apart are seated?

"We march two hundred thousand strong,
  And that's a sight, my baby beauty,
To quicken silence into song
  And glorify the soldier's duty."

"It's very, very grand, I know,"
  The little maid gave soft replying;
"And father, mother, brother too,
  All say 'Hurrah' while I am crying;

"But think, oh, Mr. Soldier, think,
  How many little sisters' brothers
Are going all away to fight,
  And may be killed, as well as others!"

"Why, bless thee, child," the sergeant said,
  His brawny hand her curls caressing,
"'Tis left for little ones like thee
  To find that war's not all a blessing."

And "Bless thee!" once again he cried,
  Then cleared his throat and looked indignant
And marched away with wrinkled brow
  To stop the struggling tear benignant.

And still the ringing shouts went up
  From doorway, thatch, and fields of tillage;
The pall behind the standard seen
  By one alone of all the village.

The oak and cedar bend and writhe
  When roars the wind through gap and braken;
But 'tis the tenderest reed of all
  That trembles first when Earth is shaken.

    _Robert Henry Newell._




The King's Ring


Once in Persia reigned a king
Who upon his signet ring
Graved a maxim true and wise
Which, if held before his eyes,
Gave him counsel at a glance
Fit for every change and chance.
Solemn words; and these are they:
"Even this shall pass away."

Trains of camels through the sand
Brought him gems from Samarcand,
Fleets of galleys through the seas
Brought him pearls to match with these;
But he counted not his gain--
Treasurer of the mine and main,
"What is wealth?" the king would say;
"Even this shall pass away."

In the revels of his court
At the zenith of the sport,
When the palms of all his guests
Burned with clapping at his jests,
He, amid his figs and wine,
Cried: "O loving friends of mine!
Pleasures come, but not to stay,
Even this shall pass away."

Fighting on a furious field
Once a javelin pierced his shield;
Soldiers with loud lament
Bore him bleeding to his tent,
Groaning with his tortured side.
"Pain is hard to bear," he cried;
"But with patience day by day,
Even this shall pass away."

Struck with palsy, sere and old,
Waiting at the gates of gold,
Spake he with his dying breath:
"Life is done, but what is death?"
Then, in answer to the king,
Fell a sunbeam on his ring,
Showing by a heavenly ray:
"Even this shall pass away."

    _Theodore Tilton._




Leaving the Homestead


You're going to leave the homestead, John,
  You're twenty-one to-day:
And very sorry am I, John,
  To see you go away.
You've labored late and early, John,
  And done the best you could;
I ain't going to stop you, John,
  I wouldn't if I could.

Yet something of your feelings, John,
  I s'pose I'd ought to know,
Though many a day has passed away--
  'Twas forty years ago--
When hope was high within me, John,
  And life lay all before,
That I, with strong and measured stroke,
  "Cut loose" and pulled from shore.

The years they come and go, my boy,
  The years they come and go;
And raven locks and tresses brown
  Grow white as driven snow.
My life has known its sorrows, John,
  Its trials and troubles sore;
Yet God withal has blessed me, John,
  "In basket and in store."

But one thing let me tell you, John,
  Before you make a start,
There's more in being honest, John,
  Twice o'er than being smart.
Though rogues may seem to flourish, John,
  And sterling worth to fail,
Oh! keep in view the good and true;
  'Twill in the end prevail.

Don't think too much of money, John,
  And dig and delve and plan,
And rake and scrape in every shape,
  To hoard up all you can.
Though fools may count their riches, John,
  In dollars and in cents,
The best of wealth is youth and health,
  And good sound common sense.

And don't be mean and stingy, John,
  But lay a little by
Of what you earn; you soon will learn
  How fast 'twill multiply.
So when old age comes creeping on,
  You'll have a goodly store
Of wealth to furnish all your needs--
  And maybe something more.

There's shorter cuts to fortune, John,
  We see them every day;
But those who save their self-respect
  Climb up the good old way.
"All is not gold that glitters," John,
  And makes the vulgar stare,
And those we deem the richest, John,
  Have oft the least to spare.

Don't meddle with your neighbors, John,
  Their sorrows or their cares;
You'll find enough to do, my boy,
  To mind your own affairs.
The world is full of idle tongues--
  You can afford to shirk!
There's lots of people ready, John,
  To do such dirty work.

And if amid the race for fame
  You win a shining prize,
The humbler work of honest men
  You never should despise;
For each one has his mission, John,
  In life's unchanging plan--
Though lowly be his station, John,
  He is no less a man.

Be good, be pure, be noble, John;
  Be honest, brave, be true;
And do to others as you would
  That they should do to you;
And put your trust in God, my boy,
  Though fiery darts be hurled;
Then you can smile at Satan's rage,
  And face a frowning world.

Good-by! May Heaven guard and bless
  Your footsteps day by day;
The old house will be lonesome, John,
  When you are gone away.
The cricket's song upon the hearth
  Will have a sadder tone;
The old familiar spots will be
  So lonely when you're gone.




Bernardo Del Carpio

King Alphonso of Asturias had imprisoned the Count Saldana, about the
time of the birth of the Count's son Bernardo. In an effort to secure
his father's release, Bernardo, when old enough, took up arms. Finally
the King offered Bernardo possession of his father's person, in exchange
for the Castle of Carpio and all the King's subjects there imprisoned.
The cruel trick played by the King on Bernardo is here described.


The warrior bowed his crested head, and tamed his heart of fire,
And sued the haughty king to free his long-imprisoned sire;
"I bring thee here my fortress-keys, I bring my captive train,
I pledge thee faith, my liege, my lord!--oh break my father's chain!"
"Rise, rise! even now thy father comes, a ransomed man this day;
Mount thy good horse; and thou and I will meet him on his way."

Then lightly rose that loyal son, and bounded on his steed,
And urged, as if with lance in rest, the charger's foamy speed.
And lo! from far, as on they pressed, there came a glittering band,
With one that midst them stately rode, as leader in the land:
"Now haste, Bernardo, haste! for there, in very truth, is he,
The father whom thy faithful heart hath yearned so long to see."

His dark eye flashed, his proud breast heaved, his cheek's hue came and
      went;
He reached that gray-haired chieftain's side, and there, dismounting, bent;
A lowly knee to earth he bent, his father's hand he took--
What was there in its touch that all his fiery spirit shook?
That hand was cold,--a frozen thing,--it dropped from his like lead!
He looked up to the face above,--the face was of the dead!
A plume waved o'er the noble brow,--the brow was fixed and white,
He met, at last, his father's eyes, but in them was no sight!

Up from the ground he sprang and gazed, but who could paint that gaze?
They hushed their very hearts that saw its horror and amaze.
They might have chained him, as before that stony form he stood,
For the power was stricken from his arm, and from his lip the blood.
"Father!" at length he murmured low, and wept like childhood then;
Talk not of grief till thou hast seen the tears of warlike men!

He thought on all his glorious hopes, and all his young renown;
He flung the falchion from his side, and in the dust sat down.
Then covering with his steel-gloved hands his darkly mournful brow:
"No more, there is no more," he said, "to lift the sword for now;
My king is false, my hope betrayed, my father--oh, the worth,
The glory, and the loveliness, are passed away from earth!
I thought to stand where banners waved, my sire, beside thee, yet!
I would that there our kindred blood on Spain's free soil had met!
Thou wouldst have known my spirit then;--for thee my fields were won;
And thou hast perished in thy chains, as though thou hadst no son!"

Then, starting from the ground once more, he seized the monarch's rein,
Amidst the pale and 'wildered looks of all the courtier train;
And, with a fierce, o'ermastering grasp, the rearing war-horse led,
And sternly set them face to face, the king before the dead:
"Came I not forth, upon thy pledge, my father's hand to kiss?
Be still, and gaze thou on, false king! and tell me what is this?
The voice, the glance, the heart I sought--give answer, where are they?
If thou wouldst clear thy perjured soul, send life through this cold clay!
Into these glassy eyes put light; be still! keep down thine ire;
Bid these white lips a blessing speak, this earth is not my sire.
Give me back him for whom I strove, for whom my blood was shed!
Thou canst not?--and a king!--his dust be mountains on thy head."

He loosed the steed--his slack hand fell; upon the silent face
He cast one long, deep, troubled look, then turned from that sad place.
His hope was crushed, his after fate untold in martial strain;
His banner led the spears no more, amidst the hills of Spain.

    _Felicia Hemans._




Mizpah


Go thou thy way, and I go mine,
  Apart--but not afar.
Only a thin veil hangs between
  The pathways where we are,
And God keep watch 'tween thee and me
  This is my prayer.
He looks thy way--He looketh mine
  And keeps us near.

I know not where thy road may lie
  Nor which way mine will be,
If thine will lead through parching sands
  And mine beside the sea.
Yet God keeps watch 'tween thee and me,
  So never fear.
He holds thy hand--He claspeth mine
  And keeps us near.

Should wealth and fame perchance be thine
  And my lot lowly be,
Or you be sad and sorrowful
  And glory be for me,
Yet God keep watch 'tween thee and me,
  Both are his care.
One arm round me and one round thee
  Will keep us near.

I sigh sometimes to see thy face
  But since this may not be
I leave thee to the love of Him
  Who cares for thee and me.
"I'll keep ye both beneath My wings,"
  This comforts--dear.
One wing o'er thee--and one o'er me,
  So we are near.

And though our paths be separate
  And thy way be not mine--
Yet coming to the mercy seat
  My soul shall meet with thine.
And "God keep watch 'tween thee and me"
  I'll whisper there.
He blesses me--He blesses thee
  And we are near.




God


O Thou eternal One! whose presence bright
All space doth occupy, all motion guide--
Unchanged through time's all-devastating flight!
Thou only God--there is no God beside!
Being above all beings! Mighty One,
Whom none can comprehend and none explore,
Who fill'st existence with Thyself alone--
Embracing all, supporting, ruling o'er,--
Being whom we call God, and know no more!

In its sublime research, philosophy
May measure out the ocean-deep--may count
The sands or the sun's rays--but, God! for Thee
There is no weight nor measure; none can mount
Up to thy mysteries:* Reason's brightest spark,
Though kindled by Thy light, in vain would try
To trace Thy counsels, infinite and dark:
And thought is lost ere thought can soar so high,
Even like past moments in eternity.

Thou from primeval nothingness didst call
First chaos, then existence--Lord! in Thee
Eternity had its foundation; all
Sprung forth from Thee--of light, joy, harmony,
Sole Origin--all life, all beauty Thine;
Thy word created all, and doth create;
Thy splendor fills all space with rays divine;
Thou art and wert and shalt be! Glorious! Great!
Light-giving, life-sustaining Potentate!

Thy chains the unmeasured universe surround--
Upheld by Thee, by Thee inspired with breath!
Thou the beginning with the end hast bound,
And beautifully mingled life and death!
As sparks mount upward from the fiery blaze,
So suns are born, so worlds spring forth from Thee;
And as the spangles in the sunny rays
Shine round the silver snow, the pageantry
Of heaven's bright army glitters in Thy praise.

A million torches, lighted by Thy hand,
Wander unwearied through the blue abyss--
They own Thy power, accomplish Thy command,
All gay with life, all eloquent with bliss.
What shall we call them? Piles of crystal light--
A glorious company of golden streams--
Lamps of celestial ether burning bright--
Suns lighting systems with their joyous beams?
But Thou to these art as the noon to night.

Yes! as a drop of water in the sea,
All this magnificence in Thee is lost:--
What are ten thousand worlds compared to Thee?
And what am I then?--Heaven's unnumbered host,
Though multiplied by myriads, and arrayed
In all the glory of sublimest thought,
Is but an atom in the balance, weighed
Against Thy greatness--is a cipher brought
Against infinity! What am I then? Naught!

Naught! But the effluence of Thy light divine,
Pervading worlds, hath reached my bosom too;
Yes! in my spirit doth Thy spirit shine
As shines the sunbeam in a drop of dew.
Naught! but I live, and on hope's pinions fly
Eager toward Thy presence; for in Thee
I live, and breathe, and dwell; aspiring high,
Even to the throne of Thy divinity.
I am, O God! and surely Thou must be!

Thou art!--directing, guiding all--Thou art!
Direct my understanding then to Thee;
Control my spirit, guide my wandering heart;
Though but an atom midst immensity,
Still I am something, fashioned by Thy hand!
I hold a middle rank 'twixt heaven and earth--
On the last verge of mortal being stand.
Close to the realm where angels have their birth,
Just on the boundaries of the spirit-land!

The chain of being is complete in me--
In me is matter's last gradation lost,
And the next step is spirit--Deity!
I can command the lightning, and am dust!
A monarch and a slave--a worm, a god!
Whence came I here, and how? so marvelously
Constructed and conceived? unknown! this clod
Lives surely through some higher energy;
For from itself alone it could not be!

Creator, yes! Thy wisdom and Thy word
Created me! Thou source of life and good!
Thou spirit of my spirit, and my Lord!
Thy light, Thy love, in their bright plenitude
Filled me with an immortal soul, to spring
Over the abyss of death; and bade it wear
The garments of eternal day, and wing
Its heavenly flight beyond this little sphere,
