



CHAPTER IV.--_How Prince Prigio was deserted by Everybody_

MEANWHILE, Prince Prigio had to suffer many unpleasant things. Though
he was the crown prince (and though his arguments were unanswerable),
everybody shunned him for a coward. The queen, who did not believe in
Firedrakes, alone took his side. He was not only avoided by all, but he
had most disagreeable scenes with his own cousins, Lady Molinda and Lady
Kathleena. In the garden Lady Molinda met him walking alone, and did not
bow to him.

"Dear Molly," said the prince, who liked her, "how have I been so
unfortunate as to offend you?"

"My name, sir, is Lady Molinda," she said, very proudly; "and you have
sent your own brother to his grave!"

[Illustration: Page 24]

"Oh, excuse me," said the prince, "I am certain he has merely gone
off on his travels. He'll come back when he's tired: there _are_ no
Firedrakes; a French writer says they are 'purement fabuleux, purely
fabulous, you know."

"Prince Alphonso has gone on his travels, and will come back when he is
tired! And was he then--tired--of _me_?" cried poor Molinda, bursting
into tears, and forgetting her dignity.

"Oh! I beg your pardon, I never noticed; I'm sure I am very sorry,"
cried the prince, who, never having been in love himself, never thought
of other people. And he tried to take Molinda's hand, but she snatched
it from him and ran away through the garden to the palace, leaving
Prince Prigio to feel foolish, for once, and ashamed.

As for Lady Kathleena, she swept past him like a queen, without a word.
So the prince, for all his cleverness, was not happy.

After several days had gone by, the king returned from the solitary
place where he had been speaking his mind. He now felt calmer and
better; and so at last he came back to the palace. But on seeing Prince
Prigio, who was lolling in a hammock, translating Egyptian hieroglyphs
into French poetry for his mother, the king broke out afresh, and made
use of the most cruel and impolite expressions.

At last, he gave orders that all the Court should pack up and move to a
distant city; and that Prince Prigio should be left alone in the palace
by himself. For he was quite unendurable, the king said, and he could
not trust his own temper when he thought of him. And he grew so fierce,
that even the queen was afraid of him now.

The poor queen cried a good deal; Prigio being her favourite son, on
account of his acknowledged ability and talent. But the rest of the
courtiers were delighted at leaving Prince Prigio behind. For his part,
he, very good-naturedly, showed them the best and shortest road to
Falkenstein, the city where they were going; and easily proved that
neither the chief secretary for geography, nor the general of the army,
knew anything about the matter--which, indeed, they did not.

The ungrateful courtiers left Prigio with hoots and yells, for they
disliked him so much that they forgot he would be king one day. He
therefore reminded them of this little fact in future history, which
made them feel uncomfortable enough, and then lay down in his hammock
and went to sleep.

When he wakened, the air was cold and the day was beginning to grow
dark. Prince Prigio thought he would go down and dine at a tavern in the
town, for no servants had been left with him. But what was his annoyance
when he found that his boots, his sword, his cap, his cloak--all his
clothes, in fact, except those he wore,--had been taken away by the
courtiers, merely to spite him! His wardrobe had been ransacked, and
everything that had not been carried off had been cut up, burned, and
destroyed. Never was such a spectacle of wicked mischief. It was as if
hay had been made of everything he possessed. What was worse, he had not
a penny in his pocket to buy new things; and his father had stopped his
allowance of fifty thousand pounds a month.

Can you imagine anything more cruel and _unjust_ than this conduct? for
it was not the prince's fault that he was so clever. The cruel fairy had
made him so. But, even if the prince had been born clever (as may have
happened to you), was he to be blamed for that? The other people were
just as much in fault for being born so stupid; but the world, my dear
children, can never be induced to remember this. If you are clever, you
will find it best not to let people know it--if you want them to like
you.

Well, here was the prince in a pretty plight. Not a pound in his pocket,
not a pair of boots to wear, not even a cap to cover his head from the
rain; nothing but cold meat to eat, and never a servant to answer the
bell.

[Illustration: Chapter Five]




CHAPTER V.--_What Prince Prigio found in the garret._

THE prince walked from room to room of the palace; but, unless he
wrapped himself up in a curtain, there was nothing for him to wear when
he went out in the rain. At last he climbed up a turret-stair in the
very oldest part of the castle, where he had never been before; and
at the very top was a little round room, a kind of garret. The prince
pushed in the door with some difficulty--not that it was locked, but the
handle was rusty, and the wood had swollen with the damp. The room was
very dark; only the last grey light of the rainy evening came through
a slit of a window, one of those narrow windows that they used to fire
arrows out of in old times.

But in the dusk the prince saw a heap of all sorts of things lying on
the floor and on the table. There were two caps; he put one on--an old,
grey, ugly cap it was, made of felt. There was a pair of boots; and
he kicked off his slippers, and got into _them_. They were a good deal
worn, but fitted as if they had been made for him. On the table was a
purse with just three gold coins--old ones, too--in it; and this, as
you may fancy, the prince was very well pleased to put in his pocket.
A sword, with a sword-belt, he buckled about his waist; and the rest of
the articles, a regular collection of odds and ends, he left just where
they were lying. Then he ran downstairs, and walked out of the hall
door.

[Illustration: Chapter Six]




CHAPTER VI.--_What Happened to Prince Prigio in Town_

BY this time the prince was very hungry. The town was just three miles
off; but he had such a royal appetite, that he did not like to waste it
on bad cookery, and the people of the royal town were bad cooks. "I
wish I were in 'The Bear,' at Gluck-stein," said he to himself; for he
remembered that there was a very good cook there. But, then, the town
was twenty-one leagues away--sixty-three long miles!

No sooner had the prince said this, and taken just three steps, than he
found himself at the door of the "Bear Inn" at Gluckstein!

"This is the most extraordinary dream," said he to himself; for he was
far too clever, of course, to believe in seven-league boots. Yet he had
a pair on at that very moment, and it was they which had carried him in
three strides from the palace to Gluckstein!

The truth is, that the prince, in looking about the palace for clothes,
had found his way into that very old lumber-room where the magical gifts
of the fairies had been thrown by his clever mother, who did not believe
in them. But this, of course, the prince did not know.

Now you should be told that seven-league boots only take those
prodigious steps when you say you _want_ to go a long distance.
Otherwise they would be very inconvenient--when you only want to cross
the room, for example. Perhaps this has not been explained to you by
your governess?

Well, the prince walked into "The Bear," and it seemed odd to him that
nobody took any notice of him. And yet his face was as well known as
that of any man in Pantouflia; for everybody had seen it, at least in
pictures. He was so puzzled by not being attended to as usual, that _he
quite forgot to take off his cap_.

[Illustration: Page 31]

He sat down at a table, however, and shouted "_Kellner!_" at which all
the waiters jumped, and looked round in every direction, but nobody came
to him. At first he thought they were too busy, but presently another
explanation occurred to him.

"The king," said he to himself, "has threatened to execute anybody who
speaks to me, or helps me in any way. Well, I don't mean to starve in
the midst of plenty, anyhow; here goes!"

The prince rose, and went to the table in the midst of the room, where
a huge roast turkey had just been placed. He helped himself to half the
breast, some sausages, chestnut stuffing, bread sauce, potatoes, and a
bottle of red wine--Burgundy. He then went back to a table in a corner,
where he dined very well, nobody taking any notice of him. When he
had finished, he sat watching the other people dining, and smoking his
cigarette. As he was sitting thus, a very tall man, an officer in the
uniform of the Guards, came in, and, walking straight to the prince's
table, said: "Kellner, clean this table, and bring in the bill of fare."

With these words, the officer sat down suddenly in the prince's lap,
as if he did not see him at all. He was a heavy man, and the prince,
enraged at the insult, pushed him away and jumped to his feet. As he
did so, _his cap dropped off_. The officer fell on his knees at once,
crying:

"Pardon, my prince, pardon! I never saw you!"

This was more than the prince could be expected to believe.

"Nonsense! Count Frederick von Matterhorn," he said; "you must be
intoxicated. Sir! you have insulted your prince and your superior
officer. Consider yourself under arrest! You shall be sent to a prison
to-morrow."

On this, the poor officer appealed piteously to everybody in the tavern.
They all declared that they had not seen the prince, nor ever had an
idea that he was doing them the honour of being in the neighbourhood of
their town.

More and more offended, and convinced that there was a conspiracy to
annoy and insult him, the prince shouted for the landlord, called for
his bill, threw down his three pieces of gold without asking for change,
and went into the street.

"It is a disgraceful conspiracy," he said. "The king shall answer for
this! I shall write to the newspapers at once!"

He was not put in a better temper by the way in which people hustled him
in the street. They ran against him exactly as if they did not see
him, and then staggered back in the greatest surprise, looking in every
direction for the person they had jostled. In one of these encounters,
the prince pushed so hard against a poor old beggar woman that she fell
down. As he was usually most kind and polite, he pulled off his cap to
beg her pardon, when, behold, the beggar woman gave one dreadful scream,
and fainted! A crowd was collecting, and the prince, forgetting that he
had thrown down all his money in the tavern, pulled out his purse. Then
he remembered what he had done, and expected to find it empty; but, lo,
there were three pieces of gold in it! Overcome with surprise, he thrust
the money into the woman's hand, and put on his cap again. In a
moment the crowd, which had been staring at him, rushed away in every
direction, with cries of terror, declaring that there was a magician in
the town, and a fellow who could appear and disappear at pleasure!

[Illustration: Page 35]

By this time, you or I, or anyone who was not so extremely clever as
Prince Prigio, would have understood what was the matter. He had put
on, without knowing it, not only the seven-league boots, but the cap of
darkness, and had taken Fortunatus's purse, which could never be empty,
however often you took all the money out. All those and many other
delightful wares the fairies had given him at his christening, and
the prince had found them in the dark garret. But the prince was so
extremely wise, and learned, and scientific, that he did not believe in
fairies, nor in fairy gifts.

"It is indigestion," he said to himself: "those sausages were not of
the best; and that Burgundy was extremely strong. Things are not as they
appear."

Here, as he was arguing with himself, he was nearly run over by a
splendid carriage and six, the driver of which never took the slightest
notice of him. Annoyed at this, the prince leaped up behind, threw down
the two footmen, who made no resistance, and so was carried to the door
of a magnificent palace. He was determined to challenge the gentleman
who was in the carriage; but, noticing that he had a very beautiful
young lady with him, whom he had never seen before, he followed them
into the house, not wishing to alarm the girl, and meaning to speak to
the gentleman when he found him alone.

A great ball was going on; but, as usual, nobody took any notice of the
prince. He walked among the guests, being careful not to jostle them,
and listening to their conversation.
