Isaac Hull; the other was the little full-rigged ship _Tonquin_, of two
hundred and ninety tons burden.

This little vessel was captained by one Jonathan Thorn, who was at the
time a lieutenant in the United States Navy.  He had obtained leave of
absence for the purpose of making a cruise in the _Tonquin_.  Thorn was
a thoroughly experienced seaman and a skilled and practised navigator.
He was a man of magnificent physique, with a fine war record.

He was with Decatur in the _Intrepid_ when he put the captured
_Philadelphia_ to flames six years before.  In the subsequent desperate
gunboat fighting at Tripoli, Midshipman Thorn had borne so
distinguished a part that he received special commendation by Commodore
Preble.  As to his other qualities, Washington Irving, who knew him
from infancy, wrote of him to the last with a warm affection which
nothing could diminish.

Mr. John Jacob Astor, merchant, fur-trader, financier, had pitched upon
Thorn as the best man to take {262} the ship bearing the first
representatives of the Pacific Fur Company around the Horn and up to
the far northwestern American coast to make the first settlement at
Astoria, whose history is so interwoven with that of our country.

Mr. Astor already monopolized the fur trade of the Far West south of
the Great Lakes.  His present plan was to form a fur company and
establish a series of trading posts along the Missouri River, reaching
overland across the Rocky Mountains until they joined the posts on the
Pacific.  The place he selected for his Pacific depot was the mouth of
the Columbia River.

The principal rival of the Astor Fur Trading Company was the Northwest
Company.  Astor tried to persuade the company to join him in his new
venture.  When it refused to do so as an organization, he approached
individual employees of the Company, and in 1810 formed the Pacific Fur
Company.  Among the incorporators were four Scottish Canadians, Messrs.
McKay, McDougall, David Stuart, and Robert, his nephew.  There were
several other partners, including Wilson Price Hunt, of New Jersey.

It was planned that Hunt should lead an overland expedition from St.
Louis, while the four Scotsmen mentioned went around the Horn, and that
they should meet at the mouth of the Columbia River, where the trading
post was to be situated.  Most of the employees of the company were
Canadians who had enjoyed large experience in the fur business.  Among
these were included a large number of French _voyageurs_.

Thus the _Tonquin_, owned by a German, captained by an American, with a
crew including Swedes, French, English, Negroes, and Americans,
carrying out a party of Scottish and French Canadians and one Russian,
{263} started on her memorable voyage to establish a trading post under
the American flag!  The crew of the _Tonquin_ numbered twenty-three
men.  The number of passengers was thirty-three.

The story of her voyage is related in the letters of the captain to Mr.
Astor, and more fully in a quaint and curious French journal published
at Montreal in 1819, by M. Gabriel Franchere, one of the Canadian
clerks who made the voyage.

The _Tonquin_ was pierced for twenty guns, only ten small ones being
mounted.  The other ports were provided with imposing wooden dummies.
She had a high poop and a topgallant forecastle.  The four partners,
with James Lewis, acting captain's clerk, and one other, with the two
mates, slept in the cabin or wardroom below the poop.   Forward of this
main cabin was a large room extending across the ship, called the
steerage, in which the rest of the clerks, the mechanics, and the
Canadian boatmen were quartered.

Thorn seems to have felt to the full all the early naval officer's
utterly unmerited contempt for the merchant service.  It is also the
habit of the Anglo-Saxon to hold the French in slight esteem on the
sea.  The Canadians were wretched sailors, and Thorn despised them.
Thorn also cherished a natural hatred against the English, who were
carrying things with a high hand on our coast.  He began the voyage
with a violent prejudice against the four partners on his ship.
Indeed, the _Constitution_ had convoyed the _Tonquin_ to sea because it
was rumored that a British brig-o'-war intended to swoop down upon her
and take off the English subjects on board.  It was quite evident that
war would shortly break out between England {264} and the United
States, and the Scottish partners had surreptitiously consulted the
English consul as to what they should do if hostilities began.  They
were informed that in that case they would be treated as British
subjects--a fine situation for an American expedition!

With such a spirit in the captain, and such a feeling on the part of
the passengers, the relations between them were bound to become
strained.  Hostilities began at once.  The first night out Thorn
ordered all lights out at eight bells.   This in spite of all the
remonstrances of the four partners, who, as representing Mr. Astor,
considered themselves, properly enough, as owners of the ship.  These
gentlemen did not wish to retire at so early an hour, nor did they
desire to spend the intervening time in darkness.  They remonstrated
with Thorn, and he told them, in the terse, blunt language of a seaman,
to keep quiet or he would put them in irons.  In case he attempted
that, they threatened to resort to firearms for protection.  Finally,
however, the captain allowed them a little longer use of their lights.
Thus was inaugurated a long, disgraceful wrangle that did not cease
while life lasted.

There was doubtless much fault on both sides, but, in spite of the
brilliant advocate who has pleaded Thorn's cause, I cannot but admit
that he was decidedly the more to blame.  He carried things with a high
hand, indeed, treating the partners as he might a graceless lot of
undisciplined midshipmen.

A voyage around the Horn in those days was no slight matter.  The
_Tonquin_ was a remarkably good sailer, but it was not until the 5th of
October that they sighted the Cape Verde Islands.  There they struck
the Trades, and went booming down the African coast {265} at a great
rate.  There, also, they were pursued by a large man-o'-war brig.  On
the third day she drew so near that Thorn prepared for action,
whereupon the brig sheered off, and left them.

On the 11th of October they ran into a terrific storm, which prevailed
until the 21st, when they found themselves off the River Plate.  While
the storm was at its height the man at the wheel was thrown across the
deck by a sudden jump of the wheel and severely injured, breaking three
of his ribs and fracturing his collar-bone[1].  Thorn's seamanship
during the trying period was first class.  After the gale blew itself
out, a fresh breeze succeeded, which enabled them rapidly to run down
their southing.  The water supply had grown very low, and it was
determined to run in to the Falkland Islands to fill the casks.

They made a landfall on the 3rd of December, got on shore on one of the
smaller islets on the 4th, found no water, and were driven to sea to
seek an offing on the 5th by a gale.  On the 6th they landed at Point
Egmont on the West Falkland, and found a fine spring of fresh water.
As it would take several days to fill the casks, all the passengers
went ashore and camped on the deserted island.  They amused themselves
by fishing, shooting and rambling about.  On the 11th of the month the
captain, having filled his water-casks, signalled for every man to come
aboard, by firing a gun.  Eight passengers, including McDougall and
Stuart, happened to be on shore at the time.  They had wandered around
to the other side of the island, and did not hear the report of the
gun.  Thorn, after waiting a short time, weighed anchor and filled away
from {266} the island, firmly resolved to leave the men ashore,
marooned and destitute of supplies on that desolate and uninhabited
spot, where they must inevitably perish of starvation and exposure.

Some of the abandoned passengers happened to see the _Tonquin_ fast
leaving the island.  In great alarm they hastily summoned all the other
wanderers, and the eight got into a small boat twenty feet long, which
had been left with them, and rowed after the rapidly receding ship.
They had not the slightest hope of catching her unless she waited for
them, but they pulled for her with furious energy, nevertheless.  As
the _Tonquin_ got from under the lee of the land the breeze freshened
and she drew away from them with every passing moment in spite of their
manful work at the oars.  When they had about given up in exhaustion
and despair, the ship suddenly changed her course and stood toward them.

Franchere says that it was because young Stuart put a pistol to the
captain's head and swore that he would blow out his brains unless he
went back for the boat.  The captain's account to Mr. Astor is that a
sudden shift of wind compelled him to come about and this gave the boat
an opportunity to overhaul him.  There was a scene of wild
recrimination when the boat reached the ship, shortly after six bells
(3 P. M.), but it did not seem to bother Thorn in the least.

On the 18th of December, they were south and east of Cape Horn.  The
weather was mild and pleasant, but before they could make headway
enough against the swift easterly current to round that most dangerous
point it came on to blow a regular Cape Horn gale.  After seven days of
hard beating they celebrated Christmas under pleasanter auspices in the
southern Pacific.

{267}

Their run northward was uneventful, and on the 11th of February, 1811,
they sighted the volcano of Mauna Loa in the Sandwich Islands.  They
landed on the 12th and spent sixteen days among the different islands,
visiting, filling the water-casks, and buying fresh meat, vegetables,
and live-stock from Kamehameha I.

While Captain Thorn was hated by the passengers, he was not loved by
his officers.  Singularly enough, he seems to have been well liked by
the crew, although there were some exceptions even there.  Anderson,
the boatswain, left the ship at Hawaii.  There had been difficulties
between them, and the captain was glad to see him go.  A sample of
Thorn's method of administering discipline is interesting.

The day they sailed a seaman named Aymes strayed from the boat party,
and was left behind when the boat returned to the ship.  In great
terror Aymes had some natives bring him aboard in a canoe.  A longboat
loaded with fodder for the live-stock lay alongside.  As Aymes
clambered into the long-boat, the captain, who was furiously angry,
sprang down into the boat, seized Aymes with one hand and a stout piece
of sugar-cane with the other.  With this formidable weapon the
unfortunate sailor was beaten until he screamed for mercy.  After
wearing out the sugarcane upon him, with the remark that if he ever saw
him on the sloop again, he would kill him, the captain pitched him into
the water.  Aymes, who was a good swimmer, made the best of his way to
the shore, and stayed there with Anderson.  Twenty-four natives were
shipped at Hawaii, twelve for the crew and twelve for the new
settlement.

On the 16th of March they ran into another storm, of such violence that
they were forced to strike their {268} topgallant masts and scud under
double-reefed foresail.  As they were nearing the coast, the ship was
hove to at night.  Early on the morning of the 22nd of March, they
sighted land, one hundred and ninety-five days and twenty thousand
miles from Sandy Hook.  The weather was still very severe, the wind
blowing in heavy squalls and the sea running high, and the captain did
not think it prudent to approach the shore nearer than three miles.
His navigation had been excellent, however, for before them lay the
mouth of the Columbia River, the object of their long voyage.  They
could see the waves breaking over the bar with tremendous force as they
beat to and fro along the coast.

Thorn, ignorant of the channel, did not dare take the ship in under
such conditions.  He therefore ordered First-Mate Ebenezer Fox to take
Sailmaker Martin and three Canadians into a boat and find the channel.
It was a hazardous undertaking, and the despatch of the small boat
under such circumstances was a serious error in judgment.

There had been bad blood between the captain and the mate, and Fox did
not wish to go.  If he had to go, he begged that his boat might be
manned with seamen instead of Canadians.  The captain refused to change
his orders.  Fox appealed to the partners.  They remonstrated with the
captain, but they could not alter his determination.  The boat was
pulled away and was lost to sight in the breakers.  Neither the boat
nor any member of the crew was ever seen or heard of again.  The boat
was ill-found and ill-manned.  She was undoubtedly caught in the
breakers and foundered.

The next day the wind increased in violence, and they cruised off the
shore looking for the boat.  Every one on board, including the captain,
stern and {269} ruthless though he was, was very much disturbed at her
loss.

On the 24th the weather moderated somewhat, and running nearer to the
shore, they anchored just outside Cape Disappointment, near the north
shore of the river mouth.  The wind subsiding, Mumford, the second
mate, with another boat, was sent to search for the passage, but
finding the surf still too heavy, he returned about noon, after a
terrible struggle with the breakers.

In the afternoon McKay and Stuart offered to take a boat and try to get
ashore to seek for Fox and the missing men.  They made the endeavor,
but did not succeed in passing the breakers, and returned to the ship.
Later in the afternoon a gentle breeze sprang up from the west, blowing
into the mouth of the river, and Thorn determined to try and cross the
bar.  He weighed anchor, therefore, and bore down under easy sail for
the entrance of the river.  As he came close to the breakers he hove to
and sent out another boat, in charge of Aitkin, a Scottish seaman,
accompanied by Sailmaker Coles, Armorer Weeks and two Sandwich
Islanders.

The breakers were not quite so rough as they had been, and Aitkin
proceeded cautiously some distance in front of the ship, making
soundings and finding no depth less than four fathoms.  In obedience to
his signals, the ship came bowling on, and the fitful breeze suddenly
freshening, she ran through the breakers, passing Aitkin's boat to
starboard in pistol-shot distance.  Signals were made for the boat to
return, but the tide had turned, and the strong ebb, with the current
of the river, bore the boat into the breakers in spite of all her crew
could do.  While they were watching the boat, over which the waves were
seen breaking furiously, {270} the ship, the wind failing, was driven
seaward by the tide, and struck six or seven times on the bar.  The
breakers, running frightfully high, swept over her decks again and
again.  Nothing could be done for the boat by the ship, their own
condition being so serious as to demand all their efforts.

Thorn at last extricated the _Tonquin_ from her predicament.  The wind
favored her again, and she got over the bar and through the breakers,
anchoring at nightfall in seven fathoms of water.  The night was very
dark.  The ebb and current threatened to sweep the ship on the shore.
Both anchors were carried out.  Still the holding was inadequate and
the ship's position grew more dangerous.  They passed some anxious
hours until the turn of the tide, when in spite of the fact that it was
pitch dark, they weighed anchor, made sail, and succeeded in finding a
safe haven under the lee of Cape Disappointment, in a place called
Baker's Bay.  The next day the captain and some of the partners landed
in the morning to see if they could find the missing party.  As they
were wandering aimlessly upon the shore, they came across Weeks,
exhausted and almost naked.

He had a sad story to tell.  The boat had capsized in the breakers and
his two white companions had been drowned.  He and the Kanakas had
succeeded in righting the boat and clambering into her.  By some
fortunate chance they were tossed outside the breakers and into calmer
waters.  The boat was bailed out, and the next morning Weeks sculled
her ashore with the one remaining oar.  One of the Sandwich Islanders
was so severely injured that he died in the boat, and the other was
probably dying from exposure.  The relief party prosecuted their {271}
search for the Kanaka and found him the next day almost dead.

The loss of these eight men and these two boats was a serious blow to
so small an expedition, but there was nothing to be done about it, and
the work of selecting a permanent location for the trading-post on the
south shore, unloading the cargo, and building the fort was rapidly
carried on, although not without the usual quarrels between captain and
men.  After landing the company, Thorn had been directed by Mr. Astor
to take the _Tonquin_ up the coast to gather a load of furs.  He was to
touch at the settlement which they had named Astoria, on his way back,
and take on board what furs the partners had been able to procure and
bring them back to New York.  Thorn was anxious to get away, and on the
1st of June, having finished the unloading of the ship, and having seen
the buildings approaching completion, accompanied by McKay as
supercargo, and James Lewis of New York, as clerk, he started on his
trading voyage.

That was the last that anybody ever saw of Thorn or the _Tonquin_ and
her men.  Several months after her departure a Chehalis Indian, named
Lamanse, wandered into Astoria with a terrible story of an appalling
disaster.  The _Tonquin_ made her way up the coast, Thorn buying furs
as he could.  At one of her stops at Gray's Harbour, this Indian was
engaged as interpreter.  About the middle of June, the _Tonquin_
entered Nootka Sound, an ocean estuary between Nootka and Vancouver
Islands, about midway of the western shore of the latter.  There she
anchored before a large Nootka Indian village, called Newity.

The place was even then not unknown to history.  The Nootkas were a
fierce and savage race.  A few {272} years before the advent of the
_Tonquin_, the American ship _Boston_, Captain Slater, was trading in
Nootka Sound.  The captain had grievously insulted a native chieftain.
The ship had been surprised, every member of her crew except two
murdered, and the ship burned.  These two had been wounded and
captured, but when it was learned that one was a gunsmith and armorer,
their lives were preserved and they had been made slaves, escaping long
after.

Every ship which entered the Sound thereafter did so with the full
knowledge of the savage and treacherous nature of the Indians, and the
trading was carried on with the utmost circumspection.  There had been
no violent catastrophes for several years, until another ship _Boston_
made further trouble.  Her captain had shipped twelve Indian hunters,
promising to return them to their people on Nootka Sound when he was
finished with them.  Instead of bringing them back, he marooned them on
a barren coast hundreds of miles away from their destination.  When
they heard of his cruel action, the Nootkas swore to be revenged on the
next ship that entered the Sound.  The next ship happened to be the
ill-fated _Tonquin_.

Now, no Indians that ever lived could seize a ship like the _Tonquin_
if proper precautions were taken by her crew.  Mr. Astor, knowing the
record of the bleak north-western shores, had especially cautioned
Thorn that constant watchfulness should be exercised in trading.  Thorn
felt the serenest contempt for the Indians, and took no precautions of
any sort.  Indeed, the demeanor of the savages lulled even the
suspicions of McKay, who had had a wide experience with the aborigines.
McKay even went ashore at the invitation of one of the chiefs and spent
