"Good.  You have one half-hour, my child.  God grant that you may serve
France and induce this wretched prisoner to give up the Eagle.  Your
impulse of mercy does you credit," he said adroitly, making the best of
the situation for St. Laurent's benefit.  "Now you may go."

"This way, mademoiselle," said St. Laurent, bowing low before her at
the open door.

As the Countess passed down the long corridor she almost ran into young
Pierre, the boy.  He had been questioned with the rest, but had
absolutely nothing to tell.  Of course, he knew about the recovery of
the Eagle, but that was all.  He had known nothing about the midnight
meeting.  The Countess Laure had taken him into her service, her uncle
being willing.  And he had spent a miserable day when not with her,
wondering and hoping and praying for Marteau.  With others in the
regiments he had received important news in the last hour, and had made
every effort to get it to Marteau, as had been suggested to him, but he
had hitherto failed.  No sentry would pass him, and there was no way he
could get speech with the prisoner.

He was in despair when he saw the Countess approaching, St. Laurent
marching ceremoniously ahead, as if to clear the way.

"Mademoiselle," he whispered, plucking her gown.

"What is it?" asked the girl, naturally sinking her voice to the
other's pitch.

"You will see--him?"

"Yes."

"A message."

"What is it?"

"Give him this."

The boy thrust into her hand two or three flowers like those her uncle
had picked, the first purple blossoms of the virgin spring.

"And the message?"

"The violets have bloomed," said the boy, and he was gone.




CHAPTER XXIV

ON THE WHOLE DEATH MAY BE BETTER THAN LIFE

Marteau realized fully his position, and it would be idle to say that
despite his depression he contemplated his fate without regret.
Normally he would have wanted to live as much as any man, even though
in his more passionate moments he had said that life without Laure
d'Aumenier held nothing for him.  To be sure, life without her did not
look very inviting, and there was nothing in it for which he
particularly cared, especially since the Emperor was gone, and Marteau
had become a stranger, as it were, in France.  If the Emperor had come
back, or was coming back, it would be different.

In spite of rumors, originating nowhere apparently and spread by what
means no one could say, that the Emperor was coming back, Marteau, in
the depressed condition of his mind, gave these statements but little
credence.  Besides, even if they were true, even if Laure d'Aumenier
loved him, even if he had everything on earth for which a man could ask
or expect to live, he could not therewith purchase life; he could not
even purchase love, at the expense of his honor.

He could not give up the Eagle for the kingdom.  It was only a bit of
gilded copper, battered and shattered, but it awakened in his nature
the most powerful emotions which he was capable of entertaining.  His
love for Laure d'Aumenier was the great passion of his life.  Yet even
his love for the woman, or hers for him, if she had returned his
devotion with equal intensity and ardor, would not avail to persuade
him to give up that battered standard.

Even if she had loved him!  Ah, what had she said in that moment of
madness in her room that night?  It was a moment of madness, of course,
nothing else.  Marteau put it out of his mind, or strove to.  It could
not be.  Indeed, now that he was about to die, he would even admit that
it should not be.  But, if it were true, if that impulsive declaration
indicated the true state of her regard--the possibility was thrilling,
yet reflection convinced him it was better that he should die just the
same, because there could be no mating between the two.

He had crossed swords with the Marquis.  He had felt the hardness, the
inflexibility and temper of the old man's steel.  There would be no
breaking him, no altering his will.  He had made assurance doubly sure
in some way, Marteau was convinced.  This marriage with this young
Englishman, whom the Frenchman regarded with a tolerant, half-amused
contemptuousness for his simplicity and bluntness, would have to be
carried through.  When Marteau was dead the Countess would presumably
return to a saner frame of mind, and forget the mad attachment, if
indeed she had entertained it.

He took a certain melancholy satisfaction in the hope that he would at
least become one of her sacred and cherished memories.  But no memory
can successfully dispute the claim of the living, as a rule.  She would
eventually marry this Englishman; he would make her a good husband, and
by and by she would be happy, and Marteau would not be there to see.
And for that he would be glad.

If the Emperor had been there, if the war god had come and summoned his
men to arms again, Marteau might have eased the fever in his brain and
soul by deeds of prowess on fields of battle, but in peace he should
only eat his heart out thinking of her in the other man's arms.  There
were things worse than death, and this was one.  On the whole, he
concluded it was just as well, or even better, that he should die.

He was sufficiently versed in military and even civil law to see that
his condemnation was irregular in the extreme, but he let it go.  He
was an obscure officer of a lost cause.  There would not be any too
rigorous an inquiry into what disposition the Marquis made of him.
Nobody would care after it was all over.  There remained nothing for
him, therefore, but to die like a soldier, and--he smiled bitterly at
the thought--almost a gentleman!

He had been informed that any reasonable request he made would be
granted.  He would fain see a priest of his Church, but later, and
endeavor to make his peace with man after the time-honored custom of
his religion, and thus insure his peace with God.  Meanwhile, a request
for a brief interview with the woman he loved had trembled on his lips,
but it had found no utterance.  He was quite aware how he stood in that
quarter.  He had come to the conclusion that the Marquis, at least, had
seen through the little comedy--or, was it not a tragedy, after
all?--which he had played in her bed-chamber, and he had convinced
himself that the swiftness, the almost unseemly haste of his trial and
condemnation and the nearness of his execution were largely due to a
determination on the part of the old noble to get him out of the way
before any scandal should arise.  Perhaps scandal was certain to come,
and gossip to prevail, but it would be less harmful if the man were
dead.

To ask to see a woman whom he was supposed to have insulted so deeply
and wronged so grievously would have served only to call attention to
those things, to have given the whole game away, as it were.  Besides,
what would be the good of it?  She would leave him weaker in his
resolution than before.  If she had loved him--ah, God, how his heart
throbbed--if that impulsive admission had been the truth of her heart!
Well, he told himself, he would have gone through the trial, accepted
the verdict, received the bullets of the firing-squad in his heart,
although it would have been harder.  And yet--how he longed to see her.

He had not expected to see her ever again during his long tramp from
Salzburg to Grenoble.  He had not entertained the least idea that she
would be there.  He had schooled himself to do without her, contemplate
life absolutely sundered from her.  But when he did see her his whole
being had flamed with the passion he had so long repressed in vain.

And the Countess Laure knew more of his heart than he fancied.  During
the morning she had had young Pierre before her.  She had questioned
him, suggesting and even prompting his artless revelations.  The boy
needed no suggestions.  He was quick-witted and keen-eyed.  Admiring
Marteau extravagantly and devotedly as he did, he could not conceive
how any one could fail to share his feelings.  He told the
hungry-hearted woman the story of their lives since they had been
captured together at Arcis.

Reticent at first, Marteau had finally made a confidant of the lad, who
had shown himself sympathetic, discreet, adoring.  He had to tell
somebody, he had to ease his heart of his burden.  And when he had once
begun naturally he poured it all out before the boy.  He could not have
told a man, a woman, perhaps, had one been by sufficiently sympathetic
and tender, but, failing that, it was the boy who received the
confidences and who never once presumed on these revelations.  Indeed,
he had a vein of romance in his peasant heart.  He was a poet in his
soul.  Perhaps that was one reason why the man could confide in him.
And then, when Marteau lay in the delirium of fever, the boy had shared
their watches with the good Sisters of Charity.  He alone had
understood the burden of his ravings, for they were all about the
woman.  And, when she questioned him and gave him the opportunity, he
poured forth in turn all the stored treasure of his memory.

And the poor, distraught, unhappy young woman hung on his words with
heaving breast and panting heart and tear-dimmed eyes and cheeks that
flushed and paled.  Glad she was that he had so loved her; sad that it
could make no difference.  Indeed, young Pierre served his master well
in that hour, and earned whatsoever reward, however great it might be,
he should receive from him in the future.

How strangely selfish even in its loves is humanity!  Although Marteau
was intensely fond of the lad, and deeply devoted to him, absorbed in
his overwhelming affection for the woman he had forgot the boy until
too late to send for him that day.  Well, he would remedy that omission
on the morrow, he thought, as he abandoned himself once more to dreams
of other days, to fruitless anticipations, to vain hopes of what might
have been.

To him suddenly came St. Laurent.  The young aide knew but vaguely of
the scene in the Countess's bed-chamber and, therefore, there was no
prejudice in his mind against the officer.  Although he was a loyalist
to the core, he could sympathize as a soldier with the other's point of
view.  His address toward him, therefore, was respectful, and even
indicated some of that sympathy.

"Monsieur," he began most courteously, "I am sent by the Governor to
conduct you elsewhere."

"Shall I need my hat and cloak, monsieur?" asked the other, quite
appreciative of the young man's treatment of him.

"You will," was the answer.

"Am I leaving this room permanently?"

"You will return to it in half an hour."

"And whither----"

"You will pardon me," was the firm reply, "I have orders to conduct
you, not to answer questions."

"Your reproof," admitted Marteau, smiling faintly, "is well deserved.
I attend you at once, sir."

Escorted by St. Laurent and two soldiers, he left the building, walked
across the barrack yard, attracting instant attention from the soldiers
off duty congregated there, and a few officers of the garrison who
chanced to be passing.  All of them saluted him with the utmost
deference and the most profound respect.  He punctiliously acknowledged
their salutes with a melancholy grace and dignity.  There was an air of
great excitement everywhere, and he wondered vaguely what could be the
cause of it.

To his further wonderment also he found his steps directed to the
Governor's palace.  Entering, he was ushered through the halls and
marched to the door of a room which he remembered was one of the
smaller waiting-rooms of the palace.  St. Laurent stopped before the
door, his hand upon the knob.

"Monsieur," he said, "to this room there is but this one door.  I
remain without with these soldiers.  You can see by a glance through
the windows that they also are closely guarded.  Escape is impossible.
In half an hour I will knock upon the door, open it, and escort you
back to your place of confinement.  Do you understand?"

"Perfectly."

"Enter."

Somewhat bewildered by the mysteriousness of the whole proceeding, and
yet with a heart which in spite of himself did beat a little faster,
Marteau entered the room, St. Laurent closing the heavy door behind him.




CHAPTER XXV

NOT EVEN LOVE CAN FIND A WAY

Standing in the middle of the room, her closed hand resting upon a
table upon which she leaned as if for support, was Laure d'Aumenier.
The old Marquis had not noticed it, nor did the young man; that is, the
eye of neither took in the details, but both had been conscious of the
general effect, for the young Countess had dressed herself in her most
becoming gown, one that had been newly made for her in Paris before the
journey to the south of France and that she had never worn before.

She had spent a miserable night and day.  When she had talked with her
uncle a short time before, the effects of her sleeplessness and anguish
had been plainly apparent.  But there, within that room, her color
coming to her face, her eyes shining with excitement and emotion, she
looked as fresh and as beautiful as the springtime without.

It was her right hand that rested on the table, and as Marteau
approached her left instinctively sought her heart.  In his emotion he
looked at her with steady, concentrated glance, so keen, so piercing,
as if he sought to penetrate to the very depths of her heart, that she
could scarcely sustain his gaze.  He, too, had forgot cares and
anxieties, anticipation, hopes, dreams; in his excitement and surprise
everything had gone from him but her presence.  Here was the woman he
loved, looking at him in such a way, with such an air and such a
bearing, her hand upon her heart--was that heart beating for him?  Was
she trying to still it, to control it, because----

His approach was slow, almost terribly deliberate, like the movement of
the old Guard under Dorsenne--_Le Beau Dorsenne_!--against the heights
of Pratzen on the glorious yet dreadful day of Austerlitz.  His advance
was irresistible, but unhurried, as if there must be a tremendous clash
of arms in a moment to which haste could lend nothing, from the dignity
and splendor of which hurry would detract.  At another time the woman
might have shrunk back faltering, she might have voiced a protest, or
temporized, but now, in the presence of death itself, as it were, she
stood steady waiting for him.  Enjoying the luxury of looking upon him
unrestrained, her heart going out to him as he drew nearer, nearer,
nearer, she found herself tremblingly longing for his actual touch.

Now his arms went out to her, she felt them slowly fold around her, and
then, like a whirlwind released, he crushed her against his breast,
and, as she hung there, her throbbing heart making answer to the
beating of his own, he kissed her again, again, again.  Her heart
almost stopped its beating.  Beneath the fire of his lips her face
burned.  Her head drooped at last, her tense body gave way, she leaned
upon him heavily, glad for the support of his strong arms.

"Laure," he whispered, "my little Laure, you love me.  Oh, my God, you
love me.  It was true, then.  I did not dream it.  My ears did not mock
me."

"Yes, yes," said the woman at last.  "Whoever you are, whatever you
are, wherever you go, I love you."

"And was it to tell me this that you came?"

"Yes.  But not for this alone."

"What else?"

"I would have you live."

"For you?"

"For me."

"As your husband?"

"And if that were possible would you----"

"Yes, yes, would I what?"

"Give up the Eagle?"

"My God!" said the man, loosening his clasp of her a little and holding
her a little away that he might look at her.  "Does your love tempt me
to dishonor?"

"I do not know," said the woman piteously.  "I am confused.  I cannot
think aright.  Oh, Marteau, Jean, with whom I played as a child, think
of me.  I cannot bear to see you dead outside there.  I cannot look
upon a soldier without thinking of it.  The rattling of the carts in
the streets sounds in my ear like shots.  Don't, don't die.  You must
not."

"And, if I lived, would you love me?"

"So long as the good God gives me the breath of life."

"With the love of youth and the love of age?"

"Aye, for eternity."

"And would you be my wife?"

"Your wife?" said the woman, her face changing.  "It would be joy
beyond all, but I could not."

"Why not?"

"I--you know I am promised to another," she went on desperately, "and
but that I might see you I repeated the promise.  Otherwise my uncle
