  on hips.

Repeat rhyme and activity back to former aisle.


[Illustration: JACK JUMPED OVER THE CANDLE STICK]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 2

Music-- _See Jack Be Nimble-- No. 1_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be

  Interpretation;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

nimble

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Jack be

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

quick;

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

3rd Line;-- Jack

  Inter.;-- One-quarter turn to the left, placing hands on the near
  edge of desk and back of seat, bending knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat; replace hands to hips and execute
  1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

4th Line;-- The candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, three counts. (Left; right and left.)

Repeat back to original position.




HUMPTY DUMPTY


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
  Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
  All the King's horses and all the King's men,
  Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils sit upon own desks;
  feet hanging in aisle.

2nd Line;-- Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fall," pupils jump into the right aisles;
  bending knees deeply, facing the front of the room.

3rd Line;-- All the King's horses and all the King's men,

  Inter.;-- Assume position of attention with arms stretched forward
  holding imaginary reins, at the same time "marking time" (ten counts),
  raising knees waist high.

4th Line;-- Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.

  Inter.;-- Shaking the head in sorrow; right, left, right and front.
  Hands are placed upon hips during this movement.


[Illustration: HUMPTY DUMPTY SAT ON A WALL]




DICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK


_First Verse_

_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Dickory, dickory, dock;
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck, One.
    The mouse ran down;
  Dickory, dickory, dock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock;

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- The mouse ran up the clock;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," stand in own seats with the arms
  stretched sideward.

3rd Line;-- The clock struck, One,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "One," clap hands overhead and lower arms
  sideward.

The mouse ran down;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," jump into the left aisle with hands
  clasped overhead.

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat activity to the right, bringing all pupils back to former aisles.


[Illustration: THE PENDULUM]


_Second Verse-- Music on Page 25_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock,

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- "Why scamper," said the clock.

  Inter.;-- Place hands on hips; execute six running steps forward.
  (Seven counts.) (Left; right; left; right; left; right; close left
  to right, completing the movement.)

3rd Line;-- You

scared

  Inter.;-- Execute 1/2 turn right about.

me so,

I'll

have to go;

  Inter.;-- Execute three running steps forward. (Four counts.)
  (Left; right; left, and close right to left, completing the movement.)

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat to bring the class back to the original position.




LITTLE MISS MUFFET


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet,
    eating of curds and whey,
  Along came a spider
  And sat down beside her;
  And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Miss Muffet; other aisles act as the Spider. (Count off from left
flank by twos. No. 1-- Miss Muffet. No. 2-- The Spider.)


1st Line;-- Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet, eating of curds and
whey.

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," Little Miss Muffet climbs
  into her own seat, faces back of room and sits upon the right side
  of desk. Hold imaginary plate in left arm and imitate eating.

2nd Line;-- Along came a spider

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Along," the Spider hastens over own seat
  and Miss Muffet's aisle; climbs upon seat and sits with Miss Muffet.

3rd Line;-- And sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- Completion of second line activity.

4th Line;-- And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "frighten'd," children return to own seats.

Upon returning to their own seats the children sing--
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!


[Illustration: ALONG CAME A SPIDER (Spiders vaulting seats)]




JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack and Jill went up the hill,
  to fetch a pail of water;
  Jack fell down and broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after,
  Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Jack. (Girls and boys.) Other aisles act as Jill. (Girls and
boys.) Count off from left flank by twos. No. 1-- Jill. No. 2-- Jack.


1st Line;-- Jack and Jill went up the hill,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "up," Jack and Jill take hold of
  hands and climb into same seats. (The climbing of the hill.)

2nd Line;-- To fetch a pail of water;

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Jack fell down and broke his crown,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fell," Jack falls (jumps) into own aisle,
  bends knees, deeply covering his face with his hands, imitating
  crying.

4th Line;-- And Jill came tumbling after.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tumbling," Jill falls (jumps) into the same
  aisle as Jack; bends knees, deeply covering her face with her hands,
  imitating crying.


Upon completion of the song all children return to their own seats,
singing--

  Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!


[Illustration: JACK AND JILL WENT UP THE HILL]




BYE O BABY BUNTING


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bye O Baby Bunting,
  Daddy's gone a-hunting;
  To fetch a little rabbit skin
  To wrap the Baby Bunting in.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Bye O

  Interpretation;-- Hold the baby in the arms, looking down at it,
  and sway gently to the right.

Baby-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the left.

Bunt-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the right.

ing

  Inter.;-- Assume stationary position.

2nd Line;-- Daddy's gone a-hunting;

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, seven counts; carry gun over the
  right shoulder (flex right arm; place hand on shoulder with fingers
  clenched, forefinger extended to represent barrel of gun.)

3rd Line;-- To fetch a little rabbit skin

  Inter.;-- Kneel on left knee and extend the right arm forward,
  representing the aiming of a gun. (Fingers of the right hand clenched,
  with forefinger extended; left hand resting on right upper arm.)

4th Line;-- To wrap the Baby Bunting in.

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position; bend forward and encircle body with
  arms and return hands to hips upon completion of the sentence.


[Illustration: AIMING THE GUN]
