She had looked, and felt, very sad on the first day of the
advertisement, but on the second day she was more cheerful, and
suggested to Ronald that Connie should come and have tea with him.

Ronald was delighted, and clapped his hands in glee. Mrs. Anderson wrote
a little note to Connie, slightly blaming her for not coming to see her,
but begging her to call that afternoon and have tea with Ronald. Connie
was greatly delighted when she got the letter.

"May I go, Giles? Do yer mind?" she asked.

"In course not," answered Giles. "Why should I mind? Yer'll dress
yerself in yer wery best, Connie, and I'll like well to look at yer
afore yer goes out, an' w'en yer comes back."

So Connie put on her dark-blue costume once more, and brushed out her
mane of golden hair and let it hang down her back; for she knew that
Ronald would scarcely recognize her deprived of this ornament. Then,
having left his tea all ready for Giles, she ran quickly in the
direction of Mrs. Anderson's house.

She arrived there at four o'clock in the afternoon, to see a little face
pressed up close to the pane of glass, and eager eyes watching for her.
When she appeared on the steps little hands began to clap, and there was
an eager rush of footsteps and then Ronald himself opened the door.

"Oh Connie, Connie!" he said, "come in--do, do come in!"

"How be yer, Ronald?" asked Connie.

"I'm as well as well can be, and I'm happy, too. Mrs. Anderson is just a
beautiful old lady, and so very good to me! But come and tell me all
about yourself. You and I are to have tea all alone in this room. We
will have fun. Why, Connie dear, how lovely you look!"

Connie told Ronald that he also looked lovely, and the two children sat
down side by side, while Ronald related the little bit of his story
which had transpired since Connie saw him last.

"I was very ill," he said, "for a bit, and silly, and--and cowardly. But
a wonderful man came to see me, and he talked--oh, so beautifully!--and
then I got better; and Mrs. Anderson has been more than good to me--no
one was ever so good to me before except father. She tells me, Connie,
that I must not keep looking out for father; for if he can come he will,
and if he can't I've just got to wait with patience. The street
preacher, too, talked about patience. It's a little bit hard to be very
patient, isn't it, Connie?"

"Yus," said Connie.

"Oh! and, Connie, some day perhaps you and I may go and stay with Mrs.
Cricket in the country, and Mrs. Anderson is going to send her money for
the chickens and fresh eggs and things. But I can't remember where the
country is--can you, Connie?"

"We got out at a plice called Eastborough, an' the cottage wor a ivy
cottage down a lane."

"Ivy Cottage--of course!" said Ronald. "How stupid of me to have
forgotten! Now it's all right, and dear Mrs. Cricket will get her
money."

When Ronald had told all his story Connie told all hers. In especial she
told about Giles, and about poor Sue, who had vanished just as suddenly
and completely as she (Connie) and Ronald himself on a certain day had
disappeared from their friends.

"It's very, very queer," said Ronald. "Connie," he added, "I want to see
that little boy. Can't you take me back to him now--can't you?"

"Yus," said Connie, "I could; but would it be right?"

"We'll ask Mrs. Anderson," said Ronald, "I'm certain sure she won't
mind. You know the way there; you won't let yourself be kidnapped any
more, will you, Connie?"

"No," said Connie.

Then tea was brought in, and the children enjoyed it. But Ronald could
think of nothing but Giles and his earnest desire to see him. Once again
he begged and implored of Connie to take him, just to sit for a few
minutes by the little cripple's side, and Connie again said that Mrs.
Anderson ought to know.

It was just at that moment that a cab drew up at the door, and out of
the cab there stepped a white-headed old man, who came ponderously up
the steps, leaning on a gold-headed stick. He rang the bell with a loud
peal. Ronald began to listen.

"Who can it be?" he said. He ran to the window, and looking out, saw the
cab waiting; but he missed the sight of the old gentleman, whom
doubtless he would have recognized; and the neat little parlor-maid went
to open the door, and then the labored steps were heard in the hall, and
the drawing-room door was opened and shut, and there was silence.

"A visitor for my dear new aunty," said Ronald. "I always call her my
aunty, and she likes it very much. Oh Connie, do take me just to see
Giles! I know it isn't wrong, and I should be quite safe with you."

"First of all," said Connie, "we'll ring the bell and ask if we may
speak to Mrs. Anderson for a minute."

"Very well," said Ronald; "only I 'spect she's busy with the person who
has called."

Anne came to answer the children's summons, and told them that her
mistress was particularly engaged and could not be disturbed.

"That's all right," answered Ronald; "you can go away now, please. You
needn't take the tea-things just for a bit. You can go away, please,
Anne."

Anne, who was devoted to Ronald, thought that the children wanted to
play together, and left them alone in the little parlor. The light was
growing dim, and Connie poked the fire into a blaze.

"I ought to be goin' back," she said. "Giles 'ull want me. I'll come
another day, Ronald, and Mrs. Anderson'll let me bring yer back to Giles
then."

"No, no--to-day," said Ronald--"to-day--to-night--this minute. It isn't
wrong. I must see him. You'll take me to see him, and then you'll bring
me back, won't you, Connie?"

"W'y, yus," said Connie. "I s'pose it ain't wrong; but you can't do more
nor set down in the room for about five minutes, Ronald, for yer'll 'ave
to get back 'ere quite early, you know."

Ronald, delighted at any sort of consent on the part of his little
friend, rushed upstairs to fetch his velvet cap and his little overcoat.
But he forgot, and so did Connie, all about the thin house-shoes he was
wearing. Soon he had slipped into the coat, and cramming the cap on his
head and looking up at Connie with a gay laugh, said:

"Now we'll come."

They were in the hall, and had just opened the hall door, when suddenly
that of the drawing-room was opened, and the old man, who helped himself
along with a stick, came out. Ronald looked back and caught sight of
him; but Ronald himself being in shadow, the old man did not notice him.
The old man then spoke in a loud voice:

"It is all settled, then, and I will call to-morrow morning at ten
o'clock to fetch back the boy. Have him ready. And now, good-day to you,
madam."

But the old gentleman suddenly stopped as he uttered these words, for
the hall door was slammed by some one else with violence, and Ronald
turned a white face up to Connie.

"It's himself--it's Uncle Stephen. He made mother cry and cry. I won't
go back to him. I won't be his boy. Hide me--hide me, Connie!"

Connie herself felt very much frightened.

"Come along 'ome with me," she said. "He can't get yer at my 'ome. Don't
shrink like that, Ronald. Be a man, dear Ronald."

The children got back to Connie's rooms without any special adventure.
There Giles was waiting with that peaceful look on his face which seemed
more or less to quiet every one who came in his way. He smiled all over
his little face when he saw Connie, and then his eyes grew big and
surprised as he noticed the small boy who kept her company.

"Why are yer back so soon, Connie?" he said. "I warn't not one little
bit lonesome. And 'oo's he?" said Giles.

"This is my dear little friend Ronald," said Connie.

"And I wanted to see you awful bad," said Ronald, running up to Giles,
flinging his cap on the floor, and kneeling down by him. "I have thought
of you--oh, so much! It was you, you know, who taught me to endure to
the end. Did Connie tell you about that?"

"Yes," said Giles, "she told me."

Ronald looked up at Connie. Giles watched the two, and then he held out
his little hand and touched Ronald's.

"You're wery brave," he said. "You had a brave father."

"He is a V. C. man. He's coming to see me one day," said Ronald.

"I know," said Giles. "It's real supporting to 'ave a brave father. I
have one too."

"Have you?" said Ronald. "And is he coming to see you one day?"

"No--I'm goin' to 'im. Don't let's talk about it now."

Ronald sat down on the side of Giles's crimson and gold bed, and glanced
round the room. Connie lit a paraffin lamp and put it on the table. In
his first excitement at seeing Giles, Ronald forgot the mad terror which
had awakened in him at the sound of Uncle Stephen's voice. But now he
remembered.

"I have come to stay," he remarked emphatically.

"Oh no, Ronald, you can't," exclaimed Connie.

"I am not going back," exclaimed Ronald. "Giles, I needn't, need I?
There's a dreadful man coming to-morrow, and he's going to take me away
from my darling aunty. I won't go. I'll hide here with you, Giles."

"Will yer?" said Giles. "That 'ull be real pain to yer aunty, won't it?"

"Real pain?" said Ronald. "But Connie can tell her. Connie needn't say
where I am. She can just tell that I heard Uncle Stephen's voice, and
that I am hiding. I can't go back, can I, Giles--can I?"

"Dunno," said Giles; but a wistful expression came into his face.

"Why do you look like that?" asked Ronald.

"Sometimes one 'as to do things one can't do," was Giles's next rather
difficult remark.

"But this is really silly," said Ronald, "for we can do the things we
can do."

"Course not--not by ourselves," said Giles. "But if we're to endure to
the end, why, 'E'll help."

"You remind me of that awful fire," said Ronald.

He jumped up and walked across the room. His eyes were dim; his heart
was beating with great rapidity, for he was still weak and had gone
through much. Oh, that cruel, cruel old man who had made his mother cry
so often! He thought upon him with a growing terror.

Connie looked at Ronald, and then she glanced at Giles and her eyes said
to Giles:

"Help me all you can about Ronald." Then Giles called her to him.

"Leave Ronald with me for a bit," he said. "Go back and tell Mrs.
Anderson; but leave little Ronald with me."

Connie immediately went out; but Ronald was so absorbed in trying to
quiet his beating heart, and in trying to recover his courage, that he
did not even know when she closed the door after her.

Connie ran as quickly as she could all the way to Carlyle Terrace. There
she rang a loud peal at the front door. It was Mrs. Anderson herself who
opened it to her.

"Oh Connie!" said the widow, "thank God! Have you brought news of
Ronald? What _has_ happened, Connie--what _has_ happened?"

Connie immediately entered the house.

"May I speak to yer, ma'am?" she said.

"Certainly; but where is the boy?"

"He's quite safe, ma'am--he's with Giles."

"Why did he go out? He did very wrong."

"I did wrong too," said Connie. "I tuk him. He's frightened, ma'am.
Ronnie's rare and frightened. He heered wot the old gentleman said."

"How could he hear?" said Mrs. Anderson.

Connie told.

"'Tain't true, ma'am, is it?" said Connie. "Yer wouldn't niver, niver,
let little Ronald go away?"

"Yes, but I must. I am very sad. I wish I needn't send him; but the
gentleman who called to-day is his father's uncle, and his nearest
relation in the world. Connie, you must bring Ronald home. I will go
with you myself to fetch him."

"Oh, ma'am," said Connie, beginning to sob, "it 'ull break his 'eart."

"No, Connie," answered Mrs. Anderson. "Hearts like Ronald's--brave and
true and faithful--don't break; they endure. Besides that, the old
gentleman--Mr. Harvey--will not be unkind to him; I am certain of that."

So Connie and Mrs. Anderson returned side by side to the house where
Giles and Ronald were waiting for them.

When they entered they saw a picture which Mrs. Anderson could never
forget: the dying boy, with his radiant face, lying on the bed
half-supported by pillows, the crimson and gold coverlet making a
wonderful patch of color; and Ronald, the tears still wet on his cheeks,
but his eyes very bright, his lips firm, his whole attitude that of a
soldier's child.

The moment he saw Mrs. Anderson he went up to her.

"I am ashamed," he said. "Giles has told me the son of a V. C. man
should not be a coward. It is all right--I am going back."

Mrs. Anderson pressed the boy's hand.

"I knew you wouldn't disappoint me, Ronald," she said. Then she turned
and talked a little longer to Giles. She saw how weak the child was, and
knew, with a woman's perception, what a very little time longer he had
to live in this old world.

"My sister's in the country, ma'am," said Giles in his brightest manner.
"She's looking for a little house for her an' me--two winders in our
room--that's wot Sue an' me thought we 'ud like--and iverythink wery
purty. Sue may be back any day. She's takin' a good bit of a time
a-lookin' for the 'ouse; but she'll find it, an' then I'll go there."

"But are you strong enough to be moved, Giles?" inquired Mrs. Anderson.

"Yus," said Giles in his confident tone, "quite strong enough. I want to
see the country, and to live in it for a spell, afore I go right 'ome to
the best Country of all. Sue's lookin' out; she'll be back--oh, any day,
for she knows the time's short."

"Giles," said Connie, "you're too tired to talk any more."

She gave the boy some of his restorative medicine, and Ronald went up
and kissed him. "Don't forget," said Giles, "brave fathers----"

"Not me!" answered Ronald. "Brave fathers for ever!" Then Ronald went
away.
