of beings!  Without doubt our friends have been slain, or carried into
captivity."

Poor Makarooroo, who had been from the first going about among the ruins
like a maniac, with a bewildered air of utter despair on his sable
countenance, looked at me as if he hoped for a slight word that might
reanimate hope in his bosom.  But I could give him none, for I myself
felt hopeless.

Not so, Jack.  With that buoyancy of spirit that was peculiar to him, he
suggested many ideas that consoled our guide not a little.

"You see," said he, "the rascally Portuguese trafficker in human flesh
would naturally try to effect his object with as little bloodshed as
possible.  He would just fight until he had conquered, not longer; and
then he would try to take as many prisoners as he could, in order to
carry them away into slavery.  Now, I cannot conceive it possible that
he could catch the whole tribe."

"Of course not," interrupted Peterkin; "he had a comparatively small
party.  To take a whole tribe prisoners with such a band were
impossible."

"Ay, but you forget," said I, "that he might easily prevail on some
other tribe to go to war along with him, and thus capture nearly the
whole.  Yet some must have escaped into the woods, and it is probable
that among these may have been the chief and his household.  Okandaga
may be safe, and not far off, for all we know."

The guide shook his head.

"At any rate," observed Jack, "if caught they would certainly be guarded
with care from injury; so that if we could only find out which way they
have gone, we might pursue and attack them."

"Four men attack forty or fifty!" said I despondingly.

"Ay, Ralph.  Why not?" asked Peterkin.

"Oh, I doubt not our pluck to do it," I replied; "but I doubt very much
our chances of success."

While we were yet speaking our attention was attracted by a low wail,
and the appearance of some living object creeping amongst the ruins not
far from us.  At first we thought it must be a beast of prey lurking in
the neighbourhood of the dead, and impatient at our having interrupted
its hideous banquet; but presently the object sat up and proved to be a
woman.  Yet she was so covered with blood and dust, and so awfully
haggard in appearance, that we could with difficulty believe her to be a
human being.

At first she appeared to be in ignorance of our presence.  And indeed so
she actually was; for her whole soul was absorbed in the contemplation
of the dead and mangled body of an infant which lay in her arms, and
which she pressed ever and anon with frantic energy to her breast,
uttering occasionally a wail of such heart-broken sadness that the tears
sprang irresistibly into my eyes while I gazed upon her.  There needed
no explanation of her tale of woe.  The poor mother had crept back to
her hut after the fierce din of battle was over to search for her child,
and she had found it; but ah, who can conceive the unutterable anguish
of heart that its finding had occasioned!

"Speak to her, Mak," said Peterkin, in a husky voice; "she will be less
afraid of you, no doubt, than of us."

Our guide advanced.  The slight noise he made in doing so attracted the
poor woman's attention, and caused her to look up with a wild, quick
glance.  The instant she saw us she leaped up with the agility of a
leopard, clasped her dead child tightly to her breast, and uttering
shriek upon shriek, rushed headlong into the jungle.

"After her!" cried Jack, bounding forward in pursuit.  "She's our only
chance of gaining information."

We all felt the truth of this, and joined in the chase at top speed.
But although we ran fast and well, the affrighted creature at first
outstripped us.  Then, as we tired her out and drew near, she doubled on
her track, and dived hither and thither among the thick underwood in a
way that rendered it exceedingly difficult to catch her.

Peterkin was the first to come up with her.  He gradually but
perseveringly ran her down.  When he came within a few yards of her, the
poor creature sank with a low wail to the ground, and turning half
round, glanced at her pursuer with a timid, imploring, yet despairing
expression.  Alas! despair mingled with it, because she knew too well
the terrible cruelty of savage men when their blood is up, and she knew
nothing yet of the hearts of Christians.

Peterkin, whose susceptible nature was ever easily touched, felt a
thrill of self-reproach as the thought suddenly occurred that, however
good his intentions might be, he was in reality running a helpless woman
down like a bloodhound.  He stopped short instantly, and acting, as on
most occasions he did, impulsively, he threw his rifle away from him,
unclasped his belt, and throwing it, with his hunting-knife, also away,
sat down on the ground and held out both his hands.

There was something almost ludicrous in the act, but it had the effect
of, to some extent, relieving the poor woman's fears.  Seeing this, as
we successively came up we all laid down our rifles, and stood before
the crouching creature with our empty hands extended towards her, to
show that we meant her no harm.  Still, although she seemed less
terrified, she trembled violently, and panted from her recent exertion,
but never for a moment relaxed her hold of the dead child.

"Speak to her, Mak," said Jack, as the guide came up.  "Tell her who and
what we are at once, to relieve her feelings; and let her know
especially that we are the bitter enemies of the villain who has done
this deed."

While Makarooroo explained, the woman's countenance seemed to brighten
up, and in a few minutes she began to tell with great volubility the
events of the attack.  The trader, she said, had come suddenly on them
in the dead of night with a large band, and had at once routed the
warriors of the village, who were completely taken by surprise.  A few
had escaped; but Mbango, with Okandaga and his household, had been taken
prisoners, and carried away with many others.

"How long is it since this happened?" inquired Jack.

"She say two days, massa.  Den dey go off to 'tack King Jambai."

"Ah! then it is too late to save him," returned Jack, in a tone of
sadness.

Our hearts sank on learning this; but on questioning the woman further,
we found that the marauding party, deeming themselves too weak to attack
so large a village as that of King Jambai, had talked of turning aside
to secure the assistance of another tribe not far distant, who, they
knew, would be too glad to pick a quarrel with that chief.

"Then we shall do it yet!" cried Jack, springing up energetically.  "We
shall be in time to warn Jambai and to save Okandaga and her friends.
Come, Mak, cheer up; things begin to look better."

The cheerful, confident voice in which our friend said this raised my
hopes wonderfully, even although, on consideration, I could not see that
our chances of success were very great.  Our guide was visibly
comforted, and we stepped aside to pick up our rifles with considerable
alacrity.

During the brief period in which we were thus employed, the poor woman
managed to creep away, and when we again looked round she was gone.  Our
first impulse was to give chase again, but the thought of the needless
terror which that would occasion her deterred us, and before we could
make up our minds what to do she was almost beyond our reach, and would
certainly have cost us an hour of search, if not longer, to find her.
Time pressed.  To reach the village of King Jambai with the utmost
possible speed was essential to the safety of the tribe, so we resolved
to leave her, feeling as we did so that the poor creature could sustain
herself on roots and berries without much difficulty or suffering until
she reached the village of some neighbouring tribe.

We now pushed on again by forced marches, travelling by night and by
day, shooting just enough game as we required for food, and taking no
more rest than was absolutely necessary to enable us to hold on our way.
In a short time we reached the village, which, to our great joy, we
found in much the same state as it was when we left it.

King Jambai received us with great delight, and his people went into a
state of immense rejoicing--firing guns, and shouting, and beating
kettles and drums, in honour of the arrival of the "white faces;" which
name was certainly a misnomer, seeing that our faces had by that time
become the very reverse of white--indeed they were little lighter than
the countenances of the good people by whom we were surrounded.

But the king's consternation was very great when we told him the reason
of our unexpected visit, and related to him the details of the terrible
calamity that had befallen poor Mbango and his people.  He appeared
sincerely grateful for the effort we had made to warn him of the
impending attack, and seemed unable to express his thanks when we
offered to aid him in the defence of his village.

We now deemed this a fitting moment to tell the king boldly of our
having assisted in the escape of Okandaga from his village, and beg his
forgiveness.  He granted this at once, but strongly advised us to keep
our secret quiet, and leave it to him to account to his warriors for the
reappearance of the runaway maiden when retaken.  Of course we could
make no objection to this, so after thanking him we entered upon a
discussion of the best method of frustrating the slave-dealer's designs.

"Tell the king," said Jack, addressing himself to our guide, "that if he
will make me commander-in-chief of his forces, I will show him how white
warriors manage to circumvent their enemies."

"I would like much," said Peterkin, laughing, "to know how Mak will
translate the word `circumvent.'  Your style is rather flowery, Jack,
for such an interpreter; and upon my word, now I think of it, your
presumption is considerable.  How do you know that _I_ do not wish to be
commander-in-chief myself?"

"I shall make over the command to you with all my heart, if you wish
it," said Jack, smiling blandly.

"Nay, I'll none of it.  However suited I may be to the work, the work is
not suited to me, so I resign in your favour."

"Well, then," said Jack, "since you decline to accept the chief command,
I'll make you my second.  Mak shall be my _aide-de-camp_; you and Ralph
shall be generals of divisions."

"I thank you much, my honoured and honourable generalissimo; but perhaps
before being thus liberal of your favours, it were well to ascertain
that your own services are accepted."

"That is soon done.--What says the king, Mak?"

"Hims say that him's delighted to git you, an' you may doos how you
like."

"That's plain and explicit.  You see, Peterkin, that I'm fairly
installed; so you and I will take a short walk together, and hold a
consultation as to our plans in the approaching campaign, while Ralph
arranges our hut and makes things comfortable."

"A glorious campaign, truly, to serve in an army of baboons, led by a
white gorilla!  I would deem it almost comical, did I not see too sure a
probability of bloodshed before its conclusion," remarked Peterkin.

"That you shall not see, if I can prevent it; and it is for the purpose
of consulting you on that point, and claiming your services in an old
and appropriate character, that I drag you along with me now," said
Jack, as he rose, and, making a bow to the king, left the hut.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

PREPARATIONS FOR WAR, AND PECULIAR DRILL.

The plan which Jack and Peterkin concocted, while I was engaged in
making the interior of our old residence as comfortable as possible, was
as follows:--

Scouts were, in the first place, to be sent out that night all over the
country, to ascertain the whereabouts of the enemy.  Then, when the
enemy should be discovered, they were to send back one of their number
to report; while the remainder should remain to dog their steps, if need
be, in order to ascertain whether Mbango and Okandaga were in their
possession, and if so, where they were kept--whether in the midst of the
warriors or in their rear.

This settled, the remainder of the warriors of the village were to be
collected together, and a speech to be made to them by Jack, who should
explain to them that they were to be divided into two bands: all who
carried guns to be under the immediate charge of Jack himself; the
others, carrying bows and spears, to be placed under me.  Peterkin was
to act a peculiar part, which will appear in the course of narration.

Having partaken of a hearty supper, we assembled the scouts, and having,
through Makarooroo, given them their instructions, sent them away just
as the shades of night began to fall.  We next caused a huge bonfire to
be kindled, and round this all the men of the village assembled, to the
extent of several hundreds.  The king soon appeared, and mounting the
trunk of a fallen tree, made a long speech to his warriors, telling them
of the danger that threatened them, in such vivid and lively terms that
the greater part of them began to exhibit expressions of considerable
uneasiness on their countenances.  He then told them of the trouble that
we had taken, in order to give them timely warning--whereat they cast
upon us looks of gratitude; and after that introduced Jack to them as
their commander-in-chief, saying, that as a white man led the enemy,
nothing could be better than that a white man should lead them to meet
the enemy--whereat the sable warriors gave a shout of satisfaction and
approval.

Having been thus introduced, Jack mounted the trunk of the fallen tree,
and Makarooroo got up beside him to interpret.  He began, like a wise
diplomatist, by complimenting King Jambai, and spoke at some length on
courage in general, and on the bravery of King Jambai's warriors in
particular; which, of course, he took for granted.  Then he came to
particulars, and explained as much of his intended movements as he
deemed it good for them to know; and wound up by saying that he had
three words of command to teach them, which they must learn to
understand and act upon that very night.  They were, "Forward!"  "Halt!"
and "Fire!"  By saying the first of these words very slow and in a
drawling voice, thus, "Forw-a-a-a-a-a-rd!" and the second in a quick,
sharp tone, and the third in a ferocious yell that caused the whole band
to start, he actually got them to understand and distinguish the
difference between the commands, and to act upon them in the course of
half an hour.

The drill of his army being thus completed, Jack dismissed them with a
caution to hold themselves in readiness to answer promptly the first
call to arms; and the king enforced the caution by quietly assuring them
that the man who did not attend to this order, and otherwise respect and
obey Jack as if he were the king, should have his heart, eyes, and liver
torn out, and the rest of his carcass cast to the dogs--a threat which
seemed to us very horrible and uncalled for, but which, nevertheless,
was received by the black warriors with perfect indifference.

"Now, Mak," said Jack, as he descended to the ground, "do you come with
me, and help me to place sentries."

"W'at be dat, massa?"

"Men who are placed to guard the village from surprise during the
night," explained Jack.

"Ho! dat be de ting; me know someting 'bout dat."

"No doubt you do, but I daresay you don't know the best way to place
them; and perhaps you are not aware that the pretty little threat
uttered by the king shall be _almost_ carried out in the case of every
man who shall be found asleep at his post or who shall desert it."

The guide grinned and followed his commander in silence, while I
returned to our hut and busied myself in cleaning the rifles and making
other preparations for the expected fight.

At an early hour on the following morning we were awakened by the
arrival of one of the scouts, who reported that the Portuguese trader,
with a strong and well-armed force, was encamped on the margin of a
small pond about fifteen miles distant from the village.  The scout had
gone straight to the spot on being sent out, knowing that it was a
likely place for them to encamp, if they should encamp at all.  And here
he found them making active preparations for an attack on the village.
Creeping like a serpent through the grass, the scout approached near
enough to overhear their arrangements, which were to the elect that the
attack should take place at midnight of the following day.  He observed
that there were many prisoners in the camp--men, women, and children--
and these were to be left behind, in charge of a small party of armed
men; while the main body, under the immediate command of the Portuguese
trader, should proceed to the attack of the village.

From the scout's description of the prisoners, we became convinced that
they were none other than our friends Mbango and his people, and one
woman answering to the description of Okandaga was among them.

"So, Mak, we shall save her yet," cried Jack heartily, slapping the
shoulder of the guide, whose honest visage beamed with returning hope.

"Yis, massa.  S'pose we go off dis hour and fight 'em?"

"Nay; that were somewhat too hasty a movement.  `Slow but sure' must be
our motto until night.  Then we shall pounce upon our foes like a
leopard on his prey.  But ask the scout if that is all he has got to
tell us."

"Hims say, massa, dat hims find one leetle chile--one boy--when hims go
away from de camp to come back to here."

"A boy!" repeated Jack; "where--how?"

"In de woods, where hims was trow'd to die; so de scout take him up and
bring him to here."

"Ah, poor child!" said I; "no doubt it must have been sick, and being a
burden, has been left behind.  But stay.  How could that be possible if
