"I did the paper pretty well, mamma; I think; the examiner doesn't come
for two or three days; but--but--you won't be here--then," and back
came the memory of the fateful message, back came the fears at the
thought that he would be alone in the world then.

"How hot the room is," sighed Mrs Campbell.  "It makes me feel so weak."

"Ah! the air isn't like it was at Malta; is it, mamma?  You told me it
was so cool and sweet there; didn't you, mamma?"

"Yes, dear boy; but those cool winds have made me like this.  It was
sitting out, in the evenings there, that first gave me my cough.  But
it was God's will," she said half to herself, "and why should one look
to second causes?"

"Go and have your dinner, Harry dear or you will be late for school,"
she said to him.

"Must I go to school, mamma, and leave you?"

"Yes, dear," she answered, "it is far better for you to go, as usual.
They shall send for you if--if--  Go down now, dear," she added,
falteringly.

And when Harry hesitatingly left the room, Mrs Campbell turned her face
to the wall, and prayed to God, to guard the motherless child; to guard
the toilers on the sea; and then she thought of her girlhood, of her
bright, strong, healthy days; and then of her marriage in the ominous
Scotch mists, of the sojourning at Malta, of the journeyings to and
fro; and chiefly of her husband's love, and of her happy life; and from
the depths of her heart she thanked God for it all, and confessed that
it had indeed "been well."




CHAPTER VI.

INJURED INNOCENCE.

A surprise--Public opinion--Questioned--Circumstantial
evidence--Inexorable.


With a heavy heart Harry set out for school; but it was a walk of a
mile, and his spirits were very elastic; so that by the time he had
settled to his afternoon's work, all his old interest and excitement in
the examination had returned.  Again the class sat writing in their
corner-classroom, with busy fingers and hushed voices.

At half-past four Mr Prichard rose, contrary to his ordinary custom, to
collect the papers.  Harry had just opened his desk hastily for some
blotting paper, and as he took the piece from its wonted corner, what
was his astonishment to see Egerton's crib lying there.  As he was
making assurance doubly sure, that it really was the delectus-crib, he
felt a hand on his shoulder, and starting suddenly, found Mr Prichard
standing, looking over him into his desk.

"Give me your paper, Campbell," said Mr Prichard; "and that book!" he
added, sternly.

Harry's heart seemed to rise into his mouth.  He was too frightened to
utter a word, but gave up the book immediately with his paper.  The
whole affair had so astonished him that he scarcely knew whether he
stood on his head or his heels.

"Stay after school-prayers, Campbell," said Mr Prichard, as he passed
on, collecting the papers as he went.

Shortly after, the whole class rose, and many were the murmurs, "Sneak!
cribber!" that greeted Harry's burning ears as they all hurried along
towards the big schoolroom.

Poor boy! he felt in a sad strait, for he well knew how hard it would
be to clear himself.  However, the consciousness of his innocence gave
him a brave heart.  His mother had always told him that, no matter what
the consequences were, so long as his conscience told him he was in the
right, it was all well; and that seeming misfortunes would but work to
his final good.

Prayers over, Harry took up his position at Mr Prichard's desk.  It so
happened no boys were kept in that evening, so the rest of the masters
were soon gone; but somehow or other the room did not clear so speedily
as usual.  Harry's class especially was among the lingerers.  The
report had soon spread through the school.  And the boys (the younger
ones chiefly), always glad of a row when not themselves concerned,
stood peeping through the open doors.

"Leave the room at once, all of you," shouted Mr Prichard, "unless you
want an imposition?"

Waiting calmly and deliberately till the room was clear, and the doors
shut, while Harry longed, and yet dreaded for him to begin, Mr Prichard
turned and said--

"Well, Campbell, what have you to say for yourself?  This morning, I
catch you in the act of copying, or attempting to copy, from Egerton's
paper; and, now, this afternoon, I find you with a book in your
possession, which, you know, you have no business whatever to have.  I
suppose this will account for the correctness of your work during the
past half-year?  Do you feel very proud of your performance," he added,
sneeringly, "when none of it was your own labour or cleverness?"

Meek-hearted Harry was in tears long before this oration was concluded;
and the streaming face and crimson blushes only tended to confirm Mr
Prichard's conviction of his guilt.

"Please, sir, I wasn't copying off Egerton this morning," sobbed Harry;
"I wasn't copying off him; and it isn't my book.  It's--it's--it isn't
mine, sir!"

"It isn't yours, sir?" cried Mr Prichard, indignantly.  "Have you the
face to contradict me flatly, sir, and say the book does not belong to
you?  Whose name is that?" he cried, holding the delectus-translation,
open at its fly-leaf, to Harry.

And there plain enough it was--_Harry Campbell_.

"No, sir, no; it isn't mine," persisted Harry, through his tears.  "It
isn't mine.  I never saw it till this morning."

"You are only adding to your wrong conduct, Campbell," said Mr Prichard
very gravely.  "It is bad enough for you to take unfair advantage of
your school-fellows; but you make the whole matter ten times worse by
telling a deliberate falsehood.  The book is yours.  Your name is in
it."

In vain Harry protested his innocence; Mr Prichard remained inexorable.

"You will come with me to Dr Palmer to-morrow," and putting the book
into his pocket, he stalked from the room.




CHAPTER VII.

A BOY FIGHT AT SCHOOL.

Lynch law--At bay--Bully Warburton--Single combat--The deciding
round--Harry is victorious.


If Harry felt heavy-hearted when he started for home that afternoon,
what must he have felt now?  Deeper than ever he was plunged in the
trouble from which he knew not how to extricate himself.  His thoughts,
however, soon flew to his mother.  He knew that there he would find
comfort, that there, at least, he would be believed.  So carefully
wiping away all traces of his tears, and putting on as brave a face as
he could, he strapped his books together, and ran down the broad stone
stairs into the lobby.

For some time, however, he could not find his cap.  It did not need
much reflection to tell him what this meant or foreboded.  It was the
beginning of persecution.  But after rumaging about among the boxes
kept in the lobby, his patience was at length rewarded.  There, in a
corner, was the missing cap; but torn and dirty and much injured.
Nothing daunted, he cleaned it as well as he could, and, putting it on,
emerged into the play-ground.

Just as he was fairly in the open, walking quickly towards the gates,
and not looking about him, he heard a burst of voices that bore no
pleasant meaning; and then a body of tennis-balls flew all round
him--some hitting him smartly, some whizzing within an ace of him.

As soon as he had recovered from the first shock of his astonishment,
stung and bruised, he looked to see who were his assailants, and there
he saw about twenty boys, mostly of his own age and size, in fact,
belonging to his form; though several of the crowd stood out from the
rest, as older and bigger.

Harry's weakness was now turned to indignation.

"You beastly cowards!" he cried, "what have I done to you?"

"Thought to get the prize by cribbing, did you, you sneak?"

"I did not crib," shouted Harry, who had not stirred from where he was
first hit by the balls.

"You little liar, you did.  Give it him again," cried one of the bigger
boys; and then another shower of balls fell thick about him.

"I'm not a liar.  It's you're the liars, and the cowards too," he
cried, coming nearer the crowd; and then the boys, too, crowded nearer
to him.

"Do you mean to call me a liar?  Do you mean to call me a coward?"
cried one after the other--the bigger boys now being louder and more
threatening in their tones.

"Yes, I do," answered Harry, "if you say I cribbed, when I didn't.  And
you are cowards to all set on one."

"Leave him to me," said Warburton, a tall, ungainly boy of fourteen, as
boy after boy was eager to take the quarrel to himself.  "I'll teach
him.  Now, you young brute," he cried, advancing to Harry.  "Do you
mean to call me a liar and a coward?"

[Illustration: "'Leave him to me,' said Warburton, a tall ungainly boy
of fourteen, as boy after boy was eager to take the quarrel to
himself."--WILTON SCHOOL, page 52.]

"Yes, I do," persisted Harry, as Warburton came nearer, and shook his
fist in his face.  "It wasn't my crib; and you'd better not hit me!"

"Better not hit _you_," jeered Warburton; while the group echoed,
"Better not hit him, indeed!  Give him a good licking for his cheek,
Warburton; I would if I were you!"

Warburton's jeer was very forced, but the voices of the rest gave him
courage.  So he rushed at Harry.  The latter, however, seeing what to
expect, threw away his books, and then flew at Warburton, who, from
sheer astonishment at having actually to fight when he thought to
administer an easy licking, began the combat at rather a disadvantage.
Both hit very wildly at first, and not much damage was done.  Of the
two, Warburton was most out of breath, for he had been hitting
furiously at Harry, who, not being strong enough to ward off the blows
with his arms, had been forced to dodge and duck his head.

Presently they got into a corner close to the lobby-door, and Harry was
beginning to flag.  Not a word all this time had been uttered by the
on-lookers.  They would not back Harry; and to cheer on Warburton would
be ridiculous.  "Of course he would lick him all to pieces in a
minute," they said.

But the minute had been a good long one, and all in their hearts were
somewhat surprised.  Just then Egerton came up; and Harry could
scarcely believe his ears, when one voice alone came out of the crowd,
cheering him on, and saying, "Go it, Campbell!  Well fought!  I'll back
you, after all."  And the voice was Egerton's.

At that moment Warburton was making a furious charge at him, when Harry
stepped sharply aside, and gathering all his remaining force into one
blow, hit his foe on the jaw: at the same instant Warburton slipped,
and the blow and the false step terminated the fight, for he fell
violently through the open lobby-door upon the stone floor.

"Well fought, Campbell! well fought!" cried Egerton.

No one else uttered a word.

Waiting till Warburton was on his feet again, his mouth bleeding, his
face very crestfallen, Harry picked up his books, and shaking off
Egerton's congratulations and friendly words, for he felt he was far
more his enemy than Warburton, started home.

A good bathe in the lavatory set the mouth to rights; but Warburton was
utterly cowed, and had learnt a lesson, which the rest had learnt too,
that meek-hearted boys may bear a good deal of bullying, but that even
to their endurance there is a certain limit.




CHAPTER VIII.

FRIENDS IN MISFORTUNE.

Ominous words--A visitor--Harry breaks down--A confused story--What is
to be done?--In good keeping.


Harry reached the farm about six o'clock--later than his usual time,
and he knew his mother would be sure to inquire the reason; and,
besides, his hair was very rough, and there was a suspicious-looking
red mark on his left cheekbone.  However, he was no sooner inside the
house than he ran straight up-stairs to his mother.  Her bedroom door
was just ajar, and hearing a strange voice proceeding from the room.
Harry knew some one was with her; so he sat down on the stairs, hoping
that it would not be long before he might go in to see her.  His heart
was bursting to tell her all.  He could keep it a secret no longer.
To-morrow was the dreaded day when he was to be taken before Dr Palmer,
and what the punishment might be, he dared not think.  Expulsion,
perhaps: certainly the loss of his place in his class, and nothing
scarcely could be worse than that.  Poor boy, he was in ignorance (and
happily so) of the extent of the fault of cribbing.  Most boys would
have said: "I shall get a good caning, but I can get my crib again soon
enough."

It was a lady who was with Mrs Campbell; so Harry knew from the voice,
which was soft and sweet.  She was talking quietly to his mother about
her death; and as the words fell upon the silence.  Harry listened
eagerly for every syllable, nervous and trembling, and grew more
miserable as each minute stole wearily by.

"It wouldn't have been so hard to die," Mrs Campbell was saying, "if he
could only have been with me till the last.  Dear Alan!  I wonder where
he is now?"

"Yet think, dear Mrs Campbell, how he is spared the pain of seeing you
suffer," said the doctor's wife, for it was she.  "You love him well
enough, I know, to enable you to think this, don't you?"

"Oh, yes! yes!" answered the dying wife.  "God knows what is for our
good.  It may have saved him much pain and sorrow.  Dear Alan!" and her
voice grew very low.  She was talking half to herself.  Then, as the
new thought flashed across, she said again aloud, "But what will become
of Harry when I am gone, and Alan out at sea?"

And Harry, where he sat on the stairs in the deepening dusk, burst into
tears.  His mother's quick ears caught the sound of his sobs, and she
exclaimed:

"Why, there is Harry crying on the stairs?  Tell him to come in, will
you, Mrs Bromley?"

Harry needed no telling.  He was soon in the room, at his mother's
bedside, and clasped in her arms.

"Don't cry, Harry, darling," the weak voice said.  "Don't cry so!"

"You aren't really going to die, mamma?  What shall I do without
you?--all alone--and--and Dr Palmer won't believe me.  I know he
won't," sobbed Harry.

