suddenly appeared to them.

An apparition, however, that is welcome; altogether different to the
impression it has produced upon their guide.

Meanwhile, Wilder advances to meet them; as he comes on, keeping up a
fire of exclamatory phrases, addressed to Hamersley, who is close
behind.

"Air this chile awake, or only dreaming?  Look thar, Frank!  That's Ned
Haynes, my old captin'.  An' thar's Nat Cully, an' Jim Buckland.  Durn
it, thar's the hul strenth o' the kumpany."

Walt is now close to their horses' heads, and the rangers, assured it is
himself and not his ghost, are still stricken with surprise.  Some of
them turn towards the Mexican for explanation.  They suppose him to have
lied in his story about their old comrade having been closed up in a
cave, though with what motive they cannot guess.  The man's appearance
does not make things any clearer.  He still stands affrighted,
trembling, and repeating his Paternosters.  But now in changed tone, for
his fear is no longer of the supernatural.  Reason reasserting itself,
he has given up the idea of disembodied spirits, convinced that the two
figures coming forward are real flesh and blood; the same whose blood he
assisted in spilling, and whose flesh he lately believed to be decaying
in the obscurity of a cave.  He stands appalled as ever; no more with
unearthly awe, but the fear of an earthly retribution--a terrible one,
which he is conscious of having provoked by the cruel crime in which he
participated.

Whatever his fears and reflections they are not for the time intruded
upon.  The rangers, after giving a glance to him, turn to the two men
who are now at their horses' heads; and, springing from their saddles,
cluster around them with questions upon their tongues and eager
expectations in their eyes.

The captain and Cully are the two first who interrogate.

"Can we be sure it's you, Walt?" is the interrogatory put by his old
officer.  "Is it yourself?"

"Darn me ef I know, cap.  Jess now I ain't sure o' anythin', arter
what's passed.  Specially meetin' you wi' the rest o' the boys.  Say,
cap, what's fetched ye out hyar?"

"You."

"Me!"

"Yes; we came to bury you."

"Yis, hoss," adds Cully, confirming the captain's statement.  "We're on
the way to gie burial to your bones, not expecting to find so much flesh
on 'em.  For that purpiss we've come express all the way from Peecawn
Crik.  An' as I know'd you had a kindly feelin' for yur ole shootin'-
iron, I've brought that along to lay it in the grave aside o' ye."

While speaking, Cully slips out of his saddle and gives his old comrade
a true prairie embrace, at the same time handing him his gun.

Neither the words nor the weapon makes things any clearer to Walt, but
rather add to their complication.  With increased astonishment he cries
out,--

"Geehorum!  Am I myself, or somebody else?  Is't a dream, or not?
That's my ole shootin' stick, sartin.  I left it over my hoss, arter
cuttin' the poor critter's throat.  Maybe you've got him too?  I shedn't
now be surprised at anythin'.  Come, Nat; don't stan' shilly-shallyin',
but tell me all about it.  Whar did ye git the gun?"

"On Peecawn Crik.  Thar we kim acrost a party o' Tenawa Kimanch, unner a
chief they call Horned Lizart, o' the whom ye've heern.  He han't no
name now, seein' he's rubbed out, wi' the majority of his band.  We did
that.  The skrimmage tuk place on the crik, whar we foun' them camped.
It didn't last long; an' arter 'twere eended, lookin' about among thar
bodies, we foun' thar beauty o' a chief wi' this gun upon his parson,
tight clutched in the death-grup.  Soon's seeing it I know'd 'twar
yourn; an' in coorse surspected ye'd had some mischance.  Still, the gun
kedn't gie us any informashun o' how you'd parted wi' it.  By good luck,
'mong the Injuns we'd captered a Mexikin rennygade--thet thing ye see
out thar.  He war joined in Horned Lizart's lot, an' he'd been wi' 'em
some time.  So we put a loose larzette roun' his thrapple, an' on the
promise o' its bein' tightened, he tolt us the hul story; how they hed
attackted an' skuttled a carryvan, an' all 'bout entoomin' you an' a
kimrade--this young fellur, I take it--who war wi' ye.  Our bizness out
hyar war to look up yur bones an' gie 'em a more Christyun kind o'
beril.  We were goin' for that cave, the rennygade guidin' us.  He said
he ked take us a near cut up the gully through which we've just come--
arter ascendin' one o' the heads o' the Loosyvana Rod.  Near cut!
Doggone it, he's been righter than I reck'n he thort o'.  Stead o' your
bones thar's yur body, wi' as much beef on't as ever.  Now I've told our
story, we want yourn, the which appears to be a darned deal more o' a
unexplainable mistry than ourn.  So open yur head, ole hoss, and let's
have it."

Brief and graphic as is Cully's narrative, it takes Walt still less time
to put his former associates in possession of what has happened to
himself and Hamersley, whom he introduces to them as the companion of
his perilous adventures--the second of the two believed to have been
buried alive!



CHAPTER FIFTY NINE.

MUTUAL EXPLANATIONS.

The arrival of the Rangers at that particular time is certainly a
contingency of the strangest kind.  Ten minutes later, and they would
have found the jacal deserted; for Hamersley and Wilder had made up
their minds to set off, taking the traitor along with them.  The Texans
would have discovered signs to tell of the place having been recently
occupied by a large body of men, and from the tracks of shod horses
these skilled trailers would have known the riders were not Indians.
Still, they would have made delay around the ranche and encamped in the
valley for that night.  This had been their intention, their horses
being jaded and themselves wearied making their way up the canon.
Though but ten miles in a direct line, it was well nigh twenty by the
winding of the stream--a good, even difficult, day's journey.

On going out above they would have seen the trail of Uraga's party, and
known it to be made by Mexican soldiers.  But, though these were their
sworn foemen, they might not have been tempted to follow them.  The
start of several hours, their own animals in poor condition, the
likelihood of a larger force of the enemy being near--all this would
have weighed with them, and they would have continued on to the cave
whither the renegade was guiding them--a direction altogether different.
A very singular coincidence, then, their coming up at that exact
instant.  It seemed the hand of Providence opportunely extended; and in
this light Hamersley looked upon it, as also the ex-Ranger.

Briefly as may be they make known to the new-comers all that had
transpired, or as much as for the time needs to be told.  Then appeal to
them for assistance.

By the Texans their cause is instantly espoused--unanimously, without
one dissenting voice.  On the contrary, all are uttered with an energy
and warmth that give Hamersley a world of hope.  Here are friends, whose
enemies are his own.  And they are in strength sufficient to pursue
Uraga's troop and destroy it.  They may overtake it that very night; if
not, on the morrow.  And if not then, they will pursue it to the borders
of New Mexico--to the banks of the Del Norte itself.

His heart is no more depressed.  The chance of rescuing his friends from
death and saving his betrothed from dishonour is no longer hopeless.
There is now a probability--almost a certainty--of its success.  Backed
by Wilder, he proposes instant pursuit.

To the Texans the proposal is like an invitation to a ball or frontier
fandango.  Excitement is the breath of their life, and a fight with
Mexicans their joy; a pursuit of these their supremest delight.  Such as
this, moreover, having for its object not only the defeat of a hated
foe, but the recovery of captives, beautiful women, as their old comrade
Walt enthusiastically describes them, is the very thing to rouse the
Rangers to energetic action, rekindling in their hearts the spirit of
frontier chivalry--the same which led them to become Rangers.

Notwithstanding their wild enthusiasm they do not proceed rashly.
Haynes, their captain, is an old "Indian fighter," one of the most
experienced chiefs of that Texan border warfare, so long continued.

Checking their impatience to pursue at once, he counsels prudence and
deliberate action.  Cully also recommends this course.

"But why should we lose a moment?" inquires the hot-blooded Kentuckian,
chafing at the delay; "they cannot yet be more than ten miles off.  We
may overtake them before sunset."

"That's just what we mustn't do," rejoins the Ranger chief.  "Suppose
they get sight of us before we're near?  On the naked plain, you say it
is, they'd be sure to do that.  What then?  Their horses, I take it, are
fresh, compared with ours.  They might gallop off and leave us gazing
after them like so many April fools.  They'd have time, too, to take
their prisoners along with them."

This last speech makes an impression upon all.  Even Hamersley no longer
offers opposition.

"Let the sun go down," continues the Texan captain; "that's just what we
want.  Since they're bound due west I reckon we can easily keep on their
trail, clear night or dark one.  Here's Nat Cully can do that; and if
our friend Walt hasn't lost his old skill he can be trusted for the
same."

The Ranger and ex-Ranger, both standing by, remain modestly silent.

"Our plan will be," pursues Haynes, "to approach their camp under cover
of night, surround, and so make certain of them.  They'll have a camp;
and these Mexican soldiers are such greenhorns, they're sure to keep big
fires burning, if it is only to give them light for their card-playing.
The blaze'll guide us to their squatting-ground, wherever they may make
it."

The captain's scheme seems so rational that no one opposes it.  Walt
Wilder in words signifies assent to it, and Hamersley, with, some
reluctance, is at length constrained to do the same.

It is resolved to remain two hours longer in the valley, and then start
for the upper plain.  That will give time to recruit their horses on the
nutritious _gramma_ grass, as themselves on the game they have killed
before entering the canon.  This hangs plentifully over the horns of
their saddles, in the shape of wild turkeys, haunches of venison, and
pieces of bear meat.

The fire on the cabin hearth and those kindled by the soldiers outside
are still smouldering.  They are quickly replenished, and the abandoned
cooking utensils once more called into use.  But pointed saplings, and
the iron ramrods of their rifles--the Ranger's ordinary spit--are in
greater demand, and broiling is the style of _cuisine_ most resorted to.

The turkeys are plucked and singed, the venison and bear meat cut into
collops, and soon two score pieces are sputtering in the flames of
half-a-dozen bivouac fires, while the horses, unbridled, are led out
upon their lariats, and given to the grass.



CHAPTER SIXTY.

CROSS-QUESTIONING.

While the Rangers are preparing for their Homeric repast, a group
gathered in front of the jacal is occupied with an affair altogether
different.

The individuals most conspicuous in it are the Texan captain, the guide
Cully, Walt Wilder, and the young Kentuckian, though several besides
take part in the conference.

Two others are concerned in it, though not forming figures in the group.
They are some paces apart, lying on the grass, both bound.  These are
the traitor Manuel and the renegade Barbato.

Both Indian and Mexican appear terribly cowed and crestfallen, for both
feel themselves in what Cully or Walt Wilder would call a "bad fix."
They are, in truth, in a dangerous predicament; for, now that Walt and
the Kentuckian have turned up alive, what with the story they have to
tell, added to that already known to the Rangers--comparing notes
between the two parties--new light is let in, floods of it, falling upon
spots hitherto dark, and clearing up points confused and obscure.  The
two culprits are again cross-examined, and, with pistols held to their
heads, forced to still further confession.

The peon repeats what he has already told, without adding much, not
having much to add.  With the renegade it is different.  He has kept
much back concerning the part played by Uraga and his lieutenant in the
affair of the destroyed waggon train.

But with Hamersley, who speaks his own native tongue, now
cross-questioning him, and Walt Wilder to extract his testimony by the
persuasive influence of a knife-blade glistening in his eyes, he goes
further, and admits the unnatural confederation that existed between the
white and red robbers--the Mexican colonel and Comanche chief.  In
short, to save his life, he makes a much cleaner breast of it than
before, this time only keeping back his own special guiltiness in being
their willing go-between.

While he is repeating his confession, all the other Rangers gather
around the group to listen to him.  They stand silent, with bated breath
and brows contracted.

When at length they become possessed of the tale in all its diabolical
atrocity, all its completeness, their anger, already excited, become
almost ungovernable; and it is as much as their captain can do to
restrain them from at once starting in pursuit.  Some fling their spits
in the fire with the meat upon them still untouched; others drop the
pieces roasted and partly eaten; most demanding to be led on.

The counsels of the more prudent prevail; and again tranquillised, they
recover the morsels of meat and continue their repast.

Not long, till they have reason to regret the delay and deem the
prudence misplaced.  Though this arises not from any mistake on the part
of their counsellors, but from a circumstance entirely accidental.

While they are still in the midst of their meal, the sky, all day long
of cerulean clearness, becomes suddenly clouded.  Not as this term is
understood in the ordinary sense, but absolutely black, as if the sun
were instantly eclipsed, or had dropped altogether out of the firmament.
Scarce ten minutes after its commencement the obscurity has reached
completeness--that of a total solar eclipse or as in a starless night.

Though troubled at the change, none of the Rangers are dismayed by it,
or even surprised.  The old prairie men are the least astonished, since
they know what it means.  At the first portentous sign Cully is heard
crying out,--

"A hurricane!--A norther!"

Wat Wilder has observed it at the same time, and confirms the
prognostic.  This is before any of the others have noticed aught
peculiar in the aspect of the sky, and when there is just the selvedge
of a cloud seen above the cliff.

All Texans understand the significance of the word "norther"--a storm or
tornado, usually preceded by a hot, stifling atmosphere, with drifting
dust, accompanied by sheet or forked lightning and claps of terrific
thunder, followed by wind and rain, sometimes hail or sleet, as if the
sluices of heaven were drawn open, ending in a continued blast of more
regular direction, but chill as though coming direct from the Arctic
regions.

In less than ten minutes after its first sign, the tempest is around
them.  Down into the valley pours the dust, swept from the surface of
the upper plain, along with it the leaves and stalks of the wild
wormwood, with other weeds of the desert.  Simultaneously the wind, at
first in low sighs, like the sound of a distant sea; then roaring
against the rocks, and swooping down among the trees, whose branches go
crashing before its blast.  Then succeed lightning, thunder, and rain--
the last falling, not in drops, but in sheets, as if spilled from a
spout.

For shelter the Rangers rush inside the ranche, leaving their horses to
take care of themselves.  The latter stand cowering under the trees,
neighing with affright--the mules among them giving vent to their
plaintive hinney.  There are dogs, too, that howl and bark, with other
sounds that come from farther off--from the wild denizens of the
wilderness; cries of the cougar in contralto, wolf-barkings in
mezzo-soprano, screaming of eagles in shrill treble, snorting of bears
in basso, and hooting of scared owls in lugubrious tone, to be likened
only to the wailing of agonised spirits in Purgatory.

Crowded within the hut, so thickly as to have scarce standing room, the
Rangers wait for the calming of the tempest.  They submit with greater
resignation, knowing it will not long continue.  It is far from being
their first experience of a "norther."

The only thought that troubles them is the delay--being hindered from
setting forth on the pursuit.  True, the party to be pursued will be
stayed by the same obstruction.  The soldiers will have to halt during
the continuance of the storm, so that the distance between will remain
the same.

But then their tracks will be obliterated--every vestige of them.  The
wind, the rain, and dust will do this.  How is their trail to be taken
up?  "That will be easy enough," says one, whose self-esteem is greater
than his prairie experience.  He adds: "As they're going due west, we
can't make any mistake by steering the same way."

"How little he knows about it!" is the muttered remark exchanged between
Wilder and Cully.  For they know that the deflection of a single point
upon the prairies--above all, upon the Staked Plain--will leave the
traveller, like a ship at sea without chart or compass, to steer by
guesswork, or go drifting at sheer chance.

To most, the consoling thought is that the Mexicans will halt near, and
stay till the storm is over.  They have some baggage--a tent or two,
with other camp equipage.  This is learnt from the Indian; and
Hamersley, as also Wilder, have themselves made note of it.

To the returning soldiers there can be no great reason for haste, and
they will not likely resume their march till the sky is quite clear.
Therefore they will gain nothing in distance.

Satisfied by such assurance given by the sager ones of the party, the
Rangers remain inside the hut, on the roof of which the rain dashes
down, without experiencing any keen pangs of impatience.  Some of them
even jest--their jokes having allusion to the close quarters in which
they are packed, and other like trifles incidental to the situation.

Walt Wilder for a while gives way to this humour.  Whatever may be the
danger of Don Valerian and the others, he does not believe his
sweetheart much exposed.  The little brown-skinned damsel is not in the
proscribed list; and the ex-Ranger, strong in the confidence of having
her heart, with the promise of her hand, has less reason to be
apprehensive about the consequences.  Besides, he is now in the midst of
his former associates, and the exchange of new histories and old
reminiscences is sufficient to fill up the time, and keep him from
yielding to impatient longing.

Of all Hamersley alone is unhappy.  Despite the assurances spoken, the
hopes felt, there is yet apprehension for the future.  The position,
however, is endurable, and only passes this point as a thought comes
into his mind--a memory that flashes across his brain, as if a bullet
had struck him between the temples.

It causes him to spring suddenly to his feet, for he has been seated, at
the same time wringing from him a cry of peculiar signification.

"What is it, Mr Hamersley?" asks the Ranger Captain, who is close by
his side.

"My God!" exclaims the Kentuckian.  "I'd forgotten.  We must be off at
once, or we shall be too late--too late!"

Saying this, he makes a dash for the door, hurtling his way through the
crowd close standing between.

The Rangers regard him with glances of astonishment, and doubts about
his sanity.  Some of them actually think he has gone mad!

One alone understands him--Walt Wilder; though he, too, seems demented.
With like incoherent speech and frantic gesture, he follows Hamersley to
the door.

Both rush outside; as they do so calling back, "Come on! come on!"



CHAPTER SIXTY ONE.

INTO THE STORM.

Lightning flashes, thunder rolls, wind bellows, and rain pours down in
sheets, as if from sluices; for the storm is still raging as furiously
as ever.  Into it have rushed the two, regardless of all.

The Texans are astounded--for a time some of them still believing both
men mad.  But soon it is seen they are acting with method, making
straight for the horses, while shouting and gesticulating for the
Rangers to come after.

These do not need either the shouts or signs to be repeated.  Walt's old
comrades know he must have reason, and, disregarding the tempest, they
strike out after.  Their example is electric, and in ten seconds the
jacal is empty.

In ten more they are among their horses, drawing in the trail-ropes and
bridling them.

Before they can get into their saddles they are made aware of what it is
all about.

Hamersley and Walt, already mounted and waiting, make known to the
Ranger captain the cause of their hurried action, apparently so
eccentric.  A few words suffice.

"The way out," says the Kentuckian, "is up yonder ravine, along the bed
of the stream that runs through.  When it rains as it's doing now, then
the water suddenly rises and fills up the channel, leaving no room, no
road.  If we don't get out quick we may be kept here for days."

"Yis, boys!" adds Wilder, "we've got to climb the stairs right smart,
rain or shine, storm or no storm.  Hyar's one off for the upper storey,
fast as his critter kin carry him."

While speaking, he jobs his heels against the ribs of his horse--for he
is now mounted on one, as also Hamersley--supernumeraries of the Texan
troop.  Then, dashing off, with the Kentuckian by his side, they are
soon under the trees and out of sight.  Not of the Rangers, who,
themselves now in the saddle, spur after in straggling line, riding at
top speed.

Once again the place is deserted, for, despite their precipitate
leave-taking, the Texans have carried the prisoners along with them.  No
living thing remains by the abandoned dwelling.  The only sign of human
occupation is the smoke that ascends through its kitchen chimney, and
from the camp fires outside, these gradually getting extinguished by the
downpour.

Still the lightning flashes, the thunder rolls, the wind bellows, and
the rain pours down as from dishes.  But not to deter the Texans, who,
drenched to their shirts, continue to ride rapidly on up the valley
road.  There is in reality no road, only a trail made by wild animals,
occasionally trodden by the domesticated ones belonging to Colonel
Miranda; later still by Uraga's lancers.

Soaked by the rain, it has become a bed of mud, into which the horses of
the Rangers sink to their saddle girths, greatly impeding their
progress.  Whip and spur as they may, they make but slow time.  The
animals baulk, plunge, stumble, some going headforemost into the mire,
others striking their shoulders against the thick-standing trees, doing
damage to themselves and their riders.  For with the norther still
clouding the sky, it is almost dark as night.

Other dangers assail them from falling trees.  Some go down bodily
before the blast, while from others great branches are broken off by the
wind, and strike crashing across the path.  One comes near crushing half
a dozen horsemen under its broad, spreading avalanche of boughs.

Notwithstanding all, they struggle on fearlessly, and fast as they can,
