leathern bag which contained their earnings.

"Come now," said he, replenishing his pipe, "let's hear the letter, Bax,
who d'ye say's the friend you've written to?"

"He's a boy," said Bax, "Tommy Bogey by name, of which name, by the way,
he has no reason to be proud--but he's a first-rate fellow, and I fear
will have set me down as a faithless friend, for I left him without
saying good-bye, and the letter I wrote to him on my arrival here went
to the bottom with the unfortunate ship that carried it.  However, here
is the epistle.  I'm open to correction, Harry, if you think any part of
it not ship-shape."

"All right," said Harry, "go ahead."

Bax read as follows:--

  "Kangaroo Flats, Daisy Hill Diggings,

  "Australia, _10th January_, 18--.

  "MY DEAR TOMMY,--The mail is just about to leave us, so I write to let
  you know where I am and what doing--also to tell you that I have just
  heard of the wreck of the ship that conveyed my first letter to you,
  which will account for my _apparent_ neglect.

  "Gold digging is anything but a paying affair, I find, and it's the
  hardest work I've ever had to do.  I have only been able to pay my way
  up to this time.  Everything is fearfully dear.  After deducting the
  expenses of the last week for cartage, sharpening picks, etcetera, I
  and my mate have just realised 15 shillings each; and this is the
  first week we have made anything at all beyond what was required for
  our living.  However, we live and work on in the hope of turning up a
  nugget, or finding a rich claim, singing--though we can't exactly
  believe--`There's a good time coming.'"  Here Bax paused.  "I won't
  read the next paragraph," said he, with a smile, "because it's about
  yourself, Harry, so I'll skip."

Nevertheless, reader, as we wish _you_ to hear that passage, we will
make Bax read on.

  "My mate, Harry Benton, is an old schoolfellow, whom I met with
  accidentally in Melbourne.  We joined at once, and have been together
  ever since.  I hope that nothing may occur to part us.  You would like
  him, Tommy.  You've no idea what a fine, gentle, lion-like fellow he
  is, with a face like a true, bold man in expression, and like a
  beautiful woman in form.  I'm not up to pen-and-ink description,
  Tommy, but I think you'll understand me when I say he's got a splendid
  figure-head, a strong frame, and a warm heart.

  "Poor fellow, he has had much sorrow since he came out here.  He is a
  widower, and brought out his little daughter with him, an only child,
  whose sweet face was once like sunshine in our tent.  Not long ago
  this pretty flower of the desert sickened, drooped, and died, with her
  fair head on her father's bosom.  For a long time afterwards Harry was
  inconsolable; but he took to reading the Bible, and the effect of that
  has been wonderful.  We read it regularly every night together, and no
  one can tell what comfort we have in it, for I too have had sorrow of
  a kind which you could not well understand, unless I were to go into
  an elaborate explanation.  I believe that both of us can say, in the
  words of King David, `It was good for me that I was afflicted.'

  "I should like _very_ much that you and he might meet.  Perhaps you
  may one of these days!  But, to go on with my account of our life and
  doings here."

(It was at this point that Bax continued to read the letter aloud.)

  "The weather is tremendously warm.  It is now (10th January) the
  height of summer, and the sun is unbearable; quite as hot as in India,
  I am told; especially when the hot winds blow.  Among other evils, we
  are tormented with thousands of fleas.  Harry stands them worse than I
  do," ("untrue!" interrupted Harry), "but their cousins the flies are,
  if possible, even more exasperating.  They resemble our own house
  flies in appearance--would that they were equally harmless!  Myriads
  of millions don't express their numbers more than ten expresses the
  number of the stars.  They are the most persevering brutes you ever
  saw.  They creep into your eyes, run up your nose, and plunge into
  your mouth.  Nothing will shake them off, and the mean despicable
  creatures take special advantage of us when our hands are occupied in
  carrying buckets of gold-dust, or what, alas! ought to be gold-dust,
  but isn't!  On such occasions we shake our heads, wink our eyes, and
  snort and blow at them, but all to no purpose--there they stick and
  creep, till we get our hands free to attack them.

  "A change must be coming over the weather soon, for while I write, the
  wind is blowing like a gale out of a hot oven, and is shaking the
  tent, so that I fear it will come down about my ears.  It is a curious
  fact that these hot winds always blow from the north, which inclines
  me to think there must be large sandy deserts in the interior of this
  vast continent.  We don't feel the heat through the day, except when
  we are at the windlass drawing up the pipeclay, or while washing our
  `stuff,' for we are generally below ground `driving.'  But, although
  not so hot as above, it is desperately warm there too, and the air is
  bad.

  "Our drives are two and a half feet high by about two feet broad at
  the floor, from which they widen a little towards the top.  As I am
  six feet three in my stockings, and Harry is six feet one, besides
  being, both of us, broader across the shoulders than most men, you may
  fancy that we get into all sorts of shapes while working.  All the
  `stuff' that we drive out we throw away, except about six inches on
  the top where the gold lies, so that the quantity of mullock, as we
  call it, or useless material hoisted out is very great.  There are
  immense heaps of it lying at the mouth of our hole.  If we chose to
  liken ourselves to gigantic moles, we have reason to be proud of our
  mole-hills!  All this `stuff' has to be got along the drives, some of
  which are twenty-five feet in length.  One of us stands at the top,
  and hoists the stuff up the shaft in buckets.  The other sits and
  fills them at the bottom.

  "This week we have taken out three cart-loads of washing stuff, which
  we fear will produce very little gold.  Of course it is quite dark in
  the drives, so we use composition candles.  Harry drives in one
  direction, I in another, and we hammer away from morning till night.
  The air is often bad, but not explosive.  When the candles burn low
  and go out, it is time for us to go out too and get fresh air, for it
  makes us blow terribly, and gives us sore eyes.  Three-fourths of the
  people here are suffering from sore eyes; the disease is worse this
  season than it has been in the memory of the oldest diggers.

  "We have killed six or seven snakes lately.  They are very numerous,
  and the only things in the country we are absolutely _afraid_ of!  You
  have no idea of the sort of dread one feels on coming slap upon one
  unexpectedly.  Harry put his foot on one yesterday, but got no hurt.
  They are not easily seen, and their bite is always fatal.

  "From all this you will see that a gold-digger's life is a hard one,
  and worse than that, it does not pay well.  However, I like it in the
  meantime, and having taken it up, I shall certainly give it a fair
  trial.

  "I wish you were here, Tommy; yet I am glad you are not.  To have you
  and Guy in the tent would make our party perfect, but it would try
  your constitutions I fear, and do you no good mentally, for the
  society by which we are surrounded is anything but select.

  "But enough of the gold-fields.  I have a lot of questions to ask and
  messages to send to my old friends and mates at Deal."

At this point the reading of the letter was interrupted by an uproar
near the tent.  High above the noise the voice of a boy was heard in
great indignation.

For a few minutes Bax and his friend did not move; they were too much
accustomed to scenes of violence among the miners to think of
interfering, unless things became very serious.

"Come, Bill, let him alone," cried a stern voice, "the lad's no thief,
as you may see if you look in his face."

"I don't give a straw for looks and faces," retorted Bill, who seemed to
have caused the uproar, "the young rascal came peeping into my tent, and
that's enough for me."

"What!" cried the boy, in an indignant shout, "may I not search through
the tents to find a friend without being abused by every scoundrel who
loves his gold so much that he thinks every one who looks at him wants
to steal it?  Let me go, I say!"

At the first words of this sentence Bax started up with a look of
intense surprise.  Before it was finished he had seized a thick stick,
and rushed from the tent, followed by his mate.

In two seconds they reached the centre of a ring of disputants, in the
midst of which a big, coarse-looking miner held by the collar the
indignant lad, who proved to be an old and truly unexpected
acquaintance.

"Bax!" shouted the boy.

"Tommy Bogey!" exclaimed Bax.

"Off your hands," cried Bax, striding forward.

The miner, who was a powerful man, hesitated.  Bax seized him by the
neck, and sent him head over heels into his own tent, which stood behind
him.

"Serves him right!" cried one of the crowd, who appeared to be delighted
with the prospect of a row.

"Hear, hear!" echoed the rest approvingly.

"Can it be _you_, Tommy?" cried Bax, grasping the boy by both arms, and
stooping to gaze into his face.

"Found you at last!" shouted Tommy, with his eyes full and his face
flushed by conflicting emotions.

"Come into the tent," cried Bax, hastening away and dragging his friend
after him.

Tommy did not know whether to laugh or cry.  His breast was still
heaving with recent indignation, and his heart was bursting with present
joy; so he gave utterance to a wild hysterical cheer, and disappeared
behind the folds of his friend's tent, amid the cheers and laughter of
the miners, who thereafter dispersed quietly to their several places of
abode.

"Tommy," said Bax, placing the boy directly in front of him, on a pile
of rough coats and blankets, and staring earnestly into his face, "I
don't believe it's you!  I'm dreaming, that's what I am, so the sooner
you pinch me out of this state the better."

It were vain to attempt to give the broken and disjointed converse that
here took place between the two friends.  After a time they became more
rational and less spasmodic in their talk, and Tommy at last
condescended to explain the way in which he had managed to get there.

"But before I begin," said he, "tell me who's your friend?"

He turned as he spoke to Harry, who, seated on a provision cask, with a
pleasant smile on his handsome face and a black pipe in his mouth, had
been enjoying the scene immensely.

"Ah! true, I forgot; this is my mate, Harry Benton, an old
school-fellow.  You'll know more of him and like him better in course of
time."

"I hope he will," said Harry, extending his hand, which Tommy grasped
and shook warmly, "and I hope to become better acquainted with you,
Tommy, though in truth you are no stranger to me, for many a night has
Bax entertained me in this tent with accounts of your doings and his
own, both by land and sea.  Now go on, my boy, and explain the mystery
of your sudden appearance here."

"The prime cause of my appearance is the faithlessness of Bax," said
Tommy.  "Why did you not write to me?"

When it was explained that Bax had written by a vessel which was
wrecked, the boy was mollified; and when the letter which had just been
written was handed to him, he confessed that he had judged his old
friend hastily.  Thereafter he related succinctly his adventures in the
"Butterfly" up to the point where we left him sound asleep in the
skipper's berth.

"How long I slept," said Tommy, continuing the narrative, "I am not
quite sure; but it must have been a longish time, for it was somewhere
in a Tuesday when I lay down, and it was well into a Thursday when I got
up, or rather was knocked up by the bow of a thousand-ton ship!  It was
a calm evening, with just a gentle breeze blowin' at the time, and a
little hazy.  The look out in the ship did not see the schooner until he
was close on her; then he yelled `hard-a-lee!' so I was told, for I
didn't hear it, bein', as I said, sound asleep.  But I heard and felt
what followed plain enough.  There came a crash like thunder.  I was
pitched head-foremost out o' the berth, and would certainly have got my
neck broken, but for the flimsy table in the cabin, which gave way and
went to pieces under me, and thus broke my fall.  I got on my legs, and
shot up the companion like a rocket.  I was confused enough, as you may
suppose, but I must have guessed at once what was wrong--perhaps the
rush of water told it me--for I leaped instantly over the side into the
sea to avoid being sucked down by the sinking vessel.  Down it went sure
enough, and I was so near it that in spite of my struggles I was carried
down a long way, and all but choked.  However, up I came again like a
cork.  You always said I was light-headed, Bax, and I do believe that
was the reason I came up so soon!

"Well, I swam about for ten minutes or so, when a boat rowed up to the
place.  It had been lowered by the ship that ran me down.  I was picked
up and taken aboard, and found that she was bound for Australia!

"Ha! that just suited you, I fancy," said Bax.

"Of course it did, but that's not all.  Who d'ye think the ship belonged
to?  You'll never guess;--to your old employers, Denham, Crumps, and
Company!  She is named the `Trident,' after the one that was lost, and
old Denham insisted on her sailing on a Friday.  The sailors said she
would be sure to go to the bottom, but they were wrong, for we all got
safe to Melbourne, after a very good voyage.

"Well, I've little more to tell now.  On reaching Melbourne I landed--"

"Without a sixpence in your pocket?" asked Bax.

"By no means," said Tommy, "I had five golden sovereigns sewed up in the
waist-band of my trousers, not to mention a silver watch like a saucepan
given to me by old Jeph at parting, and a brass ring that I got from
Bluenose!  But it's wonderful how fast this melted away in Melbourne.
It was half gone before I succeeded in finding out what part of the
country you had gone to.  The rest of it I paid to a party of miners,
who chanced to be coming here, for leave to travel and feed with them.
They left me in the lurch, however, about two days' walk from this
place; relieving me of the watch at parting, but permitting me to keep
the ring as a memorial of the pleasant journey we had had together!
Then the rascals left me with provisions sufficient for one meal.  So I
came on alone; and now present myself to you half-starved and a beggar!"

"Here is material to appease your hunger, lad," said Harry Benton, with
a laugh, as he tossed a mass of flour cake, known among diggers as
"damper," towards the boy.

"And here," added Bax, pitching a small bag of gold-dust into his lap,
"is material to deliver you from beggary, at least for the present.  As
for the future, Tommy, your own stout arms must do the rest.  You'll
live in our tent, and we'll make a gold-digger of you in a couple of
days.  I could have wished you better fortune, lad, but as you have
managed to make your way to this out-o'-the-way place, I suppose you'll
want to remain."

"I believe you, my boy!" said Tommy, with his mouth full of damper.

So Tommy Bogey remained with his friends at the Kangaroo Flats, and dug
for gold.

For several years they stuck to the laborious work, during which time
they dug up just enough to keep themselves in food and clothing.  They
were unlucky diggers.  Indeed, this might have been said of most of the
diggers around them.  Those who made fortunes, by happening to find rich
spots of ground, were very few compared with the host of those who came
with light hearts, hoping for heavy pockets, and went away with heavy
hearts and light pockets.

We shall not follow the fortunes of those three during their long period
of exile.  The curtain was lifted in order that the Reader might take a
glance at them in the far-off land.  They are a pleasant trio to look
upon.  They do not thirst feverishly for the precious metal as many do.
Their nightly reading of the Word saves them from that.  Nevertheless,
they work hard, earn little, and sleep soundly.  As we drop the curtain,
they are still toiling and moiling, patiently, heartily, and hopefully,
for gold.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

DENHAM LONGS FOR FRESH AIR, AND FINDS IT.

There came a day, at last, in which foul air and confinement, and
money-making, began to tell on the constitution of Mr Denham; to
disagree with him, in fact.  The rats began to miss him, occasionally,
from Redwharf Lane, at the wonted hour, and, no doubt, gossiped a good
deal on the subject over their evening meals, after the labours and
depredations of the day were ended!

They observed too (supposing them to have been capable of observation),
that when Mr Denham did come to his office, he came with a pale face
and an enfeebled step; also with a thick shawl wrapped round his neck.
