On having ocular demonstration of the depravity of her pet, Ailie at
first wept, then, on beholding its eccentric movements, she laughed in
spite of herself.

After that, she wept again, and spoke to it reproachfully, but failed to
make the slightest impression on its hardened little heart.  Then she
put it to bed, and wrapped it up carefully in its sailcloth blanket.

With this piece of unmerited kindness Jacko seemed touched, for he said,
"Oo-oo--oo-oo--ooee-ee!" once or twice in a peculiarly soft and
penitential tone, after which he dropped into a calm, untroubled
slumber.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE BOAT FINISHED--FAREWELL TO FAIRYLAND--ONCE MORE AT SEA.

At last the boat was finished.  It had two masts and two lug-sails, and
pulled eight oars.  There was just sufficient room in it to enable the
men to move about freely, but it required a little management to enable
them to stow themselves away when they went to sleep, and had they
possessed the proper quantity of provisions for their contemplated
voyage, there is no doubt that they would have found themselves
considerably cramped.  The boat was named the _Maid of the Isle_, in
memory of the sandbank on which she had been built, and although in her
general outline and details she was rather a clumsy craft, she was
serviceable and strongly put together.

Had she been decked, or even half-decked, the voyage which now began
would not have been so desperate an undertaking; but having been only
covered in part with a frail tarpaulin, she was not at all fitted to
face the terrible storms that sometimes sweep the southern seas.  Each
man, as he gazed at her, felt that his chance of ultimate escape was
very small indeed.  Still, the men had now been so long contemplating
the voyage and preparing for it, and they had become so accustomed to
risk their lives upon the sea, that they set out upon this voyage at
last in cheerful spirits, and even jested about the anticipated dangers
and trials which they knew full well awaited them.

It was a lovely morning, that on which the wrecked crew of the whaler
bade adieu to "Fairyland," as the islet had been named by Ailie--a name
that was highly, though laughingly, approved of by the men.  The ocean
and sky presented that mysterious co-mingling of their gorgeous elements
that irresistibly call forth the wonder and admiration of even the most
unromantic and matter-of-fact men.  It was one of Ailie's peculiarly
beloved skies.  You could not, without much consideration, have decided
as to where was the exact line at which the glassy ocean met the clear
sky, and it was almost impossible to tell, when gazing at the horizon,
which were the real clouds and which the reflections.

The bright blue vault above was laden with clouds of the most gorgeous
description, in which all the shades of pearly-grey and yellow were
mingled and contrasted.  They rose up, pile upon pile, in stupendous
majesty, like the very battlements of heaven, while their images, clear
and distinct almost as themselves, rolled down and down into the watery
depths, until the islet--the only well-defined and solid object in the
scene--appeared to float in their midst.  The rising sun shot throughout
the vast immensity of space, and its warm rays were interrupted, and
broken, and caught, and absorbed, and reflected in so many magical ways,
that it was impossible to trace any of the outlines for more than a few
seconds, ere the eye was lost in the confusion of bright lights and deep
shadows that were mingled and mellowed together by the softer lights and
shades of every degree of depth and tint into splendid harmony.

In the midst of this scene Captain Dunning stood, with Ailie by his
side, and surrounded by his men, on the shores of the little island.
Everything was now in readiness to set sail.  The boat was laden, and in
the water, and the men stood ready to leap in and push off.

"My lads," said the captain, earnestly, "we're about to quit this morsel
of sandbank on which it pleased the Almighty to cast our ship, and on
which, thanks be to Him, we have found a pretty safe shelter for so
long.  I feel a sort o' regret almost at leavin' it now.  But the time
has come for us to begin our voyage towards the Cape, and I need
scarcely repeat what you all know well enough--that our undertakin' is
no child's play.  We shall need all our bodily and our mental powers to
carry us through.  Our labour must be constant, and our food is not
sufficient, so that we must go on shorter allowance from this day.  I
gave you half rations while ye were buildin' the boat, because we had to
get her finished and launched as fast as we could, but now we can't
afford to eat so much.  I made a careful inspection of our provisions
last night, and I find that by allowing every man four ounces a day, we
can spin it out.  We may fall in with islands, perhaps, but I know of
none in these seas--there are none put down on the charts--and we may
get hold of a fish now and then, but we must not count on these chances.
Now it must be plain to all of you that our only chance of getting on
well together in circumstances that will try our tempers, no doubt, and
rouse our selfishness, is to resolve firmly before starting--each man
for himself--that we will lay restraint on ourselves and try to help
each other as much as we can."

There was a ready murmur of assent to this proposal; then the captain
continued:--

"Now, lads, one word more.  Our best efforts, let us exert ourselves
ever so much, cannot be crowned with success unless before setting out,
we ask the special favour and blessing of Him who, we are told in the
Bible, holds the waters of the ocean in the hollow of His hand.  If He
helps us, we shall be saved; if He does not help us, we shall perish.
We will therefore offer up a prayer now, in the name of our blessed
Redeemer, that we may be delivered from every danger, and be brought at
last in peace and comfort to our homes."

Captain Dunning then clasped his hands together, and while the men
around him reverently bowed their heads, he offered up a short and
simple, but earnest prayer to God.

From that day forward they continued the habit of offering up prayer
together once a day, and soon afterwards the captain began the practice
of reading a chapter aloud daily out of Ailie's Bible.  The result of
this was that not only were the more violent spirits among them
restrained, under frequent and sore privations and temptations, but all
the party were often much comforted and filled with hope at times when
they were by their sufferings well-nigh driven to despair.

"I'm sorry to leave Fairyland, papa," said Ailie sadly, as the men
shoved the _Maid of the Isle_ into deep water and pulled out to sea.

"So am I, dear," replied the captain sitting down beside his daughter in
the stern-sheets of the boat, and taking the tiller; "I had no idea I
could have come to like such a barren bit of sand so well."

There was a long pause after this remark.  Every eye in the boat was
turned with a sad expression on the bright-yellow sandbank as they rowed
away, and the men dipped their oars lightly into the calm waters, as if
they were loth to leave their late home.

Any spot of earth that has been for some time the theatre of
heart-stirring events, such as rouse men's strong emotions, and on which
happy and hopeful as well as wretched days have been spent, will so
entwine itself with the affections of men that they will cling to it and
love it, more or less powerfully, no matter how barren may be the spot
or how dreary its general aspect.  The sandbank had been the cause, no
doubt, of the wreck of the _Red Eric_, but it had also been the means,
under God, of saving the crew and affording them shelter during many
succeeding weeks--weeks of deep anxiety, but also of healthful, hopeful,
energetic toil, in which, if there were many things to create annoyance
or fear, there had also been not a few things to cause thankfulness,
delight, and amusement.

Unknown to themselves, these rough sailors and the tender child had
become attached to the spot, and it was only now that they were about to
leave it for ever that they became aware of the fact.  The circumscribed
and limited range on which their thoughts and vision had been bent for
the last few weeks, had rendered each individual as familiar with every
inch of the bank as if he had dwelt there for years.

Ailie gazed at the low rocks that overhung the crystal pool in
Fairyland, until the blinding tears filled her eyes, and she felt all
the deep regret that is experienced by the little child when it is
forcibly torn from an old and favourite toy--regret that is not in the
least degree mitigated by the fact that the said toy is but a sorry
affair, a doll, perchance, with a smashed head, eyes thrust out, and
nose flattened on its face or rubbed away altogether--it matters not;
the long and happy hours and days spent in the companionship of that
battered little mass of wood or wax rush on the infant memory like a
dear delightful dream, and it weeps on separation as if its heart would
break.

Each man in the boat's crew experienced more or less of the same
feeling, and commented, according to his nature, either silently or
audibly, on each familiar object as he gazed upon it for the last time.

"There's the spot where we built the hut when we first landed, Ailie,"
said Glynn, who pulled the aft oar; "d'ye see it?--just coming into
view; look!  There it will be shut out again in a moment by the rock
beside the coral-pool."

"I see it!" exclaimed Ailie eagerly, as she brushed away the tears from
her eyes.

"There's the rock, too, where we used to make our fire," said the
captain, pointing it out.  "It doesn't look like itself from this point
of view."

"Ah!" sighed Phil Briant, "an' it wos at the fut o' that, too, where we
used to bile the kittle night an' mornin'.  Sure it's many a swait bit
and pipe I had beside ye."

"Is that a bit o' the wreck?" inquired Tim Rokens, pointing to the low
rocky point with the eagerness of a man who had made an unexpected
discovery.

"No," replied Mr Millons, shading his eyes with his hands, and gazing
at the object in question, "it's himpossible.  I searched every bit o'
the bank for a plank before we came hoff, an' couldn't find a morsel as
big as my 'and.  W'at say you, doctor?"

"I think with you," answered Dr Hopley; "but here's the telescope,
which will soon settle the question."

While the doctor adjusted the glass, Rokens muttered that "He wos sure
it wos a bit o' the wreck," and that "there wos a bit o' rock as nobody
couldn't easy git a t'other side of to look, and that that wos it, and
the bit of wreck was there," and much to the same effect.

"So it is," exclaimed the doctor.

"Lay on your oars, lads, a moment," said the captain, taking the glass
and applying it to his eye.

The men obeyed gladly, for they experienced an unaccountable
disinclination to row away from the island.  Perhaps the feeling was
caused in part by the idea that when they took their last look at it, it
might possibly be their _last_ sight of land.

"It's a small piece of the foretopmast crosstrees," observed the
captain, shutting up the telescope and resuming his seat.

"Shall we go back an' pick it up, sir?" asked Dick Barnes gravely,
giving vent to the desires of his heart, without perceiving at the
moment the absurdity of the question.

"Why, what would you do with it, Dick?" replied the captain, smiling.

"Sure, ye couldn't ait it!" interposed Briant; "but afther all, there's
no sayin'.  Maybe Nikel Sling could make a tasty dish out of it stewed
in oakum and tar."

"It wouldn't be purlite to take such a tit-bit from the mermaids,"
observed Gurney, as the oars were once more dipped reluctantly, in the
water.

The men smiled at the jest, for in the monotony of sea life every
species of pleasantry, however poor, is swallowed with greater or less
avidity; but the smile did not last long.  They were in no jesting
humour at that time, and no one replied to the passing joke.

Soon after this a soft gentle breeze sprang up.  It came direct from
Fairyland, as if the mermaids referred to by Gurney had been touched by
the kindly feelings harboured in the sailors' bosoms towards their
islet, and had wafted towards them a last farewell.  The oars were
shipped immediately and the sails hoisted, and, to the satisfaction of
all on board, the _Maid of the Isle_ gave indications of being a swift
sailer, for, although the puff of wind was scarcely sufficient to ruffle
the glassy surface of the sea, she glided through the water under its
influence a good deal faster than she had done with the oars.

"That's good!" remarked the captain, watching the ripples as they passed
astern; "with fair winds, and not too much of 'em, we shall get on
bravely; so cheer up, my lassie," he added, patting Ailie on the head,
"and let us begin our voyage in good spirits, and with hopeful, trusting
hearts."

"Look at Fairyland," said Ailie, clasping her father's hand, and
pointing towards the horizon.

At the moment she spoke, an opening in the great white clouds let a ray
of light fall on the sandbank, which had now passed almost beyond the
range of vision.  The effect was to illumine its yellow shore and cause
it to shine out for a few seconds like a golden speck on the horizon.
No one had ceased to gaze at it from the time the boat put forth; but
this sudden change caused every one to start up, and fix their eyes on
it with renewed interest and intensity.  "Shall we ever see land again?"
passed, in one form or another, through the minds of all.  The clouds
swept slowly on the golden point melted away, and the shipwrecked
mariners felt that their little boat was now all the world to them in
the midst of that mighty world of waters.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

REDUCED ALLOWANCE OF FOOD--JACKO TEACHES BRIANT A USEFUL LESSON.

The first few days of the voyage of the _Maid of the Isle_ were bright
and favourable.  The wind, though light, was fair, and so steady that
the men were only twice obliged to have recourse to their oars.  The
boat behaved admirably.  Once, during these first days, the wind
freshened into a pretty stiff breeze, and a somewhat boisterous sea
arose, so that she was tested in another of her sailing qualities, and
was found to be an excellent sea-boat.  Very little water was shipped,
and that little was taken in rather through the awkwardness of King
Bumble, who steered, than through the fault of the boat.

Captain Dunning had taken care that there should be a large supply of
tin and wooden scoops, for baling out the water that might be shipped in
rough weather, as he foresaw that on the promptness with which this duty
was performed, might sometimes depend the safety of the boat and crew.

There was one thing that proved a matter of much regret to the crew, and
that was the want of a fowling-piece, or firearm of any kind.  Had they
possessed a gun, however old and bad, with ammunition for it, they would
have been certain, at some period of their voyage, to shoot a few
sea-birds, with which they expected to fall in on approaching the land,
even although many days distant from it.  But having nothing of the
kind, their hope of adding to their slender stock of provisions was very
small indeed.  Fortunately, they had one or two fishing-lines, but in
the deep water, over which for many days they had to sail, fishing was
out of the question.

This matter of the provisions was a source of constant anxiety to
Captain Dunning.  He had calculated the amount of their stores to an
ounce, and ascertained that at a certain rate of distribution they would
barely serve for the voyage, and this without making any allowance for
interruptions or detentions.  He knew the exact distance to be passed
over, namely, 2322 miles in a straight line, and he had ascertained the
sailing and rowing powers of the boat and crew; thus he was enabled to
arrive at a pretty correct idea of the probable duration of the voyage,
supposing that all should go well.  But in the event of strong contrary
winds arising, no fresh supplies of fish or fowl being obtained, or
sickness breaking out among the men, he knew either that they must
starve altogether, or that he must at once, before it was too late,
still farther reduce the scanty allowance of food and drink to each man.

The captain sat at the helm one fine evening, about a week after their
departure from Fairyland, brooding deeply over this subject.  The boat
was running before a light breeze, at the rate of about four or five
knots, and the men, who had been obliged to row a good part of that day,
were sitting or reclining on the thwarts, or leaning over the gunwale,
watching the ripples as they glided by, and enjoying the rest from
labour; for now that they had been for some time on reduced allowance of
food, they felt less able for work than they used to be, and often began
to look forward with intense longing to seasons of repose.  Ailie was
sitting near the entrance of her little sleeping apartment--which the
men denominated a kennel--and master Jacko was seated on the top of it,
scratching his sides and enjoying the sunshine.

"My lads," said the captain, breaking a silence which had lasted a
considerable time, "I'm afraid I shall have to reduce our allowance
still farther."

This remark was received by Gurney and Phil Briant with a suppressed
groan--by the other men in silence.

"You see," continued the captain, "it won't do to count upon chances,
which may or may not turn out to be poor.  We can, by fixing our
allowance per man at a lower rate, make quite certain of our food
lasting us until we reach the Cape, even if we should experience a
little detention; but if we go on at the present rate, we are equally
certain that it will fail us just at the last."

"We're sartain to fall in with birds before we near the land," murmured
Gurney, with a rueful expression of countenance.

"We are certain of nothing," replied the captain; "but even suppose we
were, how are we to get hold of them?"

"That's true," observed Briant, who solaced himself with his pipe in the
absence of a sufficiency of food.  "Sea-birds, no more nor land-birds,
ain't given to pluckin' and roastin' themselves, and flyin' down
people's throats ready cooked."

"Besides," resumed the captain, "the plan I propose, although it will
entail a little more present self-denial, will, humanly speaking, ensure
our getting through the voyage with life in us even at the worst, and if
we _are_ so lucky as to catch fish or procure birds in any way, why we
shall fare sumptuously."

Here Tim Rokens, to whom the men instinctively looked, upon all matters
of perplexity, removed his pipe from his lips, and said--

"Wot Cap'en Dunnin' says is true.  If we take his plan, why, we'll
starve in a reg'lar way, little by little, and p'raps spin out till we
git to the Cape; w'ereas, if we take the other plan, we'll keep a little
fatter on the first part of the voyage, mayhap, but we'll arrive at the
end of it as dead as mutton, every man on us."

This view of the question seemed so just to the men, and so full of
incontrovertible wisdom, that it was received with something like a
murmur of applause.

"You're a true philosopher, Rokens.  Now Doctor Hopley, I must beg you
to give us your opinion, as a medical man, on this knotty subject," said
the captain, smiling.  "Do you think that we can continue to exist if
our daily allowance is reduced one-fourth?"

The doctor replied, "Let me see," and putting his finger on his
forehead, frowned portentously, affecting to give the subject the most
