you, and that's how Jim and I came to grief.  We were sitting on the
edge of the slope watching a boulder slide, when we began to slide
ourselves.  We hadn't our spikes on, or we might have pulled up.  As it
was, we got up no end of a speed down that slope.  It was no joke.  I
yelled to Jim to lie flat, and not sit up, or he might pitch on his
head.  I don't remember how we got on after that; I must have bumped my
head, for when I pulled myself together I found I was sitting in the
middle of a grass field with a jolly headache, and pretty well black and
blue.

I was able to get up though, and looked about for old Jim.  I can tell
you it was no joke.  I couldn't see him anywhere, and thought he must
have been buried in the snow.  I can tell you, old man, it was rough on
me for a quarter of an hour or so.  But I found him at last, about a
quarter of a mile down the field.  He rolled, he said; he couldn't get
up, as his foot was screwed.  So it was a pretty go, as I couldn't carry
him.  If I hadn't been quite so knocked about I might have tried; but
Jim's a good nine stone, so I might have dropped him.  Luckily, some
fellows came--they'd come to look for us, in fact, as we'd told the
waiter we were going up the Matterhorn, and might not be back in time
for dinner; and when we didn't turn up, they guessed, I suppose, we
might have come to grief.  It was a good job they came, as Jim's foot
was rather bad.  All the hotel turned out to see us get back.  I had to
be carried too, the last bit of the way, as I got fagged.  It's a sell
we couldn't get to the top, as it's rather a crow to do the Matterhorn.

Jim's foot is better to-day, but he'll have to shut off tennis the rest
of this season.  I wish mother was here.  She could look after Jim
better than I can.  In fact, the doctor here, rather a jolly fellow,
says she and the pater had better come at once.  I got him to write to
the pater himself, as I was afraid it might make them think something
was wrong if I did.

Please to remember me to your young sister.

T.  Hooker.

Zermatt, _August_ 22.

Dear Gus,--There's a telegram from the pater to say they'll be here to-
morrow night.  I'm rather glad, as Jim is feverish.  The pater will have
a good deal of tipping to do, as everybody here's no end civil.  Can't
write more, as I'm fagged.  Remember me to your young sister.

T.H.

P.S.--I fancy we shall spend next summer in England--Jim and I.  We
don't either of us think much of Switzerland.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

BILK'S FORTUNE--A GHOST STORY.



CHAPTER I.  SUPERSTITION.

We had a fellow at Holmhurst School who rejoiced in the name of
Alexander Magnus Bilk.  But, as sometimes happens, our Alexander the
Great did not in all respects resemble the hero to whom he was indebted
for his name.  Alexander the Great, so the school-books say, was small
in stature and mighty in mind.  Bilk was small in mind and lanky in
stature.  They called him "Lamp-post" as a pet name, and as regarded his
height, his girth, and the lightness of his head, the term conveyed a
very fair idea of our hero's chief characteristics.  In short, Bilk had
very few brains, and such as he had he occupied by no means to the best
advantage.  He read trashy novels, and believed every word of them, and,
like poor Don Quixote of old, he let any one who liked make a fool of
him, if he only took the trouble to get at his weak side.

I need hardly say the fellows at Holmhurst were not long in discovering
that weak side and getting plenty of fun out of Alexander Magnus.  He
could be gammoned to almost any extent, so much so that after a term or
two his persecutors had run through all the tricks they knew, and the
unhappy youth was let alone for sheer want of an idea.

But one winter, when things seemed at their worst, and it really
appeared likely that Bilk would have to be given up as a bad job, his
tormentors suddenly conceived an idea, and proceeded to put it into
practice in the manner I am about to relate in this most veracious
history.

The neighbourhood of Holmhurst had for some weeks past been honoured by
the presence of a gang of gipsies, who during the period of their
sojourn had rendered themselves conspicuous by their diligence in their
triple business of chair-mending, fowl-house robbing, and fortune-
telling.  In the last of these three departments they perhaps succeeded
best in winning the confidence of their temporary neighbours, and the
private seances they held with housemaids, tradesmen's boys, and
schoolgirls had been particularly gratifying both as to attendance and
pecuniary result.

It had at length been deemed to be for the general welfare that these
interesting itinerants should seek a change of air in "fresh fields and
pastures new," and the police had accordingly hinted as much to the
authorities of the camp, and given them two hours to pack up.

More than ever convinced that gratitude is hopeless to seek in human
nature, the gipsies had shaken the dust of Holmhurst from the soles of
their not very tidy feet, and had moved off, no one knew whither.

These proceedings had, among other persons, interested Alexander Magnus
Bilk not a little, and no one mourned the rapid departure of the gipsies
more than he.  For Bilk had for some days past secretly hugged the idea
of presenting himself to the oracle of these wise ones and having his
fortune told.  He had in fact gone so far as to make a secret
observation of their quarters one afternoon, and had resolved to devote
the next half-holiday to the particular pursuit of knowledge they
offered, when, lo! cruel fate snatched the cup from his lips and swept
the promised fruit from his reach.  In other words, the gipsies had
gone, and, like his great namesake, Alexander, Magnus mourned.

Among those who noticed his dejection and guessed the cause of it were
two of his particular persecutors.  Morgan and Dell had for some months
been suffering affliction for lack of any notion how to get a rise out
of their victim.  But they now suddenly cheered up, as they felt the
force of a mighty idea moving them once more to action.

"Old chap," said Morgan, "I've got it at last!"

"What have you got?" asked "the old chap"; "your back tooth, or measles,
or what?"

"I've got a dodge for scoring off the Lamp-post."

"Have you, though?  You are a clever chap, I say!  What is it?"

What it was, Morgan disclosed in such a very low whisper to his ally
that the reader will have to guess.  Suffice it to say, the two dear
lads put their heads together for some time, and were extremely busy in
the privacy of their own study all that evening.

Bilk, little dreaming of the compassion and interest he was evoking in
the hearts of his schoolfellows, retired early to his sorrowful couch,
and mourned his departed gipsies till slumber gently stepped in and
soothed his troubled mind.  But returning day laid bare the old wound,
and Alexander girded himself listlessly to the duties of the hour, with
a heart far away.

He was wandering across the playground after dinner, disinclined alike
for work and play, when Dell accosted him.  Bilk might have known Dell
by this time, but his memory was short and his mind preoccupied, and he
smelt no rat, as the Irish would say, in his companion's salutation.

"Hullo! where are you off to, Lamp-post?  How jolly blue you look!"

"I'm only taking a walk."

"Well, you don't seem to be enjoying it, by the looks of you.  I've just
been taking a trot over the common."

"I suppose the gipsies have all gone?" inquired Bilk, as unconcernedly
as he could.

"Yes, I suppose so," answered Dell, offhand.  "Anyhow, they've cleared
off the common."

"But I was told," said Bilk rather nervously, "they'd gone quite away."

"Not all of them, anyhow," said Dell.  "But of course they can't now
show up the way they used to."

"Where are they, then?" asked Magnus, with a new hope breaking in upon
him.

"How can I tell?  All I know is there are some hanging about still, and
I shouldn't wonder if they weren't far from here."

"Really, I say!  I wonder where?"

"I'd as good as bet you'd come across one or two of them after dark in
Deadman's Lane, or up at the cross roads, any evening for a week yet.
They don't clear out as fast as fellows think.  But I must be off now,
as I've a lot of work to do.  Ta, ta!"

Alexander stood where the other left him, in deep meditation.  Those few
casual observations of his schoolfellow had kindled anew the fire that
burned within him.  Little could Dell guess how interesting his news
was!  After dark!  The afternoon was getting on already.  The school
clock had struck half-past four nearly a quarter of an hour ago, and by
five it would be quite dark.  Tea was at a quarter-past five, and for
half an hour after tea boys could do as they liked.  Yes, it would be
foolish to throw away such a chance.  At any rate, he would take the air
after tea in Deadman's Lane, and if there he should meet--oh! how he
wondered what his fortune would be!  Tea was a feverish meal for Bilk
that evening.  He spoke to no one, and ate very little; and as the hand
of the clock worked round to a quarter to six he began to feel
distinctly that a crisis in his life was approaching.  He was glad
neither Dell nor Morgan, whose studies probably kept them in their
study, were at tea.  They were such fellows for worrying him, and just
now he wanted to be in peace.

The meal was over at last, and the boys rushed off to enjoy their short
liberty before the hour of preparation.  Bilk, who had taken the
precaution to put both a sixpence and a cricket-cap in his pocket,
silently and unobserved slid out into the deserted playground, and in
another minute stood beyond the precincts of Holmhurst.

Deadman's Lane was scarcely three minutes distant, and thither, with
nervous steps, he wended his way, fumbling the sixpence in his pocket,
and straining his eyes in the darkness for any sign of the gipsies.
Alas! it seemed to be a vain quest.  The lane was deserted, and the
cross roads he knew were too far distant to get there and back in half
an hour.  He was just thinking of giving it up and turning back, when a
sound behind one of the hedges close to him startled him and sent his
heart to his mouth.  He stood still to listen, and heard a gruff voice
say--or rather intone--the following mysterious couplet:

  Ramsdam pammydiddle larrybonnywigtail
  Wigtaillarrybonny keimo.

This could be no other than an incantation, and Bilk stood rooted to the
spot, unable to advance or retreat.  He heard a rustling in the hedge,
and the incantation suddenly ceased.  Then a figure like that of an old
man bent with age and clad in a ragged coat which nearly touched the
ground advanced slowly, saying in croaking accent as he did so--

"Ah, young gentleman, we've waited for ye.  We couldn't go till we'd
seen ye; for we've something to tell ye.  Come quietly this way, and say
not a word, or the spell's broken--come, young gentleman; come, young
gentleman;" and the old man went on crooning the words to himself as he
led the way with tottering steps round the hedge, and discovered a sort
of tent in which sat, with her face half shrouded in a shawl, an old
woman who wagged her head incessantly and chattered to herself in a
language of her own.  She took no notice of Bilk as he drew near
tremblingly, and it was not until the old man had nudged her vehemently,
and both had indulged in a long fit of coughing, that she at last
growled, without even lifting her head--

"I see nothing unless for silver."

It said a great deal for Bilk's quickness of apprehension that he at
once guessed this vague observation to refer to the sixpence he had not
yet offered.  He drew it out and handed it to the old woman, and was
about to offer an apology at the same time, when the man put his hand to
his mouth and snarled--

"Not a word."

The old woman took the coin in her trembling hand, and bent her head
over it in silence.  Bilk began to get uneasy.  The time was passing,
and he would have to start back in a very few moments.  Could it be
possible these gipsies, now they had his sixpence, were going to refuse
to tell him the fortune for which he had longed and risked so much?

No!  After a long pause the old woman lifted up her hand and said
something in gibberish to her partner.  It was a long time coming, for
they both coughed and groaned violently during the recital.  At length,
however, the old man turned to Bilk and said gruffly--

"Kneel."

The boy obeyed, and the old man proceeded.

"She says a great danger threatens you this night.  If you escape it,
you will live to be a baronet or member of parliament, and perhaps you
will marry a duke's daughter; but she can't be certain of that.  If you
don't escape it, you will be in a lunatic asylum next week, and never
come out.  Not a word," added he, as Bilk once more showed signs of
breaking silence.  "Wait till she speaks again."

Another long pause, and then another long recital in gibberish by the
old woman, broken by the same coughing and groaning as before.  Then the
man said--

"Stand up, and hold your hands above your head."

Bilk obeyed.

"You want to know how to escape the peril?" said the man.

Bilk, with his hands still up, nodded.

"To-night at nine o'clock you will hear a bell."

Again Bilk nodded.  Fancy the gipsies knowing that!

"You will go up to a small room with a chair and a bed in it, and
undress."

A pause, and another nod from the astonished Bilk.

"You will put on a long white robe coming down to your ankles.  At half-
past nine the place will be dark--as black as pitch."

Bilk shuddered a little at the prospect.

"Then will be the time to escape your peril, or else to fall a victim.
To escape it you must go quietly down the stairs and out of the house.
The being who rules your life will be away for this one evening, and you
will escape through his room by the window, which is close to the
ground."

Bilk started once more.  _He_ knew the doctor was to be out that
evening, but what short of supernatural vision could tell the gipsies of
it?

"You must escape in the long white robe, and run past here on to the
cross roads.  No one will see you.  At the cross roads there is a post
with four arms.  You must climb it and sit on the arm pointing this way
until the clock strikes twelve.  The peril will then be past, and your
fortune will be made.  Not a word.  Go, and beware, Alexander Magnus
Bilk!"

The legs of the scared Alexander could scarcely uphold him as he obeyed
this last order, and sped trembling towards the school.  The gipsies sat
motionless as his footsteps echoed down the lane and died slowly away
into silence.

Then they rose to go also; but as they did so other footsteps suddenly
sounded, approaching them.  With an alacrity astonishing in persons of
their advanced age they darted back to their place of retreat; but too
late.  The footsteps came on quickly, and followed them to their very
hiding-place, and next moment the light of two bullseyes turned full
upon them, and the aged couple were in the hands of the police.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOURCHAPTER TWO.

De Prudhom did not often allow himself the luxury of an evening out
during term time.  But on this particular evening he was pledged to
fulfil a long-standing engagement with an old crony and fellow-bachelor,
residing about two miles from the school.  By some mysterious means the
worthy dominie's intentions had oozed out, and Bilk was by no means the
only boy who had heard of it.  Mice seem to find out by instinct when
the cat is away, and fix their own diversions accordingly.

I merely mention this to explain that as far as Alexander Magnus was
concerned no night could have been more favourable for carrying out the
intricate series of instructions laid down by the gipsy for the making
of his fortune.  With this reflection he consoled himself somewhat as he
ran back to the school.

The doctor had already started for his evening's dissipation, if dining
with Professor Hammerhead could be thus described.  This eccentric old
gentleman combined in one the avocations of a bachelor, a man of
science, and a justice of the peace.  He rarely took his walks abroad,
preferring the solitude of his library, and the occasional company of
some old comrade with whom to talk over old times, and unburden his mind
of the scientific problems which encumbered it.  On the present occasion
he had lit upon a congenial spirit in worthy Dr Prudhom, and the two
spent a very snug evening together over the dessert, raking up memories
of the good old days when they lived on the same staircase at Brasenose;
and plunging deep into abstruse questions of natural and physical
science which even the sherry could not prevent from being dry.

The professor's present craze was what is commonly termed ethnology.
Anything connected with the history and vicissitudes of the primitive
races of mankind excited his enthusiasm, and he was never tired of
inquiring into the languages, the manners, the customs, the dress, the
ceremonies, and the movements generally of various branches of the human
family, of whom the most obscure were sure to be in his eyes the most
interesting.

It was only natural, therefore, that when Dr Prudhom made some casual
reference to the recent incursion of gipsies, his host should seize the
occasion to expatiate on the history of that extraordinary race; tracing
them from the Egyptians downwards, and waxing eloquent on their tribal
instincts, which no civilisation or even persecution could eradicate or
domesticate.

"Fact is," said he, with a chuckle, "they had me to thank that they were
allowed here so long.  Police came to me end of first week and said they
were a nuisance.  I told the police when I wanted their opinion I'd ask
it.  End of second week police came again and said all the farmyards
round had been robbed.  I said I must inquire into it.  He! he!  All the
time I was making glorious observations, my boy; a note-book full, I
declare.  End of third week inspector of police came and said he should
have to apply at head-quarters for instructions if I wouldn't give them.
Not a place was secure as long as the vagabonds stayed.  Had to cave in
then, and issue a warrant or so and get rid of them.  Sorry for it.
Much to learn ye: about them, and the few specimens brought before me
weren't good ones.  Young gipsies, you know, Prudhom, aren't up to the
mark.  You only get the true aboriginal ring about the old people.  Yes,
I'm afraid they're breaking up, you know.  Sorry for it."

Dr Prudhom concurred, and mentioned as a somewhat significant fact
that very few old gipsies had accompanied the late visitation, which
consisted almost altogether of the young and possibly degenerate members
of the tribe.

The discussion had reached this stage, and the professor was about to
adduce evidence from history of a similar period of depression in the
race, when there came a ring at the front bell, followed by a shuffling
of feet in the hall, which was presently explained by the appearance of
the servant, who announced that there were two constables below who
wished to see his worship.

Now his worship was anything but pleased to be interrupted in the midst
of his interesting discussion by a matter of such secondary importance
as an interview with the police.
