ill-will, and carefully fanned it into a flame without appearing to have
any such end in view.  When the iron was sufficiently hot he struck it--
supplied the chief with guns and ammunition, and even, as a great
favour, offered to lend him a few of his own men in order that he might
make a vigorous attack on his old enemy.

The device succeeded to perfection.  War was begun without any previous
declaration; prisoners were soon brought in--not only men, but women and
children.  The first were coupled together with heavy slave-sticks,
which were riveted to their necks; the latter were attached to each
other with ropes; and thus Yoosoof, in a few days, was enabled to
proceed on his journey with a goodly drove of "black cattle" behind him.

This occurred not far from Lake Nyassa, which he intended should be his
headquarters for a time, while his men, under a new leader whom he
expected to meet there, should push their victorious arms farther into
the interior.

On reaching the shores of the noble lake, he found several birds of the
same feather with himself--Arabs engaged in the same trade.  He also
found his old friend and trusty ally, Marizano.  This gratified him
much, for he was at once enabled to hand over the charge of the
expedition to his lieutenant, and send him forth on his mission.

That same evening--a lovely and comparatively cool one--Yoosoof and the
half-caste sauntered on the margin of the lake, listening to the sweet
melody of the free and happy birds, and watching the debarkation, from a
large boat, of a band of miserable slaves who had been captured or
purchased on the other side.

"Now, Marizano," said Yoosoof, addressing the half-caste in his native
tongue, "I do not intend to cumber you with cloth or beads on this
expedition.  I have already spent a good deal in the purchase of slaves,
who are now in my barracoon, and I think it will be both cheaper and
easier to make up the rest of the gang by means of powder and lead."

"It is lighter to carry, and more effectual," remarked Marizano, with a
nod of approval.

"True," returned Yoosoof, "and quicker.  Will a hundred men and guns
suffice?"

"Eighty are enough to conquer any of the bow and spear tribes of this
region," replied the half-caste carelessly.

"Good!" continued Yoosoof.  "Then you shall start to-morrow.  The tribes
beyond this lake are not yet afraid of us--thanks to the mad Englishman,
Livingstone, who has opened up the country and spread the information
that white men are the friends of the black, and hate slavery."
[Livingstone tells us that he found, on ascending the Shire river, that
the Portuguese slave-traders had followed closely in the footsteps of
his previous discoveries, and passed themselves off as his friends, by
which means they were successful in gaining the confidence of the
natives whom they afterwards treacherously murdered or enslaved.]

"You may try to pass yourself off as a white man, though your face is
not so white as might be desired; however, you can comfort yourself with
the knowledge that it is whiter than your heart!"

The Arab smiled and glanced at his lieutenant.  Marizano smiled, bowed
in acknowledgment of the compliment, and replied that he believed
himself to be second to no one except his employer in that respect.

"Well, then," continued Yoosoof, "you must follow up the discoveries of
this Englishman; give out that you are his friend, and have come there
for the same purposes; and, when you have put them quite at their ease,
commence a brisk trade with them--for which purpose you may take with
you just enough of cloth and beads to enable you to carry out the
deception.  For the rest I need not instruct; you know what to do as
well as I."

Marizano approved heartily of this plan, and assured his chief that his
views should be carried out to his entire satisfaction.

"But there is still another point," said Yoosoof, "on which I have to
talk.  It appears that there are some white men who have been taken
prisoners by one of the interior tribes--I know not which--for the
finding of whom the British consul at Zanzibar has offered me five
hundred dollars.  If you can obtain information about these men it will
be well.  If you can find and rescue them it will be still better, and
you shall have a liberal share of the reward."

While the Arab was speaking, the half-caste's visage betrayed a slight
degree of surprise.

"White men!" he said, pulling up his sleeve and showing a gun-shot wound
in his arm which appeared to be not very old.  "A white man inflicted
that not long ago, and not very far from the spot on which we stand.  I
had vowed to take the life of that white man if we should ever chance to
meet, but if it is worth five hundred dollars I may be tempted to spare
it!"

He laughed lightly as he spoke, and then added, with a thoughtful
look,--"But I don't see how these men--there were two of them, if not
more--can be prisoners, because, when I came across them, they were
well-armed, well supplied, and well attended, else, you may be sure,
they had not given me this wound and freed my slaves.  But the
scoundrels who were with me at the time were cowards."

"You are right," said Yoosoof.  "The white men you met I heard of at
Zanzibar.  They cannot be the prisoners we are asked to search for.
They have not yet been long enough away, I should think, to have come by
any mischance, and the white men who are said to be lost have been
talked about in Zanzibar for a long time.  However, make diligent
inquiries, because the promise is, that the five hundred dollars shall
be ours if we rescue _any_ white man, no matter who he may chance to be.
And now I shall show you the cattle I have obtained on the way up."

The barracoon, to which the Arab led his lieutenant, was a space
enclosed by a strong and high stockade, in which slaves were kept under
guard until a sufficient number should be secured to form a gang,
wherewith to start for the coast.  At the entrance stood a
savage-looking Portuguese half-caste armed with a gun.  Inside there was
an assortment of Yoosoof's Black Ivory.  It was in comparatively good
condition at that time, not having travelled far, and, as it was
necessary to keep it up to a point of strength sufficient to enable it
to reach the coast, it was pretty well fed except in the case of a few
rebellious articles.  There were, however, specimens of damaged goods
even there.  Several of the orphans, who had become Yoosoof's property,
although sprightly enough when first purchased, had not stood even the
short journey to the lake so well as might have been expected.  They had
fallen off in flesh to such an extent that Yoosoof was induced to remark
to Marizano, as they stood surveying them, that he feared they would
never reach the coast alive.

"That one, now," he said, pointing to a little boy who was tightly
wedged in the midst of the group of slaves, and sat on the ground with
his face resting on his knees, "is the most troublesome piece of goods I
have had to do with since I began business; and it seems to me that I am
going to lose him after all."

"What's the matter with him?" asked the half-caste.

"Nothing particular, only he is a delicate boy.  At first I refused him,
but he is so well-made, though delicate, and such a good-looking child,
and so spirited, that I decided to take him; but he turns out to be
_too_ spirited.  Nothing that I can do will tame him,--oh, _that_ won't
do it," said Yoosoof, observing that Marizano raised the switch he
carried in his hand with a significant action; "I have beaten him till
there is scarcely a sound inch of skin on his whole body, but it's of no
use.  Ho! stand up," called Yoosoof, letting the lash of his whip fall
lightly on the boy's shoulders.

There was, however, no response; the Arab therefore repeated the order,
and laid the lash across the child's bare back with a degree of force
that would have caused the stoutest man to wince; still the boy did not
move.  Somewhat surprised, Yoosoof pushed his way towards him, seized
him by the hair and threw back his head.

The Arab left him immediately and remarked in a quiet tone that he
should have no more trouble with him--he was dead!

"What's the matter with that fellow?" asked Marizano, pointing to a man
who was employed in constantly rolling up a bit of wet clay and applying
it to his left eye.

"Ah, he's another of these unmanageable fellows," replied Yoosoof.  "I
have been trying to tame _him_ by starvation.  The other morning he fell
on his knees before the man who guards the barracoon and entreated him
to give him food.  The guard is a rough fellow, and had been put out of
temper lately by a good many of the slaves.  Instead of giving him food
he gave him a blow in the eye which burst the ball of it, and of course
has rendered him worthless; but _he_ won't trouble us long."

In another place a woman crouched on the ground, having something
wrapped in leaves which she pressed to her dried breast.  It was the
body of a child to which she had recently given birth in that place of
woe.

Leaving his cringing and terrified goods to the guardian of the
barracoon, the Arab returned to his tent beside the beautiful lake, and
there, while enjoying the aroma of flowers and the cool breeze, and the
genial sunshine, and the pleasant influences which God has scattered
with bountiful hand over that luxuriant portion of the earth, calmly
concerted with Marizano the best method by which he could bring
inconceivable misery on thousands of its wretched inhabitants.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

TELLS OF MISFORTUNES THAT BEFELL OUR WANDERERS; OF FAMILIAR TOYS UNDER
NEW ASPECTS, ETCETERA.

When Harold Seadrift and Disco Lillihammer were stopped in their
journey, as related in a former chapter, by the sudden illness of the
bold seaman, an event was impending over them which effectually
overturned their plans.  This was the sudden descent of a band of armed
natives who had been recently driven from their homes by a slaving
party.  The slavers had taken them by surprise during the night, set
their huts on fire, captured their women and children, and slaughtered
all the men, excepting those who sought and found safety in flight.  It
was those who had thus escaped that chanced to come upon the camp of our
travellers one evening about sunset.

Disco was recovering from his attack of fever at the time, though still
weak.  Harold was sitting by his couch of leaves in the hut which had
been erected for him on the first day of the illness.  Jumbo was cutting
up a piece of flesh for supper, and Antonio was putting the kettle on
the fire.  The rest of the party were away in the woods hunting.

No guard was kept; consequently the savages came down on them like a
thunderbolt, and found them quite unprepared to resist even if
resistance had been of any use.

At first their captors, bitterly infuriated by their recent losses,
proposed to kill their prisoners, without delay, by means of the most
excruciating tortures that they could invent, but from some unknown
cause, changed their minds; coupled Harold and Disco together by means
of two slave-sticks; tied Antonio and Jumbo with ropes, and drove them
away.

So suddenly was the thing done, and so effectually, that Disco was far
from the camp before he could realise that what had occurred was a fact,
and not one of the wild feverish dreams that had beset him during his
illness.

The natives would not listen to the earnest explanation of Antonio that
Harold and Disco were Englishmen, and haters of slavery.  They scowled
as they replied that the same had been said by the slavers who had
attacked their village; from which remark it would seem that Yoosoof was
not quite the originator of that device to throw the natives off their
guard.  The Portuguese of Tette on the Zambesi had also thought of and
acted on it!

Fortunately it was, as we have said, near sunset when the capture was
made, and before it became quite dark the band encamped, else must poor
Disco have succumbed to weakness and fatigue.  The very desperation of
his circumstances, however, seemed to revive his strength, for next
morning he resumed his journey with some hope of being able to hold out.
The continued protestations and assurances of Antonio, also, had the
effect of inducing their captors to remove the heavy slave-sticks from
the necks of Harold and Disco, though they did not unbind their wrists.
Thus were they led further into the country, they knew not whither, for
several days and nights, and at last reached a large village where they
were all thrust into a hut, and left to their meditations, while their
captors went to palaver with the chief man of the place.

This chief proved to be a further-sighted man than the men of the tribe
who had captured the Englishmen.  His name was Yambo.  He had heard of
Dr Livingstone, and had met with men of other tribes who had seen and
conversed with the great traveller.  Thus, being of a thoughtful and
inquiring disposition, he had come to understand enough of the good
white man's sentiments to guard him from being imposed on by pretended
Christians.

Yambo's name signified "how are you?" and was probably bestowed on him
because of a strongly benevolent tendency to greet friend and stranger
alike with a hearty "how d'ee do?" sort of expression of face and tone
of voice.

He was a tall grave man, with a commanding firm look, and, withal, a
dash of child-like humour and simplicity.  On hearing his visitors'
remarks about their captives, he at once paid them a visit and a few
leading questions put to Harold through Antonio convinced him that the
prisoners were true men.  He therefore returned to his black visitors,
told them that he had perfect confidence in the good faith of the white
men, and said that he meant to take charge of them.  He then entertained
his black brothers hospitably, gave them a few presents, and sent them
on their way.  This done he returned to his guests and told them that
they were free, that their captors were gone, and that they might go
where they pleased, but that it would gratify him much if they would
consent to spend some time hunting with him in the neighbourhood of his
village.

"Now," said Disco, after Yambo left them, "this is wot I call the most
uncommon fix that ever wos got into by man since Adam an' Eve began
housekeepin' in the garden of Eden."

"I'm not quite sure," replied Harold, with a rueful look, "that it is
absolutely the _worst_ fix, but it is bad enough.  The worst of it is
that this Yambo has let these rascals off with all our fire-arms and
camp-equipage, so that we are absolutely helpless--might as well be
prisoners, for we can't quit this village in such circumstances."

"Wot's wuss than that to my mind, sir, is, that here we are at sea, in
the heart of Afriky, without chart, quadrant, compass, or rudder, an' no
more idea of our whereabouts than one o' them spider monkeys that grins
among the trees.  Hows'ever, we're in luck to fall into the hands of a
friendly chief, so, like these same monkeys, we must grin an' bear it;
only I can't help feelin' a bit cast down at the loss of our messmates.
I fear there's no chance of their findin' us."

"Not the least chance in the world, I should say," returned Harold.
"They could not guess in which direction we had gone, and unless they
had hit on the right road at first, every step they took afterwards
would only widen the distance between us."

"It's lucky I was beginnin' to mend before we was catched," said Disco,
feeling the muscles of his legs; "true, I ain't much to boast of yet but
I'm improvin'."

"That is more than I can say for myself," returned Harold, with a sigh,
as he passed his hand across his forehead; "I feel as if this last push
through the woods in the hot sun, and the weight of that terrible
slave-stick had been almost too much for me."

Disco looked earnestly and anxiously into the face of his friend.

"Wot," asked he, "does you feel?"

"I can scarcely tell," replied Harold, with a faint smile.  "Oh, I
suppose I'm a little knocked up, that's all.  A night's rest will put me
all right."

"So I thought myself, but I wos wrong," said Disco.  "Let's hear wot
your feelin's is, sir; I'm as good as any doctor now, I am, in regard to
symptoms."

"Well, I feel a sort of all-overishness, a kind of lassitude and
sleepiness, with a slight headache, and a dull pain which appears to be
creeping up my spine."

"You're in for it sir," said Disco.  "It's lucky you have always carried
the physic in your pockets, 'cause you'll need it, an' it's lucky, too,
that I am here and well enough to return tit for tat and nurse you,
'cause you'll have that 'ere pain in your spine creep up your back and
round your ribs till it lays hold of yer shoulders, where it'll stick as
if it had made up its mind to stay there for ever an' a day.  Arter that
you'll get cold an' shivering like ice--oh! doesn't I know it well--an'
then hot as fire, with heavy head, an' swimming eyes, an' twisted sight,
an' confusion of--"

"Hold! hold!" cried Harold, laughing, "if you go on in that way I shall
have more than my fair share of it!  Pray stop, and leave me a little to
find out for myself."

"Well, sir, take a purge, and turn in at once, that's my advice.  I'll
dose you with quinine to-morrow mornin', first thing," said Disco,
rising and proceeding forthwith to arrange a couch in a corner of the
hut, which Yambo had assigned them.

Harold knew well enough that his follower was right.  He took his advice
without delay, and next morning found himself little better than a
child, both physically and mentally, for the disease not only prostrated
his great strength--as it had that of his equally robust companion--but,
at a certain stage, induced delirium, during which he talked the most
ineffable nonsense that his tongue could pronounce, or his brain
conceive.

Poor Disco, who, of course, had been unable to appreciate the extent of
his own delirious condition, began to fear that his leader's mind was
gone for ever, and Jumbo was so depressed by the unutterably solemn
expression of the mariner's once jovial countenance, that he did not
once show his teeth for a whole week, save when engaged with meals.

As for Antonio, his nature not being very sympathetic, and his health
being good, he rather enjoyed the quiet life and good living which
characterised the native village, and secretly hoped that Harold might
remain on the sick-list for a considerable time to come.

