  You fly them for a moment to fight with them again.
  But I've ninety men and more that are lying sick ashore.            10

  I should count myself the coward if I left them, my Lord Howard,
  To these Inquisition dogs and the devildoms of Spain."

  So Lord Howard past away with five ships of war that day,
  Till he melted like a cloud in the silent summer heaven;
  But Sir Richard bore in hand all his sick men from the land         15
  Very carefully and slow,
  Men of Bideford in Devon,
  And we laid them on the ballast down below;
  For we brought them all aboard,
  And they blest him in their pain, that they were not left
    to Spain,                                                         20
  To the thumbscrew and the stake, for the glory of the Lord.

  He had only a hundred seamen to work the ship and to fight,
  And he sailed away from Flores till the Spaniard came in sight,
  With his huge sea-castles heaving upon the weather bow.
  "Shall we fight or shall we fly?                                    25
  Good Sir Richard, tell us now,
  For to fight is but to die!
  There'll be little of us left by the time this sun be set."
  And Sir Richard said again: "We be all good English men.
  Let us bang these dogs of Seville, the children of the devil,       30
  For I never turn'd my back upon Don or devil yet."

  Sir Richard spoke and he laugh'd, and we roar'd a hurrah, and so
  The little Revenge ran on sheer into the heart of the foe,
  With her hundred fighters on deck, and her ninety sick below;
  For half of their fleet to the right and half to the left
    were seen,                                                        35
  And the little Revenge ran on thro' the long sea-lane between.

  Thousands of their soldiers look'd down from their decks
    and laugh'd,
  Thousands of their seamen made mock at the mad little craft
  Running on and on, till delay'd
  By their mountain-like San Philip that, of fifteen hundred tons,    40
  And up-shadowing high above us with her yawning tiers of guns,
  Took the breath from our sails, and we stay'd.

  And while now the great San Philip hung above us like a cloud
  Whence the thunderbolt will fall
  Long and loud,                                                      45
  Four galleons drew away
  From the Spanish fleet that day,
  And two upon the larboard and two upon the starboard lay,
  And the battle-thunder broke from them all.

  But anon the great San Philip she bethought herself and went        50
  Having that within her womb that had left her ill-content;
  And the rest they came aboard us, and they fought us hand to hand,
  For a dozen times they came with their pikes and musqueteers,
  And a dozen times we shook 'em off as a dog that shakes his ears
  When he leaps from the water to the land.                           55

  And the sun went down, and the stars came out far over
    the summer sea,
  But never a moment ceased the fight of the one and the fifty-three.
  Ship after ship, the whole night long, their high-built
    galleons came,
  Ship after ship, the whole night long, with their battle-thunder
    and flame;
  Ship after ship, the whole night long, drew back with her dead
    and her shame:                                                    60
  For some were sunk and many were shatter'd, and so could fight
    us no more--
  God of battles, was ever a battle like this in the world before?

  For he said "Fight on! fight on!"
  Tho' his vessel was all but a wreck;
  And it chanced that, when half of the short summer night
    was gone,                                                         65
  With a grisly wound to be drest he had left the deck,

  But a bullet struck him that was dressing it suddenly dead,
  And himself he was wounded again in the side and the head,
  And he said, "Fight on! fight on!"

  And the night went down, and the sun smiled out far over
    the summer sea,                                                   70
  And the Spanish fleet with broken sides lay round us all in a ring;
  But they dar'd not touch us again, for they fear'd that we still
    could sting,
  So they watch'd what the end would be.
  And we had not fought them in vain,
  But in perilous plight were we,                                     75
  Seeing forty of our poor hundred were slain,
  And half of the rest of us maim'd for life
  In the crash of the cannonades and the desperate strife;
  And the sick men down in the hold were most of them stark and cold,
  And the pikes were all broken or bent, and the powder was all
    of it spent;                                                      80
  And the masts and the rigging were lying over the side;
  But Sir Richard cried in his English pride,
  "We have fought such a fight for a day and a night
  As may never be fought again!
  We have won great glory, my men!                                    85
  And a day less or more
  At sea or ashore,
  We die--does it matter when?
  Sink me the ship, Master Gunner--sink her, split her in twain!
  Fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of Spain!"           90

  And the gunner said "Ay, ay," but the seamen made reply:
  "We have children, we have wives,
  And the Lord hath spared our lives.
  We will make the Spaniard promise, if we yield, to let us go;
  We shall live to fight again and to strike another blow."           95
  And the lion there lay dying, and they yielded to the foe.

  And the stately Spanish men to their flagship bore him then
  Where they laid him by the mast, old Sir Richard caught at last,
  And they praised him to his face with their courtly foreign grace;
  But he rose upon their decks, and he cried:                        100
  "I have fought for Queen and Faith like a valiant man and true;
  I have only done my duty as a man is bound to do:
  With a joyful spirit I Sir Richard Grenville die!"
  And he fell upon their decks, and he died.

  And they stared at the dead that had been so valiant and true,     105
  And had holden the power and glory of Spain so cheap
  That he dared her with one little ship and his English few;
  Was he devil or man? He was devil for aught they knew,
  But they sank his body with honour down into the deep,

  And they mann'd the Revenge with a swarthier alien crew,           110
  And away she sail'd with her loss and long'd for her own;
  When a wind from the lands they had ruin'd awoke from sleep,
  And the water began to heave and the weather to moan,
  And or ever that evening ended a great gale blew,
  And a wave like the wave that is raised by an earthquake grew,     115
  Till it smote on their hulls and their sails and their masts
    and their flags,
  And the whole sea plunged and fell on the shot-shatter'd navy
    of Spain,
  And the little Revenge herself went down by the island crags
  To be lost evermore in the main.

      --_Alfred Tennyson_


  PREPARATORY.--Give a series of titles suggestive of the
  events narrated in this ballad; describe the picture
  that each title calls up, and tell on what part of the
  poem it is based.

  What different ideals of bravery are brought out in this
  ballad, and by whom is each presented? Compare them with
  those set forth in _The Private of the Buffs_ (Fourth
  Reader), and _Horatius_.

  1, 3, and 13. (Appendix A, 1 and 6.)

  'FORE GOD ... sick. What Inflection prevails?
  (Introduction, pp. 17 and 18.)

  What Inflection is placed on the questions in ll. 7, 25,
  62, 88, and 108? (Introduction, pp. 18 and 19.)

  FOR THE GLORY OF THE LORD. How is the irony brought out
  by the voice? (Introduction, pp. 21, 22, and 30.)

  25-28. (Introduction, p. 18.)

  Compare the speech of the men (ll. 25-28) with that of
  Sir Richard (ll. 29-31) from the standpoint of mental
  attitude. How is this difference indicated by Stress?

  32. Which are the emphatic words? Give your reasons.
  Select words that are emphatic because of contrast from
  ll. 34, 35, and 91. What Inflection is placed on the
  emphatic words in each case?

  How does repetition affect the Emphasis in ll. 37-38,
  53-54, 58-60, 63, and 89? (Introduction, pp. 31-33.)

  40. With what word is THAT connected in sense? How does
  the voice make the connection? (Introduction, p. 33.)

  43-47. Analyse these lines from the standpoint of
  Perspective.

  66-67. Where do the Pauses occur? How does the Grouping
  affect them?

  68. Why is HIMSELF emphatic?

  75-81. Give examples of "momentary completeness".

  93. Which is the most emphatic word in this line? Give
  your reason.

  101-103. To what extent should Imitation enter into the
  reading of this speech? (Introduction, pp. 4 and 5.)

  112-117. How can the effect of this Climax be brought
  out by the voice? (Introduction, p. 31.)

  118. Note the transition in thought and feeling. By what
  change in Time, Pitch, and Force is it accompanied?

       *       *       *       *       *


HERVE RIEL


  On the sea and at the Hogue, sixteen hundred ninety-two,
    Did the English fight the French,--woe to France!
  And the thirty-first of May, helter-skelter through the blue,
  Like a crowd of frightened porpoises a shoal of sharks pursue,
    Came crowding ship on ship to St. Malo on the Rance,               5
  With the English fleet in view.

  'Twas the squadron that escaped, with the victor in full chase;
    First and foremost of the drove, in his great ship, Damfreville:
      Close on him fled, great and small,
      Twenty-two good ships in all;                                   10
  And they signalled to the place,
  "Help the winners of a race!
    Get us guidance, give us harbour, take us quick--or, quicker still,
    Here's the English can and will!"

  Then the pilots of the place put out brisk and leapt on board;      15
    "Why, what hope or chance have ships like these to pass?"
       laughed they:
  "Rocks to starboard, rocks to port, all the passage scarred
    and scored,
  Shall the _Formidable_ here, with her twelve and eighty guns,
    Think to make the river-mouth by the single narrow way,
  Trust to enter where 'tis ticklish for a craft of twenty tons,      20
      And with flow at full beside?
      Now 'tis slackest ebb of tide.
    Reach the mooring? Rather say,
  While rock stands or water runs,
    Not a ship will leave the bay!"                                   25

  Then was called a council straight.
  Brief and bitter the debate:
  "Here's the English at our heels; would you have them take in tow
  All that's left us of the fleet, linked together stern and bow,
  For a prize to Plymouth Sound?                                      30
  Better run the ships aground!"
    (Ended Damfreville his speech.)
  Not a minute more to wait!
    "Let the captains all and each
    Shove ashore, then blow up, burn the vessels on the beach!        35
  France must undergo her fate.

  Give the word!" But no such word
  Was ever spoke or heard;
    For up stood, for out stepped, for in struck amid all these,--
  A Captain? a Lieutenant? a Mate--first, second, third?              40
    No such man of mark, and meet
    With his betters to compete!
    But a simple Breton sailor pressed by Tourville for the fleet,
  A poor coasting-pilot he, Herve Riel the Croisickese.

  And, "What mockery or malice have we here?" cries Herve Riel:       45
    "Are you mad, you Malouins?  Are you cowards, fools, or rogues?
  Talk to me of rocks and shoals, me who took the soundings, tell
  On my fingers every bank, every shallow, every swell
    'Twist the offing here and Greve, where the river disembogues?
  Are you bought by English gold? Is it love the lying's for?         50
    Morn and eve, night and day,
    Have I piloted your bay,
  Entered free and anchored fast, at the foot of Solidor.
    Burn the fleet and ruin France? That were worse than fifty Hogues!
      Sirs, they know I speak the truth! Sirs, believe me there's
        a way!                                                        55
  Only let me lead the line,
    Have the biggest ship to steer,
    Get this _Formidable_ clear,
  Make the others follow mine,
  And I lead them, most and least, by a passage I know well,          60
    Right to Solidor past Greve,
      And there lay them safe and sound;
    And if one ship misbehave--
        Keel so much as grate the ground--
  Why, I've nothing but my life,--here's my head!" cries
    Herve Riel.                                                       65

  Not a minute more to wait.
  "Steer us in, then, small and great!
    Take the helm, lead the line, save the squadron!" cried its chief.
  Captains, give the sailor place!
    He is Admiral, in brief.                                          70
  Still the north wind, by God's grace!
  See the noble fellow's face
  As the big ship, with a bound,
  Clears the entry like a hound.
  Keeps the passage, as its inch of way were the wide sea's
      profound!                                                       75
    See, safe through shoal and rock,
    How they follow in a flock,
  Not a ship that misbehaves, not a keel that grates the ground,
    Not a spar that comes to grief!
  The peril, see, is past,                                            80
  All are harboured to the last,
  And just as Herve Riel hollas "Anchor!"--sure as fate,
  Up the English come--too late.

  So, the storm subsides to calm:
    They see the green trees wave                                     85
    On the heights o'erlooking Greve.
  Hearts that bled are stanched with balm.
  "Just our rapture to enhance,
    Let the English rake the bay,
  Gnash their teeth and glare askance                                 90
    As they cannonade away!
  'Neath rampired Solidor pleasant riding on the Rance!"
  How hope succeeds despair on each captain's countenance!
  Out burst all with one accord,
    "This is Paradise for Hell!                                       95
    Let France, let France's King,
    Thank the man that did the thing!"
  What a shout, and all one word,
    "Herve Riel!"
  As he stepped in front once more,                                  100
    Not a symptom of surprise
    In the frank, blue Breton eyes,
  Just the same man as before.

  Then said Damfreville, "My friend,
  I must speak out at the end,                                       105
    Though I find the speaking hard.
  Praise is deeper than the lips:
  You have saved the King his ships,
    You must name your own reward.
  'Faith, our sun was near eclipse!                                  110
  Demand whate'er you will,
  France remains your debtor still.
  Ask to heart's content and have! or my name's not Damfreville."

  Then a beam of fun outbroke
  On the bearded mouth that spoke,                                   115
  As the honest heart laughed through
  Those frank eyes of Breton blue:
  "Since I needs must say my say,
    Since on board the duty's done,
    And from Malo Roads to Croisic Point, what is it but a run?--    120
  Since 'tis ask and have, I may--
    Since the others go ashore--
  Come! A good whole holiday!
    Leave to go and see my wife, whom I call the Belle Aurore!"
    That he asked and that he got,--nothing more.                    125

  Name and deed alike are lost:
  Not a pillar nor a post
    In his Croisic keeps alive the feat as it befell;
  Not a head in white and black
  On a single fishing-smack,                                         130
  In memory of the man but for whom had gone to wrack
    All that France saved from the fight whence England bore the bell.
  Go to Paris: rank on rank
    Search the heroes flung pell-mell
  On the Louvre, face and flank!                                     135
    You shall look long enough ere you come to Herve Riel.
  So, for better and for worse,
  Herve Riel, accept my verse!
  In my verse, Herve Riel, do thou once more
  Save the squadron, honour France, love thy wife the Belle
    Aurore!                                                          140

    --_Robert Browning_
         (_By permission of the owner of the copyright
             and Smith, Elder & Co._)


  PREPARATORY.--Narrate briefly the events of the poem and
  describe (_a_) the council, (_b_) the scene after the
  ships are safely anchored.

  How does this poem illustrate the truth that the highest
  motive in life is duty? From this standpoint compare
  Herve Riel with Sir Richard Grenville in Tennyson's _The
  Revenge_.

  Give other examples to show that true nobility does not
  depend on such externals as rank and position.

  2. WOE TO FRANCE. How does the voice indicate that this
  phrase is parenthetical?

  4. What is the subject of PURSUE? Its object? How does
  the reader make the meaning clear?

  3-5. What is the Shading?

  8 and 14. Supply the ellipsis in each case. How is the
  reading affected by an ellipsis? (Introduction, p. 10.)

  12-14. What is the Stress? (Introduction, pp. 27 and
  28.)

  16-25. What energy characterizes these lines? With what
  Stress should they be read?

  TWELVE AND EIGHTY GUNS, TWENTY TONS. What is the
  difference in the Quality of voice? Compare MAN OF MARK,
  SIMPLE BRETON SAILOR, ll. 40 and 42.

