"What does the doctor say about him?" Ralph asked.

"He says it is brain fever," the nurse said. "He only said it might
be some days, before the crisis came; and that he could not give
any decided opinion, at present. But he seemed to have hope."

"Thank God, at least, for that!" Ralph said, earnestly.

Percy, turning his head round again, caught sight of Ralph.

"Ah, there is that schoolmaster again! If no one else will hang
him, I will do it, myself. Let me get at him!"

And he again made desperate efforts to get out of bed.

"You had better go, sir," one of the sisters said, urgently. "The
sight of you makes him worse, and you can do him no good."

Seeing that it was so, Ralph reluctantly left the room; his only
comfort being that Percy was as carefully tended, and looked after,
as it was possible for him to be. He had scarcely returned to his
room, when an officer was shown in.

"I daresay you hardly remember me," he said. "I came here with you,
last night."

"I am very glad to see you again, and to thank you for the trouble
you took," Ralph said. "I was too sleepy to do so, last night."

"Not at all," the officer answered. "However, I am here with a
message from the general, now. He would have asked you to dine with
him but, hearing of the state of your brother, he could not ask you
to leave him for so long a time; but he would be glad if you would
come to see him, for an hour, this evening. He wishes to know how
you managed to pass through the German lines; and he also desires
to be informed, as far as you can give such information, of the
number and position of the enemy.

"What surprises us all, more than anything, is that the dispatches
are dated the morning of the thirteenth instant; and you were
picked up, by the Farcey, upon the evening of the sixteenth. It
seems incredible that you should have done the distance, and
managed to get through the German lines, in the time. Only one
other messenger has got through; and his dispatches were more than
ten days old, when they reached us, and had been forestalled by
some pigeons. Your news is six days later than any we have
received."

"We slept, on the night of the thirteenth, at Montargis," Ralph
said; "on the fourteenth at Melun, on the fifteenth at Versailles;
and last night--as you know--here."

"I must not get the information before the general," the officer
said, with a laugh. "It is half-past six, now. The general dines at
seven. At what time will you be with him? Shall we say nine?"

"I will be there at nine," Ralph said, "but the general will, I
hope, excuse my coming either in uniform, or full dress of any
kind. I have, of course, nothing with me."

"General Trochu will of course understand that," the officer said.
"Goodbye."

Ralph now went back to Percy's room. The doctor had just come. He
was accompanied by another medical man. Ralph stood by, in silent
attention, while the doctor felt Percy's pulse, and asked a few
questions of the nurse. They then gave some orders, and said that
fresh medicine should be sent in, in a quarter of an hour; and that
they would come in again, at ten o'clock, to see how he was going
on.

"What do you think of him, sir?" Ralph asked, as the doctor came
out.

"He has a sharp attack of brain fever," the doctor said, "but he is
young, with an excellent constitution. I trust we shall pull him
through. I cannot say anything for certain, at present--till the
fever takes a turn, one way or the other--but I have strong hopes."

Ralph ordered some dinner to be sent up to his room, for he began
to be keenly awake to the fact that he had eaten nothing, for more
than twenty-four hours. After he had taken the meal, he sat in
Percy's room, until it was time to go to General Trochu's; keeping
himself, however, in a position so as to be hidden by the
curtain--for the sight of him evidently excited the patient. Percy
was, as far as his brother could see, in just the same state as
before: sometimes talking to himself, in disconnected sentences;
sometimes raving wildly, and imagining himself repeating the scenes
through which he had passed, since he left home.

At nine o'clock, exactly, Ralph sent in his name to the governor;
and was at once shown in. The general had already left the table,
and was smoking in a small study. With him were Generals Ducrot and
Vinoy. General Trochu rose, and shook him cordially by the hand;
presented him to the other generals, and asked him to take a cigar,
and sit down.

"Generals Ducrot and Vinoy are surprised, I see, at your
appearance, Captain Barclay," General Trochu began.

"By the way," he interrupted himself, "you are in the Gazette, this
morning, as captain."

Ralph bowed, and expressed his thanks.

"No thanks are due at all, Captain Barclay," the old veteran said.
"You have well earned your promotion; and Gambetta--who speaks of
you, I may say, in the highest terms--tells me that he promised you
the step, if you got in. I need not say that, whether he had done
so or not, I should have given it to you.

"But I was saying, I see Generals Vinoy and Ducrot are
surprised--as I am, myself--at your appearance. Gambetta, in his
letter, twice uses the expression young officers. Once he said,
'these young officers have greatly distinguished themselves, and
have gained the cross of the legion of honor;' and again he says,
'these young officers have volunteered to carry dispatches.'

"Naturally, my friends were looking for a younger man; and having
only seen you for an instant last night, and not having observed
your features, specially, I confess that I was expecting a younger
man.

"You see," he said, with a smile, "we can quite understand
Gambetta's calling your brother a young officer, for he is a mere
lad; but one would hardly have applied the same term to yourself."

Ralph had flushed crimson, at the commencement of this speech.

"I must apologize very greatly, general," he said, when the
Governor of Paris stopped; "for the mistake is certainly due to my
own forgetfulness."

His hearers looked surprised.

"I slept until five o'clock this afternoon," Ralph continued;
"owing, I believe, to a powerful opiate that the doctor you kindly
sent us gave me. Since I woke, my thoughts have been entirely given
to my brother; and the thought of my singular appearance never
entered my mind. I have become so accustomed--in the few days since
I left Tours--to this beard, mustache, and hair, that I never
thought of them, for a moment. Had I thought of it, I could not
have presented myself before you, this evening; for I should not
have presumed to do so, in my present state; and it will take me
some hours of hard work, and not a little pain, before I get rid of
them--for they are fastened on with shoemaker's wax and, I fear,
will not come off, without taking a considerable portion of skin
with them."

The three generals laughed heartily at Ralph's apology, and their
own mistake; and General Trochu then asked him to give them a full
account of what had happened to him, what he had seen, and what
information he had gained since he left Tours. Ralph told the story
unaffectedly, from beginning to end, and received warm commendation
from his listeners.

"Your story began at Tours," General Trochu said; "where had you
last been, before that?"

"We had only arrived, ten days before, from a German prison," Ralph
answered.

The generals all laughed.

"You are adventurous fellows, you and your brother," General Vinoy
said. "How did you get taken, and how did you get out?"

Ralph again told his story.

"You are cool hands, you Barclays," General Ducrot said. "How did
you get commissions first? Were you at the Polytechnic, or Saint
Cyr?"

"No, general," Ralph said, modestly, "we had no such advantages. We
won our commissions--and the cross of the Legion--in the Vosges, as
franc tireurs."

"In which corps?" General Trochu asked, a little sharply. "They
have not done any very great things, the franc tireurs."

"We were in the franc tireurs of Dijon," Ralph said, a little
proudly. "We several times beat superior forces. We blew up the
bridge of the Vesouze; and should have blown up the tunnel of
Saverne, had it not been for treachery."

"Yes, yes," General Trochu said; "I remember Gambetta has once or
twice mentioned your corps, especially. You see, we don't hear much
from outside.

"Let us hear of the affairs you have mentioned. Your account will
give us a better idea of the state of things, in the Vosges, than
fifty dispatches would do."

Thus asked, Ralph gave an account of the doings of the corps; from
the day they arrived in the Vosges, to the day he had left
them--reduced to a fourth of their original strength. The three
generals sat and smoked their cigars while he spoke, asking
questions occasionally.

"Very good," General Trochu said, when he finished; and the other
generals cordially assented.

"But how come you to speak German so well?" General Trochu asked;
"and how was it you understood the English in which the officer
spoke, at Saverne?"

"We are English," Ralph said; and his hearers gave a simultaneous
start of surprise. "That is to say, our nationality is English,
though we are half French. Our father--an officer in the English
army--was wounded, left the service, married a French lady, and
settled in France for a time. We have been educated partly in
England, Germany, and France; so that we speak the three languages
nearly equally well."

"Well, Captain Barclay," General Trochu said, "I am almost sorry
that you are not French; for you would be a credit to any country.

"And now, I think it is time to be going to bed," and he drew out
his watch. "Bless me, it is one o'clock! I had no idea it was so
late. Good night.

"I will not ask you to call again, for a day or two; as your
brother will naturally occupy your attention, and care. I trust
that I shall soon hear good news of him."

"Good night, Captain Barclay," the other generals said, cordially,
each giving him their hands; and Ralph made his way across the dark
streets--for there was no gas--back to his hotel.

He went at once up to Percy's room; and found that, if not
decidedly better, he was at least no worse; and the Sisters of
Charity, who were nursing him, said that the doctors had spoken
hopefully at their last visit. Ralph had intended to sit up all
night, but the nurses assured him that he could be of no use,
whatever; and indeed, that he would be worse than useless, as his
presence excited Percy. They themselves were keeping watch, by
turns.

Accordingly Ralph--who still felt the effects of the cold
immersion--went off to bed and--in spite of the late hour at which
he had risen--was in a few minutes sound asleep.



Chapter 17: A Balloon Voyage.


For eight-and-forty hours, Percy's fever and delirium continued
unabated. At the end of that time, he fell into a long sleep; and
the doctor, as he felt his hand and heard his breathing, told his
brother that he thought the crisis was over, and that he would
awaken, conscious. His prognostication turned out well founded and,
to Ralph's intense delight, Percy knew him when he opened his eyes.
He was weak--weaker than Ralph could have supposed anyone could
possibly have become, after only two days' illness. But he was
fairly convalescent.

Ralph had scarcely left him, during these two days; and had only
been out once from the hotel. He had sent for a newspaper; to read
for himself, in the Gazette, the promotion which General Trochu had
notified to him and, after doing so, he turned to another portion;
and there, among the lists of decorations given, were the names of
Percy and himself, as promoted to be commanders of the Legion for
having, with extreme gallantry, conveyed dispatches from Tours to
Paris, through the German lines.

It was after reading this newspaper that Ralph went out. His walk
was not a long one. He went first to a tailor, and ordered two
captain's uniforms; for Percy was so nearly his own size
that--except that his shoulders were an inch less in width--Ralph's
clothes fitted him exactly. He then went to the Palais Royal, where
there are several shops which sell nothing but medals, and
decorations; and bought two ribbons of the commander's rank, in the
legion of honor.

One terrible morning Ralph spent in a hairdresser's hands and, at
the cost of no little pain, got rid of all that mass of hair which
had so transformed him. The stain was now nearly worn off the skin;
and Ralph was quite surprised, when he again looked at himself in
the glass.

"I was about beginning to forget," he said, with a laugh, "that I
was a boy, after all."

The first day of Percy's convalescence, he dozed a good deal; but
the next day he woke, much brighter and better.

"Look here, Percy," Ralph said, laying the ribbon before him;
"that's better than medicine for you. There is the ribbon of a
commander of the legion of honor. You can safely boast that you are
the youngest who ever wore it; and earned it well, too, old man.
Won't they be pleased, at home? And we are both gazetted as
captains."

Percy smiled with pleasure. His attack had been a very sharp one;
but so short an illness, however severe, is speedily got over. The
doctor had, that morning, said that all he wanted now was building
up; and that, in a very few days, he would be about. Indeed, Percy
wanted to get up that day; insisting that he was quite strong. When
he once stood up, however, he found he was much weaker than he had
imagined; but sat up in an armchair, all the evening. The next day
he remained up all day and, three days after, he felt strong enough
to go to the governor with Ralph, to ask for their promised places
in the next balloon.

It was now the twenty-third of November. A carriage was sent for
and, after some difficulty, procured; for carriages were already
becoming scarce, in Paris. They drove up to the entrance, and went
in; but were told by an orderly--who could scarcely conceal his
surprise at these lads, in the uniform of captains of the staff,
and with decorations scarcely ever seen, except upon the breasts of
superior officers--that the general was out. They turned and went
out but, as they reached the steps, a number of officers rode up.

"There is General Trochu himself, with Vinoy and Ducrot," Ralph
said.

The generals dismounted, and came up the steps. As they did so
their eyes fell upon the boys, who both saluted. They paused, in
surprise.

"What masquerade is this, young gentlemen?" General Trochu asked,
sternly. "Allow me to ask how you venture to dress up as captains,
on the staff; and still more how you dare to put on the ribbons of
commanders of the legion of honor?

"It is no laughing matter," he said, angrily, as Ralph could not
resist a smile. "It is a punishable offence; and your impudence in
showing yourselves off, at my door, makes the matter the more
unpardonable."

"I see, general, that you do not remember us."

"I do not, sir," General Trochu said, looking at him sternly. "To
the best of my belief, I never set eyes upon you before."

The numerous staff of officers--who had accompanied the generals,
and who were scattered thickly around them--gave an angry murmur;
for scarce one among them wore the coveted decoration.

"I am Ralph Barclay, and this is my brother Percy," Ralph said,
respectfully.

"Impossible!" the three generals exclaimed, simultaneously; while
there was a general exclamation of surprise, from the officers
round--for the courageous deed of the Barclays, in making their way
through the enemy's lines, had been a general topic of conversation,
and all Paris was familiar with their names.

"It is so, general," Ralph said, respectfully. "I explained to you,
at the interview that I had the honor of having with you, in the
presence of Generals Ducrot and Vinoy, that it was the false hair
which made all the difference; and that I was but little older than
my brother."

The generals no longer doubted. They all shook both boys by the
hand.

"I am astounded," General Trochu said; "astounded that two such
mere boys, as I now see you are, should have accomplished what you
have done. However, courage is of no age; and I do not think that
there are any here,"--and he turned to the officers round him--"who
will not agree with me that these ribbons are worthily placed."

"No, indeed," was the general reply; and the officers all pressed
round, to shake hands with the boys, as they accompanied the
governor back into the house.

General Trochu went at once into his private study, and told the
boys to sit down.

"Now, what can I do for you, boys?"

"Monsieur Gambetta promised us that he would write, to ask for us
to have places in the first balloon which came out, after we
arrived," Ralph said. "Owing to my brother's illness, I have not
been able to ask, before; but I am now anxious to leave as soon as
possible, especially as the doctor says that change is desirable
for my brother, and that he ought to have at least a month's
nursing, at home, before he gets on horseback again."

"A balloon will start tomorrow morning," General Trochu said, "but
if you choose to stay here, I will promise you both places upon my
own staff; or upon those of Generals Ducrot or Vinoy--either of
whom would, I am sure, be very glad to receive you."

"You are very kind, indeed, sir--very kind; and we feel greatly
honored by your offer," Ralph said, gratefully. "Had we any
intention, whatever, of remaining in the army, we should accept it,
with many thanks; but it is not so. We are English; and at the end
of the war we leave France, and go back to live at home. We entered
the ranks with no thought of winning promotion, or favor; but
simply from a sense of duty to the country to which our mother
belonged, and in which we were born.

"There will, I suppose, be a great battle fought near Orleans,
shortly; and I should like to be present, if possible--and Percy
wants rest. Therefore, general, while thanking you most warmly for
your kindness, we would rather go out."

"Very well," the general said, "it shall be as you wish. There is
certainly more chance of your seeing stirring service, in the
field, than in here. I do not blame you for your choice. I will
send a note at once to Monsieur Teclier--who has charge of the
balloon--to say that you will accompany him.

"Goodbye, lads, goodbye; you are fine young fellows, and your
father has every right to be proud of you. Tell him so, from me."

The boys rose, and bowed; but the general held out his hand, and
shook theirs warmly.

Upon leaving the room, they found several of the officers of the
staff waiting outside; who begged them to stay, and have a chat
with them. Ralph at once accepted the invitation; upon the
condition that Percy should have a sofa upon which to lie down, for
his brother was looking pale, and faint. They were most warmly
received, in a large drawing room, in which were over a dozen
officers of different ranks. Some bottles of champagne were opened,
cigars were lit and, while Percy lay quietly upon the sofa, Ralph
chatted with the officers; relating, at their earnest request,
several of their adventures in the Vosges, as well as the story of
their entering into Paris.

