"All down!" yelled Dan. "Set 'em up in the other alley!"

Though downed for the moment, the two men were disposed to make a
livelier fight of it than ever. It was a brisk, picturesque,
rough-and-tumble fight that followed, in which the young boys got a deal
of rough handling.

Frightened, yet fascinated, Mrs. Dexter tottered against the fence and
stood looking on.

Things might yet have fared badly with Dick and his friends had not a
newcomer arrived on the scene. He came running, and proved to be
Policeman Whalen in uniform.

"Here! What's on?" demanded the Gridley officer. "Let up on kicking them
boys! I want you!"

With that Whalen, who was a big and powerful man, grabbed Abner Dexter
by the coat collar and pulled him to his feet. With this prisoner in
tow, he moved up and seized Gus in similar fashion.

"Now, what's the row?" demanded Officer Whalen.

"Arrest these boys for assault!" quivered Dexter in a passion.

"Yes, arrest them!" insisted Gus. "I'm an officer, too, and I was trying
to take them in."

"You didn't seem to be having very good luck at it," grinned Whalen.
"But I know these boys, and they're all good lads."

"Arrest them, just the same! They were assaulting me," insisted Dexter
angrily.

"And what were you doing?" insisted Whalen wonderingly.

"He was trying to steal jewels and money from his wife," interposed Dick
Prescott.

"Bah!" growled Dexter. "A man can't steal from his wife."

"But he can assault her," returned Policeman Whalen. "And a man can
disturb the peace with his wife, just as handily as he can anywhere
else. Mrs. Dexter, are these lads telling the truth?"

"Oh, yes, officer! My husband was trying to take this satchel away from
me, and he knew that it contains my jewels and thirty-five hundred
dollars in cash."

"Do you want him arrested?"

"Yes; I--I'm afraid I shall have to have him arrested, or he'll go right
on annoying me."

"Will you appear against him, Mrs. Dexter?"

"Yes."

"Then I'll take him along. And what about this fellow?"

"Me?" demanded Gus with offended dignity. "I'm a police officer."

"What's your name?"

"August Driggs."

"Where are you a policeman?"

"In Templeton."

"Why were you lads fighting Officer Driggs?" inquired Whalen blandly.

Dick supplied some of the details, Dave others. Mrs. Dexter confirmed
the statements that they made.

"I guess I'll take you along, too, Driggs," announced Policeman Whalen.

"But I'm a police officer!" protested Driggs aghast.

"Police officers can be arrested like anyone else, when they break the
law," announced Policeman Whalen dryly. "Come along, the two of you!
Mrs. Dexter, you wouldn't like to be seen walking along with us, but
I'll ask you to be at the station house inside of five minutes."

"I'll be there, officer," promised the woman.

"Do you want us, too?" inquired Dick. He and all of his friends were
eager to see the affair through to the finish.

"No; I know where to find you lads, if you're wanted," grinned Policeman
Whalen. "I don't want a big crowd following. Mrs. Dexter, ma'am, I'll be
looking for you to be on hand sharp."

With that the broad-backed policeman started off with two savage
prisoners in tow.

"Say, if we're to have any dinner and get back to school on time, we'll
have to be moving fast," declared Dan Dalzell.

"I thought we were surely going to get into a lot of trouble," muttered
Hazelton, as the youngsters moved along rapidly. "But Whalen knew his
business."

"I hope the judge can send that Dexter fellow up for a good, long time,"
muttered Dick. "He's been annoying that poor woman all the time lately."

"Just because she has her grandfather's money at last," grumbled Dave
Darrin.

Soon the youngsters came to a point where they had to separate. But all
hands were back at school on time. The work of the afternoon was duly
progressing when the telephone bell at the principal's desk rang.

Old Dut held what proved to be a mysterious conversation for a few
moments. Then he wound up with:

"All right. I'll send them right over."

Ringing off, Old Dut glanced at Dick.

"Master Prescott, it appears that you, Darrin, Reade, Holmes, Dalzell
and Hazelton saw some trouble on the street this noon."

"Yes, sir."

"All six of you are wanted, at once, down at court, to give evidence.
You are excused. If you get through at court early enough, come back to
finish your afternoon's work."

Six Grammar School boys rose and filed out quietly. How enviously the
other boys in the room stared after them! How curiously the girls
glanced at the young heroes who were now wanted on the government's
business!

"Say," ventured Dan as soon as they got outside, "I hope the judge
orders Dexter hanged."

"He'll hardly do that," retorted Dave. "A street row is hardly a hanging
offense. If it were, there'd be a lot of fellows missing from the
Central Grammar School."

"So we're called in to help decide the case?" asked Greg, puffing up.

"Oh, get busy with some brains!" scoffed Dick airily. "We haven't
anything to do with deciding the case. That's what the judge is paid
for. But we're wanted just to tell what we know. Say, you fellows, be
careful you don't get so rattled that you try to tell a lot of things
that you don't know."

In due time they reached the court building. Grown suddenly very quiet
and almost scared, these six thirteen-year-old boys filed upstairs. A
policeman stood before the door of the courtroom.

"May we go in?" whispered Dick.

"Of course," nodded the policeman. "Take your hats off."

The officer conducted the sextette of young witnesses inside, past a
group or two of loungers who made up the usual police-court audience,
and thence on before the bench.

At one side, at this end of the room, sat Dexter and Driggs. Right in
front of the clerk of the court were seated Mrs. Dexter and a lawyer.
Officer Whalen lounged near the two prisoners.

"These are the lads, your honor," nodded Policeman Whalen, after giving
Dick & Co. a keen looking over.

"Swear them, Mr. Clerk," said the Justice.

Solemnly the six youngsters held up their right hands and took the oath.
Then Justice Lee began to question them. From Dick, first, he drew out
the story of the dispute in the street. Then the others told the same
story.

"Why did you boys interfere?" asked the justice of Prescott.

"Because, sir," Dick answered, "we didn't want to see a woman
ill-treated on the street."

"A very good reason," nodded Justice Lee approvingly. "But weren't you
afraid of Driggs, here, who is really a police officer?"

"No, sir; I didn't believe that a police officer had any more right than
any one else to break the law."

"You boys have acted very sensibly," nodded Justice Lee. "Dexter, do you
wish to question any of these young witnesses?"

Dexter shook his head, scowling.

"Do you, Driggs?"

"No, your honor. 'Twouldn't be any use."

"You're right about that, I imagine," nodded the justice. "Boys, the
court wishes to express its pleasure over your good sense, and to praise
you for your chivalry and courage. You did just right--as the court
hopes you will always do under similar circumstances. Dexter, stand up.
Driggs, also."

The two prisoners arose, sullen enough in their appearance.

"Dexter, you have been guilty of disturbing the peace. I do not believe
a mere fine sufficient in your case. I therefore sentence you to serve
thirty days in jail. Driggs, your primary offense was about as great as
Dexter's, but your offense is worse, for you are a police officer, and
you tried to throw the strength of your position around the acts of the
prisoner. The court therefore sentences you to sixty days in jail."

"We both wish to appeal, your honor," cried Dexter, his face aflame.

"Dexter's bail will then be fixed at two hundred dollars; Driggs's at
four hundred dollars. Are you prepared to furnish bail?"

"I will furnish the cash for both of us," announced Abner Dexter,
drawing a roll of banknotes from a pocket.

Mrs. Dexter and her lawyer filed out while this matter was being
arranged with the clerk of the court. Dick and his friends, at a sign
from the court, left the room as soon as they had received their fees as
witnesses.

"So he pays the money, Dexter does, and walks out?" grunted Dan Dalzell.

"Oh, no," Dick answered. "Dexter and his friend have to be tried over
again in a higher court. That money is just their forfeit in case they
don't show up for trial."

"They won't," predicted Greg.

"I don't know," murmured Dick. "Six hundred dollars would be a lot of
money to lose."

By hastening, the Grammar School boys were back in school for the last
hour of the session.




CHAPTER III

FOOTBALL--WITHOUT RULES


School was out for the day. Three quarters of the boys belonging to the
four upper grades made a bee line for a field about a block away. The
magnet was a football that Dave Darrin proudly carried tucked under his
left arm.

"I wanter play!"

"Let me try just one good kick with it, Dave!"

"Take a stroll," advised Darrin laconically. "How can I blow up the ball
and talk to you fellows, too?"

"Hurry up, then. We want to give the ball a fierce old kick."

"No kids in this," announced Dave, rather loftily. "Only fellows in the
eighth and seventh grades. Fellows in the grades below the seventh are
only kids and would get hurt."

"Oh, say!"

"That isn't fair!"

The protests were many and vigorous from sixth and fifth-grade boys, but
Darrin, ignoring them all, went placidly on inflating the pigskin. At
last the task was completed.

"Hurrah! Now, Dave, give it a boost and let us all have some fun!" cried
the boys. But Darrin coolly tucked the ball under one arm.

"Dick Prescott has a few remarks to make first," Dave announced.

"Dick going to make a speech?"

"Cut it, and start the ball moving!"

"Won't you fellows interrupt your music lessons long enough to listen to
an idea that some of us have been talking over?" called Dick. "Now,
fellows, you know this is the time when the crack Gridley High School
football team is hard at work. We're all proud of the Gridley High
School eleven. A lot of you fellows expect to go to High School, and I
know you'd all like a chance to play on Gridley High's eleven."

"Set the ball moving!"

"Wait a minute," Dick insisted. "Now, fellows, no Grammar School in
Gridley has ever had an eleven."

"How could we," came a discontented wail, "if we have to stand here and
see Dave just do nothing but hold the ball?"

"Fellows," Dick went on impressively, "it's time to have Grammar School
football teams here in Gridley. Central Grammar ought to have one, North
Grammar one and South Grammar one. Then our three Grammar Schools could
play a championship series among themselves."

"Hooray! Give the ball a throw, Dave!"

"So, fellows," Dick continued, "a lot of us think we ought to organize a
football team at once. Then we can challenge North Grammar and South
Grammar. We can practise the rest of this month, and next month we can
play off our games. What do you say?"

"Hooray!"

"We'll have two teams," called Dave. "We'll call one team the Rangers
and the other the Rustlers. Now, let's make Dick captain of the
Rangers."

"All right!"

"And Tom Craig captain of the Rustlers."

"Good!"

"All right, then," nodded Dave. "Dick, you pick out the Rangers; Craig,
you go ahead with the Rustlers. After we've practised a few times we'll
pick the best men from both elevens, and make up the Central Grammar
eleven. Get busy, captains!"

Forthwith the choosing began. Dick chose all his chums for his own
eleven. And no boy lower than seventh grade was allowed on either team.

"Now, who'll be referee?" demanded Dick. "Captain Craig, have you any
choice?"

"Have we got any fellows, not on either team, who really know the
rules?" asked Tom Craig dubiously.

There was a hush, for this was surely a stumbling block. It seemed clear
that a referee ought to know the rules of the game.

"What's up, kids?" called a friendly voice.

The speaker was Len Spencer, a young man who had been graduated from the
High School the June before, and who was now serving his apprenticeship
as reporter on one of the two local daily papers, the morning "Blade."

"Oh, see here, Len!" called Dick joyously. "You're just the right fellow
for us. You know the football rules?"

"I have a speaking acquaintance with 'em," laughed Len.

Dick rapidly outlined what was being planned, adding:

"You can put that in the 'Blade' to-morrow morning, Len, and state our
challenge to North and South Grammars. Won't you?"

"Surely."

"But we want to practise this afternoon," Dick continued earnestly, "and
we haven't any referee. Len, can't you spare us a little time? Won't you
boss the first practice for us?"

"All right," agreed Len, after a little thought. "I'll tackle it for a
while. Have you got your teams picked?"

"Teams all picked, and the ball ready. We'll have to place stones for
goal posts, though."

"Hustle and do it, then," commanded Len. "I can't stay here forever."

Five minutes later the field was as ready as it could be made.

"Captains will now attend the toss-up," ordered Len Spencer, producing a
coin from one of his pockets. "Heads for Craig, tails for Prescott."

It fell head up, and Craig chose his goal, and also the first kick-off.

Dick had been busily engaged in making up his line and backfield. There
was some delay while Tom Craig accomplished this same thing.

"Now, one thing that all you youngsters want to remember," declared Len,
"is that no player can play off-side. All ready?"

Both young football captains called out that they were. Len had provided
himself with a pocket whistle loaned by one of the fifth-grade boys.

Trill-ll! Tom Craig kicked the ball himself, but it was a poor kick. The
pigskin soon struck the ground.

"I'll try that over again," announced Tom.

But Dick and his own fighting line had already started. Dick, at center,
with Dave on his right hand and Greg Holmes on his left, snatched up the
ball and started with it for the Rustlers' goal.

A bunch of Rustlers opposed and tackled Prescott. Dick succeeded, by the
help of Dave and Greg, in breaking through the line, but the Rustlers
turned and were after him. Down went Dick, but he had the pigskin under
him.

"Take it away from him, fellows!" panted Craig. But Len blew his
whistle, following up the signal by some sharp commands that brought the
struggle to a close.

"Prescott's side have the ball," declared Len, "and will now play off a
snap-back. And, boys, one thing I must emphasize. I've told you that
under the rules no man may play off-side. So, hereafter, if I find any
of you off-side, I'm going to penalize that eleven."
