opportunity to meet and carry off the sweet little fairy in spite of--"

"Das me an' my black darlin', zactly--same zif you bin dar an' sawd us
do it!" exclaimed Ebony, with beaming interest.

"Just so," resumed Mark.  "However, I have not left things altogether to
chance.  Although I did not see Ravonino lately, I saw him not _very_
long ago, and gave him to understand that when some unusual festivities
were going on in this garden he was to be ready at the old spot for
whatever might happen!  Now, here is my little plan.  You know I've been
drilling fifty picked natives for some time in that big shed at the back
of the cliff on the north side o' the city.  I picked them for
intelligence as well as strength and activity.  Well, I have taught them
a wild war-dance.  It cost me no little trouble and many sleepless
nights to invent it, but I've managed it, and hope to show the Queen and
Court what can be done by a little organisation.  These fifty are first
of all to glide quietly among the trees, each man to a particular spot
and hang on the branches fifty earthen saucers full of grease, with
wicks in them.  At a given signal they are to light these
instantaneously and retire.  At another signal they are to rush upon the
open space in front of the garden-house, and there engage in a sham
fight.  While thus engaged, men who have been taught will set fire to
the mildest of our fireworks.  When these are about to go out I will
myself light the big Roman candle--"

"De young cannon, massa?"

"Yes, the young cannon, and that will keep things going for a
considerable time.  Now, it is when the fight of the fifty begins and
engrosses the attention of every one that I will myself take Rafaravavy
out from among the ladies and lead her to the rendezvous.  You will all
stand by--to lend a hand if need be--at the south-east corner of the
garden-house, that I may know exactly where to find you.  My hope and
expectation is that by keeping things going as long as possible our
friends Ravonino and Rafaravavy will get a good start.  After the flight
of the latter is found out, nothing more can be done for them."

"Do they go all alone?" asked Hockins.

"No, Laihova goes with them; and Mamba, who knows the secret
meeting-places of the Christians, will, I have no doubt, soon find out
which way they have gone.  Anyhow they will all certainly make for the
cave in Betsilio-land where so many of their friends are.  May God speed
them!  Meanwhile we must keep the Queen amused with races, wrestling,
and such-like; and when she begins to get wearied with mere eating and
talking, I want you, Hockins, to go in for a wrestling-match with Ebony
by way of varying the entertainment, and showing them what Englishmen
and niggers can do."

"Wery good," said the seaman, with a sedate smile, "if that's to be the
fun, you better make your will, Ebony, for I'll break your back."

"All right," retorted Ebony, with a grin, "an' I tink you'll be wise to
make your last dyin' speech afore we begin, for I'll bust you!"

The various plans which we have here sketched were carried out with such
brilliant success that the Queen did not weary at all, and darkness
began to descend on the scene before the day seemed to have half run its
course.  At this point Mark hastened to the south-east corner of the
garden-house, where he found the other conspirators faithfully at their
post.

"Have you the flageolet with you?" he asked, hastily.

"In course I has.  Never goes nowheres without it," said the seaman,
drawing the little instrument from his breast-pocket.

"Go then, make your bow to the Queen, and give her a tune.  You know
she's quite in love with your pipe--or yourself--and has been asking me
about it already.  She's in the verandah just now, and they are lighting
the torches there."

With the silent obedience of a man-of-war's man, Hockins went off, and,
without prelude, began.  Dead silence was the instant result, for the
small bird-like pipe seemed to charm the very soul of every one who
heard it.  We know not whether it was accident or a spice of humour in
the seaman, but the tune he played was "Jock o' Hazeldean!"  And as Mark
hurried off to see that his fifty men were in readiness, he gave vent to
a slight laugh as he thought of the lines:

  "She's ower the border and awa'
  Wi' Jock o' Hazeldean!"

To the surprise of the audience, no sooner had the last notes of the air
died away than the performer thrust the pipe into his pocket, threw off
his coat, and in a loud voice challenged the best man in Madagascar to
wrestle with him.  As the challenge was given in English of course no
native responded.  Even if it had been given in choice Malagasy we
question whether any brown man there would have ventured a hug with the
huge sailor.  But no sooner had the challenge passed his lips than Ebony
sprang forward, flung off not only his coat but his vest and shirt, and
embraced his white opponent in a grip of iron.

At that opportune moment the signal was given to the fifty men, who
applied their lights, and, as if by magic, the entire scene was
illuminated by a blaze of intense light that almost rivalled that of the
sun itself!

A tremendous "oo!--oo!--oo!" of applause burst from the astonished
company, who, having had their attention fixed on the wrestlers, did not
observe how the sudden illumination had been effected.

Truly the proceedings of Hockins and Ebony would have surprised even
more finished wrestlers than those of Madagascar, for the two men had
entered into a sly compact not only to exert their strength to the
uttermost, but to give way, each at certain points or moments, when by
so doing the appearance of what they styled a "back-breaker" and a
"buster" might be achieved in an effective manner.  It was a marvellous
exhibition.  Ebony glared and gasped!  Hockins growled and frowned!
Nothing short of a tussle between Achilles and Hercules could have
equalled it.  The Court, from the Queen downwards, was awe-stricken,
eye-strained, open-mouthed, and breathless, but Mark felt that it was
time to cut it short.  Giving a preconcerted signal, he caused both men
to fall down side by side as if exhausted but not conquered.  Then he
gave another signal.  A moment after, fire-wheels and Roman candles
began to play, and the fifty warriors rushed upon the scene, brandishing
muskets and yelling like fiends.

Hastening, according to orders, to the south-east corner of the
garden-house, Hockins and Ebony found the Director-General awaiting
them.

"I cannot delay to fire the big candle," he said quickly.

"De young cannon!" panted Ebony.

"Yes, yes.  You must fire it for me in about ten minutes or so, when the
warriors seem to be getting knocked up.  Follow me, Hockins, and keep
close."

Another minute and Rafaravavy, who was standing near the Queen's chair,
felt a touch on her arm.  She looked round with a start, for, like every
one else, she had been fascinated and quite engrossed by the scene
before her.

A glance and motion of the hand from Mark sufficed.  She glided gently
backwards and reached the other side of the house unobserved.  Here Mark
grasped her hand and Hockins followed.  They walked at first, but began
to run on gaining the shrubbery, which was rendered doubly dark by
contrast with the glare behind them.

In a couple of minutes they reached the thicket where the previous
meeting had taken place.  The over-arching foliage deepened the darkness
so that it was impossible to distinguish features.  A form was dimly
seen, but it was only by the sound of the voice that they knew it to be
Ravonino.

Few words were uttered.  Every instant was precious.

"Farewell, dear friend," said Ravonino, grasping Mark's hand, "God grant
that we may meet again in better times!  Laihova waits for me beyond the
garden--"

He stopped abruptly, seized Rafaravavy's hand and glided with her
noiselessly into the thicket, for at that moment another figure was seen
to approach them.  From his unusual size they knew him to be one of
Ranavalona's chief executioners.  He was a cool-headed and suspicious
man, a sort of natural detective, who always had his wits about him.
Having observed several people gliding through the shrubbery he had
quitted the sports and followed.  To have been recognised by this
official would have been fatal--at least to those plotters who did not
take to flight.  Hockins, who was prompt to conceive and act when danger
pressed, at once stepped forward and gave the man of blood a
right-hander on the top of the nose which instantly Romanised that
feature and laid its owner on his back insensible.

At the same moment--as if the blow had been the touching of a secret
spring--the whole garden was lighted up with a magnificent red glare,
and they knew that Ebony had done his part and lighted the giant candle.
The red glare lasted long enough to reveal the fact that Ravonino and
Rafaravavy were gone, and that the man at their feet was indeed the
executioner whom they had guessed him to be.  Leaving him there they ran
quickly back to the scene of festivities, hoping that their absence had
not been observed.  Before they had gone half-a-dozen steps there was an
explosion like that of a big gun, a bomb went high into the air, and
burst in a magnificent constellation of brilliant stars, mingled with
fiery rain.  The "oo!--oo!--oo!" cheers became vociferous at this, and
were, if possible, still more enthusiastic when the red fire changed to
a beautiful blue.

"Splendid!" exclaimed Mark, much satisfied with the result of his recent
labours, "and it will keep going on for a considerable time yet."

As he spoke there was a crash like the loudest thunder, and a momentary
glare as of the brightest noon-light, which was followed by intense
darkness, while the garden was shaken as if by an earthquake.  Loud
cries and shrieks were accompanied by the falling of a shower of dust
and small stones.  Evidently there had been a catastrophe, and the
quaking conspirators hastened to the spot, half expecting to find the
Queen and Court of Madagascar blown to atoms.

"The whole consarn's busted up!" exclaimed Hockins, on coming in sight
of the garden-house.

The seaman's explanation was the true one.  Owing to some inexplicable
mistake in the loading of the monster Roman candle, fire had
communicated somehow with the lowest charge, which was a good strong
one, intended to propel a glorious mass of ingenious contrivances into
the air and end the matter with an effective bang.  As it turned out,
the bang was ten times more effective, for it not only blew out the
entire charge but burst the cast-iron case, and upturned tons of earth
in which Mark had taken the precaution to bury the thing up to its neck.

At first the Queen, like her people, had got a severe fright; but,
seeing that no one seemed to be hurt, she controlled her feelings, under
the impression, no doubt, that the explosion was part of the programme.

"Have you got your whistle, Hockins?" asked Mark, quickly, as he ran
forward.

"Ay, sir--always here, ready for action!"

"Come, then, play up when I give the word--something quieting.  Hold on!
Let's do it sedately."

By this time they had got within the circle of torchlight.  Reducing
their run to a smart walk the two friends advanced, as Mark had
suggested, sedately, in front of the Queen, while the Secretary rejoined
the circle of courtiers unperceived.

As they advanced they encountered Ebony with an unused Roman candle in
each hand, and an expression of horror on his black face.

"Oh! massa--" he began.

"Hush! never mind!  Follow me!" said Mark, in a peremptory whisper.

Another moment and the sweet tones of the flageolet silenced the noise
of the excited throng, as Hockins stood before the Queen and played one
of the sweetest of Scottish songs.

Mark placed Ebony behind his comrade, made him hold up the Roman
candles, quietly lighted them both, and retired.  Thus Hockins, much to
his own surprise, found himself, in the midst of spouting fire,
producing the melodious notes of "Afton Water!"

When the little candles exploded, our Director-General advanced to the
royal chair and expressed a hope that the performances had given
satisfaction.

This the Secretary--ever-ready in time of need--translated, and returned
the answer that the Queen was charmed, after which the proceedings
terminated, and Ranavalona returned to her palace to dream, no doubt, of
fireworks and music instead of martyrdoms.

So engrossed was the whole Court with the exciting and singular events
of the day that no one noticed the absence of Rafaravavy, and, happily,
the Queen did not happen to require her attendance that night.

Even those who were in closest proximity to the fugitive's own room,
were so taken up with what they had seen that they either did not think
of her, or supposed that fatigue had induced her to retire early.

Thus it came to pass that when her flight was discovered on the
following day, Rafaravavy, carried by strong and willing bearers, and
guarded by her devoted Ravonino and his faithful friend Laihova, was
being swiftly borne over mountain and plain to the forest stronghold in
Betsilio-land.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

FLIGHT AND PURSUIT OF RAVONINO AND RAFARAVAVY.

The fury of the Queen when she heard of the flight of Rafaravavy was
terrible, for this was the second of her favourite ladies-in-waiting who
had become Christians and deserted her Court in fear of their lives--
Ra-Ruth, the fair little sister of Ravonino, having been the first.

Fortunately Ranavalona did not think of connecting the flight of
Rafaravavy with the recent entertainments, so that suspicion did not
attach to Mark and his friends.  Neither did the executioner with the
Romanised nose suspect them, for in the profound darkness he had not
been able to see who it was that knocked the senses out of him; and when
afterwards he was told of the explosion that had occurred, he came to
the conclusion, (and told his friends), that a big stone, hurled into
the air at that time, had descended on his head and felled him.  Whether
the "friends" believed this or not we cannot say, but certain it is that
they covertly rejoiced in the accident, for naturally the man of blood
was no favourite!

As might be supposed, soldiers were at once despatched all over the
country in search of the fugitive; and the Queen, relapsing into one of
her dark fits of cruelty, began to persecute the Christians more
severely than ever.  Still, Mark Breezy strove to influence her towards
mercy, and in some measure restrained her.

Meanwhile Ravonino and his party pushed on in hot haste towards their
place of refuge in the wild forest.

The dangers to which they were exposed and the risks they ran on this
adventurous journey were too numerous to be related in detail.  We can
only touch on a few of them here.

Laihova, it may be mentioned in passing, failed to join them, certainly
not from want of will, but because the place where he had concealed
himself was discovered while he lay awaiting the signal to join his
friends.  Two female relations who knew of his hiding-place were caught,
convicted, if we may so put it, of Christianity! and put to the torture.
Although true-hearted, these poor girls were so agonised by suffering
and terror that, in a moment of weakness, they disclosed the secret.
But even among prison authorities there were found followers of Jesus--
secretly, however, for fear of the tyrant Queen--and one of these sent a
swift messenger to Laihova to warn him.  Had the youth been an ordinary
man the warning would have been too late, for close on the heels of the
messenger came the soldiers with his death-warrant.  But Laihova was
gifted with cool courage and unusual speed of foot.  Trust, also, in the
certainty of God's blessing, whether life or death should be his
portion, filled him with that spirit of enthusiastic energy which goes
so far, in all circumstances of life, to ensure success.  He soon
distanced his pursuers, left them out of sight behind, and, finally,
found refuge with a Christian friend, who hid him over an oven in his
house when he had reached the last stage of exhaustion from hard
running, and could not have advanced further without rest.  The soldiers
came up and searched the house while he was asleep, but happily did not
observe the oven!  They remained there, however, over the night, and
thus rendered it impossible for Laihova to join his friends at that
time.

Ravonino could not, of course, afford to delay.  Knowing also that his
young friend was well able to take care of himself, and that his soul's
anchor was the Lord, he felt comparatively little anxiety in starting
without him.

To let Rafaravavy have female companionship on the hazardous journey,
her lover induced a Christian girl who had been named Sarah to accompany
them.  This faithful creature was the means of saving their lives more
than once by giving timely warning of approaching danger.

The first place to which the fugitives directed their steps was a
village about fifty miles from the capital, where dwelt a Christian who,
with his wife, offered them hospitality and protection.  This man had
sent a noble message to the persecuted ones in the city.  It ran thus:--

"Let all the Christians who are compelled to run away for their lives
come to me.  I will take care of them.  As long as I am safe they are
safe, and as long as I have food they shall share it."

Not an hour's rest was taken until the house of their friend was
reached.  Of course they were received with open arms.  Food was placed
before them, and mats were spread in a safe place on which they might
rest.  But neither food nor repose would the fugitives take until they
had joined the Christian family in thanking God for their escape and in
singing His praise.

"Sing the hymn of dear Ramanisa," said Ravonino as he seated himself at
the side of Rafaravavy, after arranging her mat.

The host smiled as he turned over the leaves of a Malagasy hymn-book.
"All the fugitives like that hymn," he said.

"Do you wonder?" returned his guest.  "Before the last great persecution
he was one of our most faithful preachers of the Gospel, and when
trouble came he always forgot himself in his eager desire to help and
comfort others.  Many a time has he guided and strengthened the Lord's
people when they have been compelled to fly,--to travel weary and
footsore by night, to wander in the dark forests, and hide in the gloomy
caves.  Wherever he went there was sunshine, because his heart was very
full of the love of Jesus; and when he was led out to be speared, was he
not faithful to the last?  Perhaps we may be permitted to sing his own
hymn along with him some day before the throne.  No wonder that we love
the words of Ramanisa.  They called him Josiah when he was baptized, but
he was Ramanisa when the Lord called him, and I think _that_ is the name
that is written in the Book of Life."

The hymn composed by this good native, which these Christians began to
sing--and which is incorporated, as we have said, in the Malagasy
hymn-book,--is still, and will doubtless continue to be, a great
favourite with the Christians of Madagascar.  The following is a
translation of three of the verses.  _See Note 1_.

  "Loud to the Lord your voices raise,
  Extol His name, exalt His praise;
