money on our letters of credit, and get to Paris. We can take a steamer
back to Brest. The fare will not be more than ten dollars apiece in the
fore cabin."

"Why not wait till we see where we are going?" suggested Sheffield.

"It may be too late then," answered Perth. "If Fluxion should suddenly
head the vessel to the westward, that would mean home. The cook says we
have fresh provisions enough for thirty days, which they took in while
we were attending lecture."

"Does he know where we are bound?"

"No; or if he does, he won't say anything."

"I don't believe in landing at any such place as Lisbon, or anywhere in
Portugal; though, of course, I will do what the rest of the fellows
wish."

Perth and Little were too impatient to postpone the enterprise, though
they acknowledged the difficulty of landing in Portugal. They worked up
the details of the plan, and a part was assigned to each of the
runaways. Phillips was to secure Bitts, with the assistance of half a
dozen others. Perth was to close the companion way, lock it, and also
drive a nail into the slide to make it sure. Greenway was to cover and
secure the sky-lights. Herman was to fasten the door leading from the
cabin to the steerage with a handspike. Ibbotson was to bar the door of
the forecastle, where the cooks and under stewards slept. Others were
to back the head sails, so as to lay to the vessel; and when all these
things had been done, the boats were to be lowered,--the places of all
the party having been assigned to them,--and they were to pull for the
shore.

The night came on, and the light on Cape Roca was identified by Perth,
at four bells; but a fog set in from seaward, and he decided that it
was not prudent to take to the boats under such circumstances, for the
reason that the boat compasses were in the cabin, and could not be
obtained. At seven bells on Saturday morning the Josephine was off Cape
St. Vincent.

"Keep her south-east," said Mr. Fluxion to the quarter-master at the
wheel, when the headland bore north-east from the vessel.

"South-east!" exclaimed Perth, when the order had been repeated. "That
means the Straits of Gibraltar. Fellows, we are bound up the
Mediterranean."

"What does it mean?" inquired Herman.

"Fluxion is going to Italy," replied the leader, bitterly. "He is
taking us with him!"

Perth's conclusion was passed along till every seaman on board
understood it. The mystery was solved at last. There could be no doubt
of the correctness of the solution, and great were the wrath and
indignation of the runaways. It was abominable to compel them, the sons
of gentlemen, to work the vessel as foremast hands, while she was
employed on Mr. Fluxion's private business. It was an insult to them,
an insult to their parents, and an outrage upon humanity in general. It
was not to be endured, and rebellion was a duty. Little's plan was in
higher favor than ever.

The wind was light, and the vessel, close-hauled, made but five and six
knots during the day. At night she was out of sight of land. All day
Sunday she made but little progress, and lay in a calm for several
hours. Towards night, however, a fresh westerly wind came to her aid,
and on Monday morning the crew saw the mountains of Europe and Africa
vying with each other in sublimity, though they were too sour to
appreciate the grandeur of the scene. The vessel hugged the Spanish
shore, and Perth was on the lookout for an opportunity to spring the
trap; but the sea was so rough and choppy, and the current so swift,
that he was not willing to embark in the boats. It looked altogether
too perilous. Besides, Bitts did not lean against the mast and go to
sleep, and Cleats sent a hand down to bring up his luncheon, and the
vice-principal staid on deck nearly all night.

"I think Fluxion smells a mice," said Perth, the next day.

"Why so?" asked Little.

"Because he stays on deck more than half the night."

"He is anxious about the navigation, perhaps."

"It is plain sailing here," added Perth. "I think he has seen our
fellows talking together a great deal."

That was really the case. The vice-principal understood boys
thoroughly. He had observed the earnest talks among little squads, and
cautioned the acting officers to be very vigilant. It is enough to say
that no opportunity was presented for carrying out the scheme of
Little, and the Josephine came to anchor in the harbor of Genoa, ten
days after she sailed from Brest. If the runaways had been in a proper
frame of mind to enjoy it, there was a great deal to be seen; but they
were too much taken up with their grievances to appreciate strange
sights or beautiful scenery.

As soon as the schooner came to anchor, three of the four boats were
hauled in, and lowered to the deck, where they were turned over to be
painted. Bitts and Gage rowed the vice-principal ashore, while Peaks
and Cleats, laying aside the dignity of their temporary positions, went
to work scraping and painting the bottoms of the boats, which seemed to
have been removed from the davits solely for the purpose of preventing
any of the crew from escaping. Mr. Fluxion was absent only an hour, and
during his absence Dr. Carboy watched the students every moment of the
time.

The next morning a shore boat brought off a pale lady, who was
understood to be the vice-principal's sister. They spent the whole
forenoon in the cabin; but in the afternoon they went on shore
together, to draw up and execute certain papers. Perth, in behalf of
the crew, asked permission of Mr. Fluxion, just as he was departing, to
go on shore.

"Quite impossible, young gentlemen," replied the vice-principal. "They
are painting the boats, which are not in condition to be used. Besides,
there is hardly time, for I hope we shall be able to sail before
night."

Perth was very angry, and so were all the others, though they hardly
expected the desired permission. Mr. Fluxion went on shore with the
pale lady, and Dr. Carboy, Peaks, and Cleats watched the crew with
Argus eyes. It was of no use for Little to fall overboard, for there
was no boat to send after him. Perth was not quite willing to attempt a
swim to the shore, for a fresh south-west wind kept up an ugly swell in
that part of the port where the Josephine was anchored. Shore boats
were driven from alongside by Peaks. In a word, Mr. Fluxion understood
his crew, and knew what he was about. With a ship's company who had
been desperate enough to capture the vessel on a former occasion, he
was wise enough to keep everything taut. So the runaways could only
grumble and growl, and watch the steamers which were constantly
arriving and departing.

Before sundown Mr. Fluxion returned alone. He had finished his business
with his sister, and the order was given to get under way, after the
boats had all been restored to the davits. There was no chance to
execute any of the desperate schemes which had been adopted. Discipline
was triumphant, and the Josephine sped on her way to the Straits of
Gibraltar. Four days out, Cape Antonio, on the coast of Spain, was
sighted, and for the next two days the vessel sailed along the coast,
with the lofty mountains of Spain in full view.

Mr. Fluxion was communicative enough to say that the Josephine would
put into Lisbon, and await the arrival of the Young America. The
intelligence was not pleasant to the runaways. Perth declared that
something must be done at once, or at least before the vessel had
passed Cape de Gata. Alicante and Carthagena were near, and from either
of them steamers frequently departed for Marseilles. They had actually
made the trip in the Josephine which they had contemplated before their
runaway excursion in her, but under different circumstances from those
they desired. If they could get to Marseilles, the rest of the plan
might be realized.

They had kept everything in readiness for the enterprise which Little
had planned, and for a fortnight had been on the lookout for an
opportunity to strike the blow. After the vessel had come up with Cape
Antonio, Perth told the fellows he should make the attempt that night,
though it would be bright moonlight. The signal for those below to
perform the part assigned to them was three raps on the deck, over the
steerage, with the heel of the leader. But Perth was not in Cleats's
watch; so he and Herman hid themselves under the top-gallant
forecastle, when their watch was relieved. About three bells in the mid
watch, Little informed the leader that Cleats had gone below.

"Where's Bitts?" whispered Perth.

"In the waist, planking the deck."

"Call Phillips, quick!" added the leader, as he came out of his
hiding-place.

Phillips promptly appeared. He was a great, stout fellow, as ugly as he
was big. He immediately prepared to do his part. Herman was sent below
to see that every seaman in the steerage was awake and ready to act,
and he succeeded in eluding the sleepy vigilance of Bitts.

Perth gave the signal for those in the steerage, and at the same time
whistled for the information of those on deck. Bitts was not so
obliging as to lean against a mast, or anything else, and the
conspirators were compelled to take him flying. Phillips had prepared,
with a piece of whale line, a kind of lasso, and, stepping up behind
him, threw it over his head, drawing it tight around his neck, before
the astonished carpenter suspected any mischief. The end of the whale
line was then hooked to the clewline of the fore-square-sail, which had
been detached for the purpose. The hands at the clewline walked away
with it, until the rope bore hard on the throat of the carpenter. All
this was done in an instant, for Phillips had carefully adjusted all
the details of his share of the work. Bitts tried to cry out; but when
he did so, Phillips ordered the hands at the buntline to haul taut.

"Keep still, old fellow, or you shall be hung!" said the ruffian in
charge of the deed.

Bitts was obliged to keep still, for when he struggled to release his
neck with his hands the rope was tightened. In the mean time, Perth had
secured the slide, and those below had barred the doors.

"Clear away the boats!" and all but Phillips, who was obliged to watch
Bitts, sprang to their stations for lowering the boats, and in a couple
of minutes all four of them were in the water, with the oars tossed,
ready to pull for the shore. In the cabin there was a tremendous din,
made by Cleats and the other officers, who had been aroused by the
noise. They were trying to batter down the door leading into the
steerage, but as yet with no success.

"All ready!" shouted Perth.

Phillips, who was the only one of the crew remaining on board, hastily
belayed the clewline at the fife-rail, hauling it just taut enough to
hold Bitts, without choking him to death. As the ruffian leaped into
the boat, to which he had been assigned, Perth gave the order to shove
off, and the runaways pulled with all their might for the shore.




CHAPTER XVII.

HEIDELBERG AND HOMBURG.


On the arrival of the excursion party at Heidelberg, they were
conducted, by Mr. Arbuckle's _avant-courrier_, to the Hotel Prinz Karl,
in the marketplace, and near the castle, which is the principal object
of interest in the town. One of the first persons that Shuffles saw, as
he walked up to the hotel, was Lady Feodora, promenading the veranda
with Sir William. She looked a shade paler than when the captain had
met her last; but her color deepened when she discovered her gallant
friend.

"I am delighted to see you, Captain Shuffles!" exclaimed she, deserting
her titled companion, and rushing towards him, her cheeks suffused with
blushes.

"This is a very unexpected pleasure," replied the commander, his brown
face flushing, "but none the less welcome because unexpected."

"How glad I am to see you again!" said she, taking his offered hand, as
they met.

"Thank you; but not so glad as I am," added he, in a lower tone.

"I hope you are very well, Captain Shuffles," interposed Sir William,
stiffly.

"Quite well, I thank you."

"Lady Feodora has been quite ill," added the baronet, "or we should
have been in Brussels by this time."

"I have not been very ill; but father thought we had better remain here
a few days. Now I am almost glad I was ill, since it gives me the
pleasure of seeing you again," continued the young lady, with a
childish candor which brought a frown to the brow of the little
baronet.

"You are very kind, Lady Feodora."

Sir William thought so too.

"We have been all over the castle, Captain Shuffles; and I am going to
be your guide," continued she, playfully.

"I am afraid your health will not permit you to do so much," suggested
Sir William.

"O, I feel quite strong now."

The conversation was interrupted by the appearance of Feodora's father
and mother, who extended to Shuffles a cordial and hearty greeting. Mr.
Lowington and the party were warmly welcomed by the earl's family. The
business of sight-seeing required immediate attention, and Shuffles was
taken into a carriage with his English friends; for the daughter
insisted upon redeeming her promise. Sir William evidently did not
enjoy the excursion; but he was apparently unwilling to be left at the
hotel.

Heidelberg is beautifully located on a narrow strip of land between the
River Neckar and the vast, high rock on which the castle stands. It has
one principal street, nearly three miles long, and contains a
population of about seventeen thousand. It is situated in the midst of
some of the finest scenery in Germany; and all tourists agree in
calling it one of the most delightful residences in Europe. The
students walked through the principal street and along the banks of the
Neckar until dinner time, when Professor Mapps found an opportunity to
say something about the place.

"Heidelberg was once the capital of the Palatinate established here by
the Emperor Otto of Germany in the tenth century. The Palatines were
sub-rulers, whose duty it was to look after the interests of the
emperor. This palatinate, including the northern portion of Baden and a
part of Bavaria, became the most powerful in the empire, and was
divided into the Upper and Lower Palatinates."

"What does _palatinate_ mean, sir?" asked a student.

"It means merely the territory of a sub-ruler, who was called a
_palatine_, from the Latin word _palatium_, a palace. When the throne
of Germany became elective, these palatines chose the emperor, and for
this reason were called electors-palatine, or simply electors. The
castle here was the residence of the elector of this division. The town
has suffered more from the ravages of war than almost any other in
Europe. It has been bombarded five times, burned twice, and captured
and pillaged three times.

"The university is one of the most noted in the world, as well as one
of the oldest in Germany, having been founded in 1386. It has had at
one time nearly nine hundred students, and generally has seven or eight
hundred. It employs the most celebrated professors in Europe,
especially in the departments of law and medicine. Its library contains
some very rare and valuable works, printed and in manuscript."

"What about the duels, sir?" inquired Haven.

"The students here are noted for the duels which take place among them.
Four or five have occurred in a single day, and perhaps they average a
dozen a week. But I wish to say, in the beginning, that duelling and
other vicious practices charged upon the University of Heidelberg are
confined to about one fifth of the whole number of students. They are
not all duellists, nor all inordinate beer-drinkers. Probably they are
no worse than the residents at other universities, though the duels are
certainly exceptional. Four fifths of the students here are devoted to
their studies, improve their time to the utmost, and never engage in,
or even see, a duel.

"These combats--which they are, rather than duels--take place at the
Hirschgasse, a lonely hotel on the other side of the Neckar. The
fighting and dissipated students form themselves into clubs, called
'chores,' among which a great deal of jealousy and ill feeling
prevails. The fights are to avenge insults, to 'see who is the best
fellow,' or between representatives of different chores, who battle for
the honor of their clubs. The champions fight with blunt swords ground
sharp on the two edges. They slash each other, but do not thrust, so
that the combats seldom result in mortal wounds.

"In a fight for the honor of the clubs, the parties tie up their necks
and right arms in bandages and cushions. When they fight for the
satisfaction of an injury or insult, they have no protection. The
combat, in all cases, is decided in fifteen minutes; and at the end of
this time, the one who has the fewest cuts is declared to be the best
fellow. If one of the champions is severely injured in less than
fifteen minutes, so that he cannot continue the fight, it is finished
up on another occasion. A surgeon is always in attendance to decide
whether a wounded contestant is able to go on. The police are on the
watch for these fights; but the students station sentinels for some
distance from the arena of contest, and the approach of an officer is
communicated to them in season to enable the combatants to escape. I
need not add, that these duels are brutal and disgraceful. It looks as
though the police winked at them.

"In some of these clubs, the ability to drink from a dozen to thirty
glasses of beer at a sitting is a necessary qualification for
admission. But these beastly and brutal tendencies belong, I repeat, to
a minority of the students."

After the lecture, the party started for the castle, Shuffles riding
with the earl's family, and Paul with the Arbuckles, while the rest
walked. Heidelberg Castle has the reputation of being one of the most
imposing and interesting ruins in Europe. The grounds are quite
extensive, and full of curious objects. The students wandered through
the halls and subterranean vaults till they came to the famous _tun_,
which is thirty-six feet long, and twenty-four feet high, having a
capacity of eight hundred hogsheads. It was employed to contain the
wine of the vineyards; but it has not been used during the last hundred
years. A run to the Koenigstuhl, or King's Seat,--a high hill behind the
castle, which commands a magnificent view of the valleys of the Neckar
and the Rhine, and of the mountains in the vicinity,--finished the work
of the week.

As the next day was Sunday, the party remained at Heidelberg, and
attended church at the English chapel in the forenoon. In the afternoon
they visited the Church of the Holy Ghost, which has a partition
through the entire length of it, dividing it into two equal parts, one
of which is used by the Catholics, and the other by the Protestants.
Services in both take place at the same time.

On Monday morning the excursionists, including the earl's party,
proceeded to Darmstadt. When Lady Feodora had taken a back seat next to
the window, in a compartment of the railway carriage, she insisted that
Shuffles should have the seat opposite, much to the disgust of Sir
William, who usually occupied that position. In fact, he was angry, and
did not take much pains to conceal his ill-will. It is doubtful whether
Shuffles understood the matter, but the young lady was very strongly
interested in him. She did not like the baronet, and she did like the
young commander. As the latter had rendered her a signal service on
