Alas for poor Nat! Little did he dream of what was in store for him, and
of the little trap into which he was to fall as soon as he arrived in
New York City.




CHAPTER IV

ABNER BALBERRY'S DISCOVERY


"Nat!"

Abner Balberry uttered the name in a loud, clear voice and waited fully
a minute for an answer.

"Nat!" he repeated. "I want you to answer me, do you hear? Nat!"

Still there was no reply, and now, in some alarm, Abner Balberry turned
back into his bedchamber and donned part of his clothing.

"If that boy is moving around this house I'm goin' to know it," he
murmured to himself, as he felt his way toward Nat's room. Coming to the
door, he threw it open and took a step toward the bed.

As we already know, it was empty. The discovery was something of a shock
to the farmer and for the moment he stood stock-still, gazing at the bed
and feeling under the covers to make certain that his nephew was not
really there.

"Gone!" he muttered at last. "He must be downstairs. More'n likely he
went down to git somethin' to eat. Wait till I catch him! I'll tan him
well!"

Hoping to catch Nat unawares, he tiptoed his way down the stairs and
entered the living room. Then he passed to the kitchen and the shed, and
came back to peer into the parlor. Not a trace of the lad was to be
found anywhere.

"I certainly heard him," he reasoned. "I certainly did."

"Mr. Balberry!" The call came from the housekeeper. "Are you up?"

"Yes, I am."

"Oh, all right."

"But it ain't all right! Nat's up too."

"Is he down there with you?"

"No, I don't know at all where he is. I'm a-lookin' fer him."

By this time Mrs. Felton's curiosity was aroused and she lost no time in
slipping on her wrapper. When she came down she brought with her a lamp.

"Where do you suppose he went?" she asked.

"How do I know?" snarled Abner Balberry.

The housekeeper happened to glance into the pantry. She was about to
utter an exclamation, but checked herself.

"What did you say, Mrs. Felton?"

"I--I didn't say anything."

"He ain't in there, is he?"

"No."

"Has he been at the victuals?"

"Not--not very much," stammered the housekeeper.

"Humph! I guess he ate as much as he wanted. Jest wait till I catch
him--I'll tan him harder than he was ever tanned before!"

"Maybe he went to bed again."

"No, I jest looked into his room."

Abner Balberry unlocked the kitchen door and stepped out into the
dooryard. As he did this he caught sight of somebody running swiftly
down the road.

"Hi! Stop!" he yelled. "Stop, Nat, do you hear?"

To this there was no answer, and the fleeing individual merely ran the
faster.

"Was it Nat?" asked the housekeeper.

"To be sure it was. Oh, wait till I lay my hands on him!" And the farmer
shook his fist at the figure that was fast disappearing in the gloom.

"What's that light in the barn?" demanded Mrs. Felton, an instant later.

"Light? Where?"

"Up in the haymow."

Abner Balberry gave a glance toward the structure.

"The barn's afire!" he screamed. "Thet good-fer-nuthin' boy has set the
place on fire!"

"Oh! oh!" screamed the housekeeper, and began to tremble from head to
feet, for to her mind a fire was the most dreadful thing that could
happen.

"I've got to git thet fire out," said the farmer, and ran toward the
barn with all speed.

"Be careful, or you'll be burnt up!" screamed Mrs. Felton.

"Go on an' git the water pails!" said the farmer. "Fill everything with
water. An' bring a rag carpet, an' I'll soak thet too!"

He already had an old patch of carpet used at the doorstep in his hand,
and this he soused in the watering trough as he passed. Then he ran into
the open barn and mounted to the loft.

The fire was in a patch of hay at one end of the loft, close to an open
window. Regardless of his personal safety, Abner Balberry leaped in and
threw part of the hay out of the window. Then he began to beat out the
fire with the water-soaked carpet.

"Here's some water," came timidly from below, and Mrs. Felton appeared
with two pails full to the brim. He took these upstairs and dashed them
on the flames.

"You look out or you'll be burnt up!" cried the housekeeper. She was
trembling to such a degree that she could scarcely stand.

"Git some more water," was Abner Balberry's only reply. The thought that
his barn might be totally destroyed filled him with dread, for there was
no insurance on the structure--he being too miserly to pay the premium
demanded by the insurance company.

More water was procured by Mrs. Felton, and at last it was apparent that
the farmer was getting the best of the fire. He worked hard and did not
seem to mind the fact that his eyebrows were singed and his hands
slightly blistered.

"There! now I've got it!" he sighed at last.

"Are you sure?" asked the housekeeper in a faint voice.

"Yes, but I'm a-goin' to hunt around fer sparks. Git some more water."

Additional water was soon at hand, and Abner Balberry began a minute
search of the whole loft, on the lookout for stray sparks. A few were
found and extinguished, and then the excitement came to an end.

"How thankful I am that the barn didn't burn down," said the
housekeeper, as the farmer came below and began to bathe his face and
hands.

"It was hot work."

"Are you burnt much?"

"More'n I want to be. Jest wait till I catch Nat!"

"Do you think----" began the housekeeper.

"O' course I do!" snorted Abner Balberry. "Didn't I see him a-runnin'
away from the barn?"

"I never thought Nat would be wicked enough to set a barn on fire."

"He was mad because I wouldn't give him no supper. He's a young rascal,
he is!"

"But to burn a barn!"

"Thet boy has got to be taken in hand, Mrs. Felton. I've let him have
his own way too much. I'm goin' to lay down the law good an' hard after
this."

"Maybe he won't come back," suggested the housekeeper.

This thought startled the farmer and he lost no time in finishing his
washing.

"I'm goin' after him," he announced. "If he thinks to run away I'll put
a spoke in his wheel putty quick."

Taking another look around, to make certain that the fire was really
out, Abner Balberry brought out one of his horses and hitched the animal
to a buckboard, in the meantime sending the housekeeper back to the
house to get his hat and coat.

"Where do you suppose you'll find him?" asked Mrs. Felton.

"Somewhere along the road most likely."

"Maybe he'll hide on you."

"He had better not. If he does that, I'll call on the squire about him."

"Can you do that?"

"O' course I can. Didn't he try to burn down the barn? The squire can
make out a warrant for his arrest."

"It would be awful to have him arrested."

"Well, he brought it on himself," answered Abner Balberry, doggedly. "He
had no right to try to set the barn afire. Next thing you know, Mrs.
Felton, he'll be a-trying to burn us up in our beds."

"Oh, I don't think Nat would be as bad as that."

"You don't know thet boy as well as I do. He's sly an' stubborn, and
he'll do 'most anything when he's crossed. But I'll fix him! Jest you
wait an' see!"

"How far will you follow him?"

"As far as it's necessary. If he thinks he can git away from me he'll
find out, sooner or later, he is mistaken."

"You don't know when you'll be back?"

"No. It may be I'll have to wait in town till the squire opens his
office--that is, if I can't find Nat."

"But you are going to look for him yourself first?"

"Yes."

With this answer Abner Balberry drove off in the darkness. Mrs. Felton
watched him and heaved a long and deep sigh.

"Too bad!" she murmured. "If he catches Nat it will surely go hard with
that boy. Well, I didn't think he was bad enough to set fire to a
barn!"




CHAPTER V

THE SALE OF A COW


Totally unconscious of what had taken place at the farm after his
departure, Nat, in company with his friend, Sam Price, proceeded on his
way to Brookville.

On the journey Nat told his friend of many things that had happened to
him and of his uncle's meanness.

"I don't wonder you want a change," said Sam. "I'd want a change
myself."

At last they came in sight of Brookville, and Nat drove the cow to the
yard of Jackson the butcher.

The butcher was a fat, good-natured man of middle age. But he was a
shrewd business man and first-class at driving a bargain.

"What do you want, boy?" he asked of Nat.

"Do you want to buy a cow, Mr. Jackson? Sam says you were out looking
for cows day before yesterday."

"I did want cows then, but I've got nearly all I want now."

"Oh, then I'll go elsewhere," answered Nat.

"Hold on, not so fast. What do you want for your cow?"

"Thirty dollars."

"Phew! you don't want much."

"She's worth it. You can milk her or use her for meat, just as you
choose."

"Whose cow is she?"

"Mine."

"Yours?" And the butcher gazed at Nat curiously.

"Yes. I've owned her ever since she was a little calf."

"And now you are tired of her?"

"Not exactly that, but I want to use the money. Will you buy her?"

"Yes, but not for thirty dollars."

"How much will you give?"

"Twenty dollars."

"I don't care to sell for twenty dollars."

"That's the best I can do."

"Then I'll have to go elsewhere. Come, Jennie," and Nat turned to drive
the cow from the butcher's yard again.

"Hold on!" cried the meat man. "I'll give you twenty-two dollars."

"Make it twenty-five and I'll accept. I can't take less. I ought to get
thirty dollars."

There was some more talk, and in the end, the butcher agreed to pay
twenty-five dollars and did so. He wanted a receipt, and Nat wrote it
out for him.

"So you are Nat Nason," said the butcher. "I used to know your father. A
very nice man."

"He was a nice man."

"Live with your uncle now, don't you?"

"I have been living with him, yes. Good-day, and much obliged," returned
the boy, and to avoid being questioned further he left the yard at once,
followed by Sam.

"You made a good bargain on the cow," said Sam. "I reckon you got every
cent she was worth."

"She was a good cow, Sam. I'm rather sorry to part with her. She was
almost like a friend."

"What are you going to do next?"

"Strike out for the city."

"I wish you luck."

"You won't tell my uncle?"

"Not a word. But, say."

"Well?"

"When you get to the city write and tell me how you like it."

"I will, Sam, and you must tell me the news from home, and how my uncle
gets along without me."

So it was arranged; and a few minutes later the two lads separated, and
Sam Price started for home.

Brookville was on a small branch railroad running to Cleveland, and by
consulting a time-table Nat learned that a train for Cleveland would
leave in ten minutes. He lost no time in purchasing a ticket, and spent
the rest of the time in eating some of the lunch he had brought along.
With over twenty-three dollars still in his pocket he felt rich, and
bought some peanuts and a cake of sweet chocolate.

When the train came along there were scarcely any passengers aboard, so
he had little difficulty in getting the seat he wanted. He sat down by a
window, with his bundle beside him, and gave himself up to thinking and
to looking at the scenery as it whirled past.

Nat had traveled but little on the cars, so the ride to Cleveland was
intensely enjoyable. The different places passed were so interesting
that he soon forgot to think about his prospects, or of what he was to
do when he arrived at the city on the lake.

"Next stop is Cleveland!" cried the conductor, standing at the open
doorway. "All change, for trains east and west!"

A moment later the train rolled into the smoky station, and bundle in
hand, Nat left the car and stepped onto the platform. From there he
walked to the street, where he gazed in some bewilderment at the crowds
of people and the swiftly moving street cars.

"Paper!" cried a newsboy. "Morning paper?"

"No, I don't want any paper," answered Nat.

"All about the big fire in Chicago, boss. Take a paper?"

"Yes, I'll take one," said Nat, and passed over the necessary change.
Off darted the newsboy, to be lost in the crowd on the other side of the
street. Nat gazed at the paper, to find that a tenement had burned out
in Chicago, with the loss of one life.

"That's not such a terrible thing--for a big city like Chicago," he
mused, and then noticed that the newspaper was two days old.

"That boy stuck me!" he muttered, and a cloud crossed his face. "I
