"That's the right way to feel, Tom. I wish I had a father and mother to
look out for," said Miles, soberly, "but you're in better luck than I.
Both died when I was a mere lad. How much do you want to send?"

"Seventy-five dollars."

"Have you saved up so much already?" asked Miles, in surprise.

"Part of it I had left over when I got here."

"Will you have any left?"

"No."

"Isn't it well to reserve a little, then?"

"Oh, I shall have some more soon," answered Tom, sanguine, as most boys
are.

"Suppose you are sick?"

"If he is sick he shall suffer for nothing," said the Scotchman. "While
I have money, Tom shall not feel the want of it."

"Thank you, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, gratefully.

"That old fellow has a heart, after all," thought Miles, who had been
disposed to look upon Ferguson ever since their first acquaintance, as
rather miserly.

The Scotchman was certainly frugal, and counted his pennies carefully,
but he was not mean, and had conceived a strong affection for his young
companion, whom he regarded much as a son or a nephew.

"Suppose you take the money now, John," said Tom.

"Shall I scribble a receipt, Tom? I am afraid my writing materials have
given out."

"I don't want any receipt," said Tom; "I'll trust you without one."

"Nevertheless, lad," said the cautious Scotchman, "it may be well--"

"Yes, Tom, Mr. Ferguson is right. Of course I know that you trust me;
but if anything should happen to me,--any accident, I mean,--the paper
may be useful to you."

"Just as you like, Mr. Miles, but I don't ask it, remember that."

"Yes, I will remember it, and I don't mean to meet with any accident if
I can help it. Mr. Ferguson, can you oblige me with a pipeful of
tobacco? I'll join you in smoking."

Smoking was the Scotchman's solitary extravagance, not a costly one,
however, as he never smoked cigars, but indulged only in a democratic
clay pipe.

John Miles threw himself on the ground between Tom and his Scotch
friend, and watched complacently the wreaths of smoke as they curled
upwards.

"Tom, you ought to smoke," he said. "You don't know how much enjoyment
you lose."

"Don't tempt the lad," said Ferguson. "It's a bad habit."

"You smoke yourself."

"That is true, but it isn't well for a growing boy. It can do him no
good."

"I smoked before I was as old as Tom."

"So did I, but I wish I had not."

"Well, perhaps you're right, but it's a comfort when a man's tired or
out of spirits."

"I am not troubled in that way," said Tom. "I mean with being out of
spirits."

"Youth is a hopeful age," said the Scotchman. "When we are young we are
always hoping for something good to befall us."

"And when one is older, how is it, Mr. Ferguson?"

"We fear ill more than we hope for good," he replied.

"Then I want to remain young as long as I can."

"A good wish, Tom. Some men are always young in spirit; but those that
have seen the evil there is in the world find it harder to be hopeful."

"You speak as if you had had experience of the evil, Mr. Ferguson."

"So I have," answered the Scotchman slowly. Then, after a pause, "I will
tell you about it: it's no secret."

"Not if it is going to pain you."

"Oh, the pain is past. It's only a matter of money, and those wounds
heal."

"Only a matter of money!" said John Miles to himself. "I must have
misjudged Ferguson. I thought money was all in all with him. I did not
think he would speak so lightly of it."

"When I was a young man," Ferguson began, "my father died, leaving me a
thousand pounds, and a small annuity to my mother. With this money I
felt rich, but I knew it would not support me, nor was I minded to be
idle. So I began to look about me, to consider what business I had best
go into, when a young man, about my own age, a clerk in a mercantile
house, came to me and proposed a partnership. He was to put in five
hundred pounds, and contribute his knowledge of business, which was
greater than mine. He was a young man of good parts, and had a brisk,
pleasant way with him, that made him a favorite in business circles. I
thought it was a good chance, and, after taking a little time for
thought, agreed to his proposal. So the firm of McIntire and Ferguson
was formed. We went into business, and for a time all seemed to go
well. As my partner chose to keep the books, I was not so clear as I
wished to be about matters, but we seemed to be prospering. One morning,
however, on coming to business, I found that my partner had disappeared,
after possessing himself of all the money he could collect on the credit
of the firm. Of course we were bankrupts, or rather I was, for he left
me to bear the brunt of failure."

"Have you ever seen him since, Mr. Ferguson?"

"From that day to this--twenty years--I have never set eyes on Sandy
McIntire."

"It was a mean trick to serve you, Ferguson," said Miles.

"Yes," said the Scotchman, soberly. "I minded the loss of money, but the
loss of confidence was a sore thought too, after all the trust I had put
in that man."

Presently Miles rose to go.

"I'll take care of your money, Tom," he said, "and do my best to get it
safely to your father."

"Thank you, John."

As Miles left the tent, he did not observe a crouching figure on the
other side of it. It was the figure of Bill Crane, a crony of Missouri
Jack, in fact, the man who helped him to fleece poor Peabody of his
scanty hoard.

Bill looked after Miles enviously.

"I wonder how much money he's got?" thought Bill. "I'd like some of it,
for I'm bust. I must tell Jack. I don't dare to tackle him alone."




CHAPTER IV.

A FOILED ROBBER.


In the grand rush to the newly discovered gold-fields all classes were
represented. There were men of education, representatives of all the
learned professions, men versed in business, and along with them
adventurers and men of doubtful antecedents, graduates of prisons and
penitentiaries. Bill Crane, introduced in the last chapter, belonged to
the latter undesirable class. He had served a term at Sing-Sing as a
housebreaker, and later another term in a Western penitentiary. He had
come to California with a prejudice against honest labor, and a
determination to make a living by the use of the peculiar talents on
which he had hitherto relied. He had spent a week at River Bend, chiefly
at the saloon of Missouri Jack, whom he found a congenial spirit, and
had picked up a little money from flats like the young Bostonian; but,
on the whole, he had found it an unprofitable field for the exercise of
his special talents.

"I must make a raise somehow," he bethought himself, "and then I'll make
tracks for some other settlement."

Precisely how to raise the fund of which he stood in need was difficult
to decide. Moneyed men were not plenty at River Bend. Captain Fletcher
and his party had been at work but a short time, and were not likely to
have collected much.

As we know, Bill Crane overheard a part of the closing conversation
between Tom and John Miles. From this he learned that Miles, besides his
own money, would be in charge of seventy-five dollars belonging to our
young hero. It was not much, but it was something.

"If the whole doesn't come to over two hundred dollars, I can make it
do," thought Crane. "It will get me out of this beastly hole, and carry
me to San Francisco."

John Miles slept by himself under a small tent at the northern end of
the small encampment. He looked like a man who ate well and slept well,
and this would be favorable to Bill Crane, who proposed to effect the
robbery in the night. He had half a mind to secure the aid of Missouri
Jack, but then Jack would expect to go shares in the "plunder," and
there was likely to be little enough for one. So Bill decided to make
the attempt alone.

In a small camp like that at River Bend, the movements and plans of each
individual were generally known. So it was generally understood that
John Miles intended to start on Thursday for the city.

The previous evening he spent with Tom and Ferguson, with whom he was
more intimate than any others of the party. He would not have been drawn
to the Scotchman, but for his being Tom's room-mate. Through him he came
to appreciate and respect the Scot's sterling virtues, and to overlook
his dry, phlegmatic manner.

"I hope you'll have good luck, Mr. Miles," said Tom.

"Thank you, my boy."

"I would join with my young friend Tom," said Ferguson, "if I were quite
clear in my mind whether good luck is the right term to use."

"Don't you think some men are luckier than others, Mr. Ferguson?" asked
Tom.

"Some men are more successful, doubtless; but what we call good luck,
generally comes from greater industry, good judgment, and, above all,
the prompt use of opportunities."

"There is something in that," said Miles; "but when two men work side by
side with equal industry, and one finds a nugget worth thousands of
dollars, while the other plods along at a few dollars a day, isn't there
some luck there?"

"It may be so," said the Scotchman, cautiously, "but such cases are
exceptional."

"So one boy is born to an inheritance of wealth and another to an
inheritance of hard work. Isn't there any luck there?"

"The luck may be on the side of the poor boy," was the reply. "He is
further removed from temptation."

John Miles laughed.

"Well, at any rate, it seems you believe in luck after all. I am sure
you both wish me to be prosperous, whether you call it luck or by some
other name. Tom, if I meet with any good opening that I think will suit
you, I shall write you. You don't want to stay here, particularly?"

"No; the place is not so pleasant since these new people have come here.
Missouri Jack isn't a neighbor that I like."

"He is exerting a bad influence," said Ferguson. "I am afraid Peabody
visits him too often for his own good."

"He ought to have stayed in Boston," said Miles. "He is not the man for
such a life as ours. He is too delicate to work, or thinks he is, and I
see no other reliable road to success."

"I saw Peabody reeling out of the saloon this afternoon," said Tom. "I
asked him if he considered it was 'high-toned' to drink in a saloon, as
that is the word he is always using, but he said it didn't make much
difference out here, where he wasn't known."

"Peabody isn't overstocked with brains, though he does come from
Boston," said Miles.

Ten o'clock came, and Miles rose to go.

"I must have a good night's rest," he said, "for to-morrow night must
see me many miles on my road. Tom, I will attend to that commission of
yours just as soon as I have the opportunity."

"Thank you, Mr. Miles."

John Miles walked slowly toward his tent. Arrived there, he threw
himself down on his rude couch, and in less than fifteen minutes, he was
sound asleep. He had done his usual day's work, and made some
preparations for his journey besides, and these made slumber sweet and
refreshing.

Before settling himself for the night, however, Miles carefully
deposited a bag of gold-dust under his head, wrapped up in an extra pair
of pantaloons. Had he known that Bill Crane had formed a plan to rob him
that very night, he would have taken extra precautions, but he was not
inclined to be suspicious, or to anticipate danger.

Perhaps an hour later, Tom, who found himself unusually restless, got up
from his hard couch, leaving Ferguson fast asleep, and went out into
the air, thinking that a walk would do him good and dispose him to
sleep. The night was dark, but not wholly so. There was no moon, but a
few stars were shining; and as his eyes became accustomed to the faint
light, he could easily distinguish objects at the distance of a few
rods.

Tom's thoughts reverted to his humble home, more than three thousand
miles away. Probably the fact that he had committed to John Miles a sum
of money to send to his father, had turned his thoughts in that
direction.

"Father will be glad to get the seventy-five dollars," thought Tom, "and
I am sure he will need it. I wish it could get there more quickly, but
it is a long way off."

Tom was not homesick, and was far from wishing himself back, with his
object in coming yet unaccomplished, but it did occur to him, that he
would like to see his father and mother, and brothers and sisters, if
only for a few minutes.

When he came out he had no particular direction in mind in which he
wished to walk, but chance directed his steps toward the tent of his
friend, John Miles.

When he came near it, his attention was arrested by the sight of a
crouching figure which appeared to be entering the tent. His first
thought was, that Miles, like himself, had got up from his couch and was
just returning. He was on the point of calling out "John," when a sudden
doubt and suspicion silenced him.--"Might not it be a robber?"

Tom was determined to find out. He crept nearer, so that he could have a
clearer view of the figure.

"It's Bill Crane!" he said to himself, with sudden recognition. "What's
he up to?"

Tom could guess. He didn't know the man's antecedents, but he had read
his character aright. He was instantly on the alert. Crane evidently was
on a thief's errand, and was likely to steal not only Miles's money but
Tom's. Our hero was alive to the emergency, and resolved to foil him. He
had his revolver with him; for in the unsettled state of society, with
no one to enforce the laws, and indeed no laws to enforce, it was the
custom for all men to go armed.

Tom was not long left in doubt as to Crane's intentions. He saw him
cautiously pulling at something in the tent, and felt sure that it was
the bag of treasure. He decided that the time had come to act.

"Put that back," he exclaimed in boyish, but clear, commanding tone.
