street is parallel to the rest, the effect is bad; regularity here is
disagreeable.  This is a deep subject requiring much study and
philosophical inquiry.  If I were to go farther into it, our friend Fred
Temple's adventures would have to be cast overboard.  I will, therefore,
cut it short with the remark that the subject is well worthy the
attention of even deeper-thinking men than are ever likely to read this
book.

When the three friends, Temple, Grant, and Sorrel, found themselves in
the quaint old city of Bergen their first thought was _supper_; their
second thought _bed_.

Now this may seem to some minds a dreadfully low and contemptible state
of things.  "What!" a romantic reader may exclaim, "they had arrived in
that celebrated city, from which in days of old the stalwart Vikings
used to issue on their daring voyages, in which the descendants of these
grand fellows still dwell, and in which are interesting memorials of the
past and quaint evidences of the present.  Did your heroes, Temple,
Sorrel, and Grant, think of supper and of bed when their feet for the
first time trod the soil of Old Norway?"

Even so!  Romantic reader, I am bound to tell you that romance is all
very well in its way, but it has no power whatever over an empty stomach
or an exhausted brain.

When our three friends landed in Bergen it was past midnight.  Their
admiration of the scenery had induced them to neglect supper and to defy
sleep, so that when they landed they felt more than half inclined to
fall upon their boatman and eat him up alive, and then to fall down on
the stone pier and go off to sleep at once.

In this frame of mind and body they entered the house of Madame Sontoom,
and called for supper.

Madame Sontoom was the owner of a private hotel.  Moreover, she was the
owner of a plump body and a warm heart.  Consequently, she at once
became a mother to all who were fortunate enough to dwell under her
roof.

Her hotel was by no means like to a hotel in this country.  It was more
like a private residence.  There were no hired waiters.  Her amiable
daughters waited; and they did not look upon you as a customer, or
conduct themselves like servants.  No, they treated you as a visitor,
and conducted themselves with the agreeable familiarity of friends!  Of
course they presented their bill when you were about to leave them, but
in all other respects the idea of a hotel was banished from the mind.

"Supper," cried Temple, on entering the house.

"Ya, ya," (yes, yes), in cheerful tones from two of Madame Sontoom's
daughters.

Then followed a violent conversation in the Norse language, in which
there was much that was puzzling, and more that was amusing, for the
Norwegian ladies were talkative and inquisitive.

Fred Temple had studied the Norse language for three months before
setting out on this voyage, and, being a good linguist he understood a
good deal of what was said, and could make his own wants known pretty
well.  Grant had studied the language also, but not for so long a time,
and, being an indifferent linguist, he made little headway in
conversation.  As to Sam Sorrel, he had no talent for languages.  He
hated every language but his mother-tongue, had not studied Norse at
all, and did not intend to do so.  It may be supposed, therefore, that
he was dumb.  Far from it.  He had picked up a few phrases by ear, and
was so fond of making use of these, and of twisting them into all shapes
and out of all shape, that he really appeared to be a great talker of
Norse, although in reality he could scarcely talk at all!

Supper consisted of coffee, rolls, eggs, "gamleost" (old cheese),
lobster, and smoked salmon.  The viands were good, the appetites were
also good, so the supper went off admirably.

"Ver so goot," said one of the young ladies, handing Mr Sorrel a plate
of smoked salmon.

"Tak, tak," (thanks, thanks), said our artist, accepting the salmon, and
beginning to devour it.

"I say, what d'ye mean by `ver so goot'?  You're never done saying it.
What does it mean?"

The fair waitress laughed, and bowed politely, as much as to say, "I
don't understand English."

"Can you explain it, Fred?" said Sam.

"Well, yes, I can give you a sort of explanation," replied Fred, "but it
is not an easy sentence to translate.  `Ver so goot' (another claw of
that lobster, please.  Thanks),--`ver so goot' is an expression that
seems to me capable of extension and distension.  It is a comfortable,
jovial, rollicking expression, if I may say so.  I cannot think of a
better way of conveying an idea of its meaning than saying that it is a
compound of the phrases `be so good,' `by your leave,' `good luck to
you,' `go it, ye cripples,' and `that's your sort.'  The first of these,
`be so good,' is the literal translation.  The others are more or less
mixed up with it.  You may rely on it, Sam, that when a Norwegian offers
you anything and says `ver so goot,' he means you well, and hopes that
you will make yourself comfortable."

"You don't say so, Fred; I'll adopt the phrase from this hour!"

Accordingly Sam Sorrel did adopt it, and used it on all and every
occasion, without any regard to its appropriateness.

Little was said at supper.  The whole party were too tired to converse.

"Now for bed," cried Sam, rising.  "I say, Fred, what's the Norse for a
bed?"

"Seng," replied Fred.

"Seng! what a remarkable name!  Now, then, my good girl, _ver so goot_
will you show me my _seng_?  Good night, comrades, I'm off to--ha! ha!
what a musical idea--to seng."

"More probably to snore," observed Grant.

"Oh, Grant," said Sam, looking back and shaking his head, "give up
jesting.  It's bad for your health; fie for shame! good night."

Norwegian beds are wooden boxes of about three feet wide, and five and a
half long.  I have never been able to discover why it is that Norwegians
love to make their beds as uncomfortable as possible.  Yet so it is.

Grant had a room to himself.  Temple and our artist were shown into a
double-bedded room.

"Is that a bed?" said Sam, pointing to a red-painted wooden box in a
corner; "why, it's too short even for me, and you know I'm not a giant."

"Oh! then what must it be for me?" groaned Fred Temple.

On close examination it was found that each bed was too short for any
man above five feet two, and, further, that there was a feather-bed
below and a feather-bed above, instead of blankets.  Thus they lay that
night between two feather-beds, which made them so hot that it was
impossible to sleep at first.  Sorrel, being short, managed to lie
diagonally across his box, but Fred, being long, was compelled to double
himself up like a foot-rule.  However, fatigue at last caused them to
slumber in spite of all difficulties.  In the morning they were visited
by a ghost!



CHAPTER FOUR.

A GHOST AND A CUSTOM--A FISH-MARKET AND A NORSE LOVER.

There was no night in Bergen at this time.  At the midnight hour there
was light enough to see to read the smallest print, and at an early hour
in the morning this sweet twilight brightened into dawn.

This being the case, Fred Temple was not a little surprised to see a
ghost make its appearance about six o'clock--for ghosts are famous for
their hatred of broad daylight.  Nevertheless there it was, in the form
of a woman.  What else could it be but a ghost? for no woman would dare
to enter his bedroom (so he thought) without knocking at the door.

The ghost had in her hand a tray with a cup of coffee on it.  Fred
watched her motions with intense curiosity, and kept perfectly still,
pretending to be asleep.  She went straight to the box in which Sam
Sorrel slept, and going down on her knees, looked earnestly into his
face.  As our artist's mouth happened to be wide-open, it may be said
that she looked down his throat.  Presently she spoke to him in a soft
whisper--"Will de have caffe?"  (Will you have coffee?)  A loud snore
was the reply.  Again she spoke, somewhat louder: "Vill de have caffe?"

A snort was the reply.

Once more, in a tone which would not be denied:

"_Vill de have caffe_?"

"Eh! hallo! what! dear me! yes--ah--thank you--_ver so goot_," replied
Sam, as he awoke and gazed in wild surprise at the ghost who was none
other than the female domestic servant of the house, who had brought the
visitors a cup of coffee before breakfast.

Sam's exclamations were wild at first, and he stared like a maniac, but
as consciousness returned he understood his position, and being
naturally a modest man, he hastily drew on his nightcap and gathered the
bedding round his shoulders.  Accepting the coffee, he drank it, and the
girl crossed the room to pay similar attentions to Fred Temple.

This presentation of a cup of coffee in bed before breakfast is a custom
in Norway, and a very pleasant custom it is, too, especially when it
breaks upon you unexpectedly for the first time.

"Now for the fish-market, Sam," cried Fred, leaping out of bed when the
girl had left the room.

"Who cares for the fish-market?" said Sam testily, as he turned round in
his bed, and prepared to slumber.

"I care for it," retorted Fred, "and so do you, old boy, only you are
lazy this morning.  Come, get up.  I have resolved to spend only one day
in this queer old city, so you _must_ not let drowsiness rob you of your
opportunities of seeing it.  The fish-market, you know, is famous.
Come, get up."

Temple enforced his advice by seizing his companion by the ankles and
hauling him out of bed.  Sam grumbled but submitted, and in a short time
they were ready to start.

"Hallo!  Grant," cried Fred, as they passed his door, "will you come
with us to ramble over the town?"

"No," said Grant, in a deep bass voice.

"Why?"

"Because I won't."

"A most excellent reason; one much in use in this world," replied
Temple, laughing.  "By the way, will you remember to order two sheep to
be killed for our voyage north?"

"Yes," in a sulky tone from Grant.

"Now mind, I trust this to you."

"Go away, and don't bother!"

Thus dismissed, Temple and Sorrel went out and sauntered towards the
fish-market.

Now, fish-markets are famous all the world over for noise, riot, and
confusion.  The fish-market of Bergen is no exception to the rule; but
there is this peculiarity about it, that the sellers of fish are all
men, and the buyers all women; moreover, the noise is all on the side of
the buyers!  The scene of the market is the pier, alongside of which the
fishermen's boats are ranged; and here the fish are sold direct from the
boats by the men to all the servant-girls of the town, who assemble each
morning to purchase the day's dinner.

The men, standing in the boats, are considerably below the level of the
pier, so that they have to look up at the girls, who look down at them
with eager, anxious faces.  The men, sure that their fish will be sold
in the long-run, are quiet sedate, silent.  The women, anxious to get
good bargains and impatient to get home, bend forward, shouting,
screaming, and flourishing arms, fists, and umbrellas.  Every one
carries an umbrella in Bergen, for that city is said to be the rainiest
in the world.  Of gay colours are these umbrellas too.  Pink and
sky-blue are not uncommon.  There is a stout iron rail round the pier,
which prevents the eager females from tumbling headlong into the boats.
Over this they lean and bargain.

Fierce were the pretty blue eyes of these Norse females, and flushed
were their fair faces, and tremendous was the flourishing of their
umbrellas and the shaking of their fists, at the time when Temple and
Sorrel approached.  The fishermen were used to it; they only smiled, or
paid no attention whatever to the noise.  And what was all the noise
about?  You shall hear.

Look at yonder flaxen-haired, pretty-faced, stoutish little girl,
leaning so far over the iron rail that it seems her desire to tumble
over it, and plunge into the arms of a rough old fisherman, who is
gazing quietly up at her with a sarcastic smile.  He has put up a lot of
fish for which she has offered "sex (six) skillings."  A skilling is
about equal to a halfpenny.

He thinks this too little, but he won't condescend to say so.  He merely
pays no attention to the girl's violent entreaties.  The language of the
girl bears so strong a resemblance to our own that it scarcely requires
translation.

"Fiskman," she cries, "vill du have otto skillings?"  (will you have
eight skillings?)

No, the fiskman won't have that; it is not enough, so he makes no reply,
but pretends to be washing his boat.

"Fiskman, fiskman, vill du have ni?"  (will you have nine?)

Still no reply.  The fisherman turns his back on the market, gazes out
to sea, and begins to whistle.

At this the girl becomes furious.  She whirls her umbrella in the air
desperately.  If that umbrella were only a foot longer the fiskman's
head would certainly feel its weight!

Presently the girl forces herself to become calm and deeply earnest; she
has made up her mind to make a liberal offer.

"Fiskman, vill du have ti (ten) skillings?"

The fiskman, who wears a red nightcap, with a tall hat on the top of it,
takes off his head-gear, exposes his bald pate to view, and wipes it
with a fishy cotton handkerchief; but he takes no notice whatever of the
girl, who now becomes mad--that is to say, she stamps, glares, shakes
her pretty little fist at the hard-hearted man, and gasps.

Suddenly she becomes reckless, and makes a wild offer of "tolve (twelve)
skillings."

Ha! the mark is hit at last!  The fiskman can hold out no longer.
Without saying a word, he turns quietly round and hands up the fish.
The girl, without a word, stoops down and pays for them, and then goes
off in triumph, for her energy has been successful; she _has_ got the
fish a little cheaper than she had expected.

Suppose twenty or thirty such scenes going on at once, and you have a
faint idea of the Bergen fish-market.

It was just before the termination of the bargain which has been
described that Fred Temple and Sam Sorrel arrived on the scene.  The
artist was busy with his sketch-book in one minute.

"Sam," said Fred, touching his friend's arm, "look here, sketch me
yonder girl, like a good fellow."

"Which girl; the one with the nose?"

"If you see one _without_ a nose," retorted Fred, "I'll be glad to have
a portrait of her too."

"Nay, but really, I do see one with such a long red nose that--"

"Well, well," interrupted Fred impatiently, "it's not _her.  Do_ look to
where I am pointing; see, the stout pretty little woman who is talking
so fiercely to that fisherman."

"Oh, I see!" exclaimed Sam, who began to take her portrait without
delay.

Meanwhile Fred was observant.  At first he was much amused by the scene
before him, and continued to gaze with interest at one group after
another.  In a short time his curiosity was awakened by a handsome
Norwegian youth, whose gaze was fixed with intense earnestness on the
maiden whom Sam was sketching.  When the girl had concluded her bargain
