traverse before the sheltering mountains could be reached.

At first they walked rapidly and in silence, one behind the other--Mark
leading--but as time passed, and the danger of being overtaken
decreased, they fell more into line and began to talk of their plans and
prospects.

Of course they thought about the _Eastern Star_, and the possibility of
her hanging about the coast in the hope of picking them up; but as there
was no certainty upon that point, and a return to the coast would be
like rushing into the very jaws of the lion, from which they were
fleeing, they soon dismissed the idea as untenable.

"Now then, the question is, sir, Wot are we a-goin' for to do?" said
Hockins.

"Ay, dat's de question," added Ebony with much force, and more than
Shakespearean brevity.

"Well now, lads," said Mark, "I've been thinking over that, and it seems
to me that there's not much to choose between.  Unfortunately, I know
uncommonly little about this island--not that my geographical education
has been neglected, but the class-books I have used did not give much
information about Madagascar.  I know, however, that the Mozambique
Channel, which divides us from Africa, is a little too wide to swim.  I
also know that there is a capital somewhere near the middle of the
island, the name of which begins with an `Ant,' and ends with a `rivo.'
There are some syllables between, I believe, but how many, is more than
I can tell.  There's a government in it, however, and a queen, and some
Christian missionaries.  Now, it strikes me that where there's a
government, a queen, and Christian missionaries, there must be more or
less of civilisation and safety, so I would advise that we make straight
for the capital."

"Right you are, sir," said Hockins.  "As I know nothin' whotsomever
about the place, I'll take my sailin' orders from you, captain, an'
steer a straight course for Anty--whatever-she-is--arivo, where I hope
we'll arrive O!--`all alive O!' in the course o' time.  What say you,
Ebony?"

"I's agreeable; don't care much for nuffin' when it don't trouble me.
But I's gettin' awful hungry, an' I don't see nuffin' to eat in dis yer
forest--not even fruit--dough it's pritty enough to look at."

The scenery through which they were passing at the time was indeed more
than pretty.  It was gorgeous, and would certainly have claimed more
attention from the travellers had they been less anxious to advance,
and, perhaps, less hungry.

By that time--near mid-day--they had got through the densest part of the
woods, and were come to a part where occasional openings in the foliage
lighted them up.  They had also discovered a narrow track or footpath,
which they gladly followed; for although by so doing they ran the risk
of coming suddenly upon natives, who might be foes just as well as
friends, the comparative ease of travelling was too great to be
neglected.  This path struck over hill and down dale in a somewhat
dogged and straightforward manner, scorning to go round hillocks, save
when too precipitous for unwinged animals.  At times it wound in and out
among trees of great beauty and variety, and of tropical aspect.
Elsewhere it plunged into denser stretches of forest, where the
profusion of vegetable life was extraordinary--here, a dense undergrowth
of shrubs, tree-ferns, and dwarf-palms; there, trees of higher growth,
and, shooting high above them all, the slender trunks of many varieties
of palms, whose graceful crowns and feathery leaves were pictured
vividly on the blue sky.  Elsewhere, innumerable creeping plants
interlaced the branches, producing a wild and beautiful net-work, their
tendrils crossing in all directions, and producing a green twilight in
places.  The whole was enriched by orchids, the abundant pink and white
wax-like flowers of which contrasted well with other wild-flowers
innumerable, and with many large and gorgeous flowering trees.

Different species of bamboos gave quite a peculiar aspect to the scenery
in some places, and still greater variety was secured by long pendant
masses of feathery grey moss and lichens.  Some of the trees were of
enormous height; one palm, with a straight stem, in particular, being
estimated as not less than a hundred feet high to the spot where the
leaves sprouted.

"'Tis a perfect paradise!" exclaimed Mark, stopping suddenly and looking
around with admiration.

"Yes, massa," murmured Ebony, with solemn looks, "if dere was on'y a few
wegibles--cooked!  Flowers is all bery well to look at, but we can't
heat him."

"Well, if we can't eat, we can, at all events, sleep," returned Mark.
"I believe it is usually thought wise in tropical countries to cease
work and rest about noon, so, as I feel rather tired, I'll have a
snooze.  What say you?"

No objection being made, the party again climbed into the branches of a
low spreading tree, in order to avoid snakes, scorpions, or any other
noxious creatures, though they knew not at the time whether such existed
on the island.  In less than five minutes they were sound asleep.

Awaking after about two hours' repose, they descended, wished for
something to eat, sighed, put a bold heart on it, tightened their belts
to suit diminishing waists, and continued their journey.

Perseverance is sure to be rewarded.  If that is not a proverb, it ought
to be!  At all events the perseverance of our travellers was rewarded at
this time by their coming suddenly out of the woods into a wide grassy
plain, on which was browsing a herd of wild cattle--at least they judged
them to be wild from the fact of their being discovered in such a wild
place, and resolved to treat them as wild because of the "wolves" inside
of them, which clamoured so wildly for food.

"Beef!" exclaimed Hockins in some excitement, as he pointed to the
animal nearest to them, which happened to be a black, sleek, fat young
bull, with slender limbs and fierce eyes.

"Neber mind the wegibles, massa; shot 'un!" exclaimed Ebony in an
excited whisper, as he turned his glaring eyeballs on his leader.

"Hush! don't speak," returned Mark, drawing quietly back into cover--for
the animal had not observed them.  "We must consult what is to be done,
because, you know, we have lost our powder-flask, the two charges in my
gun are all I have got, and these are only small shot--I have no
bullets!"

Grave concern overspread the face of the sturdy seaman--blank dismay
that of the sea-cook!

"Might as well blaze at the beast wi' sand," said Hockins.

"Or wid nuffin'," sighed Ebony.

"Nevertheless, I will try," said Mark, quickly.  "We shall be starved to
death at this rate.  Yonder is a line of bushes that runs close out to
the brute.  I'll stalk it.  When close I will make a dash at it, get as
near as I can, clap the muzzle against its ribs if possible, and--well,
we shall see!  You two had better stop here and look on."

"No, massa," said the negro, firmly, "I go wid you.  If you _is_ to die,
we die togidder!"

"What are you thinking of, Hockins?" asked the youth, observing that the
seaman stood staring at the ground with knitted brows, as if in deep
thought.

"I'll go with you too," he replied, drawing his cutlass and feeling its
point with his finger.  "You may need help.  Heave ahead, sir."

Mark could not avoid smiling at the way in which this was said, although
he was sufficiently impressed with the hopelessness, it might even be
the danger, of the attempt he was about to make.

They found no difficulty in approaching to within about thirty yards of
the animal, being well concealed by the line of bushes before mentioned,
but beyond that point there was no cover.  Here therefore Mark cocked
his gun and gathered himself up for a rush, and Hockins drew his
cutlass.  So agile was our young doctor that he actually reduced the
thirty yards to ten before the astonished bull turned to fly.  Another
moment and the contents of both barrels were lodged in its flank.  The
effect was to produce a bellow of rage, a toss-up of the hindquarters,
and a wild flourish of the tail, as the animal scurried away after the
rest of the herd, which was in full flight.

Poor Breezy stopped at once, with a feeling of mingled disgust and
despair.  Ebony also stopped, and looked with wide sympathetic eyes in
his leader's face, as though to say, "Well, massa, you's done your
best."

But Hockins ran on with persistent vigour, although the creature was
leaving him further behind at every stride.

"Absurd!" murmured Mark, as he gazed at him.

"No use wassomiver," said Ebony.

It did indeed seem as if the seaman's exertions would prove abortive,
but something in the spirit of the wounded bull suddenly changed the
aspect of affairs.  Whether it was the stinging pain of the small shot
in its flank, or the indignation in its breast that influenced it we
cannot tell, but in a moment it wheeled round with a furious roar and
charged its pursuer.

Hockins stopped at once, and his comrades fully expected to see him turn
and run; but our seaman was made of better stuff than they gave him
credit for, and the situation was not so new to him as they imagined.
In the course of his voyaging to many lands, Hockins had been to a
bull-fight in South America.  He had seen with fascination and some
surprise the risks run by the footmen in the arena; he had beheld with
mingled anger and disgust the action of the picadors, who allowed their
poor horses to be gored to death by the infuriated bulls; and he had
watched with thrilling anxiety, not unmingled with admiration, the cool
courage of the matadors, as they calmly stood up to the maddened and
charging bulls and received them on the points of their swords, stepping
lightly aside at the same moment so as to avoid the dangerous horns.

The seaman's purpose now was to act the part of a matador.  He knew that
he possessed coolness and nerve sufficient for the deed; he hoped that
he had the skill; he felt that hunger could no longer remain
unsatisfied; he feared that death by starvation might be the lot of
himself and his companions, and he preferred to meet death in action--if
meet it he must.  All things considered, he resolved to face the bovine
thunderbolt with unflinching front, like a true-blue British tar!

His coolness in the circumstances was evinced by the remarks muttered to
himself in a growly tone as the bull approached.

"Three futt--that'll be enough.  I don't rightly remember how near them
mattydoors let him come before they putt their helms hard down an' let
him go by, but I think three futt'll do."

This decision was barely reached when the bull was upon him with lowered
head and erect tail.  It was an awful rush, but Hockins stood like a
rock with the cutlass pointed.  At the pre-arranged moment he stepped to
one side, but instead of letting the momentum of the animal do the work,
he could not resist the impulse to drive the cutlass deeper into the
bull's neck.  The result was that, though he escaped the creature's horn
by a very narrow shave, the cutlass was wrenched violently from his
grasp, and he was sent head over heels upon the plain!

Seeing this, Mark and the negro ran to the rescue, the one howling like
a maniac, the other clubbing his gun; but their aid was not required,
for the work of the amateur matador had been effectively done.  After
receiving the deadly thrust the bull plunged forward a few paces, and
then fell dying upon the ground, while Hockins got up and began to feel
himself all over to make sure that no bones were broken.

It need scarcely be told that they rejoiced greatly over their success,
and that they cut off some of the flesh immediately, with which they
returned to the forest to enjoy a much-needed meal.

"We must kindle a fire now," said Mark, stopping at an open space in the
midst of a very secluded spot at the foot of a magnificent palm-tree.
"You see I'm not prepared to act like a cannibal or Eskimo, and eat the
meat raw."

"There won't be much fear now," said Hockins, "especially if we make the
fire of dry wood an' keep it small.  Just look at that, Doctor."

He held out his cutlass for inspection.  It had been seriously bent in
the recent encounter.

"Ain't that a cryin' shame to the owners, now, to send us poor fellows
to the eastern seas, where we may meet pirates any day, with tin
cutlashes like that."

"You kin put him straight de next bull you kills," said Ebony, as he
prepared some touchwood; "you've on'y got to stick 'im on the _left_
side an' he'll twis' it all right.  Now, massa, I's ready, bring de gun
an' snap de flints ober dat."

Hockins straightened his weapon between the branches of a tree, his
comrades managed to capture a spark in a mass of dry combustibles, which
soon burst into a flame.  As the seaman had recommended, only the driest
wood was used, and just enough of that to enable them to half-roast what
food they required.  Then they returned to the carcass of the bull, and
cut off a large quantity of meat, using the cutlass as well as their
clasp-knives in the operation.

"Cut the meat in thin slices," said Mark Breezy, when they began this
work.

"Why you so 'ticklar, massa?" asked Ebony.  "I's fond o' t'ick slices--
w'en him's not too tough."

"Because then we can dry the meat in the sun or over a slow fire, and so
be able to keep it longer without spoiling.  We must spend the night
here for the purpose, and perhaps part of to-morrow.--Why, Hockins, what
are you about?"

"Makin' a pair o' shoes, sir; you see them old dancin' pumps as I left
the ship with wouldn't hold out another day o' this rough travellin', so
I'm makin' a noo pair of shoes when I've got the chance."

"They will be a primitive pair," observed Mark.

"If that means a good pair, you're right, sir.  They are after the
pattern first made by Adam for Eve--leas'wise it's supposed her first
pair o' dancin' pumps was made this fashion.  I'll make a sim'lar pair
for you, sir, w'en your boots give out."

In case the reader should ever be reduced to extremities in the matter
of foot-gear we may explain the seaman's method.

Selecting what he believed to be the thickest part of the bull's hide,
he cut off a small portion about eighteen inches square.  Spreading this
on the ground with the hair upwards, he planted his naked foot on it and
marked the shape thereon.  Then with his knife he cut away the hide all
round the foot-mark at four inches or so from the outline of the foot.
Next, he bored little holes all round the margin, through which he ran a
line, or lace, also made of raw hide.  Then, planting his foot again in
the middle of the hide, he drew the line tight, causing the edges to
rise all round the foot and almost cover it.

"There you are, sir," he said, stretching out his limb and admiring the
contrivance; "rough-an'-ready, you see, but soon finished.  It ain't
recorded in ancient history what Eve said when Adam presented her wi'
the little testimonial of his affection, but if I might ventur' a guess
I should opine that she said `puckery.'"

"H'm!  Dey ain't a tight fit," observed Ebony.  "I's ob opinion dat your
corns are quite safe in 'em."

Having completed his shoe-making work, the ingenious seaman assisted his
companions to prepare the dried meat, which they afterwards tied up in
three convenient little parcels to be slung on their backs.

That night they found a more commodious tree to sleep in.  Under the
pleasant influence of a good supper they enjoyed unbroken rest, and
awoke the following morning greatly refreshed.  They were thus, both
physically and mentally, prepared for the events of that day, to which,
as they afterwards had a most important bearing on their fortunes in the
island, we will devote a separate chapter.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE DOCTOR FINDS UNEXPECTED WORK IN THE WILDERNESS, AND A MYSTERIOUS
STRANGER IS INTRODUCED.

It has been said that the travellers--for we cannot now appropriately
style them fugitives--had reached a more open country, and that
Hockins's fight with the wild bull had taken place on the margin of a
wide grassy plain.

This plain, however, was limited.  In front of them the scenery was
undulating and beautifully varied--almost park-like in its character,
and only in one direction--to the right--did it extend like a sea of
waving grass to the horizon.  Behind them lay the dense forest through
which they had passed.  The forest also curved round to their left, and
stretched away, apparently unbroken, on to still far-off mountains.

After they had breakfasted, packed their dried meat, and sallied forth
on the journey of another day, they walked in silence until they reached
the edge of the plain, where there was room to walk abreast.

"Now, comrades," said Mark Breezy, "we will go to the top of yon mound,
see how the land lies, and hold a council of war."

"Just so, cap'n; take our bearin's an' lay our course," assented
Hockins.

They soon reached the spot, and found the view from it unexpectedly
beautiful.  The whole landscape was clothed with tropical verdure.  Past
the foot of the mound ran a considerable stream, which opened out into a
series of lakelets in the hollows beyond, the waters of which seemed to
be the home of considerable numbers of wild-fowl,--but there was no sign
of the presence of man.

"Strange," said Mark, in a low voice, "that such a lovely scene should
have been created a solitude, with no one to profit by or enjoy it."

"Well now, sir," remarked the sailor, "d'ee know that same thought has
puzzled me now an' again; for although my purfession is the sea, I've
travelled a good bit on the land--specially in South America--and I've
seen miles on miles o' splendid country, that made me think of Adam an'
Eve in paradise, with never a soul, as you say, to make use of or enjoy
it.  I've often wondered what it was all made for!"

"Don't you tink," said Ebony, with his head a little on one side, and
his earnest eyes betraying the sincerity of his nature, "don't you tink
dat p'r'aps de ducks an' geese, an' sitch-like, makes use ob an' enjoys
it? to say nuffin' oh de beasts, hinsects, an' fishes."

"You may be right, Ebony," returned Hockins, with an approving nod; "we
human being's is apt to think too much of ourselves.  Moreover, it has
come into my mind that Great Britain was a solitood once--or much about
it--an' it's anything but that now; so mayhap them lands will be
swarmin' wi' towns an' villages some day or other.  What d'ee think,
Doctor?"

But the young doctor said nothing, for while his companions were thus
indulging in speculations, he was anxiously considering what course they
should pursue.

"You see, comrades," he said, turning to them abruptly, "if we go to the
right and traverse this fine country we may very likely fall in with
villages, but the villagers may be savages, like those we met on the
coast.  On the other hand, if we go to the left, we shall have to
