Perhaps the fullest account of the country yet given is that contained
in "The Narrative of a Residence of Six Years on the Western Slopes of
the Rocky Mountains," by Ross Cox, one of the earliest explorers of
British North America.  He says, "The district of New Caledonia extends
from 51 degrees 30 minutes north latitude to about 56 degrees.  Its
extreme western boundary is 124 degrees 10 minutes.  Its principal
trading post is called Alexandria, after the celebrated traveller Sir
Alexander Mackenzie.  It is built on the banks of Fraser River, in about
latitude 53 degrees north.  The country in its immediate vicinity
presents a beautiful and picturesque appearance.  The banks of the river
are rather low; but a little distance inland some rising grounds are
visible, partially diversified by groves of fir and poplar.  This
country is full of small lakes, rivers, and marshes.  It extends about
ten days' march in a north and north-east direction.  To the south and
south-east the Atnah, or Chin Indian country, extends about one hundred
miles; on the east there is a chain of lakes, and the mountains
bordering Thompson River; while to the westward and north-west lie the
lands of the Naskotins and Clinches.  The lakes are numerous, and some
of them tolerably large: one, two, and even three days are at times
required to cross some of them.  They abound in a plentiful variety of
fish, such as trout, sucker, etcetera; and the natives assert that white
fish is sometimes taken.  These lakes are generally fed by mountain
streams, and many of them spread out, and are lost in the surrounding
marshes.  On the banks of the river, and in the interior, the trees
consist of poplar, cypress, alder, cedar, birch, and different species
of fir, spruce, and willow.  There is not the same variety of wild fruit
as on the Columbia; and this year (1827) the berries generally failed.
Service berries, choke-cherries, gooseberries, strawberries, and red
whortleberries are gathered; but among the Indians the service-berry is
the great favourite.  There are various kinds of roots, which the
natives preserve and dry for periods of scarcity.  There is only one
kind which we can eat.  It is called _Tza-chin_, has a bitter taste, but
when eaten with salmon imparts an agreeable zest, and effectually
destroys the disagreeable smell of that fish when smoke-dried.  Saint
John's wort is very common, and has been successfully applied as a
fomentation in topical inflammations.  A kind of weed, which the natives
convert into a species of flax, is in general demand.  An evergreen,
similar to that we found at the mouth of the Columbia, with small
berries growing in clusters like grapes, also flourishes in this
district.  Sarsaparilla and bear-root are found in abundance.  White
earth abounds in the vicinity of the fort; and one description of it,
mixed with oil and lime, might be converted into excellent soap.  Coal
in considerable quantities has been discovered; and in many places we
observed a species of red earth, much resembling lava, and which
appeared to be of volcanic origin.  We also found in different parts of
New Caledonia quartz, rock crystal, cobalt, talc, iron, marcasites of a
gold colour, granite, fuller's earth, some beautiful specimens of black,
marble, and limestone in small quantities, which appeared to have been
forced down the beds of the rivers from the mountains.  The
jumping-deer, or chevreuil, together with the rein and red-deer,
frequent the vicinity of the mountains in considerable numbers, and in
the summer season they oftentimes descend to the banks of the rivers and
the adjacent flat country.  The marmot and wood-rat also abound: the
flesh of the former is exquisite, and capital robes are made out of its
skin; but the latter is a very destructive animal.  Their dogs are of
diminutive size, and strongly resemble those of the Esquimaux, with the
curled up tail, small ears, and pointed nose.  We purchased numbers of
them for the kettle, their flesh constituting the chief article of food
in our holiday feasts for Christmas and New Year.  The fur-bearing
animals consist of beavers; bears, black, brown, and grizzly; otters,
fishers, lynxes, martins; foxes, red, cross, and silver; minks,
musquash, wolverines, and ermines.  Rabbits also are so numerous that
the natives manage to subsist on them during the periods that salmon is
scarce.  Under the head of ornithology we have the bustard, or Canadian
_outarde_ (wild goose), swans, ducks of various descriptions, hawks,
plovers, cranes, white-headed eagles, magpies, crows, vultures,
wood-thrush, red-breasted thrush or robin, woodpeckers, gulls, pelicans,
hawks, partridges, pheasants, and snow-birds.  The spring commences in
April, when the wild flowers begin to bud, and from thence to the latter
end of May the weather is delightful.  In June it rains incessantly,
with strong southerly and easterly winds.  During the months of July and
August the heat is intolerable; and in September the fogs are so dense
that it is quite impossible to distinguish the opposite side of the
river any morning before ten o'clock.  Colds and rheumatisms are
prevalent among the natives during this period: nor are our people
exempt from them.  In October the falling of the leaves and occasional
frost announce the beginning of winter.  The lakes and parts of the
rivers are frozen in November.  The snow seldoms exceeds twenty-four
inches in depth.  The mercury in Fahrenheit's thermometer falls in
January to 15 degrees below zero; but this does not continue many days.
In general, I may say, the climate is neither unhealthy nor unpleasant;
and if the natives used common prudence, they would undoubtedly live to
an advanced age.  The salmon fishery commences about the middle of July,
and ceases in October.  This is a busy period for the natives; for upon
their industry in saving a sufficiency of salmon for the winter depends
their chief support.  Jub, suckers, trout, and white-fish, are caught in
the lakes; and in the month of October, towards the close of the
salmon-fishery, we catch trout of a most exquisite flavour.  Large-sized
sturgeon are occasionally taken in the _vorveaux_, but they are not
relished by the natives."

Mr Dunn, in his valuable "History of the Oregon Territory," thus
describes the country and climate:--"After the Columbia, the river next
in importance is Fraser River.  It takes its rise in the Rocky
Mountains, near the source of Canoe River, taking a north-west course of
eighty miles.  It then turns to the southward, receiving Stuart's River,
which rises in a chain of lakes in the northern boundary of the
territory.  It then pursues a southerly course, and after receiving many
tributaries, breaks through the cascade range of hills in a series of
falls and rapids; and after a westerly course of seventy miles, empties
itself into the Gulf of Georgia, in latitude 49 degrees 7 minutes north.
This latter portion is navigable for vessels that can pass its bar
drawing ten feet of water.  Its whole length is 350 miles.  There are
numerous lakes scattered through the several sections.  The country is
all well watered; and there are but four places where an abundance of
water cannot be obtained, either from lakes, rivers, or springs.

"The climate of the western division is mild throughout the year,
neither the cold of winter, nor the heat of summer predominating.  The
mean temperature is about 50 degrees Fahrenheit.  The prevailing winds,
in summer, are from the northward and westward, and in winter, from the
west, south, and south-east.  The winter lasts from about November till
March, generally speaking.  During that time there are frequent falls of
rain, but not heavy.  Snow seldoms lies longer than a week on the
ground.  There are frosts so early as September, but they are not
severe, and do not continue long.  The easterly winds are the coldest,
as they come from across the mountains, but they are not frequent.
Fruit trees blossom early in April in the neighbourhood of Nasqually and
Vancouver; and in the middle of May pease are a foot high, and
strawberries in full blossom; indeed, all fruits and vegetables are as
early there as in England.  The hills, though of great declivity, have a
sward to their tops.  Lieutenant Wilkes says, that out of 106 days, 67
were fair, 19 cloudy, and 11 rainy.  The middle section is subject to
droughts.  During summer the atmosphere is drier and warmer, and in
winter colder than in the western section; its extremes of heat and cold
being greater and more frequent.  However, the air is fine and healthy;
the atmosphere in summer being cooled by the breezes that blow from the
Pacific.

"The soil of the western section varies from a deep black vegetable loam
to a light brown loamy earth.  The bills are generally basalt stone and
slate.  The surface is generally undulating, well watered, well wooded,
and well adapted for agriculture and pasturage.  The timber consists of
pine, fir, spruce, oaks (white and red), ash, arbutus, cedar,
arbor-vitae, poplar, maple, willow, cherry, tew, with underwoods of
hazel and roses.  All kinds of grain, wheat, rice, barley, oats, and
pease, can be procured there in abundance.  Various fruits, such as
pears, apples, etcetera, succeed there admirably; and the different
vegetables produced in England yield there most abundant crops.

"The middle section, which is about 1000 feet above the level of the
western, is not so well wooded or fertile; yet in the southern parts of
it, where the missionaries have established settlements, they have
raised excellent crops, and reared large stocks of cattle.
Notwithstanding the occasional cold, their cattle are not housed, nor is
provender laid in for them in any quantity, the country being
sufficiently supplied with fodder in the natural hay, that is everywhere
abundant in the prairies, which the cattle prefer."

Mr Wilkes says, "In comparison with the United States, I would say,
that the labour necessary in this territory to acquire wealth or
subsistence is in the proportion of one to three; or in other words, a
man must work throughout the year three times as much in the United
States to gain the like competency.  The care of stock, which requires
so much time with us, requires no attention there, and on the increase
only, a man might find support."  He further says, "There will be also a
demand for the timber of this country at high prices, throughout the
Pacific.  The oak is well adapted for ship timber, and abundance of ash,
cedar, cypress, and arbor-vitae may be had for other purposes, building,
fuel, fencing," etcetera.  He also adds, "No part of the world affords
finer inland sounds, or a greater number of harbours, than are found
within the Straits of Juan de Fuca, capable of receiving the highest
class of vessels, and without a danger in them which is not viable.
From the rise and fall of the tides (eighteen feet) every facility is
afforded for the erection of works for a great maritime nation.  The
country also affords as many sites for maritime power as any other."

On the northern coast there are a number of islands which belong to the
territory.  The largest are Vancouver's Island, and Queen Charlotte
Island, both of which enjoy a mild and salubrious climate, with a soil
well adapted to agriculture.  They have also an abundance of fine fish
in their waters.  Coal of a very good quality is found there close by
the surface, and they also contain numerous veins of valuable minerals.

All the rivers abound in salmon of the finest quality, which run twice a
year, beginning in May and October, and appear inexhaustible.  In Fraser
River, the salmon are very numerous.  The bays and inlets abound with
several kinds of salmon, sturgeon, cod, carp, sole, flounders, perch,
herring, and eels; also with shell-fish--crabs, oysters, etcetera.
Whales and sea otters in numbers are found along the coast, and are
frequently captured by Indians, in and at the mouth of the Straits of
Juan de Fuca.

Game abounds in the western section, such as elk, deer, antelopes,
bears, wolves, foxes, musk-rats, martins.  And in the spring and fall,
the rivers are covered with geese, ducks, and other water-fowl.  Towards
the Rocky Mountains buffaloes are found in great numbers.

From the advantages this country possesses, it bids fair to have an
extensive commerce, on advantageous terms, with most parts of the
Pacific.  It is well calculated to produce the following staple
commodities,--furs, salted beef and pork, grain, flour, wool, hides,
tallow, timber, and coals.  And in return for these--sugars, coffee, and
other tropical productions may be obtained at the Sandwich Islands.
Advantages that in time must become of immense importance.

Those districts of British America west of the lakes which by soil and
climate are suitable for settlement, may be thus enumerated:--

Vancouver's Island 16,200 square miles.

Fraser and Thomson Rivers 60,000 ditto

Sources of the Upper Columbia 20,000 ditto

Athabasca District 50,000 ditto

Saskatchewan, Red River, Assineboin, etcetera. 360,000 ditto

506,200

Under these geographical divisions we propose to give the results of a
parliamentary investigation (just published) into the affairs of the
Hudson's Bay Company, so far as they are descriptive of the foregoing
districts:--

VANCOUVER'S ISLAND.

This island is fertile, well timbered, finely diversified by
intersecting mountain ranges, and small prairies, with extensive coal
fields, compared by one witness to the West Riding of Yorkshire coal,
and fortunate in its harbours.  Esquimault Harbour, on which Victoria is
situated, is equal to San Francisco.  The salmon and other fisheries are
excellent; but this advantage is shared by every stream and inlet of the
adjacent coast.  The climate is frequently compared with England, except
that it is even warmer.  The winter is stormy, with heavy rains in
November and December; frosts occur in the lowlands in January, but
seldom interrupt agriculture; vegetation starts in February, rapidly
progressing in March and fostered by alternate warm showers and sunshine
in April and May--while intense heat and drought are often experienced
during June, July, and August.  As already remarked, the island has an
area of 16,200 square miles.

FRASER AND THOMPSON RIVERS.

Northward of Vancouver's Island the coast range of mountains trends so
near the Pacific as to obstruct intercourse with the interior, but
"inside," in the language of a witness, "it is a fine open country."
This is the valley of Fraser River.  Ascending this river, near Fort
Langley, "a large tract of land" is represented as "adapted to
colonists;" while of Thomson River, the same witness says that it is
"one of the most beautiful countries in the world"--"climate capable of
producing all the crops of England, and much milder than Canada."  The
sources of Fraser River, in latitude 55 degrees, are separated from
those of Peace River (which flows through the Rocky Mountains, eastward,
into the Athabasca) by the distance of only 317 yards.

SOURCES OF THE COLUMBIA.

A glance at the map will shew how considerable a district of British
Oregon is watered by the Upper Columbia and its tributary, the
McGillivray or Flat Bow river.  It is estimated above at 20,000 square
miles, and has been described in enthusiastic terms, by the Bishop of
Oregon--De Smet--in his "Oregon Missions."  The territory of the
Kootonais Indians would seem, from his glowing description, to be
divided in favourable proportion between forests and prairies.  Of
timber, he names birch, pine of different species, cedar, and cypress.
He remarked specimens of coal, and "great quantities of lead,"
apparently mixed with silver.  The source of the Columbia seemed to
impress him as "a very important point."  He observes that "the climate
is delightful"--that the extremes of heat and cold are seldom known, the
snow disappearing as it falls.  He reiterates the opinion "that the
advantages nature seemed to have bestowed on the Columbia, will render
its geographical position very important at some future day, and that
the hand of civilised man would transform it into a terrestrial
paradise."

It is an interesting coincidence that Bishop De Smet published in a
Saint Louis paper, a few months since, a similar description of this
region, adding that it could be reached from Salt Lake City along the
western base of the Rocky Mountains with waggons, and that Brigham Young
proposed to lead his next Mormon exodus to the sources of the Columbia
River.  Such a movement is not improbable, and would exhibit far greater
sagacity than an emigration to Sonora.

THE ATHABASCA DISTRICT.

The valleys of the Peace and Athabasca Rivers, which occupy the eastern
base of the Rocky Mountains from latitudes 55 degrees to 59 degrees
share the Pacific climate in a remarkable degree.  The Rocky Mountains
are greatly reduced in breadth and mean elevation, and through the
numerous passes between their lofty peaks the winds of the Pacific reach
the district in question.  Hence it is that Sir Alexander Mackenzie,
under date of 10th May, mentions the "exuberant verdure of the whole
country"--trees about to blossom, and buffalo attended by their young.
During the late parliamentary investigation, similar statements were
elicited.  Dr Richard King, who accompanied an expedition in search of
Sir John Ross, as "surgeon and naturalist," was asked what portion of
the country he saw was available for the purpose of settlement.  In
reply, he described as a "very fertile valley," a "square piece of
country," bounded on the south by Cumberland House, and by the Athabasca
Lake on the north.  His own words are as follows:--"The sources of the
Athabasca and the sources of the Saskatchewan include an enormous area
of country; it is, in fact, a vast piece of land surrounded by water.
When I heard Dr Livingstone's description of that splendid country
which he found in the interior of Africa within the equator, it appeared
to me to be precisely the kind of country which I am now describing. ...
It is a rich soil interspersed with well-wooded country, there being
growth of every kind and the whole vegetable kingdom alive."  When asked
concerning mineral productions, his reply was,--"I do not know of any
other mineral except limestone; this is apparent in all directions. ...
The birch, the beech, and the maple are in abundance, and there is every
sort of fruit."  When questioned further as to the growth of trees, Dr
King replied by a comparison "with the magnificent trees round
Kensington Park in London."  He described a farm near Cumberland House
under very successful cultivation--"luxuriant wheat"--potatoes, barley,
pigs, cows and horses.

SASKATCHEWAN, ASSINEBOIN, AND RED RIVER DISTRICT.

The area of this continent, north-west of Minnesota, and known as the
Saskatchewan district, is estimated by English authorities to comprise
368,000 square miles.  North-west from Otter Tail Lake, the geographical
centre of Minnesota, extends a vast silurian formation, bounded on the
west along the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains by coal measures.
Such a predominance of limestone implies fertility of soil, as in the
north-western States, and the speedy colonisation of Saskatchewan would
be assured if the current objection to the severity of climate was
removed.  On this point a few facts will be presented.

The Sea of Azof, which empties into the Black Sea, forming the eastern
border of the Crimean peninsula, freezes about the beginning of
November, and is seldom open before the beginning of April.  A point
less than one hundred miles north, but far down in southern Russia,
namely, Catherineoslay, has been found, from the observation of many
years, to be identical in summer and winter climate with Fort Spelling.
Nine-tenths of European Russia, therefore, the main seat of population
and resources, is further north than Saint Paul.  In fact, Pembina is
the climatic equivalent of Moscow, and for that of Saint Petersburg,
(which is 60 degrees north), we may reasonably go to latitude 55 degrees
on the American continent.

Like European Russia, also, the Saskatchewan district has a climate of
extremes--the thermometer having a wide range; but it is well understood
that the growth of the cereals and of the most useful vegetables depends
chiefly on the intensity and duration of the summer heats, and is
comparatively little influenced by the severity of winter cold, or the
lowness of the mean temperature during the year.  Therefore it is
important to observe that the northern shore of Lake Huron has the mean
summer heat of Bordeaux, in southern France, or 70 degrees Fahrenheit;
while Cumberland House, in latitude 54 degrees, longitude 102 degrees,
on the Saskatchewan, exceeds in this respect Brussels and Paris.

The United States Army Meteorological Register has ascertained that the
line of 70 degrees mean summer heat crosses the Hudson River at West
Point, thence descends to the latitude of Pittsburg, but, westward, is
traced through Sandusky, Chicago, Fort Snelling, and Fort Union, near
latitude 49 degrees, into British America.  The average annual heat at
Quebec is experienced as far north as latitude 52 degrees in the
Saskatchewan country.

Mr Blodget states that not only all the vicinity of the south branch of
the Saskatchewan is as mild in climate as Saint Paul, but that the north
branch of that river is almost equally favourable, and that the
ameliorating influence of the Pacific, through the gorges of the Rocky
Mountains, is so far felt on Mackenzie's River, that wheat may be grown
in its valley nearly to the 65th parallel.

In the foregoing account of the districts of the _interior_, we have
given faithfully, as in duty bound, the _fact_ that have been elicited
in the various investigations, public and otherwise, that have taken
place.  At the same time, we think it but fair to state, that large
portions of these fine districts, especially the Athabasca and
Saskatchewan, are at present very far beyond the reach of any civilised
market, and overrun by hordes of warlike Indians.

We have thus given a brief survey of the position and resources, of the
territory surrounding the new El Dorado.  One observation we may be
permitted to hazard.  Perhaps there is no more striking illustration of
the wisdom of that Providence which presides over the management of our
affairs, than in the fact that emigration was first led to the eastern
coast, rather than to the slopes or plains of the west.  Had the latter
been first occupied, it is doubtful whether the rocks and lagoons of the
seaboard would ever have been settled.  No man would have turned from
