it, might well feel confident in the valour of his troops. His envoys,
on arriving at the French camp, found that Phillip had apparently
changed his mind. He declined to discuss the matter with which they were
charged, and spoke only of the terms upon which Edward would be willing
to raise the siege of Calais. As they had no authority on this subject
the English knights returned to their camp, where the news was received
with great disappointment, so confident did all feel in their power
to defeat the huge host of the French. But even greater was the
astonishment the next morning when, before daylight, the tents of the
French were seen in one great flame, and it was found that the king and
all his host were retreating at full speed. The Earls of Lancaster and
Northampton, with a large body of horse at once started in pursuit, and
harassed the retreating army on its march towards Amiens.

No satisfactory reasons ever have been assigned for this extraordinary
step on the part of the French king. He had been for months engaged in
collecting a huge army, and he had now an opportunity of fighting the
English in a fair field with a force four times as great as their own.
The only means indeed of accounting for his conduct is by supposing him
affected by temporary aberration of mind, which many other facts in his
history render not improbable. The fits of rage so frequently recorded
of him border upon madness, and a number of strange actions highly
detrimental to his own interests which he committed can only be
accounted for as the acts of a diseased mind. This view has been to some
extent confirmed by the fact that less than half a century afterwards
insanity declared itself among his descendants.

A few hours after the departure of the French the French standard was
lowered on the walls of Calais, and news was brought to Edward that
the governor was upon the battlements and desired to speak with some
officers of the besieging army. Sir Walter Manny and Lord Bisset were
sent to confer with him, and found that his object was to obtain the
best terms he could. The English knights, knowing the determination of
the king on the subject, were forced to tell him that no possibility
existed of conditions being granted, but that the king demanded their
unconditional surrender, reserving to himself entirely the right whom to
pardon and whom to put to death.

The governor remonstrated on the severe terms, and said that rather
than submit to them he and his soldiers would sally out and die sword in
hand. Sir Walter Manny found the king inexorable. The strict laws of war
in those days justified the barbarous practise of putting to death the
garrison of a town captured under such circumstances. Calais had been
for many years a nest of pirates, and vessels issuing from its port had
been a scourge to the commerce of England and Flanders, and the king was
fully determined to punish it severely. Sir Walter Manny interceded long
and boldly, and represented to the king that none of his soldiers would
willingly defend a town on his behalf from the day on which he put to
death the people of Calais, as beyond doubt the French would retaliate
in every succeeding siege. The other nobles and knights joined their
entreaties to those of Sir Walter Manny, and the king finally consented
to yield in some degree. He demanded that six of the most notable
burghers of the town, with bare heads and feet, and with ropes about
their necks and the keys of the fortress in their hands, should deliver
themselves up for execution. On these conditions he agreed to spare the
rest. With these terms Sir Walter Manny returned to Sir John of Vienne.

The governor left the battlements, and proceeding to the market-place
ordered the bell to be rung. The famished and despairing citizens
gathered a haggard crowd to hear their doom. A silence followed the
narration of the hard conditions of surrender by the governor, and sobs
and cries alone broke the silence which succeeded. Then Eustace St.
Pierre, the wealthiest and most distinguished of the citizens, came
forward and offered himself as one of the victims, saying, "Sad pity and
shame would it be to let all of our fellow-citizens die of famine or the
sword when means could be found to save them." John of Aire, James
and Peter De Vissant, and another whose name has not come down to us,
followed his example, and stripping to their shirts set out for the
camp, Sir John of Vienne, who, from a late wound, was unable to walk,
riding at their head on horseback. The whole population accompanied them
weeping bitterly until they came to the place where Sir Walter Manny was
awaiting them. Here the crowd halted, and the knight, promising to do
his best to save them, led them to the tent where the king had assembled
all his nobles around him. When the tidings came that the burghers of
Calais had arrived, Edward issued out with his retinue, accompanied by
Queen Philippa and the Black Prince.

"Behold, Sire," Sir Walter Manny said, "the representatives of the town
of Calais!"

The king made no reply while John of Vienne surrendered his sword, and
kneeling with the burghers, said, "Gentle lord and king; behold, we six
who were once the greatest citizens and merchants of Calais, bring you
the keys of the town and castle, and give ourselves up to your pleasure,
placing ourselves in the state in which you see us by our own free-will
to save the rest of the people of the city, who have already suffered
many ills. We pray you, therefore, to have pity and mercy upon us for
the sake of your high nobleness."

All present were greatly affected at this speech, and at the aspect of
men who thus offered their lives for their fellow-citizens. The king's
countenance alone remained unchanged, and he ordered them to be taken to
instant execution. Then Sir Walter Manny and all the nobles with tears
besought the king to have mercy, not only for the sake of the citizens,
but for that of his own fame, which would be tarnished by so cruel a
deed.

"Silence, Sir Walter!" cried the king. "Let the executioner be called.
The men of Calais have put to death so many of my subjects that I will
also put these men to death."

At this moment Queen Philippa, who had been weeping bitterly, cast
herself upon her knees before the king. "Oh, gentle lord," she cried,
"since I have repassed the seas to see you I have neither asked or
required anything at your hand; now, then, I pray you humbly, and
require as a boon, that for the sake of the Son of Mary, and for the
love of me, you take these men to mercy."

The king stood for a moment in silence, and then said:

"Ah! lady, I would that you had been other where than here; but you beg
of me so earnestly I must not refuse you, though I grant your prayer
with pain. I give them to you; take them, and do your will."

Then the queen rose from her knees, and bidding the burghers rise, she
caused clothing and food to be given them, and sent them away free.

Sir Walter Manny, with a considerable body of men-at-arms, now took
possession of the town of Calais. The anger of the king soon gave way
to better feelings; all the citizens, without exception, were fed by his
bounty. Such of them as preferred to depart instead of swearing fealty
to the English monarch were allowed to carry away what effects they
could bear upon their persons and were conducted in safety to the
French town of Guisnes. Eustace de St. Pierre was granted almost all
the possessions he had formerly held in Calais, and also a considerable
pension; and he and all who were willing to remain were well and kindly
treated. The number was large, for the natural indignation which they
felt at their base desertion by the French king induced very many of
the citizens to remain and become subjects of Edward. The king issued a
proclamation inviting English traders and others to come across and take
up their residence in Calais, bestowing upon them the houses and lands
of the French who had left. Very many accepted the invitation, and
Calais henceforth and for some centuries became virtually an English
town.

A truce was now, through the exertions of the pope's legates, made
between England and France, the terms agreed on being very similar
to those of the previous treaty; and when all his arrangements were
finished Edward returned with his queen to England, having been absent
eighteen months, during which time almost unbroken success had attended
his arms, and the English name had reached a position of respect and
honour in the eyes of Europe far beyond that at which it previously
stood.



CHAPTER XVIII: THE BLACK DEATH



The court at Westminster during the few months which followed the
capture of Calais was the most brilliant in Europe. Tournaments and
fetes followed each other in rapid succession, and to these knights came
from all parts. So great was the reputation of King Edward that deputies
came from Germany, where the throne was now vacant, to offer the crown
of that kingdom to him. The king declined the offer, for it would have
been impossible indeed for him to have united the German crown with that
of England, which he already held, and that of France, which he claimed.

Some months after his return to England the Black Prince asked his
father as a boon that the hand of his ward Edith Vernon should be
bestowed upon the prince's brave follower Sir Walter Somers, and as
Queen Philippa, in the name of the lady's mother, seconded the request,
the king at once acceded to it. Edith was now sixteen, an age at which,
in those days, a young lady was considered to be marriageable, and the
wedding took place with great pomp and ceremony at Westminster; the
king himself giving away the bride, and bestowing, as did the prince and
Queen Philippa, many costly presents upon the young couple. After taking
part in several of the tournaments, Walter went with his bride and Dame
Vernon down to their estates, and were received with great rejoicing
by the tenantry, the older of whom well remembered Walter's father and
mother, and were rejoiced at finding that they were again to become the
vassals of one of the old family. Dame Vernon was greatly loved by her
tenantry; but the latter had looked forward with some apprehension to
the marriage of the young heiress, as the character of the knight upon
whom the king might bestow her hand would greatly affect the happiness
and well being of his tenants.

Sir James Carnegie had not returned to England after the fall of Calais;
he perceived that he was in grave disfavour with the Black Prince,
and guessed, as was the case, that some suspicion had fallen on him
in reference to the attack upon Walter in the camp, and to the strange
attempt which had been made to destroy him by Sir Phillip Holbeaut. He
had, therefore, for a time taken service with the Count of Savoy, and
was away from England, to the satisfaction of Walter and Dame Vernon,
when the marriage took place; for he had given proofs of such a
malignity of disposition that both felt, that although his succession to
the estates was now hopelessly barred, yet that he might at any moment
attempt some desperate deed to satisfy his feeling of disappointment and
revenge.

In spite of the gaiety of the court of King Edward a cloud hung over the
kingdom; for it was threatened by a danger far more terrible than any
combination of foes--a danger which no gallantry upon the part of her
king or warriors availed anything. With a slow and terrible march the
enemy was advancing from the East, where countless hosts had been slain.
India, Arabia, Syria, and Armenia had been well-nigh depopulated. In no
country which the dread foe had invaded had less than two-thirds of the
population been slain; in some nine-tenths had perished. All sorts of
portents were reported to have accompanied its appearance in the East;
where it was said showers of serpents had fallen, strange and unknown
insects had appeared in the atmosphere, and clouds of sulphurous vapour
had issued from the earth and enveloped whole provinces and countries.
For two or three years the appearance of this scourge had been heralded
by strange atmospheric disturbances; heavy rains and unusual floods,
storms of thunder and lightning of unheard-of violence, hail-showers
of unparalleled duration and severity, had everywhere been experienced,
while in Italy and Germany violent earthquake shocks had been felt, and
that at places where no tradition existed of previous occurrences of the
same kind.

From Asia it had spread to Africa and to Europe, affecting first the
sea-shores and creeping inland by the course of the rivers. Greece first
felt its ravages, and Italy was not long in experiencing them. In Venice
more than 100,000 persons perished in a few months, and thence spreading
over the whole peninsula, not a town escaped the visitation. At Florence
60,000 people were carried off, and at Lucca and Genoa, in Sicily,
Sardinia, and Corsica it raged with equal violence. France was assailed
by way of Provence, and Avignon suffered especially. Of the English
college at that place not an individual was left, and 120 persons died
in a single day in that small city. Paris lost upwards of 50,000 of its
inhabitants, while 90,000 were swept away in Lubeck, and 1,200,000 died
within a year of its first appearance in Germany.

In England the march of the pestilence westward was viewed with deep
apprehension, and the approaching danger was brought home to the people
by the death of the Princess Joan, the king's second daughter. She was
affianced to Peter, the heir to the throne of Spain; and the bride, who
had not yet accomplished her fourteenth year, was sent over to Bordeaux
with considerable train of attendants in order to be united there to
her promised husband. Scarcely had she reached Bordeaux when she was
attacked by the pestilence and died in a few hours. A few days later
the news spread through the country that the disease had appeared almost
simultaneously at several of the seaports in the south-west of England.
Thence with great rapidity it spread through the kingdom; proceeding
through Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire it broke out in London, and the
ravages were no less severe than they had been on the Continent, the
very lowest estimate being that two-thirds of the population were swept
away. Most of those attacked died within a few hours of the seizure. If
they survived for two days they generally rallied, but even then many
fell into a state of coma from which they never awoke.

No words can describe the terror and dismay caused by this the most
destructive plague of which there is any record in history. No remedies
were of the slightest avail against it; flight was impossible, for the
loneliest hamlets suffered as severely as crowded towns, and frequently
not a single survivor was left. Men met the pestilence in various moods:
the brave with fortitude, the pious with resignation, the cowardly and
turbulent with outbursts of despair and fury. Among the lower classes
the wildest rumours gained credence. Some assigned the pestilence to
witchcraft, others declared that the waters of the wells and streams had
been poisoned. Serious riots occurred in many places, and great numbers
of people fell victims to the fury of the mob under the suspicion of
being connected in some way with the ravages of the pestilence. The
Jews, ever the objects of popular hostility, engendered by ignorance
and superstition, were among the chief sufferers. Bands of marauders
wandered through the country plundering the houses left empty by the
death of all their occupants, and from end to end death and suffering
were universal.

Although all classes had suffered heavily the ravages of the disease
were, as is always the case, greater among the poor than among the rich,
the insanitary conditions of their life, and their coarser and commoner
food rendering them more liable to its influence; no rank, however, was
exempted, and no less than three Archbishops of Canterbury were carried
off in succession by the pestilence within a year of its appearance.

During the months which succeeded his marriage Sir Walter Somers lived
quietly and happily with his wife at Westerham. It was not until late
in the year that the plague approached the neighbourhood. Walter had
determined to await its approach there. He had paid a few short visits
to the court, where every effort was made by continuous gaiety to keep
up the spirits of the people and prevent them from brooding over the
approaching pestilence; but when it was at hand Walter and his wife
agreed that they would rather share the lot of their tenants, whom their
presence and example might support and cheer in their need, than
return to face it in London. One morning when they were at breakfast a
frightened servant brought in the news that the disease had appeared
in the village, that three persons had been taken ill on the previous
night, that two had already died, and that several others had sickened.

"The time has come, my children," Dame Vernon said calmly, "the danger
so long foreseen is at hand, now let us face it as we agreed to do. It
has been proved that flight is useless, since nowhere is there escape
from the plague; here, at least, there shall be no repetition of the
terrible scenes we have heard of elsewhere, where the living have fled
in panic and allowed the stricken to die unattended. We have already
agreed that we will set the example to our people by ourselves going
down and administering to the sick."

"It is hard," Walter said, rising and pacing up and down the room, "to
let Edith go into it."

"Edith will do just the same as you do," his wife said firmly. "Were it
possible that all in this house might escape, there might be a motive
for turning coward, but seeing that no household is spared, there is, as
we agreed, greater danger in flying from the pestilence than facing it
firmly."

Walter sighed.

"You are right," he said, "but it wrings my heart to see you place
yourself in danger."

"Were we out of danger here, Walter, it might be so," Edith replied
gently; "but since there is no more safety in the castle than in the
cottage, we must face death whether it pleases us or not, and it were
best to do so bravely."

"So be it," Walter said; "may the God of heaven watch over us all!
Now, mother, do you and Edith busy yourselves in preparing broths,
strengthening drinks, and medicaments. I will go down at once to the
village and see how matters stand there and who are in need. We have
already urged upon all our people to face the danger bravely, and if
die they must, to die bravely like Christians, and not like coward dogs.
When you have prepared your soups and cordials come down and meet me
in the village, bringing Mabel and Janet, your attendants, to carry the
baskets."

Ralph, who was now installed as major-domo in the castle, at once set
out with Walter. They found the village in a state of panic. Women were
sitting crying despairingly at their doors. Some were engaged in packing
their belongings in carts preparatory to flight, some wandered aimlessly
about wringing their hands, while others went to the church, whose bells
were mournfully tolling the dirge of the departed. Walter's presence
soon restored something like order and confidence; his resolute tone
cheered the timid and gave hope to the despairing. Sternly he rebuked
those preparing to fly, and ordered them instantly to replace their
goods in their houses. Then he went to the priest and implored him to
cause the tolling of the bell to cease.

"There is enough," he said, "in the real danger present to appall even
the bravest, and we need no bell to tell us that death is among us. The
