either.  It would not be difficult to show, that different kinds of dogs
have sprung from different kinds of animals--that is, animals of the
same great family--from wolves, foxes, jackals, zerdas, and even hyenas.
This can be proved from the fact, that domesticated breeds among savage
tribes, both in Asia and America, are undoubtedly the descendants of
wolves and jackals: such, for instance, as the Esquimaux dog of the
Arctic regions, the Dingo of Australia, the Indian dogs of North
America--of which there are several varieties--and also one or two kinds
existing in Mexico and South America.

Naturalists deny that there are any true dogs living in a wild state.
This is simply an unreasonable assertion.  Wild dogs of several species
are to be met with in Asia and America; and if it be asserted that these
originally came from a domesticated stock, the same cannot be said of
the hunting dog of Southern Africa--which is neither more nor less than
a _wild hound_.

Perhaps none of the animals that have submitted to the conquest of man
have branched off into a greater number of varieties than this one.
There are more kinds than either of horses or oxen.  We shall not,
therefore, attempt a description of each; but limit ourselves to speak
of those breeds that are the most remarkable--or rather those with which
the reader is supposed to be least familiar.  To describe such varieties
as the spaniel, the greyhound, the mastiff, or the terrier, would not
add much to the knowledge which the English reader already possesses.

One of the most remarkable of dogs is the huge mastiff of Tibet.  He is
long-haired, and usually of a jet black colour.  He is quite a match in
size for either the Newfoundland or San Bernard breeds, and not unlike
one or the other--for it may be remarked, that these in many points
resemble each other.

The Tibet dog, as his name implies, is the property of the Tibetians:
especially the Bhootees--the same people who own that curious species of
cattle, the _Yak_, or grunting ox, and who reside on the northern slopes
of the Himalaya mountains.  It may be inferred, therefore, that the
Tibet dog affects a cold climate; and such is in reality the case.  He
cannot bear heat; and does not thrive, even in the kingdom of Nepaul.
Attempts to introduce the breed into England have resulted in failure:
the animals brought hither having died shortly after their arrival.

The masters of these dogs--the Bhootees, or Bhoteas, are a singular
race, of a ruddy copper colour, rather short in stature, but of
excellent disposition.  Their clothing consists of furs and woollen
cloths, adapted to the cold climate which they inhabit.  The men till
the ground, and keep yaks and sheep, and sometimes come down into the
warm plains to trade--penetrating even to Calcutta.  The women remain at
home, their only protectors being these great dogs, who watch faithfully
over their villages and encampments, and fly fiercely at any stranger
who may approach them.  It is said that they are especially hostile to
people who have a _white_ face; but this disposition is also
characteristic of the dogs belonging to the American Indians--and
perhaps those possessed by all savages with a coloured skin.

The Dingo, or dog of Australia, is an animal domesticated among the
aborigines of that country.  He is a dog of wolf-like shape, who does
not bark, but utters only a mournful howling.  He is used by the
wretched natives both for the chase and as an article of food; and is a
fierce and voracious creature--not hesitating to launch himself on the
larger kinds of animals.  He is especially employed in hunting the
kangaroo; and sometimes terrible combats occur between the dingo and the
larger species of kangaroos--resulting always in the death of the
latter.

The San Bernard dog, supposed to be a cross between the mastiff and
shepherd's dog, is too celebrated to require a description here.  His
sagacity in discovering travellers amid the Alpine snows, and guiding
them upon their path, is the quality upon which the fame of this dog has
been founded; but it may be remarked that many of the feats attributed
to him have their origin in the fertile fancies of Parisian writers.

The Esquimaux dog is another celebrated variety.  He is an animal with a
fox-like face and thick coat of whitish hair, generally tinged with
yellow.  He is to the Esquimaux a most valuable companion: trained to
draw their sledges over the surface of the snow, and enabling them to
make long and rapid journeys--without which these singular people would
be ofttimes in danger of perishing amid the inhospitable regions they
inhabit.

The Indians of North America possess two or three varieties of
domesticated dogs, evidently derived from the wolves of that region.
Indeed, the common Indian dogs, found among the Sioux and other northern
tribes, bear so close a resemblance to the large American wolf, that
they are often taken for this animal, and in consequence shot, or
otherwise killed by mistake.  The Indians use them for carrying burdens:
their tents and tent poles being transported by these animals on long
journeys across the prairies.  Their flesh is a favourite article of the
savage _cuisine_; but it is too costly to be used as an every-day food;
and is only served up on grand festive occasions.  Like the dogs of
Tibet, these Indian wolf dogs have the greatest antipathy to a white
skin; so much so, that even a friend in that guise can rarely obtain
either their confidence or friendship.

A smaller kind than the common one is found among certain tribes, and
appears to have derived its origin from the prairie wolf--the jackal of
America--while the Hare Indians of the Rocky Mountains possess a third
variety; and it is known that still another exists among the tribes of
Russian America.  This last is short-haired and smooth-coated: therefore
differing altogether from the Indian dogs of the prairies.

In Mexico, there are two or three native dogs: found there on the
arrival of Europeans.  One is the _Alco_--a dog remarkable for a curious
hunch or protuberance upon the back and shoulders, a thick short neck,
and small pointed muzzle.  He is thinly covered with long hair, of a
yellowish colour.

Another singular variety is the dog of Chihuahua and this is, perhaps,
the smallest of all canine creatures.  Full-grown specimens have been
seen, whose dimensions did not exceed those of the common rat; and a
singular fact, well authenticated, is, that this dog, when transported
from Chihuahua to any other place--even to the city of Mexico itself--
invariably becomes larger, or degenerates, as the Mexicans have it!
There is also in Mexico a hairless dog.  It is, no doubt, the same as
that known by the name of Turkish dog; since this variety came
originally from Spanish America.

In South America, there are several species of native dogs, found among
the savages of the Orinoco and Amazon.  They are small animals, usually
of a whitish colour: but their owners follow the curious practice of
dyeing them with annatto, indigo, and other brilliant dyes, for the
purpose of rendering them more ornamental!

We can only find space to say that there are many other varieties of
domesticated dogs, almost unknown beyond the countries in which they are
found.  Such are the _Quao_ of Rhamgur, the Sumatran dog, the _Poull_ of
New Ireland, the dogs of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego--those of the
South Sea Islands; and the _Waht_ that inhabits some of the ranges of
the Himalayas.

It is reasonable to suppose that there is not a nation upon earth,
hardly a tribe--civilised or savage--that does not possess some variety
of the canine race differing from all the others.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

WILD DOGS.

By _Wild Dogs_, we mean not only several sorts of true dogs, that in
different parts of the world are found living in a wild state; but also
Wolves, Foxes, Jackals, Hyenas, and Fennecs--for all these are but dogs
in a state of nature.

First, we shall speak of the true dogs living in a wild state--that is,
apart from the society of man.

It is not necessary here to go into the often-debated question, as to
whether dogs were originally wolves, or what species of wolf the dog is
descended from.  This is all mere speculation, and answers no purpose.
It is just as likely that wolves sprang from dogs, as that dogs came
from wolves; and every one may perceive that two breeds of the dog
species are often far more unlike each other--both in appearance and
habits--than a dog is to a wolf itself.  Again, foxes differ only from
wolves in point of size; and a small wolf is in reality a fox, while a
large fox may be equally regarded as a wolf.  Furthermore, the jackal is
nothing else than another form of the same animal--the wolf or dog,
whichever you choose to term it; and the hyenas but a still _uglier_
shape of the same carnivorous creature.

With regard to the true wild dogs--which are not regarded as wolves--we
find them existing in various parts of the world.  They usually live in
communities, and have the habit of hounds--that is, they hunt in packs.
Whether they were originally dogs in a domesticated state, and have
since seceded from the society of man, is a question which naturalists
are unable to agree upon.

In India there are two or three kinds of wild dogs living thus.  One in
the Deccan--called Kolsun by the Mahratta people--is a reddish-coloured
animal, nearly as large as the common European wolf.  It dwells in the
forests, far remote from the villages--and of course lives by preying
upon other animals--just as wolves and foxes do.  Again, in the forests
of the Himalaya mountains there is another species of wild dog,
different from that of the Deccan.  It is usually known as the wild dog
of Nepaul, from its being found in many parts of that kingdom.  A large
community of these animals is often met with in the mountain forests--
living in caves, or at the bottoms of cliffs, where there are deep
crevices among the boulders of loose rocks, that afford them a secure
asylum when pursued by their enemies.  In these places the dogs sleep,
and bring forth their young; and the puppies are taught to be
exceedingly wary, and not stray far from their dens during the absence
of the mothers.  Indeed, so cunning do they become when only a few days
old, that it is difficult to capture one of them outside its
impenetrable lodging-place.

During many hours the old ones are abroad, in pursuit of the animals
upon whose flesh they subsist; and, as already stated, these dogs follow
their game not singly, but in bands or packs.  In this way, instinct
teaches them that they will have a better chance of success; since they
are more able to head the pursued animal, turn it in different
directions, and at length run it to the ground.  A curious fact is
related of the cunning of these wild dogs.  It is stated that when in
pursuit of the larger animals--such as stags and large antelopes that
inhabit the same district--instead of running them down at once, the
dogs manoeuvre so as to guide the game to their breeding place, before
giving the final _coup_ to the chase!  The object of this is to bring
the carcass within reach of their young; which, were it killed at a
great distance off, would be obviously impossible.  Such a habit as this
would prove them possessed of something more than instinct; but for all
that, it may be true.  A fact seems to confirm it: the fact that a large
quantity of bones is always observed in the immediate neighbourhood of
the breeding places--some of these being of such a size as to preclude
the belief that they could have been carried thither by the dogs
themselves.

In Ramghur there is a wild dog called Quao, or Quaw, which lives in
communities, just as those of Nepaul; and still another kind inhabits
the forests of the Island of Sumatra.

None of these kinds are to be confounded with the half-wild dogs of
India, called pariah dogs; since the latter, although not owned by
individuals, dwell in the villages, and of course associate with man.
Besides, the pariahs are of no particular breed--there being several
sorts of pariah dogs.  They are merely _outcast curs_, without owners,
that pick up a living as they best can.

Passing from India to the tropical countries of America, we find another
sort of wild dog in the forests of Guiana, known as the Koupara, or
Crab-dog.  It is not certain whether these dogs are indigenous to
Guiana, or the progeny of some domestic variety introduced by the
colonists.  They dwell in small troops or families, of six or seven
individuals each, and their food is furnished by the _pacas, agoutis_,
and other small rodent animals of tropical America.  They also find
sustenance in several kinds of crabs, which they adroitly capture upon
the banks of the rivers; and it is from their habit of feeding upon
these they have derived the name of crab-dogs.  They are easily tamed;
and when crossed with other breeds, a variety is produced which is
esteemed by the natives as the very best kind for the hunting of the
agoutis, cavies, and capibaras.

The wild dogs of the Cape country, called _Wilde Hunden_ (wild hounds)
by the Dutch, are usually regarded as near akin to the _hyenas_.  But
they are more like real wild hounds than hyenas; and their colour--which
is a mixture of black, white, and tan--almost points to them as the
progenitors of that variety of dog known as the hound.  Their habits,
too, would seem to confirm this hypothesis: for it is well-known that
these animals pursue their prey just after the manner of a pack of real
hounds--doubling upon it, and using every artifice to run it down.  The
numerous species of ruminant animals--the antelope in particular--are
the especial objects of their pursuit, and upon these they subsist.
Like the Indian wild dogs, they live in communities--using the burrows
of the wild hog and ant-eater, as also the hollow ant-hills, for their
lairs and breeding places.  Travellers passing across the plains of
South Africa have often witnessed the splendid spectacle of a pack of
these beautiful wild hounds in pursuit of a large antelope, and almost
fancied themselves looking at a stag hunt, with a kennel of real hounds
going at full view!

The true wild dog of all is that creature so well-known and celebrated
in all our tales of childhood--the _Wolf_.

To describe the wolf, or even to give an account of his habits, would be
superfluous.  Almost every one is acquainted with the gaunt form, the
shaggy hide, and tierce aspect of this formidable creature; and every
one has heard of his fierce and savage disposition: for who is ignorant
of the story of "Little Red Riding Hood?"

The presence of this much-disliked animal is almost universal: by which
I mean, that in some form or other he is represented in almost every
corner of the globe.  You may say there are no wolves in Africa; but
this is not true: for the hyenas are nothing more nor less than wolves,
and wolves of the very ugliest kind.

Fortunately wolves are no longer found in Britain, though they were once
plentiful enough in these islands; but all over the continent of Europe
there are still numerous wolves in the forests and mountains.

The Common Wolf, that is, the wolf of Europe, is the type of the family;
but this type offers many varieties--according to the different
localities in which it is found.  I shall here notice these varieties.

French wolves are generally browner and smaller than those of Germany;
and the wolves of Russia, Sweden, and Norway are still stronger animals,
and of a more sinister appearance.  These differ very much in colour,
which in winter is almost white.  Again, the Alpine wolves are smaller
than the French, and of a brownish-grey colour; while those of Italy and
Turkey have a yellowish tinge.  Black wolves are not uncommon,
especially in the Pyrenees of Spain; but whether these, as well as the
others, are all mere varieties of the common wolf, or whether there are
two or three distinct species of European wolf, are questions to be left
to the disputation of systematic naturalists.

Over all the continent of America, from the Arctic shores in the north
to Tierra del Fuego in the south, wolves are found; and here again there
are varieties in size, colour, and even habits, that may fairly entitle
the different kinds to rank as separate species.  Most certainly there
are distinct species, for that known as the Prairie Wolf, and also the
Coyote of Mexico, are two kinds that more resemble jackals than real
wolves.

Besides, other wolves of the American continent, as the Brown Wolf of
Mexico, the great Dusky Wolf of the Upper Missouri, the Aguara Dog of
South America, the Wild Dog of the Falkland Islands, the Fox Wolves of
Patagonia and Terra del Fuego, the Guazu of Paraguay and Chili, and the
North American Common Wolf--are all animals of such different appearance
and habits, that it is absurd to term them varieties of the same
species.  In Asia we have just the same series of varieties--that is, in
every part of the great continent is found some representative of the
tribe, which in reality is no variety, but an original and indigenous
animal of the wolf kind--such as the Sandgah, or Indian wolf of the
Himalayas; the Beriah, another Indian wolf; and the Derboom, a black
species that inhabits the mountains of Arabia and Syria.

In Africa the wolf is represented by the hyenas, of which there are at
least four species--one of them, the common hyena, belonging to the
northern half of the African continent, and extending its range into
several countries of Asia.  At the Cape, and northward into Central
Africa, three large species of hyena, and one small one (the Aard wolf),
represent the lupine family.  The Jackal, too--of which there are
several distinct kinds in Asia and Africa--is only a wolf of diminutive
size and gregarious habit.

This creature is fairly represented in America by the Coyote of Mexico,
and the Barking Wolf of the prairies; and in Asia, upon the steppes of
Tartary, by the Corsac.

Even in Australia, where new mammalia have turned up in such odd and
fantastic forms, the wolf has his congener in that curious creature
known as the Tasmanian wolf.

With regard to foxes, they, like the wolves, are distributed almost
universally over the globe; and exhibit a like variety of forms and
colours, according to the different localities which they inhabit.
Their name is legion.

As the smallest representatives of the wild dogs, we find in Africa the
curious little creatures known as the Fennecs.  Of these there are also
varieties; for, although very much alike in habits, the Fennecs of
Abyssinia and those of the Cape are evidently distinct species.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

CATS.

The Lion is the _king of cats_; though there are some who think that the
Tiger has a better claim to the _throne_.  In point of size and
strength, there is not much difference between these two animals.  The
lion _appears_ larger, on account of his shaggy mane; but specimens of
the tiger have been taken whose measurement was equal to that of the
largest lion.  Otherwise, the tiger is decidedly superior in courage, in
address, and in beauty; in fact, the royal tiger is one of the most
beautiful of animals; while the lion, notwithstanding the great fame he
enjoys, is among the very ugliest of brutes.

These two powerful creatures often meet in the jungles of India, and try
their strength in single combat.  It is not decided which is superior in
prowess, since victory is sometimes on one side and sometimes on the
other.  No doubt this depends on the individuals who may engage, for
lions are not all alike, nor tigers neither.  Both differ in strength
and courage, just as men do; and this difference is caused by a variety
of circumstances--such as age, size, season of the year, nature of the
country and climate, and many like contingencies.

Remember that the lion is found both in Asia and Africa, and nowhere
else.  He inhabits the whole of Africa, from the Cape to the shores of
the Mediterranean, and there are three well-marked varieties on that
continent.  In Asia he is only found in its southern part--that is, in
the tropical and sub-tropical regions; and there are also two or three
varieties of the Asiatic lion.

With regard to the tiger, he is altogether an Asiatic.  There are no
tigers in Europe, Africa, and America--of course we mean in their wild
state; and the stories of tiger-hunts in Africa and America, frequently
to be met with in books and newspapers, are the narratives of mere
ignorant travellers, who confound the royal tiger with several species
of spotted cats--of which we shall presently speak.  We may add that the
tiger, although exclusively Asiatic, is not exclusively tropical in his
haunts.  Tigers are more abundant in the hot jungles of India and some
of the larger islands of the Indian Ocean than elsewhere; but they have
also been observed far to the north of the Himalayan chain on the great
_steppes_ that extend almost to the confines of Siberia.

To continue the monarchical analogy; there are four cats that may be
called the princes of the family.  These are the _Jaguar_, the
_Leopard_, the _Panther_, and the _Hunting-leopard_ or _Cheetah_.  The
first of these is exclusively American; the other three, African and
Asiatic.  They are all four what are termed spotted cats; that is,
having black markings on a buff or yellowish ground.  I need not add
that they are all beautiful creatures.  A superficial observer would
easily mistake the one for the other; and in common phrase, they are
indifferently termed leopards, panthers, and even tigers; but the
naturalist, and even the _furrier_ knows that they are four distinct
species.

I shall endeavour to point out as briefly as possible some marks that
will enable _you_ to distinguish them.  In the spots we find a tolerably
good criterion of the species.  Those upon the body of the jaguar are
not spots, but rather what may be termed rosettes.  So, too, the black
markings of the leopard and panther are rosettes; that is, irregular
black rings enclosing an open space of the yellow ground.  On the
contrary, the spots upon the hunting-leopard are real spots, of a
uniform black; and, consequently, this animal is easily distinguished
from the other three.  He differs from them also in shape.  He is longer
in the legs, stands more upright upon them, and can run more swiftly
than any of the cat tribe.  In fact, he has a tendency towards the
nature and habits of the dog, and might be appropriately termed the
cat-dog, or the dog-cat, whichever you please.  It is on account of his
canine qualities that he is sometimes trained to the chase: hence his
specific name of the hunting-leopard.  He inhabits both Asia and Africa.

But how are the jaguar, leopard, and panther to be distinguished from
one another?  The jaguar easily enough from the other two.  His rosettes
have a black point in the centre, which is wanting in the rings of the
panther and leopard.  Besides, the jaguar is a larger and more powerful
animal.  Humboldt and others have observed specimens of the jaguar
nearly equal in dimensions to those of the royal tiger himself; and his
feats of fierce prowess, in the forests of Spanish America, are scarce
eclipsed by those of his congener in the jungles of India.  Human beings
are frequently his victims, and settlements have been abandoned on
account of the dangerous proximity of the jaguars.  His range in America
is pretty nearly co-terminal with the Spanish territories--including, of
course, Brazil and Guiana, and excluding the country of Patagonia, where
a smaller species takes his place.  In all these countries he is
misnamed tiger (_tigre_)--hence the anomalous stories to which we have
alluded.  We may add that there is a _black_ jaguar in tropical America,
just as there is a _black_ panther in Asia.  In neither case is it a
different species: only a variety as regards colour.  In all other
respects the black and yellow kinds are alike.  Even on the black ones
the spots are observable in a certain light, being of a deeper hue than
the general ground colour of the skin.

Thus, then, it is easy to distinguish a cheetah from a jaguar, or either
from a leopard or panther; but with regard to these last two, the
distinction is more difficult.  In fact, so much are they alike, that
the two species are confounded even by naturalists; and it is yet an
undecided point which is the leopard, and which the panther!  That there
are two distinct species is certain.  The London furrier knows that
there are two kinds of skins, which he distinguishes mainly by the feel;
but the learned zoologist, Temminck, has pointed out a difference in the
anatomical structure.  Both animals are natives of Africa, and both were
supposed to exist in Asia; but it is doubtful whether that known as the
leopard extends beyond the limits of the African continent.  The panther
is that one which is a little heavier in the body, more cat-like in
shape, and of a deeper yellow in the ground colour; but, perhaps, the
truest distinction is found in the tail, which is longer in the panther
than in the leopard, and consists of a greater number of vertebrae.

The panther is a well-known animal in India and the Asiatic islands;
and, as already stated, there is a dark-skinned variety, commonly known
as the Black Panther of Java.

Taking the cat family according to size, the next that deserves mention
is the Couguar, or Puma.  This is the panther of the Anglo-Americans,
and the lion (_leon_) of the Mexicans and South Americans.  His colour
is a uniform tawny red, or calf colour; and he is inferior to the jaguar
in size, strength, and courage.  Notwithstanding, he is a formidable
animal, and has been known to attack and destroy the larger mammalia.
When wounded, or at bay, he will also defend himself against a human
enemy; and there have been instances of hunters, both white and Indian,
having succumbed to his strength.  His range extends over nearly the
whole continent of America; but he more particularly affects the deep
shadow of the forests; and, like the jaguar, he is a tree-climber.  He
has no claim to the title of lion, except from some resemblance in
colour; and no doubt it was this that led to his misnomer among the
early settlers of Spanish America.

The Ounce comes next.  Of all the large cats this is the least known,
either to naturalists or hunters.  We only know that such a species
exists; that it is a native of Western Asia (Persia, and perhaps
Arabia); that it is an animal nearly as large as the leopard or panther,
but of stouter build and clumsier shape; that it is covered with long
woolly hair of a pale-yellow colour, and spotted, not so distinctly as
the true leopards, from which it is easily distinguished, both by its
form and colour.  The name Ounce is from Buffon; but this specific
appellation is also applied to the jaguar of America, the Jaguarundi, or
lesser jaguar of Paraguay, and even to the Ocelot.

The _Rimau-dahan_ is one of the most beautiful species of cats.  It is
of a yellowish ground colour, not spotted like the leopard, but marked
with broad black bands and patches; in other words, clouded.  It is not
so large as either of the species described.  It is a tree-climber, and
lies in wait for its prey in the forks of the lower limbs, where it also
goes to sleep.  From this habit it derives its name, _Dalian_; which, in
the Sumatran language, signifies the fork of a tree.

Not unlike the _Rimau-dahan_, both in size and markings, is the Nepaul
cat: a species, as its name imports, found in Nepaul, in the mountain
forests.

The Serval is a spotted cat--black upon a pale-yellowish ground--and
considerably larger than the domestic species.  It is a native of South
Africa; and its skin is prized among the Kaffirs, for making their fur
cloaks or _karosses_.

The Ocelot is about equal in size to the last-named, and equally prized
for its beautiful skin, which is clouded with an admixture of spots and
stripes upon a ground of yellowish-grey.  It belongs to Spanish
America--more especially Mexico: and it is said to have been this animal
that is represented on the hieroglyphical paintings of the ancient
Aztecs.  More probably its nobler congener, the jaguar, which is also
found in Mexico, is the animal that held this distinction in the land of
Anahuac.

In Central and South America there are a great many species of striped
and spotted cats, known generally as tiger cats.  The Ocelot is one of
these; but there are also the Pampas cats, the Chati, the Jaguarundi,
the Margay, the False Margay, and many others.

Numerous species, too, exist in the forests of India; as also in the
great tropical islands of Java, Sumatra, Borneo, and the Philippines.

There is yet a section of the cat family to be described.  These are the
