had muskets that were used in the Revolutionary War. If they found this
out I'd never whip another fight. And there's another thing: I don't
want to have it said that any Yankee scout can stick his nose in my
camp and not git it pulled. That's why I sent for you; I want you to
catch this fellow and fetch him to me."

[Illustration: "I want you to catch this fellow and fetch him to me."]

I tried hard to get out of the difficulty. I protested that I didn't
know the scout from a side of sole leather. But the General said that
this was one of his reasons for detailing me to perform this duty. He
said he would have given it to Jasper Goodrum, of the Independents, but
everybody in Tennessee knew Goodrum.

"He was born and raised around here," the General said, "and he's got a
tongue like a bell-clapper. Now, you're not much of a talker, and your
face gives you the look of a big baby that has got out of its mammy's
yard and don't know how to git back." I suppose I must have turned red
under this back-handed compliment, for he went on, "I wish I had a
thousand like you. I watched you that day on the hill and at the river,
and you may put it down that I'll trust you anywhere."

I tried to thank the General for his confidence, but he stayed me by a
gesture. He settled all the details that could be thought of
beforehand, and, as I turned to go, he rose from his chair and followed
me to the door. "If you have to shoot that fellow," he said, "do it and
don't wait too long before you do it; and if you have to shoot two or
three men, don't let that stand in your way--charge 'em up to me. But
you must catch that fellow; I want to string him up just to show the
balance of 'em that they can't fool with me."

As everything had been arranged to my hand I was soon going about the
camp and the town arrayed in jeans clothes and looking like anything
but a soldier. I had thought to surprise Whistling Jim, the negro, with
my garb, but, as it turned out, the surprise was mine, for that night,
when I went to see whether the horses had been properly groomed and
fed, I found the door of the stable unlocked. I was not only surprised
but irritated. Both Harry Herndon and myself had tried hard to impress
the negro with the necessity of taking unusual precautions to secure
the safety of the horses, for they had attracted the attention of the
whole camp, which was full of questionable characters, some of whom
would have answered to their names if Falstaff had appeared to call the
roll of his ragamuffins.

The key had been turned in the lock, but the bolt of the lock had
failed to catch in the socket. It was plain that the negro thought he
had locked the door, but it was quite as plain that he had been
careless, and I made a resolution then and there to look after the
safety of the horses myself. I swallowed more than half of my
irritation when I found that the horses were in their stalls, warmly
blanketed, and an abundance of food before them. I was on the point of
locking the door with my own key, when I heard the sound of approaching
footsteps. There were two men, civilians, as I judged, and one of them
stuttered. Their conversation was of a nature to interest me.

They paused near the door of the stable. "This is the place where they
keep them," remarked one of the men. "They are the finest horses in the
rebel army, and it would be a good job to run them into the Union lines
some fine night. I know a man that would pay a cracking good price for
them."

"But the nigger sleeps in there with 'em," said the other man, "and
what are you going to do about him?"

"That's as easy as picking up rocks in the road. A nigger will sell his
immortal soul for ten dollars, and I'll git him to leave the door open
some night when he's got a job of jiggering on the peanner and
whistling with his mouth at the tavern in the woods."

"But that's horse-stealing."

"No, it ain't; it's turn and turn about. How many horses has old
Forrest took from the loyal citizens of Tennessee? You couldn't count
'em if you was to try. I'll give you three hundred dollars for them
three horses delivered at my brother's house--three hundred dollars in
gold--and you'll have two men to help you. Don't you call that picking
up money?"

"An' whilst I'm a-gittin' the horses, what'll you be doing?"

"Ain't I told you?" answered the man with some display of irritation.
"I'll be putting up the money, the cold cash. What more do you want?
I've always heard that good money is good enough for anybody."

They passed on, and I slipped from the stable, taking care to lock it
behind me, and followed them.




V


I have never spent a more disagreeable hour than that which passed
while I was engaged in following the two men for the purpose of
identifying them. The weather was cold and the night dark, and there
were peppery little showers of sleet. The two left the town proper and
turned into a by-way that I had travelled many times in my rambles in
the countryside. I knew that it led to a house that had been built for
a suburban home, but now, in the crowded condition of the town, was
used as a tavern. It had attracted the suspicion of General Forrest and
I knew that he had placed it under the surveillance of the
Independents. It was a very orderly public-house, however, and nothing
had ever occurred there to justify the suspicions of the General.

The two men I followed could have reached their destination in less
than twenty minutes if they had gone forward with the briskness that
the weather justified; but there was an argument of some kind between
them--I judged that the stuttering man had no stomach for the part he
was to play as a horse-thief. At any rate, there was a dispute of some
kind, and they stopped on the road at least half a dozen times to have
it out. One point settled, another would arise before they had gone
far, and then they would stop again; and at last, so dark did the wood
become, and so low their conversation grew, that I passed within three
feet of them and never knew it until it was too late to betray the
astonishment I naturally felt.

I simply jogged along the path and pretended that I had not seen them.
I went along briskly, and in a few minutes came to the tavern. The door
was shut, the weather being cold, but I knew by the lights shining
through the windows that a hospitable fire was burning on the hearth.
There was no need to knock at the door. I heard the jangling piano
playing an accompaniment to the flute-like whistling of Harry Herndon's
negro. Remembering his carelessness, I felt like going into the tavern
and giving him a frailing. The inclination was so strong that I held my
hand on the door-knob until the first flush of anger had subsided. It
was a very fortunate thing for me, as it turned out, that Whistling Jim
was present, but at the moment the turn of a hair would have caused me
to justify much that the people of the North have said in regard to the
cruelty of Southerners to the negro.

The guests and visitors--and there were quite a number--made room for
me at the fire, the landlord provided me with a chair and welcomed me
very heartily, taking it for granted that I was from the country and
would want a bed for the night. On the wide hearth a very cheerful fire
burned, and the place reminded me somehow of home--particularly a big
rocking-chair in which one of the guests was seated. It had an
upholstered seat and back, and the high arms were made more comfortable
by a covering of the same material. It was a fac-simile of a chair that
we had at home, and I longed to occupy it, if only for the sake of old
times.

Among those who were taking their ease at this suburban inn was Jasper
Goodrum, one of my comrades. He was a noted scout as well as a seasoned
soldier. He looked at me hard as I entered, and continued to watch me
furtively for some time, and then his face cleared up and I knew that
he had recognized me. He was in civilian's clothes, and I knew by that
that he did not care to be recognized. So I turned my attention
elsewhere. But in a little while he seemed to have changed his mind,
and, suddenly rising from his chair, came to me with outstretched hand.

It was a mixed company around the fire. There was a big Irishman, who
leaned calmly back in a small chair and smoked a short pipe. More than
once I caught his bright eyes studying my face, but his smile was ample
apology for his seeming rudeness. He was as handsome a man as I had
ever seen, and if I had been searching for a friend on whom to depend
in an emergency I should have selected him out of a thousand.

There was a short-haired man who was built like a prize-fighter. He
wore a sarcastic smile on his face, and his shifty eyes seemed to be
constantly looking for a resting-place. He had a thick neck and jaw
like a bull-dog. I marked him down in my mental note-book as dangerous.
There was a tall and pious-looking man, and two or three civilians who
had no particular points about them; and then there was a burly man,
who sat with his hands in his pockets and did nothing but chew tobacco
and gaze in the fire, uttering not one word until some of the company
fell to discussing Captain Leroy, the famous Union scout. When Leroy's
name was mentioned the burly man was quick to join in the conversation.

"There ain't a word of truth in all this stuff you hear about Leroy,"
he said, and his manner was more emphatic than the occasion seemed to
demand. "He's in the newspapers, and he ain't anywhere else on top of
the ground. I know what I'm a-talking about. Leroy is the invention of
Franc Paul, of the Chattanooga _Rebel_. He as good as told me so. He
said that when he wanted to stir up talk and create a sensation he had
something written about this Captain Frank Leroy. He's a paper man and
he's able to do anything the newspapers want done."

"You talk like you had gray hair," said the man that looked like a
prize-fighter; "but you're givin' away a mighty big secret. What are
you doin' it for? Say!"

"Oh, because I'm tired of all this talk about a man that doesn't live
outside of the mind of a newspaper man."

The big Irishman, who had been smoking and watching me with a shrewd
smile hovering about his mouth, began to chuckle audibly. He kept it up
so long that it attracted the attention of the company.

"What tickles you, my friend?" the burly man asked.

"Maybe ye know Franc Paul?" he inquired. His countenance was an
interrogation-point. The man answered somewhat sullenly in the
affirmative. "Is there anny risimblance bechune him an' me?"

"Not the slightest in the world," the man answered.

"Thin ye'd have a quarrel wit' his wife an' she'd have all the
advantages," said the Irishman with a laugh. "F'r no longer than the
last time I was at Chattanooga, Missus Paul says, 'It's a good thing,
Mr. O'Halloran,' she says, 'that ye're a hair's breadth taller than me
beloved husband,' she says, 'or I'd niver tell ye apart. Only the sharp
eyes av a wife or a mither,' she says, 'could pick out me husband if he
stood be your side,' she says."

"I must say," remarked the pious-looking man, "that you gentlemen were
never more mistaken in your lives when you hint that there is no such
person as Frank Leroy. I knew him when he was a boy--a beardless boy,
as you may say. In fact, his father was my next-door neighbor in
Knoxville, and I used to see Frank reading old Brownlow's paper."

"Don't think ut!" replied the Irishman, and with that all joined in the
conversation and I heard more of the perilous adventures and
hair-breadth escapes of Captain Frank Leroy than you could put in a
book. It seemed that his identity was a mystery, but he was none the
less a hero in men's minds because his very existence had been called
in question; for people will hug delusions to their bosoms in the face
of religion itself, as we all know.

The door of an inner room was open, and I could hear a conversation
going on. One of the participants was the stuttering man, whose voice I
had heard before the stable-door, and at a moment when I thought that
my movements would attract no attention I took advantage of the freedom
of a public-house and sauntered aimlessly into the room as if I had no
particular business there. I saw with surprise that the chap who had
proposed to steal the horses was one of the merchants of the town at
whose store I had occasionally traded. In the far end of the room,
reading a newspaper by the light of a small fire, sat a slip of a
youth. He wore a military cloak that covered his figure from his neck
to his top-boots.

I saw that he was not so absorbed in the paper that he failed to make a
note of my presence in the room, and he shifted himself around in his
chair so that he could get a better view of me, and still leave his
face in the shadow. Near him sat a motherly-looking woman of fifty. She
was well preserved for her age, and wore a smile on her face that was
good to look at. The youngster said something to her in a low tone, and
she immediately turned her attention to me. Some other words passed
between the two, and then the woman beckoned to me. I obeyed the
summons with alacrity, for I liked her face.

"You seem to be lonely," she said. "Have a seat by our little fire.
This is not a guest-room, but we have been so overrun lately that we
have had to turn it over to the public." She paused a moment and then
went on. "You are over-young to be in the army," she suggested.

She had turned so that she looked me full in the face, and there was a
kindly, nay, a generous light in her eyes, and I could no more have
lied to her in the matter than I could have lied to my own mother if
she had been alive. "I do not have a very hard time in the army," I
replied.

"No, I suppose not," she remarked. "You are one to make friends
wherever you go. Few are so fortunate; I have known only one or two."

There was a note of sadness in her tones that touched me profoundly.
The cause I can't explain, and the effect was beyond description. I
hesitated before making any reply, and when I did I tried to turn it
off lightly. "I never saw but one," I answered, "on whom I desired to
make an impression."

"And who was that?" the woman inquired with a bright smile of sympathy.

"You will think it a piece of foolishness," I replied; "but it was a
lady riding in a top-buggy. I had never seen her before and never
expect to see her again."

The youngster clutched his paper in his hand and turned in his chair.
"The light is detestable," he said. "Please throw on a piece of pine,
mother."

"You can't read by such a light," the woman replied. "Put your paper in
your pocket and read it to-morrow." Then she turned to me. "If you are
in the army," she said, "why do you wear such clothes? They are not
becoming at all." She had such a kindly smile and betrayed such a
friendly interest that it was not in human nature to suspect her--at
least, it was not in my nature to do so.

"Why, mainly for comfort," I answered; "and while I am wearing them I
am having my uniform, such as it is, furbished up and cleaned a bit. I
have a few days' leave, and I am taking advantage of it in this way."

"I wish my son here would take advantage of his short furlough to wear
the clothes he used to wear," she remarked, and her tone was so
significant that I could but regard her with a look of inquiry. I
suppose the puzzled expression of my face must have amused her, for she
laughed heartily, while the son, as if resenting his mother's words,
arose and swaggered to the other end of the room.

We had more conversation, and then I returned to the public room. Some
of the guests had retired, but their places had been taken by others,
and there was a goodly company gathered around the fire. I found the
big arm-chair unoccupied, and, seating myself on its comfortable
cushion, soon forgot the wonder I had felt that the woman in the next
room had known me for a soldier. I had accomplished one thing--the
identification of the prospective horse-thief--and I satisfied myself
with that. As for Leroy, I knew I should have to trust to some stroke
of good fortune.

The comfort of the rocker appealed to me, and, with my hands on its
arms, I leaned back and, in spite of the talking all around me, was
soon lost in reflection. Through long usage the upholstering on the
arms of the chair had become worn, and in places the tufts of moss or
horse-hair were showing. I fell to fingering these with the same
impulse of thoughtlessness that induces people to bite their
finger-nails. Suddenly I felt my finger in contact with a small roll of
paper that had been carefully pushed under the leather, and then I
remembered that the last occupant of the chair was the short-haired
man--the man who had the general appearance of a prize-fighter.

Now, it had occurred to me in a dim way that this man might be
identical with Leroy, and I suspected that he had left in the chair a
communication for some of his accomplices. I determined to transfer the
roll of paper to my pocket and examine it at my leisure. But no sooner
had I come to this determination than I imagined that every person in
the room had his eyes fixed on me. And then the problem, if you can
call it so, was solved for me.

A stranger who had evidently arrived while I was in the next room
appeared to be regarding Whistling Jim with some curiosity, and
presently spoke to him, inquiring if he was the negro that played on
the piano. Whistler replied that he could "sorter" play. "If you are
Whistling Jim," I said, "play us a plantation tune. I heard a man say
the other day that the finest tune he ever heard was one you played for
him. It was something about 'My gal's sweet.'"

The negro looked at me hard, but something in my countenance must have
conveyed a warning to him. "I 'member de man, suh; he say he wuz fum
Cincinnati, an' he gun me a fi'-dollar bill--a green one."

Without more ado, he went to the piano and plunged into the
heart-breaking melody of--

    "_Yo' gal's a neat gal, but my gal's sweet--
      Sweet-a-little, sweet-a-little, sweet, sweet, sweet!
    Fum de crown er her head ter de soles er her feet--
      Feet-a-little, feet-a-little, feet, feet, feet!_"

Naturally all eyes were turned on the performer, and I took advantage
of that fact to rise from the rocking-chair with the roll of paper safe
in my pocket, and saunter across the room in the direction of the
piano. Leaning against a corner of the ramshackle old instrument, I
drank in the melody with a new sense of its wild and melancholy beauty.
The room in which I stood seemed transformed into what it never could
be, and the old piano shed its discord and was glorified by the
marvellous playing of the negro.

The foolish little song runs along for several stanzas, simulating the
sound of dancing feet. Alternately the negro sang the air and whistled
the chorus, but whether he did one or the other, the effect was the
same. The silly song struck the home note and sent it vibrating through
my brain so invitingly that I was almost sorry that Whistling Jim had
played it.

I returned to earth when he ceased playing. He looked hard at me when
he had finished, but I did not glance at him. At the other end of the
piano, leaning against it, and apparently lost in thought, was the
young fellow I had seen in the other room. His cloak was thrown back
from his throat, and the red lining gave a picturesque touch to his
small, lithe figure. His face was partly in the shadow, but I could see
that his expression was one of profound melancholy. He aroused himself
at last, and, looking toward me, said with a smile that had no heart in
it, "If all the negroes in the South are so gifted you must have a
happy time down there."

"So it would seem," I answered, "but this negro is an exception. He
tells me that he learned to play while his old mistress was away from
home looking after her plantation interests. He can whistle better than
he can play."

"He has great gifts," said the lad, "and I trust he is treated
accordingly; but I doubt it," and with that he turned away from the
piano with a snap of thumb and finger that sounded for all the world
like a challenge. He turned and went swaggering across the room, and
seated himself in the rocking-chair of which I have spoken. In a word,
and with a snap of the finger, he had thrown mud at the whole South,
and with no more excuse than I should have had had I made an attack on
the North. Yet curiosity, and not irritation, was uppermost in my mind.

His conduct was so puzzling that I determined to have another taste of
it if possible, and so discover what he would be at. So I went back to
the fire and took a seat close to his elbow, while Whistling Jim passed
around his hat, as was his custom when he played for company. He held
it out to all except the young fellow and myself, and then returned to
the piano and played for his own amusement, but so softly that
conversation could flow on undisturbed.

I had a good look at the lad, and liked him all the better. His face
had in it that indescribable quality--a touch of suffering or of
sorrow--that always draws me, and I thought how strange it was that he
should sit there ignorant of the fact that a word or two would make me
his friend for life. I had a great pity for him, and there arose in me
the belief that I had met him before, but whether in reality or only in
a dream I could not make out. It was a foolish and a romantic notion,
but it nibbled around my mind so persistently that I turned my gaze on
the fire and fell into reflections that were both teasing and pleasing.

While thus engaged I suddenly became aware of the fact that the young
fellow was fingering at the worn place on the chair-arm. Conversation
was going on very briskly. The genial landlord, who had joined the
group at the fire, was relating to a listening and an eager guest
another story of the almost superhuman performances of the Union scout,
Leroy, when suddenly the lad arose from the rocker and began to search
the floor with his eyes. He had had the color of youth in his cheeks,
in spite of the swarthiness of his skin, and I had admired the
combination--your light-haired man is for everything that has a touch
of the brunette--but now he had gone white.

As he stooped to search under my chair, I jumped up and drew it back
politely. "Pardon me for disturbing you," he said; "I have lost a
paper."

"Is it of importance?" I inquired, endeavoring to show an interest in
