"Not in itelf, but you know, Jefferson, my salary is only four hundred
dollars a year. It would take nearly half my income, so I think Austin
will have to give up his hopes of going to college and follow in his
brother's steps."

"How old is Austin now?"

"He is eighteen."

"Is he ready for college?"

"Yes, he could enter at the next commencement but for the financial
problem."

"I never had any taste for college, or study, as you know, Mr. Canfield.
It is different with my friend Rodney, who is a Latin and Greek
scholar."

The minister regarded Rodney with new interest.

"Do you think of going to college, Mr. Ropes?" he asked.

"Not at present. I am going back to Montana with Mr. Pettigrew. Perhaps
he and I will both go to college next year."

"Excuse me," said Jefferson Pettigrew. "Latin and Greek ain't in my
line. I should make a good deal better miner than minister."

"It is not desirable that all should become ministers or go to college,"
said Mr. Canfield. "I suspect from what I know of you, Jefferson, that
you judge yourself correctly. How long shall you stay in Burton?"

"I expect to go away tomorrow."

"Your visit is a brief one."

"Yes, I intended to stay longer, but I begin to be homesick after the
West."

"Do you expect to make your permanent home there?"

"I can't tell as to that. For the present I can do better there than
here."

The conversation lasted for some time. Then Jefferson Pettigrew rose to
go.

"Won't you call again, Jefferson?" asked the minister hospitably.

"I shall not have time, but before I go I want to make you a small
present," and he put into the hands of the astonished minister four fifty
dollar bills.

"Two hundred dollars!" ejaculated the minister. "Why, I heard you only
brought home a few hundred."

"I prefer to leave that impression. To you I will say that I am worth a
great deal more than that."

"But you mustn't give me so much. I am sure you are too generous for
your own interest. Why, it's munificent, princely."

"Don't be troubled about me. I can spare it. Send your boy to college,
and next year I will send you another sum equally large."

"How can I thank you, Jefferson?" said Mr. Canfield, the tears coming
into his eyes. "Never in forty years have I had such a gift."

"Not even from Squire Sheldon?"

"The squire is not in the habit of bestowing gifts, but he pays a large
parish tax. May I--am I at liberty to say from whom I received this
liberal donation?"

"Please don't! You can say that you have had a gift from a friend."

"You have made me very happy, Jefferson. Your own conscience will reward
you."

Jefferson Pettigrew changed the subject, for it embarrassed him to be
thanked.

"That pays me for hard work and privation," he said to Rodney as they
walked back to the tavern. "After all there is a great pleasure in
making others happy."

"Squire Sheldon hadn't found that out."

"And he never will."

On the way they met the gentleman of whom they had been speaking. He
bowed stiffly, for he could not feel cordial to those whom had snatched
from him the house for which he had been scheming so long.

"Squire Sheldon," said Jefferson, "you were kind enough to invite
Rodney and myself to supper some evening. I am sorry to say that we must
decline, as we leave Burton tomorrow."

"Use your own pleasure, Mr. Pettigrew," said the squire coldly.

"It doesn't seem to disappoint the squire very much," remarked
Jefferson, laughing, when the great man of the village had passed on.

"It certainly is no disappointment to me."

"Nor to me. The little time I have left I can use more pleasantly than
in going to see the squire. I have promised to supper at my uncle's
tonight--that is, I have promised for both of us."

Returning to New York, Jefferson and Rodney set about getting ready for
their Western journey. Rodney gave some of his wardrobe to Mike Flynn,
and bought some plain suits suitable for his new home.

While walking on Broadway the day before the one fixed for his departure
he fell in with Jasper Redwood.

"Have you got a place yet Ropes?" asked Jasper.

"I am not looking for any."

"How is that?" asked Jasper in some surprise.

"I am going to leave the city."

"That is a good idea. All cannot succeed in the city. You may find a
chance to work on a farm in the country."

"I didn't say I was going to the country."

"Where are you going, then?"

"To Montana."

"Isn't that a good way off?"

"Yes."

"What are you going to do there?"

"I may go to mining."

"But how can you afford to go so far?"

"Really, Jasper, you show considerable curiosity about my affairs. I
have money enough to buy my ticket, and I think I can find work when I
get out there."

"It seems to me a crazy idea."

"It might be--for you."

"And why for me?" asked Jasper suspiciously.

"Because you might not be willing to rough it as I am prepared to do."

"I guess you are right. I have always been used to living like a
gentleman."

"I hope you will always be able to do so. Now I must bid you good by, as
I am busy getting ready for my journey."

Jasper looked after Rodney, not without perplexity.

"I can't make out that boy," he said. "So he is going to be a common
miner! Well, that may suit him, but it wouldn't suit me. There is no
chance now of his interfering with me, so I am glad he is going to leave
the city."



CHAPTER XXIX.


A MINING TOWN IN MONTANA.


The scene changes.

Three weeks later among the miners who were sitting on the narrow
veranda of the "Miners' Rest" in Oreville in Montana we recognize two
familiar faces and figures--those of Jefferson Pettigrew and Rodney
Ropes. Both were roughly clad, and if Jasper could have seen Rodney he
would have turned up his nose in scorn, for Rodney had all the look of a
common miner.

It was in Oreville that Mr. Pettigrew had a valuable mining property, on
which he employed quite a number of men who preferred certain wages to a
compensation depending on the fluctuations of fortune. Rodney was among
those employed, but although he was well paid he could not get to like
the work. Of this, however, he said nothing to Mr. Pettigrew whose
company he enjoyed, and whom he held in high esteem.

On the evening in question Jefferson rose from his seat and signed to
Rodney to follow him.

"Well, Rodney, how do you like Montana?" he asked.

"Well enough to be glad I came here," answered Rodney.

"Still you are not partial to the work of a miner!"

"I can think of other things I would prefer to do."

"How would you like keeping a hotel?"

"Is there any hotel in search of a manager?" asked Rodney smiling.

"I will explain. Yesterday I bought the 'Miners' Rest.'"

"What--the hotel where we board?"

"Exactly. I found that Mr. Bailey, who has made a comfortable sum of
money, wants to leave Montana and go East and I bought the hotel."

"So that hereafter I shall board with you?"

"Not exactly. I propose to put you in charge, and pay you a salary. I
can oversee, and give you instructions. How will that suit you?"

"So you think I am competent, Mr. Pettigrew?"

"Yes, I think so. There is a good man cook, and two waiters. The cook
will also order supplies and act as steward under you."

"What then will be my duties?"

"You will act as clerk and cashier, and pay the bills. You will have to
look after all the details of management. If there is anything you don't
understand you will have me to back you up, and advise you. What do you
say?"

"That I shall like it much better than mining. My only doubt is as to
whether I shall suit you."

"It is true that it takes a smart man to run a hotel, but I think we can
do it between us. Now what will you consider a fair salary?"

"I leave that to you, Mr. Pettigrew."

"Then we will call it a hundred and fifty dollars a month and board."

"But, Mr. Pettigrew," said Rodney in surprise, "how can I possibly earn
that much?"

"You know we charge big prices, and have about fifty steady boarders.
I expect to make considerable money after deducting all the expenses of
management."

"My friend Jasper would be very much surprised if he could know the
salary I am to receive. In the store I was only paid seven dollars a
week."

"The duties were different. Almost any boy could discharge the duties of
an entry clerk while it takes peculiar qualities to run a hotel."

"I was certainly very fortunate to fall in with you, Mr. Pettigrew."

"I expect it will turn out fortunate for me too, Rodney."

"When do you want me to start in?"

"Next Monday morning. It is now Thursday evening. Mr. Bailey will turn
over the hotel to me on Saturday night. You needn't go to the mines
tomorrow, but may remain in the hotel, and he will instruct you in the
details of management."

"That will be quite a help to me, and I am at present quite ignorant on
the subject."

Rodney looked forward with pleasure to his new employment. He had good
executive talent, though thus far he had had no occasion to exercise it.
It was with unusual interest that he set about qualifying himself for
his new position.

"Young man," said the veteran landlord, "I think you'll do. I thought
at first that Jefferson was foolish to put a young boy in my place, but
you've got a head on your shoulders, you have! I guess you'll fill the
bill."

"I hope to do so, Mr. Bailey."

"Jefferson tells me that you understand Latin and Greek?"

"I know something of them."

"Thats what prejudiced me against you. I hired a college boy once as a
clerk and he was the worst failure I ever came across. He seemed to have
all kinds of sense except common sense. I reckon he was a smart scholar,
and he could have made out the bills for the boarders in Latin or Greek
if it had been necessary, but he was that soft that any one could cheat
him. Things got so mixed up in the department that I had to turn him
adrift in a couple of weeks. I surmised you might be the same sort of a
chap. If you were it would be a bad lookout for Jefferson."

In Oreville Mr. Pettigrew was so well known that nearly everyone called
him by his first name. Mr. Pettigrew did not care about this as he had
no false pride or artificial dignity.

"Do you consider this hotel a good property, Mr. Bailey?"

"I'll tell you this much. I started here four years ago, and I've
made fifty thousand dollars which I shall take back with me to New
Hampshire."

"That certainly is satisfactory."

"I shouldn't wonder if you could improve upon it."

"How does it happen that you sell out such a valuable property, Mr.
Bailey? Are you tired of making money?"

"No, but I must tell you that there's a girl waiting for me at home, an
old schoolmate, who will become Mrs. Bailey as soon as possible after
I get back. If she would come out here I wouldn't sell, but she has a
mother that she wouldn't leave, and so I must go to her."

"That is a good reason, Mr. Bailey."

"Besides with fifty thousand dollars I can live as well as I want to
in New Hampshire, and hold up my head with the best. You will follow my
example some day."

"It will be a long day first, Mr. Bailey, for I am only sixteen."

On Monday morning the old landlord started for his Eastern home and
