in vogue, of providing a feast for the departed relatives on certain
fixed dates. All Hallows' Eve being one of the occasions a meal was
prepared, and the feast spread as though ordinary living visitants were
going to sit round the "gay and festive board." The chain hanging down
from the centre of the chimney to the fireplace was removed--a boundary
line of the domestic home--but at these times especial care was taken to
remove it so that the "pixies and goblins and elves" could have a
licence to enter the house. In spite of Christian teaching and other
widening influences the belief remained fixed in the minds of the rural
classes that elves, goblins, sprites, pixies, and the manes were stern
realities.

The Erl King of Goethe, a sprite endowed with more than human passions,
elegantly portrays the modern idea of an old theme. How he haunted the
regions of the Black Forest in Thuringia, snatching up children rambling
in the shades of the leafed wood, to kill them in his terrible shambles.
The King of the Wood and the Spirit of the Waters were both early among
the terrors of old-time European peasantry's superstitions.

Another surviving custom, carried out with much picturesque ceremony, is
common to the peoples of the Balkan States. In time of water-famine,
more particularly in Servia, the girls go through the neighbouring
villages singing a Dodolo song of--

    "We go through the village,
    The clouds go in the sky;
      We go faster,
    Faster go the clouds;
    They have overtaken us,
    And wetted the corn and wine."

Precisely as the hawthorn bushes were stripped of their blossoms by
Maying parties in England in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, so
in Servia the ballet of the leaf-dressed girl, encircled by a party of
holiday-makers, proceeds through the hamlets invoking not the Fair
Flora, but the Spirit of the Waters; the central figure, the girl in
green, being besprinkled by each cottager.

The Greeks, Bulgarians, and Roumanians observe a similar ceremony, but
on the confines of Russia so intense is the belief in the superstition
of the water goblin that in times of long drought a traveller
journeying along the road has often been seized by the ruthless hands of
the villagers and ceremoniously flung into a rivulet--a sacrifice to
appease the spirit that lay in the waters. In Ireland the fairy-tale of
Fior Usga--Princess Spring-water--has a kindred meaning; she, so the
legend relates, sank down in a well with her golden pitcher, and the
flood-gates opened and swamped the parched and barren countryside near
Kinsale.

In Germany, when a person is drowned, people recollect the fancies of
childhood, and exclaim, "The River Spirit claims its yearly sacrifice."
Even the hard-reasoning Scotch, years ago, clung to the same
superstitious fancy which oftentimes prevented some of the most selfish
of their race from saving their drowning fellows. "He will do you an
injury if you save him from the water" was one of their fears. In
England, too, the north-country people speak of the River Sprite as
Jenny Greenteeth, and children dread the green, slimy-covered rocks on a
stream's bank or on the brink of a black pool. "Jenny Greenteeth will
have thee if thee goest on't river banks" is the warning of a Lancashire
mother to her child.

The Irish fisherman's belief in the Souls' Cages and the Merrow, or Man
of the Sea, was once held in general esteem by the men who earned a
livelihood on the shores of the Atlantic. This Merrow, or Spirit of the
Waters, sometimes took upon himself a half-human form, and many a sailor
on the rocky coast of Western Ireland has told the tale of how he saw
the Merrow basking in the sun, watching a storm-driven ship. His form is
described as that of half man, half fish, a thing with green hair, long
_green teeth_, legs with scales on them, short arms like fins, a fish's
tail, and a huge red nose. He wore no clothes, and had a cocked hat
like a sugar-loaf, which was carried under the arm--never to be put on
the head unless for the purpose of diving into the sea. At such times he
caught all the souls of those drowned at sea and put them in cages made
like lobster pots.

The child's tale of the German fisherman and his wife tells the same
story--

    "O Man of the Sea, come list unto me,
    For Alice, my wife, the plague of my life,
    Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee."

Unless such past credulities as these be considered it would be most
difficult to account for many of the sayings of child-days, and the
archaic ideas that have drifted into our folk-lore tales. On all hands
it is admitted that it is no unusual thing to find a game or practice
outliving the serious performance of which it is an imitation. The
condition of a people who originally held such mystic and crude ideas is
seen to-day in types of aborigines and uncivilised races.

In Halmahero, a large island to the west of New Guinea, a wizard goes
through a ceremony somewhat similar to the Servian village maid's.
Cutting down branches, he dips them into the water and sprinkles the
parched ground.

In Ceram the outer barks of certain trees are cast on the surface of
running streams and rivulets and dedicated to the spirits that lie in
the waters, that after this offering they may arise from the depths of
the deep and clothe the earth with a cloud of mist.


THE CORN SPIRIT.

Another spirit, dreaded by all European peoples, was the Spirit of the
Corn. In Russia especially children of the rural class sing songs of a
very distant age, mother handing down to child themes unexposed to
foreign influence. It is true the Church has altered the application of
many by dressing up afresh pagan observances in Christian costumes.
There are several, but one of the songs of the Russian serf to his
prattling offspring illustrates this statement. Before reading it, it
should be borne in mind that Ovsen is the Teutonic _Sun God_ who
possessed a boar, and that the antiquity of the song belongs to a time
when the Russian peasant's forefathers worshipped the glories of the
heavens, deifying the Sun for his fire and lustre.

The translation of this poem of the fire worshippers is taken from
Ralston's _Songs of the Russian People_, and runs as follows. Imagine
the crooning voice of the old Slav woman singing it to her nurse child.

    "In the forest, in the pine forest,
      There stood a pine tree,
        Green and shaggy.
      Oh Ovsen! Oh Ovsen!

    "The Boyars came,
      Cut down the pine,
    Sawed it into planks,
      Built a bridge,
    Fastened it with nails.
      Oh Ovsen! Oh Ovsen!

    "Who will go
      Over the bridge?
    Ovsen will go there,
      And the New Year.
      Oh Ovsen! Oh Ovsen!"

Another song asks--

    "On what will he come?
      On a dusky swine.
    What will he chase?
      A brisk little pig."

The present singers of songs about Ovsen receive presents in lieu of the
old contributions towards a sacrifice to the gods. The habit is to ask
in some such words as these--

    "Give us a pig for Vasily's Eve."

Pigs' trotters used to be offered as a sacrifice at the beginning of the
New Year, and the custom still prevails in Russia of proffering such
dishes at this time. The compliments of the season are commemorated by
giving away the feet of the "brisk little pig." The first day of the New
Year was Ovsen's day, but now consecrated to the memory of St. Basil the
Great. The previous evening was called St. Basil's Eve, or Vasily's
Eve. In one of the little Russian songs it is said--

    "Ilya comes on Vasily's Day,"

meaning on St. Basil's, or New Year's Day, comes the Sun-god, or
thunder-bearer, originally Pevan, who, under Christian influences,
becomes Elijah, or Ilya.

    "Ilya comes on Vasily's Day;
    He holds a whip of iron wire,
      And another of tin.
    Hither he comes,
      Thither he waves,
        Corn grows."

This supports the inference that the agriculturist was a nature
worshipper. But quite apart from sun worshippers, and their songs about
corn-growing, the children of the rural classes in many other parts of
Europe have fixed ideas, or beliefs, in the "Spirit of the Cornfield";
their sayings are represented by different figures, "a mad dog in the
corn," "a wolf in the corn," are found amongst the many shibboleths of
the youngsters playing in the fields prior to harvest-time. That they
dread the wavy movement of the grain-laden stalks is certain, and the
red poppy, the blue cornflower, the yellow dandelion, and the marguerite
daisy, although plucked by tiny hands on the fringe of the fields, it is
not often tiny feet trample down the golden stalks. At nightfall, in
Germany, an old peasant, observing the gentle undulating motion of the
ripe crop while seated before his cottage, will exclaim--

    "There goes the rye-wolf. The wolf is passing through the corn."

In some parts the "corn spirit" was said to be a cow.

    "The cow's in the corn."

In one of our home counties--Hertfordshire--it is a "mare," and the
custom of "crying the mare" has allusion to the corn spirit, and is
spoken of in some villages to-day. There are several rhymes that carry a
notice of cornfield games.

          "Ring a ring a rosies,
          A pocket full of posies.
    Hush!--The Cry?--Hush!--The Cry?
          All fall down."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Little boy blue come blow me thy horn,
      The sheep in the meadow,
      The cow's in the corn.
    Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?
      Under the haystack fast asleep."

The "Little Boy Blue" rhyme, it has been urged, had only reference to
the butcher's boy. The rhyme is very much older than the blue-smocked
butcher's boy, and in truth it may be said the butcher boy of a century
ago wore white overalls.

The former rhyme, "Ring a Ring a Rosies," is known in Italy and Germany.
In the northern counties of England the children use the words, "Hushu!
Hushu!" in the third line.

The Spirit of the Cornfield is dreaded by children of all European
countries. In Saxon Transylvania the children gather maize leaves and
completely cover one of their playmates with them. This game is intended
to prefigure death.


"CUCKOOS!"

    "Cuckoo cherrytree, catch a bird
      And give it to me."[G]

The people of the Oral and Tula Governments, especially the maidens,
christen the cuckoo "gossip darlings!"

In one of the Lithuanian districts the girls sing--

      "Sister, dear,
    Mottled cuckoo!
    Thou who feedest
      The horses of thy brother,
    Thou who spinnest silken threads,
      Sing, O cuckoo,
    Shall I soon be married?"

In _Love's Labour's Lost_ a passage occurs where the two seasons, Spring
and Winter, vie with each other in extolling the cuckoo and the owl.

                  _Spring._

    "When daisies pied, and violets blue,
      And lady-smocks all silver white,
    And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue,
      Do paint the meadows with delight,
    The cuckoo then, on every tree,
    Mocks married men, for thus sings he--
                  Cuckoo!
    Cuckoo! cuckoo!
    O word of fear,
    Unpleasing to the married ear!"

Thus is cuckoo gossip perpetuated in rhyme and song; but an old belief
in the mysteriously disappearing bird gave an opportunity to children to
await its return in the early summer, and then address to it all kinds
of ridiculous questions.

"How many years have I to live?" is a favourite query. The other like
that of the Lithuanian maid, "Shall I soon be married?" meets with
favour amongst single girls.

A German song, entitled "The Shepherd Maiden," indicates this custom.
The words being--

    "A shepherd maiden, one fine day,
      Two lambs to pasture led,
    To verdant fields where daisies grew,
      And bloomed the clover red;
    There spied she in a hedge close by
      A cuckoo, call with merry cry,
    Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo!"

After chasing the immortal bird from tree to tree to have her question,
"Shall I soon be married?" answered, the song concludes with this
taunting refrain--

    "Two hundred then she counted o'er,
      The cuckoo still cried as before,
    Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo!"

In our earliest published song, words and music composed by John of
Forsete, monk of Reading Abbey, date 1225, and entitled "Sumer is icumen
in," the cuckoo is also extolled--

    "Summer is a-coming in, loudly sing, cuckoo;
    Groweth the seed, bloweth the mead, and springeth wood anew.
      Sing, cuckoo! Merry sing, cuckoo,
      Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo!"

The peasantry of Russia, India, and Germany contribute to the collection
of cuckoo-lore. Grimm mentions a Cuckoo Hill in Gauchsberg. The cuckoo
and not the hill may have had the mystic sense.

Identical with this Cuckoo Hill, in its solemn significance, there
occurs a passage in the game of Hot Cockles, played formerly at
Yorkshire funerals.

    "Where is the poor man to go?"

the friends whine, and the mutes who are in readiness to follow the
coffin beat their knees with open hands and reply--

    "Over the Cuckoo Hill, I oh!"

The association of ideas about the prophetic notes of the cuckoo's
mocking voice--in matters of marriage and death--are pretty general, and
there are still further many points of identity in the tales told by
the children of India and Southern Russia. Like the Ph[oe]nix idea
amongst the people of Egypt, Persia, and India, these traditions
allegorise the soul's immortality.


A WORD ON INDIAN LORE.

The old prose editions of the sacred books of India--the law codes of
the Aryans--were suitably arranged in verse to enable the contents to be
committed to memory by the students. In these rules the ritual of the
simplest rites is set forth. New and full moon offerings are given, and
regulations minutely describing as to the way salutation shall be made.

Much after the fashion of the grandees or the Red Indian moon worshipper
of North America, it is told how a Brahmana must salute stretching forth
his right hand level with his ear, a Kshalriza holding it level with
the breast, a Sudra holding it low--all caste observances and relics of
a sign-language.

"A householder shall worship gods, manes, men, goblins, and rishis,"
remains of ancestral worship. "Adoration must be given to him who wears
the moon on his forehead," the oldest known form of worship, possibly,
of the Drift-man's period, "and he shall offer libations of water,
oblations of clarified butter, and worship the moon." The butter
oblation was practised by the Celts! They have a lunar penance, "he
shall fast on the day of the new moon."

These observances belonged to a people who, without doubt, migrated from
the West to the East. The manes and goblins are pre-Celtic, and have
likewise been preserved by those who travelled, as the journey became
possible, towards Asia. Some of our nursery tales, children's games,
are likewise known to them. The same legends are extant in the East and
West, all of which have a common origin, and that a religious one.


FOOTNOTES:

[G] An old English child rhyme mentioned in BARNES' _Shropshire
Folk-lore_.




PART II.

CHAPTER I.

    "Oh, Love! young Love! bound in thy rosy band,
      Let sage or cynic prattle as he will,
        These hours, and only these, redeemed
          Life's years of ill!"

GAMES.


The annual calendar of dates when certain of the pastimes and songs of
our street children become fashionable is an uncertain one, yet games
have their seasons most wonderfully and faithfully marked. Yearly all
boys seem to know the actual time for the revivification of a custom,
whether it be of whipping tops, flirting marbles, spinning peg-tops, or
playing tip-cat or piggy. This survival of custom speaks eloquently of
the child influence on civilisation, for the conservation of the human
family may be found literally portrayed in the pastimes, games, and
songs of the children of our streets.

Curious relics of past cruelties are shadowed forth in many of the
present games--some of which are not uninteresting. The barbarous custom
of whipping martyrs at the stake is perpetuated by the game of whip-top.
In a black-letter book in the British Museum, date 15--(?) occurs this
passage--

    "I am good at scourging of my toppe,
    You would laugh to see me morsel the pegge,
    Upon one foot I can hoppe,
    And dance trimly round an egge."

The apprentices of the London craftsmen followed the popular diversion
of cock-throwing on Shrove Tuesday and tossing pancakes in the
frying-pan--the latter custom is still kept up at Westminster School.
Both bear allusion to the sufferings and torments of men who died for
conscience sake.

Dice and pitch-and-toss, also modern games of the present gutter
children, in primitive times were the ways and means adopted by the
learned to consult the oracles. Much in the same way the Scotch laddie
and wee lassie play--

    "Dab a prin in my lottery-book;
    Dab ane, dab two, dab a' your prins awa',"

by sticking at random pins in their school-books, between the leaves of
which little pictures are placed. This is the lottery-box, the pictures
the prizes, and the pins the forfeits.

Another favourite Scotch game is--

    "A' the birds of the air, and the days of the week."

Girls' pleasures are by no means so diversified as those of boys. It
would be considered a trifle too effeminate were the little men to amuse
themselves with their sisters' game of Chucks--an enchanting amusement,
played with a large-sized marble and four octagonal pieces of chalk.
Beds, another girlish game, is also played on the pavement--a piece of
broken pot, china or earthenware, being kicked from one of the beds or
divisions marked out on the flags to another, the girls hopping on one
leg while doing so. It is a pastime better known as Hop Scotch, and is
played in every village and town of the British Isles, varying slightly
in detail. The rhymes used by street children to decide who is to begin
the game are numerous.

The Scotch version of a well-known one is given below--

    "Zickety, dickety, dock, the mouse ran up the nock,
    The nock struck one, down the mouse ran,
      Zickety, dickety, dock."

    "Anery, twaery, tickery, seven,
    Aliby, crackeby, ten or eleven;
      Pin pan, muskidan,
    Tweedlum, twodlum, twenty-one."

Amongst the notable men in the world's history who have depicted
children's games, St. Luke the Evangelist tells in a pleasant passage of
how Jesus likened the men of His day to children sitting in the
market-place and calling to their playmates--

    "We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced;
    We have mourned unto you, and ye have not wept."

A vivid picture, illustrating puerile peevishness.

In the thousands of years that street plays have been enacted by the
youngsters, no poet's, philosopher's, nor teacher's words have been more
to the point. Every child wants to take the most prominent part in a
game, but all cannot be chief mourners, else there will be no
sympathising weepers.

    "Who'll be chief mourner? I, said the dove,
        I'll mourn for my love."

To-day things are better arranged, a counting-out rhyme settles the
question of appointment to the coveted post. Like the

    "Zickety, dickety, dock, the mouse ran up the clock"

of the north-country children.

    "Whoever I touch must be he"

ends and begins the counting-out verse of the Southern youngsters,
