
"Who has kicked her round?" growled the captain.

"Mrs. Fishley has done just the same as to kick her. She took her by the
arm, dragged her out of her chair, and was shaking her when I stepped
in."

I was particular to state the facts thus explicitly, because I did not
believe Mrs. Fishley had been careful to include this portion of the
affair in her complaint to her husband.

"It's no such thing! I should like to know!" exclaimed Mrs. Fishley,
who, by some miracle, had been enabled to hold her tongue thus far.

"I saw her do it," I added.

"It's no such thing!"

"Didn't you take her by the arm?" I demanded.

"Well, I did just touch her on the arm, but I didn't hurt her none. I
wouldn't hurt her for a million dollars."

"Let Flora speak for herself," I continued. "What did she do to you,
Flora?"

"I don't like to say anything about it, Buckland. She didn't hurt me
much," answered the terrified child.

"You see, she won't say I shook her, or did any such awful thing," said
the virago, triumphantly.

"Speak, my dearest sister. We had better settle this matter now," I
added.

"She did take me by the arm, pull me out of the chair, and was shaking
me, when you interfered," replied the poor girl, trembling with fear of
the consequences of her truthful confession.

"Well, I never!" gasped Mrs. Fishley.

Captain Fishley evidently believed that his wife was lame; but this did
not make much difference to him. He was a tyrant and a bully; but, as
tyrants and bullies always are, he was a coward, or he would have
demolished me before this time. He had a wholesome respect for the
poker, which I still kept in readiness for immediate use.

"No matter whether Mrs. Fishley touched the child or not," said he,
savagely. "No boy in my house shall insult my wife, or raise his hand
against her."

"And no man or woman, in this or any other house, shall raise his hand
against my sister," I answered.

"She sat there like a log of wood, and let the flapjacks burn," snarled
Mrs. Fishley.

"She hadn't anything to do with the flapjacks. Flora boards here, and
isn't anybody's servant," I replied.

"I should like to know! Is that girl to sit there before the fire and
let whatever's on the stove burn up before she'll raise her hand to save
it?"

"It's no use of talking," said I. "You know all about it as well as I
do. All I have to say is, that Flora shall not be abused by anybody, I
don't care who it is."

"Nobody's going to abuse her," snapped the shrew.

"I've got another account to settle with you, Buck Bradford," continued
Captain Fishley. "Did Ham tell you to black his boots?"

"He did."

"And you told him you wouldn't?"

"I told him so."

"What do you mean, you rascal?"

"I only meant that I wouldn't do it. That's all I meant."

"I should like to know what we're coming to!" ejaculated Mrs. Fishley.

"We are coming to an understanding, I hope," I answered.

"I hope so too, and I mean to do it," added the captain. "High times
we're having here, when the boys won't do what they are told, and then
take the poker when they're spoken to."

"Captain Fishley, I think there are two sides to this question. The
agreement my brother Clarence made with you was, that I should take care
of the horse and go after the mail for my board. That's what he said to
me in one of his letters. Instead of that, you make me do all the dirty
work about the place, and run from pillar to post at everybody's beck
and call."

"That's all you're good for," interposed Captain Fishley, sourly.

"Perhaps it is; but that's not what my brother, who is my guardian,
agreed to have me do. You have kept me at home from school half the
time--"

"Too much learning spoils boys."

"That wasn't what spoiled you. But that's nothing to do with the
agreement."

"None of your impudence, you saucy young cub," said he, shaking his
head, and moving a step nearer to me; whereat I demonstrated mildly with
the poker.

"I don't mean to be impudent, but I won't be treated like a dog any
longer. I was willing enough to do all I was told, even if it wasn't
according to the agreement; but I get blowed up twenty times a day by
all hands. Ham never speaks civilly to me, and treats me like a nigger
servant. This thing has gone just as far as it can go. I have made up my
mind not to stand it any longer."

"We'll see," replied the captain, grinding his teeth and puckering up
his lips.

"But I don't want to fight, or have any trouble, Captain Fishley," I
proceeded, more gently, for I had warmed up considerably as I recited
the history of my wrongs. "If Ham wants me to black his boots, and will
ask me civilly to do so, I will do it, though that's not my work, and my
brother never meant that I should be anybody's boot-black."

"You will do what you are told to," bullied the masculine tyrant.

"And not meddle with things in the house," added the feminine tyrant.

"All I ask is, that Flora shall be let alone, and to be used fairly
myself," I continued. "I will do the work just as I have done till
October, if I can be treated decently. That's all I have to say."

"That isn't all I've got to say," replied the captain. "Buck Bradford,
drop that poker!"

"I will not."

"You won't?"

"Not till I think it is safe to do so."

"Do you think I'm going to be threatened with a poker in my own house?"

"I won't threaten you if you'll let me alone. I've said all I have to
say."

I know very well that Captain Fishley had not pluck enough to touch me
while I had the poker in my hand; and I was fully satisfied that Mrs.
Fishley would not meddle with Flora again very soon. The scene was
becoming rather embarrassing to me, and I decided either to end it or to
shift the battle-field. I turned and walked towards the back room. As
one dog pitches into another when the latter appears to show the white
feather, Captain Fishley made a spring at me, hoping to take me in the
rear. I was too quick for him, and, facing about, I again drew up in
the order of battle.

"We'll settle this another time. You haven't seen the end of it yet,"
said he, as he turned and walked into the store.




CHAPTER IV.

WHO IS MASTER.


I remained in the back room long enough to assure myself that Mrs.
Fishley did not intend to put a rude hand upon Flora. I even ventured to
hope that she was ashamed of herself, and would not repeat the dastardly
act. I went to the barn to consider the situation. I felt just as though
I had won the victory over my tyrants in the present battle; but I was
confident that the conflict would be renewed at some more favorable
time.

Like all small-minded men, like all tyrants and oppressors, Captain
Fishley was a revengeful person. He would wait till he caught me
napping, and then spring some trap upon me. He would delay his vengeance
till some circumstances conspired against me, and then come down upon me
with the whole weight of his malignity. I determined to keep a sharp
lookout upon all his movements, and especially to avoid all cause of
offence myself. I meant to keep myself as straight as I possibly could.

I had time only to run my course through my mind before the supper-bell
was rung at the back door by Mrs. Fishley. Should I go in to supper as
usual, and meet the whole family, including Ham? I answered this
question in the affirmative, deciding that I would not sulk, or make any
unnecessary trouble to any one. I went in, and took my seat as usual at
the table, by the side of Flora. It was a very solemn occasion, for
hardly a word was spoken during the meal. If I had been ugly, I might
have congratulated myself upon the sensation I had produced.

The head of the family sweetened his tea twice, and upset the
milk-pitcher upon the table-cloth, which, under ordinary circumstances,
would have brought forth some sharp criticisms from his wife; but Mrs.
Fishley neglected to express her disapprobation of her spouse's
carelessness, even in the mildest terms. All these things assured me
that our host and hostess were busy thinking of the great event of the
afternoon. The captain looked morose and savage, and Mrs. Fishley looked
as though a new burden, or a new grief, had been added to her heavy load
of worldly cares.

I half suspected that Captain Fishley was not entirely satisfied with
the conduct of either his wife or his son. It was even possible that he
had spoken to them in disapprobation of their course; but I had no means
of knowing. It seemed to me that otherwise father, mother, and son would
have joined in a general jaw at me, as they had often done before.
Whatever good or evil had been wrought by my vigorous action, my
appetite was not impaired. I ate a hearty supper, and then went into the
store for the mail-bag, which was to be carried down to Riverport.

"Are you going after the mail, Buck?" asked Captain Fishley, in an ugly,
taunting tone, which assured me that he had not recovered from the
shock.

"Yes, sir."

"O, you are! I didn't know but you would give up work altogether,"
sneered he, apparently disappointed to find me no longer a rebel.

"I told you I should do my work just as I always did. All I want is fair
treatment for my sister and myself," I replied in the least offensive
tones I could command.

"I expect my brother, Squire Fishley, will come up to-night," added the
captain, more mildly. "You will go to the hotel in Riverport for him,
and bring him up. Take a lantern with you; it will be dark to-night."

Squire Fishley had been a state senator, and the captain regarded him as
one of the greatest men in Wisconsin. I was rather pleased to have his
company home on the lonely ride from Riverport, and I confess that I was
somewhat proud of making the acquaintance of the distinguished
gentleman.

"Don't be in a hurry, Buck," said Ham Fishley, as I picked up the
mail-bag.

I stopped and looked at him, for his tones were more conciliatory than I
had heard him use within my remembrance. I actually flattered myself
that I had conquered a peace.

"I want to ride with you as far as Crofton's," he added. "I have been
very busy getting ready, and haven't had time to black my boots yet.
It's a pretty stylish party I'm going to, and I want to look as
scrumptious as any of them. Will you black them for me? I'll be much
obliged to you if you will."

"Certainly I will, Ham, when you ask me in that way, and glad to do it
for you," I replied, without hesitating an instant.

I took the boots and went to work upon them. There was an unmistakable
smile of triumph on his face as I did so; but I was perfectly satisfied
that the triumph was mine, not his. Doubtless those civil, polite words
were an invention of the enemy, to win my compliance; and Ham,
forgetting that I had not rebelled against the work, but only the
tyrannical style of his order, was weak enough to believe that he had
conquered me. I made up my mind to review the circumstances, and explain
my position to him, on the way to Crofton's.

"Hasn't that letter come yet, Captain Fishley?" asked an ancient maiden
lady, who entered the store while I was polishing Ham's boots.

"I haven't seen anything of it yet, Miss Larrabee," replied the
postmaster.

"Dear me! What shall I do!" exclaimed the venerable spinster. "My
brother, down in Ohio, promised to send me forty dollars; and I want the
money awfully. I was going down to see Jim's folks, but I can't go, nor
nothin', till that money comes. I hain't got nothin' to pay for goin'
with, you see."

"I'm very sorry, Miss Larrabee. Perhaps the letter will come in
to-night's mail," added the captain.

"But the mail don't git in till nine or ten o'clock, and that's after
bedtime. Ethan writ me the money would be here by to-day, at the
furthest. You don't suppose it's got lost--do you?"

"I think not. We've never lost anything in our office, leastwise not
since I've been postmaster," answered Captain Fishley, who seemed to
attribute the fact to his own superior management.

"It may come up to-night, as you say, and I will be down again in the
morning to see about it," replied Miss Larrabee, as she left the store,
hopeful that the money would arrive in season to enable her to depart
the next day on her journey.

I finished blacking Ham's boots, and he put them on. He was going to a
party at Crofton's, and had already dressed himself as sprucely as the
resources of Torrentville would permit. He was seventeen years old, and
somewhat inclined to be "fast." He was rather a good-looking fellow--an
exceedingly good-looking fellow in his own estimation. Being an only
son, his father and mother were disposed to spoil him, though not even
Ham wholly escaped the sharp points and obliquities of his mother's
temper. His father gave him what he believed to be a liberal allowance
of spending money; but on this subject there was a disagreement between
Ham and the "old man."

The young man always wanted more money, and the old man thought he had
enough. Ham was pleasantly inclined towards some of the young ladies,
and some of the young ladies were pleasantly inclined towards him. Ham
liked to take them out to ride, especially Squire Crofton's youngest
daughter, in the stable-keeper's new buggy; but his father thought the
light wagon, used as a pleasure vehicle by the family, was good enough
even for Elsie Crofton. I had heard some sharp disputes between them on
this subject.

There was to be a party that evening at Crofton's. Ham was invited of
course; I was not. Ham was considered a young man. I was deemed a boy,
not competent to go to parties yet. As long as Flora could not go, I was
content to stay at home with her.

I placed the mail-bag in the wagon, Ham took his seat by my side, and I
drove off. As the reader already knows my position in regard to my
tyrants, I need not repeat what passed between Ham and me. I told him I
had made up my mind to do all the work I had been in the habit of doing,
without grumbling, until October, but that I would not be treated like a
dog any longer; I would take to the woods and live like a bear before I
would stand it. My remarks were evidently very distasteful to my
companion. He did not say much, and I was sorry to see that he was
nursing his wrath against me. He regarded me as a being vastly inferior
to himself, and the decided stand I had taken filled him with the same
kind of indignation which a brutal teamster feels towards his contrary
horse.

"Hold on a minute, Buck; I want to get a drink of water," said Ham, as
we approached a spring by the roadside, half a mile before we reached
Crofton's.

I drew up the black horse, and he jumped out of the wagon. He did not
drink more than a swallow; and I did not think he was very thirsty.

"Go ahead!" said he, leaping into the rear of the wagon, behind the
seat, where I had thrown the mail-bag.

He sat down on the end-board of the wagon, and though I thought it a
little strange that he should take such an uncomfortable seat,
especially when he had on his best clothes, I did not suspect any
mischief. The first thing I knew after I had started the horse, the
mail-bag came down upon my head with a force which made me see more
stars than ever before twinkled in the firmament of my imagination. At
the next instant, Ham seized me by the collar of my coat with both
hands, in such a way that I could not easily move.

"Now, Buck Bradford, we'll settle this business. I'm going to know who's
master, you or I," cried Ham.

"All right, Ham; you shall know in about two minutes and a half," I
replied, choking with wrath, as I hauled in the horse.

Then commenced a struggle which it is impossible to describe. I do not
myself know what I did, only that I thrashed, squirmed, and twisted till
I found myself behind the seat with my antagonist; but he held on to my
coat-collar as though his salvation depended upon the tenacity of his
grip. Finally I doubled myself up, and came out of my coat. In the
twinkling of an eye, I sprang upon him, and tumbled him out of the
wagon, into the dirt of the road. Though he was a year older and two
inches taller than I was, while he had been clerking it in the store, I
had been nursing my muscles with the shovel and the hoe, the pitchfork
and the axe; and I was the stronger and tougher of the two. I could do
more, and bear more, than he. A fight depends as much upon the ability
to endure injury as it does to inflict it.

The rough usage I had given Ham was very disheartening to him; while I,
with the exception of being a little shaky about the head from the blow
of the mail-bag, was as fresh as ever.

"Have you found out who's master yet, Ham?" I demanded, edging up to
him.

He looked sheepish, and retreated a pace at every step I advanced. At
this point, however, the black horse started, and I was obliged to
abandon the field for a moment to attend to him, for the reins had
fallen under his feet. I turned the horse around, and then I saw that my
cowardly assailant had armed himself with a club.




CHAPTER V.

A BATTLE AT LONG RANGE.


I was always very fond of a dog and a horse, and had a taste for
everything appertaining to these animals. Darky, as the black horse was
called, and my dog Bully, were prime favorites with me. If I bore a
divided love, it was so equally divided that I could not tell which I
liked the best. I was fond of working over the horse, the wagon, the
