I told you, eleven of their ships were burnt, four were run ashore to
avoid the flames, while six, trying to make their way out, were captured
by the galley, aided by the three prizes that were taken and which the
knights had caused to be manned by Sards."

"The ways of Allah the All Seeing are wonderful," the merchant said.
"It was indeed a marvellous feat for one galley thus to destroy a great
fleet."

"It was the result of good fortune rather than skill and valour,"
Gervaise said.

"Nay, nay; let praise be given where it is due. It was a marvellous
feat; and although there is good or bad fortune in every event, such a
deed could not have been performed, and would not even have been thought
of, save by a great commander. Who was the knight who thus with one
galley alone destroyed a strongly manned fleet, from which great things
had been looked for?"

Gervaise hesitated. "It was a young knight," he said, "of but little
standing in the Order, and whose name is entirely unknown outside its
ranks."

"By this time it must be well known," Ben Ibyn said; "and it will soon
be known throughout Christendom, and will be dreaded by every Moor. What
was it?"

Gervaise again hesitated.

"I would not have told you the story at all, Ben Ibyn, had I supposed
you would have cared to inquire into the matter. Of course, I will tell
you the name if you insist upon it, but I would much rather you did not
ask."

"But why?" the merchant asked, in surprise. "If I hear it not from you,
I shall assuredly hear it ere long from others, for it will be brought
by traders who are in communication with Italy. I cannot understand why
you should thus hesitate about telling me the name of this commander.
When known it will doubtless be cursed by thousands of Moorish wives and
mothers; but we Berbers are another race. None of our friends or kindred
were on board the fleet; and we traders have rather reason to rejoice,
for, in the first place, so severe a lesson will keep the corsairs in
their ports for a long time; and in the second, had the fleet succeeded
according to general expectation, so great a store of European goods
would have been brought home that the market would have been glutted,
and the goods in our storehouses would have lost all their value. What
reason, then, can you possibly have in refusing to tell me the name of
the commander who has won for himself such credit and glory?"

Gervaise saw that Ben Ibyn was seriously annoyed at what he deemed his
unaccountable obstinacy.

"I will tell you, Ben Ibyn, rather than excite your displeasure, though
I would much have preferred not to do so, for you speak so much more
highly of the affair than it merits. I had myself the honour of being in
command of that galley."

The ladies broke into exclamations of surprise, while the merchant
regarded him with grave displeasure.

"I had thought you truthful," he said; "but this passes all belief. Dost
tell me that a beardless youth could with one galley overcome a great
fleet, commanded by the most noted captains on our coast?"

"I thought that you would not believe me," Gervaise said quietly; "and,
therefore, would have much preferred to keep silence, knowing that I had
no means of supporting my claim. That was not the only reason; the other
was, that already a great deal too much has been said about an affair
in which, as I have told you, I owed everything to good fortune, and am
heartily sick of receiving what I consider altogether undue praise. Ah!"
he exclaimed suddenly, "the thought has just occurred to me of a way by
which you can obtain confirmation of my story; and, as I value your good
opinion and would not be regarded as a boaster and a liar, I entreat you
to take it. I heard you tell the eight men who were rowers in my boat
when I was captured, to call upon you today, that you might do something
for them."

"They came this morning to my store," the merchant said. "They told
me their wishes. I promised them that I would make inquiry about ships
sailing East; and they are to come to me again tomorrow."

"Then, sir, I beseech you to suffer me to go down with you to your
stores and meet them there. The galley of which I was in command at the
time I was captured is the same as that in which a few weeks before I
fought the corsairs, and these eight men were with me at that time.
I begged them for my sake to maintain an absolute silence as to that
affair, and I have no doubt that they have done so, for in the fury
the news would excite, they might fall victims to the first outburst,
though, of course, wholly innocent of any share in the misfortune.
Did you question them without my being present, they might still keep
silent, fearing to injure me. But if, before you begin to do so, I tell
them that they can speak the truth with reference to me, they will, I am
sure, confirm my story, incredible as it may now appear to you."

"That is a fair offer," the merchant said gravely, "and I accept it,
for it may be that I have been too hasty, and I trust it may prove so. I
would rather find myself to be in fault than that the esteem with which
you have inspired me should prove to be misplaced. We will speak no
further on the subject now. I have not yet asked you how it is that you
come to speak our language so well."

Gervaise related how he had studied with Suleiman Ali, and had escorted
him to Syria and received his ransom.

"I had hoped," he said, "that the corsair would have taken me to Syria,
for there I could have communicated with Suleiman, who would, I am sure,
have given me such shelter and aid as he was able, in the event of my
making my escape from slavery and finding myself unable to leave by
sea."

The next day Gervaise went with Ben Ibyn to his stores. The eight
men arrived shortly afterwards, and the merchant, in the presence
of Gervaise, questioned them as to whether they knew anything of a
misfortune that was said to have befallen some ships that had sailed
for the coast of Italy. The men, surprised at the question, glanced at
Gervaise, who said, "Tell Ben Ibyn the truth; it will do neither you nor
me any harm, and will be mentioned by him to no one else."

Accordingly the story was told. Ben Ibyn listened gravely.

"It was the will of Allah," he said, when it was concluded. "I have
wronged you, Gervaise, but your tale seemed too marvellous to be true.

"Do not speak of this to others;" he went on to the eight men. "Now as
to yourselves. For the four of you who desire to return to Syria I have
taken passage in a trader that sails tomorrow and will touch at Joppa
and Acre. Here is money to provide yourselves with garments and to carry
you to your homes. For you," he said to two who were natives of the
town, "I can myself find employment here, and if your conduct is good,
you will have no reason to regret taking service with me. The two of
you who desire to go to Smyrna I will give passage there in a ship which
will sail next week; in the meantime, here is money for your present
wants."

Two days later the merchant's family moved to his house two miles
outside the town, and here Gervaise remained for six months. His life
was not an unpleasant one; he was treated with great kindness by the
merchant and his wife, his duties were but slight, and he had no more
labour to perform in the garden than he cared to do. Nevertheless, he
felt that he would rather have fallen into the hands of a less kind
master, for it seemed to him that it would be an act almost of treachery
to escape from those who treated him as a friend; moreover, at the
country house he was not in a position to frame any plans for escape,
had he decided upon attempting it, nor could he have found out when
Hassan made one of his occasional visits to the port.

One evening the merchant returned from the town accompanied by one of
the sultan's officers and four soldiers. Ben Ibyn was evidently much
depressed and disturbed; he told Muley as he entered, to fetch Gervaise.
When the latter, in obedience to the order, came in from the garden, the
officer said in Italian, "It having come to the ears of the sultan my
master that the merchant Ben Ibyn has ventured, contrary to the law,
to purchase a Christian slave brought secretly into the town, he has
declared the slave to be forfeited and I am commanded to take him at
once to the slaves' quarter."

"I am at the sultan's orders," Gervaise said, bowing his head. "My
master has been a kind one, and I am grateful to him for his treatment
of me."

Gervaise, although taken aback by this sudden change in his fortunes,
was not so cast down as he might otherwise have been; he would now be
free to carry out any plan for escape that he might devise, and by his
being addressed in Italian it was evident to him that his knowledge
of Turkish was unsuspected. When among the other slaves he had always
maintained his character of a mute; and it was only when alone in his
master's family that he had spoken at all. He had no doubt that his
betrayal was due to one of the gardeners, who had several times shown
him signs of ill will, being doubtless jealous of the immunity he
enjoyed from hard labour, and who must, he thought, have crept up and
overheard some conversation; but in that case it was singular that
the fact of his knowledge of Turkish had not been mentioned. Gervaise
afterwards learned that Ben Ibyn had been fined a heavy sum for his
breach of the regulations.

He was now placed between the soldiers, and marched down to the town,
without being allowed to exchange a word with the merchant. On his
arrival there he was taken to the slaves' quarter; here his clothes were
stripped from him, and he was given in their place a ragged shirt and
trousers, and then turned into a room where some fifty slaves were
lying. Of these about half were Europeans, the rest malefactors who had
been condemned to labour.

The appearance of all was miserable in the extreme; they were clothed in
rags, and the faces of the Europeans had a dull, hopeless look that told
alike of their misery and of their despair of any escape from it. They
looked up listlessly as he entered, and then an Italian said, "Cospetto,
comrade; but I know not whether your place is with us, or with the
Moslems across there. As far as colour goes I should put you down as a
Nubian; but your hair is of a hue that consorts but badly with that of
your flesh."

"I am an Englishman," Gervaise replied; "but I have been passing under a
disguise which has unfortunately been detected, so you see here I am."

The mystery explained, his questioner had no further interest in the
matter, and Gervaise, picking out a vacant place on the stone floor, sat
down and looked round him. The room, although large, was roughly built,
and had doubtless been erected with a view to its present purpose. There
were only a few windows; and these were small, strongly barred, and
twelve feet above the floor.

"Not easy to get out of them," Gervaise said to himself "at least, not
easy without aid; and with these Moslems here it is clear that nothing
can be done."

They were roused at daybreak next morning, and were taken out to their
work under the guard of six armed Moors, two overseers, provided with
long whips, accompanied them. The work consisted of cleaning the streets
and working on the roads, and at times of carrying stones for the use of
the masons employed in building an addition to the palace of the sultan.
This was the work to which the gang was set that morning, and it was not
long before the vigour with which Gervaise worked, and the strength he
displayed in moving the heavy stones, attracted the attention of the
overseers and of the head of the masons.

"That is a rare good fellow you have got there, that black with the
curious hair," the latter said. "What is the man? I never saw one like
him."

"He is a Christian," one of the overseers said. "He was smuggled into
the town and sold to Ben Ibyn the Berber, who, to conceal the matter,
dyed him black; but it got to the ears of the sultan, and he had him
taken from the Berber, and brought here; I have no doubt the merchant
has been squeezed rarely."

"Well, that is a good fellow to work," the other said. "He has just
moved a stone, single handed, that it would have taken half a dozen of
the others to lift. I wish you would put him regularly on this job; any
one will do to sweep the streets; but a fellow like that will be of real
use here, especially when the wall rises a bit higher."

"It makes no difference to me," the overseer said. "I will give orders
when I go down that he shall be always sent up with whichever gang comes
here."

The head mason, who was the chief official of the work, soon saw that
Gervaise not only possessed strength, but knowledge of the manner in
which the work should be done.

Accustomed as he had been to direct the slaves at work on the
fortifications at Rhodes, he had learned the best methods of moving
massive stones, and setting them in the places that they were to occupy.
At the end of the day the head mason told one of the slaves who spoke
Italian to inquire of Gervaise whether he had ever been employed on
such work before. Gervaise replied that he had been engaged in the
construction of large buildings.

"I thought so," the officer said to the overseer; "the way he uses his
lever shows that he knows what he is doing. Most of the slaves are worth
nothing; but I can see that this fellow will prove a treasure to us."

Gervaise returned to the prison well satisfied with his day's work. The
labour, hard though it was, was an absolute pleasure to him. There was,
moreover, nothing degrading in it, and while the overseers had plied
their whips freely on the backs of many of his companions, he had not
only escaped, but had, he felt, succeeded in pleasing his masters. The
next morning when the gangs were drawn up in the yard before starting
for work, he was surprised at being ordered to leave the one to which
he belonged and to fall in with another, and was greatly pleased when he
found that this took its way to the spot at which they were at work on
the previous day.

At the end of the week, when the work of the day was finished, the head
mason came down to the prison and spoke to the governor; a few minutes
afterwards Gervaise was called out. The governor was standing in the
courtyard with an interpreter.

"This officer tells me that you are skilled in masonry," the governor
said, "and has desired that you shall be appointed overseer of the gang
whose duty it is to move the stones, saying he is sure that with half
the slaves now employed you would get as much work done as at present.
Have you anything to say?"

"I thank you, my lord, and this officer," Gervaise replied. "I will do
my best; but I would submit to you that it would be better if I could
have the same slaves always with me, instead of their being changed
every day; I could then instruct them in their work. I would also submit
that it were well to pick men with some strength for this labour, for
many are so weak that they are well nigh useless in the moving of heavy
weights; and lastly, I would humbly submit to you that if men are to
do good work they must be fed. This work is as heavy as that in the
galleys, and the men there employed receive extra rations to strengthen
them; and I could assuredly obtain far better results if the gang
employed upon this labour were to receive a somewhat larger supply of
food."

"The fellow speaks boldly," the governor said to the head mason, when
the reply was translated.

"There is reason in what he says, my lord. Many of the slaves, though
fit for the light labour of cleaning the streets, are of very little use
to us, and even the whip of the drivers cannot get more than a momentary
effort from them. If you can save twenty-five men's labour for other
work, it will pay to give more food to the other twenty-five. I should
let this man pick out his gang. He has worked in turn with all of them,
and must know what each can do; besides, it is necessary that he should
have men who can understand his orders."

Gervaise accordingly was allowed to pick out his gang; and he chose
those whom he had observed to be the strongest and most handy at the
work.

"You will be responsible," the governor said to him, "for the masons
being supplied with stone, and if you fail you will be punished and put
to other labour."

So far from there being any falling off in the work, the head mason
found that, even though the walls began to rise and the labour of
transporting the stones into their positions became greater, the masons
were never kept standing. The men, finding their position improved,
both in the matter of food and in the immunity they enjoyed from blows,
worked cheerfully and well. Gervaise did not content himself with
giving orders, but worked at the heaviest jobs, and, little by little,
introduced many of the appliances used by the skilled masons of Rhodes
in transporting and lifting heavy stones. Gradually his own position
improved: he was treated as an overseer, and was permitted to sleep
under an arcade that ran along one side of the yard, instead of being
confined in the close and stifling cell. His dye had long since worn
off.

One day as he was going up with his gang under charge of the usual
guards to the building, he saw Hassan, who grinned maliciously.

"Ah, ah, Christian dog!" he said; "you threatened me, and I have not
forgotten it. The last time I was here I made it known to an officer of
the sultan that Ben Ibyn had a Christian slave who had been smuggled
in; and here you are. I hope you like the change. Look, I have still got
your amulet, and it has brought me better luck than it did you. I have
been fortunate ever since, and no money could buy it from me."

He had been walking close to Gervaise as he spoke, and one of the guards
pushed him roughly aside.

Time passed on. One day on his return from work a well dressed Moor met
him as the gang broke up in the courtyard.

"I have permission to speak to you," he said to Gervaise, and drew him
aside. "Know, O Christian, that I have received a letter from Suleiman
Ali, of Syria. He tells me that he has heard from Ben Ibyn, the Berber,
that you are a slave, and has asked me to inquire of the sultan the
price that he will take for your ransom, expressing his willingness to
pay whatever may be demanded, and charging me to defray the sum and to
make arrangements by which you may return to Europe. This I am willing
to do, knowing Suleiman Ali by report as a wealthy man and an honourable
one. I saw the sultan yesterday. He told me that I should have an answer
this morning as to the ransom that he would take. When I went to him
again today, he said that he had learnt from the governor of the prison
and from the head mason that you were almost beyond price, that you had
been raised to the position of superintendent of the slaves employed in
the building of his palace, and that you were a man of such skill that
he would not part with you at any price until the work was finished.
After that he would sell you; but he named a price threefold that at
which the very best white slave in Tripoli would be valued. However,
from the way in which Suleiman Ali wrote, I doubt not that he would pay
it, great as it is, for he speaks of you in terms of affection, and I
would pay the money could you be released at once. As it is, however,
I shall write to him, and there will be ample time for an answer to be
received from him before the building is finished."

"Truly I am deeply thankful to my good friend, Suleiman Ali; but for
reasons of my own I am not desirous of being ransomed at present,
especially at such a cost, which I should feel bound in honour to repay
to him; therefore, I pray you to write to him, saying that while I thank
him from my heart for his kindness, I am not able to avail myself of it.
In the first place, I am well treated here, and my position is not an
unpleasant one; secondly, the sum required for ransom is altogether
preposterous; thirdly, I am not without hopes that I may some day find
other means of freeing myself without so great a sacrifice; and lastly,
that I have a reason which I cannot mention, why, at present, I would
not quit Tripoli, even were I free tomorrow. You can tell him that this
is the reason which, most of all, weighs with me. Do not, however, I
pray you, let the sultan know that I have refused to be ransomed, for
he might think I was meditating an escape, and would order extra
precautions to be taken to prevent my doing so. Will you also see Ben
Ibyn, and thank him from me for having written to Suleiman Ali on my
behalf?"



CHAPTER XIX ESCAPE


Gradually a greater amount of liberty was given to Gervaise. Escape
from Tripoli was deemed impossible, especially as he was supposed to be
entirely ignorant of Arabic. He was, indeed, scarcely regarded now as a
slave by the head mason, and instead of being clad in rags was dressed
like other overseers. He was no longer obliged to walk with the gang to
and from the palace, and was at last granted permission to go into the
town for an hour or two after his work was over, instead of returning
direct to the prison. The first time this permission was given to him
he placed himself on the road by which Ben Ibyn would leave the town,
choosing a quiet spot where the meeting would not be observed. Gervaise
had for some time taken to staining his face, hands, and legs with
walnut juice, beginning with a weak solution, and very gradually
increasing the strength until he had reached a shade approximating to
that of the lighter coloured portion of the population. The head mason
had on one occasion noticed it, and said, "The sun is darkening your
skin, Gervaise, until you might verily pass as a Moor."

Gervaise detected an expression of doubt in the tone the officer had
spoken to the interpreter, and replied at once, "It is not altogether
the sun. Since I have obtained permission to come to my work alone,
I have taken to slightly darkening my skin, in order to go to and fro
unmolested, and free from the insults that the boys and beggars hurl at
Christians."

The master mason nodded approvingly when the answer was translated to
him.

"It is a wise step," he said; "for truly the hatred of Christians is
very strong among the lower classes, especially since it became known
that the galleys that sailed from here nearly two years ago were, with
all the fleet from which so much was expected, utterly destroyed. It is
well, then, that you should pass unnoticed, for were there a tumult in
the street you might lose your life, and I should lose the best labour
overseer I have ever had."

Thus, then, as Gervaise walked through the streets on the first occasion
of obtaining his liberty, he attracted no attention whatever. When he
saw Ben Ibyn approaching he stepped out to meet him. The merchant looked
in his face, but for a moment failed to recognise him, then he exclaimed
suddenly, "It is Gervaise! Ah, my son, I am indeed rejoiced to see
you. We have spoken of you so often at home, and sorely did my wife and
daughters grieve when you were torn from us. I did not dare to send any
message to you, for the sultan pretended great anger against me, and
used the opportunity to squeeze me hardly; but I have frequently made
inquiries about you, and was glad indeed to find that even in prison you
received promotion; had it been otherwise--had I found that you were
in misery--I would have endeavoured, whatever the risk, to aid you to
escape."

"I have indeed nothing to complain of, and was sorry to learn that you
had suffered on my account. Have you ever learned how it came about that
I was denounced?"

"No, indeed; I would have given much to know, and assuredly the dog,
whoever he was, should have been made to suffer."

"It was Hassan. The villain met me when I was with the gang, and boasted
that it was he who had sent me there. He had told the news to some
official, who had, of course, repeated it to the sultan; doubtless he
concealed his own share in the matter, otherwise he too would, next time
he returned here, have had to pay for his part in it."

"I will make him pay more heavily than the sultan would," Ben Ibyn said
sternly; "I will speak to my friends among the merchants, and henceforth
no Berber will buy aught from him; and we have hitherto been his best
customers. But let us not waste our time in speaking of this wretch. How
comes it that you are walking freely in the streets of Tripoli? I can
see that your face is stained, although you are no longer a Nubian."

Gervaise told him how it was that he was free to walk in the city after
his work was done.

"I shall now," he went on, "be able to carry out any plan of escape that
may occur to me; but before I leave, as I shall certainly do ere long,
I mean to settle my score with Hassan, and I pray you to send one of
the men who were with me in the galley, and whom you took into your
employment, directly you hear that his ship is in harbour. Do not give
him either a note or a message: bid him simply place himself in the
road between the prison gate and the palace, and look fixedly at me as I
pass. I shall know it is a signal that Hassan is in the port."

