"Celia has loved you ever since she first saw you, only she would not
tell you while you were so obstinate and naughty. Now you have repented
and mean to be good you deserve to be happy, and so she may love you as
much as she likes."

Celia and Prince Darling threw themselves at the Fairy's feet, and
the Prince was never tired of thanking her for her kindness. Celia
was delighted to hear how sorry he was for all his past follies and
misdeeds, and promised to love him as long as she lived.

"Rise, my children," said the Fairy, "and I will transport you to the
palace, and Prince Darling shall have back again the crown he forfeited
by his bad behavior."

While she was speaking, they found themselves in Suliman's hall, and his
delight was great at seeing his dear master once more. He gave up the
throne joyfully to the Prince, and remained always the most faithful of
his subjects.

Celia and Prince Darling reigned for many years, but he was so
determined to govern worthily and to do his duty that his ring, which he
took to wearing again, never once pricked him severely.(1)


(1) Cabinet des Fees.




BLUE BEARD


There was a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, a deal
of silver and gold plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilded all
over with gold. But this man was so unlucky as to have a blue beard,
which made him so frightfully ugly that all the women and girls ran away
from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were
perfect beauties. He desired of her one of them in marriage, leaving to
her choice which of the two she would bestow on him. They would neither
of them have him, and sent him backward and forward from one another,
not being able to bear the thoughts of marrying a man who had a blue
beard, and what besides gave them disgust and aversion was his having
already been married to several wives, and nobody ever knew what became
of them.

Blue Beard, to engage their affection, took them, with the lady their
mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance, with other young
people of the neighborhood, to one of his country seats, where they
stayed a whole week.

There was nothing then to be seen but parties of pleasure, hunting,
fishing, dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all
passed the night in rallying and joking with each other. In short,
everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think
the master of the house not to have a beard so very blue, and that he
was a mighty civil gentleman.

As soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded. About a
month afterward, Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take
a country journey for six weeks at least, about affairs of very great
consequence, desiring her to divert herself in his absence, to send for
her friends and acquaintances, to carry them into the country, if she
pleased, and to make good cheer wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great wardrobes, wherein I
have my best furniture; these are of my silver and gold plate, which is
not every day in use; these open my strong boxes, which hold my money,
both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and this is the
master-key to all my apartments. But for this little one here, it is the
key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground floor.
Open them all; go into all and every one of them, except that little
closet, which I forbid you, and forbid it in such a manner that, if you
happen to open it, there's nothing but what you may expect from my just
anger and resentment."

She promised to observe, very exactly, whatever he had ordered; when
he, after having embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his
journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the
new married lady, so great was their impatience to see all the rich
furniture of her house, not daring to come while her husband was there,
because of his blue beard, which frightened them. They ran through all
the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were all so fine and rich that
they seemed to surpass one another.

After that they went up into the two great rooms, where was the best
and richest furniture; they could not sufficiently admire the number
and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets, stands, tables, and
looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself from head to foot; some
of them were framed with glass, others with silver, plain and gilded,
the finest and most magnificent ever were seen.

They ceased not to extol and envy the happiness of their friend, who in
the meantime in no way diverted herself in looking upon all these rich
things, because of the impatience she had to go and open the closet on
the ground floor. She was so much pressed by her curiosity that, without
considering that it was very uncivil to leave her company, she went
down a little back staircase, and with such excessive haste that she had
twice or thrice like to have broken her neck.

Coming to the closet-door, she made a stop for some time, thinking upon
her husband's orders, and considering what unhappiness might attend her
if she was disobedient; but the temptation was so strong she could not
overcome it. She then took the little key, and opened it, trembling, but
could not at first see anything plainly, because the windows were shut.
After some moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered
over with clotted blood, on which lay the bodies of several dead women,
ranged against the walls. (These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had
married and murdered, one after another.) She thought she should have
died for fear, and the key, which she pulled out of the lock, fell out
of her hand.

After having somewhat recovered her surprise, she took up the key,
locked the door, and went upstairs into her chamber to recover herself;
but she could not, she was so much frightened. Having observed that the
key of the closet was stained with blood, she tried two or three times
to wipe it off, but the blood would not come out; in vain did she wash
it, and even rub it with soap and sand; the blood still remained, for
the key was magical and she could never make it quite clean; when the
blood was gone off from one side, it came again on the other.

Blue Beard returned from his journey the same evening, and said he had
received letters upon the road, informing him that the affair he went
about was ended to his advantage. His wife did all she could to convince
him she was extremely glad of his speedy return.

Next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with
such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

"What!" said he, "is not the key of my closet among the rest?"

"I must certainly have left it above upon the table," said she.

"Fail not to bring it to me presently," said Blue Beard.

After several goings backward and forward she was forced to bring him
the key. Blue Beard, having very attentively considered it, said to his
wife,

"How comes this blood upon the key?"

"I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death.

"You do not know!" replied Blue Beard. "I very well know. You were
resolved to go into the closet, were you not? Mighty well, madam; you
shall go in, and take your place among the ladies you saw there."

Upon this she threw herself at her husband's feet, and begged his pardon
with all the signs of true repentance, vowing that she would never more
be disobedient. She would have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful
was she; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than any rock!

"You must die, madam," said he, "and that presently."

"Since I must die," answered she (looking upon him with her eyes all
bathed in tears), "give me some little time to say my prayers."

"I give you," replied Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not
one moment more."

When she was alone she called out to her sister, and said to her:

"Sister Anne" (for that was her name), "go up, I beg you, upon the top
of the tower, and look if my brothers are not coming over; they promised
me that they would come to-day, and if you see them, give them a sign to
make haste."

Her sister Anne went up upon the top of the tower, and the poor
afflicted wife cried out from time to time:

"Anne, sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?"

And sister Anne said:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which
looks green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, holding a great sabre in his hand, cried
out as loud as he could bawl to his wife:

"Come down instantly, or I shall come up to you."

"One moment longer, if you please," said his wife, and then she cried
out very softly, "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see anybody coming?"

And sister Anne answered:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which is
green."

"Come down quickly," cried Blue Beard, "or I will come up to you."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister
Anne, dost thou not see anyone coming?"

"I see," replied sister Anne, "a great dust, which comes on this side
here."

"Are they my brothers?"

"Alas! no, my dear sister, I see a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?" cried Blue Beard

"One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out: "Anne,
sister Anne, dost thou see nobody coming?"

"I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are yet a great way off."

"God be praised," replied the poor wife joyfully; "they are my brothers;
I will make them a sign, as well as I can, for them to make haste."

Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble.
The distressed wife came down, and threw herself at his feet, all in
tears, with her hair about her shoulders.

"This signifies nothing," says Blue Beard; "you must die"; then, taking
hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up the sword with the other,
he was going to take off her head. The poor lady, turning about to him,
and looking at him with dying eyes, desired him to afford her one little
moment to recollect herself.

"No, no," said he, "recommend thyself to God," and was just ready to
strike...

At this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that
Blue Beard made a sudden stop. The gate was opened, and presently
entered two horsemen, who, drawing their swords, ran directly to Blue
Beard. He knew them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other
a musketeer, so that he ran away immediately to save himself; but the
two brothers pursued so close that they overtook him before he could get
to the steps of the porch, when they ran their swords through his body
and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and
had not strength enough to rise and welcome her brothers.

Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his
estate. She made use of one part of it to marry her sister Anne to a
young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to buy
captains commissions for her brothers, and the rest to marry herself to
a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the ill time she had passed
with Blue Beard.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




TRUSTY JOHN


Once upon a time there was an old king who was so ill that he thought to
himself, "I am most likely on my death-bed." Then he said, "Send Trusty
John to me." Now Trusty John was his favorite servant, and was so called
because all his life he had served him so faithfully. When he approached
the bed the King spake to him: "Most trusty John, I feel my end is
drawing near, and I could face it without a care were it not for my son.
He is still too young to decide everything for himself, and unless you
promise me to instruct him in all he should know, and to be to him as a
father, I shall not close my eyes in peace." Then Trusty John answered:
"I will never desert him, and will serve him faithfully, even though it
should cost me my life." Then the old King said: "Now I die comforted
and in peace"; and then he went on: "After my death you must show him
the whole castle, all the rooms and apartments and vaults, and all the
treasures that lie in them; but you must not show him the last room in
the long passage, where the picture of the Princess of the Golden Roof
is hidden. When he beholds that picture he will fall violently in love
with it and go off into a dead faint, and for her sake he will encounter
many dangers; you must guard him from this." And when Trusty John had
again given the King his hand upon it the old man became silent, laid
his head on the pillow, and died.

When the old King had been carried to his grave Trusty John told the
young King what he had promised his father on his death-bed, and added:
"And I shall assuredly keep my word, and shall be faithful to you as I
have been to him, even though it should cost me my life."

Now when the time of mourning was over, Trusty John said to him: "It
is time you should see your inheritance. I will show you your ancestral
castle." So he took him over everything, and let him see all the riches
and splendid apartments, only the one room where the picture was he
did not open. But the picture was placed so that if the door opened
you gazed straight upon it, and it was so beautifully painted that
you imagined it lived and moved, and that it was the most lovable and
beautiful thing in the whole world. But the young King noticed that
Trusty John always missed one door, and said: "Why do you never open
this one for me?" "There is something inside that would appall you," he
answered. But the King replied: "I have seen the whole castle, and shall
find out what is in there"; and with these words he approached the door
and wanted to force it open. But Trusty John held him back, and said: "I
promised your father before his death that you shouldn't see what that
room contains. It might bring both you and me to great grief." "Ah!
no," answered the young King; "if I don't get in, it will be my certain
destruction; I should have no peace night or day till I had seen what
was in the room with my own eyes. Now I don't budge from the spot till
you have opened the door."

Then Trusty John saw there was no way out of it, so with a heavy heart
and many sighs he took the key from the big bunch. When he had opened
the door he stepped in first, and thought to cover the likeness so that
the King might not perceive it; but it was hopeless: the King stood on
tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the picture of the
maid, so beautiful and glittering with gold and precious stones, he fell
swooning to the ground. Trusty John lifted him up, carried him to bed,
and thought sorrowfully: "The curse has come upon us; gracious heaven!
what will be the end of it all?" Then he poured wine down his throat
till he came to himself again. The first words he spoke were: "Oh! who
is the original of the beautiful picture?" "She is the Princess of the
Golden Roof," answered Trusty John. Then the King continued: "My love
for her is so great that if all the leaves on the trees had tongues they
could not express it; my very life depends on my winning her. You are my
most trusty John: you must stand by me."

The faithful servant pondered long how they were to set about the
matter, for it was said to be difficult even to get into the presence of
the Princess. At length he hit upon a plan, and spoke to the King: "All
the things she has about her--tables, chairs, dishes, goblets, bowls,
and all her household furniture--are made of gold. You have in
your treasure five tons of gold; let the goldsmiths of your kingdom
manufacture them into all manner of vases and vessels, into all sorts of
birds and game and wonderful beasts; that will please her. We shall
go to her with them and try our luck." The King summoned all his
goldsmiths, and they had to work hard day and night, till at length the
most magnificent things were completed. When a ship had been laden with
them the faithful John disguised himself as a merchant, and the King had
to do the same, so that they should be quite unrecognizable. And so
they crossed the seas and journeyed till they reached the town where the
Princess of the Golden Roof dwelt.

Trusty John made the King remain behind on the ship and await his
return. "Perhaps," he said, "I may bring the Princess back with me, so
see that everything is in order; let the gold ornaments be arranged and
the whole ship decorated." Then he took a few of the gold things in his
apron, went ashore, and proceeded straight to the palace. When he came
to the courtyard he found a beautiful maiden standing at the well,
drawing water with two golden pails. And as she was about to carry away
the glittering water she turned round and saw the stranger, and asked
him who he was. Then he replied: "I am a merchant," and opening his
apron, he let her peep in. "Oh! my," she cried; "what beautiful gold
wares!" she set down her pails, and examined one thing after the other.
Then she said: "The Princess must see this, she has such a fancy for
gold things that she will buy up all you have." She took him by the hand
and let him into the palace, for she was the lady's maid.

When the Princess had seen the wares she was quite enchanted, and said:
"They are all so beautifully made that I shall buy everything you have."
But Trusty John said: "I am only the servant of a rich merchant, what
I have here is nothing compared to what my master has on his ship; his
merchandise is more artistic and costly than anything that has ever been
made in gold before." She desired to have everything brought up to her,
but he said: "There is such a quantity of things that it would take many
days to bring them up, and they would take up so many rooms that
you would have no space for them in your house." Thus her desire and
curiosity were excited to such an extent that at last she said: "Take me
to your ship; I shall go there myself and view your master's treasures."

Then Trusty John was quite delighted, and brought her to the ship; and
the King, when he beheld her, saw that she was even more beautiful than
her picture, and thought every moment that his heart would burst. She
stepped on to the ship, and the King led her inside. But Trusty John
remained behind with the steersman, and ordered the ship to push off.
"Spread all sail, that we may fly on the ocean like a bird in the air."
Meanwhile the King showed the Princess inside all his gold wares, every
single bit of it--dishes, goblets, bowls, the birds and game, and all
the wonderful beasts. Many hours passed thus, and she was so happy that
she did not notice that the ship was sailing away. After she had seen
the last thing she thanked the merchant and prepared to go home; but
when she came to the ship's side she saw that they were on the high
seas, far from land, and that the ship was speeding on its way under
full canvas. "Oh!" she cried in terror, "I am deceived, carried away and
betrayed into the power of a merchant; I would rather have died!" But
the King seized her hand and spake: "I am no merchant, but a king of as
high birth as yourself; and it was my great love for you that made me
carry you off by stratagem. The first time I saw your likeness I fell to
the ground in a swoon." When the Princess of the Golden Roof heard this
she was comforted, and her heart went out to him, so that she willingly
consented to become his wife.

Now it happened one day, while they were sailing on the high seas,
that Trusty John, sitting on the forepart of the ship, fiddling away to
himself, observed three ravens in the air flying toward him. He ceased
playing, and listened to what they were saying, for he understood their
language. The one croaked: "Ah, ha! so he's bringing the Princess of
the Golden Roof home." "Yes," answered the second, "but he's not got her
yet." "Yes, he has," spake the third, "for she's sitting beside him on
the ship." Then number one began again and cried: "That'll not help him!
When they reach the land a chestnut horse will dash forward to greet
them: the King will wish to mount it, and if he does it will gallop away
with him, and disappear into the air, and he will never see his bride
again." "Is there no escape for him?" asked number two. "Oh! yes, if
someone else mounts quickly and shoots the horse dead with the pistol
that is sticking in the holster, then the young King is saved. But who's
to do that? And anyone who knows it and tells him will be turned into
stone from his feet to his knees." Then spake number two: "I know more
than that: even if the horse is slain, the young King will still not
keep his bride: when they enter the palace together they will find a
ready-made wedding shirt in a cupboard, which looks as though it were
woven of gold and silver, but is really made of nothing but sulphur and
tar: when the King puts it on it will burn him to his marrow and bones."
Number three asked: "Is there no way of escape, then?" "Oh! yes,"
answered number two: "If someone seizes the shirt with gloved hands and
throws it into the fire, and lets it burn, then the young King is saved.
But what's the good? Anyone knowing this and telling it will have half
his body turned into stone, from his knees to his heart." Then number
three spake: "I know yet more: though the bridal shirt too be burnt, the
King hasn't even then secured his bride: when the dance is held after
the wedding, and the young Queen is dancing, she will suddenly grow
deadly white, and drop down like one dead, and unless some one lifts her
up and draws three drops of blood from her right side, and spits them
out again, she will die. But if anyone who knows this betrays it, he
will be turned into stone from the crown of his head to the soles of his
feet." When the ravens had thus conversed they fled onward, but Trusty
John had taken it all in, and was sad and depressed from that time
forward; for if he were silent to his master concerning what he had
heard, he would involve him in misfortune; but if he took him into his
confidence, then he himself would forfeit his life. At last he said: "I
will stand by my master, though it should be my ruin."

Now when they drew near the land it came to pass just as the ravens had
predicted, and a splendid chestnut horse bounded forward. "Capital!"
said the King; "this animal shall carry me to my palace," and was about
to mount, but Trusty John was too sharp for him, and, springing up
quickly, seized the pistol out of the holster and shot the horse dead.
Then the other servants of the King, who at no time looked favorably on
Trusty John, cried out: "What a sin to kill the beautiful beast that was
to bear the King to his palace!" But the King spake: "Silence! let him
alone; he is ever my most trusty John. Who knows for what good end he
may have done this thing?" So they went on their way and entered
the palace, and there in the hall stood a cupboard in which lay the
ready-made bridal shirt, looking for all the world as though it were
made of gold and silver. The young King went toward it and was about to
take hold of it, but Trusty John, pushing him aside, seized it with his
gloved hands, threw it hastily into the fire, and let it burn The
other servants commenced grumbling again, and said: "See, he's actually
burning the King's bridal shirt." But the young King spoke: "Who knows
for what good purpose he does it? Let him alone, he is my most trusty
John." Then the wedding was celebrated, the dance began, and the bride
joined in, but Trusty John watched her countenance carefully. Of a
sudden she grew deadly white, and fell to the ground as if she were
dead. He at once sprang hastily toward her, lifted her up, and bore her
to a room, where he laid her down, and kneeling beside her he drew three
drops of blood from her right side, and spat them out. She soon
breathed again and came to herself; but the young King had watched the
proceeding, and not knowing why Trusty John had acted as he did, he flew
into a passion, and cried: "Throw him into prison." On the following
morning sentence was passed on Trusty John, and he was condemned to be
hanged. As he stood on the gallows he said: "Every one doomed to
death has the right to speak once before he dies; and I too have that
privilege?" "Yes," said the King, "it shall be granted to you." So
Trusty John spoke: "I am unjustly condemned, for I have always been
faithful to you"; and he proceeded to relate how he had heard the
ravens' conversation on the sea, and how he had to do all he did in
order to save his master. Then the King cried: "Oh! my most trusty John,
pardon! pardon! Take him down." But as he uttered the last word Trusty
John had fallen lifeless to the ground, and was a stone.

The King and Queen were in despair, and the King spake: "Ah! how ill
have I rewarded such great fidelity!" and made them lift up the stone
image and place it in his bedroom near his bed. As often as he looked at
it he wept and said: "Oh! if I could only restore you to life, my most
trusty John!" After a time the Queen gave birth to twins, two small
