
'Hans,' said he, 'what a fool you were not to come with me yesterday! I
was well feasted and entertained, and I have money in my pocket into the
bargain,' he went on, rattling some coins while he spoke, to make Hans
understand how much he had lost.

'Ah, sir,' replied Hans calmly, 'in order to have gained so much money
you must have lain awake all night, but I have earned a hundred times
that amount while I was sleeping soundly.'

'How did you manage that?' asked the minister eagerly, but Hans
answered, 'It is only fools who boast of their farthings; wise men take
care to hide their crowns.'

They drove home, and Hans neglected none of his duties, but put up the
horses and gave them their food before going to the church corner, where
he found the loose stone, exactly in the place described by the dwarf.
Then he returned to his work.

The first night of the full moon, when the whole village was asleep, he
stole out, armed with a pickaxe, and with much difficulty succeeded in
dislodging the stone from its place. Sure enough, there was the hole,
and in the hole lay the treasure, exactly as the little man had said.

The following Sunday he handed over the third part to the village poor,
and informed the minister that he wished to break his bond of
service. As, however, he did not claim any wages, the minister made no
objections, but allowed him to do as he wished. So Hans went his way,
bought himself a large house, and married a young wife, and lived
happily and prosperously to the end of his days.

(Ehstnische Marchen.)




THE YOUNG MAN WHO WOULD HAVE HIS EYES OPENED

Once upon a time there lived a youth who was never happy unless he was
prying into something that other people knew nothing about. After he had
learned to understand the language of birds and beasts, he discovered
accidentally that a great deal took place under cover of night which
mortal eyes never saw. From that moment he felt he could not rest till
these hidden secrets were laid bare to him, and he spent his whole time
wandering from one wizard to another, begging them to open his eyes,
but found none to help him. At length he reached an old magician called
Mana, whose learning was greater than that of the rest, and who could
tell him all he wanted to know. But when the old man had listened
attentively to him, he said, warningly:

'My son, do not follow after empty knowledge, which will not bring you
happiness, but rather evil. Much is hidden from the eyes of men, because
did they know everything their hearts would no longer be at peace.
Knowledge kills joy, therefore think well what you are doing, or some
day you will repent. But if you will not take my advice, then truly I
can show you the secrets of the night. Only you will need more than a
man's courage to bear the sight.'

He stopped and looked at the young man, who nodded his head, and then
the wizard continued, 'To-morrow night you must go to the place where,
once in seven years, the serpent-king gives a great feast to his whole
court. In front of him stands a golden bowl filled with goats' milk,
and if you can manage to dip a piece of bread in this milk, and eat it
before you are obliged to fly, you will understand all the secrets of
the night that are hidden from other men. It is lucky for you that the
serpent-king's feast happens to fall this year, otherwise you would have
had long to wait for it. But take care to be quick and bold, or it will
be the worse for you.'

The young man thanked the wizard for his counsel, and went his way
firmly resolved to carry out his purpose, even if he paid for it with
his life; and when night came he set out for a wide, lonely moor, where
the serpent-king held his feast. With sharpened eyes, he looked eagerly
all round him, but could see nothing but a multitude of small hillocks,
that lay motionless under the moonlight. He crouched behind a bush
for some time, till he felt that midnight could not be far off, when
suddenly there arose in the middle of the moor a brilliant glow, as if
a star was shining over one of the hillocks. At the same moment all the
hillocks began to writhe and to crawl, and from each one came hundreds
of serpents and made straight for the glow, where they knew they should
find their king. When they reached the hillock where he dwelt, which was
higher and broader than the rest, and had a bright light hanging over
the top, they coiled themselves up and waited. The whirr and confusion
from all the serpent-houses were so great that the youth did not dare to
advance one step, but remained where he was, watching intently all that
went on; but at last he began to take courage, and moved on softly step
by step.

What he saw was creepier than creepy, and surpassed all he had ever
dreamt of. Thousands of snakes, big and little and of every colour, were
gathered together in one great cluster round a huge serpent, whose body
was as thick as a beam, and which had on its head a golden crown, from
which the light sprang. Their hissings and darting tongues so terrified
the young man that his heart sank, and he felt he should never have
courage to push on to certain death, when suddenly he caught sight of
the golden bowl in front of the serpent-king, and knew that if he lost
this chance it would never come back. So, with his hair standing on end
and his blood frozen in his veins, he crept forwards. Oh! what a noise
and a whirr rose afresh among the serpents. Thousands of heads were
reared, and tongues were stretched out to sting the intruder to death,
but happily for him their bodies were so closely entwined one in the
other that they could not disentangle themselves quickly. Like lightning
he seized a bit of bread, dipped it in the bowl, and put it in his
mouth, then dashed away as if fire was pursuing him. On he flew as if a
whole army of foes were at his heels, and he seemed to hear the noise
of their approach growing nearer and nearer. At length his breath failed
him, and he threw himself almost senseless on the turf. While he lay
there dreadful dreams haunted him. He thought that the serpent-king with
the fiery crown had twined himself round him, and was crushing out his
life. With a loud shriek he sprang up to do battle with his enemy, when
he saw that it was rays of the sun which had wakened him. He rubbed his
eyes and looked all round, but nothing could he see of the foes of the
past night, and the moor where he had run into such danger must be at
least a mile away. But it was no dream that he had run hard and far, or
that he had drunk of the magic goats' milk. And when he felt his limbs,
and found them whole, his joy was great that he had come through such
perils with a sound skin.

After the fatigues and terrors of the night, he lay still till mid-day,
but he made up his mind he would go that very evening into the forest to
try what the goats' milk could really do for him, and if he would now be
able to understand all that had been a mystery to him. And once in the
forest his doubts were set at rest, for he saw what no mortal eyes had
ever seen before. Beneath the trees were golden pavilions, with flags of
silver all brightly lighted up. He was still wondering why the pavilions
were there, when a noise was heard among the trees, as if the wind had
suddenly got up, and on all sides beautiful maidens stepped from the
trees into the bright light of the moon. These were the wood-nymphs,
daughters of the earth-mother, who came every night to hold their
dances, in the forest. The young man, watching from his hiding place,
wished he had a hundred eyes in his head, for two were not nearly enough
for the sight before him, the dances lasting till the first streaks of
dawn. Then a silvery veil seemed to be drawn over the ladies, and they
vanished from sight. But the young man remained where he was till the
sun was high in the heavens, and then went home.

He felt that day to be endless, and counted the minutes till night
should come, and he might return to the forest. But when at last he got
there he found neither pavilions nor nymphs, and though he went back
many nights after he never saw them again. Still, he thought about them
night and day, and ceased to care about anything else in the world, and
was sick to the end of his life with longing for that beautiful vision.
And that was the way he learned that the wizard had spoken truly when he
said, 'Blindness is man's highest good.'

(Ehstnische Marchen.)




THE BOYS WITH THE GOLDEN STARS

Once upon a time what happened did happen: and if it had not happened,
you would never have heard this story.

Well, once upon a time there lived an emperor who had half a world all
to himself to rule over, and in this world dwelt an old herd and his
wife and their three daughters, Anna, Stana, and Laptitza.

Anna, the eldest, was so beautiful that when she took the sheep to
pasture they forgot to eat as long as she was walking with them. Stana,
the second, was so beautiful that when she was driving the flock the
wolves protected the sheep. But Laptitza, the youngest, with a skin
as white as the foam on the milk, and with hair as soft as the finest
lamb's wool, was as beautiful as both her sisters put together--as
beautiful as she alone could be.

One summer day, when the rays of the sun were pouring down on the earth,
the three sisters went to the wood on the outskirts of the mountain to
pick strawberries. As they were looking about to find where the largest
berries grew they heard the tramp of horses approaching, so loud that
you would have thought a whole army was riding by. But it was only the
emperor going to hunt with his friends and attendants.

They were all fine handsome young men, who sat their horses as if they
were part of them, but the finest and handsomest of all was the young
emperor himself.

As they drew near the three sisters, and marked their beauty, they
checked their horses and rode slowly by.

'Listen, sisters!' said Anna, as they passed on. 'If one of those young
men should make me his wife, I would bake him a loaf of bread which
should keep him young and brave for ever.'

'And if I,' said Stana, 'should be the one chosen, I would weave my
husband a shirt which will keep him unscathed when he fights with
dragons; when he goes through water he will never even be wet; or if
through fire, it will not scorch him.'

'And I,' said Laptitza, 'will give the man who chooses me two boys,
twins, each with a golden star on his forehead, as bright as those in
the sky.'

And though they spoke low the young men heard, and turned their horses'
heads.

'I take you at your word, and mine shall you be, most lovely of
empresses!' cried the emperor, and swung Laptitza and her strawberries
on the horse before him.

'And I will have you,' 'And I you,' exclaimed two of his friends, and
they all rode back to the palace together.

The following morning the marriage ceremony took place, and for three
days and three nights there was nothing but feasting over the whole
kingdom. And when the rejoicings were over the news was in everybody's
mouth that Anna had sent for corn, and had made the loaf of which she
had spoken at the strawberry beds. And then more days and nights passed,
and this rumour was succeeded by another one--that Stana had procured
some flax, and had dried it, and combed it, and spun it into linen,
and sewed it herself into the shirt of which she had spoken over the
strawberry beds.

Now the emperor had a stepmother, and she had a daughter by her first
husband, who lived with her in the palace. The girl's mother had always
believed that her daughter would be empress, and not the 'Milkwhite
Maiden,' the child of a mere shepherd. So she hated the girl with all
her heart, and only bided her time to do her ill.

But she could do nothing as long as the emperor remained with his wife
night and day, and she began to wonder what she could do to get him away
from her.

At last, when everything else had failed, she managed to make her
brother, who was king of the neighbouring country, declare war against
the emperor, and besiege some of the frontier towns with a large army.
This time her scheme was successful. The young emperor sprang up in
wrath the moment he heard the news, and vowed that nothing, not even
his wife, should hinder his giving them battle. And hastily assembling
whatever soldiers happened to be at hand he set off at once to meet
the enemy. The other king had not reckoned on the swiftness of his
movements, and was not ready to receive him. The emperor fell on him
when he was off his guard, and routed his army completely. Then when
victory was won, and the terms of peace hastily drawn up, he rode home
as fast as his horse would carry him, and reached the palace on the
third day.

But early that morning, when the stars were growing pale in the sky, two
little boys with golden hair and stars on their foreheads were born to
Laptitza. And the stepmother, who was watching, took them away, and dug
a hole in the corner of the palace, under the windows of the emperor,
and put them in it, while in their stead she placed two little puppies.

The emperor came into the palace, and when they told him the news he
went straight to Laptitza's room. No words were needed; he saw with
his own eyes that Laptitza had not kept the promise she had made at the
strawberry beds, and, though it nearly broke his heart, he must give
orders for her punishment.

So he went out sadly and told his guards that the empress was to be
buried in the earth up to her neck, so that everyone might know what
would happen to those who dared to deceive the emperor.

Not many days after, the stepmother's wish was fulfilled. The emperor
took her daughter to wife, and again the rejoicings lasted for three
days and three nights.

Let us now see what happened to the two little boys.

The poor little babies had found no rest even in their graves. In the
place where they had been buried there sprang up two beautiful young
aspens, and the stepmother, who hated the sight of the trees, which
reminded her of her crime, gave orders that they should be uprooted. But
the emperor heard of it, and forbade the trees to be touched, saying,
'Let them alone; I like to see them there! They are the finest aspens I
have ever beheld!'

And the aspens grew as no aspens had ever grown before. In each day they
added a year's growth, and each night they added a year's growth, and at
dawn, when the stars faded out of the sky, they grew three years' growth
in the twinkling of an eye, and their boughs swept across the palace
windows. And when the wind moved them softly, the emperor would sit and
listen to them all the day long.

The stepmother knew what it all meant, and her mind never ceased from
trying to invent some way of destroying the trees. It was not an easy
thing, but a woman's will can press milk out of a stone, and her cunning
will overcome heroes. What craft will not do soft words may attain, and
if these do not succeed there still remains the resource of tears.

One morning the empress sat on the edge of her husband's bed, and began
to coax him with all sorts of pretty ways.

It was some time before the bait took, but at length--even emperors are
only men!

'Well, well,' he said at last, 'have your way and cut down the trees;
but out of one they shall make a bed for me, and out of the other, one
for you!'

And with this the empress was forced to be content. The aspens were cut
down next morning, and before night the new bed had been placed in the
emperor's room.

Now when the emperor lay down in it he seemed as if he had grown a
hundred times heavier than usual, yet he felt a kind of calm that was
quite new to him. But the empress felt as if she was lying on thorns and
nettles, and could not close her eyes.

When the emperor was fast asleep, the bed began to crack loudly, and to
the empress each crack had a meaning. She felt as if she were listening
to a language which no one but herself could understand.

'Is it too heavy for you, little brother?' asked one of the beds.

'Oh, no, it is not heavy at all,' answered the bed in which the emperor
was sleeping. 'I feel nothing but joy now that my beloved father rests
over me.'

'It is very heavy for me!' said the other bed, 'for on me lies an evil
soul.'

And so they talked on till the morning, the empress listening all the
while.

By daybreak the empress had determined how to get rid of the beds. She
would have two others made exactly like them, and when the emperor had
gone hunting they should be placed in his room. This was done and the
aspen beds were burnt in a large fire, till only a little heap of ashes
was left.

Yet while they were burning the empress seemed to hear the same words,
which she alone could understand.

Then she stooped and gathered up the ashes, and scattered them to the
four winds, so that they might blow over fresh lands and fresh seas, and
nothing remain of them.

But she had not seen that where the fire burnt brightest two sparks flew
up, and, after floating in the air for a few moments, fell down into the
great river that flows through the heart of the country. Here the sparks
had turned into two little fishes with golden scales, and one was so
exactly like the other that everyone could tell at the first glance that
they must be twins. Early one morning the emperor's fishermen went down
to the river to get some fish for their master's breakfast, and cast
their nets into the stream. As the last star twinkled out of the sky
they drew them in, and among the multitude of fishes lay two with scales
of gold, such as no man had ever looked on.

They all gathered round and wondered, and after some talk they decided
that they would take the little fishes alive as they were, and give them
as a present to the emperor.

'Do not take us there, for that is whence we came, and yonder lies our
destruction,' said one of the fishes.

'But what are we to do with you?' asked the fisherman.

'Go and collect all the dew that lies on the leaves, and let us swim in
it. Then lay us in the sun, and do not come near us till the sun's rays
shall have dried off the dew,' answered the other fish.

The fisherman did as they told him--gathered the dew from the leaves and
let them swim in it, then put them to lie in the sun till the dew should
be all dried up.

And when he came back, what do you think he saw? Why, two boys, two
beautiful young princes, with hair as golden as the stars on their
foreheads, and each so like the other, that at the first glance every
one would have known them for twins.

The boys grew fast. In every day they grew a year's growth, and in every
night another year's growth, but at dawn, when the stars were fading,
they grew three years' growth in the twinkling of an eye. And they
grew in other things besides height, too. Thrice in age, and thrice in
wisdom, and thrice in knowledge. And when three days and three nights
had passed they were twelve years in age, twenty-four in strength, and
thirty-six in wisdom.

'Now take us to our father,' said they. So the fisherman gave them each
a lambskin cap which half covered their faces, and completely hid their
golden hair and the stars on their foreheads, and led them to the court.

By the time they arrived there it was midday, and the fisherman and his
charges went up to an official who was standing about. 'We wish to speak
with the emperor,' said one of the boys.

'You must wait until he has finished his dinner,' replied the porter.

'No, while he is eating it,' said the second boy, stepping across the
threshold.

