great seaport town of Bordeaux, and found themselves in the monotonous
forests of the Landes. The scenery was not pretty here. The ground was
flat, and for miles and miles around them swept an interminable growth
of fir trees, each tall and straight, many having their bark pierced,
and with small tin vessels fastened round their trunks to catch the
turpentine which oozed slowly out. These trees, planted in long
straight rows, and occupying whole leagues of country, would have been
wearisome to eyes less occupied, to hearts less full, than those that
looked out of the faces and beat in the breasts of the children who on
foot still pursued their march. For in this forest Cecile's heart had
revived. Before she reached Bordeaux she often had felt her hope
fading. She had believed that her desire could never be accomplished,
for, inquire as they would, they could get in none of the towns or
villages they passed through any tidings of Lovedy. No one knew
anything of an English girl in the least answering to her description.
Many smiled almost pityingly on the eager little seekers, and thought
the children a trifle mad to venture on so hopeless a search.

But here, in the Landes, were villages innumerable--small villages,
sunny and peaceful, where simple and kind-hearted folks lived, and
barndoor-fowl strutted about happily, and the goats browsed, and sheep
fed; and the people in these tiny villages were very kind to the little
pilgrims, and gave them food and shelter gladly and cheerfully, and
answered all the questions which Cecile put through her interpreter,
Joe, about Lovedy. Though there were no tidings of the blue-eyed girl
who had half-broken her mother's heart, Cecile felt that here surely,
or in some such place as here, she should find Lovedy, for were not
these exactly the villages her stepmother had described when she lay
a-dying? So Cecile trudged on peacefully, and each day dawned with a
fresh desire. Joe, too, was happy; he had lost his fear of Anton. Anton
could never surely pursue him here. There was no danger now of his
being forced back to that old dreadful life. The hardships, the cold,
the beatings, the starvings, lay behind him; he was a French boy again.
Soon someone would call him by his old forgotten name of Alphonse, and
he should look into his mother's eyes, and then go out among the
vineyards with his brother Jean. Yes, Joe was very happy, he was loved
and he loved; he was useful, too, necessary indeed to the children; and
every day brought him nearer to his beloved Pyrenees. Once amongst
those mountains, he had a sort of idea that he soon should roll off
that seven years of London cruelty and defilement, and become a happy
and innocent child again.

Of course, Maurice was joyful in the Landes; he liked the south, it was
sunny and good, and he liked the kind peasant-women, who all petted the
pretty boy, and fed him on the freshest of eggs and richest of goat's
milk. But, perhaps, of all the little pilgrims, Toby was now the
happiest--the most absolutely contented. Not a cloud hung over Toby's
sky, not a care lingered in his mind.

He was useful too--indeed he was almost the breadwinner of the little
party. For Joe had at last taught Toby to dance, and to dance with
skill quite remarkable in a dog of his age. No one knew what Toby
suffered in learning that rather ponderous dance; how stiff his poor
legs felt, how weak his back, how hard he had to struggle to keep his
balance. But from the day that Joe had rescued the children in the
snow, Toby had become so absolutely his friend, had so completely
withdrawn the fear with which at first he had regarded him, that now,
for very love of Joe, he would do what he told him. He learned to
dance, and from the time the children left Bordeaux, he had really by
this one accomplishment supported the little party.

In the villages of the Landes the people were simple and innocent, they
cared very little about centimes, sous, or francs; but they cared a
great deal about amusement; and when Joe played his fiddle and Toby
danced, they were so delighted, and so thoroughly enjoyed the sport,
that in return they gave supper, bed, and breakfast to the whole party
free of charge.

Thus Cecile's winsey frock still contained a great many francs put away
toward a rainy day; for, since they entered the Landes, the children
not only spent nothing, but lived better than they had ever done before.

Thus the days went on, and it all seemed very Arcadian and very
peaceful, and no one guessed that a serpent could possibly come into so
fair and innocent an Eden.




CHAPTER XVII.

MAURICE TAKES THE MANAGEMENT OF AFFAIRS.


After many weeks of wandering about, the children found themselves in a
little village, about three miles from the town of Arcachon. This
village was in the midst of a forest covering many thousand acres of
land. They had avoided the seaport town of Arcachon, dreading its
fashionable appearance; but they hailed the little village with delight.

It was a pretty place, peaceful and sunny; and here the people
cultivated their vines and fruit trees, and lived, the poorer folks
quite in the village, the better-off inhabitants in neat farmhouses
close by. These farmhouses were in the midst of fields, with cattle
browsing in the meadows.

Altogether, the village was the most civilized-looking place the
children had stopped at since they entered what had been a few years
ago the dreary desert of the Landes. Strange to say, however, here, for
the first time, the weary little pilgrims met with a cold reception.
The people in the village of Moulleau did not care for boys who played
the fiddle, and dogs that tried clumsily to accompany it. They looked
with a fine lack of sympathy at Cecile's pathetic blue eyes, and
Maurice was nothing more to them than a rather dirty little sunburnt
boy.

One or two of the inns even refused the children a night's lodging for
money, and so disagreeable did those that did take them in make
themselves that after the first night Cecile and Joe determined to
sleep in the forest close by. it was now April, the weather was
delicious, and in the forest of pines and oak trees not a breath of
wind ever seemed to enter. Joe, looking round, found an old tumbledown
hut. In the hut was a pile of dry pine needles. These pine needles made
a much snugger bed than they had found in a rather dirty inn in the
village; and, still greater an advantage, they could use this pleasant
accommodation free of all charge.

It was, indeed, necessary to economize, for the francs sewn into the
winsey frock would come to an end by and by.

The children found to their dismay that they had by no means taken a
direct road to the Pyrenees, but had wandered about, and had been
misdirected many times.

There was one reason, however, which induced Cecile to stay for a few
days in the forest close to the village of Moulleau.

This was the reason: Amongst the many sunny farms around, was one, the
smallest there, but built on a slight eminence, and resembling in some
slight and vague way, not so much its neighbors, as the low-roofed,
many-thatched English farmhouse of Warren's Grove. Cecile felt
fascinated by this farm with its English frontage. She could not
explain either her hopes or her fears with regard to it. But an
unaccountable desire was over her to remain in the forest for a short
time before they proceeded on their journey.

"Let us rest here just one day longer," she would plead in her gentle
way; and Joe, though seeing no reason for what seemed like unnecessary
delay, nevertheless yielded to her demand.

He was not idle himself. As neither fiddling nor dancing seemed to pay,
he determined to earn money in some other manner; so, as there were
quantities of fir cones in the forests, he collected great piles and
took them into Arcachon for sale.

While Joe was away, sometimes accompanied by Maurice, sometimes alone,
Cecile would yield to that queer fascination, which seemed
unaccountable, and wander silently, and yet with a certain anxiety to
the borders of that English-looking farm.

Never did she dare to venture within its precincts. But she would come
to the edge of the paling which divided its rich meadows from the road,
and watch the cattle browsing, and the cocks, and hens, and ducks and
geese, going in and out, with wistful and longing eyes.

Once, from under the low and pretty porch, she saw a child run eagerly,
with shouts of laughter. This child, aged about two, had golden hair
and a fair skin. Cecile had seen no child like him in the village. He
Looked like an English boy. How did he and that English-looking farm
get into the sequestered forest of the Landes?

After seeing the child, Cecile went back to her hut, sat down on the
pine needles, and began to think.

Never yet had she obtained the faintest clew to her search.

Looking everywhere for blue eyes and golden hair, it seemed to Cecile
that such things had faded from the earth. And now! but no, what would
bring the English girl Lovedy there?

Why should Lovedy be at Moulleau more than at any other village in the
Landes? and in any case what had the English-looking child to say to
Lovedy?

Cecile determined to put any vague hopes out of her head. They must
leave Moulleau the next morning; that she had promised Joe. Whenever
Lovedy did come across their path, she would come in very different
guise. But still, try as she would, Cecile's thoughts returned over and
over again to the golden-haired laddie, and these thoughts, which came
almost against her will, might have led to results which would have
quickly solved her difficulties, but for an event which occurred just
then.

This event, terrible and anxious, put all remembrance of the English
farm and English child far from her mind.

Joe had made rather a good day at Arcachon selling his pine cones; and
Maurice, who had gone with him, and had tried in his baby fashion to
help him, had returned to the hut very tired, and so sleepy that, after
eating a little bread and fruit, he lay down on the pine needles and
went sound asleep. Generally tired and healthy, little Maurice slept
without moving until the morning. But this night, contrary to his wont,
he found himself broad awake before Cecile or Joe had lain down. Joe, a
lighted fir cone in his hand, which he carefully guarded from the dry
pine needles, was sitting close to Cecile, who was reading aloud to him
out of the Testament which Mrs. Moseley had given to her. Cecile read
aloud to Joe every night, and this time her solemn little voice
stumbled slowly over the words, "He that loveth father or mother more
than Me is not worthy of Me."

"I think as that is a bit hard," interrupted Joe. "I wonder ef Jesus
could tell wot a hankering a feller has fur his mother when he ain't
seen her fur seven years? Why, Miss Cecile, I'm real starved fur my
mother. I dreams of her hevery night, and I feels as tho' we 'ud never,
never get back to the dear blue mountains again. No," continued Joe,
shaking his dark head, "I never, never could love Jesus better nor my
mother."

"I don't remember my mother," said Cecile; "and I think I love Jesus
the Guide even better than I love Maurice. But oh, Joe, I'm a selfish
little girl. I ought not to stay on here when you want to see your
mother so very badly. We will start to your mountains quite, quite
early in the morning, Joe."

"Thank yer, Missie," said Joe, with a very bright smile; and then,
having put the pine carefully out, the two children also lay down to
sleep.

But little Maurice, who had heard every word, was still quite wide
awake. Maurice, who loved his forest life, and who quite hated these
long and enforced marches, felt very cross. Why should they begin to
walk again? _He_ had no interest in these long and interminable
rambles. How often his feet used to ache! How blistered they often
were! And now that the weather was so warm and sunny, little Maurice
got tired even sooner than in the winter's cold. No; what he loved was
lying about under the pine trees, and watching the turpentine trickling
very slowly into the tin vessels fastened to their trunks; and then he
liked to look at the squirrels darting merrily from bough to bough, and
the rabbits running about, and the birds flying here and there. This
was the life Maurice loved. This was south. Cecile had always told him
they were going south. Well, was not this south, this pleasant, balmy
forest-land. What did they want with anything further? Maurice
reflected with dismay over the tidings that they were to leave quite
early in the morning. He felt inclined to cry, to wake Cecile, to get
her to promise not to go. Suddenly an idea, and what he considered
quite a brilliant idea, entered his baby mind. Cecile and Joe had
arranged to commence their march quite early in the morning.
Suppose--suppose he, Maurice, slipped softly from the old hut and hid
himself in the forest. Why, then, they would not go; they would never
dream of leaving Maurice behind. He could come back to them when the
sun was high in the heavens; and then Joe would pronounce it too hot to
go on any journey that day. Thus he would secure another long day in
his beloved woods.




CHAPTER XVIII.

AN OGRE IN THE WOOD.


Full of his idea, Maurice slept very little more that night. He tossed
from side to side on the pine needles. But though he felt often drowsy,
he was afraid to yield to the sensation; and early, very early in the
morning, before the sun had risen, he got up. Going to the door of the
hut, he stood there for a moment or so looking down into the forest.
Just around the little hut there was a clearing of trees; but the
forest itself looked dark. The trees cast long shadows, and Maurice
felt rather nervous at the idea of venturing into their gloom.
Suddenly, however, he heard a bird sing clear and sweet up into the
sky, and the next moment two squirrels darted past his feet.

These two events decided him: the day was coming on apace, and soon
Cecile and Joe would wake and begin to prepare for their journey.
Without waiting to look around, he stepped into the dark shadows of the
trees; and, in a moment, his little figure was lost in the gloom. To
enable him to creep very quietly away--so quietly that even Toby should
not awake--he had decided not to put on his shoes and stockings, and he
now ran along the grass with his bare feet. He liked the sensation. The
grass felt both cool and soft, and he began to wonder why he had ever
troubled himself with such clumsy, tiresome things as shoes and
stockings.

The sun had now risen, and the forest was no longer dark; and Maurice,
looking back, saw that he had quite lost sight of the hut. He also, at
the same moment, discovered, growing in great clusters, almost at his
feet, dog violets, some as large as heart's-ease.

He gave a little cry of delight. He was very fond of flowers, and he
decided to pick a great bunch to bring back to Cecile; in case she was
a little vexed with him, she would be sure to be pacified by this
offering.

He therefore sat down on the grass, and picked away at the violets
until he had filled both his hands.

Then hearing, or fancying he heard, a little rustling in the grass, and
thinking it might be Joe coming in search of him, he set off running
again.

This time he was not so fortunate. A great thorn found its way into the
little naked foot; the poor child gave a cry of pain, then sat plump
down; he found that he could not walk another step. The day had now
fully come, and the forest was alive with sights and sounds. Maurice
was too young, too much of a baby to feel at all frightened. The idea
of getting lost never even occurred to him. He said to himself that, as
he could not possibly walk on his lame and swollen foot, he would wait
quietly where he had planted himself, until Cecile or Joe or Toby found
him out.

This quiet waiting resulted, as might have been expected, in the little
fellow making up for the night's wakefulness, and soon he was sound
asleep, his pretty head resting on his violets.

For several hours tired little Maurice slept. When at last he opened
his eyes, a man was sitting by his side.

He looked at him for a moment sleepily and peacefully out of his velvet
brown eyes; then sitting up, he exclaimed in a tone of joyful
recognition:

"Anton!"

Anton--for it was indeed he--looked into the innocent face with his own
guilty one, then nodded in the affirmative.

Maurice, having no idea of fearing Anton, knowing nothing about the
purse of gold, and being on the whole rather prepossessed in his favor
than otherwise, exclaimed:

"How did you come, Anton? did you find Cecile and Joe, and did they
send you for me? and have I slept a long, long time, Anton? It is quite
too late to begin a journey to-day?"
