some unlucky chance it didn't explode, for I saw the line torn away by
the men's legs, and heard the click o' the lock; so I fancy the priming
had got damp and didn't catch. I was in a great quandary now what to
do, for I couldn't concoct in my mind, in the hurry, any good reason
for firin' off my piece. But they say necessity's the mother of
invention; so just as I was givin' it up and clinchin' my teeth to bide
the worst o't and take what should come, a sudden thought came into my
head. I stepped out before the rest, seemin' to be awful anxious to be
at the savages, tripped my foot on a fallen tree, plunged head foremost
into a bush, an of coorse, my carbine exploded! Then came such a
screechin' from the camp as I never heard in all my life. I rose at
once, and was rushing on with the rest, when the captain called a halt.

"'You did that a-purpose, you villain!' he said with a tremendous oath,
and drawin' a pistol from his belt, let fly right into my breast. I
fell at once, and remembered no more till I was startled and brought
round by the most awful yell I ever heard in my life--except, maybe,
the shrieks o' them poor critters that were crushed to death under yon
big canoe. Jumpin' up, I looked round, and through the trees saw a fire
gleamin' not far off, the light of which showed me the captain and men
tied hand and foot, each to a post, and the savages dancin' round them
like demons. I had scarce looked for a second, when I saw one o' them
go up to the captain flourishing a knife, and before I could wink he
plunged it into his breast, while another yell, like the one that
roused me, rang upon my ear. I didn't wait for more, but bounding up,
went crashing through the bushes into the woods. The black fellows
caught sight of me, however, but not in time to prevent me jumpin' into
the boat, as you know."

Bill seemed to be much exhausted after this recital, and shuddered
frequently during the narrative, so I refrained from continuing the
subject at that time, and endeavoured to draw his mind to other things.

"But now, Bill," said I, "it behoves us to think about the future, and
what course of action we shall pursue. Here we are, on the wide
Pacific, in a well-appointed schooner, which is our own--at least no
one has a better claim to it than we have--and the world lies before
us, Moreover, here comes a breeze, so we must make up our minds which
way to steer."

"Ralph, boy," said my companion; "it matters not to me which way we go.
I fear that my time is short now. Go where you will; I'm content."

"Well then, Bill, I think we had better steer to the Coral Island, and
see what has become of my dear old comrades, Jack and Peterkin. I
believe the island has no name, but the captain once pointed it out to
me on the chart, and I marked it afterwards; so, as we know pretty well
our position just now, I think I can steer to it. Then, as to working
the vessel, it is true I cannot hoist the sails single-handed, but
luckily we have enough of sail set already; and if it should come on to
blow a squall, I could at least drop the peaks of the main and fore
sails, and clew them up partially without help, and throw her head
close into the wind, so as to keep her all shaking till the violence of
the squall is past. And if we have continued light breezes, I'll rig up
a complication of blocks and fix them to the top-sail halyards, so that
I shall be able to hoist the sails without help. 'Tis true I'll require
half a day to hoist them, but we don't need to mind that. Then I'll
make a sort of erection on deck to screen you from the sun, Bill; and
if you can only manage to sit beside the tiller and steer for two hours
every day, so as to let me get a nap, I'll engage to let you off duty
all the rest of the twenty-four hours. And if you don't feel able for
steering, I'll lash the helm and heave-to, while I get you your
breakfasts and dinners; and so we'll manage famously, and soon reach
the Coral Island."

Bill smiled faintly as I ran on in this strain.

"And what will you do," said he, "if it comes on to blow a storm?"

This question silenced me, while I considered what I should do in such
a case. At length I laid my hand on his arm, and said, "Bill, when a
man has done all that he can do, he ought to leave the rest to God."

"O Ralph," said my companion in a faint voice, looking anxiously into
my face, "I wish that I had the feelin's about God that you seem to
have, at this hour. I'm dyin', Ralph; yet I, who have braved death a
hundred times, am afraid to die. I'm afraid to enter the next world.
Something within tells me there will be a reckoning when I go there.
But it's all over with me, Ralph. I feel that there's no chance o' my
bein' saved."

"Don't say that, Bill," said I in deep compassion; "don't say that. I'm
quite sure there's hope even for you, but I can't remember the words of
the Bible that make me think so. Is there not a Bible on board, Bill?"

"No; the last that was in the ship belonged to a poor boy that was
taken aboard against his will. He died, poor lad--I think through
ill-treatment and fear. After he was gone the captain found his Bible
and flung it overboard."

I now reflected, with great sadness and self-reproach, on the way in
which I had neglected my Bible; and it flashed across me that I was
actually in the sight of God a greater sinner than this blood-stained
pirate; for, thought I, he tells me that he never read the Bible, and
was never brought up to care for it; whereas I was carefully taught to
read it by my own mother, and had read it daily as long as I possessed
one, yet to so little purpose that I could not now call to mind a
single text that would meet this poor man's case, and afford him the
consolation he so much required. I was much distressed, and taxed my
memory for a long time. At last a text did flash into my mind, and I
wondered much that I had not thought of it before.

"Bill," said I in a low voice, "'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved.'"

"Ay, Ralph, I've heard the missionaries say that before now, but what
good can it do me? It's not for me, that; it's not for the likes o' me."

I knew not now what to say, for although I felt sure that that word was
for him as well as for me, I could not remember any other word whereby
I could prove it.

After a short pause, Bill raised his eyes to mine and said, "Ralph,
I've led a terrible life. I've been a sailor since I was a boy, and
I've gone from bad to worse ever since I left my father's roof. I've
been a pirate three years now. It is true I did not choose the trade,
but I was inveigled aboard this schooner and kept here by force till I
became reckless and at last joined them. Since that time my hand has
been steeped in human blood again and again. Your young heart would
grow cold if I--But why should I go on? 'Tis of no use, Ralph; my doom
is fixed."

"Bill," said I, "'Though your sins be red like crimson, they shall be
white as snow.' Only believe."

"Only believe!" cried Bill, starting up on his elbow. "I've heard men
talk o' believing as if it was easy. Ha! 'tis easy enough for a man to
point to a rope and my, 'I believe that would bear my weight;' but 'tis
another thing for a man to catch hold o' that rope and swing himself by
it over the edge of a precipice!"

The energy with which he said this, and the action with which it was
accompanied, were too much for Bill. He sank back with a deep groan. As
if the very elements sympathised with this man's sufferings, a low moan
came sweeping over the sea.

"Hist, Ralph!" said Bill, opening his eyes; "there's a squall coming,
lad. Look alive, boy! Clew up the fore-sail. Drop the main-sail peak.
Them squalls come quick sometimes."

I had already started to my feet, and saw that a heavy squall was
indeed bearing down on us. It had hitherto escaped my notice, owing to
my being so much engrossed by our conversation. I instantly did as Bill
desired, for the schooner was lying motionless on the glassy sea. I
observed with some satisfaction that the squall was bearing down on the
larboard bow, so that it would strike the vessel in the position in
which she would be best able to stand the shock. Having done my best to
shorten sail, I returned aft, and took my stand at the helm.

"Now, boy," said Bill in a faint voice, "keep her close to the wind."

A few seconds afterwards he said, "Ralph, let me hear those two texts
again."

I repeated them.

"Are ye sure, lad, ye saw them in the Bible?"

"Quite sure," I replied.

Almost before the words had left my lips the wind burst upon us, and
the spray dashed over our decks. For a time the schooner stood it
bravely, and sprang forward against the rising sea like a war-horse.
Meanwhile clouds darkened the sky, and the sea began to rise in huge
billows. There was still too much sail on the schooner, and as the gale
increased, I feared that the masts would be torn out of her or carried
away, while the wind whistled and shrieked through the strained
rigging. Suddenly the wind shifted a point, a heavy sea struck us on
the bow, and the schooner was almost laid on her beam ends, so that I
could scarcely keep my legs. At the same moment Bill lost his hold of
the belaying-pin which had served to steady him, and he slid with
stunning violence against the skylight. As he lay on the deck close
beside me, I could see that the shock had rendered him insensible; but
I did not dare to quit the tiller for an instant, as it required all my
faculties, bodily and mental, to manage the schooner. For an hour the
blast drove us along, while, owing to the sharpness of the vessel's bow
and the press of canvas, she dashed through the waves instead of
breasting over them, thereby drenching the decks with water fore and
aft. At the end of that time the squall passed away, and left us
rocking on the bosom of the agitated sea.

My first care, the instant I could quit the helm, was to raise Bill
from the deck and place him on the couch. I then ran below for the
brandy bottle, and rubbed his face and hands with it, and endeavoured
to pour a little down his throat. But my efforts, although I continued
them long and assiduously, were of no avail; as I let go the hand which
I had been chafing, it fell heavily on the deck. I laid my hand over
his heart, and sat for some time quite motionless; but there was no
flutter there--the pirate was dead!




Chapter XXVIII

Alone on the deep--Necessity the mother of invention--A valuable book
discovered--Natural phenomenon--A bright day in my history.


It was with feelings of awe, not unmingled with fear, that I now seated
myself on the cabin skylight and gazed upon the rigid features of my
late comrade, while my mind wandered over his past history and
contemplated with anxiety my present position. Alone, in the midst of
the wide Pacific, having a most imperfect knowledge of navigation, and
in a schooner requiring at least eight men as her proper crew! But I
will not tax the reader's patience with a minute detail of my feelings
and doings during the first few days that followed the death of my
companion. I will merely mention that I tied a cannon-ball to his feet,
and, with feelings of the deepest sorrow, consigned him to the deep.

For fully a week after that a steady breeze blew from the east, and as
my course lay west and by north, I made rapid progress towards my
destination. I could not take an observation, which I very much
regretted, as the captain's quadrant was in the cabin; but from the day
of setting sail from the island of the savages I had kept a dead
reckoning, and as I knew pretty well now how much leeway the schooner
made, I hoped to hit the Coral Island without much difficulty. In this
I was the more confident that I knew its position on the chart (which I
understood was a very good one), and so had its correct bearings by
compass.

As the weather seemed now quite settled and fine, and as I had got into
the trade-winds, I set about preparations for hoisting the top-sails.
This was a most arduous task, and my first attempts were complete
failures, owing, in a great degree, to my reprehensible ignorance of
mechanical forces. The first error I made was in applying my apparatus
of blocks and pulleys to a rope which was too weak, so that the very
first heave I made broke it in two, and sent me staggering against the
after-hatch, over which I tripped, and, striking against the main-boom,
tumbled down the companion-ladder into the cabin. I was much bruised
and somewhat stunned by this untoward accident. However, I considered
it fortunate that I was not killed. In my next attempt I made sure of
not coming by a similar accident, so I unreeved the tackling and fitted
up larger blocks and ropes. But although the principle on which I acted
was quite correct, the machinery was now so massive and heavy that the
mere friction and stiffness of the thick cordage prevented me from
moving it at all. Afterwards, however, I came to proportion things more
correctly; but I could act avoid reflecting at the time how much better
it would have been had I learned all this from observation and study,
instead of waiting till I was forced to acquire it through the painful
and tedious lessons of experience.

After the tackling was prepared and in good working order, it took me
the greater part of a day to hoist the main top-sail. As I could not
steer and work at this at the same time, I lashed the helm in such a
position that, with a little watching now and then, it kept the
schooner in her proper course. By this means I was enabled also to go
about the deck and down below for things that I wanted, as occasion
required; also to cook and eat my victuals. But I did not dare to trust
to this plan during the three hours of rest that I allowed myself at
night, as the wind might have shifted, in which case I should have been
blown far out of my course ere I awoke. I was, therefore, in the habit
of _heaving-to_ during those three hours--that is, fixing the rudder
and the sails in such a position as that, by acting against each other,
they would keep the ship stationary. After my night's rest, therefore,
I had only to make allowance for the leeway she had made, and so resume
my course.

Of course I was to some extent anxious lest another squall should come,
but I made the best provision I could in the circumstances, and
concluded that by letting go the weather-braces of the top-sails and
the top-sail halyards at the same time, I should thereby render these
sails almost powerless. Besides this, I proposed to myself to keep a
sharp look-out on the barometer in the cabin, and if I observed at any
time a sudden fall in it, I resolved that I would instantly set about
my multiform appliances for reducing sail, so as to avoid being taken
unawares. Thus I sailed prosperously for two weeks, with a fair wind,
so that I calculated I must be drawing near to the Coral Island; at the
thought of which my heart bounded with joyful expectation.

The only book I found on board, after a careful search, was a volume of
Captain Cook's voyages. This, I suppose, the pirate captain had brought
with him in order to guide him, and to furnish him with information
regarding the islands of these seas. I found this a most delightful
book indeed, and I not only obtained much interesting knowledge about
the sea in which I was sailing, but I had many of my own opinions,
derived from experience, corroborated, and not a few of them corrected.
Besides the reading of this charming book, and the daily routine of
occupations, nothing of particular note happened to me during this
voyage, except once, when on rising one night, after my three hours'
nap, while it was yet dark, I was amazed and a little alarmed to find
myself floating in what appeared to be a sea of blue fire. I had often
noticed the beautiful appearance of phosphorescent light, but this far
exceeded anything of the sort I ever saw before. The whole sea appeared
somewhat like milk, and was remarkably luminous.

I rose in haste, and letting down a bucket into the sea, brought some
of the water on board and took it down to the cabin to examine it; but
no sooner did I approach the light than the strange appearance
disappeared, and when I removed the cabin lamp the luminous light
appeared again. I was much puzzled with this, and took up a little of
the water in the hollow of my hand and then let it run off, when I
found that the luminous substance was left behind on my palm. I ran
with it to the lamp, but when I got there it was gone. I found,
however, that when I went into the dark my hand shone again; so I took
the large glass of the ship's telescope and examined my hand minutely,
when I found that there were on it one or two small patches of a clear,
transparent substance like jelly, which were so thin as to be almost
invisible to the naked eye. Thus I came to know that the beautiful
phosphoric light, which I had so often admired before, was caused by
animals, for I had no doubt that these were of the same kind as the
medusae or jelly-fish which are seen in all parts of the world.

On the evening of my fourteenth day I was awakened out of a nap into
which I had fallen by a loud cry, and starting up I gazed around me. I
was surprised and delighted to see a large albatross soaring
majestically over the ship. I immediately took it into my head that
this was the albatross I had seen at Penguin Island. I had, of course,
no good reason for supposing this, but the idea occurred to me, I know
not why, and I cherished it, and regarded the bird with as much
affection as if he had been an old friend. He kept me company all that
day, and left me as night fell.

Next morning, as I stood motionless and with heavy eyes at the
helm--for I had not slept well--I began to weary anxiously for
daylight, and peered towards the horizon, where I thought I observed
something like a black cloud against the dark sky. Being always on the
alert for squalls, I ran to the bow. There could be no doubt it was a
squall, and as I listened I thought I heard the murmur of the coming
gale. Instantly I began to work might and main at my cumbrous tackle
for shortening sail, and in the course of an hour and a half had the
most of it reduced--the top-sail yards down on the caps, the top-sails
clewed up, the sheets hauled in, the main and fore peaks lowered, and
the flying-jib down. While thus engaged the dawn advanced, and I cast
an occasional furtive glance ahead in the midst of my labour. But now
that things were prepared for the worst, I ran forward again and looked
anxiously over the bow. I now heard the roar of the waves distinctly,
and as a single ray of the rising sun gleamed over the ocean I
saw--what! could it be that I was dreaming?--that magnificent breaker
with its ceaseless roar!--that mountain top!--yes, once more I beheld
the Coral Island!




Chapter XXIX

The effect of a cannon-shot--A happy reunion of a somewhat moist
nature--Retrospect and explanations--An awful dive--New plans--The last
of the Coral Island.


I almost fell upon the deck with the tumult of mingled emotions that
filled my heart as I gazed ardently towards my beautiful island. It was
