her pace, she would throw her weight right into the collar, and pull
away straight up. We had both the same sort of courage at our work, and
John had oftener to hold us in than to urge us forward; he never had to
use the whip with either of us; then our paces were much the same, and
I found it very easy to keep step with her when trotting, which made it
pleasant, and master always liked it when we kept step well, and so did
John. After we had been out two or three times together we grew quite
friendly and sociable, which made me feel very much at home.

As for Merrylegs, he and I soon became great friends; he was such a
cheerful, plucky, good-tempered little fellow that he was a favorite
with every one, and especially with Miss Jessie and Flora, who used to
ride him about in the orchard, and have fine games with him and their
little dog Frisky.

Our master had two other horses that stood in another stable. One was
Justice, a roan cob, used for riding or for the luggage cart; the other
was an old brown hunter, named Sir Oliver; he was past work now, but was
a great favorite with the master, who gave him the run of the park; he
sometimes did a little light carting on the estate, or carried one of
the young ladies when they rode out with their father, for he was very
gentle and could be trusted with a child as well as Merrylegs. The cob
was a strong, well-made, good-tempered horse, and we sometimes had a
little chat in the paddock, but of course I could not be so intimate
with him as with Ginger, who stood in the same stable.




06 Liberty


I was quite happy in my new place, and if there was one thing that I
missed it must not be thought I was discontented; all who had to do with
me were good and I had a light airy stable and the best of food. What
more could I want? Why, liberty! For three years and a half of my life
I had had all the liberty I could wish for; but now, week after week,
month after month, and no doubt year after year, I must stand up in a
stable night and day except when I am wanted, and then I must be just
as steady and quiet as any old horse who has worked twenty years. Straps
here and straps there, a bit in my mouth, and blinkers over my eyes.
Now, I am not complaining, for I know it must be so. I only mean to say
that for a young horse full of strength and spirits, who has been used
to some large field or plain where he can fling up his head and toss up
his tail and gallop away at full speed, then round and back again with
a snort to his companions--I say it is hard never to have a bit more
liberty to do as you like. Sometimes, when I have had less exercise than
usual, I have felt so full of life and spring that when John has taken
me out to exercise I really could not keep quiet; do what I would, it
seemed as if I must jump, or dance, or prance, and many a good shake I
know I must have given him, especially at the first; but he was always
good and patient.

"Steady, steady, my boy," he would say; "wait a bit, and we will have a
good swing, and soon get the tickle out of your feet." Then as soon as
we were out of the village, he would give me a few miles at a spanking
trot, and then bring me back as fresh as before, only clear of the
fidgets, as he called them. Spirited horses, when not enough exercised,
are often called skittish, when it is only play; and some grooms will
punish them, but our John did not; he knew it was only high spirits.
Still, he had his own ways of making me understand by the tone of
his voice or the touch of the rein. If he was very serious and quite
determined, I always knew it by his voice, and that had more power with
me than anything else, for I was very fond of him.

I ought to say that sometimes we had our liberty for a few hours; this
used to be on fine Sundays in the summer-time. The carriage never went
out on Sundays, because the church was not far off.

It was a great treat to us to be turned out into the home paddock or
the old orchard; the grass was so cool and soft to our feet, the air so
sweet, and the freedom to do as we liked was so pleasant--to gallop, to
lie down, and roll over on our backs, or to nibble the sweet grass.
Then it was a very good time for talking, as we stood together under the
shade of the large chestnut tree.




07 Ginger


One day when Ginger and I were standing alone in the shade, we had a
great deal of talk; she wanted to know all about my bringing up and
breaking in, and I told her.

"Well," said she, "if I had had your bringing up I might have had as
good a temper as you, but now I don't believe I ever shall."

"Why not?" I said.

"Because it has been all so different with me," she replied. "I never
had any one, horse or man, that was kind to me, or that I cared to
please, for in the first place I was taken from my mother as soon as I
was weaned, and put with a lot of other young colts; none of them cared
for me, and I cared for none of them. There was no kind master like
yours to look after me, and talk to me, and bring me nice things to eat.
The man that had the care of us never gave me a kind word in my life.
I do not mean that he ill-used me, but he did not care for us one
bit further than to see that we had plenty to eat, and shelter in the
winter. A footpath ran through our field, and very often the great boys
passing through would fling stones to make us gallop. I was never hit,
but one fine young colt was badly cut in the face, and I should think
it would be a scar for life. We did not care for them, but of course
it made us more wild, and we settled it in our minds that boys were our
enemies. We had very good fun in the free meadows, galloping up and down
and chasing each other round and round the field; then standing still
under the shade of the trees. But when it came to breaking in, that was
a bad time for me; several men came to catch me, and when at last they
closed me in at one corner of the field, one caught me by the forelock,
another caught me by the nose and held it so tight I could hardly draw
my breath; then another took my under jaw in his hard hand and wrenched
my mouth open, and so by force they got on the halter and the bar into
my mouth; then one dragged me along by the halter, another flogging
behind, and this was the first experience I had of men's kindness; it
was all force. They did not give me a chance to know what they wanted.
I was high bred and had a great deal of spirit, and was very wild, no
doubt, and gave them, I dare say, plenty of trouble, but then it was
dreadful to be shut up in a stall day after day instead of having my
liberty, and I fretted and pined and wanted to get loose. You know
yourself it's bad enough when you have a kind master and plenty of
coaxing, but there was nothing of that sort for me.

"There was one--the old master, Mr. Ryder--who, I think, could soon have
brought me round, and could have done anything with me; but he had given
up all the hard part of the trade to his son and to another experienced
man, and he only came at times to oversee. His son was a strong, tall,
bold man; they called him Samson, and he used to boast that he had never
found a horse that could throw him. There was no gentleness in him, as
there was in his father, but only hardness, a hard voice, a hard eye, a
hard hand; and I felt from the first that what he wanted was to wear all
the spirit out of me, and just make me into a quiet, humble, obedient
piece of horseflesh. 'Horseflesh'! Yes, that is all that he thought
about," and Ginger stamped her foot as if the very thought of him made
her angry. Then she went on:

"If I did not do exactly what he wanted he would get put out, and make
me run round with that long rein in the training field till he had
tired me out. I think he drank a good deal, and I am quite sure that the
oftener he drank the worse it was for me. One day he had worked me hard
in every way he could, and when I lay down I was tired, and miserable,
and angry; it all seemed so hard. The next morning he came for me early,
and ran me round again for a long time. I had scarcely had an hour's
rest, when he came again for me with a saddle and bridle and a new kind
of bit. I could never quite tell how it came about; he had only just
mounted me on the training ground, when something I did put him out
of temper, and he chucked me hard with the rein. The new bit was very
painful, and I reared up suddenly, which angered him still more, and he
began to flog me. I felt my whole spirit set against him, and I began
to kick, and plunge, and rear as I had never done before, and we had a
regular fight; for a long time he stuck to the saddle and punished me
cruelly with his whip and spurs, but my blood was thoroughly up, and I
cared for nothing he could do if only I could get him off. At last after
a terrible struggle I threw him off backward. I heard him fall heavily
on the turf, and without looking behind me, I galloped off to the other
end of the field; there I turned round and saw my persecutor slowly
rising from the ground and going into the stable. I stood under an oak
tree and watched, but no one came to catch me. The time went on, and the
sun was very hot; the flies swarmed round me and settled on my bleeding
flanks where the spurs had dug in. I felt hungry, for I had not eaten
since the early morning, but there was not enough grass in that meadow
for a goose to live on. I wanted to lie down and rest, but with the
saddle strapped tightly on there was no comfort, and there was not a
drop of water to drink. The afternoon wore on, and the sun got low. I
saw the other colts led in, and I knew they were having a good feed.

"At last, just as the sun went down, I saw the old master come out with
a sieve in his hand. He was a very fine old gentleman with quite white
hair, but his voice was what I should know him by among a thousand. It
was not high, nor yet low, but full, and clear, and kind, and when
he gave orders it was so steady and decided that every one knew, both
horses and men, that he expected to be obeyed. He came quietly along,
now and then shaking the oats about that he had in the sieve, and
speaking cheerfully and gently to me: 'Come along, lassie, come along,
lassie; come along, come along.' I stood still and let him come up; he
held the oats to me, and I began to eat without fear; his voice took all
my fear away. He stood by, patting and stroking me while I was eating,
and seeing the clots of blood on my side he seemed very vexed. 'Poor
lassie! it was a bad business, a bad business;' then he quietly took the
rein and led me to the stable; just at the door stood Samson. I laid my
ears back and snapped at him. 'Stand back,' said the master, 'and keep
out of her way; you've done a bad day's work for this filly.' He growled
out something about a vicious brute. 'Hark ye,' said the father, 'a
bad-tempered man will never make a good-tempered horse. You've not
learned your trade yet, Samson.' Then he led me into my box, took off
the saddle and bridle with his own hands, and tied me up; then he called
for a pail of warm water and a sponge, took off his coat, and while the
stable-man held the pail, he sponged my sides a good while, so tenderly
that I was sure he knew how sore and bruised they were. 'Whoa! my pretty
one,' he said, 'stand still, stand still.' His very voice did me good,
and the bathing was very comfortable. The skin was so broken at the
corners of my mouth that I could not eat the hay, the stalks hurt me. He
looked closely at it, shook his head, and told the man to fetch a good
bran mash and put some meal into it. How good that mash was! and so soft
and healing to my mouth. He stood by all the time I was eating, stroking
me and talking to the man. 'If a high-mettled creature like this,'
said he, 'can't be broken by fair means, she will never be good for
anything.'

"After that he often came to see me, and when my mouth was healed the
other breaker, Job, they called him, went on training me; he was steady
and thoughtful, and I soon learned what he wanted."




08 Ginger's Story Continued


The next time that Ginger and I were together in the paddock she told me
about her first place.

"After my breaking in," she said, "I was bought by a dealer to match
another chestnut horse. For some weeks he drove us together, and then we
were sold to a fashionable gentleman, and were sent up to London. I had
been driven with a check-rein by the dealer, and I hated it worse
than anything else; but in this place we were reined far tighter, the
coachman and his master thinking we looked more stylish so. We were
often driven about in the park and other fashionable places. You who
never had a check-rein on don't know what it is, but I can tell you it
is dreadful.

"I like to toss my head about and hold it as high as any horse; but
fancy now yourself, if you tossed your head up high and were obliged to
hold it there, and that for hours together, not able to move it at all,
except with a jerk still higher, your neck aching till you did not know
how to bear it. Besides that, to have two bits instead of one--and mine
was a sharp one, it hurt my tongue and my jaw, and the blood from my
tongue colored the froth that kept flying from my lips as I chafed and
fretted at the bits and rein. It was worst when we had to stand by the
hour waiting for our mistress at some grand party or entertainment, and
if I fretted or stamped with impatience the whip was laid on. It was
enough to drive one mad."

"Did not your master take any thought for you?" I said.

"No," said she, "he only cared to have a stylish turnout, as they
call it; I think he knew very little about horses; he left that to his
coachman, who told him I had an irritable temper! that I had not been
well broken to the check-rein, but I should soon get used to it; but he
was not the man to do it, for when I was in the stable, miserable and
angry, instead of being smoothed and quieted by kindness, I got only a
surly word or a blow. If he had been civil I would have tried to
bear it. I was willing to work, and ready to work hard too; but to be
tormented for nothing but their fancies angered me. What right had they
to make me suffer like that? Besides the soreness in my mouth, and
the pain in my neck, it always made my windpipe feel bad, and if I had
stopped there long I know it would have spoiled my breathing; but I grew
more and more restless and irritable, I could not help it; and I began
to snap and kick when any one came to harness me; for this the groom
beat me, and one day, as they had just buckled us into the carriage,
and were straining my head up with that rein, I began to plunge and
kick with all my might. I soon broke a lot of harness, and kicked myself
clear; so that was an end of that place.

"After this I was sent to Tattersall's to be sold; of course I could not
be warranted free from vice, so nothing was said about that. My handsome
appearance and good paces soon brought a gentleman to bid for me, and I
was bought by another dealer; he tried me in all kinds of ways and with
different bits, and he soon found out what I could not bear. At last
he drove me quite without a check-rein, and then sold me as a perfectly
quiet horse to a gentleman in the country; he was a good master, and I
was getting on very well, but his old groom left him and a new one came.
This man was as hard-tempered and hard-handed as Samson; he always spoke
in a rough, impatient voice, and if I did not move in the stall the
moment he wanted me, he would hit me above the hocks with his stable
broom or the fork, whichever he might have in his hand. Everything he
did was rough, and I began to hate him; he wanted to make me afraid
of him, but I was too high-mettled for that, and one day when he had
aggravated me more than usual I bit him, which of course put him in a
great rage, and he began to hit me about the head with a riding whip.
After that he never dared to come into my stall again; either my heels
or my teeth were ready for him, and he knew it. I was quite quiet with
my master, but of course he listened to what the man said, and so I was
sold again.

"The same dealer heard of me, and said he thought he knew one place
where I should do well. ''Twas a pity,' he said, 'that such a fine horse
should go to the bad, for want of a real good chance,' and the end of it
was that I came here not long before you did; but I had then made up my
mind that men were my natural enemies and that I must defend myself. Of
course it is very different here, but who knows how long it will last? I
wish I could think about things as you do; but I can't, after all I have
gone through."

"Well," I said, "I think it would be a real shame if you were to bite or
kick John or James."

"I don't mean to," she said, "while they are good to me. I did bite
James once pretty sharp, but John said, 'Try her with kindness,' and
instead of punishing me as I expected, James came to me with his arm
bound up, and brought me a bran mash and stroked me; and I have never
snapped at him since, and I won't either."

I was sorry for Ginger, but of course I knew very little then, and I
thought most likely she made the worst of it; however, I found that as
the weeks went on she grew much more gentle and cheerful, and had lost
the watchful, defiant look that she used to turn on any strange person
who came near her; and one day James said, "I do believe that mare is
getting fond of me, she quite whinnied after me this morning when I had
been rubbing her forehead."

"Ay, ay, Jim, 'tis 'the Birtwick balls'," said John, "she'll be as good
as Black Beauty by and by; kindness is all the physic she wants, poor
thing!" Master noticed the change, too, and one day when he got out of
the carriage and came to speak to us, as he often did, he stroked her
beautiful neck. "Well, my pretty one, well, how do things go with you
now? You are a good bit happier than when you came to us, I think."

She put her nose up to him in a friendly, trustful way, while he rubbed
it gently.

"We shall make a cure of her, John," he said.

"Yes, sir, she's wonderfully improved; she's not the same creature that
she was; it's 'the Birtwick balls', sir," said John, laughing.

This was a little joke of John's; he used to say that a regular course
of "the Birtwick horseballs" would cure almost any vicious horse; these
