observed Rose, in a pensive tone, as if it was rather a nice thing to be
an invalid.

"Aunt Myra is a ahem! an excellent woman, but it is her hobby to believe
that everyone is tottering on the brink of the grave; and, upon my life,
I believe she is offended if people don't fall into it! We will show her
how to make constitutions and turn pale-faced little ghosts into rosy,
hearty girls. That's my business, you know," he added, more quietly, for
his sudden outburst had rather startled Rose.

"I had forgotten you were a doctor. I'm glad of it, for I do want to be
well, only I hope you won't give me much medicine, for I've taken quarts
already, and it does me no good."

As she spoke, Rose pointed to a little table just inside the window, on
which appeared a regiment of bottles.

"Ah, ha! Now we'll see what mischief these blessed women have been at."
And, making a long arm, Dr. Alec set the bottles on the wide railing
before him, examined each carefully, smiled over some, frowned over
others, and said, as he put down the last: "Now I'll show you the best
way to take these messes." And, as quick as a flash, he sent one after
another smashing down into the posy-beds below.

"But Aunt Plenty won't like it; and Aunt Myra will be angry, for she
sent most of them!" cried Rose, half frightened and half pleased at such
energetic measures.

"You are my patient now, and I'll take the responsibility. My way of
giving physic is evidently the best, for you look better already," he
said, laughing so infectiously that Rose followed suit, saying saucily,

"If I don't like your medicines any better than those, I shall throw
them into the garden, and then what will you do?"

"When I prescribe such rubbish, I'll give you leave to pitch it
overboard as soon as you like. Now what is the next trouble?"

"I hoped you would forget to ask."

"But how can I help you if I don't know them? Come, let us have No. 3."

"It is very wrong, I suppose, but I do sometimes wish I had not quite so
many aunts. They are all very good to me, and I want to please them; but
they are so different, I feel sort of pulled to pieces among them," said
Rose, trying to express the emotions of a stray chicken with six hens
all clucking over it at once.

Uncle Alec threw back his head and laughed like a boy, for he could
entirely understand how the good ladies had each put in her oar and
tried to paddle her own way, to the great disturbance of the waters and
the entire bewilderment of poor Rose.

"I intend to try a course of uncles now, and see how that suits your
constitution. I'm going to have you all to myself, and no one is to give
a word of advice unless I ask it. There is no other way to keep order
aboard, and I am captain of this little craft, for a time at least. What
comes next?"

But Rose stuck there, and grew so red, her uncle guessed what that
trouble was.

"I don't think I can tell this one. It wouldn't be polite, and I feel
pretty sure that it isn't going to be a trouble any more."

As she blushed and stammered over these words, Dr. Alec turned his eyes
away to the distant sea, and said so seriously, so tenderly, that she
felt every word and long remembered them,

"My child, I don't expect you to love and trust me all at once, but I do
want you to believe that I shall give my whole heart to this new duty;
and if I make mistakes, as I probably shall, no one will grieve over
them more bitterly than I. It is my fault that I am a stranger to you,
when I want to be your best friend. That is one of my mistakes, and I
never repented it more deeply than I do now. Your father and I had a
trouble once, and I thought I could never forgive him; so I kept away
for years. Thank God, we made it all up the last time I saw him, and he
told me then, that if he was forced to leave her he should bequeath his
little girl to me as a token of his love. I can't fill his place, but
I shall try to be a father to her; and if she learns to love me half as
well as she did the good one she has lost, I shall be a proud and happy
man. Will she believe this and try?"

Something in Uncle Alec's face touched Rose to the heart, and when he
held out his hand with that anxious troubled look in his eyes, she was
moved to put up her innocent lips and seal the contract with a confiding
kiss. The strong arm held her close a minute, and she felt the broad
chest heave once as if with a great sigh of relief; but not a word was
spoken till a tap at the door made both start.

Rose popped her head through the window to say "come in," while Dr. Alec
hastily rubbed the sleeve of his jacket across his eyes and began to
whistle again.

Phebe appeared with a cup of coffee.

"Debby told me to bring this and help you get up," she said, opening her
black eyes wide, as if she wondered how on earth "the sailor man" got
there.

"I'm all dressed, so I don't need any help. I hope that is good and
strong," added Rose, eyeing the steaming cup with an eager look.

But she did not get it, for a brown hand took possession of it as her
uncle said quickly,

"Hold hard, my lass, and let me overhaul that dose before you take it.
Do you drink all this strong coffee every morning, Rose?"

"Yes, sir, and I like it. Auntie says it 'tones' me up, and I always
feel better after it."

"This accounts for the sleepless nights, the flutter your heart gets
into at the least start, and this is why that cheek of yours is pale
yellow instead of rosy red. No more coffee for you, my dear, and by and
by you'll see that I am right. Any new milk downstairs, Phebe?"

"Yes, sir, plenty right in from the barn."

"That's the drink for my patient. Go bring me a pitcherful, and another
cup; I want a draught myself. This won't hurt the honeysuckles, for they
have no nerves to speak of." And, to Rose's great discomfort, the coffee
went after the medicine.

Dr. Alec saw the injured look she put on, but took no notice, and
presently banished it by saying pleasantly,

"I've got a capital little cup among my traps, and I'll give it to you
to drink your milk in, as it is made of wood that is supposed to improve
whatever is put into it something like a quassia cup. That reminds me;
one of the boxes Phebe wanted to lug upstairs last night is for you.
Knowing that I was coming home to find a ready-made daughter, I picked
up all sorts of odd and pretty trifles along the way, hoping she would
be able to find something she liked among them all. Early to-morrow
we'll have a grand rummage. Here's our milk! I propose the health of
Miss Rose Campbell and drink it with all my heart."

It was impossible for Rose to pout with the prospect of a delightful
boxful of gifts dancing before her eyes; so, in spite of herself, she
smiled as she drank her own health, and found that fresh milk was not a
hard dose to take.

"Now I must be off, before I am caught again with my wig in a toss,"
said Dr. Alec, preparing to descend the way he came.

"Do you always go in and out like a cat, uncle?" asked Rose, much amused
at his odd ways.

"I used to sneak out of my window when I was a boy, so I need not
disturb the aunts, and now I rather like it, for it's the shortest road,
and it keeps me limber when I have no rigging to climb. Good-bye till
breakfast." And away he went down the water-spout, over the roof, and
vanished among the budding honey-suckles below.

"Ain't he a funny guardeen?" exclaimed Phebe, as she went off with the
cups.

"He is a very kind one, I think," answered Rose, following, to prowl
round the big boxes and try to guess which was hers.

When her uncle appeared at sound of the bell, he found her surveying
with an anxious face a new dish that smoked upon the table.

"Got a fresh trouble, Rosy?" he asked, stroking her smooth head.

"Uncle, are you going to make me eat oatmeal?" asked Rose, in a tragic
tone.

"Don't you like it?"

"I de-test it!" answered Rose, with all the emphasis which a turned-up
nose, a shudder, and a groan could give to the three words.

"You are not a true Scotchwoman, if you don't like the 'parritch.' It's
a pity, for I made it myself, and thought we'd have such a good time
with all that cream to float it in. Well, never mind." And he sat down
with a disappointed air.

Rose had made up her mind to be obstinate about it, because she did
heartily "detest" the dish; but as Uncle Alec did not attempt to make
her obey, she suddenly changed her mind and thought she would.

"I'll try to eat it to please you, uncle; but people are always saying
how wholesome it is, and that makes me hate it," she said, half-ashamed
at her silly excuse.

"I do want you to like it, because I wish my girl to be as well and
strong as Jessie's boys, who are brought up on this in the good old
fashion. No hot bread and fried stuff for them, and they are the biggest
and bonniest lads of the lot. Bless you, auntie, and good morning!"

Dr. Alec turned to greet the old lady, and, with a firm resolve to eat
or die in the attempt, Rose sat down.

In five minutes she forgot what she was eating, so interested was she in
the chat that went on. It amused her very much to hear Aunt Plenty call
her forty-year-old nephew "my dear boy"; and Uncle Alec was so full
of lively gossip about all creation in general, and the Aunt-hill in
particular, that the detested porridge vanished without a murmur.

"You will go to church with us, I hope, Alec, if you are not too tired,"
said the old lady, when breakfast was over.

"I came all the way from Calcutta for that express purpose, ma'am. Only
I must send the sisters word of my arrival, for they don't expect me
till to-morrow, you know, and there will be a row in church if those
boys see me without warning."

"I'll send Ben up the hill, and you can step over to Myra's yourself; it
will please her, and you will have plenty of time."

Dr. Alec was off at once, and they saw no more of him till the old
barouche was at the door, and Aunt Plenty just rustling downstairs in
her Sunday best, with Rose like a little black shadow behind her.

Away they drove in state, and all the way Uncle Alec's hat was more off
his head than on, for everyone they met smiled and bowed, and gave him
as blithe a greeting as the day permitted.

It was evident that the warning had been a wise one, for, in spite of
time and place, the lads were in such a ferment that their elders sat
in momentary dread of an unseemly outbreak somewhere. It was simply
impossible to keep those fourteen eyes off Uncle Alec, and the dreadful
things that were done during sermon-time will hardly be believed.

Rose dared not look up after a while, for these bad boys vented their
emotions upon her till she was ready to laugh and cry with mingled
amusement and vexation. Charlie winked rapturously at her behind his
mother's fan; Mac openly pointed to the tall figure beside her; Jamie
stared fixedly over the back of his pew, till Rose thought his round
eyes would drop out of his head; George fell over a stool and dropped
three books in his excitement; Will drew sailors and Chinamen on his
clean cuffs, and displayed them, to Rose's great tribulation; Steve
nearly upset the whole party by burning his nose with salts, as he
pretended to be overcome by his joy; even dignified Archie disgraced
himself by writing in his hymn book, "Isn't he blue and brown?" and
passing it politely to Rose.

Her only salvation was trying to fix her attention upon Uncle Mac
a portly, placid gentleman, who seemed entirely unconscious of the
iniquities of the Clan, and dozed peacefully in his pew corner. This was
the only uncle Rose had met for years, for Uncle Jem and Uncle Steve,
the husbands of Aunt Jessie and Aunt Clara, were at sea, and Aunt Myra
was a widow. Uncle Mac was a merchant, very rich and busy, and as quiet
as a mouse at home, for he was in such a minority among the women folk
he dared not open his lips, and let his wife rule undisturbed.

Rose liked the big, kindly, silent man who came to her when papa died,
was always sending her splendid boxes of goodies at school, and often
invited her into his great warehouse, full of teas and spices, wines and
all sorts of foreign fruits, there to eat and carry away whatever she
liked. She had secretly regretted that he was not to be her guardian;
but since she had seen Uncle Alec she felt better about it, for she did
not particularly admire Aunt Jane.

When church was over, Dr. Alec got into the porch as quickly as
possible, and there the young bears had a hug all round, while the
sisters shook hands and welcomed him with bright faces and glad hearts.
Rose was nearly crushed flat behind a door in that dangerous passage
from pew to porch; but Uncle Mac rescued her, and put her into the
carriage for safe keeping.

"Now, girls, I want you to come and dine with Alec; Mac also, of course.
But I cannot ask the boys, for we did not expect this dear fellow till
tomorrow, you know, so I made no preparations. Send the lads home, and
let them wait till Monday, for really I was shocked at their behaviour
in church," said Aunt Plenty, as she followed Rose.

In any other place the defrauded boys would have set up a howl; as it
was, they growled and protested till Dr. Alec settled the matter by
saying,

"Never mind, old chaps, I'll make it up to you to-morrow, if you sheer
off quietly; if you don't, not a blessed thing shall you have out of my
big boxes."



Chapter 4--Aunts

All dinner-time Rose felt that she was going to be talked about, and
afterward she was sure of it, for Aunt Plenty whispered to her as they
went into the parlour,

"Run up and sit awhile with Sister Peace, my dear. She likes to have you
read while she rests, and we are going to be busy."

Rose obeyed, and the quiet rooms above were so like a church that she
soon composed her ruffled feelings, and was unconsciously a little
minister of happiness to the sweet old lady, who for years had sat there
patiently waiting to be set free from pain.

Rose knew the sad romance of her life, and it gave a certain tender
charm to this great-aunt of hers, whom she already loved. When Peace was
twenty, she was about to be married; all was done, the wedding dress lay
ready, the flowers were waiting to be put on, the happy hour at hand,
when word came that the lover was dead. They thought that gentle Peace
would die, too; but she bore it bravely, put away her bridal gear, took
up her life afresh, and lived on a beautiful, meek woman, with hair as
white as snow and cheeks that never bloomed again. She wore no black,
but soft, pale colours, as if always ready for the marriage that had
never come.

For thirty years she had lived on, fading slowly, but cheerful, busy,
and full of interest in all that went on in the family; especially the
joys and sorrows of the young girls growing up about her, and to them
she was adviser, confidante, and friend in all their tender trials and
delights. A truly beautiful old maiden, with her silvery hair, tranquil
face, and an atmosphere of repose about her that soothed whoever came to
her!

Aunt Plenty was utterly dissimilar, being a stout, brisk old lady, with
a sharp eye, a lively tongue, and a face like a winter-apple. Always
trotting, chatting, and bustling, she was a regular Martha, cumbered
with the cares of this world and quite happy in them.

Rose was right; and while she softly read psalms to Aunt Peace, the
other ladies were talking about her little self in the frankest manner.

"Well, Alec, how do you like your ward?" began Aunt Jane, as they all
settled down, and Uncle Mac deposited himself in a corner to finish his
doze.

"I should like her better if I could have begun at the beginning, and
so got a fair start. Poor George led such a solitary life that the child
has suffered in many ways, and since he died she has been going on worse
than ever, judging from the state I find her in."

"My dear boy, we did what we thought best while waiting for you to wind
up your affairs and get home. I always told George he was wrong to bring
her up as he did; but he never took my advice, and now here we are with
this poor dear child upon our hands. I, for one, freely confess that
I don't know what to do with her any more than if she was one of those
strange, outlandish birds you used to bring home from foreign parts."
And Aunt Plenty gave a perplexed shake of the head which caused great
commotion among the stiff loops of purple ribbon that bristled all over
the cap like crocus buds.

"If my advice had been taken, she would have remained at the excellent
school where I placed her. But our aunt thought best to remove her
because she complained, and she has been dawdling about ever since she
came. A most ruinous state of things for a morbid, spoilt girl like
Rose," said Mrs. Jane, severely.

She had never forgiven the old ladies for yielding to Rose's pathetic
petition that she might wait her guardian's arrival before beginning
another term at the school, which was a regular Blimber hot-bed, and
turned out many a feminine Toots.

"I never thought it the proper school for a child in good circumstances
an heiress, in fact, as Rose is. It is all very well for girls who are
to get their own living by teaching, and that sort of thing; but all
she needs is a year or two at a fashionable finishing school, so that at
eighteen she can come out with eclat," put in Aunt Clara, who had been a
beauty and a belle, and was still a handsome woman.

"Dear, dear! how short-sighted you all are to be discussing education
and plans for the future, when this unhappy child is so plainly marked
for the tomb," sighed Aunt Myra, with a lugubrious sniff and a solemn
wag of the funereal bonnet, which she refused to remove, being afflicted
with a chronic catarrh.

"Now, it is my opinion that the dear thing only wants freedom, rest, and
care. There is look in her eyes that goes to my heart, for it shows that
she feels the need of what none of us can give her a mother," said Aunt
Jessie, with tears in her own bright eyes at the thought of her boys
being left, as Rose was, to the care of others.

Uncle Alec, who had listened silently as each spoke, turned quickly
towards the last sister, and said, with a decided nod of approval,

"You've got it, Jessie; and, with you to help me, I hope to make the
child feel that she is not quite fatherless and motherless."

"I'll do my best, Alec; and I think you will need me, for, wise as you
are, you cannot understand a tender, timid little creature like Rose as
a woman can," said Mrs. Jessie, smiling back at him with a heart full of
motherly goodwill.

"I cannot help feeling that I, who have had a daughter of my own, can
best bring up a girl; and I am very much surprised that George did
not entrust her to me," observed Aunt Myra, with an air of melancholy
importance, for she was the only one who had given a daughter to
the family, and she felt that she had distinguished herself, though
ill-natured people said that she had dosed her darling to death.

"I never blamed him in the least, when I remember the perilous
experiments you tried with poor Carrie," began Mrs. Jane, in her hard
voice.

"Jane Campbell, I will not hear a word! My sainted Caroline is a sacred
object," cried Aunt Myra, rising as if to leave the room.

Dr. Alec detained her, feeling that he must define his position at once,
and maintain it manfully if he hoped to have any success in his new
undertaking.

"Now, my dear souls, don't let us quarrel and make Rose a bone of
contention though, upon my word, she is almost a bone, poor little lass!
You have had her among you for a year, and done what you liked. I cannot
say that your success is great, but that is owing to too many fingers in
the pie. Now, I intend to try my way for a year, and if at the end of it
she is not in better trim than now, I'll give up the case, and hand her
over to someone else. That's fair, I think."

"She will not be here a year hence, poor darling, so no one need dread
future responsibility," said Aunt Myra, folding her black gloves as if
all ready for the funeral.

"By Jupiter! Myra, you are enough to damp the ardour of a saint!" cried
Dr. Alec, with a sudden spark in his eyes. "Your croaking will worry
that child out of her wits, for she is an imaginative puss, and will
fret and fancy untold horrors. You have put it into her head that she
has no constitution, and she rather likes the idea. If she had not had a
pretty good one, she would have been 'marked for the tomb' by this
time, at the rate you have been going on with her. I will not have any
interference please understand that; so just wash your hands of her, and
let me manage till I want help, then I'll ask for it."

"Hear, hear!" came from the corner where Uncle Mac was apparently wrapt
in slumber.

"You were appointed guardian, so we can do nothing. But I predict that
the girl will be spoilt, utterly spoilt," answered Mrs. Jane, grimly.

"Thank you, sister. I have an idea that if a woman can bring up two boys
as perfectly as you do yours, a man, if he devotes his whole mind to it,
may at least attempt as much with one girl," replied Dr. Alec, with a
humorous look that tickled the others immensely, for it was a well-known
fact in the family that Jane's boys were more indulged than all the
other lads put together.

"I am quite easy, for I really do think that Alec will improve the
