they wasn't no r's. You'd say door, an' hour, when ev'body knowed it was
doah, an' houah, but I don't hold it ag'in you fo' not knowin' how to
pronounce them wo'ds. Yoh name is Ahthuh Winchestuh."

"As right as right can be," said Colonel Winchester, reaching over and
giving him a hearty hand. "I'm a colonel in the Union army now, and
these are my officers and men. What was it you wanted to tell us?"

"Not to ride on fuhthah. It ain't mo' than fifteen miles to Frankfort.
The place is plum full of the Johnnies. I seed 'em thah myself. Ki'by
Smith, an' a sma't gen'ral he is, too, is thah, an' so's Bragg, who I
don't know much 'bout. They's as thick as black be'ies in a patch, an'
they's all gettin ready fo' a gran' ma'ch an' display to-mo'ow when
they sweah in the new Southe'n gove'nuh, Mistah Hawes. They've got out
scouts, too, colonel, an' if you go on you'll run right squah into 'em
an' be took, which I allow you don't want to happen, nohow."

"No, Malachi, I don't, nor do any of us, but we're going on and we don't
mean to be taken. Most of the men know this country well. Two of them,
in fact, were born in Frankfort."

"Then mebbe you kin look out fo' yo'selves, bein' as you are
Kentuckians. I'm mighty strong fo' the Union myself, but a lot of them
officers that came down from the no'th 'pear to tu'n into pow'ful fools
when they git away from home, knowin' nothin' 'bout the country, an'
not willin' to lea'n. Always walkin' into traps. I guess they've nevah
missed a single trap the rebels have planted. Sometimes I've been so
mad 'bout it that I've felt like quittin' bein' a Yank an' tu'nin' to a
Johnny. But somehow I've nevah been able to make up my mind to go ag'in
my principles. Is Gen'ral Grant leadin' you?"

"No, General Buell."

"I'm so'y of that. Gen'ral Buell, f'om all I heah, is a good fightah,
but slow. Liable to git thar, an' hit like all ta'nation, when it's a
little mite too late. He's one of ouah own Kentuckians, an' I won't say
anything ag'in him; not a wo'd, colonel, don't think that, but I've been
pow'ful took with this fellow Grant. I ain't any sojah, myself, but I
like the tales I heah 'bout him. When a fellow hits him he hits back
ha'dah, then the fellow comes back with anothah ha'dah still, an' then
Grant up an' hits him a wallop that you heah a mile, an' so on an' so
on."

"You're right, Malachi. I was with him at Donelson and Shiloh and that's
the way he did."

"I reckon it's the right way. Is it true, colonel, that he taps the
ba'el?"

"Taps the barrel? What do you mean, Malachi?"

White put his hands hollowed out like a scoop to his mouth and turned up
his face.

"I see," said Colonel Winchester, "and I'm glad to say no, Malachi. If
he takes anything he takes water just like the rest of us."

"Pow'ful glad to heah it, but it ain't easy to get too much good watah
this yeah. Nevah knowed such a dry season befoah, an' I was fifty-two
yeahs old, three weeks an' one day ago yestuhday."

"Thank you, Malachi, for your warning. We'll be doubly careful, because
of it, and I hope after this war is over to share your fine hospitality
once more."

"You'll sho'ly be welcome an' ev'y man an' boy with you will be welcome,
too. Fuhthah on, 'bout foah hund'ed yahds, you'll come to a path leadin'
into the woods. You take that path, colonel. It'll be sundown soon, an'
you follow it th'ough the night."

The two men shook hands again, and then the soldiers rode on at a brisk
trot. Malachi White sat on the fence, looking at them from under the
brim of his old straw hat, until they came to the path that he had
indicated and disappeared in the woods. Then he sighed and walked back
slowly to his house in the cornfield. Malachi White had no education,
but he had much judgment and he was a philosopher.

But Dick and the others rode on through the forest, penetrating into the
high and rough hills which were sparsely inhabited. The nights, as it
was now October, were cool, despite the heat and dust of the day, and
they rode in a grateful silence. It was more than an hour after dark
when Powell, one of the Frankforters, spoke:

"We can hit the old town by midnight easy enough," he said. "Unless
they've stretched pretty wide lines of pickets I can lead you, sir,
within four hundred yards of Frankfort, where you can stay under cover
yourself and look right down into it. I guess by this good moonlight I
could point out old Bragg himself, if he should be up and walking around
the streets."

"That suits us, Powell," said Colonel Winchester. "You and May lead the
way."

May was the other Frankforter and they took the task eagerly. They were
about to look down upon home after an absence of more than a year, a
year that was more than a normal ten. They were both young, not over
twenty, and after a while they turned out of the path and led into the
deep woods.

"It's open forest through here, no underbrush, colonel," said Powell,
"and it makes easy riding. Besides, about a mile on there's a creek
running down to the Kentucky that will have deep water in it, no matter
how dry the season has been. Tom May and I have swum in it many a time,
and I reckon our horses need water, colonel."

"So they do, and so do we. We'll stop a bit at this creek of yours,
Powell."

The creek was all that the two Frankfort lads had claimed for it. It was
two feet deep, clear, cold and swift, shadowed by great primeval trees.
Men and horses drank eagerly, and at last Colonel Winchester, feeling
that there was neither danger nor the need of hurry, permitted them
to undress and take a quick bath, which was a heavenly relief and
stimulant, allowing them to get clear of the dust and dirt of the day.

"It's a beauty of a creek," said Powell to Dick. "About a half mile
further down the stream is a tremendous tree on which is cut with a
penknife, 'Dan'l Boone killed a bar here, June 26, 1781.' I found it
myself, and I cut away enough of the bark growth with a penknife for it
to show clearly. I imagine the great Daniel and Simon Kenton and Harrod
and the rest killed lots of bears in these hills."

"I'd go and see that inscription in the morning," said Dick, "if I
didn't have a bit of war on my hands."

"Maybe you'll have a chance later on. But I'm feeling bully after
this cold bath. Dick, I came into the creek weighing two hundred and
twenty-five pounds, one hundred and fifty pounds of human being and
seventy-five pounds of dust and dirt. I'm back to one hundred and fifty
now. Besides, I was fifty years old when I entered the stream, and I've
returned to twenty."

"That just about describes me, too, but the colonel is whistling for us
to come. Rush your jacket on and jump for your horse."

They had stayed about a half-hour at the creek, and about two o'clock in
the morning Powell and May led them through a dense wood to the edge of
a high hill.

"There's Frankfort below you," said May in a voice that trembled.

The night was brilliant, almost like day, and they saw the little city
clustered along the banks of the Kentucky which flowed, a dark ribbon of
blue. Their powerful glasses brought out everything distinctly. They saw
the old state house, its trees, and in the open spaces, tents standing
by the dozens and scores. It was the division of Kirby Smith that
occupied the town, and Bragg himself had made a triumphant entry. Dick
wondered which house sheltered him. It was undoubtedly that of some
prominent citizen, proud of the honor.

"Isn't it the snuggest and sweetest little place you ever saw?" said
May. "Lend me your glasses a minute, please, Dick."

Dick handed them to him, and May took a long look, Dick noticed that
the glasses remained directed toward a house among some trees near the
river.

"You're looking at your home, are you not?" he asked.

"I surely am. It's that cottage among the oaks. It's bigger than it
looks from here. Front porch and back porch, too. You go from the back
porch straight down to the river. I've swum across the Kentucky there
at night many and many a time. My father and mother are sure to be there
now, staying inside with the doors closed, because they're red hot for
the Union. Farther up the street, the low red brick house with the iron
fence around the yard is Jim Powell's home. You don't mind letting Jim
have a look through the glasses, do you?"

"Of course not."

The glasses were handed in turn to Powell, who, as May had done, took
a long, long look. He made no comment, when he gave the glasses back to
Dick, merely saying: "Thank you." But Dick knew that Powell was deeply
moved.

"It may be, lads," said Colonel Winchester, "that you will be able
to enter your homes by the front doors in a day or two. Evidently the
Southerners intend to make it a big day to-morrow when they inaugurate
Hawes, their governor."

"A governor who's a governor only when he is surrounded by an army,
won't be much of a governor," said Pennington. "This state refused to
secede, and I guess that stands."

"Beyond a doubt it does," said Colonel Winchester, "but they've made
great preparations, nevertheless. There are Confederate flags on the
Capitol and the buildings back of it, and I see scaffolding for seats
outside. Are there other places from which we can get good looks, lads?"

"Plenty of them," May and Powell responded together, and they led them
from hill to hill, all covered with dense forest. Several times they saw
Southern sentinels on the slopes near the edge of the woods, but May and
Powell knew the ground so thoroughly that they were always able to keep
the little troop under cover without interfering with their own scouting
operations.

Buell had given final instructions to the colonel to come back with all
the information possible, and, led by his capable guides, the colonel
used his opportunities to the utmost. He made a half circle about
Frankfort, going to the river, and then back again. With the aid of
the glasses and the brilliancy of the night he was able to see that the
division of Kirby Smith was not strong enough to hold the town under
any circumstances, if the main Union army under Buell came up, and the
colonel was resolved that it should come.

It was a singular coincidence that the Southerners were making a
military occupation of Frankfort with a Union army only a day's march
away. The colonel found a certain grim irony in it as he took his last
look and turned away to join Buell.

A half mile into the forest and they heard the crashing of hoofs in the
brushwood. Colonel Winchester drew up his little troop abruptly as a
band of men in gray emerged into an open space.

"Confederate cavalry!" exclaimed Dick.

"Yes," said the colonel.

But the gray troopers were not much more numerous than the blue.
Evidently they were a scouting party, too, and for a few minutes they
stared at each other across a space of a couple of hundred yards or so.
Both parties fired a few random rifle shots, more from a sense of duty
than a desire to harm. Then they fell away, as if by mutual consent, the
gray riding toward Frankfort and the blue toward the Union army.

"Was it a misfortune to meet them?" asked Dick.

"I don't think so," replied Colonel Winchester. "They had probably found
out already that our army was near. Of course they had out scouts. Kirby
Smith, I know, is an alert man, and anyway, the march of an army as
large as ours could not be hidden."

It was dawn again when the colonel's little party reached the Union
camp, and when he made his report the heavy columns advanced at once.
But the alarm had already spread about at Frankfort. The morning there
looked upon a scene even more lively than the one that had occurred
in Buell's camp. The scouts brought in the news that the Union army in
great force was at hand. They had met some of their cavalry patrols in
the night, on the very edge of the city. Resistance to the great Union
force was out of the question, because Bragg had committed the error
that the Union generals had been committing so often in the east. He had
been dividing and scattering his forces so much that he could not now
concentrate them and fight at the point where they were needed most.

The division of the Southern army that occupied Frankfort hastily
gathered up its arms and supplies and departed, taking with it the
governor who was never inaugurated, and soon afterward the Union men
marched in. Both May and Powell had the satisfaction of entering their
homes by the front doors, and seeing the parents who did not know until
then whether they were dead or alive.

Dick had a few hours' leave and he walked about the town. He had made
friends when he was there in the course of that memorable struggle over
secession, and he saw again all of them who had not gone to the war.

Harry and his father were much present in his mind then, because he had
recently seen Colonel Kenton, and because the year before, all three of
them had talked together in these very places.

But he could not dwell too much in the past. He was too young for it,
and the bustle of war was too great. It was said that Bragg's forces
had turned toward the southeast, but were still divided. It was reported
that the Bishop-General, Polk, had been ordered to attack the Northern
force in or near Frankfort, but the attack did not come. Colonel
Winchester said it was because Polk recognized the superior strength
of his enemy, and was waiting until he could co-operate with Bragg and
Hardee.

But whatever it was Dick soon found himself leaving Frankfort and
marching into the heart of the Bluegrass. He began to have the feeling,
or rather instinct warned him, that battle was near. Yet he did not
fear for the Northern army as he had feared in Virginia and Maryland.
He never felt that such men as Lee and Jackson were before them. He felt
instead that the Southern commanders were doubtful and hesitating. They
now had there no such leaders as Albert Sidney Johnston, who fell at
Shiloh when victory was in Southern hands and before it had time to slip
from their grasp.

So the army dropped slowly down eastward and southward through the
Bluegrass. May and Powell had obtained but a brief glimpse of their
home town, before they were on their way again with a purpose which had
little to do with such peaceful things as home.

Dick saw with dismay that the concentric march of the armies was
bringing them toward the very region into which his mother had fled for
refuge. She was at Danville, which is in the county of Boyle, and he
heard now that the Confederate army, or at least a large division of
it, was gathering at a group of splendid springs near a village called
Perryville in the same county. But second thought told him that she
would be safe yet in Danville, as he began to feel sure now that the
meeting of the armies would be at Perryville.

Dick's certainty grew out of the fact that the great springs were about
Perryville. The extraordinary drouth and the remarkable phenomenon of
brooks drying up in Kentucky had continued. Water, cool and fresh for
many thousands of men, was wanted or typhoid would come.

This need of vast quantities of water fresh and cool from the earth, was
obvious to everybody, and the men marched gladly toward the springs.
The march would serve two purposes: it would quench their thirst, and it
would bring on the battle they wanted to clear Kentucky of the enemy.

"Fine country, this of yours, Dick," said Warner as they rode side
by side. "I don't think I ever saw dust of a higher quality. It sifts
through everything, fills your eyes, nose and mouth and then goes down
under your collar and gives you a neat and continuous dust bath."

"You mustn't judge us by this phenomenon," said Dick. "It has not
happened before since the white man came, and it won't happen again in a
hundred years."

"You may speak with certainty of the past, Dickie, my lad, but I don't
think we can tell much about the next century. I'll grant the fact,
however, that fifty or a hundred thousand men marching through a dry
country anywhere are likely to raise a lot of dust. Still, Dickie, my
boy, I don't mean to hurt your feelings, but if I live through this, as
I mean to do, I intend to call it the Dusty Campaign."

"Call it what you like if in the end you call it victory."

"The dust doesn't hurt me," said Pennington. "I've seen it as dry as
a bone on the plains with great clouds of it rolling away behind the
buffalo herds. There's nothing the matter with dust. Country dust is one
of the cleanest things in the world."

"That's so," said Warner, "but it tickles and makes you hot. I should
say that despite its cleanly qualities, of which you speak, Frank, my
friend, its power to annoy is unsurpassed. Remember that bath we took in
the creek the night we went to Frankfort. Did you ever before see such
cool running water, and Dickie, old boy, remember how much there was of
it! It was just as deep and cool and fine after we left it."

"George," said Dick, as he wiped his dusty face, "if you say anything
more about the creek and its cool water this army will lose a capable
lieutenant, and it will lose him mighty soon. It will be necessary, too,
to bury him very far from his home in Vermont."

"Keep cool, Dickie boy, and let who will be dusty. Brooks may fail once
in a hundred years in Kentucky, but they haven't failed in a thousand in
Vermont. You need not remind me that the white man has been there only
two or three hundred years. My information comes straight from a
very old Indian chief who was the depository of tribal recollections
