fixed her eye on the light, and just poured out her song as simply and
joyfully as the lark does soaring toward the sun.

"My faith, Alec that's the sort of voice that wins a man's heart out
of his breast!" exclaimed Uncle Mac, wiping his eyes after one of the
plaintive ballads that never grow old.

"So it would!" answered Dr. Alec delightedly.

"So it has," added Archie to himself; and he was right, for just at that
moment he fell in love with Phebe. He actually did, and could fix the
time almost to a second, for at a quarter past nine, he merely thought
her a very charming young person; at twenty minutes past, he considered
her the loveliest woman he ever beheld; at five and twenty minutes past,
she was an angel singing his soul away; and at half after nine he was
a lost man, floating over a delicious sea to that temporary heaven on
earth where lovers usually land after the first rapturous plunge.

If anyone had mentioned this astonishing fact, nobody would have
believed it; nevertheless, it was quite true, and sober, businesslike
Archie suddenly discovered a fund of romance at the bottom of his
hitherto well-conducted heart that amazed him. He was not quite clear
what had happened to him at first, and sat about in a dazed sort of way,
seeing, hearing, knowing nothing but Phebe, while the unconscious idol
found something wanting in the cordial praise so modestly received
because Mr. Archie never said a word.

This was one of the remarkable things which occurred that evening.
Another was that Mac paid Rose a compliment, which was such an
unprecedented fact, it produced a great sensation, though only one
person heard it.

Everybody had gone but Mac and his father, who was busy with the doctor.
Aunt Plenty was counting the teaspoons in the dining room, and Phebe was
helping her as of old. Mac and Rose were alone he apparently in a brown
study, leaning his elbows on the chimneypiece, and she lying back in a
low chair looking thoughtfully at the fire. She was tired, and the quiet
was grateful to her, so she kept silence and Mac respectfully held his
tongue. Presently, however, she became conscious that he was looking at
her as intently as eyes and glasses could do it, and without stirring
from her comfortable attitude, she said, smiling up at him, "He looks as
wise as an owl I wonder what he's thinking about?"

"You, Cousin."

"Something good, I hope?"

"I was thinking Leigh Hunt was about right when he said, 'A girl is the
sweetest thing God ever made.'"

"Why, Mac!" and Rose sat bolt upright with an astonished face this was
such an entirely unexpected sort of remark for the philosopher to make.

Evidently interested in the new discovery, Mac placidly continued, "Do
you know, it seems as if I never really saw a girl before, or had
any idea what agreeable creatures they could be. I fancy you are a
remarkably good specimen, Rose."

"No, indeed! I'm only hearty and happy, and being safe at home again
may make me look better than usual perhaps, but I'm no beauty except to
Uncle."

"'Hearty and happy' that must be it," echoed Mac, soberly investigating
the problem. "Most girls are sickly or silly, I think I have observed,
and that is probably why I am so struck with you."

"Of all the queer boys you are the queerest! Do you really mean that
you don't like or notice girls?" asked Rose, much amused at this new
peculiarity of her studious cousin.

"Well, no, I am only conscious of two sorts noisy and quiet ones. I
prefer the latter, but, as a general thing, I don't notice any of them
much more than I do flies, unless they bother me, then I'd like to flap
them away, but as that won't do, I hide."

Rose leaned back and laughed until her eyes were full. It was so comical
to hear Mac sink his voice to a confidential whisper at the last
words and see him smile with sinful satisfaction at the memory of the
tormentors he had eluded.

"You needn't laugh it's a fact, I assure you. Charlie likes the
creatures, and they spoil him. Steve follows suit, of course. Archie is
a respectful slave when he can't help himself. As for me, I don't
often give them a chance, and when I get caught I talk science and dead
languages till they run for their lives. Now and then I find a sensible
one, and then we get on excellently."

"A sad prospect for Phebe and me," sighed Rose, trying to keep sober.

"Phebe is evidently a quiet one. I know she is sensible, or you wouldn't
care for her. I can see that she is pleasant to look at, so I fancy
I shall like her. As for you, I helped bring you up, therefore I am a
little anxious to see how you turn out. I was afraid your foreign polish
might spoil you, but I think it has not. In fact, I find you quite
satisfactory so far, if you don't mind my saying it. I don't quite know
what the charm is, though. Must be the power of inward graces, since you
insist that you have no outer ones."

Mac was peering at her with a shrewd smile on his lips, but such a
kindly look behind the glasses that she found both words and glance very
pleasant and answered merrily, "I am glad you approve of me, and much
obliged for your care of my early youth. I hope to be a credit to you
and depend on your keeping me straight, for I'm afraid I shall be spoilt
among you all."

"I'll keep my eye on you upon one condition," replied the youthful
mentor.

"Name it."

"If you are going to have a lot of lovers around, I wash my hands of
you. If not, I'm your man."

"You must be sheep dog and help keep them away, for I don't want any yet
awhile and, between ourselves, I don't believe I shall have any if it is
known that I am strong-minded. That fact will scare most men away like a
yellow flag," said Rose, for, thanks to Dr. Alec's guardianship, she had
wasted neither heart nor time in the foolish flirtations so many girls
fritter away their youth upon.

"Hum! I rather doubt that," muttered Mac as he surveyed the damsel
before him.

She certainly did not look unpleasantly strong-minded, and she was
beautiful in spite of her modest denials. Beautiful with the truest sort
of beauty, for nobility of character lent its subtle charm to the bloom
of youth, the freshness of health, the innocence of a nature whose sweet
maidenliness Mac felt but could not describe. Gentle yet full of spirit,
and all aglow with the earnestness that suggests lovely possibilities
and makes one hope that such human flowers may have heaven's purest air
and warmest sunshine to blossom in.

"Wait and see," answered Rose; then, as her uncle's voice was heard in
the hall, she held out her hand, adding pleasantly, "The old times are
to begin again, so come soon and tell me all your doings and help me
with mine just as you used to do."

"You really mean it?" And Mac looked much pleased.

"I really do. You are so little altered, except to grow big, that I
don't feel at all strange with you and want to begin where we left off."

"That will be capital. Good night, Cousin," and to her great amazement,
he gave her a hearty kiss.

"Oh, but that is not the old way at all!" cried Rose, stepping back
in merry confusion while the audacious youth assumed an air of mild
surprise as he innocently asked: "Didn't we always say good night in
that way? I had an impression that we did and were to begin just as we
left off."

"Of course not. No power on earth would have bribed you to do it, as you
know well enough. I don't mind the first night, but we are too old for
that sort of thing now."

"I'll remember. It was the force of habit, I suppose, for I'm sure
I must have done it in former times, it seemed so natural. Coming,
Father!" and Mac retired, evidently convinced he was right.

"Dear old thing! He is as much a boy as ever, and that is such a
comfort, for some of the others have grown up very fast," said Rose to
herself, recalling Charlie's sentimental airs and Archie's beatified
expression while Phebe sang.




Chapter 2 OLD FRIENDS WITH NEW FACES

"It is so good to be home again! I wonder how we ever made up our minds
to go away!" exclaimed Rose as she went roaming about the old house next
morning, full of the satisfaction one feels at revisiting familiar nooks
and corners and finding them unchanged.

"That we might have the pleasure of coming back again," answered Phebe,
walking down the hall beside her little mistress, as happy as she.

"Everything seems just as we left it, even to the rose leaves we used to
tuck in here," continued the younger girl, peeping into one of the tall
India jars that stood about the hall.

"Don't you remember how Jamie and Pokey used to play Forty Thieves with
them, and how you tried to get into that blue one and got stuck, and the
other boys found us before I could pull you out?" asked Phebe, laughing.

"Yes, indeed, and speaking of angels, one is apt to hear the rustling
of their wings," added Rose, as a shrill whistle came up the avenue
accompanied by the clatter of hoofs.

"It is the circus!" cried Phebe gaily as they both recalled the red cart
and the charge of the clan.

There was only one boy now, alas, but he made noise enough for half a
dozen, and before Rose could run to the door, Jamie came bouncing in
with a "shining morning face," a bat over his shoulder, a red and white
jockey cap on his head, one pocket bulging with a big ball, the other
overflowing with cookies, and his mouth full of the apple he was just
finishing off in hot haste.

"Morning! I just looked in to make sure you'd really come and see that
you were all right," he observed, saluting with bat and doffing the gay
cap with one effective twitch.

"Good morning, dear. Yes, we really are here, and getting to rights as
fast as possible. But it seems to me you are rather gorgeous, Jamie.
What do you belong to a fire company or a jockey club?" asked Rose,
turning up the once chubby face, which now was getting brown and square
about the chin.

"No, ma'am! Why, don't you know? I'm captain of the Base Ball Star
Club. Look at that, will you?" And, as if the fact were one of national
importance, Jamie flung open his jacket to display upon his proudly
swelling chest an heart-shaped red flannel shield decorated with a white
cotton star the size of a tea plate.

"Superb! I've been away so long I forgot there was such a game. And you
the captain?" cried Rose, deeply impressed by the high honor to which
her kinsman had arrived.

"I just am, and it's no joke you'd better believe, for we knock our
teeth out, black our eyes, and split our fingers almost as well as the
big fellows. You come down to the Common between one and two and see us
play a match, then you'll understand what hard work it is. I'll teach
you to bat now if you'll come out on the lawn," added Jamie, fired with
a wish to exhibit his prowess.

"No, thank you, captain. The grass is wet, and you'll be late at school
if you stay for us."

"I'm not afraid. Girls are not good for much generally, but you never
used to mind a little wet and played cricket like a good one. Can't you
ever do that sort of thing now?" asked the boy, with a pitying look
at these hapless creatures debarred from the joys and perils of manly
sports.

"I can run still and I'll get to the gate before you, see if I don't."
And, yielding to the impulse of the moment, Rose darted down the steps
before astonished Jamie could mount and follow.

He was off in a moment, but Rose had the start, and though old Sheltie
did his best, she reached the goal just ahead, and stood there laughing
and panting, all rosy with fresh October air, a pretty picture for
several gentlemen who were driving by.

"Good for you, Rose!" said Archie, jumping out to shake hands while Will
and Geordie saluted and Uncle Mac laughed at Jamie, who looked as if
girls had risen slightly in his opinion.

"I'm glad it is you, because you won't be shocked. But I'm so happy to
be back I forgot I was not little Rose still," said Atalanta, smoothing
down her flying hair.

"You look very like her, with the curls on your shoulders in the old
way. I missed them last night and wondered what it was. How are Uncle
and Phebe?" asked Archie, whose eyes had been looking over Rose's head
while he spoke toward the piazza, where a female figure was visible
among the reddening woodbines.

"All well, thanks. Won't you come up and see for yourselves?"

"Can't, my dear, can't possibly. Business, you know, business. This
fellow is my right-hand man, and I can't spare him a minute. Come, Arch,
we must be off, or these boys will miss their train," answered Uncle
Mac, pulling out his watch.

With a last look from the light-haired figure at the gate to the
dark-haired one among the vines, Archie drove away and Jamie cantered
after, consoling himself for his defeat with apple number two.

Rose lingered a moment, feeling much inclined to continue her run and
pop in upon all the aunts in succession, but, remembering her uncovered
head, was about to turn back when a cheerful "Ahoy! ahoy!" made her look
up to see Mac approaching at a great pace, waving his hat as he came.

"The Campbells are coming, thick and fast this morning, and the more the
merrier," she said, running to meet him. "You look like a good boy going
to school, and virtuously conning your lesson by the way," she added,
smiling to see him take his finger out of the book he had evidently been
reading, and tuck it under his arm, just as he used to do years ago.

"I am a schoolboy, going to the school I like best," he answered, waving
a plumy spray of asters as if pointing out the lovely autumn world about
them, full of gay hues, fresh airs, and mellow sunshine.

"That reminds me that I didn't get a chance to hear much about your
plans last night the other boys all talked at once, and you only got a
word now and then. What have you decided to be, Mac?" asked Rose as they
went up the avenue side by side.

"A man first, and a good one if possible. After that, what God pleases."

Something in the tone, as well as the words, made Rose look up quickly
into Mac's face to see a new expression there. It was indescribable, but
she felt as she had often done when watching the mists part suddenly,
giving glimpses of some mountaintop, shining serene and high against the
blue.

"I think you will be something splendid, for you really look quite
glorified, walking under this arch of yellow leaves with the sunshine on
your face," she exclaimed, conscious of a sudden admiration never felt
before, for Mac was the plainest of all the cousins.

"I don't know about that, but I have my dreams and aspirations, and
some of them are pretty high ones. Aim at the best, you know, and keep
climbing if you want to get on," he said, looking at the asters with an
inward sort of smile, as if he and they had some sweet secret between
them.

"You are queerer than ever. But I like your ambition, and hope you will
get on. Only mustn't you begin at something soon? I fancied you would
study medicine with Uncle that used to be our plan, you know."

"I shall, for the present at least, because I quite agree with you that
it is necessary to have an anchor somewhere and not go floating off into
the world of imagination without ballast of the right sort. Uncle and
I had some talk about it last night and I'm going to begin as soon as
possible, for I've mooned long enough," and giving himself a shake, Mac
threw down the pretty spray, adding half aloud:

    "Chide me not, laborious band,
      For the idle flowers I brought:

    Every aster in my hand
      Goes home laden with a thought."

Rose caught the words and smiled, thinking to herself, "Oh, that's it
he is getting into the sentimental age and Aunt Jane has been lecturing
him. Dear me, how we are growing up!"

"You look as if you didn't like the prospect very well," she said
aloud, for Mac had rammed the volume of Shelley into his pocket and the
glorified expression was so entirely gone, Rose fancied she had been
mistaken about the mountaintop behind the mists.

"Yes, well enough I always thought the profession a grand one, and
where could I find a better teacher than Uncle? I've got into lazy ways
lately, and it is high time I went at something useful, so here I go,"
and Mac abruptly vanished into the study while Rose joined Phebe in Aunt
Plenty's room.

The dear old lady had just decided, after long and earnest discussion,
which of six favorite puddings should be served for dinner, and thus had
a few moments to devote to sentiment, so when Rose came in she held out
her arms, saying fondly: "I shall not feel as if I'd got my child back
again until I have her in my lap a minute. No, you're not a bit too
heavy, my rheumatism doesn't begin much before November, so sit here,
darling, and put your two arms round my neck."

