very numerous, and the white men cannot fight their way through them.
The white settlements are very far away, and their friends cannot
reach them; and it will be many months before the water softens, and
long before that the white men will have eaten their moccasins."

"Waal, chief," Pearson said, "we're in a tight hole, I grant you; but
I'm far from allowing that we aint no chances left to us yet. What do
you propose? I suppose you've some proposition to make."

"Let the white men leave behind them their guns and their powder and
the maidens they have taken from War Eagle's camp; then let them go
in peace. They shall not be harmed."

Pearson gave a short laugh.

"War Eagle must think the white men are foolish. What's to prevent
the red warriors from taking all our scalps when our arms are in
their hands?"

"The word of a great chief," War Eagle said. "War Eagle never lies."

"You may not lie, chief," Pearson said bluntly, "but I've known many
a treaty broken afore now. You and your people may not touch us, but
there's other redskins about, and I wouldn't give a beaver's skin for
our sculps ef we were to take the back trail to the settlements
without arms in our hands. Besides that, we've among us the father of
the gal who was stole far away off from Lake Champlain, and a
relative of hers whose parents you've killed down on the lake. Ef we
were to agree to give up our arms, it stands to reason it aint likely
they'd agree to give up the gals. No, no, chief; your terms aren't
reasonable. But I tell ye what we will do; ef you'll give us your
word that neither you nor your tribe'll molest us in our retreat
we'll go back to the settlements, and 'll engage that, when we get
back there, we'll send you nine of the best rifles money can buy,
with plenty of powder and ball, and blankets and such like."

The chief waved his hand in contemptuous refusal of the terms.

"There are six of my young men's scalps at your girdles, and their
places are empty. War Eagle has spoken."

"Very well, chief," Pearson said. "Ef nothing but sculps will content
you, to fighting it must come; but I warn you that your tribe'll lose
a good many more afore they get ours."

So saying, without another word, they separated, each party making
their way back to their friends.

"What on earth can he have proposed such terms as those for?" Harold
asked, when Pearson had related what had taken place between him and
the chief. "He must have known we should not accept them."

"I expect," Pearson said, "he wanted to see who we were and to judge
what sort of spirit we had. It may be, too, that there was a party
among the tribe who had no stomachs for the job of attacking this
place, and so he was obliged to make a show of offering terms to
please 'em; but he never meant as they should be accepted. No, I take
it they'll wait a few days to see what hunger'll do. They must be
pretty sure that we've not a very large supply of food."




CHAPTER XVI.


THE GREAT STORM.

"Let us overhaul our packages," Harold said, "and see what provisions
we have left. It would be as well to know how we stand."

It was found that they had a sufficient supply of flour to last, with
care, for a fortnight. The meal was nearly exhausted; of tea they had
an abundance; the sugar was nearly out, and they had three bottles of
spirits.

"Could we not make the flour last more than the fourteen days by
putting ourselves on half rations?" Harold asked.

"We might do that," Peter said, "but I tell you the rations would be
small even for fourteen days. We've calkilated according to how much
we eat when we've plenty of meat, but without meat it'd be only a
starvation ration to each. Fortunately we've fish-hooks and lines,
and by making holes in the ice we can get as many fish as we like.
Waal, we can live on them alone, if need be, and an ounce or two of
flour, made into cakes, will be enough to go with 'em. That way the
flour would last us pretty nigh two months. I don't say that, if the
wust comes to the wust, we might not hold on right to the spring on
fish. The lake's full of 'em, and some of 'em have so much oil in 'em
that they're nigh as good as meat."

"Do you think, Peter, that if the Indians make one great attack and
are beaten off they will try again?"

"No one can say," Peter answered. "Injun natur' can't never be
calkilated on. I should say if they got a thundering beating they
aint likely to try again; but there's never no saying."

"The sooner they attack and get it o'er the better," Cameron said. "I
hae na slept a wink the last twa nights. If I doze off for a moment I
wake up, thinking I hear their yells. I am as ready to fight as ony
o' you when the time comes, but the thought o' my daughter, here,
makes me nervous and anxious. What do you say, Jake?"

"It all de same to Jake, Massa Cameron. Jake sleeps bery sound, but
he no like de tought ob eating nothing but fish for five or six
months. Jake neber bery fond ob fish."

"You'll like it well enough when you get used to it, Jake," Pearson
said. "It's not bad eating on a pinch, only you want to eat a sight
of it to satisfy you. Well, let's see how the fish'll bite."

Four holes were cut in the ice at a short distance apart. The hooks
were attached to strong lines and baited with deer's flesh, and soon
the fishing began. The girls took great interest in the proceeding.
Nelly was an adept at the sport, having generally caught the fish for
the consumption of the household at home. She took charge of one of
the lines, Harold of another, while Jake and one of the Senecas
squatted themselves by the other holes. There had been some
discussion as to whether the fishing should take place on the side of
the island facing the shore or behind the rocks, but the former was
decided upon. This was done because all were anxious that the
expected attack should take place as soon as possible, and the event
was likely to be hastened when the Indians saw that they were
provided with lines and were thus able to procure food for a
considerable time.

It was soon manifest that, if they could live upon fish, they need
feel no uneasiness as to its supply. Scarcely had the lines been let
down than fish were fast to them. Harold and the other men soon had
trout, from three to six pounds, lying on the ice beside them, but
Nelly was obliged to call Pearson to her assistance, and the fish,
when brought to the surface, was found to be over twenty pounds in
weight. An hour's fishing procured them a sufficient supply for a
week's consumption. There was no fear as to the fish keeping, for in
a very short time after being drawn from the water they were frozen
stiff and hard. They were hung up to some boughs near the huts, and
the party were glad enough to get into shelter again, for the cold
was intense.

As before, the early part of the night passed quietly; but toward
morning Peter, who was on watch, ran down and awakened the others.

"Get your shooting-irons and hurry up," he said. "The varmints are
coming this time in arnest."

In a minute everyone was at the post assigned to him. A number of
dark figures could be seen coming over the ice.

"There's nigh two hundred of 'em," Peter said. "War Eagle has brought
the whole strength of his tribe."

Contrary to their usual practice the Indians did not attempt to crawl
up to the place they were about to attack, but advanced at a run
across the ice. The defenders lost not a moment in opening fire, for
some of their rifles would carry as far as the shore.

"Shoot steady," Peter said. "Don't throw away a shot."

Each man loaded and fired as quickly as he could, taking a steady
aim, and the dark figures which dotted the ice behind the advancing
Indians showed that the fire was an effectual one. The Indians did
not return a shot. Their chief had, no doubt, impressed upon them the
uselessness of firing against men lying in shelter, and had urged
them to hurry at the top of their speed to the island and crush the
whites in a hand-to-hand fight.

It was but three or four minutes from the time the first shot was
fired before they were close to the island. They made, as Peter had
expected, toward the little cove, which was indeed the only place at
which a landing could well be effected. Harold ran down and hid
himself in a bush at the spot where the train terminated, carrying
with him a glowing brand from the fire.

"War Eagle means to have our sculps this time," Peter said to
Pearson. "I never seed an uglier rush. White men couldn't have done
better."

The Indians had run in scattered order across the ice, but they
closed up as they neared the cove. As they rushed toward it four fell
beneath the shots of half the defenders, and another four a few
seconds later from a volley by the other section.

In a wonderfully short time the first were ready again, and the
Indians wavered at the slaughter and opened fire upon the breastwork,
behind which the defenders were crouching. Those behind pressed on,
and, with terrific yells, the mass of Indians bounded forward.

Harold had remained inactive, crouching behind the bush. He saw the
head of the dark mass rush past him and then applied the brand to the
train.

There was a tremendous explosion. Yells and screams rent the air, and
in an instant a dark line of water, twenty feet wide, stretched
across the mouth of the cove.

In this were pieces of floating ice and numbers of Indians struggling
and yelling. Some made only a faint struggle before they sank, while
others struck out for the side furthest from the island.

The main body of the Indians, appalled by the explosion, checked
themselves in their course and at once took to flight; some, unable
to check their impetus, fell into the water upon the wounded wretches
who were struggling there. Those who had crossed stood irresolute,
and then, turning, leaped into the water. As they struggled to get
out on the opposite side the defenders maintained a deadly fire upon
them, but, in two or three minutes, the last survivor had scrambled
out, and all were in full flight toward the shore.

"I think we've seen the last of the attacks," Peter said, as they
came down from their breastwork and joined Harold in the cove. "That
was a first-rate notion of yours, lad. Ef it hadn't been for that we
should have been rubbed out, sure enough; another minute and we'd
have gone down. They were in arnest and no mistake; they'd got steam
up and was determined to finish with us at once, whatever it cost
'em."

The instant the attack had ceased Cameron had hastened to the hut
where the girls were lying, to assure them that all danger was over
and that the Indians were entirely defeated. In an hour a fresh skim
of ice had formed across the streak of water, but, as through its
clear surface many of the bodies of the Indians could be seen, the
men threw snow over it, to spare the girls the unpleasantness of such
a sight every time they went out from the cove. The bodies of all the
Indians who had fallen near the island were also covered with snow.
Those nearer the shore were carried off by the Iroquois in their
retreat.

"I suppose, Peter," Harold said as they sat round the fire that
evening, "you have been in quite as awkward scrapes as this before
and have got out all right?"

"Why, this business aint nothing to that affair we had by Lake
Champlain. That were as bad a business, when we was surrounded in
that log hut, as ever I went through--and I've been through a good
many. Pearson and me nigh got our har raised more nor once in that
business of Pontiac's. He were a great chief and managed to get up
the biggest confederation agin us that's ever been known. It were
well for us that that business didn't begin a few years earlier when
we was fighting the French; but you see, so long as we and they was
at war the Indians hoped as we might pretty well exterminate each
other, and then they intended to come in and finish off whoever got
the best of it. Waal, the English they drove the French back and
finally a treaty was made in Europe by which the French agreed to
clear out.

"It was jest about this time as Pontiac worked upon the tribes to lay
aside their own quarrels and jine the French in fighting agin us. He
got the Senecas, and the Delawares, and the Shawnees, the Wyandots,
and a lot of other tribes from the lakes and the hull country between
the Niagara River and the Mississippi.

"Jack Pearson and me, we happened to be with the Miamis when the
bloody belt which Pontiac were sending round as a signal for war
arrived at the fort there. Jack and me knew the redskins pretty well,
and saw by their manner as something unusual had happened. I went to
the commandant of the fort and told him as much. He didn't think much
of my news. The soldier chaps always despises the redskins till they
see 'em come yelling along with their tomahawks, and then as often as
not it's jest the other way. Howsumdever, he agreed at last to pay
any amount of trade goods I might promise to the Miamis if the news
turned out worth finding out. I discovered that a great palaver was
to be held that evening at the chief's village, which was a mile away
from the fort.

"I'd seen a good deal of the Miamis and had fought with 'em against
the Shawnees, so I could do as much with 'em as most. Off Pearson and
I goes to the chief; and I says to him, 'Look ye here, chief, I've
good reasons to believe you've got a message from Pontiac and that it
means trouble. Now don't you go and let yourself be led away by him.
I've heard rumors that he's getting up a great confederation agin the
English. But I tell you, chief, if all the redskins on this continent
was to jine together, they couldn't do nothing agin the English. I
don't say as you mightn't wipe out a number of little border forts,
for no doubt you might; but what would come of it? England would send
out as many men as there are leaves in the forest, who would scorch
up the redskin nations as a fire on the prairie scorches up the
grass. I tell yer, chief, no good can come on it. Don't build yer
hopes on the French; they've acknowledged that they're beaten and are
all going out of the country. It'd be best for you and your people to
stick to the English. They can reward their friends handsomely, and
ef you jine with Pontiac, sooner or later trouble and ruin will come
upon you. Now I can promise you, in the name of the officer of the
fort, a good English rifle for yerself and fifty guns for your braves
and ten bales of blankets ef yer'll make a clean breast of it, and
first tell us what deviltry Pontiac is up to and next jine us
freely--or anyway hold aloof altogether from this conspiracy till yer
see how things is going.'

"Waal, the chief he thought the matter over and said he'd do his best
at the palaver that night, but till that was over, and he knew what
the council decided on, he couldn't tell me what the message was. I
was pretty well satisfied, for Prairie Dog were a great chief in his
tribe, and I felt pretty sartin he'd git the council to go the way he
wanted. I told him I'd be at the fort and that the governor would
expect a message after the council was over.

"It was past midnight when the chief came with four of his braves. He
told us that the tribe had received a bloody belt from Pontiac and a
message that the Mingoes and Delawares, the Wyandots and Shawnees
were going to dig up the hatchet against the whites, and calling upon
him and his people to massacre the garrison of the fort and then
march to jine Pontiac, who was about to fall upon Detroit and Fort
Pitt. They were directed to send the belt on to the tribes on the
Wabash, but they loved the English and were determined to take no
part against them; so they delivered the belt to their friend the
white commander, and hoped that he'd tell the great king in England
that the Miamis were faithful to him. The governor highly applauded
their conduct and said he'd send the news to the English governor at
New York, and at once ordered the presents which I promised to be
delivered to the chief for himself and his braves. When they'd gone
he said:

"'You were right, Peter. This news is important indeed, and it's
clear that a terrible storm's about to bust upon the frontier.
Whether the Miamis will keep true is doubtful; but now I'm on my
guard they'll find it difficult to take the fort. But the great thing
is to carry the news of what's happened to Detroit, to put them on
their guard. Will you and Pearson start at once?'

"In course we agreed, though it was clear that the job was a risksome
one, for it wouldn't be no easy matter to journey through the woods
with the hull redskin tribes on the war-path.

"The commander wanted me to carry the belt with me, but I said, 'I
might jest as well carry my death warrant to the first redskins as I
come across.' Major Gladwin, who commanded at Detroit, knew me, and I
didn't need to carry any proof of my story. So, afore the Miamis had
been gone half an hour, Jack and me took the trail for Detroit. We
had got a canoe hid on the lake a few miles away, and we was soon on
board. The next morning we seed a hull fleet of canoes coming down
the lake. We might have made a race with 'em, but being fully manned
the chances was as they'd have cut us off, and seeing that at present
war had not been declared, we judged it best to seem as if we weren't
afeared. So we paddles up to 'em and found as they were a lot of
Wyandots whose hunting-grounds lay up by Lake Superior. In course I
didn't ask no questions as to whar they was going, but jest mentioned
as we was on our way down to Detroit. 'We're going that way, too,'
the chief said, 'and 'll be glad to have our white brothers with us.'
So we paddled along together until, about noon, they landed. Nothing
was said to us as how we were prisoners, but we could see as how we
was jest as much captives as ef we'd been tied with buckskin ropes.

"Jack and me talked it over and agreed as it was no manner o' use
trying to make our escape, but that as long as they chose to treat us
as guests we'd best seem perfectly contented and make no show of
considering as they was on the war-path; although, seeing as they had
no women or children with 'em, a baby could have known as they were
up to no good.

"The next morning they started again at daybreak, and after paddling
some hours landed and hid away their canoes and started on foot.
Nothing was said to us, but we saw as we was expected to do as they
did. We went on till we was within ten mile of Detroit and then we
halted. I thought it were best to find out exactly how we stood, so
Jack and I goes up to the chief and says that as we was near Detroit
we would jest say good-by to him and tramp in.

"'Why should my white brothers hurry?' he said. 'It is not good for
them to go on alone, for the woods are very full of Indians.' 'But,'
I said, 'the hatchet's buried between the whites and the redskins, so
there's no danger in the woods.' The chief waved his hand. 'My white
brothers have joined the Wyandots, and they will tarry with them
until they go into Detroit. There are many redskins there, and there
will be a grand palaver. The Wyandots will be present.'

"Jack and me made no signs of being dissatisfied, but the position
weren't a pleasant one, I can tell you. Here was the redskins
a-clustering like bees around Detroit, ready to fall upon the
garrison and massacre 'em, and we, who was the only men as knew of
the danger, was prisoners among the redskins. It was sartin, too,
that though they mightn't take our lives till they had attacked the
garrison, they was only keeping us for the pleasure of torturing us
quietly arterward. The situation was plain enough; the question was,
what were to be done? There was about sixty of the varmints around us
sitting by their fires and looking as ef they didn't even know as we
was there, but we knew as sharp eyes was watching us and that, afore
we'd gone five yards, the hull lot would be on our track.

"Jack and me didn't say much to each other, for we knew how closely
we was watched and didn't want 'em to think as we was planning our
escape, so after a few words we sat down by one of the fires till it
got time to lie down for the night; but we had both been a-thinking.
We saw, when we lay down, that the Injuns lay pretty well around us,
while two on 'em, with their rifles ready to hand, sat down by a fire
close by and threw on some logs, as if they intended to watch all
night.

"It was a goodish-size clearing as they'd chose for a camping-ground,
