boards of the roof. On the whole, it was a room well calculated to be as
hot as possible in summer, and as cold as possible in winter, but that
would do very well in spring and autumn. At all events, it was "as good
as he had been used to at home." Mrs. Myers herself said that to Almira;
and the answer was,--

"Guess it is, and better too."

Dick never dreamed of making any criticisms. In fact, his young brains
were in a whirl of excitement, through the dust of which every thing in
and about Grantley took on a wonderfully rosy color.

"Dis room?" he said to his inquiring friends when they looked in on him.
"How does I like dis room? It's de bes' room in de house. I
shall--study--hard--in--this--room."

"Bully for you," said Ford; "but you mustn't forget there's a stove in
our room, when cold weather comes. Got your books out?"

"Here they are. I will pile them upon the table."

"Stick to it, Dick," said Ford. "But it's about time we set out for Dr.
Brandegee's.--Dab, hadn't we better kindle a fire before we go? It makes
me feel chilly to think of it."

"We'll all be warm enough before he gets through with us," said Dab.
"But the sooner we get there, the better. Maybe there are other boys,
and we must go in first."

"Come on, Dick."

Not one of them seemed to be in a hurry, in spite of Dab's prudent
suggestion; and at the bottom of the stairs they were met by Mrs. Myers.

"Going for your examination? That's right. Dinner'll be ready at
half-past twelve. When, school's opened, it will be a few minutes
earlier, so you'll have plenty of time to eat and get back. Dick, as
soon as your examination's over, I want you to come right back here, so
I can finish making my arrangement with you."

"Yes, ma'am. I will return at once."

"You said that tip-top," said Dab, the moment they were on the sidewalk;
"but I can't guess what she means. Ham Morris made all the bargain for
you when he settled for me. S'pose it's all right, though."

"Course it is. I's got to work out half my board a-doin' chores. Jes'
wot I's been used to all my life."

Frank Harley had seen a great many people, considering how young he was;
and he had done less talking than the rest, that morning, and more
"studying" of his landlady and her daughter. The results of it came out
now.

"Tell you what, boys: if I'm not mistaken, Dick Lee'll pay more for his
board than we will for ours."

"I don't care," said Dick bravely. "It's wuff a good deal to feed a boy
like me."

His mother had told him so, many a time; and in that matter "Glorianna"
had not been so far from the truth.

Ham Morris had indeed made a careful and particular bargain for Dick,
and that his duties about the house should not interfere with his
studies. He had done more; for he had insisted on buying Dick's
text-books for him, and had made him promise to write to him about the
way things went at Grantley.

Up the street marched the four new boys, still a little slowly, until
Ford broke out into a sudden word of encouragement,--

"Look here, boys, we're a set of wooden-heads! I'd like to know if we
need be afraid of any thing Joe and Fuz Hart could go through?"

"Well, I guess not," replied Dab. "Let's push ahead."

He found himself leading the procession when it went through Dr.
Brandegee's front gate; and there was a look of admiration on Dick's
face, when he saw how promptly and courageously "Captain Dab Kinzer"
pulled that door-bell.

"This way, please," said the servant who opened the door,--"into the
library. The doctor'll see you in a minute."

"And we'll see him," muttered Ford, as they walked in, and he added in a
whisper to Dick,--

"That's his portrait. There, over the mantel."

"Jes' so," said Dick, coming dangerously near smiling; "an' his name den
was Oliver Cromwell, an' dey dressed him up in sheet iron."

That was the name printed under the engraving; but the smile had barely
time to fade from Dick's face, before a door opened on the opposite side
of the room, and the dreaded Principal of Grantley Academy walked in.

"Good-morning, my young friends. Glad to see you so early."

His hand was out towards Dick Lee, as he spoke; and they all had what
Ford afterwards called "a good square shake of it," by the time they
recovered their tongues, and replied to that genial, hearty, encouraging
welcome.

Dick couldn't have helped it, if he had tried,--and he somehow forgot to
try,--a broad grin of delight spread all over his face, as he looked up
in that of the doctor.

The latter himself was smiling a good deal as if he could not help it,
but he did not know the exact reason why every one of those boys looked
so cheerful just then.

The thought in Ford's mind came within an inch of getting out over his
tongue.

"Dwarf? Why, he's more like a giant. How Joe and Fuz Hart did spin it!"

The great man was certainly a good "six feet two," and all his bodily
proportions were correspondingly ample.

Frank Harley was the last to be shaken hands with, and so had time to
think,--

"Afraid of him? Why, he's too big to be afraid of. We're all right."

That was the whole truth. Dr. Brandegee was too big, in mind as well as
body, for any boy of their size to feel at all uneasy after the first
half-minute of looking in his calm, broad, thoughtful face. Every member
of that quartet began to feel a queer sort of impatience to tell all he
knew about books.

The doctor mentioned the fact that he had that morning received letters
from their parents and friends, announcing their arrival; but the oddity
of it was that he seemed to know, at sight, the right name for each boy,
and the right boy for each name.

"He might have guessed at Dick," thought Ford; "but how did he know me?"

Perhaps a quarter of a century spent in receiving, classifying, and
managing young gentlemen of all sorts had given the man of learning
special faculties for his work.

"I shall have to ask you a few questions, my young friends; but I think
there will be little difficulty in assigning you your places and
studies. Be seated, please."

That library was plainly a place where no time was to be wasted, for in
less than a minute more Ford Foster was suddenly stopped in the middle
of a passage of easy Latin,--

"That will do. Give me a free translation."

Ford did so, glibly enough; but there followed no word of comment,
favorable or otherwise. Similar brief glimpses were taken of three or
four other studies; and then the doctor suddenly remarked to him, in
French,--

"Your father has written me very fully concerning your previous studies.
You are well prepared, but you have plenty of hard work before you."

Ford fairly strained his best French in the reply he made; and the
doctor observed,--

"I see. Constant practice. I wish more parents would be as wise.--Mr.
Harley, I had not been informed that you spoke French. You noticed Mr.
Foster's mistake. Please correct it for him."

Frank blushed to his eyes, but he obeyed; and he hardly knew how it was,
that, before the doctor's rapid questioning was over, his answers had
included the whole range of his schooling and acquirements.

"Isn't dey doin' fine!" was the proud thought in the mind of Dick Lee.
"But jes' wait till he gits hol' ob Cap'n Dab!"

Dick's confidence in his friend was at least ten times greater than
Dabney's in himself. The very air of the room he was in seemed, to the
latter, to grow oppressively heavy with learning, and he dreaded his own
turn more than ever. While he was waiting for it to come, however, some
casual reference to Long Island by the doctor, and a question as to the
precise character of its southern coast, rapidly expanded into a wider
range of geography, upon the heels of which history trod a little
carelessly, and other subjects came tumbling in, until Dabney discovered
that he was computing, at the doctor's request, sundry arithmetical
results, which might with greater propriety have been reserved for his
"examination." That, too, was the way poor Dick Lee came to make so bad
a breakdown. His shining face would have told, even to eyes less
practised than those of Dr. Brandegee, exactly the answer, as to kind
and readiness, which he would have made to every question put to his
white friends. That is, unless he had been directly called upon to
"answer out aloud." There is no telling what he would have done in such
a case as that.

The doctor found out, for he quietly shifted his last question over
Dab's left shoulder, and let it fall upon Dick in such a way as not to
scare him.

"You's got me, dis time! Dat's de berry place whar we stopped at de end
of our school, las' year."

"Then, I think I know about where it's best for you to begin. I'll have
another talk with you about it, Richard. You must come up and see me
again."

It was not a great deal to say; but the way in which he said it plainly
added,--

"I mean to be your friend, my dear boy. I'll do all I can to help you
along."

Dick understood it too, but he was feeling dolefully about his tongue
just then.

"Missed fire de fust time!" he said to himself; but he carefully
replied, aloud,--

"Thank you, sir. Will you tell me when to come?"

"To-night, right away after tea. Now, young gentlemen, I must bid you
good-morning. Bear in mind that the first law of Grantley Academy is
punctuality. I expect you to be in your places promptly at nine o'clock,
Monday morning."

"We will, sir," said Dabney. "But will you please tell us when we are to
be examined?"

"I believe, Mr. Kinzer, I have a fair idea of the use you have made of
your books up to this time. No further examination will be necessary. I
will see you all, with others, after school is opened, next Monday."

They were politely shown out of the library, but they did not clearly
comprehend the matter until they had drawn each a good long breath in
the open air.

"Dab," said Ford, "can't you see it?"

"I'm beginning to. Seems to me we've been through the sharpest
examination I ever heard of. I say, Frank, do you know any thing he
didn't make you tell him?"

"Nothing but Hindustanee and a little Teloogoo. Well, yes, I know a
Karen hymn. He got all the rest, if I'm not mistaken."

There was no doubt at all but what Dr. Brandegee had gained a correct
view of the attainments of his new pupils.





CHAPTER XXVIII.

AN UNUSUAL AMOUNT OF INTRODUCTION.


The front door of Dr. Brandegee's library had hardly closed behind that
earliest flock of his autumn birds, before the door by which he had
entered swung open, and a fine-looking, middle-aged matron stood in it,
remarking,--

"My dear, there are more than a dozen waiting in the parlor. Have you
not spent a great deal of time on those four?"

"They're worth it, Mary. There's enough in every one of them to make a
man of, and they've all started fairly well."

"I fear that is more than you will be able to say of all these others."

"Of course it will. Their fathers and mothers have had a great deal to
do with that."

They were all "examined," however, in due season, some in one way and
some in another; and during all that time Dab Kinzer and his friends
were inwardly wondering, whether they said so or not, precisely what
impression they had made upon the doctor.

It was just as well, every way, that they did not know.

It was a curious fact, that with one accord they accompanied Dick on his
return to their boarding-house; and, while he disappeared through the
door at the end of the hall with Miss Almira, some invisible
leading-string dragged them up stairs. Not that they really had any
studying to do; but it was dinner-time before they had finished turning
over the leaves of their text-books, and estimating the amount of hard
work it would cost to prepare for an "examination" on them.

There was no good reason for complaint of that dinner any more than of
their breakfast; and it wound up with a very excellent Indian-meal
pudding, concerning which Dabney went so far as to say he would like to
send the recipe home to his mother.

"I'm so glad you like it," said Mrs. Myers. "Almira, just remember that.
They can have it as often as they please."

She asked them, too, how they proposed to spend their afternoon, and
smilingly explained, as to Dick Lee, that,--

"Saturday is one of my busy days, and he will have to stay at home and
help. Errands to run, and I want him to learn how. He's a bright, active
little fellow."

That was all "according to contract;" but Dick did not come in for his
dinner until the rest had eaten theirs; and then he barely had time to
say to Dab Kinzer,--

"Did you ebber shell corn?"

"Course I have. Why?"

"'Cause dar's a bigger heap ob corn out in de barn dan you ebber see."

"Bigger'n Ham's?"

"Well, no, not so big as his'n, mebbe; but dar's more ob it. I's got it
to shell."

