"'Why, how do you know?' was the general question.
"'Measured it.' "'How?'
"'Foot rule and yardstick.'
"'You didn't climb that tall tree?' his mother asked anxiously.
"'No'm; I found the length of the shadow and measured that.'
"'But the length of the shadow changes.'
"'Yes'm; but twice a day the shadows are just as long as the
things themselves. I've been trying it all summer. I drove a
stick into the ground, and when its shadow was just as long as
the stick I knew that the shadow of the tree would be just as
long as the tree, and that's 33 ft.'"

The above paragraph appeared in one of the daily papers which come
to our office. The item was headed, "A Clever Boy." Now we do not
know who this advertised boy was, but we knew quite as clever a
boy, one who could have got the approximate height of the tree
without waiting for the sun to shine at a particular angle or to
shine at all for that matter. The way boy No. 2 went about the
same problem was this: He got a stick and planted it in the ground
and then cut it off just at the level of his eyes. Then he went
out and took a look at the tree and made a rough estimate of the
tree's height in his mind, and judging the same distance along the
ground from the tree trunk, he planted his stick in the ground.
Then he lay down on his back with his feet against the standing
stick and looked at the top of the tree over the stick.

If he found the top of stick and tree did not agree he tried a new
position and kept at it until he could just see the tree top over
the end of the upright stick. Then all he had to do was to measure
along the ground to where his eye had been when lying down and
that gave him the height of the tree.

'The point about this method is that the boy and stick made a
right-angled triangle with boy for base, stick for perpendicular,
both of the same length, and the "line of sight" the hypotenuse or
long line of the triangle. When he got into the position which
enabled him to just see the tree top over the top of the stick he
again had a right-angled triangle with tree as perpendicular, his
eye's distance away from the trunk, the base, and the line of
sight the hypotenuse. He could measure the base line along the
ground and knew it must equal the vertical height, and he could do
this without reference to the sun. It was an ingenious application
of the well known properties of a right-angled triangle. --Railway
and Locomotive Engineer.



** White Putty to Black [376]

White putty on a black window frame can be made to harmonize by
rubbing the fresh putty with a piece of cotton dipped in
lampblack.



** Using Sandpaper [376]

Sandpaper may be kept from slipping under the hand by chalking the
back.



** An Interesting Electrical Experiment [377]

Anyone possessing a battery having an electromotive force of from
4 to 20 volts can perform the following experiment, which is
particularly interesting on account of the variation of results
with apparently the same conditions.

Immerse two pieces of brass in a strong solution of common salt
and water. Connect one piece to the positive wire and the other to
the negative, taking care that the brass pieces do not touch each
other.

After the current has passed one

[Illustration: How Wires are Connected]

or two minutes, the solution will become colored, and if the
process is continued a colored pigment will be precipitated. The
precipitate varies considerably in color and may be either yellow,
blue, orange, green or brown, depending on the strength of the
current, the strength of the solution, and the composition of the
brass.



** Novelty Chain Made from a Match [377]

The accompanying engraving shows what is possible to do with a
penknife.

[Illustration: Lay a Match on the Picture]

A small chain composed of several links was cut from the wood that
forms the match.



** Keeping Doors Closed [377]

Glass doors in bookcases may be kept from swinging open by boring
a hole, about 1/4 in. deep, either at the top or bottom in the
edge of the door, 2 in. from the closing edge, and inserting an
ordinary cork, allowing a small portion to project and rub on the
facing.



** Restoring Broken Negatives [377]

Whoever has the misfortune to break a valuable negative need not
despair, for the damage can be repaired most effectively. In case
the negative be broken into many pieces, take a clean glass, the
same size as the broken negative, and put upon this the pieces,
joining them accurately, says Camera Craft. Put another clean
glass on top of this and bind the three together with
passe-partout binding or gummed strips of ordinary paper, as one
would a lantern slide, and cover the glass edges.

Next make a transparency of this--in the camera, of course--and if
it is done right, the positive will only show the cracks as dark
and light lines. The

[Illustration: Before and After Mending]

dark lines are removed with the etching knife and the light ones
with the retouching pencil. From this transparency another
negative can be made, or as many negatives as necessary, by either
contact or in the camera, and if the work on the glass positive
was done carefully, no trace of the break should be seen on the
finished negative. If the negative is broken in two or three
larger pieces only, a contact positive may be made in the printing
frame without binding, by using a clean glass in the latter, upon
which the pieces are put together, face up, and a dry plate
exposed in contact with them in the dark room. The accompanying
engravings show a print before and after repairing a broken
negative in this manner.



** Coin and Tumbler Trick [378]

The accompanying sketch shows how a good trick may be easily
performed by anyone. Lay a piece of

[Illustration: This Is a Good Trick]

heavy paper that is free from creases on a board or table. Secure
three tumblers that are alike and stick a piece of the same heavy
paper over the openings in two of them, neatly trimming it all
around the edges so as to leave nothing of the paper for anyone to
see. Make three covers of paper as shown in Fig. 1 to put over the
tumblers. Place three coins on the sheet of paper, then the
tumblers with covers on top of the coins, the unprepared tumbler
being in the middle. Now lift the covers off the end tumblers, and
you will see that the paper on the openings covers the coins.
Replace the covers, lift the middle one, and a coin will be seen
under the tumbler, as the opening of this tumbler is not covered.
Drop the cover back again and lift the other tumblers and covers
bodily, so that the spectators can see the coins, remarking at the
same time that you can make them vanish from one to the other. The
openings of the tumblers must never be exposed so that any one can
see them, and a safe way to do this is to keep them level with the
table.



** Another Way to Renew Dry Batteries  [378]

There are many methods of renewing dry batteries, and I have used
several of them, but I found the following the best: Remove the
paper cover and with a 1/4-in. drill make about six holes around
the side of the zinc, about 1/2 in. from the bottom. Then drill
another row of holes about half way up the side and put the
battery to soak in a solution of sal ammoniac for 48 hours. Then
remove and plug the holes up with hard soap, and replace in the
paper box, when it will give nearly as strong a current as when
new.



** Simply Made Wire Puzzle [378]

The object of this simply made wire puzzle is to get the ring off,
which is not easy unless you know how. To do so it is necessary to
move the triangle with ring to one of the hinge joints and fold
the puzzle. Then slip the ring off the triangle over the hinge
joint and it will slip all around and off at the other hinge.

[Illustration: Puzzle]



** Pronunciation [378]

Diabolo is pronounced Dee-ab-lo.



** Repairing Box Cameras [379]

In repairing the inner part of box cameras which have been broken
loose, use a binding of strong black cloth well glued in place.
This will materially strengthen the joints where the wooden pieces
are so thin that it is impossible to use brads in holding them
together.

Do not forget to thoroughly clean all the old glue or cement from
the joints with a rasp or sandpaper before attempting a repair.



** A Fishhook Box [379]

A box that may be used to hold fishhooks, sinkers, matches or any
small articles, can be made from two empty shotgun cartridges as
shown in the sketch. The paper is cut from the brass part of one
shell at the place marked A, Fig. 1, and the brass part, Fig-. 2,
is used for a cap on the other

[Illustration: Made of Shotgun Shells]

shell (Fig. 3). Coating the box with shellac will improve its
appearance.
--Contributed by Abner B. Shaw, N. Dartmouth, Mass.



** A Tin Drinking Cup for the Camp [379]

If in need of a drinking cup while camping, a temporary cup can be
made of a tomato or baking-powder can. Punch two holes near the
top of the can; bend a piece of wire and place the ends through
the holes as shown at A in the sketch. Pull the ends to draw the
loop close up on the inside of the tin and then twist the ends to
form a handle as shown at B. When there is enough wire twisted to
form a good handle, pass the ends around the can

[Illustration: Handle on a Tin Can]

at the bottom and twist them together on the opposite side.
--Contributed by W. A. Lane, El Paso, Tex.



** A Bookmark [379]

A very handy bookmark can be made by attaching a narrow ribbon to
an ordinary paper clip and using it as shown in the sketch. The
clip is slipped over the binding in the back of the book as shown
in the sketch.
--Contributed by Chester E. Warner, Kalamazoo, Mich.

[Illustration: Bookmark]



** Kitchen Knife Sharpener [379]

A good serviceable knife sharpener may be made from a piece of
steel cut as shown with two screw holes drilled for fastening it
to a piece of wood or to a table. The knife is drawn through and
sharpened on either side. Both positions of the knife are shown.
The

[Illustration: Sharpener on Table Edge]

steel is hardened before fastening it in place.
--Contributed by George Madsen, Chicago. Ill.



** Devices of Winter Sports-How to Make and Use Them [380]

In the north the red-cheeked boy digs a hole in the ice and while
he amuses and invigorates himself at skating the fish underneath
the icy sheet

[Illustration: "Tip Up Pole"]

fasten themselves to the hook he has let down through a hole. The
boy used to sit over the hole in the ice and wait for the fish to
bite, but that became too slow and detracted too much from his
pleasure at skating. So his inventive genius set itself to work
and the "tip-up" and "signal" shown in the illustration was the
result. When the fish is not biting the flag lies flat on the ice,
but as soon as a fish has swallowed the hook the flag pole stands
straight up wafting its bright colored flag to the breezes and all
the boys on the skating pond read the word "fish." The fish is
drawn up, the hook rebaited and the youthful fisherman resumes his
pleasures on the ice. Often a score or more of these "tip-ups" are
planted about the edges of the ice pond, each boy bringing his
fishing tackle with his skates and thus finding a double source of
amusement. Maybe one boy will thus have a half dozen different
lines in the water at once, it being easy to watch them all
together.

The device by which the fish is made to give its own signal when
caught is exceedingly simple and any boy can make it. Procure a
light rod about 2 ft. in length and to one end fasten a small
flag, made of any bright colored cloth.

[Illustration: "Tip-Up" Fish Caught]

Bind the rod at right angles to another stick which is placed
across the hole, so that a short piece of the flagrod projects
over the cross stick. To this short end fasten the fishing line.
Be sure and use strong string in binding the two rods together,
and also take care that the cross stick is long enough to permit
several inches of each end to rest on the ice. After fastening the
line to the short end of the rod, bait the hook with a live minnow
or other suitable bait and let it down through the hole. When the
fish is hooked the flag will instantly raise and wave about
strenuously until the fish is taken from the water.



** "Jumping-Jack" Fisherman [380]

[Illustration: Jumping-Jack Fisherman]

If the small boy has a "jumping-jack" left over from Christmas. he
may make this do his fishing for him and serve as well as the
"tip-up," or he can easily make the jumping-jack himself
independent of Santa Claus. The string which is pulled to make the
joints move is tied securely to the fishing line; the hook is
baited and lowered into the water through a hole in the ice. The
"jumping-jack" waves his legs and arms frantically to notify the
boys when the fish is biting. The "jumping-jack" is also used for
fishing in summer time by placing it on a float which is cast into
the water.



** Merry-Go-Round Whirl on Ice [380]

A German device for the amusement of children is a whirl on an ice
merry-go-round. It is made by placing a vertical shaft or stake,
provided with a couple of old cart-wheels, in a hole in the ice.
One wheel acts as a turning base and prevents the shaft from
sinking into the pond, and the other forms a support for the long
sweep attached for propulsion purposes, and should be fastened to
the shaft about 3 ft. above the base wheel. The sleds are made
fast in a string to the long end of the sweep, which when turned
rapidly causes the sleds to slide over the ice in a circle at a
high speed.

If the sweep is long enough to have each end from the shaft the
same length, two strings of sleds may be attached, which will
balance the device and make the turning much easier.



** The Running Sleigh [381]

Another winter sport, very popular in Sweden, and which has
already reached America, is the "running sleigh," shown in the
illustration. A light sleigh is equipped with long double runners
and is propelled by foot power. The person using the sleigh stands
with one foot upon a rest attached to one of the braces connecting
the runners and propels the sleigh by pushing backward with the
other foot. To steady the body an upright support is attached to
the runners. The contrivance can be used upon hard frozen ground,
thin ice and snow-covered surfaces, and under favorable conditions
moves with remarkable speed. The "running sleigh" has a decided
advantage over skis, because the two foot supports are braced so
that they cannot come apart. Any boy can make the sleigh.

[Illustration: Running Sleigh]



** The Winged Skater [381]

With the actual speed of the wind a skater may be hurled along the
ice if he is aided by sails. He has been known to travel at the
rate of 40 miles an hour,

[Illustration: Frame for Skater's Sails]

And the sport while affording the limit of excitement, is not
attended with danger. The sails are easily made, as the
illustrations and description will show.

Secure two large thin hoops about 4 ft. in diameter. They may be
obtained from an old hogshead or by bending thin strips. For each
hoop select a piece of strong cane about 3/4 in. in diameter to
constitute the fore and main masts or cross-yards. Extend these
across the center of the hoop and fasten each end firmly to the
hoop's sides. For the middle of each cross-spar make a cleat and
lash it on firmly. The main spar should also be made of two pieces
of strong cane, each about 9-1/2 ft. long. Bind them together at
each end so that the large end of one is fastened to the small end
of the other.

Next comes the attaching of the sails to the separate masts. The
sails should be made of strong sheeting or thin canvas. Tack the
cloth to the hoop on the inner side after it has been wrapped
around the hoop two or three times.

Now the main spar should be attached by springing it apart and
slipping the cleats of the cross-spar between the two pieces. Bind
the inner sides of the hoops tightly together by means of a very
strong double cord, as shown in the figure. Then your sail is
ready for the ice pond. See that your skates are securely
fastened, raise your

[Illustration: Skater's Sails Finished]

sail and you will skim along the ice as lightly as a bird on the
wing. With a little practice you will learn to tack and guide
yourself as desired.

[Illustration: Plan of Ice Boat, Sail and Rudder]

If the hoops cannot be easily obtained the sails may be made
equally effective by using the main spar and fore and main masts
as herein described, making the sails square shaped instead of
round and leaving off the hoops. In this case the sails should be
securely bound with strong tape. Attach a corner to each end of
the cross-spar, and a corner to the outer end of the main spar.
The remaining corner of each then appears opposite to each other,
and should be fastened together by strong cord in the same manner
as the hoops. In this case the sails may be left off until after
the frame is entirely put together and then fastened on to the
spars by buttons.

A more simple sail may be made according to the plans illustrated
in the lower drawing. It is made by binding together in the center
the halves of two strong hogshead hoops, or two bent poles are
better. If possible the sail should be about 8 ft. long and 4 ft.
wide. Fasten on the sail at the four corners. The rig will convey
two persons and is more easily constructed than any other.



** Ice Boating [382]

But the sport that is greatest of all, the one that used to be
part of the life of every northern boy, and which is being revived
in popularity after years of stagnation, is ice boating. With the
aid of old skates, pieces of board and an old sheet or a small bit
of canvas, any boy possessed of ordinary mechanical genius may
make an ice boat. The frame of the boat should be made something
in the form of a kite. The center-board should be 4 or 5 ft. long,
6 in. wide and 2 in. thick. The cross board may be of a piece of 1
by 6 in. plank 3 ft. long. Fasten these with braces of small stout
strip, as shown in the drawing, and screw the cross-piece securely
to the center-board. Bore a hole in the center of the intersection
for the mast pole. The seat may be made of a piece of strong cloth
or leather. Three skates are fastened on to either side of the
cross-board and one to the rear end of the center-board, the
latter of which is to operate as a rudder. In attaching the skates
first make a couple of runner blocks, each 6 in. long and 3 in.
wide. Bore holes in them for the straps of the skates to pass
through and fasten them securely. Nail the runner blocks firmly to
the crossboard about 1-1/2 in. from each end.

[Illustration: Boy's Ice Boat]

In making the rudder hew down a piece of scantling 1 ft. long
until it assumes the shape of a club with a flat base. Nail a
strip of wood firmly to this base, and to the strip fasten the
skate. Run the top of the club through a hole bored in the stern
of the centerboard. Then make the helm by boring a hole in one end
of a strip of soft board about 1 ft. long, and through this hole
pass the club or rubber-pole and fasten it so it may be shifted
when desired. Make the sail out of an old sheet, if it be strong
enough, piece of canvas, or any such substance and attach it to
the mast and sprit as shown in the illustration, and guide it by a
stout string attached to the lower outer corner. As an ice boat
will travel faster than the wind, some care and considerable skill
is necessary. Unless you are accustomed to managing a sail boat,
do not select a place in which to learn where there are all holes
or open water. To stop the boat throw the head around into the
wind, same as you would with a sailboat. If the wind is strong the
occupants of the boat should lie flat on their stomach.



** Coasters and Chair Sleighs [383]

Make your own sled, boys! There is no use in buying them, because
your hand-made sled is probably better than any purchased one and
then you can take so much more pride in it when you know it is of
your own construction. There are so many different designs of
sleds that can be made by hand that the matter can be left almost
entirely to your own ingenuity. You can make one like the bought
sleds and face the runners with pieces of an iron hoop which will
answer every purpose. A good sled for coasting consists simply of
two barrel staves and three pieces of board as shown in the
picture, Fig. 1.

[Illustration: Fig. l; Barrel Stave Sled]

[Illustration: Chair Sleigh]

No bought sled will equal it for coasting and it is also just the
thing for carrying loads of snow for building snow houses. The
method of its construction is so simple that no other description
is needed than the picture. You can make a chair-sleigh out of
this by fitting a chair on the cross board instead of the long top
board or it will be still stronger if the top board is allowed to
remain, and then you will have a device that can readily again be
transformed into a coasting sled. In making the chair-sleigh it is
necessary, in order to hold the chair in place, to nail four
L-shaped blocks on the cross boards, one for each leg of the
chair. Skating along over the ice and pushing the chair in front
of him the proud possessor of a chair-sleigh may take his mother,
grown sister or lady friend with him on his outings, and permit
her to ride in the chair.



** Folding Chair Sleigh [384]

[Illustration: Fig. 2-Folding Chair Sleigh Bottom ]

[Illustration: Fig. 3-Folding Chair Sleigh-Top Parts Disconnected]

[Illustration: Fig. 4-Folding Chair Sleigh Open]

A folding chair sleigh is even more enjoyable and convenient than
the device just described. If the ice pond is far from home this
may be placed under your arm and carried where you like.

The illustrations, Figs. 2 and 3, show all the parts as they
should look before

[Illustration: Fig. 6-Folding Chair Sleigh Closed]

being joined together. The seat may be made of a piece of canvas
or carpet. The hinges are of leather. Figure 4 shows the folding
chair sleigh after it has been put together. Skates are employed
for the runners. The skates may be strapped on or taken off
whenever desired. When the chair is lifted the supports slip from
the notches on the side bars and fall on the runner bars. The
chair is then folded up so that it can be carried by a small boy.
With regular metal hinges and light timbers a very handsome chair
can be constructed that will also afford an ornamental lawn chair
for summer.



** The Toboggan Sled [384]

When the snow is very deep a toboggan sled is the thing for real
sport. The runners of the ordinary sled break through the crust of
the deep snow, blocking the progress, and spoiling the fun. The
toboggan sled, with its broad, smooth bottom, glides along over
the soft surface with perfect ease.

To make the toboggan sled, secure two boards each 10 ft. long and
1 ft. wide and so thin that they can be easily bent. Place the
boards beside each other and join them together with cross sticks.
Screw the boards to the cross stick from the bottom and be sure
that the heads of the screws are buried deep enough in the wood to
not protrude, so

[Illustration: Fig. 6-The Toboggan]

that the bottom will present an absolutely smooth surface to the
snow. Fasten two side bars to the top of the cross sticks and
screw them firmly. In some instances the timbers are fastened
together by strings, a groove being cut m the bottom of the boards
so as to keep the strings from protruding and being ground to
pieces. After the side bars are securely fastened, bend the ends
of the boards over and tie them to the ends of the front cross bar
to hold them in position. See Fig. 6. The strings for keeping the
boards bent must be very strong. Pieces of stout wire, or a
slender steel rod, are even better. The toboggan slide is the
favored device of sport among the boys in Canada, where nearly
every boy knows how to make them.



** The Norwegian Ski. [384]

You have often read of the ski, the snowshoe used by the
Norwegians and other people living in the far north. With them the
men and women glide down the snow-covered mountain sides, leap
across ditches, run races and have all kinds of sport. They are
just as amusing to the American boy who has ever learned to
manipulate them, and it is wonderful how much skill can be
attained in their use. Any boy with a little mechanical ingenuity
can make a pair of skis (pronounced skees). They can be made from
two barrel staves. Select staves of straight grained wood. Sharpen
the ends of each and score each end by cutting grooves in the
wood, as shown in the cut, Fig. 7. A pocket knife or small gouge
will suffice for this work. Then smear the end of the staves with
oil and hold them close to a hot fire until they can be bent so as
to tip the toes upward, as shown in the picture, Fig. 7. Then with
a cord bind the staves as they are bent and permit them to remain
thus tied until they retain the curved form of their own accord.
Now screw on top of each ski a little block, just broad and high
enough to fit in front of the heels of your shoe. Fasten a strap
in front of

[Illustration: Home-Made Skis]

each block through which to slip your toes, and the skis are made.
The inside of the shoe heel should press firmly against the block
and the toe be held tightly under the strap. This will keep the
skis on your feet. Now procure a stick with which to steer and
hunt a snow bank. At first you will afford more amusement to
onlookers than to yourself, for the skis have a way of trying to
run in opposite directions, crosswise and various ways, but with
practice you will soon become expert in their manipulation.



** Home-Made Settee [385]

Many people have old wooden beds stored away which can easily be
made into handy settees like the one shown in the accompanying
photograph. A few nails and one-half dozen 3-in. screws are all
the materials necessary besides the old bed. The tools needed are
a saw, hammer and a screwdriver. The head-board, if too high, can
be cut

[Illustration: Settee Made from Old Wooden Bed]

off and some of the ornaments replaced. The footboard must be cut
in two to make the ends or arms of the settee. The side rails and
a few of the slats are used in making the seat.
--Contributed by Wm. F. Hild, Lake Forest, Ill.



** Enameling a Bicycle Frame [385]

Make an enamel by mixing 2 oz. burnt umber with 1 qt. boiled oil,
heating, and then adding 1 oz. asphaltum. Keep the mass hot until
thoroughly mixed, says the Master Painter. Thin with turpentine
while still hot.

Use a camel's hair brush for applying the enamel and allow it to
set; then place the article in an oven, bake for six or eight
hours at a temperature of 250 deg. F. When cool rub down with
steel wool. Apply a finishing coat and allow it to bake eight
hours at 250 deg. F. Rub down with a soft rag, varnish and bake
again at 200 deg. F. Heat and cool the frame gradually each time.
Black enamel is easiest to apply and bakes hardest, but requires a
temperature of 300 deg. Colors can be baked at from 200 to 250
deg.



** How to Make a Sewing Bag [386]

A very practical and novel sewing bag for odds and ends necessary
for mending, etc., can be made of a folding camp stool. If an old
stool is not

[Illustration: Camp-Stool Work Bag]

at hand, a new one can be purchased for 25 cents. Remove the top
or seat, which is usually made of a piece of carpet, then make a
bag as shown in Fig. 1 and stitch a heavy cord around the top to
make it strong. Make pockets on the inside as shown and nail the
bag to the two crosspieces on which the ends of the carpet were
tacked. Large, brass furniture nails should be used. Attach a
small hook and eye on each end and fasten two leather handles to
the crosspieces.

Such a bag requires little room when folded and can be stored in a
closet when not in use.
--Contributed by Joseph Ledwinka, Philadelphia, Pa.



** Home-Made Roller Skates [386]

The rubber-tired wheels of an old carpet sweeper can be used to
advantage in making a pair of roller skates. In Fig. 1 is shown
how an iron washer or two may be fastened to the wood with a piece
of sheet metal to support

[Illustration: Rubber Tired Roller Skate]

the short axles of the wheels. The wheels are oiled through the
holes A and B, Fig. 2. These holes should be smaller than the
axles. The two side pieces are fastened together with a board
nailed on the top edges, as shown. This board also furnishes the
flat top for the shoe sole. Two straps are attached for fastening
the skate to the shoe.
--Contributed by Thos. De Loof, Grand Rapids, Mich.



** Adjuster for Flexible Electric Wires [386]

The accompanying illustration shows an adjuster for changing the
drop of an electric light. The main feature of this adjuster is
that it can be removed from the cord at any time. The adjuster is
made from a piece of wood, 3/8 in. thick, 2 in. wide and 3 in.
long. A 1/4 in. hole is bored in the center near each end of the
wood and a slot cut from

[Illustration: Can Be Taken from the Cord]

the holes to the outside edge, as shown in Fig. 1. It is attached
to the flexible cord as shown in Fig. 2.
--Contributed by J.J. Voelcker; Decatur, Ill.



** Making Photographs on Watch Dials [386]

Beat to a foam the white of an egg, with the addition of a little
ammonia. Add 9 oz. and 3 dr. of water and beat again. After the
egg has settled, filter and let the liquid run over the dial,
which has been previously cleaned with ammonia. When the surplus
has run off, coat with the mixture and allow to dry.

A sensitive collodion is now produced as follows: Dissolve 9 gr.
of chloride of zinc in 5 dr. of alcohol; add 7-1/2 gr. of
collodion cotton and 6-1/2 dr. of ether. Shake the whole forcibly.

Dissolve 23 gr. of nitrate of silver in hot water, add 1-1/2 dr.
of alcohol and keep the whole solution by heating. The silver
solution is now added in small quantities at a time to the
collodion, which must be well settled. This, of course, is done in
the dark room. After 24 hours the emulsion is filtered by passing
it through cotton moistened with alcohol. This durable collodion
emulsion is now flowed thinly upon the prepared watch dial, which,
after the collodion has coagulated, is moved up and down in
distilled

water until the fatty stripes disappear. The water is then
changed once, and after a short immersion, the dial is left to
dry on a piece of blotting paper. It is now ready for exposure.
Expose under magnesium light and develop with a citrate
oxalic developer, or in the following hydroquinone developer:

    Hydroquinone .............1 dr.
    Bromide of potassium .... 6 dr.
    Sulphite of soda......1-1/2 oz.
    Carbonate of soda ....2-2/3 dr.
    Water....................14 oz.

After fixing and drying, coat with a transparent positive varnish.



** Home-Made Overhead Trolley Coaster [387]

The accompanying sketch shows a playground trolley line which
furnished a great deal of amusement to many children at a minimum
cost. The wire, which is 3/16 in. in diameter, was stretched
between a tree and a barn across a vacant quarter block. The
strength of the wire was first tested by a heavy man. When not in
use the wire is unhooked from the tree and

[Illustration: Details of the Trolley and How It Is Used]

hauled into the barn and coiled loosely in the hay loft. The wire
was made taut for use by a rope which was fastened to the beams in
the barn. The trolley was made, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2, of
strips of wood bolted with stove bolts on two grooved pulleys. The
middle wide board was made of hardwood. The wheels were taken from
light pulley blocks and stove bolts were purchased from a local
hardware store to accurately fit the hubs. As it was necessary to
keep the bearings greased, we used vaseline. This coaster made
great sport for the youngsters and at no time were they in danger
of a serious fall as the line was hung low and the slant of the
wire was moderate.
--Contributed by H. J. Holden, Palm Springs, Calif.



** How to Make an Electric Furnace Regulator [388]

We have a furnace in our house and a part of my work each evening
last winter was to go down in the basement at 9 o'clock, fill the
furnace with coal for the night and stay there until it was
burning in good shape, then to close the draft door. As this
performance requires from twenty to thirty

[Illustration: Details of Furnace Regulator Construction]

minutes I concluded to make a self-acting device which would close
the draft and leave the furnace safe, without any further
attention on my part, after putting in the coal and opening it up
to burn. As some other boys may like to build the same regulator I
will tell just how to make one and how it operates.

Referring to Fig. 1, you will see a straight cord is attached to
the draft door of the furnace, D, and is run over the pulley P and
finally is attached to a small piece of iron H. This piece of
iron is hinged to 1. To the other side of H another cord G is
fastened, which passes over the pulley N and terminates in any
convenient place in the rooms above. This piece of iron H is held
in place by the release A. Now C is a coil of wire from a door
bell. R is an armature which works A on pivot J. M is a U-tube,
filled with mercury, one end being connected to a half liter glass
flask F by the tube T, and the other end terminates in an overflow
tube O. B is a battery of three bichromate cells which are
connected up with the C and the platinum points 1--2, which are
fused into the U-tube.

On fixing the furnace the iron piece H takes position X, this
being the normal position when draft door D is closed. On arriving
upstairs I pull the cord G, which causes the piece H to become
fixed in the vertical position by means of A. This opens the draft
door at the same time. Now when the furnace heats up sufficiently
it causes the air to expand in F, which causes the mercury in M to
rise a little above the point 2. This immediately causes a current
to flow through C which in turn draws R towards it, raises A and
causes H to drop to position X. This shuts the furnace door. Now
the furnace, of course, cools down, thus causing the air in F to
contract and consequently opening the circuit through C. If at any
time the furnace should overheat, the raising of A, on which is
grounded a wire from a signal bell upstairs, will make a circuit
through the bell by means of the point Z and wire leading
therefrom. This bell also serves to tell me whether H has dropped
or not. This same device of regulating the draft D can be used to
regulate the damper, found on the coal doors of most furnaces, by
simply fusing a platinum point on the other side of M and changing
the cord which is attached to D. A two-contact switch could also
be inserted to throw connections from 2 to 3. It would work in
this manner: The damper door, of course, which keeps a low fire,
would be up in a position similar to D; on the furnace cooling too
much, connection, due to contracting of air in F, would be made
through 3 and C, causing H to drop, thus closing door. This simple
device worked very well all last winter and gave me no trouble
whatever.

If you cannot readily procure a U-tube, you can make one, as I
did, and the work is interesting.

The U-tube is constructed in the following manner. A glass tube is
closed at one end. This is done by holding the tube in one corner
of a gas flame, somewhat near the dark area (A, Fig. 2), and
constantly turning the tube, when it will be found that the glass
has melted together. Now, after it is cool, about 3 or 4 in. from
the sealed end, the tube is held steadily so that the flame will
heat one small portion ( B, Fig. 2 ). After this small portion is
heated blow into the tube, not very hard, but just enough to cause
tube to bulge out. Allow to cool. Then reheat the small bulged
portion, blow quite hard, so that the glass will be blown out at
this point, forming a small hole. Now insert about 1/2 in. of
platinum wire and reheat, holding platinum

[Illustration: Making the U-Tube]

wire by means of a small pliers so that it will be partly in the
tube and partly without. The platinum will stick to the glass, and
if glass is sufficiently heated one will be able to pull it, by
means of pliers, from one side of the hole to the other, thus
sealing the wire into the tube. Another wire is sealed in the same
way about 1 in. from the first. Now, to bend the tube, one must
hold it, with both hands, in the flame and turn constantly until
soft. Quickly withdraw from flame and bend, just as you would a
piece of copper wire. Allow to cool slowly.

The several tubes are connected with a short piece of rubber
tubing.

The total cost of materials for constructing the apparatus
complete will not amount to more than one dollar.
--Contributed by M. G. Kopf, Lewis Institute, Chicago.



** Weatherproofing for Tents [389]

Dissolve 4 oz. sulphate of zinc in 10 gal. water; add 1/2 lb.
sal-soda; stir well until dissolved, and add 1/2 oz. tartaric
acid. Put the tent cover in this solution and let lie 24 hrs. Take
out (do not wring it) and hang up to dry. Grinnell's Hand Book on
Painting.



** Sawing Sheet Metal [389]

Sheet metal placed between two boards in the jaws of a vise and
clamped tightly, can be sawed easily with a hacksaw.



** A Monoplane Weather Vane [390]

The toy windmill or weather vane shown in the sketch is made to
represent a Bleriot monoplane.

[Illustration: Wire and Sheet-Metal Vane]

The propeller is turned by the wind. The frame is made of heavy
wire and connected with straps of tin. The construction is plainly
shown in the illustration. The windmill vane can be made in any
size to suit the builder.
--Contributed by W. C. Bliss, St. Louis, Missouri.



** How to Make a Minnow Trap [390]

Glass minnow traps that will give as good service as those
purchased at the tackle store can be made without difficulty. If a
trap should be banged carelessly against the side of the boat or
some other obstruction and smashed, instead of spending several
dollars to replace it, a half hour's time will turn out a new one
just as good, says a correspondent of Outing.

A trap of this kind can be made from an ordinary fruit jar such as
used in putting up preserves, either of one or two-quart capacity.
A one-quart jar gives good results, but if the bait to be caught
is of fairly large size, the two quart size may be used. As the
jars have the same style top they can be used interchangeably with
one mouthpiece.

The mouthpiece is made of a round neck bottle of which the glass
is colorless and rather thin. If the neck of the bottle is cut at
the right point, it makes a glass funnel that will just fit into
the fruit jar. The funnel forms the mouth of the trap. Put the
neck of the bottle into the fruit jar and mark the glass with a
file where the bottle and jar meet. Make as deep a cut as possible
with a file around the bottle on the mark and place two turns of a
yarn string saturated in kerosene around just below the cut when
the bottle is standing in an upright position. Set fire to the
string and turn the bottle from side to side to distribute the
heat evenly, then when the string has burned out, plunge the
bottle in cold water and it will separate on the cut.

Bind some copper wire around the neck of the jar so that three
ends will project 1/2 in. or more. These are bent down over the
funnel when put into the jar, forming clamps to hold it in place.
The copper wire can be bent many times in emptying or baiting the
trap without breaking.

Two copper wire bands are tied tightly around the jar about 3 in.
apart. They should be twisted tight with a pair of pliers and the
ends joined, forming a ring for attaching a cord.

For catching "kellies" or "killies," bait the trap with crushed
clams or salt-water mussels and for fresh water shiners use
mincemeat or bread crumbs and do not spill any bait outside of the
trap. Leave the trap down ten to fifteen minutes and when
resetting it after emptying, put back one or two of the victims,
as the others enter more readily if they see some of their
companions ahead of them.



** A Remedy for Leaking Fountain Pens [390]

Fountain-pen leaks may often be prevented by unscrewing the joint
and lightly smearing the screw with vaseline. This also makes it
easy to unscrew the joint for filling.



** Kites of Many Kinds and How to Make Them [391]

One of the prettiest of all is the butterfly kite. To make this
get two thin kite sticks of equal length. Bend each in an are,
tying one end of a strong string to one end of each stick and the
other end of the string to a point about 3 in. from the other end
of the stick. This leaves one end of each stick free, hooking over
the hemisphere described by the thread and the stick. Now tie
another thread to

[Illustration: Boy Kite]

each of these free ends and tie the other end of the thread to a
point near the other end of the stick, corresponding with the
distance from the end at which the first strings were tied on the
opposite side. This done, you should have two arched frames, each
an exact counterpart of the other in size, curvature and weight.
Now fasten the two frames together so that the arcs will overlap
each other as shown in the sketch. Bind the intersecting points
securely with thread. To make the butterfly's head, secure two
heavy broom straws or two short wires, and

[Illustration: Girl Kite]

attach them to the top part of the wing frames near where the
sticks intersect, so that the straws or wires will cross. These
form the antennae, or the "smellers." Then select the color of
paper you want, yellow, brown, blue, white or any other color; lay
it on a flat surface and place the frame on top of it, holding the
frame down securely with a weight. Then with a pair of scissors
cut the paper around the frame, leaving about a 1/2-in. margin for
pasting. Cut slits in the paper about 2 in. apart around the
curves and at all angles to keep the paper from wrinkling when it
is pasted. Distribute the paste with a small brush and make the
overlaps a little more than 1/4 in. wide and press them

[Illustration: Butterfly Kite]

together with a soft cloth. When the kite is dry decorate it with
paint or strips of colored paper in any design you may fancy. The
best effects are produced by pasting pieces of colored paper on
top of the other paper. Black paper decorations show up to fine
advantage when the kite is in flight. Attach the "belly-band" to
the

[Illustration: Frame for Girl Kite]

curved sticks by punching a hole in the paper in the same manner
as it is attached to the common hexagonal or coffin-shaped kite.
With a tail, your kite is ready to fly. Another interesting design
is the boy kite. With light colored coat and vest and gay striped
trousers, the kite standing high in the air always attracts
attention and affords splendid sport for the American youth in
