

Not expecting to see you before the spring campaign opens, I wish to
express in this way my entire satisfaction with what you have done up
to this time, so far as I understand it.  The particulars of your plans
I neither know nor seek to know.  You are vigilant and self-reliant,
and, pleased with this, I wish not to obtrude any constraints or
restraints upon you.  While I am very anxious that any great disaster
or the capture of our men in great numbers should be avoided, I know
these points are less likely to escape your attention than they would
mine.  If there is anything wanting which is within my power to give,
do not fail to let me know it.  And now, with a brave army and a just
cause, may God sustain you.


A noble letter, breathing the loftiest spirit, and showing that moral
grandeur which has been so characteristic of America's greatest men. He
had put all in Grant's hands and he had given to him an army, the like
of which had never been seen until now on the American continent. Never
before had the North poured forth its wealth and energy in such
abundance.

Four thousand wagons loaded with food and ammunition followed the army,
and there was a perfect system by which a wagon emptied of its contents
was sent back to a depot to be refilled, while a loaded wagon took its
place at the front.  Complete telegram equipments, poles, wires,
instruments and all were carried with every division.  The wires could
be strung easily and the lieutenant-general could talk to every part of
his army.  There were, also, staffs of signalmen, in case the wires
should fail at any time.  Grant held in his hand all the resources of
the North, and if he could not win no one could.

All through the night the hostile armies marched, and before them went
the spies and scouts.




CHAPTER XIV

THE GHOSTLY RIDE


Harry and Dalton kept close together during the long hours of the
ghostly ride.  Just ahead of them were Taylor and Marshall and Peyton,
and in front Lee rode in silence.  Now and then they passed regiments,
and at other times they would halt and let regiments pass them.  Then
the troops, seeing the man sitting on the white horse, would start to
cheer, but always their officers promptly subdued it, and they marched
on feeling more confident than ever that their general was leading them
to victory.

Many hours passed and still the army marched through the forests. The
trees, however, were dwindling in size and even in the night they saw
that the earth was growing red and sterile.  Dense thickets grew
everywhere, and the marching became more difficult.  Harry felt a
sudden thrill of awe.

"George," he whispered, "do you know the country into which we're
riding?"

"I think I do, Harry.  It's the Wilderness."

"It can't be anything else, George, because I see the ghosts."

"What are you talking about, Harry?  What ghosts?"

"The thousands and thousands who have fallen in that waste.  Why the
Wilderness is so full of dead men that they must walk at night to give
one another room.  I only hope that the ghost of Old Jack will ride
before us and show us the way."

"I almost feel like that, too," admitted Dalton, who, however, was of a
less imaginative mind than Harry.  "As sure as I'm sitting in the
saddle we're bound for the Wilderness.  Now, what is the day going to
give us?"

"Marching mostly, I think, and with the next noon will come battle.
Grant doesn't hesitate and hold back.  We know that, George."

"No, it's not his character."

Morning came and found them still in the forests, seeking the deep
thickets of the Wilderness, and Grant, warned by his scouts and spies,
and most earnestly by one whose skill, daring and judgment were
unequaled, turned from his chosen line of march to meet his enemy.
Once more Lee had selected the field of battle, where his inferiority
in numbers would not count so much against him.

It was nearly morning when the march ceased, and officers and troops,
save those on guard, lay down in the forest for rest.  Harry, a
seasoned veteran, could sleep under any conditions and with a blanket
over him and a saddle for a pillow closed his eyes almost immediately.
Lee and his older aides, Taylor and Peyton and Marshall, slept also.
Around them the brigades, too, lay sleeping.

A while before dawn a large man in Confederate uniform, using the soft,
lingering speech of the South, appeared almost in the center of the
army of Northern Virginia.  He knew all the pass words and told the
officers commanding the watch that the wing under Ewell was advancing
more rapidly than any of the others.  Inside the line he could go about
almost as he chose, and one could see little of him, save that he was
large of figure and deeply tanned, like all the rest.

He approached the little opening in which Lee and his staff lay,
although he kept back from the sentinels who watched over the sleeping
leader. But Shepard knew that it was the great Confederate chieftain
who lay in the shadow of the oak and he could identify him by the
glances of the sentinels so often directed toward the figure.

There were wild thoughts for a moment or two in the mind of Shepard. A
single bullet fired by an unerring hand would take from the Confederacy
its arm and brain, and then what happened to himself afterward would
not matter at all.  And the war would be over in a month or two.  But
he put the thought fiercely from him.  A spy he was and in his heart
proud of his calling, but no such secret bullet could be fired by him.

He turned away from the little opening, wandered an hour through the
camp and then, diving into the deep bushes, vanished like a shadow
through the Confederate lines, and was gone to Grant to report that
Lee's army was advancing swiftly to attack, and that the command of
Ewell would come in touch with him first.

Not long after dawn Harry was again on the march, riding behind his
general.  From time to time Lee sent messengers to the various
divisions of his army, four in number, commanded by Longstreet, Early,
Hill and Stuart, the front or Stuart's composed of cavalry.  Harry's
own time came, when he received a dispatch of the utmost importance to
take to Ewell. He memorized it first, and, if capture seemed probable,
he was to tear it into bits and throw it away.  Harry was glad he was
to go to Ewell. In the great campaign in the valley he had been second
to Jackson, his right arm, as Jackson had been Lee's right arm.  Ewell
had lost a leg since then, and his soldiers had to strap him in the
saddle when he led them into battle, but he was as daring and cheerful
as ever, trusted implicitly by Lee.

Harry with a salute to his chief rode away.  Part of the country was
familiar to him and in addition his directions were so explicit that he
could not miss the way.

The four divisions of the army were in fairly close touch, but in a
country of forests and many waters Northern scouts might come between,
and he rode with caution, his hand ever near the pistol in his belt.
The midday sun however clouded as the afternoon passed on.  The
thickets and forests grew more dense.  From the distance came now and
then the faint, sweet call of a trumpet, but everything was hidden from
sight by the dense tangle of the Wilderness, a wilderness as wild and
dangerous as any in which Henry Ware had ever fought.  How it all came
back to him! Almost exactly a year ago he had ridden into it with
Jackson and here the armies were gathering again.

Imagination, fancy, always so strong in him, leaped into vivid life.
The year had not passed and he was riding to meet Stonewall Jackson,
who was somewhere ahead, preparing for his great curve about Hooker and
the lightning stroke at Chancellorsville.  Rabbits sprang out of the
undergrowth and fled away before his horse's hoofs.  In the lonely
wilderness, which nevertheless had little to offer to the hunter, birds
chattered from every tree.  Small streams flowed slowly between dense
walls of bushes.  Here and there in the protection of the thickets wild
flowers were in early bloom.

It was spring, fresh spring everywhere, but the bushes and the grass
alike were tinged with red for Harry.  The strange mental illusion that
he was riding to Chancellorsville remained with him and he did not seek
to shake it off.  He almost expected to see Old Jack ahead on a hill,
bent over a little, and sitting on Little Sorrel, with the old slouch
hat drawn over his eyes.  They had talked of the ghost of Jackson
leading them in the Wilderness.  He shivered.  Could it be so?  All the
time he knew it was an illusion, but he permitted it to cast its spell
over him, as one who dreams knowingly.

And Harry was dreaming back.  Old Jack, the earlier of his two heroes,
was leading them.  He foresaw the long march through the thickets of
the Wilderness, Stonewall forming the line of battle in the deep roads
late in the evening, almost in sight of Hooker's camp, the sudden rush
of his brigades and then the terrible battle far into the night.

He shook himself.  It was uncanny.  The past was the past.  Dreams were
thin and vanished stuff.  Once more he was in the present and saw
clearly.  Old Jack was gone to take his place with the great heroes of
the past, but the Army of Northern Virginia was there, with Lee leading
them, and the most formidable of all the Northern chiefs with the most
formidable of all the Northern armies was before them.

He heard the distant thud of hoofs and with instinctive caution drew
back into a dense clump of bushes.  A half-dozen horsemen were near and
their eager looks in every direction told Harry that they were scouts.
There was little difference then between a well worn uniform of blue or
gray, and they were very close before Harry was able to tell that they
belonged to Grant's army.

He was devoutly glad that his horse was trained thoroughly and stood
quite still while the Northern scouts passed.  A movement of the bushes
would have attracted their attention, and he did not wish to be
captured at any time, least of all on the certain eve of a great
battle.  After a battle he always felt an extra regret for those who
had fallen, because they would never know whether they had won or lost.

They were alert, keen and vigorous men, or lads rather, as young as
himself, and they rode as if they had been Southern youths almost born
in the saddle.  Harry was not the only one to notice how the Northern
cavalry under the whip hand of defeat had improved so fast that it was
now a match, man for man, for that of the South.

The young riders rode on and the tread of their hoofs died in the
undergrowth.  Then Harry emerged from his own kindly clump of bushes
and increased his speed, anxious to reach Ewell, without any more of
those encounters.  He made good progress through the thickets, and soon
after sundown saw a glow which he took to be that of campfires.  He
advanced cautiously, met the Southern sentinels and knew that he was
right.

The very first of these sentinels was an old soldier of Jackson, who
knew him well.

"Mr. Kenton!" he exclaimed.

"Yes, Thorn!  It's you!" said Harry without hesitation.

The soldier was pleased that he should be recognized thus in the dusk,
and he was still more pleased when the young aide leaned down and shook
his hand.

"I might have known, Thorn, that I'd find you here, rifle on your arm,
watching," he said.

"Thank you, Mr. Kenton.  You'll find the general over there on a log by
the fire."

Harry dismounted, gave his horse to a soldier and walked into the
glade. Ewell sat alone, his crutch under his arms, his one foot kicking
back the coals, his bald head a white disc in the glow.

"General Ewell, sir," said Harry.

General Ewell turned about and when he saw Harry his face clearly
showed gladness.  He could not rise easily, but he stretched out a
welcoming hand.

"Ah! Kenton," he said, "you're a pleasant sight to tired eyes like
mine. You bring back the glorious old days in the valley.  So it's a
message from the commander-in-chief?"

"Yes, sir.  Here it is."

Ewell read it rapidly by the firelight and smiled.

"He tells us we're nearest to the enemy," he said, "and to hold fast,
if we're attacked.  You're to remain with us and report what happens,
but doubtless you knew all this."

"Yes, I had to commit it to memory before I started."

"Then stay here with me.  I may want to report to General Lee at any
time.  The enemy is in our front only three or four miles away.  He
knows we're here and it was a villainous surprise to him to find us in
his way. They say this man Grant is a pounder.  So is Lee, when the
time comes to pound, but he's that and far more.  I tell you, young
man, that General Lee has had to trim a lot of Northern generals.
McClellan and Pope and Burnside and Hooker and Meade have been going to
school to him, and now Grant is qualifying for his class."

"But Grant is a great general.  So our men in the West themselves say."

"He may be, but Lee is greater, greatest.  And, Harry, you and I, who
knew him and loved him, wish that another who alone was fit to ride by
his side was here with him."

"I wish it from the bottom of my heart," said Harry.

"Well, well, regrets are useless.  Help me up, Harry.  I'm only part of
a man, but I can still fight."

"We saw you do that at Gettysburg," said Harry, as he put his arm under
Ewell's shoulder.  Then Ewell took his crutch and they walked to the
far side of the glade, where several officers of his staff gathered
around him.

"Lieutenant Kenton, whom you all know," said General Ewell, "has
brought a message from the commander-in-chief that we will be attacked
first, and to be on guard.  We consider it an honor, do we not, my
lads?"

"Yes, let them come," they said.

"Harry, you may want to see the enemy.  Clayton, you and Campbell take
him forward through the pickets.  But don't go too far.  We don't want
to lose three perfectly good young officers before the battle begins.
After that it may be your business to get yourselves shot."

The two rode nearly two miles to the crest of a hill and then, using
their strong glasses in the moonlight, they were able to see the lights
of a vast camp.

"We hear that it is Warren's corps," said Clayton.  "As General Ewell
doubtless has told you, the enemy know that we're in front, but I don't
believe they know our exact location.  I believe we'll be in battle
with those men in the morning."

Harry thought so too.  In truth, it was inevitable.  Warren would
advance and Ewell would stand in his way.  Yet he slept soundly when he
went back to camp, although he was awakened long before dawn the next
day.  Then he ate breakfast, mounted and sat his horse not far away
from Ewell, whom two soldiers had strapped into his saddle, and who was
watching with eager eyes for the sunrise.

Harry, listening intently, heard no sound in front of them, save the
wind rippling through the dwarfed forests of the Wilderness, and he
knew that no battle had yet begun elsewhere.  Sound would come far on
that placid May morning, and it was a certainty that Ewell was nearest
to contact with the enemy.

But Ewell did not yet move.  All his men had been served with early
breakfast, such as it was, and remained in silent masses, partly hidden
by the forest and thickets.  The dawn was cold, and Harry felt a little
chill, but it soon passed, as the red edge of the sun showed over the
eastern border of the Wilderness.  Then the light spread toward the
zenith, but the golden glow failed to penetrate the somber thickets.

"It's going to be a good day," said Harry to an aide.

"A good day for a battle."

"We'll hear from the Yankees soon.  They can't fail to discover our
exact location by sunrise, and they'll fight.  Be sure of that."

It was now nearly six o'clock, and General Ewell, growing impatient,
rode forward a little.  Harry followed with his staff.  A half-dozen
Southern sharpshooters rose suddenly out of the thickets, and one of
them dared to lay his hands on the reins of the general's horse.  But
Ewell was not offended.  He looked down at the man and said:

"What is it, Strother?"

"Riflemen of the enemy are not more than three or four hundred yards
away.  If you go much farther, General, they will certainly see you and
fire upon you."

"Thanks, Strother.  So they've located us?"

"They're about to do it.  They're feeling around.  We've seen 'em in
the bushes.  We ask you not to go on, General.  We wouldn't know what
to do without you.  There, sir!  They're firing on our pickets!"

A half-dozen shots came from the front, and then a half-dozen or so in
reply.  Harry saw pink flashes, and then spirals of smoke rising. More
shots were fired presently on their right, and then others on their
left.  The Northern riflemen were evidently on a long line, and
intended to make a thorough test of their enemy's strength.  Harry had
no doubt that Shepard was there.  He would surely come to the point
where his enemy was nearest, and his eyes and ears would be the keenest
of all.

The little skirmish continued for a few minutes, extending along a
winding line of nearly a mile through the thickets.  Only two or three
were wounded and nobody killed on the Southern side.  Harry understood
thoroughly, as Ewell had said, that the sharpshooters of the enemy were
merely feeling for them.  They wanted to know if a strong force was
there, and now they knew.

The firing ceased, not in dying shots, but abruptly.  The Wilderness in
front of them returned to silence, broken only by the rippling leaves.
