
Behold, then, the venerable clergyman ascending the steps of the
mansion with a torch-bearer behind him. It was the elderly man who had
spoken to the Old Maid, and the same who had afterward explained the
shield of arms and recognized the features of the negro. Like their
predecessors, they gave three raps with the iron hammer.

"Old Caesar cometh not," observed the priest. "Well, I wot he no longer
doth service in this mansion."

"Assuredly, then, it was something worse in old Caesar's likeness,"
said the other adventurer.

"Be it as God wills," answered the clergyman. "See! my strength,
though it be much decayed, hath sufficed to open this heavy door. Let
us enter and pass up the staircase."

Here occurred a singular exemplification of the dreamy state of a very
old man's mind. As they ascended the wide flight of stairs the aged
clergyman appeared to move with caution, occasionally standing aside,
and oftener bending his head, as it were in salutation, thus
practising all the gestures of one who makes his way through a throng.
Reaching the head of the staircase, he looked around with sad and
solemn benignity, laid aside his staff, bared his hoary locks, and was
evidently on the point of commencing a prayer.

"Reverend sir," said his attendant, who conceived this a very suitable
prelude to their further search, "would it not be well that the people
join with us in prayer?"

"Well-a-day!" cried the old clergyman, staring strangely around him.
"Art thou here with me, and none other? Verily, past times were
present to me, and I deemed that I was to make a funeral prayer, as
many a time heretofore, from the head of this staircase. Of a truth, I
saw the shades of many that are gone. Yea, I have prayed at their
burials, one after another, and the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet hath
seen them to their graves."

Being now more thoroughly awake to their present purpose, he took his
staff and struck forcibly on the floor, till there came an echo from
each deserted chamber, but no menial to answer their summons. They
therefore walked along the passage, and again paused, opposite to the
great front window, through which was seen the crowd in the shadow and
partial moonlight of the street beneath. On their right hand was the
open door of a chamber, and a closed one on their left.

The clergyman pointed his cane to the carved oak panel of the latter.

"Within that chamber," observed he, "a whole lifetime since, did I sit
by the death-bed of a goodly young man who, being now at the last
gasp--" Apparently, there was some powerful excitement in the ideas
which had now flashed across his mind. He snatched the torch from his
companion's hand, and threw open the door with such sudden violence
that the flame was extinguished, leaving them no other light than the
moonbeams which fell through two windows into the spacious chamber. It
was sufficient to discover all that could be known. In a high-backed
oaken arm-chair, upright, with her hands clasped across her breast and
her head thrown back, sat the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet. The
stately dame had fallen on her knees with her forehead on the holy
knees of the Old Maid, one hand upon the floor and the other pressed
convulsively against her heart. It clutched a lock of hair--once
sable, now discolored with a greenish mould.

As the priest and layman advanced into the chamber the Old Maid's
features assumed such a semblance of shifting expression that they
trusted to hear the whole mystery explained by a single word. But it
was only the shadow of a tattered curtain waving betwixt the dead face
and the moonlight.

"Both dead!" said the venerable man. "Then who shall divulge the
secret? Methinks it glimmers to and fro in my mind like the light and
shadow across the Old Maid's face. And now 'tis gone!"




PETER GOLDTHWAITE'S TREASURE.


"And so, Peter, you won't even consider of the business?" said Mr.
John Brown, buttoning his surtout over the snug rotundity of his
person and drawing on his gloves. "You positively refuse to let me
have this crazy old house, and the land under and adjoining, at the
price named?"

"Neither at that, nor treble the sum," responded the gaunt, grizzled
and threadbare Peter Goldthwaite. "The fact is, Mr. Brown, you must
find another site for your brick block and be content to leave my
estate with the present owner. Next summer I intend to put a splendid
new mansion over the cellar of the old house."

"Pho, Peter!" cried Mr. Brown as he opened the kitchen door; "content
yourself with building castles in the air, where house-lots are
cheaper than on earth, to say nothing of the cost of bricks and
mortar. Such foundations are solid enough for your edifices, while
this underneath us is just the thing for mine; and so we may both be
suited. What say you, again?"

"Precisely what I said before, Mr. Brown," answered Peter Goldthwaite.
"And, as for castles in the air, mine may not be as magnificent as
that sort of architecture, but perhaps as substantial, Mr. Brown, as
the very respectable brick block with dry-goods stores, tailors' shops
and banking-rooms on the lower floor, and lawyers' offices in the
second story, which you are so anxious to substitute."

"And the cost, Peter? Eh?" said Mr. Brown as he withdrew in something
of a pet. "That, I suppose, will be provided for off-hand by drawing a
check on Bubble Bank?"

John Brown and Peter Goldthwaite had been jointly known to the
commercial world between twenty and thirty years before under the firm
of Goldthwaite & Brown; which copartnership, however, was speedily
dissolved by the natural incongruity of its constituent parts. Since
that event, John Brown, with exactly the qualities of a thousand other
John Browns, and by just such plodding methods as they used, had
prospered wonderfully and become one of the wealthiest John Browns on
earth. Peter Goldthwaite, on the contrary, after innumerable schemes
which ought to have collected all the coin and paper currency of the
country into his coffers, was as needy a gentleman as ever wore a
patch upon his elbow. The contrast between him and his former partner
may be briefly marked, for Brown never reckoned upon luck, yet always
had it, while Peter made luck the main condition of his projects, and
always missed it. While the means held out his speculations had been
magnificent, but were chiefly confined of late years to such small
business as adventures in the lottery. Once he had gone on a
gold-gathering expedition somewhere to the South, and ingeniously
contrived to empty his pockets more thoroughly than ever, while
others, doubtless, were filling theirs with native bullion by the
handful. More recently he had expended a legacy of a thousand or two
of dollars in purchasing Mexican scrip, and thereby became the
proprietor of a province; which, however, so far as Peter could find
out, was situated where he might have had an empire for the same
money--in the clouds. From a search after this valuable real estate
Peter returned so gaunt and threadbare that on reaching New England
the scarecrows in the corn-fields beckoned to him as he passed by.
"They did but flutter in the wind," quoth Peter Goldthwaite. No,
Peter, they beckoned, for the scarecrows knew their brother.

At the period of our story his whole visible income would not have
paid the tax of the old mansion in which we find him. It was one of
those rusty, moss-grown, many-peaked wooden houses which are scattered
about the streets of our elder towns, with a beetle-browed second
story projecting over the foundation, as if it frowned at the novelty
around it. This old paternal edifice, needy as he was, and though,
being centrally situated on the principal street of the town, it would
have brought him a handsome sum, the sagacious Peter had his own
reasons for never parting with, either by auction or private sale.
There seemed, indeed, to be a fatality that connected him with his
birthplace; for, often as he had stood on the verge of ruin, and
standing there even now, he had not yet taken the step beyond it which
would have compelled him to surrender the house to his creditors. So
here he dwelt with bad luck till good should come.

Here, then, in his kitchen--the only room where a spark of fire took
off the chill of a November evening--poor Peter Goldthwaite had just
been visited by his rich old partner. At the close of their interview,
Peter, with rather a mortified look, glanced downward at his dress,
parts of which appeared as ancient as the days of Goldthwaite & Brown.
His upper garment was a mixed surtout, woefully faded, and patched
with newer stuff on each elbow; beneath this he wore a threadbare
black coat, some of the silk buttons of which had been replaced with
others of a different pattern; and, lastly, though he lacked not a
pair of gray pantaloons, they were very shabby ones, and had been
partially turned brown by the frequent toasting of Peter's shins
before a scanty fire. Peter's person was in keeping with his goodly
apparel. Gray-headed, hollow-eyed, pale-cheeked and lean-bodied, he
was the perfect picture of a man who had fed on windy schemes and
empty hopes till he could neither live on such unwholesome trash nor
stomach more substantial food. But, withal, this Peter Goldthwaite,
crack-brained simpleton as, perhaps, he was, might have cut a very
brilliant figure in the world had he employed his imagination in the
airy business of poetry instead of making it a demon of mischief in
mercantile pursuits. After all, he was no bad fellow, but as harmless
as a child, and as honest and honorable, and as much of the gentleman
which Nature meant him for, as an irregular life and depressed
circumstances will permit any man to be.

As Peter stood on the uneven bricks of his hearth looking round at the
disconsolate old kitchen his eyes began to kindle with the
illumination of an enthusiasm that never long deserted him. He raised
his hand, clenched it and smote it energetically against the smoky
panel over the fireplace.

"The time is come," said he; "with such a treasure at command, it were
folly to be a poor man any longer. Tomorrow morning I will begin with
the garret, nor desist till I have torn the house down."

Deep in the chimney-corner, like a witch in a dark cavern, sat a
little old woman mending one of the two pairs of stockings wherewith
Peter Goldthwaite kept his toes from being frost-bitten. As the feet
were ragged past all darning, she had cut pieces out of a cast-off
flannel petticoat to make new soles. Tabitha Porter was an old maid
upward of sixty years of age, fifty-five of which she had sat in that
same chimney-corner, such being the length of time since Peter's
grandfather had taken her from the almshouse. She had no friend but
Peter, nor Peter any friend but Tabitha; so long as Peter might have a
shelter for his own head, Tabitha would know where to shelter hers,
or, being homeless elsewhere, she would take her master by the hand
and bring him to her native home, the almshouse. Should it ever be
necessary, she loved him well enough to feed him with her last morsel
and clothe him with her under-petticoat. But Tabitha was a queer old
woman, and, though never infected with Peter's flightiness, had become
so accustomed to his freaks and follies that she viewed them all as
matters of course. Hearing him threaten to tear the house down, she
looked quietly up from her work.

"Best leave the kitchen till the last, Mr. Peter," said she.

"The sooner we have it all down, the better," said Peter Goldthwaite.
"I am tired to death of living in this cold, dark, windy, smoky,
creaking, groaning, dismal old house. I shall feel like a younger man
when we get into my splendid brick mansion, as, please Heaven, we
shall by this time next autumn. You shall have a room on the sunny
side, old Tabby, finished and furnished as best may suit your own
notions."

"I should like it pretty much such a room as this kitchen," answered
Tabitha. "It will never be like home to me till the chimney-corner
gets as black with smoke as this, and that won't be these hundred
years. How much do you mean to lay out on the house, Mr. Peter?"

"What is that to the purpose?" exclaimed Peter, loftily. "Did not my
great-grand-uncle, Peter Goldthwaite, who died seventy years ago, and
whose namesake I am, leave treasure enough to build twenty such?"

"I can't say but he did, Mr. Peter," said Tabitha, threading her
needle.

Tabitha well understood that Peter had reference to an immense hoard
of the precious metals which was said to exist somewhere in the cellar
or walls, or under the floors, or in some concealed closet or other
out-of-the-way nook of the old house. This wealth, according to
tradition, had been accumulated by a former Peter Goldthwaite whose
character seems to have borne a remarkable similitude to that of the
Peter of our story. Like him, he was a wild projector, seeking to heap
up gold by the bushel and the cart-load instead of scraping it
together coin by coin. Like Peter the second, too, his projects had
almost invariably failed, and, but for the magnificent success of the
final one, would have left him with hardly a coat and pair of breeches
to his gaunt and grizzled person. Reports were various as to the
nature of his fortunate speculation, one intimating that the ancient
Peter had made the gold by alchemy; another, that he had conjured it
out of people's pockets by the black art; and a third--still more
unaccountable--that the devil had given him free access to the old
provincial treasury. It was affirmed, however, that some secret
impediment had debarred him from the enjoyment of his riches, and that
he had a motive for concealing them from his heir, or, at any rate,
had died without disclosing the place of deposit. The present Peter's
father had faith enough in the story to cause the cellar to be dug
over. Peter himself chose to consider the legend as an indisputable
truth, and amid his many troubles had this one consolation--that,
should all other resources fail, he might build up his fortunes by
tearing his house down. Yet, unless he felt a lurking distrust of the
golden tale, it is difficult to account for his permitting the
paternal roof to stand so long, since he had never yet seen the moment
when his predecessor's treasure would not have found plenty of room in
his own strong-box. But now was the crisis. Should he delay the search
a little longer, the house would pass from the lineal heir, and with
it the vast heap of gold, to remain in its burial-place till the ruin
of the aged walls should discover it to strangers of a future
generation.

"Yes," cried Peter Goldthwaite, again; "to-morrow I will set about
it."

The deeper he looked at the matter, the more certain of success grew
Peter. His spirits were naturally so elastic that even now, in the
blasted autumn of his age, he could often compete with the springtime
gayety of other people. Enlivened by his brightening prospects, he
began to caper about the kitchen like a hobgoblin, with the queerest
antics of his lean limbs and gesticulations of his starved features.
Nay, in the exuberance of his feelings, he seized both of Tabitha's
hands and danced the old lady across the floor till the oddity of her
rheumatic motions set him into a roar of laughter, which was echoed
back from the rooms and chambers, as if Peter Goldthwaite were
laughing in every one. Finally, he bounded upward, almost out of
sight, into the smoke that clouded the roof of the kitchen, and,
alighting safely on the floor again, endeavored to resume his
customary gravity.

"To-morrow, at sunrise," he repeated, taking his lamp to retire to
bed, "I'll see whether this treasure be hid in the wall of the
garret."

"And, as we're out of wood, Mr. Peter," said Tabitha, puffing and
panting with her late gymnastics, "as fast as you tear the house down
I'll make a fire with the pieces."

Gorgeous that night were the dreams of Peter Goldthwaite. At one time
he was turning a ponderous key in an iron door not unlike the door of
a sepulchre, but which, being opened, disclosed a vault heaped up with
gold coin as plentifully as golden corn in a granary. There were
chased goblets, also, and tureens, salvers, dinner-dishes and
dish-covers of gold or silver-gilt, besides chains and other jewels,
incalculably rich, though tarnished with the damps of the vault; for,
of all the wealth that was irrevocably lost to man, whether buried in
the earth or sunken in the sea, Peter Goldthwaite had found it in this
one treasure-place. Anon he had returned to the old house as poor as
ever, and was received at the door by the gaunt and grizzled figure of
a man whom he might have mistaken for himself, only that his garments
were of a much elder fashion. But the house, without losing its former
aspect, had been changed into a palace of the precious metals. The
floors, walls and ceilings were of burnished silver; the doors, the
window-frames, the cornices, the balustrades and the steps of the
staircase, of pure gold; and silver, with gold bottoms, were the
chairs, and gold, standing on silver legs, the high chests of drawers,
and silver the bedsteads, with blankets of woven gold and sheets of
silver tissue. The house had evidently been transmuted by a single
touch, for it retained all the marks that Peter remembered, but in
gold or silver instead of wood, and the initials of his name--which
when a boy he had cut in the wooden door-post--remained as deep in the
pillar of gold. A happy man would have been Peter Goldthwaite except
for a certain ocular deception which, whenever he glanced backward,
caused the house to darken from its glittering magnificence into the
sordid gloom of yesterday.

Up betimes rose Peter, seized an axe, hammer and saw which he had
placed by his bedside, and hied him to the garret. It was but scantily
lighted up as yet by the frosty fragments of a sunbeam which began to
glimmer through the almost opaque bull-eyes of the window. A moralizer
might find abundant themes for his speculative and impracticable
wisdom in a garret. There is the limbo of departed fashions, aged
trifles of a day and whatever was valuable only to one generation of
men, and which passed to the garret when that generation passed to the
grave--not for safekeeping, but to be out of the way. Peter saw piles
of yellow and musty account-books in parchment covers, wherein
creditors long dead and buried had written the names of dead and
buried debtors in ink now so faded that their moss-grown tombstones
were more legible. He found old moth-eaten garments, all in rags and
tatters, or Peter would have put them on. Here was a naked and rusty
sword--not a sword of service, but a gentleman's small French
rapier--which had never left its scabbard till it lost it. Here were
canes of twenty different sorts, but no gold-headed ones, and
shoebuckles of various pattern and material, but not silver nor set
with precious stones. Here was a large box full of shoes with high
heels and peaked toes. Here, on a shelf, were a multitude of phials
half filled with old apothecary's stuff which, when the other half had
done its business on Peter's ancestors, had been brought hither from
the death-chamber. Here--not to give a longer inventory of articles
that will never be put up at auction--was the fragment of a
full-length looking-glass which by the dust and dimness of its surface
made the picture of these old things look older than the reality. When
Peter, not knowing that there was a mirror there, caught the faint
traces of his own figure, he partly imagined that the former Peter
Goldthwaite had come back either to assist or impede his search for
the hidden wealth. And at that moment a strange notion glimmered
through his brain that he was the identical Peter who had concealed
the gold, and ought to know whereabout it lay. This, however, he had
unaccountably forgotten.

"Well, Mr. Peter!" cried Tabitha, on the garret stairs. "Have you torn
the house down enough to heat the teakettle?"

"Not yet, old Tabby," answered Peter, "but that's soon done, as you
shall see." With the word in his mouth, he uplifted the axe, and laid
about him so vigorously that the dust flew, the boards crashed, and in
a twinkling the old woman had an apron full of broken rubbish.

"We shall get our winter's wood cheap," quoth Tabitha.

The good work being thus commenced, Peter beat down all before him,
smiting and hewing at the joints and timbers, unclenching spike-nails,
ripping and tearing away boards, with a tremendous racket from morning
till night. He took care, however, to leave the outside shell of the
house untouched, so that the neighbors might not suspect what was
going on.

Never, in any of his vagaries, though each had made him happy while it
lasted, had Peter been happier than now. Perhaps, after all, there was
something in Peter Goldthwaite's turn of mind which brought him an
inward recompense for all the external evil that it caused. If he were
poor, ill-clad, even hungry and exposed, as it were, to be utterly
annihilated by a precipice of impending ruin, yet only his body
remained in these miserable circumstances, while his aspiring soul
enjoyed the sunshine of a bright futurity. It was his nature to be
always young, and the tendency of his mode of life to keep him so.
Gray hairs were nothing--no, nor wrinkles nor infirmity; he might look
old, indeed, and be somewhat disagreeably connected with a gaunt old
figure much the worse for wear, but the true, the essential Peter was
a young man of high hopes just entering on the world. At the kindling
of each new fire his burnt-out youth rose afresh from the old embers
and ashes. It rose exulting now. Having lived thus long--not too long,
but just to the right age--a susceptible bachelor with warm and tender
dreams, he resolved, so soon as the hidden gold should flash to light,
to go a-wooing and win the love of the fairest maid in town. What
heart could resist him? Happy Peter Goldthwaite!

Every evening--as Peter had long absented himself from his former
lounging-places at insurance offices, news-rooms, and book-stores, and
as the honor of his company was seldom requested in private
circles--he and Tabitha used to sit down sociably by the kitchen
hearth. This was always heaped plentifully with the rubbish of his
day's labor. As the foundation of the fire there would be a
goodly-sized back-log of red oak, which after being sheltered from
rain or damp above a century still hissed with the heat and distilled
streams of water from each end, as if the tree had been cut down
within a week or two. Next there were large sticks, sound, black and
heavy, which had lost the principle of decay and were indestructible
except by fire, wherein they glowed like red-hot bars of iron. On this
solid basis Tabitha would rear a lighter structure, composed of the
splinters of door-panels, ornamented mouldings, and such quick
combustibles, which caught like straw and threw a brilliant blaze high
up the spacious flue, making its sooty sides visible almost to the
chimney-top. Meantime, the gloom of the old kitchen would be chased
out of the cobwebbed corners and away from the dusky cross-beams
overhead, and driven nobody could tell whither, while Peter smiled
like a gladsome man and Tabitha seemed a picture of comfortable age.
All this, of course, was but an emblem of the bright fortune which the
destruction of the house would shed upon its occupants.

While the dry pine was flaming and crackling like an irregular
discharge of fairy-musketry, Peter sat looking and listening in a
pleasant state of excitement; but when the brief blaze and uproar were
succeeded by the dark-red glow, the substantial heat and the deep
singing sound which were to last throughout the evening, his humor
became talkative. One night--the hundredth time--he teased Tabitha to
tell him something new about his great-granduncle.

"You have been sitting in that chimney-corner fifty-five years, old
Tabby, and must have heard many a tradition about him," said Peter.
"Did not you tell me that when you first came to the house there was
an old woman sitting where you sit now who had been housekeeper to the
famous Peter Goldthwaite?"

"So there was, Mr. Peter," answered Tabitha, "and she was near about a
hundred years old. She used to say that she and old Peter Goldthwaite
had often spent a sociable evening by the kitchen fire--pretty much as
you and I are doing now, Mr. Peter."

"The old fellow must have resembled me in more points than one," said
Peter, complacently, "or he never would have grown so rich. But
methinks he might have invested the money better than he did. No
interest! nothing but good security! and the house to be torn down to
come at it! What made him hide it so snug, Tabby?"

"Because he could not spend it," said Tabitha, "for as often as he
went to unlock the chest the Old Scratch came behind and caught his
arm. The money, they say, was paid Peter out of his purse, and he
wanted Peter to give him a deed of this house and land, which Peter
swore he would not do."

"Just as I swore to John Brown, my old partner," remarked Peter. "But
this is all nonsense, Tabby; I don't believe the story."

"Well, it may not be just the truth," said Tabitha, "for some folks
say that Peter did make over the house to the Old Scratch, and that's
the reason it has always been so unlucky to them that lived in it. And
as soon as Peter had given him the deed the chest flew open, and Peter
caught up a handful of the gold. But, lo and behold! there was nothing
in his fist but a parcel of old rags."

"Hold your tongue, you silly old Tabby!" cried Peter, in great wrath.
"They were as good golden guineas as ever bore the effigies of the
king of England. It seems as if I could recollect the whole
circumstance, and how I, or old Peter, or whoever it was, thrust in my
hand, or his hand, and drew it out all of a blaze with gold. Old rags
indeed!"

But it was not an old woman's legend that would discourage Peter
Goldthwaite. All night long he slept among pleasant dreams, and awoke
at daylight with a joyous throb of the heart which few are fortunate
enough to feel beyond their boyhood. Day after day he labored hard
without wasting a moment except at meal-times, when Tabitha summoned
him to the pork and cabbage, or such other sustenance as she had
picked up or Providence had sent them. Being a truly pious man, Peter
never failed to ask a blessing--if the food were none of the best,
then so much the more earnestly, as it was more needed--nor to return
thanks, if the dinner had been scanty, yet for the good appetite which
was better than a sick stomach at a feast. Then did he hurry back to
his toil, and in a moment was lost to sight in a cloud of dust from
the old walls, though sufficiently perceptible to the ear by the
clatter which he raised in the midst of it.

How enviable is the consciousness of being usefully employed! Nothing
troubled Peter, or nothing but those phantoms of the mind which seem
like vague recollections, yet have also the aspect of presentiments.
He often paused with his axe uplifted in the air, and said to himself,
"Peter Goldthwaite, did you never strike this blow before?" or "Peter,
what need of tearing the whole house down? Think a little while, and
you will remember where the gold is hidden." Days and weeks passed on,
however, without any remarkable discovery. Sometimes, indeed, a lean
gray rat peeped forth at the lean gray man, wondering what devil had
got into the old house, which had always been so peaceable till now.
And occasionally Peter sympathized with the sorrows of a female mouse
who had brought five or six pretty, little, soft and delicate young
ones into the world just in time to see them crushed by its ruin. But
as yet no treasure.

By this time, Peter, being as determined as fate and as diligent as
time, had made an end with the uppermost regions and got down to the
second story, where he was busy in one of the front chambers. It had
formerly been the state-bedchamber, and was honored by tradition as
the sleeping-apartment of Governor Dudley and many other eminent
guests. The furniture was gone. There were remnants of faded and
tattered paper-hangings, but larger spaces of bare wall ornamented
with charcoal sketches, chiefly of people's heads in profile. These
being specimens of Peter's youthful genius, it went more to his heart
to obliterate them than if they had been pictures on a church wall by
Michael Angelo. One sketch, however, and that the best one, affected
him differently. It represented a ragged man partly supporting himself
