their own will I must make them go."

He snatched a long brand from the fire, and whirling it around his head,
and shouting at the same time, he dashed toward an old dead tree some
distance away. Two stump-tailed, tuft-eared animals, uttering loud
ferocious screams, leaped from the boughs and tore away through the
thickets, terror stabbing at their hearts, as the circling flame of red
pursued them. Tayoga returned laughing.

"They will run and they will run," he said, throwing down his brand.

"You don't give 'em much chance to see us, Tayoga," said the hunter.
"Since we're on exhibition tonight you might have let 'em look and
admire a while longer."

"So I could, Great Bear, but I do not like the lynx. Its habits are
unpleasant, and its scream is harsh. Hence, I drove the two of them
away."

"I suppose you're right. I don't dare care much about 'em either. Now
we'll rest and see what other visitors come to admire."

Tayoga sat down again. Their packs were put in a neat heap near the
three, Robert's and Willet's swords, and Tayoga's bow and arrows in
their case resting on the top. Robert threw more wood on the fire, and
contentedly watched the great, glowing circle of light extend its
circumference.

"We knew we'd find peace and rest here," said Willet, "but we didn't
know we'd be watched and admired like people on the stage at a theater."

"Have you seen many plays, Dave?" asked Robert.

"A lot, especially in London at Drury Lane and other theaters."

"And so you know London, as well as Paris?"

"Well, yes, I've been there. Some day, Robert, I'll tell you more about
both Paris and London and why I happened to be in such great cities,
but not now. We'll keep our minds on the forest, which is worth our
attention. Don't you hear a tread approaching, Tayoga?"

"Yes, Great Bear, and it's very heavy. A lord of the forest is coming."

"A moose, think you, Tayoga?"

"Yes, Great Bear, a mighty bull, one far beyond the common size. I can
tell by his tread, and I think he is angry, or he would not march so
boldly toward the fire."

"Then," said the hunter, "we'd better stand up, and be ready with our
weapons. I've no wish to be trodden to death by a mad bull moose, just
when I'm feeling so happy and so contented with the world."

"The Great Bear's advice is good," said Tayoga, and the three took it.
The approaching tread grew heavier, and the largest moose that Robert
had ever seen, pushing his way through the bushes, stood looking at the
fire, and those who had built it. He was a truly magnificent specimen,
and Tayoga had been right in calling him a lord of the forest, but his
eyes were red and inflamed and his look was menacing.

"Mad! Quite mad!" whispered the hunter. "He sees us, but he doesn't
admire us. He hates us, and he isn't afraid of us."

The three moved softly and discreetly into a place where both trees and
bushes were so dense that the moose could not get at them.

"What troubles him?" asked Robert.

"I don't know," said the hunter. "He may be suffering yet from a wound
by an Indian arrow, or he may have a spell of some kind. We can be
certain only that he's raging mad, every inch of him. Look at those
great sharp hoofs of his, Robert. I'd as soon be struck with an axe."

The moose, after some hesitation, rushed into the glade, leaped toward
the fire, leaped back again, pawed and trampled the earth in a terrible
convulsion of rage, and then sprang away, crashing through the forest.
They heard the beat of his hoofs a long time, and when the sound ceased
they returned and resumed their seats by the fire.

"That moose was a great animal," said Tayoga with irony, "but his mind
was the mind of a little child. He did nothing with his strength and
agility but tear the earth and tire himself. Now he runs away among the
trees, scratching his body with bushes and briars."

"At any rate, he was an important visitor, Tayoga," said the hunter,
"and since we've had a good look at him we're glad he's gone away. I
think it likely now that all who wanted to look at us have had their
look, and we might go to sleep. How are your leaves, Robert?"

"Fine and soft. They make a splendid bed, and I'm off to slumberland."

He pushed up the leaves at one end of his couch high enough to form a
pillow, and stretched himself luxuriously. The night was turning cold,
but he had his blanket, and there was the fire. He felt as comfortable
as at the Inn of the Eagle in Quebec, and freer from plots and danger.

They were allowing the fire to die now, but the coals would glow for a
long time, and Robert looked at them sleepily. His feeling of coziness
and content increased, and presently he slept. The hunter soon followed
him, but Tayoga slept not at all. His subtle Indian instinct warned him
not to do so. For the Onondaga the forest was not free now from danger,
and he would watch while his white friends slept.

Tayoga arose, after a while, and taking a stick, scattered the coals of
the fire. But he did it in such a manner that he made no noise, the
hunter and young Lennox continuing to sleep soundly. Then he watched the
embers, having lost that union which is strength, die one by one. The
conquered darkness came back, recovering its lost ground, slowly
invading the glade, until it was one in the dusk with the rest of the
forest. Then Tayoga felt better satisfied, and he looked at the
sleepers, whose faces he could still discern, despite the absence of the
fire, a fair moonlight falling.

Robert and the hunter slept peacefully, but their sleep was deep. The
youth was weary from the long march in the woods, but as he slept his
strong healthy tissues rapidly regained their vitality. The Onondaga
looked at the two longer than usual. These comrades of his were knitted
to him by innumerable labors and dangers shared. In him dwelled the soul
of a great Indian chief, the spirit that has animated Pontiac, and
Little Turtle, and Tecumseh and Red Cloud and other dauntless leaders of
his race, but it had been refined though not weakened by his white
education. Gratitude and truth were as frequent Indian traits as the
memory of injuries, and while he was surcharged with pride because he
was born a warrior of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of
the great League of the Hodenosaunee, he felt as truly as any knight
ever felt that he must accept and fulfill all the duties of his place.

Standing in a dusk made luminous by a silvery moonlight he was a fitting
son of the forest, one of its finest products. He belonged to it, and it
belonged to him, each being the perfect complement of the other. His
face cut in bronze was lofty, not without a spiritual cast, and his
black eyes flamed with his resolve. He looked up at the heavens, fleecy
with white vapors, and shot with a million stars, the same sky that had
bent over his race for generations no man could count, and his soul was
filled with admiration. Then he made his voiceless prayer:

"O, Tododaho, first and greatest sachem of the Onondagas, greatest and
noblest sachem of the League, look down from your home on another star,
and watch over your people, for whom the storms gather! Let the serpents
in your hair whisper to you of wisdom that you in turn may whisper it to
us through the winds! Direct our footsteps in the great war that is
coming between the white nations and save to us our green forests, our
blue lakes and our silver rivers! Remember, O, Tododaho, that although
the centuries have passed since Manitou took you from us, your name
still stands among us for all that is great, noble and wise! I beseech
you that you give sparks of your own lofty and strong spirit to your
children, to the Hodenosaunee in this, their hour of need, and I ask
too, that you help one who is scarcely yet a warrior in years, one who
invokes thee humbly, even, Tayoga, of the clan of the Bear, of the
nation Onondaga, of thy own great League of the Hodenosaunee!"

He bent his head a little to listen. All the legends and beliefs of his
race, passed from generation to generation, crowded upon him. Tododaho
leaning down from his star surely heard his prayer. Tayoga shivered a
little, not from cold or fear, but from emotion. The mystic spell was
upon him. Far above him in the limitless void little wreaths of vapor
united about a great shining star, taking the shape of a man, the shape
of a great chief, wise beyond all other chiefs that had ever lived, and
he distinctly saw the wise serpents, coil on coil, in Tododaho's hair.
They were whispering in his ear, and bending his head a little farther
he heard the words of the serpents which the rising wind brought,
repeated, from the lips of Tododaho:

"Fear not, O young warrior of the Onondagas! Tododaho leaning down from
his star hears thy pious appeal! Tododaho, for more than four hundred
years, has watched over the great League, night and day! Let the fifty
sachems, old in years and wisdom, walk in the straight path of truth,
and let the warriors follow! Let them be keepers of the faith, friends
to those who have been their friends, sage in council, brave in battle,
and they shall hold their green forests, their blue lakes and their
silver rivers! And to thee, Tayoga, I say, thou shalt encounter many
dangers, but because thy soul is pure, thou shalt have great rewards!"

Then the wind died suddenly. The leaves hung motionless. The vapors
about the great shining star dissolved, the face of Tododaho, with the
wise serpents, coil on coil in his hair, disappeared, and the luminous
heavens were without a sign. But they had spoken.

Tayoga trembled, but again it was from emotion. Tododaho had sent his
words of promise on the wind, and they had been whispered in his ear.
Great would be his dangers but great would be his rewards. He was
uplifted. His heart exulted. His deeds would be all the mightier because
of the dangers, and he would never forget that he had the promise of
Tododaho, greatest, wisest and noblest of the chiefs of the
Hodenosaunee, who had gone to a shining star more than four hundred
years ago.

He sat down under one of the trees and sleep remained far from him. He
still listened with all the power of his sensitive hearing for any sound
that might come in the forest, and after awhile he took his bow and
quiver from their case, putting his quiver over his shoulder. He covered
his rifle with the leaves, and holding the bow in his hand stole away
among the trees.

The faintest of sounds had come to him, and Tayoga did not doubt its
nature. It was strange to the forest and it was hostile. The mystic
spell was still upon him, and it heightened his faculties to an
extraordinary degree. He had almost the power of divination. A hundred
yards, and he crouched low behind the trunk of a great oak. Then as the
moonlight fell upon a small opening just ahead he saw them, Tandakora
and two warriors.

The Ojibway was in full war paint, and the luminous quality of the
moon's rays enlarged his huge form. He towered like Hanegoategeh, the
Evil Spirit, and the figures upon his shoulders and chest stood out like
carving. He and the two warriors also carried bows and arrows, and
Tayoga surmised that they had meant to slay in silence. His heart burned
with rage and he felt, too, an unlimited daring. Did he not have the
promise of Tododaho that he should pass through all dangers and receive
great rewards? He felt himself a match for the three, and he did not
need secrecy and silence. He raised his voice and cried:

"Stand forth, Tandakora, and fight. I too have only _waano_ (the bow)
and _gano_ (the arrow), but I meet the three of you!"

Tandakora and the two warriors sprang back and in an instant were hidden
by the trees, but Tayoga had expected them to do so, and he dropped
down, moving silently to another and hidden point, where he waited, an
arrow on the string. He knew that Tandakora had recognized his voice,
and would make every effort, his shoulder healed enough for use, to
secure such a prize. The Ojibway would believe, too, that three must
prevail against one, and he would push the attack. So the Onondaga
remained motionless, but confident.

Nearly ten minutes of absolute silence followed, but his hearing was so
acute that he did not think any of the three could move without his
knowledge. Then a slight sliding sound came. One of the warriors was
passing to the right, and that, too, he had expected, as they would
surely try to flank him. He moved back a little, and with the end of his
bow shook gently a bush seven or eight feet away. In an instant, an
arrow, coming from the night, whistled through the bush. But Tayoga drew
back the bow quick as lightning, fitted an arrow to the string and shot
with all the power of his arm at a bronze body showing among the leaves
at the point whence the arrow had come.

The shaft sang in the air, and so great was its speed and so short the
range that it passed entirely through the chest of the warrior, cutting
off his breath so quickly that he had no time to utter his death cry.
There was no sound but that of his fall as he crashed among the leaves.
Nor did Tayoga utter the usual shout of triumph. He sank back and fitted
another arrow to the string, turning his attention now to the left.

It had been the Onondaga's belief that Tandakora would remain in front,
sending the warriors on either flank, and now he expected a movement on
the left. He did not have to make any feint of his own to draw the
second warrior, who must have been lacking somewhat in skill, as he
presently saw a dim figure in the bushes and his second arrow sped with
the same speed and deadly result that had marked the first. Fitting his
third arrow to the string, he called:

"Stand forth, Tandakora, and show yourself like a man! Then we shall see
who shoots the better!"

But being a knight of the woods, and to convince the Ojibway that it was
no trick, he showed himself first. Tandakora shot at once, but Tayoga
dropped back like a flash, and the arrow cut the air, where his
feathered head had been. Then all his Indian nature, the training and
habit of generations, leaped up in him and he began to taunt.

"You shot quickly, Tandakora," he called, "and your arm was strong, but
the arrow struck not! You followed us all the way from Stadacona, and
you thought to have our scalps! The Great Bear and Lennox did not
suspect, but I did! The warriors who came with you are dead, and you and
I alone face each other! I have shown myself and I have risked your
arrow, now show yourself, Tandakora, and risk mine!"

But the Ojibway, it seemed, had too much respect for the bow of Tayoga.
He remained close, and did not disclose an inch of his brown body. The
Onondaga did not show himself again, but crouched for a shot, in case
the opportunity came. He knew that Tandakora was a great bowman, but he
had supreme confidence in his own skill against anybody. Nothing stirred
where his enemy lay and no sound came from the little camp, which was
beyond the reach of the words they had uttered.

A quarter of an hour, a half hour, an hour passed, and neither moved,
showing all the patience natural to the Indian on the war path. Then
Tayoga shook a bush a few feet from him, but Tandakora divined the
trick, and his arrow remained on the string. Another quarter of an hour,
and seeing some leaves quiver, Tayoga, at a chance, sent an arrow among
them. No sound came back, and he knew that it had been sped in vain.

Then he began to move slowly and with infinite care toward the right,
resolved to bring the affair to a head. At the end of twenty feet he
rustled the bushes a little once more and lay flat. An arrow flew over
his head, but he did not reply, resuming his slow advance after his
enemy's shaft had sped. Another twenty feet and he made the bushes move
again. Tandakora shot, and in doing so he exposed a little of his right
arm. Tayoga sent a prompt arrow at the brown flesh. He heard a cry of
pain, wrenched in spite of his stoical self from the Ojibway, and then
as he sank down again and put his ear to the ground came the sound of
retreating footsteps.

The affair, unfinished in a way, so far as the vital issue was
concerned, was concluded for the present, at least. Ear and mind told
Tayoga as clearly as if eye had seen. His arrow had ploughed its path
across Tandakora's arm near the shoulder, inflicting a wound that would
heal, but which was extremely painful and from which so much blood was
coming that a quick bandage was needed. Tandakora could no longer meet
Tayoga with the bow and arrow and so he must retreat. Nor was it likely
that his first wound was yet more than half healed.

The Onondaga waited until he was sure his enemy was at least a half mile
away, when he rose boldly and approached the place where Tandakora had
last lain hidden. He detected at once drops of dark blood on the leaves
and grass, and he found his arrow, which Tandakora had snatched from
the wound and thrown upon the ground. He wiped the barb carefully and
replaced it in his quiver. Then he followed the trail at least three
miles, a trail marked here and there by ruddy spots.

Tayoga did not feel sorry for his enemy. Tandakora was a savage and an
assassin, and he deserved this new hurt. He was a dangerous enemy, one
who had made up his mind to secure revenge upon the Onondaga and his
friends, but his fresh wound would keep him quiet for a while. One could
not have an arrow through his forearm and continue a hunt with great
vigor and zest.

Tayoga marked twice the places where Tandakora had stopped to rest.
There the drops of blood were clustered, indicating a pause of some
duration, and a third stop showed where he had bound up his wound. Fresh
leaves had been stripped from a bush and a tiny fragment or two
indicated that the Ojibway had torn a piece from his deerskin waistcloth
to fasten over the leaves. After that the trail was free from the ruddy
spots, but Tayoga did not follow it much farther. He was sure that
Tandakora would not return, as he had lost much blood, and for a while,
despite his huge power and strength, exertion would make him weak and
dizzy. Evidently, the bullet in his shoulder, received when they were on
their way to Quebec, had merely shaken him, but the arrow had taken a
heavier toll.

Tayoga returned to the camp of the three. All the fire had gone out, and
Willet and Robert, wrapped in their blankets, still slept peacefully.
The entire combat between the bowmen had passed without their knowledge,
and Tayoga, quietly returning the bow and quiver to their case, and
taking his rifle instead, sat down with his back against a tree, and his
weapon across his knees. He was on the whole satisfied. He had not
removed Tandakora, but he had inflicted another painful and mortifying
defeat upon him. The pride of the Indian had been touched in its most
sensitive place, and the Ojibway would burn with rage for a long time.
Tayoga's white education did not keep him from taking pleasure in the
thought.

He had no intention of going to sleep. Although Tandakora would not
return, others might come, and for the night the care of the three was
his. It had grown a little darker, but the blue of the skies was merely
deeper and more luminous. There in the east was the great shining star,
on which Tododaho, mightiest of chiefs, lived with the wise serpents
coiled in his hair. He gazed and his heart leaped. The vapors about the
star were gathering again, and for a brief moment or two they formed the
face of Tododaho, a face that smiled upon him. His soul rejoiced.

"O Tododaho," were his unspoken words. "Thou hast kept thy promise! Thou
hast watched over me in the fight with Tandakora, and thou hast given me
the victory! Thou hast sent all his arrows astray and thou hast sent
mine aright! I thank thee, O, Tododaho!"

The vapors were dissolved, but Tayoga never doubted that he had seen for
a second time the face of the wise chief who had gone to his star more
