     Death keeps watch beside the portal,
     But 'tis life that dwells beyond."
     --JOHN STERLING.

Two years have passed since the events recorded in the last chapter, and
the end of the summer half-year is again drawing on. Martin has left and
gone on a cruise in the South Pacific, in one of his uncle's ships; the
old magpie, as disreputable as ever, his last bequest to Arthur, lives
in the joint study. Arthur is nearly sixteen, and at the head of the
twenty, having gone up the school at the rate of a form a half-year.
East and Tom have been much more deliberate in their progress, and are
only a little way up the fifth form. Great strapping boys they are,
but still thorough boys, filling about the same place in the house that
young Brooke filled when they were new boys, and much the same sort
of fellows. Constant intercourse with Arthur has done much for both of
them, especially for Tom; but much remains yet to be done, if they
are to get all the good out of Rugby which is to be got there in these
times. Arthur is still frail and delicate, with more spirit than body;
but, thanks to his intimacy with them and Martin, has learned to swim,
and run, and play cricket, and has never hurt himself by too much
reading.

One evening, as they were all sitting down to supper in the fifth-form
room, some one started a report that a fever had broken out at one of
the boarding-houses. "They say," he added, "that Thompson is very ill,
and that Dr. Robertson has been sent for from Northampton."

"Then we shall all be sent home," cried another. "Hurrah! five weeks'
extra holidays, and no fifth-form examination!"

"I hope not," said Tom; "there'll be no Marylebone match then at the end
of the half."

Some thought one thing, some another, many didn't believe the report;
but the next day, Tuesday, Dr. Robertson arrived, and stayed all day,
and had long conferences with the Doctor.

On Wednesday morning, after prayers, the Doctor addressed the whole
school. There were several cases of fever in different houses, he said;
but Dr. Robertson, after the most careful examination, had assured him
that it was not infectious, and that if proper care were taken,
there could be no reason for stopping the school-work at present. The
examinations were just coming on, and it would be very unadvisable to
break up now. However, any boys who chose to do so were at liberty to
write home, and, if their parents wished it, to leave at once. He should
send the whole school home if the fever spread.

The next day Arthur sickened, but there was no other case. Before the
end of the week thirty or forty boys had gone, but the rest stayed on.
There was a general wish to please the Doctor, and a feeling that it was
cowardly to run away.

On the Saturday Thompson died, in the bright afternoon, while the
cricket-match was going on as usual on the big-side ground. The Doctor,
coming from his deathbed, passed along the gravel-walk at the side
of the close, but no one knew what had happened till the next day. At
morning lecture it began to be rumoured, and by afternoon chapel was
known generally; and a feeling of seriousness and awe at the actual
presence of death among them came over the whole school. In all the long
years of his ministry the Doctor perhaps never spoke words which sank
deeper than some of those in that day's sermon.

"When I came yesterday from visiting all but the very death-bed of him
who has been taken from us, and looked around upon all the familiar
objects and scenes within our own ground, where your common amusements
were going on with your common cheerfulness and activity, I felt there
was nothing painful in witnessing that; it did not seem in any way
shocking or out of tune with those feelings which the sight of a dying
Christian must be supposed to awaken. The unsuitableness in point of
natural feeling between scenes of mourning and scenes of liveliness did
not at all present itself. But I did feel that if at that moment any of
those faults had been brought before me which sometimes occur amongst
us; had I heard that any of you had been guilty of falsehood, or of
drunkenness, or of any other such sin; had I heard from any quarter the
language of profaneness, or of unkindness, or of indecency; had I heard
or seen any signs of that wretched folly which courts the laugh of
fools by affecting not to dread evil and not to care for good, then the
unsuitableness of any of these things with the scene I had just quitted
would indeed have been most intensely painful. And why? Not because such
things would really have been worse than at any other time, but because
at such a moment the eyes are opened really to know good and evil,
because we then feel what it is so to live as that death becomes an
infinite blessing, and what it is so to live also that it were good for
us if we had never been born."

Tom had gone into chapel in sickening anxiety about Arthur, but he came
out cheered and strengthened by those grand words, and walked up alone
to their study. And when he sat down and looked round, and saw Arthur's
straw hat and cricket-jacket hanging on their pegs, and marked all his
little neat arrangements, not one of which had been disturbed, the tears
indeed rolled down his cheeks; but they were calm and blessed tears, and
he repeated to himself, "Yes, Geordie's eyes are opened; he knows what
it is so to live as that death becomes an infinite blessing. But do I? O
God, can I bear to lose him?"

The week passed mournfully away. No more boys sickened, but Arthur was
reported worse each day, and his mother arrived early in the week. Tom
made many appeals to be allowed to see him, and several times tried to
get up to the sick-room; but the housekeeper was always in the way, and
at last spoke to the Doctor, who kindly but peremptorily forbade him.

Thompson was buried on the Tuesday, and the burial service, so soothing
and grand always, but beyond all words solemn when read over a boy's
grave to his companions, brought him much comfort, and many strange
new thoughts and longings. He went back to his regular life, and played
cricket and bathed as usual. It seemed to him that this was the right
thing to do, and the new thoughts and longings became more brave and
healthy for the effort. The crisis came on Saturday; the day week that
Thompson had died; and during that long afternoon Tom sat in his study
reading his Bible, and going every half-hour to the housekeeper's room,
expecting each time to hear that the gentle and brave little spirit
had gone home. But God had work for Arthur to do. The crisis passed:
on Sunday evening he was declared out of danger; on Monday he sent a
message to Tom that he was almost well, had changed his room, and was to
be allowed to see him the next day.

It was evening when the housekeeper summoned him to the sick-room.
Arthur was lying on the sofa by the open window, through which the rays
of the western sun stole gently, lighting up his white face and golden
hair. Tom remembered a German picture of an angel which he knew; often
had he thought how transparent and golden and spirit-like it was; and
he shuddered, to think how like it Arthur looked, and felt a shock as if
his blood had all stopped short, as he realized how near the other world
his friend must have been to look like that. Never till that moment had
he felt how his little chum had twined himself round his heart-strings,
and as he stole gently across the room and knelt down, and put his arm
round Arthur's head on the pillow, felt ashamed and half-angry at his
own red and brown face, and the bounding sense of health and power which
filled every fibre of his body, and made every movement of mere living a
joy to him. He needn't have troubled himself: it was this very strength
and power so different from his own which drew Arthur so to him.

Arthur laid his thin, white hand, on which the blue veins stood out so
plainly, on Tom's great brown fist, and smiled at him; and then looked
out of the window again, as if he couldn't bear to lose a moment of the
sunset, into the tops of the great feathery elms, round which the rooks
were circling and clanging, returning in flocks from their evening's
foraging parties. The elms rustled, the sparrows in the ivy just outside
the window chirped and fluttered about, quarrelling, and making it up
again; the rooks, young and old, talked in chorus, and the merry shouts
of the boys and the sweet click of the cricket-bats came up cheerily
from below.

"Dear George," said Tom, "I am so glad to be let up to see you at last.
I've tried hard to come so often, but they wouldn't let me before."

"Oh, I know, Tom; Mary has told me every day about you, and how she was
obliged to make the Doctor speak to you to keep you away. I'm very glad
you didn't get up, for you might have caught it; and you couldn't stand
being ill, with all the matches going on. And you're in the eleven, too,
I hear. I'm so glad."

"Yes; ain't it jolly?" said Tom proudly. "I'm ninth too. I made forty at
the last pie-match, and caught three fellows out. So I was put in
above Jones and Tucker. Tucker's so savage, for he was head of the
twenty-two."

"Well, I think you ought to be higher yet," said Arthur, who was as
jealous for the renown of Tom in games as Tom was for his as a scholar.

"Never mind. I don't care about cricket or anything now you're getting
well, Geordie; and I shouldn't have hurt, I know, if they'd have let me
come up. Nothing hurts me. But you'll get about now directly, won't you?
You won't believe how clean I've kept the study. All your things are
just as you left them; and I feed the old magpie just when you used,
though I have to come in from big-side for him, the old rip. He won't
look pleased all I can do, and sticks his head first on one side and
then on the other, and blinks at me before he'll begin to eat, till I'm
half inclined to box his ears. And whenever East comes in, you should
see him hop off to the window, dot and go one, though Harry wouldn't
touch a feather of him now."

Arthur laughed. "Old Gravey has a good memory; he can't forget the
sieges of poor Martin's den in old times." He paused a moment, and then
went on: "You can't think how often I've been thinking of old Martin
since I've been ill. I suppose one's mind gets restless, and likes to
wander off to strange, unknown places. I wonder what queer new pets the
old boy has got. How he must be revelling in the thousand new birds,
beasts, and fishes!"

Tom felt a pang of jealousy, but kicked it out in a moment. "Fancy him
on a South Sea island, with the Cherokees, or Patagonians, or some
such wild niggers!" (Tom's ethnology and geography were faulty,
but sufficient for his needs.) "They'll make the old Madman cock
medicine-man, and tattoo him all over. Perhaps he's cutting about now
all blue, and has a squaw and a wigwam. He'll improve their boomerangs,
and be able to throw them too, without having old Thomas sent after him
by the Doctor to take them away."

Arthur laughed at the remembrance of the boomerang story, but then
looked grave again, and said, "He'll convert all the island, I know."

"Yes, if he don't blow it up first."

"Do you remember, Tom, how you and East used to laugh at him and chaff
him, because he said he was sure the rooks all had calling-over or
prayers, or something of the sort, when the locking-up bell rang? Well,
I declare," said Arthur, looking up seriously into Tom's laughing eyes,
"I do think he was right. Since I've been lying here, I've watched them
every night; and, do you know, they really do come and perch, all of
them, just about locking-up time; and then first there's a regular
chorus of caws; and then they stop a bit, and one old fellow, or perhaps
two or three in different trees, caw solos; and then off they all go
again, fluttering about and cawing anyhow till they roost."

"I wonder if the old blackies do talk," said Tom, looking up at them.
"How they must abuse me and East, and pray for the Doctor for stopping
the slinging!"

"There! look, look!" cried Arthur; "don't you see the old fellow without
a tail coming up? Martin used to call him the 'clerk.' He can't steer
himself. You never saw such fun as he is in a high wind, when he can't
steer himself home, and gets carried right past the trees, and has to
bear up again and again before he can perch."

The locking-up bell began to toll, and the two boys were silent, and
listened to it. The sound soon carried Tom off to the river and the
woods, and he began to go over in his mind the many occasions on which
he had heard that toll coming faintly down the breeze, and had to pack
his rod in a hurry and make a run for it, to get in before the gates
were shut. He was roused with a start from his memories by Arthur's
voice, gentle and weak from his late illness.

"Tom, will you be angry if I talk to you very seriously?"

"No, dear old boy, not I. But ain't you faint, Arthur, or ill? What can
I get you? Don't say anything to hurt yourself now--you are very weak;
let me come up again."

"No, no; I shan't hurt myself. I'd sooner speak to you now, if you don't
mind. I've asked Mary to tell the Doctor that you are with me, so you
needn't go down to calling-over; and I mayn't have another chance, for
I shall most likely have to go home for change of air to get well, and
mayn't come back this half."

"Oh, do you think you must go away before the end of the half? I'm
so sorry. It's more than five weeks yet to the holidays, and all the
fifth-form examination and half the cricket-matches to come yet. And
what shall I do all that time alone in our study? Why, Arthur, it will
be more than twelve weeks before I see you again. Oh, hang it, I can't
stand that! Besides who's to keep me up to working at the examination
books? I shall come out bottom of the form, as sure as eggs is eggs."

Tom was rattling on, half in joke, half in earnest, for he wanted to
get Arthur out of his serious vein, thinking it would do him harm; but
Arthur broke in,--

"Oh, please, Tom, stop, or you'll drive all I had to say out of my head.
And I'm already horribly afraid I'm going to make you angry."

"Don't gammon, young un," rejoined Tom (the use of the old name, dear to
him from old recollections, made Arthur start and smile and feel quite
happy); "you know you ain't afraid, and you've never made me angry since
the first month we chummed together. Now I'm going to be quite sober for
a quarter of an hour, which is more than I am once in a year; so make
the most of it; heave ahead, and pitch into me right and left."

"Dear Tom, I ain't going to pitch into you," said Arthur piteously; "and
it seems so cocky in me to be advising you, who've been my backbone ever
since I've been at Rugby, and have made the school a paradise to me. Ah,
I see I shall never do it, unless I go head over heels at once, as
you said when you taught me to swim. Tom, I want you to give up using
vulgus-books and cribs."

Arthur sank back on to his pillow with a sigh, as if the effort had been
great; but the worst was now over, and he looked straight at Tom, who
was evidently taken aback. He leant his elbows on his knees, and stuck
his hands into his hair, whistled a verse of "Billy Taylor," and then
was quite silent for another minute. Not a shade crossed his face,
but he was clearly puzzled. At last he looked up, and caught Arthur's
anxious look, took his hand, and said simply,--

"Why, young un?"

"Because you're the honestest boy in Rugby, and that ain't honest."

"I don't see that."

"What were you sent to Rugby for?"

"Well, I don't know exactly--nobody ever told me. I suppose because all
boys are sent to a public school in England."

"But what do you think yourself? What do you want to do here, and to
carry away?"

Tom thought a minute. "I want to be A1 at cricket and football, and all
the other games, and to make my hands keep my head against any fellow,
lout or gentleman. I want to get into the sixth before I leave, and to
please the Doctor; and I want to carry away just as much Latin and Greek
as will take me through Oxford respectably. There, now, young un; I
never thought of it before, but that's pretty much about my figure.
Ain't it all on the square? What have you got to say to that?"

"Why, that you are pretty sure to do all that you want, then."

"Well, I hope so. But you've forgot one thing--what I want to leave
behind me. I want to leave behind me," said Tom, speaking slow, and
looking much moved, "the name of a fellow who never bullied a little
boy, or turned his back on a big one."

Arthur pressed his hand, and after a moment's silence went on, "You say,
Tom, you want to please the Doctor. Now, do you want to please him by
what he thinks you do, or by what you really do?"

"By what I really do, of course."

"Does he think you use cribs and vulgus-books?"

Tom felt at once that his flank was turned, but he couldn't give in. "He
was at Winchester himself," said he; "he knows all about it."

"Yes; but does he think you use them? Do you think he approves of it?"

"You young villain!" said Tom, shaking his fist at Arthur, half vexed
and half pleased, "I never think about it. Hang it! there, perhaps he
don't. Well, I suppose he don't."

Arthur saw that he had got his point; he knew his friend well, and was
wise in silence as in speech. He only said, "I would sooner have the
doctor's good opinion of me as I really am than any man's in the world."

After another minute, Tom began again, "Look here, young un. How on
earth am I to get time to play the matches this half if I give up cribs?
We're in the middle of that long crabbed chorus in the Agamemnon. I can
only just make head or tail of it with the crib. Then there's Pericles's
speech coming on in Thucydides, and 'The Birds' to get up for the
examination, besides the Tacitus." Tom groaned at the thought of his
accumulated labours. "I say, young un, there's only five weeks or so
left to holidays. Mayn't I go on as usual for this half? I'll tell the
Doctor about it some day, or you may."

Arthur looked out of the window. The twilight had come on, and all was
silent. He repeated in a low voice: "In this thing the Lord pardon thy
servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship
there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow down myself in the house of
Rimmon, when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing."

Not a word more was said on the subject, and the boys were again
silent--one of those blessed, short silences in which the resolves which
colour a life are so often taken.

Tom was the first to break it. "You've been very ill indeed, haven't
you, Geordie?" said he, with a mixture of awe and curiosity, feeling as
if his friend had been in some strange place or scene, of which he could
form no idea, and full of the memory of his own thoughts during the last
week.

"Yes, very. I'm sure the Doctor thought I was going to die. He gave me
the Sacrament last Sunday, and you can't think what he is when one is
ill. He said such brave, and tender, and gentle things to me, I felt
quite light and strong after it, and never had any more fear. My mother
brought our old medical man, who attended me when I was a poor sickly
child. He said my constitution was quite changed, and that I'm fit for
anything now. If it hadn't, I couldn't have stood three days of this
illness. That's all thanks to you, and the games you've made me fond
