
The boy was in a dense mat of shrubbery. To his right was Obed and to
his left were the Ring Tailed Panther and Urrea. He saw that the patio
was faced on three sides by piazzas or porticos, from which wide doors
opened into the house. He heard the music now as clearly as if it were
at his side. It was the music of a full band, and it was played with a
mellow, gliding rhythm. He saw, also, officers in brilliant uniform and
handsome women, as in the dance they passed and repassed the open doors.
It was Spanish, Mexican to the core, full of the South, full of warmth
and color. The lean, brown Texans crouching in the shrubbery furnished a
striking contrast.

While they waited, several officers and ladies came out on the piazzas,
ate ices and drank sweet drinks. They were so near that the four easily
heard all they said. It was mostly idle chatter, high-pitched
compliments, allusions to people in the distant City of Mexico, and now
and then a jest at the expense of the Texans. Ned realized that many of
the younger Mexicans did not take the siege of San Antonio seriously.
They could not understand how a strong city, held by an army of Mexican
regulars, could have anything to fear from a few hundred Texan
horsemen, mostly hunters in buckskin.

The music began again and the officers and women went in, but presently
several older men, also in uniform, came out. Ned instantly recognized
in the first the square figure and the dark, lowering face of Cos.

"De La Garcia, Ugartchea, Veramendi," whispered the Ring Tailed Panther,
indicating the others. "Now we may hear something."

Cos stood at the edge of the piazza and his face was troubled. He held
in his hand a small cane, with which he cut angrily at the flowers. The
others regarded him uneasily, but for a while he said nothing. Ned
hardly breathed, so intense was his interest and curiosity, but when Cos
at last spoke his disappointment was great.

The General complimented Veramendi on his house and hospitality, and the
Vice-Governor thanked him in ornate sentences. Some more courtesies were
exchanged, but Cos continued to cut off the heads of the flowers with
his cane, and Ned knew now that they had come from the ballroom to talk
of more important things. Meanwhile, the music flowed on. It was the
swaying strains of the dance, and it would have been soothing to anyone,
whose mind was not forced elsewhere. The flowers and the palms rippled
gently under a light breeze, but Ned did not hear them. He was waiting
to hear Cos speak of what was in the mind of himself and the other men
on the piazza, the same things that were in the minds of the Texans in
the shrubbery.

"Have you any further word from the Texan desperadoes, General?" asked
Veramendi, at last.

Swish went the general's cane, and a flower fell from its stem.

"Nothing direct," he replied, his voice rising in anger.

"They have not sent again demanding my surrender knowing that a
messenger would be shot. The impudence of these border horsemen passes
all belief. How dare a few hundred such men undertake to besiege us here
in San Antonio? What an insult to Mexico!"

"But they can fight," said Ugartchea. "They ride and shoot like demons.
They will give us trouble."

"I know it," said Cos, "but the more trouble they make us the more they
shall suffer. It was an evil day when the first American was allowed to
come into Texas."

"Yet they will attack us here," persisted Ugartchea, "They have driven
our men off the prairies. Our lances are not a match for their rifles.
Your pardon, General, but it will be wise for us to fortify still
further."

Cos frowned and made another wicked sweep with the cane. But he said:

"What you say is truth, Colonel Ugartchea, but with qualifications. Our
men are not a match for them on the open prairie, but should they attack
us here in the city they will be destroyed."

Then he asked further questions about the fortifications, and Ugartchea,
who seemed to be in immediate charge, began to repeat the details. It
was for this that the Texans had come into the patio, and Ned leaned
forward eagerly. He saw Obed on one side of him and the Ring Tailed
Panther on the other do the same. Suddenly there was a noise as of
something falling in the shrubbery, and then a sharp whistle. The men on
the piazza instantly looked in the direction of the hidden Texans. Cos
and Ugartchea drew pistols.

The Ring Tailed Panther acted with the greatest promptness and decision.

"We must run for it, boys," he exclaimed in a loud whisper. "Something,
I don't know what, has happened to warn them that we are here. Keep your
heads low."

Still partly hidden by the palms and flowers they ran for the gate. Cos
and Veramendi fired at the flitting forms and shouted for soldiers. Ned
felt one of the bullets scorch the back of his hand, but in a few
moments he was out of the gate and in the little dark alley. The Ring
Tailed Panther was just before him, and Obed was just behind. The
Panther, instead of running toward the street continued up the alley
which led to a large building of adobe, in the rear of the governor's
house.

"It's a stable and storehouse," said the Ring Tailed Panther, "an' we'll
hide in it while the hunt roars on through the city."

He jerked open a door, and they rushed in. Ned in the dusk saw some
horses eating in their stalls, and he also saw a steep ladder leading to
lofts above. The Ring Tailed Panther never hesitated, but ran up the
ladder and Ned followed sharply after him. He heard Obed panting at his
heels.

The lofts contained dried maize and some vegetables, but they were
mostly filled with hay. The fugitives plunged into the hay and pulled it
around them, until only their heads and the muzzles of their rifles
protruded. They lay for a few moments in silence, save for the sound of
their own hard breathing, and then Ned suddenly noticed something. They
were only three!

"Why, where is Urrea?" he exclaimed.

"Yes, where in thunder is Don Francisco?" said the Ring Tailed Panther
in startled tones.

Urrea was certainly missing, and no one could tell when they had lost
him. Their flight had been too hurried to take any count of numbers.
There could be only one conclusion. Urrea had been taken in the patio.
The Ring Tailed Panther roared between his teeth, low but savagely.

"I don't like many Mexicans," he said, "but I got to like Don Francisco.
The Mexicans have shorely got him, an' it will go 'specially hard with
him, he bein' of their own race."

Ned sighed. He did not like to think of Don Francisco at the mercy of
Cos. But they could do nothing, absolutely nothing. To leave the hay
meant certain capture within a few minutes. Already they heard the
sounds of the hunt, the shouts of soldiers and the mob, of men calling
to one another. Through the chinks in the wall they saw the light of
torches in the alley. They lay still for a few minutes and then the
noise of the search drifted down toward the plazas. The torches passed
out of the alley.

"Did you hear that whistle just before Cos and Ugartchea fired?" asked
Ned.

"I did," replied Obed. "I don't understand it, and what I don't
understand bothers me."

The Ring Tailed Panther growled, and his growl was the most savage that
Ned had ever heard from him. The growl did not turn into words for at
least a minute. Then he said:

"I'm like you, Obed; I hate riddles, an' this is the worst one that I
was ever mixed up with. Somethin' fell in the shrubbery; then came the
whistle, the Mexicans shot, away we went, lickety split, an' now we're
here. That's all I know, an' it ain't much."

"I wonder if we'll ever find out," said Ned.

"Doubtful," replied the Ring Tailed Panther. "I'm afeard, boys, they
won't waste much time on Urrea, he bein' a spy an' of their own blood,
too. It's war an' we've got to make the best of it."

But Ned could not make very well of it. A fugitive hidden there in the
hay and the dark, the fate of Urrea seemed very terrible to him. The
three sank into silence. Occasionally they heard cries from distant
parts of the town, but the hunt did not seem to come back toward them.
Ned was thankful that the Ring Tailed Panther had been so ready of wit.
The Mexicans would not dream that the Texans were hiding in the
Vice-Governor's own barn, just behind the Vice-Governor's own house. He
made himself cozy in the hay and waited.

After about an hour, the town turned quiet, and Ned inferred that the
hunt was over. The Mexicans, no doubt, would assume that the three had
escaped from San Antonio, and they would not dare to hunt far out on the
prairies. But what of Urrea! Poor Urrea! Ned could not keep from
thinking of him, but think as hard as he could he saw no way to find out
about his fate. Perhaps the Ring Tailed Panther was right. They would
never know.

The three did not stir for a long time. Ned felt very comfortable in the
hay. The night was cold without, but here he was snug and warm. He
waited for those older and more experienced than himself to decide upon
their course and he knew that Obed or the Ring Tailed Panther would
speak in time. He was almost in a doze when Obed said that it must be
about one o'clock in the morning.

"You ain't far wrong," said the Ring Tailed Panther, "but I'd wait at
least another hour. That ball will be over then, if we didn't break it
up when we were in the garden."

They waited the full hour, and then they stole from the hay.
Veramendi's house was silent and dark, and they passed safely into the
street. Ned had a faint hope that Urrea would yet appear from some dark
hiding place, but there was no sign of the young Mexican.

They chose the boldest possible course, thinking that it would be
safest, claiming to one soldier whom they passed that they were
sentinels going to their duty at the farthest outposts. Luck, as it
usually does, came to the aid of courage and skill, and they reached the
outskirts of San Antonio, without any attempt at interference.

Once more, after long and painful creeping, they stole between the
sentinels, took mental note of the earthworks again, and also a last
look at the dark bulk that was the town.

"Poor Urrea!" said Ned.

"Poor Urrea," said Obed. "I wonder what in the name of the moon and the
stars gave the alarm!"

"Poor Urrea!" said the Ring Tailed Panther. "This is the worst riddle I
ever run up ag'inst an' the more I think about it the more riddlin' it
gets."

The three sighed together and then sped over the prairie toward the camp
on the Salado.




CHAPTER XIX

THE BATTLE BY THE RIVER


It was not yet daylight when they approached the Texan camp. Despite the
fact that the Texan force was merely a band of volunteer soldiers there
was an abundance of sentinels and they were halted when they were within
a half mile of the Salado. But they were recognized quickly, and they
passed within the lines, where, in the first rosy shoot of the dawn,
they saw Bowie going the rounds of the outposts.

"What!" he exclaimed. "Back already! Then you did not get into the
town!"

"We went right into it. We split it wide open," said the Ring Tailed
Panther.

Bowie's blue eyes glittered.

"But you are only three," he said. "Where is Urrea?"

"We lost him an' we don't know how it happened. We know that he's gone,
an' that's all."

Bowie took them to Mr. Austin's tent, where they told to him, Houston,
Fannin and the others all that they had seen in San Antonio. In view of
the fact, now clearly proved, that Cos was fortifying night and day,
Bowie and all the more ardent spirits urged a prompt attack, but Mr.
Austin, essentially a man of peace, hung back. He thought their force
too small. He was confirmed, too, in the belief of his own unfitness to
be a leader in war.

"General," he said, turning to Houston, "you must take the command here.
It would be impossible to find one better suited to the place."

But Houston shook his head. He would not agree to it. Able and
ambitious, he refused, nevertheless. Perhaps he did not yet understand
the full fighting power of the Texans, and he feared to be identified
with failure, in case they made the assault upon San Antonio.

When Ned and his comrades withdrew from the tent they went to one of the
breakfast fires, where they ate broiled strips of buffalo and deer, and
drank coffee. Then Ned rolled in his blankets, and slept under an oak
tree. When he awoke about noon he sprang to his feet with a cry of joy
and surprise. Urrea was standing beside him, somewhat pale, and with his
left hand in a sling, but the young Mexican himself, nevertheless. Ned
seized his right hand and gave it a powerful grip.

"We thought you as good as dead, Don Francisco," he said. "We were sure
that you had been taken by Cos."

"I thought both things myself for a few wild moments," said Urrea,
smiling. "When we rushed from the patio one of the bullets grazed me,
but in my excitement as we passed the gate I ran down the alley toward
the street, instead of turning in toward the barn, as I have since
learned from Mr. White that you did. My wrist was grazed by one of the
bullets, fired from the piazza, but fortunately I had the presence of
mind to wrap it in the serape that I wore.

"When I reached the street there was much excitement and many soldiers
running about, but being a Mexican it was easy for me to pass
unsuspected in the crowd. I reached the home of a relative, at heart a
sympathizer with Texas and liberty, where my wound was bound up, and
where I lay hidden until morning, when I was smuggled out of the town.
Then I made my way among the oaks and pecans, until I came here to our
camp on the Salado. I had inquired for you during the night, and, not
hearing any news of your capture, I was sure that you were in hiding as
I was, and when I came here my best hopes were confirmed by the news of
your complete escape. Mr. White has already given me all the details. We
have been very lucky indeed, and we should be thankful."

"We are! We truly are!" exclaimed Ned, grasping his hand again.

The news brought by Ned and his comrades was so important that the
Texans could not be restrained. A few mornings later Bowie called upon
the boy, Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther for a new service.

"Mr. Austin has told me to take a strong party," he said, "and scout up
to the very suburbs of San Antonio, because we are going to choose a new
and closer position. There are to be ninety of us, including you three,
'Deaf' Smith and Henry Karnes, and we are to retire if the Mexicans
undertake an attack upon us, that is, if we have time--you understand,
if we have time."

Ned saw Bowie's big eyes glitter, and he understood. The party, the envy
of all the others, rode out of the camp in the absence of Urrea. Bowie
had not asked him, as he did not seem to fancy the young Mexican, but
Ned put it down to racial prejudice. Urrea had not been visible when
they started, but Ned thought chagrin at being ignored was the cause of
it. Fannin also went along, associated with Bowie in the leadership, but
Bowie was the animating spirit. They rode directly toward San Antonio,
and, as the distance was very short, they soon saw Mexican sentinels on
horseback, some carrying lances and some with rifles or muskets. They
would withdraw gradually at the appearance of the Texans, keeping just
out of gunshot, but always watching these dangerous horsemen whom they
had learned to fear. The Texans were near enough to see from some points
the buildings of the town, and the veins of the Ring Tailed Panther
swelled with ambition.

"Ned," he said to the boy who rode by his side, "if Bowie would only
give the word we would gallop right into town, smashing through the
Mexicans."

"We might gallop into it," said Ned, laughing, "but we couldn't gallop
out again. No, no, Panther, we mustn't forget that the Mexicans can
fight. Besides, Bowie isn't going to give the word."

"No, he ain't," said the Ring Tailed Panther with a sigh, "an' we won't
get the chance to make one of the finest dashes ever heard of in war."

"He who doesn't dash but rides away will live to dash another day," said
Obed White oracularly.

They rode on in a half circle about the town, keeping a fairly close
array, every man sitting his saddle erect and defiant. It seemed to Ned
that they were issuing a challenge to the whole army of Cos, and he
enjoyed it. It appealed to his youthful spirit of daring. They
practically said to the Mexican army in the town: "Come out and fight us
if you dare!"

But the Mexicans did not accept the challenge. Save for the little
scouting parties that always kept a watch at a safe distance they
remained within their intrenchments. But Bowie and Fannin were able to
take a look at the fortifications, confirming in every respect all that
Ned and his comrades had told them.

They ate in the saddle at noon, having provided themselves with rations
when they started, and then rode back on their slow half circle about
the town, Mexican scouts riding parallel with them on the inner side of
the circle, five hundred yards away. The Texans said little, but they
watched all the time.

It made a powerful appeal to Ned, who had been a great reader, and whose
mind was surcharged with the old romances. It seemed to him that his
comrades and he were like knights, riding around a hostile city and
issuing a formal challenge to all who dared to meet them. He was proud
to be there in such company. The afternoon waned. Banks of vapor, rose
and gold, began to pile up in the southwest, their glow tinting the
earth with the same colors. But beauty did not appeal just then to the
Ring Tailed Panther, who began to roar.

"A-ridin', an' a-ridin'," he said, "an' nothin' done. Up to San Antonio
an' back to camp, an' things are just as they were before."

"A Texas colonel rode out on the prairie with ninety men, and then rode
back again," said Obed.

"But we are not going back again!" cried Ned joyfully.

Bowie, who was in the lead, suddenly turned his horse away from the camp
and rode toward the river. The others followed him without a word, but
nearly every man in the company drew a long breath of satisfaction. Ned
knew and all knew that they were not going back to camp that night.

Ned eagerly watched the leader. They rode by the Mission Concepcion,
passed through a belt of timber and came abruptly to the river, where
Bowie called a halt, and sprang from his horse. Ned leaped down also,
and he saw at once the merits of the position into which Bowie had led
them. They were in a horseshoe or sharp bend of the river, here a
hundred yards in width. The belt of thick timber curved on one side
while the river coiled in a half-circle about them and in front of the
little tongue of land on which they stood, the bank rose to a height of
eighteen feet, almost perpendicular. It was a secluded place, and, as no
Mexicans had been following them in the course of the last hour, Ned
believed that they might pass a peaceful night there. But the Ring
Tailed Panther had other thoughts, although, for the present, he kept
them to himself.

They tethered the horses at the edge of the wood, but where they could
reach the grass, and then Bowie placed numerous pickets in the wood
through which an enemy must come, if he came. Ned was in the first watch
and Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther were with him. Ned stood among the
trees at a point where he could also see the river, here a beautiful,
clear stream with a greenish tint. He ate venison from his knapsack as
he walked back and forth, and he watched the last rays of the sun,
burning like red fire in the west, until they went out and the heavy
twilight came, trailing after it the dark.

Ned's impression of mediaevalism that he had received in the day when
they were riding about San Antonio continued in the night. They had gone
back centuries. Hidden here in this horseshoe, water on one side and
wood on the other, they seemed to be in an absolutely wild and primitive
world. Centuries had rolled back. His vivid imagination made the forest
about them what it had been before the white man came.

The surface of the river was now dark. The stream flowed gently, and
without noise. It, too, struck upon the boy's imagination. It would be
fitting for an Indian canoe to come stealing down in the darkness, and
he almost fancied he could see it there. But no canoe came, and Ned
walked back and forth in a little space, always watching the wood or the
river.
