worse than yours to tend, and Mademoiselle Lannes will look after you
today. She has watched over you, I understand, because you're a friend
of her brother, the great flying man, Philip Lannes."

"Yes," said John, "that's it, of course."

Julie herself said nothing.

Surgeon Delorme passed through the bar of brilliant light and
disappeared, his place being taken by a gigantic figure with grizzled
hair, and the stern face of the thoughtful peasant, the same Antoine
Picard who had been left as a guardian over the little house beyond the
Seine. John closed his eyes, that is nearly, and caught the glance that
the big man gave to Julie. It was protecting and fatherly, and he knew
that Antoine would answer for her at any time with his life. It was one
remnant of feudalism to which he did not object. He opened his eyes wide
and said:

"Well, my good Picard, perhaps you thought you were going to look at a
dead American, but you are not. Behold me!"

He sat up and doubled up his arm to show his muscle and power. Picard
smiled and offered to shake hands in the American fashion. He seemed
genuinely glad that John had returned to the real world, and John
ascribed it to Picard's knowledge that he was Lannes' friend.

Julie said some words to Picard, and with a little _au revoir_ to John,
went away. John watched her until she was out of sight. He realized
again that young French girls were kept secluded from the world, immured
almost. But the world had changed. Since a few men met around a table
six or seven weeks before and sent a few dispatches a revolution had
come. Old customs, old ideas and old barriers were going fast, and might
be going faster. War, the leveler, was prodigiously at work.

These were tremendous things, but he had himself to think about too, and
personality can often outweigh the universe. Julie was gone, taking a
lot of the light with her, but Picard was still there, and while he was
grizzled and stern he was a friend.

John sat up quite straight and Picard did not try to keep him from it.

"Picard," he said, "you see me, don't you?"

"I do, sir, with these two good eyes of mine, as good as those in the
head of any young man, and fifty is behind me."

"That's because you're not intellectual, Picard, but we'll return to our
lamb chops. I am here, I, a soldier of France, though an American--for
which I am grateful--laid four days upon my back by a wound. And was
that wound inflicted by a shell, shrapnel, bomb, lance, saber, bullet or
any of the other noble weapons of warfare? No, sir, it was done by a
horse, and not by a kick, either, he jostled me with his knee when he
wasn't looking. Would you call that an honorable wound?"

"All wounds received in the service of one's country or adopted country
are honorable, sir."

"You give me comfort, Picard. But spread the story that I was not hit by
a horse's knee but by a piece of shell, a very large and wicked piece of
shell. I want it to get into the histories that way. The greatest of
Frenchmen, though he was an Italian, said that history was a fable
agreed upon, and you and I want to make an agreement about myself and a
shell."

"I don't understand you at all, sir."

"Well, never mind. Tell me how long Mademoiselle Julie is going to stay
here. I'm a great friend of her brother, Lieutenant Philip Lannes. Oh,
we're such wonderful friends! And we've been through such terrible
dangers together!"

"Then, perhaps it's Lieutenant Lannes and not his sister, Mademoiselle
Julie, that you wish to inquire about."

"Don't be ironical, Picard. I was merely digressing, which I admit is
wrong, as you're apt to distract the attention of your hearer from the
real subject. We'll return to Mademoiselle Julie. Do you think she's
going to remain here long?"

"I would tell you if I could, sir, but no one knows. I think it depends
upon many circumstances. The young lady is most brave, as becomes one of
her blood, and the changes in France are great. All of us who may not
fight can serve otherwise."

"Why is it that you're not fighting, Picard?"

The great peasant flung up his arms angrily.

"Because I am beyond the age. Because I am too old, they said. Think of
it! I, Antoine Picard, could take two of these little officers and crush
them to death at once in my arms! There is not in all this army a man
who could walk farther than I can! There is not one who could lift the
wheel of a cannon out of the mud more quickly than I can, and they would
not take me! What do a few years mean?"

"Nothing in your case, Antoine, but they'll take you, later on. Never
fear. Before this war is over every country in it will need all the men
it can get, whether old or young."

"I fear that it is so," said the gigantic peasant, a shadow crossing his
stern face, "but, sir, one thing is decided. France, the France of the
Revolution, the France that belongs to its people, will not fall."

John looked at him with a new interest. Here was a peasant, but a
thinking peasant, and there were millions like him in France. They were
not really peasants in the old sense of the word, but workingmen with a
stake in the country, and the mind and courage to defend it. It might be
possible to beat the army of a nation, but not a nation in arms.

"No, Picard," said John, "France will not fall."

"And that being settled, sir," said Picard, with grim humor, "I think
you'd better lie down again. You've talked a lot for a man who has been
unconscious four days."

"You're right, my good Picard, as I've no doubt you usually are. Was I
troublesome, much, when I was out in the dark?"

"But little, sir. I've lifted much heavier men, and that Dr. Delorme is
strong himself, not afraid, either, to use the knife. Ah, sir, you
should have seen how beautifully he worked right under the fire of the
German guns! Psst! if need be he'd have taken a leg off you in five
minutes, as neatly as if he had been in a hospital in Paris!"

John felt apprehensively for his legs. Both were there, and in good
condition.

"If that man ever comes near me with the intention of cutting off one of
my legs I'll shoot him, good fellow and good doctor though he may be,"
he said. "Help me up a little higher, will you, Picard? I want to see
what kind of a place we're in."

Picard built up a little pyramid of saddles and knapsacks behind him and
John drew himself up with his back against them. The rows and rows of
wounded stretched as far as he could see, and there was a powerful odor
of drugs. Around him was a forest, of the kind with which he had become
familiar in Europe, that is, of small trees, free from underbrush. He
saw some distance away soldiers walking up and down and beyond them the
vague outline of an earthwork.

"What place is this, anyway, Picard?" he asked.

"It has no name, sir. It's a hospital. It was built in the forest in a
day. More than five thousand wounded lie here. The army itself is
further on. You were found and brought in by some young officers of that
most singular company composed of Americans and English who are always
quarreling among one another, but who unite and fight like demons
against anybody else."

"A dollar to a cent it was Wharton and Carstairs who brought me here,"
said John, smiling to himself.

"What does Monsieur say?"

"Merely commenting on some absent friends of mine. But this isn't a bad
place, Picard."

The shed was of immense length and breadth and just beyond it were some
small buildings, evidently of hasty construction. John inferred that
they were for the nurses and doctors, and he wondered which one
sheltered Julie Lannes. The forest seemed to be largely of young pines,
and the breeze that blew through it was fresh and wholesome. As he
breathed it young Scott felt that he was inhaling new life and strength.
But the wind also brought upon its edge that far faint murmur which he
knew was the throbbing of the great guns, miles and miles away.

"Perhaps, Monsieur had better lie down again now and sleep awhile," said
Picard insinuatingly.

"Sleep! I need sleep! Why, Picard, by your own account I've just
awakened from a sleep four days and four nights long."

"But, sir, that was not sleep. It was the stupor of unconsciousness.
Now your sleep will be easy and natural."

"Very well," said John, who had really begun to feel a little weary,
"I'll go to sleep, since, in a way, you order it, but if Mademoiselle
Julie Lannes should happen to pass my cot again, will you kindly wake me
up?"

"If possible, sir," said Picard, the faintest smile passing over his
iron features, and forced to be content with that reply, John soon slept
again. Julie passed by him twice, but Picard did not awaken him, nor
try. The first time she was alone. Trained and educated like most young
French girls, she had seen little of the world until she was projected
into the very heart of it by an immense and appalling war. But its
effect upon her had been like that upon John. Old manners and customs
crumbled away, an era vanished, and a new one with new ideas came to
take its place. She shuddered often at what she had seen in this great
hospital in the woods, but she was glad that she had come. French
courage was as strong in the hearts of women as in the hearts of men,
and the brusque but good Dr. Delorme had said that she learned fast. She
had more courage, yes, and more skill, than many nurses older and
stronger than she, and there was the stalwart Suzanne, who worked with
her.

She was alone the first time and she stopped by John's cot, where he
slept so peacefully. He was undeniably handsome, this young American who
had come to their house in Paris with Philip. And her brother, that
wonderful man of the air, who was almost a demi-god to her, had spoken
so well of him, had praised so much his skill, his courage, and his
honesty. And he had received his wound fighting so gallantly for France,
her country. Her beautiful color deepened a little as she walked away.

John awoke again in the afternoon, and the first sound he heard was that
same far rumble of the guns, now apparently a part of nature, but he did
not linger in any twilight land between dark and light. All the mists of
sleep cleared away at once and he sat up, healthy, strong and hungry.
Demanding food from an orderly he received it, and when he had eaten it
he asked for Surgeon Delorme.

The surgeon did not come for a half hour and then he demanded brusquely
what John wanted.

"None of your drugs," replied happy young Scott, "but my uniform and my
arms. I don't know your procedure here, but I want you to certify to the
whole world that I'm entirely well and ready to return to the ranks."

Surgeon Delorme critically examined the bandage which he had changed
that morning, and then felt of John's head at various points.

"A fine strong skull," he said, smiling, "and quite undamaged. When this
war is over I shall go to America and make an exhaustive study of the
Yankee skull. Has bone, through the influence of climate or of more
plentiful food, acquired a more tenacious quality there than it has
here? It is a most interesting and complicated question."

"But it's solution will have to be deferred, my good Monsieur Delorme,
and so you'd better quit thumping my head so hard. Give me that
certificate, because if you don't I'll get up and go without it. Don't
you hear those guns out there, doctor? Why, they're calling to me all
the time. They tell me, strong and well, again, to come at once and join
my comrades of the Strangers, who are fighting the enemy."

"You shall go in the morning," said Surgeon Delorme, putting his broad
hand upon young Scott's head. "The effects of the concussion will have
vanished then."

"But I want to get up now and put on my uniform; can't I?"

"I know no reason why you shouldn't. There's a huge fellow named Picard
around here who has been watching over you, and who has your uniform.
I'll call him."

When John was dressed he walked with Picard into the edge of the forest.
His first steps were wavering, and his head swam a little, but in a few
minutes the dizziness disappeared and his walk became steady and
elastic. He was his old self again, strong in every fiber. He would
certainly be with the Strangers the next morning.

Many more of the wounded, thousands of them, were lying or sitting on
the short grass in the forest. They were the less seriously hurt, and
they were cheerful. Some of them sang.

"They'll be going back to the army fast," said Picard. "Unless they're
torn by shrapnel nearly all the wounded get well again and quickly. The
bullet with the great power is merciful. It goes through so fast that it
does not tear either flesh or bone. If you're healthy, if your blood is
good, psst! you're well again in a week."

"Do you know if Lieutenant Lannes is expected here?" asked John.

"I heard from Mademoiselle Julie that he would come at set of sun. He
has been on another perilous errand. Ah, his is a strange and terrible
life, sir. Up there in the sky, a half mile, maybe a mile, above the
earth. All the dangers of the earth and those, too, of the air to fight!
Nothing above you and nothing below you. It's a new world in which
Monsieur Philip Lannes moves, but I would not go in it with him, not for
all the treasures of the Louvre!"

He looked up at the calm and benevolent blue sky and shuddered.

John laughed.

"Some of us feel that way," he said. "Many men as brave as any that ever
lived can't bear to look down from a height. But sunset is approaching,
my gallant Picard, and Lannes should soon be here."

The rays of the sun fell in showers of red gold where they stood, but a
narrow band of gray under the eastern horizon showed that twilight was
not far away. The two stood side by side staring up at the heavens,
where they felt with absolute certainty the black dot would appear at
the appointed time. It was a singular tribute to the courage and
character of Lannes that all who knew him had implicit faith in his
promises, not alone in his honesty of purpose, but in his ability to
carry it out in the face of difficulty and danger. The band of gray in
the east broadened, but they still watched with the utmost faith.

"I see something to the eastward," said John, "or is it merely a shadow
in the sky?"

"I don't think it's a shadow. It must be one of those terrible machines,
and perhaps it's that of our brave Monsieur Philip."

"You're right, Picard, it's no shadow, nor is it a bit of black cloud.
It's an aeroplane, flying very fast. The skies over Europe hold many
aeroplanes these days, but I know all the tricks of the _Arrow_, all its
pretty little ways, its manner of curving, looping and dropping, and I
should say that the _Arrow_, Philip Lannes aboard, is coming."

"I pray, sir, that you are right. I always hold my breath until he is on
the ground again."

"Then you'll have to make a record in holding breath, my brave Picard.
He is still far, very far, from us, and it will be a good ten minutes
before he arrives."

But John knew beyond a doubt, after a little more watching, that it was
really the _Arrow_, and with eager eyes he watched the gallant little
machine as it descended in many a graceful loop and spiral to the earth.
They hurried forward to meet it, and Lannes, bright-eyed and trim,
sprang out, greeting John with a welcome cry.

"Up again," he exclaimed, "and, as I see with these two eyes of mine,
as well as ever! And you too, my brave Picard, here to meet me!"

He hastened away with a report, but came back to them in a few minutes.

"Now," he said, "We'll go and see my sister."

John was not at all unwilling.

They found her in one of the new houses of pine boards, and the faithful
and stalwart Suzanne was with her. It was the plainest of plain places,
inhabited by at least twenty other Red Cross nurses, and John stood on
one side until the first greeting of brother and sister was over. Then
Lannes, by a word and a gesture, included him in what was practically a
family group, although he was conscious that the stalwart Suzanne was
watching him with a wary eye.

"Julie and Suzanne," said Lannes, "are going tomorrow with other nurses
