there by the wall and take a nap."

"I don't want to sleep now," said Ned. "You remember that I slept until
nearly midnight. But I would like to stretch out a while. It's not very
restful to be hunted through woods by Mexicans, even if you do get
away."

Ned lay by the wall upon the blankets and watched the sun go slowly up
the arch of the heavens. It seemed a hard fate to him that he should
again be trapped thus in an old mission. Nor did he have here the
strength and support of the great borderers like Bowie and Crockett. He
missed them most of all now.

The day passed slowly and with an occasional exchange of shots that did
little harm. Toward the twilight one of the sentinels on the wall
uttered a great and joyous shout.

"The reinforcements!" he cried. "See, our friends are coming!"

Ned climbed upon the wall and saw a force of more than a hundred men,
obviously Texans, approaching. They answered the hail of the sentinel
and came on more swiftly. His eyes turned to the wood, in which the
Mexican camp yet lay. Their cavalry would still outnumber the Texan
force two or three to one, but the Mexicans invariably demanded greater
odds than that before they would attack the Texans. Ned saw no stir in
the wood. Not a shot was fired as the new men came forward and were
joyously admitted to the church.

The men were one hundred and twenty in number, led by Colonel Ward, who
by virtue of his rank now commanded all the defenders. As soon as they
had eaten and rested a council, at which Ned was present, was held. King
had already told the story of young Fulton to Ward, and that officer
looked very curiously at Ned as he came forward. He asked him briefly
about the Alamo, and Ned gave him the usual replies. Then he told of
what he had seen before he joined King.

"How large do you think this force was?" asked Ward.

"About fifteen hundred men."

"And we've a hundred and fifty here. You were not much more than a
hundred and fifty in the Alamo, and you held it two weeks against
thousands. Why should we retreat?"

"But the Alamo fell at last," said Ned, "and this Refugio mission is not
so defensible as the Alamo was."

"You think, then, we should retreat?"

"I do. I'm sure the place cannot be held against a large army."

There was much discussion. Ned saw that all the men of the new force
were raw recruits from the States like King's. Many of them were mere
boys, drawn to Texas by the love of adventure. They showed more
curiosity than alarm, and it was evident to Ned that they felt able to
defeat any number of Mexicans.

Ned, called upon again for his opinion, urged that they withdraw from
the church and the town at once, but neither Ward nor King was willing
to make a retreat in the night. They did not seem especially anxious to
withdraw at all, but finally agreed to do so in the morning.

Ned left the council, depressed and uneasy. He felt that his countrymen
held the Mexicans too lightly. Were other tragedies to be added to that
of the Alamo? He was no egotist, but he was conscious of his superiority
to all those present in the grave affairs with which they were now
dealing.

He took his rifle and went upon the wall, where he resolved to watch all
through the night. He saw the lights in the wood where the Mexicans were
camped, but darkness and silence prevailed everywhere else. He had no
doubt that young Urrea had sent messengers back to hurry up the main
force. He smiled to himself at the thought of Urrea. He was sure that
the young Mexican had sustained no fatal injury, but he must have
painful wounds. And Ned, with the Alamo as vivid as ever in his mind,
was glad that he had inflicted them.

Midnight came, and Ward told Ned that he need not watch any longer when
the second relay of sentinels appeared. But the boy desired to remain
and Ward had no objection.

"But you'll be sleepy," he said, in a good-humored tone, "when we start
at the break of day, and you won't have much chance to rest on a long
march."

"I'll have to take the risk," said Ned. "I feel that I ought to be
watching."

Toward morning the men in the mission were awakened and began to prepare
for the march. They made considerable noise as they talked and adjusted
their packs, but Ned paid no attention to them. He was listening instead
to a faint sound approaching the town from the south. No one in the
church or on the walls heard it but himself, but he knew that it was
steadily growing louder.

Ned, moreover, could tell the nature of that sound, and as it swelled
his heart sank within him. The first spear of light, herald of dawn,
appeared in the east and Ward called out cheerfully:

"Well, we are all ready to go now."

"It is too late," said Ned. "The whole Mexican army is here."




CHAPTER XVI

FANNIN'S CAMP


When Ned made his startling announcement he leaped down lightly from the
wall.

"If you will look through the loophole there," he said to Colonel Ward,
"you will see a great force only a few hundred yards away. The man on
the large horse in front is General Urrea, who commands them. He is one
of Santa Anna's most trusted generals. His nephew, Captain Urrea, led
the cavalry who besieged us yesterday and last night."

Captain Ward looked, but the Mexicans turned into the wood and were
hidden from sight. Then the belief became strong among the recruits that
Ned was mistaken. This was only a little force that had come, and Ward
and King shared their faith. Ward, against Ned's protest, sent King and
thirteen men out to scout.

Ned sadly watched them go. He was one of the youngest present, but he
was first in experience, and he knew that he had seen aright. General
Urrea and the main army were certainly at hand. But he deemed it wiser
to say nothing more. Instead, he resumed his place on the wall, and kept
sharp watch on the point where he thought the Mexican force lay. King
and his scouts were already out of sight.

Ned suddenly heard the sound of shots, and he saw puffs of smoke from
the wood. Then a great shout arose and Mexican cavalry dashed from the
edge of the forest. Some of the other watchers thought the mission was
about to be attacked, but the horsemen bore down upon another point to
the northward. Ned divined instantly that they had discovered King and
his men and were surrounding them.

He leaped once more from the wall and shouted the alarm to Ward.

"The men out there are surrounded," he cried. "They will have no chance
without help!"

Ward was brave enough, and his men, though lacking skill, were brave
enough, too. At his command they threw open the gate of the mission and
rushed out to the relief of their comrades. Ned was by the side of Ward,
near the front. As they appeared in the opening they heard a great
shouting, and a powerful detachment of cavalry galloped toward their
right, while an equally strong force of infantry moved on their left.
The recruits were outnumbered at least five to one, but in such a
desperate situation they did not blench.

"Take good aim with your rifles," shouted Ward. And they did. A shower
of bullets cut gaps in the Mexican line, both horse and foot. Many
riderless horses galloped through the ranks of the foe, adding to the
confusion. But the Mexican numbers were so great that they continued to
press the Texans. Young Urrea, his head in thick bandages, was again
with the cavalry, and animated by more than one furious impulse he drove
them on.

It became evident now even to the rawest that the whole Mexican army was
present. It spread out to a great distance, and enfolded the Texans on
three sides, firing hundreds of muskets and keeping up a great shouting,
Ned's keen ear also detected other firing off to the right, and he knew
that it was King and his men making a hopeless defence against
overpowering numbers.

"We cannot reach King," groaned Ward.

"We have no earthly chance of doing so," said Ned, "and I think,
Colonel, that your own force will have a hard fight to get back inside
the mission."

The truth of Ned's words was soon evident to everyone. It was only the
deadly Texan rifles that kept the Mexican cavalry from galloping over
them and crushing them at once. The Mexican fire itself, coming from
muskets of shorter range, did little damage. Yet the Texans were
compelled to load and pull trigger very fast, as they retreated slowly
upon the mission.

At last they reached the great door and began to pass rapidly inside.
Now the Mexicans pressed closer, firing heavy volleys.

A score of the best Texan marksmen whirled and sent their bullets at the
pursuing Mexicans with such good aim that a dozen saddles were emptied,
and the whole force reeled back. Then all the Texans darted inside, and
the great door was closed and barricaded. Many of the men sank down,
breathless from their exertions, regardless of the Mexican bullets that
were pattering upon the church. Ward leaned against the wall, and wiped
the perspiration from his face.

"My God!" he exclaimed. "What has become of King?"

There was no answer. The Mexicans ceased to fire and shout, and
retreated toward the wood. Ward was destined never to know what had
become of King and his men, but Ned soon learned the terrible facts, and
they only hardened him still further. The thirteen had been compelled to
surrender to overwhelming numbers. Then they were immediately tied to
trees and killed, where their skeletons remained upright until the
Texans found them.

"You were right, Fulton," said Ward, after a long silence. "The Mexican
army was there, as we have plenty of evidence to show."

He smiled sadly, as he wiped the smoke and perspiration from his face.
Ned did not reply, but watched through a loophole. He had seen a glint
of bronze in the wood, and presently he saw the Mexicans pushing a
cannon from cover.

"They have artillery," he said to Ward. "See the gun. But I don't think
it can damage our walls greatly. They never did much with the cannon at
the Alamo. When they came too close there, we shot down all their
cannoneers, and we can do the same here."

Ward chose the best sharpshooters, posting them at the loopholes and on
the walls. They quickly slew the Mexicans who tried to man the gun, and
General Urrea was forced to withdraw it to such a distance that its
balls and shells had no effect whatever upon the strong walls of the
church.

There was another period of silence, but the watchers in the old mission
saw that much movement was going on in the wood and presently they
beheld the result. The Mexican army charged directly upon the church,
carrying in its center men with heavy bars of wood to be used in
smashing in the door. But they yielded once more to the rapid fire of
the Texan rifles, and did not succeed in reaching the building. Those
who bore the logs and bars dropped them, and fled out of range.

A great cheer burst from the young recruits. They thought victory
complete already, but Ned knew that the Mexicans would not abandon the
enterprise. General Urrea, after another futile charge, repulsed in the
same deadly manner, withdrew some distance, but posted a strong line of
sentinels about the church.

Having much food and water the recruits rejoiced again and thought
themselves secure, but Ned noticed a look of consternation on the face
of Ward, and he divined the cause.

"It must be the ammunition, Colonel," he said in a whisper.

"It is," replied Ward. "We have only three or four rounds left. We could
not possibly repel another attack."

"Then," said young Fulton, "there is nothing to do but for us to slip
out at night, and try to cut our way through."

"That is so," said Ward. "The Mexican general doubtless will not expect
any such move on our part, and we may get away."

He said nothing of his plan to the recruits until the darkness came, and
then the state of the powder horns and the bullet pouches was announced.
Most of the men had supposed that they alone were suffering from the
shortage, and something like despair came over them when they found that
they were practically without weapons. They were more than willing to
leave the church, as soon as the night deepened, and seek refuge over
the prairie.

"You think that we can break through?" said Ward to Ned.

"I have no doubt of it," replied Ned, "but in any event it seems to me,
Colonel, that we ought to try it. All the valor and devotion of the men
in the Alamo did not suffice to save them. We cannot hold the place
against a determined assault."

"That is undoubtedly true," said Ward, "and flushed by the success that
they have had elsewhere it seems likely to me that the Mexicans will
make such an attack very soon."

"In any event," said Ned, "we are isolated here, cut off from Fannin,
and exposed to imminent destruction."

"We start at midnight," said Ward.

Ned climbed upon the walls, and examined all the surrounding country. He
saw lights in the wood, and now and then he discerned the figures of
Mexican horsemen, riding in a circle about the church, members of the
patrol that had been left by General Urrea. He did not think it a
difficult thing to cut through this patrol, but the Texans, in their
flight, must become disorganized to a certain extent. Nevertheless it
was the only alternative.

The men were drawn up at the appointed time, and Ward told them briefly
what they were to do. They must keep as well together as possible, and
the plan was to make their way to Victoria, where they expected to
rejoin Fannin. They gave calabashes of water and provisions to several
men too badly wounded to move, and left them to the mercy of the
Mexicans, a mercy that did not exist, as Urrea's troops massacred them
the moment they entered the church.

Luckily it was a dark night, and Ned believed that they had more than
half a chance of getting away. The great door was thrown silently open,
and, with a moving farewell to their wounded and disabled comrades, they
filed silently out, leaving the door open behind them.

Then the column of nearly one hundred and fifty men slipped away, every
man treading softly. They had chosen a course that lay directly away
from the Mexican army, but they did not expect to escape without an
alarm, and it came in five minutes. A Mexican horseman, one of the
patrol, saw the dark file, fired a shot and gave an alarm. In an
instant all the sentinels were firing and shouting, and Urrea's army in
the wood was awakening.

But the Texans now pressed forward rapidly. Their rifles cracked,
quickly cutting a path through the patrol, and before Urrea could get up
his main force they were gone through the forest and over the prairie.

Knowing that the whole country was swarming with the Mexican forces,
they chose a circuitous course through forests and swamps and pressed on
until daylight. Some of the Mexicans on horseback followed them for a
while, but a dozen of the best Texan shots were told off to halt them.
When three or four saddles were emptied the remainder of the Mexicans
disappeared and they pursued their flight in peace.

Morning found them in woods and thickets by the banks of a little creek
of clear water. They drank from the stream, ate of their cold food, and
rested. Ned and some others left the wood and scouted upon the prairie.
They saw no human being and returned to their own people, feeling sure
that they were safe from pursuit for the present.

Yet the Texans felt no exultation. They had been compelled to retreat
before the Mexicans, and they could not forget King and his men, and
those whom they had left behind in the church. Ned, in his heart,
knowing the Mexicans so well, did not believe that a single one of them
had been saved.

They walked the whole day, making for the town of Victoria, where they
expected to meet Fannin, and shortly before night they stopped in a
wood, footsore and exhausted. Again their camp was pitched on the banks
of a little creek and some of the hunters shot two fine fat deer further
up the stream.

Seeking as much cheer as they could they built fires, and roasted the
deer. The spirits of the young recruits rose. They would meet Fannin
to-morrow or the next day and they would avenge the insult that the
Mexicans had put upon them. They were eager for a new action in which
the odds should not be so great against them, and they felt sure of
victory. Then, posting their sentinels, they slept soundly.

But Ned did not feel so confident. Toward morning he rose from his
blankets. Yet he saw nothing. The prairie was bare. There was not a
single sign of pursuit. He was surprised. He believed that at least the
younger Urrea with the cavalry would follow.

Ned now surmised the plan that the enemy had carried out. Instead of
following the Texans through the forests and swamps they had gone
straight to Victoria, knowing that the fugitives would make for that
point. Where Fannin was he could not even guess, but it was certain that
Ward and his men were left practically without ammunition to defend
themselves as best they could against a horde of foes.

The hunted Texans sought the swamps of the Guadalupe, where Mexican
cavalry could not follow them, but where they were soon overtaken by
skirmishers. Hope was now oozing from the raw recruits. There seemed to
be no place in the world for them. Hunted here and there they never
found rest. But the most terrible fact of all was the lack of
ammunition. Only a single round for every man was left, and they replied
sparingly to the Mexican skirmishers.

They lay now in miry woods, and on the other side of them flowed the
wide and yellow river. The men sought, often in vain, for firm spots on
which they might rest. The food, like the ammunition, was all gone, and
they were famished and weak. The scouts reported that the Mexicans were
increasing every hour.

It was obvious to Ned that Ward must surrender. What could men without
ammunition do against many times their number, well armed? He resolved
that he would not be taken with them, and shortly before day he pulled
through the mud to the edge of the Guadalupe. He undressed and made his
clothes and rifle into a bundle. He had been very careful of his own
ammunition, and he had a half dozen rounds left, which he also tied into
the bundle.

Then shoving a fallen log into the water he bestrode it, holding his
precious pack high and dry. Paddling with one hand he was able to direct
the log in a diagonal course across the stream. He toiled through
another swamp on that shore, and, coming out upon a little prairie,
dressed again.

He looked back toward the swamp in which the Texans lay, but he saw no
lights and he heard no sounds there. He knew that within a short time
they would be prisoners of the Mexicans. Everything seemed to be working
for the benefit of Santa Anna. The indecision of the Texans and the
scattering of their forces enabled the Mexicans to present overwhelming
forces at all points. It seemed to Ned that fortune, which had worked in
their favor until the capture of San Antonio, was now working against
them steadily and with overwhelming power.

He gathered himself together as best he could, and began his journey
southward. He believed that Fannin would be at Goliad or near it. Once
more that feeling of vengeance hardened within him. The tremendous
impression of the Alamo had not faded a particle, and now the incident
of Ward, Refugio and the swamps of the Guadalupe was cumulative.
Remembering what he had seen he did not believe that a single one of
Ward's men would be spared when they were taken as they surely would be.
There were humane men among the Mexicans, like Almonte, but the ruthless
policy of Santa Anna was to spare no one, and Santa Anna held all the
power.

He held on toward Goliad, passing through alternate regions of forest
and prairie, and he maintained a fair pace until night. He had not eaten
