
But Primrose's difficulties had not come to an end. She instantly
started to walk across the fields with Hannah; but when Daisy heard
she had come she absolutely refused to see her, and cried so
piteously, and got into such an excited state, that Primrose felt
herself obliged to yield to the child's caprice, and to keep out of
the room.

"I can't see her, Hannah," poor little Daisy said. "Of all people in
all the world, I can't see my own Primrose. Oh, if only I were well
enough to go to Mrs. Ellsworthy, or if only the Prince would come!"

Primrose heard Daisy's weak little voice through the thin walls of
Hannah's cottage.

"Hannah," she said, "I know who Daisy means by the Prince. The Prince
is that kind Mr. Noel, who has been helping me to find the little
darling. If he has not gone back to London, for he said he would go
back at once after he knew we had found Daisy, he could come to her.
Oh, Hannah," continued poor Primrose, "I cannot think what has
happened to your dear baby, Daisy. I begin to believe what Mr. Noel
has been hinting to me--that some one has got a secret influence over
her."

"We had better see and find this Mr. Noel at once, miss, now," said
practical Hannah. "We can think of secret influences and all that sort
of thing when we have found the gentleman whom the dear child is
pining to see. If Mr. Noel is still at Rosebury you had better put on
your hat, Miss Primrose, and walk across the fields to the village,
and bring him back with you. I'll stay with Miss Daisy and soothe her
the best way I can. She's dreadful agitated and very weak and
trembling ever since you came in, miss."

Primrose said she would go back to Rosebury directly, and she was so
fortunate as to meet Noel as he was starting for London.

"You must come with me," she said earnestly. "I fear our dear little
Daisy is even worse than Hannah represented her to be. She has
absolutely refused to see me, and talks only about you and Mrs.
Ellsworthy. I don't know what she can want with either of you, but it
is quite evident that she thinks you can help her and save her from
some great trouble. Poppy said she wanted Mrs. Ellsworthy to give her
money; I suppose to replace what she lost of mine. Well, Mrs.
Ellsworthy is not here; so can you come to see her to-night?"

"I will come at once, Miss Mainwaring," answered Noel. "If we walk
down this street we shall pass the post-office, and I can send a
telegram to Mrs. Ellsworthy and also to my servant, Lawson. I must try
and get into town some time to-morrow, however, for I have got to
attend the trial of no less a person than your old landlord, Dove. He
was apprehended for stealing a bank-note and a ring from my
mantle-piece."

"I never liked that man," said Primrose; "indeed, I never thought
either of the Doves quite honest. Mrs. Dove made a rule of keeping
back a little of the money she borrowed from me on all occasions."

Then Primrose and Noel walked as quickly as they could down the
village street. Noel despatched his necessary telegram, and in a short
time they both found themselves in Hannah's humble cottage.

"She is asleep," said Hannah, as she came out to meet them. "She is
moaning in her sleep, and she gives sighs enough to break your heart.
You had better, both of you, stay in my little sitting-room until she
awakes."

"If you will allow me," said Noel, "I will go and sit beside her bed;
she is accustomed to me. I will promise to be very careful in my
dealings with her. I believe I can talk to her without startling her
in the least."

Hannah looked dubious, but Primrose interposed in her gentle voice--

"Yes, Hannah, Mr. Noel will not startle Daisy; he has always had a
most happy influence over her."

Poor little Daisy! the sight of her wan face, the anxious expression
which seemed indelibly stamped on her childish brow, gave Noel so
strong a sense of pain and indignation that he sincerely longed to
secure for Dove as severe a punishment as the law would give. He sat
down gently by the humble little bed, and when the child moaned and
tossed in her sleep he laid his cool hand on her forehead. That hand
had a magnetic effect--even in her sleep Daisy seemed to know it. She
murmured, "The Prince, has he come?" and a moment after she opened her
dark blue eyes and fixed them on Noel, while a very faint smile
flitted across her little face.

"You have come at last, Mr. Prince. I am very, very glad; I have
wanted you," she said.

"I have wanted you, Daisy; I have been looking for you everywhere. I
have been in great trouble about you," answered Noel, in his gentlest
tones.

"Have you?" said little Daisy; "I am sorry you have been in trouble.
Do you know that Primrose came to-day and I could not see her? I can
see you, but not Primrose. Please let me hold your hand. I don't feel
so dreadfully weak when I hold your hand. Will you stoop down, and let
me talk to you. I can't talk at all loud, for I'm dreadfully weak. Do
you know, Mr. Prince, that I'm going to die?"

"No, Daisy, I don't think you are," answered Noel. I am the Prince who
delivers little girls from ogres. I never heard of a little girl dying
after she was delivered from the ogre."

"Wicked little girls are not delivered," answered Daisy. "I was so
dreadfully cowardly. I was afraid of a dark dungeon, and so--and
so--but I mustn't tell you. I did lose Primrose's money, and I was a
coward, but I haven't been so bad yet as to tell a lie. You mustn't
ask me to tell you what it all means, Mr. Prince, for I can't. I hope
very much you'll forgive me for being a cowardly little girl; God has,
long ago, for I asked Him, and I am not really afraid to die. I
shouldn't feel a bit afraid or unhappy about it if I thought Primrose
and Jasmine could have their money."

Here Daisy's voice quite failed her, and she looked so dreadfully
white and weak that Noel began to fear there was some truth in her
poor little words. He saw that their interview must not be prolonged,
and that he must give the child relief as soon as possible.

"Daisy, you have got to listen to me," he said. "You need say very
little yourself, but you can listen to my words. I know why you want
to see Mrs. Ellsworthy--yes, dear, you can hold my hand as tightly as
possible. No, don't tremble; you want Mrs. Ellsworthy to give you some
money. She is not here; I know she would help you, and feel sorry for
you, but there are others who do that. Daisy, suppose I give you back
your money instead of Mrs. Ellsworthy? Give me your little hand, dear,
and let me put the money into it. Here; it makes quite a small
parcel--a ten-pound note, a five-pound note, two sovereigns and a
half. Now, Daisy, shall we keep this as a little secret between
ourselves? Primrose will ask no questions if you beg of her not, and
when you have put that money into her hand will you not be able to
have her with you again?"

Daisy's little hot hand closed tightly over the money. She did not
speak, or even attempt to thank Noel, but her eyes, wider and wider
open each moment, were fixed intently on his face.

"That is settled, then, Daisy," continued Noel, "and we need not think
of Mrs. Ellsworthy just at present, for you do not now need her
services. Of course a Prince is the right person to deliver a little
girl from a dreadful ogre. I don't see that Mrs. Ellsworthy should
have anything to do with it. Now, my dear, I'm going to say one or two
other things to you--you need not feel the least frightened."

"May I really keep the money?" whispered Daisy at last.

"Of course, I said so. We will not say any more on this subject at
present. I have given you the money to-night, because I want you to
have Primrose sitting by your side and nursing you and comforting you.
When Primrose is with you again you will cease to think those gloomy
thoughts about dying. Now I have something else to add before I leave
you."

Noel had now taken a very firm hold of Daisy's little hand. She had
been trembling a good deal, but she had certainly grown calmer.
Perhaps the knowledge that she really did possess some money to give
to Primrose was comforting her. Noel felt a sense of distress at
disturbing even for her eventual good the child's present calm. It
must be done, however, and he thought a moment how he could most
gently deal with her.

"I'm going to tell you a story, Daisy," he said--"a very sad story,
and, alas, a true one. There lives a little girl, I will not tell her
name, although I know it, who has been unfortunate enough to get into
the power of a very bad man. The man is very, very bad, but I will
not mention his name here, although I know it also. The man came to
the little girl and talked to her, and no doubt he threatened her, and
at last he made her promise him something--what, I cannot say. From
the moment this little girl made this promise she became thin and
white, and anxious and unhappy. She struggled against the terrible
promise which seemed to bind her with fetters of iron, but she could
never get away from it, and the man appeared like a terrible ogre to
her, and she longed for a Prince to come and deliver her from him. The
wicked man having terrified this poor little girl, did his best to use
his influence over her to his own ends. At one time she lived in the
house with him, but although she struggled against it her friends
induced her to go elsewhere. Even in the new palace, however, she was
not safe from the terrible ogre; he followed her, and, it is to be
feared, although nothing is absolutely known, that he used cruel
threats to induce her to give him some money which was not hers to
give. The poor little weak girl was afraid to consult any one on
account of her promise. It was quite natural she should think it right
to keep her promise, although it was very sad. She was so completely
under the power of the wicked man, or the ogre, as we will call him,
that she gave him her sister's money--the money that was to support
them all for some months, and then in her great despair she ran
away." Here Noel paused--Daisy's eyes were fixed on him. Her face was
white as death.

"You see, dear, it is a painful story," he said, "but it is not quite
finished yet. The poor little girl ran away, but she never knew what
was happening to the ogre. That wicked man was not allowed to continue
his evil ways without punishment. At the present moment he is locked
up safely in prison, where he can hurt no one. He was put there
because he stole a five-pound note and a ring from the gentleman whom
the little girl used to call the Prince. It is believed, though of
course nothing is certainly known, nor will be until the little girl
is taken out of the thraldom of the ogre and confesses what has
happened, that this wicked man has also stolen a good deal of money
from an envelope which the elder sister used to consider her
'Emergency Fund' envelope. In short, it is thought that his one object
in frightening the poor little girl was simply to rob her and her
sisters. Now that he is in prison, however, and quite out of the way
of harming any one, it is greatly hoped by those who love her that the
poor little one, who was made to suffer so cruelly, will be released
from the thraldom of the wicked ogre, and be made to see that there
are times and circumstances during which even the most truthful little
girl would do better to break her word than to keep it. Now, Daisy,
that is the end of my story; I've got nothing more to say about it,
for at present I know nothing more. Good-night, dear--I will send
Primrose to you. I will come to you when you want me again."




CHAPTER XLVI.

DELIVERED FROM THE OGRE.


"Here's the money, Primrose--here's all the money," said little Daisy,
in a weak, weak voice, when her sister came up to her bedside, and
bent over her. "It was lost and the Prince brought it back; you won't
ask me any questions about it, will you, Primrose?"

"No," exclaimed Primrose, in her very quiet and matter-of-fact
voice--the kind of voice which was most soothing to the excitable and
nervous child at the present moment.

"I'm glad to have it back, Daisy, dear, for I have missed it; but of
course, I shan't ask you any questions about it. I shall just put it
into my purse, and you shall see what a nice fat purse I have got once
more."

Then Primrose held her little sister's hand, and shook up her pillows,
and tended her as only she knew how, but all that night Daisy grew
more and more restless. The drowsy state in which she had hitherto
been had changed to one of wakefulness. All through the long night
the little creature's bright eyes remained open, and her anxious face
had a question on it which yet she never spoke. At last, as the bright
summer's morning broke, she turned to Primrose and said eagerly--

"Kneel down, Primrose, and ask God what a very ignorant, very unhappy
little girl ought to do. Oh, Primrose, it's all about a promise--a
promise that was most faithfully given. What shall I do about it?"

"Do you want to keep it, or to break it?" asked Primrose.

"It seems to me I ought to keep it, Primrose, because a promise,
faithfully given, ought always to be kept; but Mr. Noel says I ought
to break this promise; oh, I don't know what to do!"

"Your heart won't be at rest, Daisy, and you won't really get better,
until you do know what to do," answered Primrose. "Of course, I will
kneel down and ask God to tell you."

Then the elder sister prayed aloud a very few earnest words, and the
little one joined her in whispered sentences. The prayer was not long,
but in Daisy's case it was quickly answered. When the morning quite
broke, and the real working-day had begun, Primrose sent a message to
Noel to come at once to see the child. Daisy received him with a
touching little smile.

"Was the little girl me?" she asked. "And was the wicked, wicked ogre,
Mr. Dove?"

"It is clever of you to guess that much, Daisy," answered Noel.

"Am I the little girl?" continued Daisy, "who made a promise which she
ought now to break? Will God forgive me for breaking a promise which I
made so very, very faithfully? Mr. Noel, I will tell you something.
That promise has nearly killed me. The old Daisy went away when that
promise was made, and such a poor, cowardly, wretched Daisy came in
her place. She'd have been selfish, too, but for you; but you taught
her a little bit about the Palace Beautiful, and she was trying to be
good in spite of the dreadful promise. Then the ogre came again, and
the second time he was so dreadful that she even became very selfish
to get rid of him. Oh, Mr. Noel, is it right for me--will God think it
really right for me--to break that dreadful promise?"

"He will, Daisy. The promise ought never to have been made. Only an
innocent and ignorant little child would have made it; yes, Daisy,
dear, yours is one of the rare cases of a promise better broken than
kept. See, I am the Prince, and I'm going to take the spell of the
ogre from you. The wicked ogre is locked up in a dungeon instead of
you, and the Prince commands the poor little captive to tell him
everything."

Then Daisy, with some broken sobs, and with a piteous light in her
blue eyes, told Noel the whole cruel story. He listened without once
interrupting the little narrator. When she had finished, he kissed
her, and told her that she now had nothing to fear, and then, bidding
her sleep away all her troubles, he left her to Primrose's care. By
the next train he himself went to London in full time to attend Dove's
trial.

That worthy was at first inclined to brazen matters out, but when
Noel, primed with Daisy's confession, appeared on the scene, his face
underwent a remarkable change. Its rubicund tints quite deserted it,
an alarming pallor spreading over every feature. Tommy Dove, who might
have been seen in a foremost position amongst the crowd of spectators,
was heard audibly to exclaim--

"Law, I guess there ain't no leg for my respected pa to stand on now!"

This, although not expressed aloud, seemed also to be Dove's opinion,
for he then and there made a full confession of his wicked practices,
and of the cruel threats he had employed to terrify Daisy. He received
his sentence, which was a severe one, with much stoicism, and, as he
was led away from his place in the prisoner's dock, addressed a
parting word to his affectionate and hysterical spouse--

"Never mind, Mrs. Dove, my only love, even fourteen years comes to an
end somehow, and when we meets again we'll make a rule for there being
no attic lodgers."

"To the very end his was a poetic turn," his wife afterwards remarked
to her favorite cronies.




CHAPTER XLVII.

ALMOST DEFEATED.


With the weight of her secret removed Daisy began slowly, very slowly,
to mend. The strain she had undergone had been too great for her
quickly to recover her strength; but little by little a faint color
did return to her white cheeks, she slept more peacefully, and began
to eat again.

"There's nothing at all for you to do, Miss Primrose," said Hannah,
"but to give up that post of continually screaming out book and
newspaper stuff to a deaf old lady."

"She isn't deaf, Hannah," interrupted Primrose. "She wants me to read
to her because her sight is very bad."

"Well, well," replied Hannah Martin, in a testy tone, "whether she's
deaf or whether she's blind, it ain't no way a fit post for you, Miss
Primrose. You've got to stay here now, and take care of that precious
little lamb, and you had better send for Miss Jasmine to keep you
company."

"I am certainly not going to leave Daisy at present," replied
Primrose. "I've got money enough to go on with, but I must go back to
town as soon as possible in order to earn enough to return Mr. Noel's
money to him. As to Jasmine, do you know, Hannah, she has got quite a
nice way of making a little income? You remember how cleverly she
always arranged the flowers in our drawing-room at dear Rosebury, and
how our mother always asked her to make bouquets for her? It now seems
that Jasmine has got rather remarkable taste, and some fine ladies in
London are employing her to arrange flowers on their dinner-tables.
They pay her very well indeed for this, and the labor is nothing at
all."

"Hoot!" said Hannah; "I think it's rather demeaning of herself. Well,
Miss Primrose, I suppose the poor dear will want a holiday the same as
the rest of you. To tell the truth, Miss Primrose, my old eyes ache to
see the darling, she was always such a bonny one."

Primrose smiled.

"When the fine ladies go out of town, Hannah, we will have Jasmine
down, and you shall squeeze us all into that nice, cosy little bedroom
of yours. What a good thing it was, Hannah; that you did not follow us
to London, but that you started this nice shop in the country, for
now we three girls can have our change in the country at such small
expense."

Tears started to Hannah's eyes.

"I've been always saving up for this, Miss Primrose, and if you will
talk of paying me at all, I'll never forgive you; aren't you my
nurslings, all three of you, and the only creatures I have got to live
