in her picturesque dress.

The call for the children came, and the two bounded on the stage. The
moment they did so, Diana ran up to Uncle Ben and took hold of the
great whip which he carried.

"You must let me do it my own way," she said; "you have pwomised.
Orion won't be bwave boy if I don't manage him. Give me that whip."

"Oh, but I say, little missy----"

"Give me that whip," repeated Diana, flashing her eyes up at the man.
"I is the gweat Diana and I order you. Give me the whip; I'll slash
it; I know how. Ah, here comes G'eased Lightning. Come 'long, you
beauty; come 'long, you darlin'."

Diana ran fearlessly up to the horse, fondled its nose, and looked
into its eyes; the creature stood perfectly still, bent its graceful
head, and licked her little hand.

"And it's a perfect brute to everyone else," thought Uncle Ben to
himself, but this time he did not utter a word.

The horse stood perfectly motionless until little Orion was mounted on
its back.

"Now, G'eased Lightning, you has got to be a good horse," said Diana,
speaking to him in a confiding voice. "You isn't to fwighten Orion;
'member he's a giant, and it's a gweat honor for you to carry him,
'cos most times he lives up in the stars."

"Come, missy, we have no time for that sort of nonsense," said Uncle
Ben, who began to get impatient. "Give me back my whip."

"No; I is going to slash the whip. Come, G'eased Lightning; twot,
twot, p'ease."

The horse began to amble gently forward. Little Diana went and stood
by Uncle Ben's side.

"I's managing," she said; "you shall have whip to-night; but I's
managing now."

The other performers stood round in breathless silence. Orion kept his
seat manfully. Greased Lightning was as gentle as a lamb.

"Good boy!" called out Diana; "vedy good little boy. Good horse,
G'eased Lightning! you is a vedy good horse. Now then, go faster."
Diana gave the whip a crack.

The horse looked at her out of his big, intelligent eyes, and began to
trot, but still very gently, round and round the circus.

"Good boy," repeated Diana; "good horse! Now then, Orion, get up on to
yous two foots; don't be fwightened. 'Member what will happen when
it's over. Get up on to yous foots this minute."

Poor little Orion scrambled in deadly terror on to his small feet; but
the horse still went swift and smooth, neither budging nor turning to
the right or the left. Diana once again cracked her whip. He went
faster and faster. Orion began to lose his fear; he even laughed with
excitement; the rose bloom came out on his delicate little face. The
terrible hoops were brought, and the child made a manful effort to get
through them. Diana cracked her whip and called out and encouraged
him, and finally brought him successfully through the ordeal. He was
taken off the stage wet with perspiration, and trembling all over, but
at the same time he had a wild sort of triumph in his little heart.

"I did it well; didn't I, Aunt Sarah?" he said.

"You did it splendidly, my little love," said Aunt Sarah; "but I never
did see a little gal like your sister. Oh, merciful Heavens! that man
aint never a-going to let her ride Pole Star!"

A black horse of immense strength and size was now brought upon the
stage. This horse seemed to paw the air as he walked; his eyes were
bloodshot and full of a dangerous light.

"Remember it's your own fault, missy," said Uncle Ben; "this aint the
'orse I'd give you. I don't want any harm to come to you; but if you
insist on that little chap, that aint a patch on you, riding Greased
Lightning, why, there aint nothing for it but for you to ride Pole
Star."

"You don't 'uppose I's fwightened of Pole Star? Why, he's a weal
beauty," said Diana.

"He's the----" The man arrested the words on his lips.

Diana had thrown down her whip and rushed across the stage. With just
the same fearless confidence as, half an hour before, she had gone up
to Greased Lightning--she now approached Pole Star.

"You's pwetty, you's a darlin'," she said. She held out her tiny
brown hand. "Give me a bit of sugar, somebody," she demanded.

A girl who stood near ran away to fetch a lump. The child offered it
to the horse. He looked at her, pawed the ground restlessly, and then,
stooping, licked the sugar off her hand as tenderly as if he were a
kitten.

"Well, I never!" said Uncle Ben, breathing a great sigh of relief.

"It's a beauty horse," repeated Diana; "I like it better nor G'eased
Lightning. Pole Star, I's going to wide you; you's a dear, good
horse." She stroked the creature's nose--the fierce eyes grew
gentle--a moment later the child was mounted on its back.

"Now, gee up, gee up!" called Diana. "P'ease, Uncle Ben, don't cwack
your whip; I can manage Pole Star." She pulled at the reins, and the
creature began, at first gently and then more rapidly, to run round
and round the stage. After all, notwithstanding her bravery, it was an
ordeal, for Pole Star could run double as fast as Greased Lightning.
Soon, from running he seemed to take to flying, and little Diana
gasped and lost her breath; but she sat firm as a statue, and never
touched a hair of the creature's mane.

"Now, Pole Star," she called out, when the horse had stopped for want
of breath; "I's going to stand on you, and you must be vedy good." She
patted the animal on its head; then she scrambled to her feet, and,
holding the reins taut, stood firm as an arrow, while the creature
once more flew round the stage. When her ride was over she had won the
applause of the whole house.

After this Diana and Orion were taken away to rest until the evening.
They were given the best food and a great deal of petting from Aunt
Sarah. As to Diana, she was in excellent spirits.

"Oh, please, Di; nothing will make you stop, nothing will make you
break your word?" said little Orion once to her.

"What I pwomise I do," replied Diana, with dignity.

And so the hours flew by, and at last the time arrived when the
children were to appear before the footlights.

The huge circus tent was packed to the highest gallery. There was, in
short, not standing room in the audience part of the house. Uncle Ben,
in the highest spirits, was darting here and there behind the wings,
giving directions, gesticulating, ordering, rearranging. Little Diana
flew up to him and took his hand.

"What is you 'cited about?" she asked. "Is you fwightened 'bout
anything?"

"No, little gal, no--that is, provided you and your brother do your
parts well."

"We has pwomised," said Diana, with great firmness; "you needn't be
fwightened; we has pwomised."

The children were to appear as the last item of the first part of the
performance. Uncle Ben felt that on them really turned the success of
the evening. At last the crucial moment arrived. Two beautiful horses
were led into the circus, and immediately afterwards little Diana,
holding Orion by the hand, skipped on to the stage. She came lightly
forward, almost up to the footlights, dropped a somewhat pert little
courtesy, turned round, and, taking Orion's hand, danced up to where
the two horses were impatiently pawing the ground. Uncle Ben, with
his big whip in his hand, dressed in evening clothes, was standing at
one side. A man came forward to help Diana to mount Pole Star--another
gave his hand to Orion.

"'Member, Orion, you has pwomised, and it all apends," said Diana, in
a low, but very clear, voice.

The little fellow looked at her. Her spirited action, the splendid
color in her cheeks, the glow of excitement in her great big eyes,
inspired him. He would not ride for those horrid people who were
crowding all the seats in front, those horrid, terrible people who
seemed to rise from the floor to the ceiling. He did not care anything
about those faces, those cruel, staring eyes, those smiling lips; but
he did care for Diana. He would ride his best for her.

"Steady, G'eased Lightning," said the little girl; "you's to be good
horse, 'member. Now, Pole Star, beauty, darlin', do just what Diana
wants."

The horses began to canter forward, going briskly and swiftly side by
side. Greased Lightning's coal-black eye was fixed upon Diana as she
sat on Pole Star's back. Pole Star felt the feather-weight of the hot
hand on his mane, the touch of the little feet somewhere near his
neck. There was a magnetic current of sympathy between the horse and
the child.

"Think you's a giant," she said once to Orion, as she shot past him in
the race.

The crowd, speechless with astonishment and delight for the first
moment or two, now began to clap and cheer loudly. Crack went Uncle
Ben's whip. The circus girls in the wings, the men, the clown, all
watched the little pair with beating hearts. Diana they felt sure of,
but what of little Orion? And yet a change had come over the child.
His face was no longer pale; some of Diana's spirit seemed to have
entered into his soul.

The signal came for the pair to stand upon the bare, backs of their
horses. Little Orion scrambled as quickly and nimbly to his feet as
Diana herself. He caught the reins; crack again went the whip; the
horses flew round and round. Now and then Diana said a soft word to
Greased Lightning; now and then she stamped her small foot on Pole
Star's neck. Each movement, each glance of the child, seemed to thrill
through the willing beast. Incomprehensible as it may seem, both these
wild, half-tamed creatures loved her. They kept straight, veering
neither to left nor right, for her sake.

The first part of the performance went safely through, but now came
the more difficult and dangerous time. The children were now not only
to ride the horses standing, but they were obliged to ride holding one
foot in the air, then to keep on their steeds standing on tiptoe, and
finally they had to spring through great rings made of tissue paper,
and leap again upon the horses as they galloped through. Diana
performed her task with unfailing exactness, always reaching the
horse's back at the right moment, springing up, sitting down, standing
first on one foot, then on the other, being apparently on wires,
afraid of nothing, triumphant through all. Orion made a gallant effort
to follow her example. In two minutes now the whole thing would be
over.

"Don't be fwightened, Orion; time's nearly up," whispered the gay,
brave little voice in his ear.

The horses flew, the children moved as if they were puppets, and all
might now have been well if at that moment Diana herself--Diana the
fearless, the brave, the unconquerable--had not slipped, slipped at
the very moment when she was springing through one of the rings. The
horse galloped on without her, and she lay prone upon the floor of the
circus. Uncle Ben rushed madly to the rescue, and before Orion's horse
had reached the spot he had caught the child in his arms. She was
stunned by the fall, and lay white as death in his embrace. The house
thought the fall had killed her, and there was a horrified murmur; but
Diana was only stunned. In a moment she raised her cheery little
voice.

"I's awfu' sossy; I's all wight now," she said. "Where's Pole Star?"

"Nay, little gal," said Uncle Ben, knowing well the temper of the
house, "you must do no more to-night. The company, I know, will excuse
you."

Seating the child on his shoulder, and patting her hand
affectionately, as if he were her father, he brought little Diana to
the front.

"I hope, ladies and gentlemen," he called out, "that you will excuse
this great lady huntress to-night. But if you wish her to take another
turn round on the back of the great Pole Star, she is willing to
comply."

"No!" shouted voice after voice in the gallery; "let little missy off.
We'll come to see little missy another night. Three cheers for little
missy!"

The next moment Diana and Orion found themselves at the back of the
stage.

"Is it true, Di?" gasped Orion. "Is it all over?"

"Yes; it's all over," answered little Diana. She leaned against the
wall. "I's a bit giddy," she said; "but I'll be all wight by and by."

Aunt Sarah, with tears in her eyes, brought the child a restorative.

"Drink this, little love," she said; "you'll soon be much better, I'm
sure."

The curtain had fallen on the first half of the performance, and Uncle
Ben came up in a huge good humor.

"Missy, I hope you aint hurt," he said.

"Hurt?" answered Diana. "What do a fall matter? I's as wight as wain.
Didn't Orion do well, Uncle Ben?"

"Yes, all things considerin'," said Uncle Ben. "We has a full house,
missy, and I'm very much obliged to you. Now you had best go straight
to bed. Sarah, take the kids off and give them a good supper, for they
has earned it."

Aunt Sarah took Diana's hand and led her to their bedroom.

"But aren't we going away now?" said Orion.

Aunt Sarah sat down at the foot of one of the beds with a white face.

"Come to me, little missy," she said to Diana.

The child went to her.

"I's k'ite well," she said, "only a little giddy. Why, Aunt Sawah,
you's kying."

"I thought you were dead for a minute, my little miss; you that is the
image of my Rachel, what the good God took from me. I thought you were
dead, and it 'most broke my 'eart--oh, little missy, little darlin'!"

"But, Diana, aren't we going away?" Said Orion. "You promised, and you
never broke your word."

"I pwomised, and I never break my word," said Diana. "Yes, Orion, yes;
we is going away."

"I declare," said Aunt Sarah, "I believe it would be the right thing
to do. It would kill me if you was killed, missy--and them 'orses!"

"They is darlin's," interrupted Diana.

"Well, go to sleep now, and I'll fetch some supper," said Aunt Sarah.

She shut the door behind the children, returning in a few minutes with
bowls of bread and milk. Diana sat listlessly down on the nearest
bench.

"I's awfu' s'eepy," she said.

She did not quite know what was the matter with her; it seemed as if
something had suddenly knocked all her spirit away. She did not know
herself without the brave spirit which God had put into her little
breast. Orion gazed at her anxiously.

