"It seems to burn me like," she said. But all the same her fingers
closed over it, and a look of greed and satisfaction filled her face.

"I don't know if I'm a-doin' right," she said, "for perhaps this ain't
worth sixpence, and then where's the rent and the food? But, all the
same, I don't like to say no to a pretty lady when she's in trouble. Here's
the nine-and-fourpence-halfpenny, Miss. I earned it bit by bit by washing
the neighbors' clothes; it wasn't easy come by; there's labor in it, and
aches and dead-tiredness about it. You take it, Miss. I only trust the
diamond will repay what I loses on that nine-and-fourpence-half penny."

Flower handled the money as if she thought it dirty.

Without a word she slipped it into the pocket of her dress.

"I am going away," she said. "They are angry with me at Sleepy Hollow. I
have done wrong. I am not a bit surprised. I'm going away, so as not to
cause them any more trouble."

"Oh, law, now, Miss! but they'll fret to part with you."

"No they won't. Anyhow, it isn't your affair. I'm going away as soon as
I possibly can. Can you tell me where the nearest railway station is?"

"There's none closer than Everton, and that's a matter of five mile from
here."

"I must get there as quickly as possible. What road shall I take?"

"Do you think, Miss, I'd let a pretty young lady like you trape the
lanes in the dead of night? No, no; carrier goes between two and three
in the morning. You might go with him, if you must go."

"That is a good thought. Where does the carrier live?"

"Three doors from here. I'll run round presently and tell him to call."

"Thank you. Do you think nine-and-fourpence-halfpenny will take me to
Bath?"

"To Bath, Miss? It might, if you condescended to third class."

"Third class will do very well. Did you ever hear Polly Maybright speak
of an aunt of hers, a Mrs. Cameron?"

Mrs. Ricketts, whose back was half turned to Flower while she shut
and locked the box out of which she had taken the precious
nine-and-fourpence-halfpenny, now sprang to her feet, and began to speak
in a tone of great excitement.

"Did I hear of her?" she exclaimed. "Did I hear of the woman--for lady
she ain't--what turned my Maggie out of her good place, and near broke
Miss Polly's heart? Don't mention Mrs. Cameron, please, Miss Flower, for
talk of her I won't; set eyes on her I wouldn't, no, not if I was to
receive a pound for it!"

"You needn't get so excited," said Flower; "you have not got to see
Polly's aunt; only I thought perhaps you could give me her address, for
I am going to her to-morrow."

"I wouldn't, Miss, if I was you."

"Yes, you would if you were me. What is Mrs. Cameron's address?"

"I don't know as I can rightly tell you, Miss."

"Yes, you must. I see you know it quite well."

"Well then, well then--you won't like her a bit, Miss Flower."

"What's her address?"

"Jasper Street; I think it's Jasper Street."

"And the number? She doesn't live in the whole of Jasper Street."

"Now, was it a one and a six or a one and a seven?" queried Mrs.
Ricketts. "Oh, Miss! if I was you, I wouldn't go near her; but I think
her number is a one and a seven."

"Seventeen, you mean."

"Yes, that's it; I was never great at counting."




CHAPTER XII.

RELICS AND A WELCOME.


Mrs. Cameron's house in Bath was decidedly old-fashioned. It was a
large, solemn, handsome mansion; its windows shone from constant
cleaning; its paint was always fresh, its Venetian blinds in perfect
order.

When a certain wild, untidy, almost disreputable-looking girl ran up its
snow-white steps, and rang its highly polished brass bell, the neat
parlor maid who answered her summons stared at her, and doubted a good
deal if Mrs. Cameron could see her.

"You had better step into the hall for a moment," said the maidservant,
"and I'll inquire if my missis is at leisure; but if it's the new
housemaid's place you've come after----"

Flower gasped; she drew herself up, raised her hand, and took off her
small black velvet cap.

"You forget yourself!" she said, with a haughtiness which did not ill
become her, notwithstanding her untidy and dishevelled state. "My name
is Flower Dalrymple, and I have come from Sleepy Hollow. Please let your
mistress know directly."

The parlor maid, who saw her mistake, was profuse in apologies.

She showed Flower into a dismal-looking dining room, and went upstairs.

"Who is it, Ann?" asked an anxious voice as she prepared to ascend the
richly-carpeted stairs.

A door was opened at the end of the passage, and a fusty, dusty-looking
little man put in an appearance.

"Who is it, Ann? Any one for me?"

"A young lady as wants to see the missis, sir. Oh, Mr. Cameron! what a
deal of dust you has brought out into the 'all!"

The little man looked meekly down at his dusty garments.

"I have just been unpacking my last crate of curiosities from China,
Ann. Where is the young lady? Perhaps she would like to see the relics."

"No, sir, that I'm sure she wouldn't; she's all blown and spent like.
She's for all the world like a relic herself."

Ann tripped lightly upstairs, and Mr. Cameron, pushing his spectacles
high up on his bald forehead, looked with an anxious glance to right and
left. Then very quickly on tiptoe he crossed the hall, opened the
dining-room door, and went in.

"How are you, young lady? If you are very quick, I can get you into my
sanctum sanctorum. I am just unpacking Chinese relics. I trust, I hope,
you are fond of relics."

Flower started to her feet.

"I thought, I certainly thought, Polly said _Mrs._ Cameron," she
remarked. "I don't think I shall be at all afraid to live with you. I
don't exactly know what Chinese relics are, but I should love to see
them."

"Then quick, my dear, quick! We haven't a minute to spare. She's sure to
be down in a jiffy. Now then, step on tiptoe across the hall. Ann has
the quickest ears, and she invariably reports. She's not a nice girl,
Ann isn't. She hasn't the smallest taste for relics. My dear, there's an
education in this room, but no one, no one who comes to the house, cares
to receive it."

While the little man was talking, he was rushing across the wide hall,
and down a long passage, Flower's hand clasped in his. Finally he pushed
open a baize-lined door, hastily admitted himself and Flower, and closed
it behind them. The sanctum sanctorum was small, stuffy, dusty, dirty.
There were several chairs, but they were all piled with relics, two or
three tables were also crammed with tokens of the past. Flower was very
weary, the dust and dirt made her sneeze, and she looked longingly for
even the smallest corner of a chair on which to seat herself.

"I do want some breakfast so badly," she began.

"Breakfast! My love, you shall have it presently. Now then, we'll begin.
This case that I have just unpacked contains teeth and a small portion
of a jawbone. Ah! hark! what is that? She is coming already! Will that
woman never leave me in peace? My love, the object of my life, the one
object of my whole life, has been to benefit and educate the young. I
thought at last I had found a pupil, but, ah, I fear she is very angry!"

The sound of a sharp voice was heard echoing down the stairs and along
the passage, a sharp, high-pitched voice, accompanied by the sharper,
shriller barking of a small dog.

"Zeb! I say, Zeb! Zebedee, if you have taken that young girl into your
sanctum, I desire you to send her out this moment."

The little man's face grew pale; he pushed his spectacles still higher
on his forehead.

"There, my love, do you hear her? I did my best for you. I was beginning
your education."

"Zeb! Zeb! Open the door this minute," was shouted outside.

"You'll remember, my love, to your dying day, that I showed you three
teeth and the bit of jawbone of a Chinaman who died a thousand years
ago."

"Zeb!" thundered the voice.

"Yap! yap! yap!" barked the small dog.

"You must go, my dear. She's a powerful woman. She always has her way.
There, let me push you out. I wouldn't have her catch sight of me at
this moment for fifty pounds."

The green baize door was opened a tiny bit, a violent shove was
administered to Flower's back, and she found herself in the arms of Mrs.
Cameron, and in extreme danger of having her nose bitten off by the
infuriated Scorpion.

"Just like Zebedee!" exclaimed the good lady. "Always struggling to
impart the dry bones of obsolete learning to the young! Come this way,
Miss--Miss--what's your name?"

"Dalrymple--Flower Dalrymple."

"An outlandish title, worthy of Sleepy Hollow. I have not an idea who
you are, but come into the dining-room."

"Might I---- might I have a little breakfast?"

"Bless me, the child looks as if she were going to faint! Ann, Ann, I
say! Down, Scorpion! You shall have no cream if you bark any more. Ann,
bring half a glass of port wine over here, and make some breakfast for
Miss--Miss Rymple as fast as you can."

"_Dal_rymple, please!"

"Don't worry me, child. I can't get my tongue round long names. Now,
what is it you are called? Daisy? What in the world have you come to me
for, Daisy?"

"I'm Flower----"

"Well, and isn't Daisy a flower? Now then, Daisy Rymple, tell your story
as quickly as possible. I don't mind giving you breakfast, but I'm as
busy as possible to-day. I've six committee meetings on between now and
two o'clock. Say your say, Daisy, and then you can go."

"But I've come to stay."

"To _stay_? Good gracious! Scorpion, down, sir! Now, young lady, have
you or have you not taken leave of your senses?"

"No, really. May I tell you my story?"

"If you take ten minutes over it; I won't give you longer time."

"I'll try to get it into ten minutes. I'm an Australian, and so is
David. David is my brother. We came over in the _Australasia_ about six
weeks ago. Dr. Maybright met us in London, and took us down to Sleepy
Hollow."

"Bless the man!--just like him. Had he any responsible matron or
spinster in the house, child?"

"I don't know; I don't think so. There was Helen and Polly and----"

"I don't want to hear about Polly! Go on; your ten minutes will soon be
up. Go on."

"A couple of days ago we went on a picnic--I have a way of getting into
awful passions--and Polly--Polly vexed me."

"Oh, she vexed you? You're not the first that young miss has vexed, I
can tell you."

"She vexed me; I oughtn't to have minded; I got into a passion; I felt
awful; I ran away with baby."

"Goodness me! what is the world coming to? You don't mean to say you
have dared to bring the infant here, Daisy?"

"No, no. I ran away with her on to the moors. I was so frightened, for I
thought baby had died. Then Maggie came, and she saved her life, and she
was brought home again."

"That's a good thing; but I can't see why you are troubling me with this
story."

"Yesterday morning I gave baby back to Dr. Maybright. He's not like
other people; he looked at me, and his look pierced my heart. He said
something, too, and then for the first time I began to be really, really
sorry. I went up to my room; I stayed there alone all day; I was
miserable."

"Served you right if you were, Daisy."

"In the evening I was so hungry, I went down for food. I met Firefly;
she told me the worst."

"Then the baby died? You really are an awful girl, Daisy Rymple."

"No. The baby is pretty well, and Polly, who sprained her foot running
after me, is pretty well; but it's--it's Dr. Maybright--the best man I
ever met--a man who could have helped me and made me a--a good
girl--he's very, very ill, and they think he may die. He wasn't strong,
and he was out all night looking for baby and me, and he got a bad
chill, and he--he may be dead now. It was my doing; Fly told me so."

Flower laid her head on the table; her long sustained fortitude gave
way; she sobbed violently.

Her tears stained Mrs. Cameron's snowy table-linen; her head was pressed
down on her hands; her face was hidden. She was impervious in her woe to
any angry words or to the furious barking of a small dog.

At last a succession of violent shakes recalled her to herself.

"_Will_ you sit up?--spoiling my damask and shedding tears into the
excellent coffee I have made for you. Ah, that's better; now I can see
your face. Don't you know that you are a very naughty, dangerous sort of
girl?"

"Yes, I know that quite well. Mother always said that if I didn't check
my passion I'd do great mischief some day."

"And right she was. I don't suppose the table-linen will ever get over
those coffee stains mixed with tears. Now, have the goodness to tell me,
Daisy, or Ivy, or whatever you are called, why you have come to tell
this miserable, disgraceful story to me."

