
"At any rate, madam," he said, turning to Mrs. Donald, "I can
congratulate you upon the fact that the bullet did not strike a
couple of inches higher. Had it done so, my ride would have been a
useless one."

A bed was at once brought from a room above and made up, and Mr.
Donald was placed upon it, in the manner which Mr. Ruskin had
suggested. Then with lightened hearts the party, with the exception
of his wife, left the room.

Kate and Mrs. Barker at once set to to prepare a meal for the
surgeon; while Reuben went over to give his companions the good
news, that the surgeon had strong hopes that Mr. Donald would
recover.

In the afternoon all the party, with the exception of Mr. and Mrs.
Barker and the constables, rode off to their respective stations;
assuring Reuben of their readiness to assemble again, at once,
should he obtain news which would afford a hope that the gang could
be traced.

A few hours later, the other four constables for whom Reuben had
sent rode up. An outhouse was now prepared for the reception of the
police, Reuben himself taking up his abode there, although Mrs.
Donald strongly urged him to come into the house; but with Mr. and
Mrs. Barker and the surgeon there, and the time of one of the
ladies taken up with the wounded man, Reuben thought that their
hands were perfectly full, and said that he should prefer to mess
and sleep with his men.

"You see, Mrs. Donald," he said, as she tried to induce him to
alter his determination, "I shall have to be sending out men and
receiving reports, and may be obliged to ride out in the middle of
the night; therefore, you see, as absolute quiet is ordered for
your husband, it will be far better for me to be outside the house;
as the coming and going would be sure to disturb him, and he would
naturally want to know what is going on."

"You will not, I hope, take all your party away in pursuit of these
men, Captain Whitney," she said anxiously. "They might get up some
false alarm, to take you away, and then come down upon the house
again. I have been too much taken up with my husband to think much
about it; but although Kate keeps up bravely, I know that she is
greatly shaken, and terribly anxious. I don't know whether she told
you; but it was to her, chiefly, that horrible man spoke; and it
was she he told, as he rushed out, that he would come back to fetch
her. She will never have a moment's peace, or tranquillity, till we
hear that he is either killed or taken."

"Nor shall I," Reuben said. "I do not think that the scoundrel will
dare to attempt to carry out his threat to come back again; but
with so daring a villain, it would be rash to omit the smallest
precaution. You may be quite sure, Mrs. Donald, that in no case
will I leave the house unprotected; and that if I should be called
away I will leave two men here who, during my absence, will remain
in the house; and with them, Mr. Barker, and the doctor, you may
feel perfectly assured that no open attack will be made.

"But I cannot impress too strongly upon you that, seeing the man
with whom we have to deal, your sister should not stir outside the
house; until we have caught him, or until Mr. Donald is so far
recovered as to be able to be removed. I will not tell her so
myself; because I see that, now the strain is over, she is greatly
shaken, and I would not add to her anxiety; but if you could break
it to her, as if it were your own idea, that she had better keep
within doors until this fellow's caught, I am sure that it will be
well."

"You will come in this evening, I hope; and always of an evening,
Captain Whitney. It will make a change, and cheer us up; besides,
we want to hear all about your adventures, since we saw you last."

This Reuben gladly promised and, after it was dark, and he had
placed a sentry, he came into the house. Mrs. Barker was on duty in
the sick room; and Reuben, at Mrs. Donald's request, gave them an
account of the voyage out, and of the circumstances which had led
to his entering the police.

He would have passed very briefly over the affair at the Cape, but
by many questions Mrs. Donald succeeded in eliciting from him all
the details of the story.

"It was a gallant action, indeed," she said warmly. "You certainly
saved the lives of those two girls, at a terrible risk of your
own."

"To make the romance complete, Whitney," Mr. Barker remarked, "you
ought to have married Miss Hudson."

"Unfortunately, you see," Reuben said with a smile, "in the first
place I was only a boy, and she was two years my senior; in the
next, and much more important place, she happened to be in love
with someone else; and I did not happen to be in love with her,
though she was, I admit, a very charming young lady, and had been
extremely kind to me."

"How was that, Whitney?" Mr. Barker asked. "Eighteen is a
susceptible age. I can only account for your coldness on the
supposition that you had left your heart in England."

"I fancy my heart was, then, where it is now," Reuben rejoined,
with a slight smile.

"In the right place, eh, Whitney?"

"In the right place," Reuben repeated quietly.

At this moment Mrs. Barker entered, and said that Mr. Donald would
be glad if Reuben would come and sit with him, for a little time.

"Don't let him talk much," Mr. Ruskin said. "The less he talks, the
better; but your talking to him, for a time, will cheer him up and
do him good."

"I am glad to see you going on so well, Mr. Donald," Reuben said
heartily, as he entered. "The doctor says you are not to talk much;
but you are to play the part of a listener."

"Do you think you will catch these fellows?" was Mr. Donald's first
question.

"I will catch them, sooner or later," Reuben said. "I will run them
down if they are above ground; but I can take no steps in the
matter until I hear from my black boy. I have been expecting him to
turn up, ever since I got here; and shall begin to be afraid that
those scoundrels have ill treated him, if he does not turn up
before long."

"My wife has been telling me that they knew you at home, Whitney;
and that she and her people did you some terrible injustice,
somehow. But she wouldn't go into the matter. Curious, isn't it,
your meeting at this end of the world; and that, too, at such a
moment?"

"It is curious," Reuben said; "what people call a coincidence. But
Mrs. Donald is mistaken in telling you that her people did me an
injustice. Her father was one of the kindest friends I ever had,
and although Mrs. Ellison somewhat misjudged me, and her daughter
naturally shared her feeling, they were not in anyway to be blamed
for that; for they only thought as ninety-nine people out of a
hundred did."

"Whitney, Whitney," Mr. Donald muttered to himself. "I seemed to
know the name, though I cannot recall where.

"Ah!" he said suddenly, "of course I remember now, for I was in the
court when--" and he stopped.

"When I was tried," Reuben put in quietly. "Yes, that was me. I was
acquitted, as you know, principally from the way in which Mr.
Ellison stood up for me. Thank God that he never, for an instant,
believed that I was guilty."

"And to think it should be you!" Mr. Donald said. "How strange
things turn out! I remember I could not make up my mind about it.
It seemed so strange, either way."

"We had better not talk about it now," Reuben said quietly. "I said
then, and I say now, that I knew the people who did it and, strange
as the circumstances have already been, you may think them stranger
still, some day, if I bring one of them before you, alive or dead."

At this moment there was a knock at the door, and Mrs. Donald came
in and said that one of the constabulary wished to speak to Reuben.

"Then I will say goodnight. I hope I shall find you getting on
nicely, in the morning, Mr. Donald.

"Will you say goodnight to Miss Ellison and Mrs. Barker for me,
Mrs. Donald? And tell Mr. Barker that I shall be ready, in five
minutes, to smoke that pipe we talked about with him, outside."



Chapter 16: Jim's Report.


"Jones, what is it?"

"Your black has just come, sir. I would not let him come in; for
the fact is, he ain't a figure to introduce among ladies."

"What's the matter with him, Jones? Not hurt, I hope?"

"He has been knocked about a bit, sir; and he is done up with
travelling. The poor fellow can hardly crawl, and was half starved;
so I set him to work eating, and came off to fetch you."

By this time they had arrived at the door of the shed. Jim was
sitting by a fire, eagerly devouring a hunch of cold meat. The men
were standing round, waiting till he had appeased his hunger before
they asked any question. He looked up and nodded, when Reuben
entered.

"Well, Jim, I am glad to see you back," Reuben said heartily. "I
was beginning to be afraid about you. I hope you are not
hurt?"--for the black had a handkerchief tied round his head.

Jim gave a grunt, but continued stuffing great lumps of meat into
his mouth. Reuben saw that he must wait till the black's hunger was
satisfied, and stood quietly looking on until, having devoured some
five pounds of meat, he gave a sigh of contentment, and then took a
long draught of rum and water, which Constable Jones handed to him.

"Jim better now," he said.

"That's right, Jim; now tell us all about it."

Jim's story was a long one, and it took more than an hour in the
telling; for his English was not always distinct, and it often
required much questioning, on Reuben's part, before he could quite
make out its meaning. The substance was as follows:

On leaving, some ten days before, on the mission of discovering the
haunt of the bush rangers, he knew that it was of no use to go
among the wild blacks, their allies; as the hostility against their
semi-civilized fellows was so great that he would, at once, have
been killed. He resolved to go back to the spot where the track had
been obliterated, by that of the flock of sheep; to make a wide
circuit, and pick it up beyond and, if possible, follow it until he
found them. The difficulties were great, for the bush rangers had
spared no pains in hiding their trail; keeping always upon hard,
high ground, and at one time getting into the bed of a running
stream, and following it for two miles before they again struck for
their rendezvous.

However, step by step Jim had tracked them; sometimes losing the
trail altogether, sometimes guided merely by a fresh-made scratch
on the surface of a stone, or by a broken twig or bruised blade of
grass. At last, he traced it far out into the bush, many miles
beyond the furthest range of settlements, and then he lost it
altogether. There had been a halt, for some time, at this spot.

Beyond this, Jim was entirely at fault. He made circle after circle
round the spot, but could find no trace whatever of their passage,
and returned to the point where he had missed the trail. He relit
the embers of the fire which the bush rangers had made, cooked some
food, and laid himself down--first to think it over, then to sleep,
for it was now just the close of day.

It was clear to him that here, more than anywhere else, the bush
rangers had made a great effort to throw anyone who might be
pursuing them off the trail. He had no doubt that the bush rangers
had muffled their horses' hoofs with cloth, and had proceeded with
the greatest care through the bush, so as to avoid breaking a
single twig in their passage; and the only reason for such greater
caution could be that it was here, and here only, that they wished
to throw the pursuers off the trail. It would have seemed, to a
white man, that they had done this before, especially when they had
kept in the water course; but to black Jim's perception, it
appeared that they had been more careless than would be expected;
and that, while apparently doing their utmost to conceal their
tracks, they had really left sufficient indications to allow a
practised tracker to follow them.

Why then, now that they were far beyond the settlements, and fairly
in the country of their native allies, should they, for the first
time, so hide their trail that he could not discover it?

The result of Jim's thoughts was that, when he awoke at daybreak,
he started back towards the settlements. When he came to the river
which the party had passed, in pursuit of the natives, he kept
along its bank, scrutinizing the ground with the greatest care.
After six miles' walking he suddenly stopped, at a point where the
soft turf near the margin was cut up by the passage of the party of
horsemen. Here was the confirmation of his ideas.

Arguing the matter out with himself, Jim had arrived at the
conclusion that, hitherto, the trail had been a false one, the bush
rangers' object being to lead their pursuers to believe that they
had gone far out into the native country; whereas, in fact, their
hiding place was somewhere among the settlements. Should this be
so, the only way to find them was to search for their back track.
This he had now found and, with a shout of triumph at his own
cleverness, Jim forded the river and followed the track of the
horses.

This was now clear enough, the horsemen taking no pains whatever to
conceal their traces, feeling perfectly confident that any pursuers
must now be thrown off the scent. Jim followed it till sundown,
when he had made some thirty miles; and then, withdrawing some
little distance from the tracks, he made his fire and camped for
the night.

He was now inside the line of the outlying stations, and had
approached to the edge of a bit of wild and broken country, which
offered so few inducements to settlers that it had been passed by
for the better land beyond; although occasionally, when herbage was
scarce, the settlers in the neighbourhood drove the animals up to
feed among its hills. The black had no doubt that the gang, of
which he was in pursuit, had their haunt somewhere in the heart of
this wild and little-known tract.

In the morning he again started and, after travelling several
miles, entered a narrow valley with very steep sides, with trees
and brushwood growing wherever they could get a foothold. He now
adopted a careless and indifferent carriage and, although he kept a
sharp lookout, no one who saw him would have supposed that he had
any particular object in view.

Presently he noticed that the tracks turned sharply off from the
line he had followed, in the centre of the valley; and entered the
trees, which grew thickly here at the foot of the hills. He made no
halt, even for an instant, but walked straight on. Half a mile
further he sat down and lit his fire, and began to cook some food.
He had no doubt that he was watched for, just after he passed the
point where the track turned off, he heard a very low whistle among
the trees.

As he sat by the fire, he kept his back towards the direction from
which he had come; and when he presently heard footsteps, no change
in his attitude betrayed that he was conscious of the fact that
persons were approaching him, until two men stopped beside him.
Then, with a cry as of sudden alarm, he leapt to his feet.

"Lor' a mussy!" he exclaimed, "de white man frighten me bery much.
What for dey no say dey come?"

"Who are you, nigger, and where do you come from, and what are you
doing here?"

"My name Jim," he said; "me going tro' the country looking for
place to tend hosses. Me bery good at hosses. Me look arter de
hosses ob Mr. Hudson."

"What did you leave him for?" one of the men asked, sternly.

"Someting lost from de house," Jim said quietly. "Massa Hudson tink
me took it. He make bobbery, so Jim ran away and look for nodder
place."

"Um," the man said; "I wonder whether you are speaking the truth?
If I thought you weren't, I would put a bullet through your head,
in double-quick time."

"No, sah," Jim said in great terror; "dat de truth, sure 'nough.
Jim try to get work at Sydney. Couldn't get; so start away, and ask
at all de stations. No one want black boy for hosses, so keep on
and tink dere more chance out furder. Does massa want a boy for
hoss?"

"What do you think, Bill?" the man who had spoken asked his
companion. "Shall we put a bullet in this fellow's head, at once,
or make him useful?"

"I dussay he is a liar," the other replied; "but then all these
black fellows are liars, so that does not make much difference. A
black fellow would certainly be useful for the horses, and to look
after the fire. We can always shoot him when we have done with him.
We shall soon see, by the way he handles the horses, whether he has
been accustomed to them."

"All right," the other said. "You come along with us then."

"What wages massa pay?" Jim asked.

"Anything you may be worth. Don't you fret about wages."

Jim pretended to hold out for a fixed sum; but the man said, in
stern tones:

"Come along, we don't want no more jaw, so you had best hold your
tongue."

No other words passed till they got back to the trees, and then
turned off where the horses had previously done so. Two minutes'
walk brought them to a roughly-made shed, built against the almost
perpendicular side of the hill. It was built of logs, and there was
nothing to show that it was inhabited. No smoke curled up from the
chimney. The door and shutters were closed. Anyone who, passing
through the valley, had turned among the trees and accidentally
come upon it, would have taken it for some hut erected by a wood
cutter.

One of the men knocked three times at the door, and it was at once
opened. Jim was pushed inside, the men followed him, and the door
was shut.

"Who have you got here?" a man, sitting by the side of a large fire
some distance inside the cottage, asked angrily.

"It's a nigger who wants work. He says he is accustomed to horses
so, as it was the choice between shooting him and bringing him
here, we thought we might as well bring him to you. It would be
handy to have a fellow to look after the horses, and cut the wood,
and make himself useful. If we find he is of no use, there will be
no great trouble in getting rid of him."

"That is true enough," the other said, "and I don't think there's
much risk about it.

"Come here, you fellow, and let me look at you."

Jim stepped forward towards the fire. He saw now that the hut was
built against the entrance to a cave of considerable size. In the
