
Mrs. Anderson took his hand and led him back to the house. She did not
scold him for going out with Connie. She did not mean to reproach him at
all; he had made a great victory; she felt proud of him. When supper had
come to an end she called the boy to her:

"Ronald dear, I wish to say something. If you were a coward to-day, so
was I."

"You--my aunt?" said Ronald. "Oh no--no!"

"Yes. I didn't want to part with you."

Ronald shivered.

"Won't you ever see me any more?"

"I hope so. Mr. Harvey was very kind."

"Is his name Harvey--same as mine?"

"Yes, darling; he is your father's uncle, and your father lived with him
in his old place in Somersetshire when he was a boy. He loved your
father. He'll tell you lots of stories about him."

"About when does he expect father home?" asked Ronald.

"He doesn't know. Perhaps, Ronald--perhaps--never."

But here Ronald gave himself a little shake.

"I know father's coming back," he said--"feel it in my bones."

There was silence then between the woman and the boy. After a long time
Ronald spoke:

"He made mother cry, all the same."

"He told me about that. He wasn't really unkind to her. I, on the whole,
like him, Ronald, and I think you can do a lot for him--I think your
father would wish it."

"Would he?" said Ronald, his eyes sparkling.

"I think so. I expect God wants you to help him. He's a hard old man
because he has no one to love him, but he did care for your father."

Ronald flung his arms round Mrs. Anderson's neck and kissed her.

That night it must be owned that he slept badly; and early--very
early--in the morning he awoke.

"Times is pretty bad," thought the boy to himself; "and there's lots o'
battles round. But oh, Giles! brave fathers for ever! You and me won't
disgrace our fathers, will we, Giles?"

Then he got up and dressed himself, and went downstairs and waited until
Mrs. Anderson arrived. As soon as she entered the room he said one word
to her--"When?"

"Ten o'clock," said Mrs. Anderson. It was eight o'clock then.

"Two hours more," said Ronald.

During those two hours he was very busy. He packed his bricks, and
helped Mrs. Anderson to put his very scanty wardrobe into a very tiny
trunk. The time went by. Ten o'clock struck, and, sharp to the minute, a
cab drew up at the door.

Out of the cab the old gentleman stepped. He entered the hall. He was a
very fussy old man, and did not want a young child to live in the house
with him. He expected, too, that Mrs. Harvey's boy--he had undoubtedly a
great contempt for poor young Harvey--would be a miserable, dwindled,
wretched sort of creature. But, lo and behold! a little chap with head
well thrown back, his eyes bright and lips brave, stepped up to him.

"Here I am, Uncle Stephen. I am Ronald. How do you do?"

"Bless my soul!" said the old man. "Let me look at you."

He drew the boy round so as to get the light on his face.

"'Pon my word!" he said, "you are not the sort of little chap I
expected. You're uncommon like your father."

Ronald flushed with pride. Mr. Harvey came into the parlor and had a
little talk with Mrs. Anderson.

"I am indeed indebted to you, madam," he said. "This boy is so
surprisingly like my nephew that I could almost fancy the years had gone
back and I was teaching the little chap to take his first gallop.--Your
father was game on a horse, my lad."

"Yes, sir," said Ronald, nodding his head. "'Spect so, sir," he added.
The old gentleman chucked him under the chin and uttered a laugh.

"Well, boy, we must be going," he said. "We mustn't keep your kind
friend. You will let me know, madam, for what I am indebted to you."

"For nothing, sir," said Mrs. Anderson. A crimson color rushed into her
face. "It has been a labor of love to help this dear little fellow. I
could take no money; you mustn't even mention it, sir."

"Well, madam--well--I respect your proper pride, and anything I can
do---- By the way--eh, Ronald?--there's no saying, but I might invite
your friend down to the country.--Do you know Somersetshire, madam?"

"I used to know it very well when I was a girl. My people lived in
Somersetshire."

"Then perhaps you will come and pay us a visit, and see Ronald after he
has learned the full use of the saddle and bridle--eh, Ronald?"

"Oh--aunty! Will you come?" said Ronald.

"I will, darling.--I should like it very much indeed, Mr. Harvey; it is
most kind of you to ask me."

"But please--please," said Ronald, who had suddenly lost all his fear,
"may Connie come, too?"

"Who's Connie?"

"My special friend and sister."

"Ho, ho!" said the old man. "I must hear more about her. Can make no
rash promises. But all right, little chap; I'll do what I can for you.
Now, if you had taken after---- Well, never mind--I won't say anything to
hurt you."

"And, please," said Ronald suddenly, "of course you wouldn't pay my
aunty, for the things she did can't be paid for. But poor Mrs.
Cricket--aunty, I know her address. The place in the country is called
Eastborough; and it's Ivy Cottage, aunty; and--she was good to me----"

"Yes," said Mrs. Anderson, "you'll let me explain, please, Mr. Harvey.
This dear little boy spent a month at Mrs. Cricket's, and she was never
paid a penny."

"She ought to be paid," said Ronald. "Course, when father returns he'll
pay you back again. But she ought to get it, for there was real new-laid
eggs, and the chickens were so tender."

"'Pon my word," said the old gentleman, "you're a queer boy! I guess
you've got the true Harvey blood in you. Never neglect a friend--eh? And
never owe a penny. Well now, madam, will you see to this? And what
amount of money ought I to give you for the woman?"

Mrs. Anderson named what she thought would be a correct sum, and
immediately afterwards the old gentleman produced the money from his
waistcoat pocket.

It was a hard moment for Ronald when he said good-bye, but after he got
into the cab he could not help feeling both surprised and elated. He
could not help staring and staring at the old gentleman.

"Was it your photograph," he said at last, "that my father kept in his
dressing-room?"

"I expect so," said the old gentleman.

"It's surprising," said Ronald, "how I forget. But now I remember. He
loved you--he used to talk to me about you. He said it was you taught
him first to be brave."

"Bless him--bless him!" said the old gentleman.

His voice got a little raspy; it is certain that his eyes were a little
dim.

"Perhaps," said Ronald--he had a marvelous way of comprehending the
situation--"but for you he would not have been a V. C. man."

"God bless you! It was in himself--he had the noblest heart, the
grandest nature! There, boy! don't upset me. 'Pon my word! I hated the
thought of having you---- And I hated going to you," said Ronald;
"but----"

The old face looked into the young face, and the young face looked into
the old face, and then they both laughed.

Before they reached the old gentleman's hotel Ronald had so far advanced
to a friendly footing that he had peered into the contents of the old
man's pocket, had pulled out his watch, had applied it to his ear, and
had even gone the amazing length of demanding one for himself.




CHAPTER XXVI.

TWO CUPS OF COFFEE.


When Harris parted from Giles and Connie--on the very same day that
Connie had gone to tea with Ronald, on the very same day that Ronald had
visited Giles--he was as troubled and miserable as man could be. There
was but one brave thing for him to do--he ought to confess his sin.

Where Sue could be he had not the faintest idea. Why was she absent? It
was days now since she had left her home--Sue, of all people--Sue, with
a little delicate brother like Giles. It was unlike her to go. There
could be but one reason. Harris had taken means to ascertain whether
poor Sue had been up before the magistrates. He knew enough about the
law, and about crime generally, to know that she would be taken up for
theft to Bow Street; but beyond doubt she had never gone there. Where in
all the world could she be? Harris was by no means sufficiently sorry to
give himself up for conscience's sake; but he was in a state of
nervousness and great distress of mind.

As he walked down a side-street, his hands in his pockets, his rough fur
cap--which he generally wore slouched--well off his eyes, he was
suddenly accosted by a red-haired boy, who looked at him with a very
innocent face and inquired meekly "ef he were lookin' for a job."

"None o' yer sauce, youngster," said Harris, passing on.

"I don't mean the least sauce in life, master," said the red-haired boy,
still in the most humble and gentle tone. "I only thought ef we were
goin' in the same direction we might p'rhaps cheer each other up."

"You're a likely youngster, you ere," he said, looking down at him with
the grimmest of smiles.

"Yus, my mother says as I'm well grown for my hage," replied Pickles;
and then, keeping pace with the tall man, he began to whistle softly.

Harris returned to his interrupted thoughts, and soon forgot the small
boy, who had to run to keep up with his long strides. Suddenly the
little boy exclaimed in a shrill, eager treble:

"I say, mister!"

"Wot now, young 'un?"

"You ain't of a wery obleeging turn, be yer? You couldn't help me, now,
ter find a guilty party?"

"You seems a wery rum chap," said Harris rather crossly.

"I don't know nothink 'bout yer guilty parties. There, be off, can't
yer!"

"I'll be off in a twinkle, master. I ain't rum a bit; my mother allers
said as I wor a real quiet boy; but when my heart is full to bustin' it
seems a relief to talk to a body, and you, tho' yer puts on bein'
fierce, have a kind nature."

"Now, what hever do yer mean by that?"

"Master, you must furgive a wery timid and heasily repulsed boy; but it
ain't possible, even fur one so known to be frightened as me, to be
feared of yer. I reads yer kindness in yer heyes, master, and so I makes
bold to tell my tale o' woe."

"Well, tell away," said Harris, who could not help laughing and looking
a little less gruff than before.

"You wouldn't be inclined, now, that we should have hour talk hover a
pint of hot coffee? There's a heatin-house where the young man have took
down the shutters and is dusting away in a manner as his real
appetizing. I has fourpence in my pocket. You wouldn't mind my treating
yer, jest fer once, would yer?"

"Not in the least, youngster. I think it'll be a wery sensible use to
put yer money to, and a deal more prudent than spending it in marbles or
street plays."

"Master, my mother don't allow me to play at marbles, or to hindulge in
street wanities, so I has the money and can afford ter be generous. Now
let's enter. I smells the coffee a-grinding hup fur hour breakfasts
halready."

So Harris and Pickles went in to the eating-house, where in a moment or
two, over two steaming cups of excellent coffee, Pickles proceeded to
unburden himself of his story.

"It is only a few days agone, master, as the occurrence as distresses me
happened. I wor walking along a certain street wot shall be nameless. I
wor walking along bravely, as is my wont, and thinking of my mother,
when I see'd a young gel a-flying past me. She wor a wery short, stout
gel, and her legs they quite waggled as she ran. I never see'd a gel run
so wery hard afore, and I pricked hup my senses to guess wot it hall
meant. Soon wor the mystery explained. I heerd ahind of her the cry of
'Stop thief!' and a number of men and boys were a-giving of her chase. I
thought as I'd run wid 'em and see what it hall meant.

"Presently we shall come up wid the gel. There she wor in the arms of a
policeman. He wor a-clutching of her, and trying to find hout wot wor
the matter; but she wor so blown she couldn't speak fur a good bit. Then
hup comes a man wot said as he had a pawnshop, and that inter the
pawnshop had come a man and a gel ter buy a ring, and when they come
hout there wor a diamond locket missing. He said as either the gel or
the man 'ad tuk the locket; and as the man could not be found, he must
get the policeman to search the gel. The poor fat gel, she looked quite
scared, and said as she hadn't done it; but the nipper said as she must
be searched, and he put in his hand inter her pocket and drew hout the
diamond locket. She said as she had never put it there. But, in course,
it worn't ter be expected as they'd believe her, so she were tuk orf ter
prison. She wor tuk orf ter prison--I see'd her myself."

Here Pickles paused. Nothing could have been more refined and delicate
than the use he had made of his eyes during this narrative; only very
quick and fleeting glances did he bestow upon his companion.

When Harris at the commencement of his tale started and changed color,
Pickles dropped a piece of bread, and stayed under the table looking for
it until the man had quite recovered his composure. When his short story
had come to an end he paused; then he said, still without bestowing more
than the swiftest side-glance on Harris, "The poor fat gel were tuk orf
to the lock-hup. But 'tis borne bin on me, master--'tis borne him on me,
and I can't get no rest day nor night--as that yer gel were hinnercent.
I believe as she never tuk the locket, and I think that ef ye're as
kind-hearted as yer looks yer'll help me ter find that other guilty
party."

Harris rose to his feet.

"Don't be a fool, lad," he said angrily. "I have no time ter give ter
sech nonsense. I'm soory fur the gel, but ef she had the locket, of
course she tuk the locket. There! I can waste no time. I'll pay fur my
hown coffee. Good-morning."
