goodbye to our fellows?"

"Yes, we may as well; but mind, don't say where we are going to,
only that we are ordered away. I don't suppose that the regiments
will know anything about it, till within an hour of the time they
march. There can be no doubt that it is a serious business. Ciudad
held out for weeks against Massena; and with Marmont within a few
days' march, with an army at least as strong as ours, it will be a
tough business, indeed, to take it before he can come up to its
relief; and I can well understand that it is all important that he
shall know nothing about the siege, till it is too late for him to
arrive in time."

"We have come in to say goodbye, colonel," Terence said, as he and
Ryan entered the mess room of the Mayo Fusiliers that evening.

"And where are you off to, O'Connor?"

"Well, sir, I don't mind mentioning it in here, but it must go no
further. The chief, knowing what we are capable of, proposes that I
shall make a rapid march to Madrid, seize the city, and bring King
Joseph back a prisoner."

There was a roar of laughter.

"Terence, my boy," Captain O'Grady said, "that is hardly a mission
worthy of a fighting man like yourself. I expect that you are
hiding something from us, and that the real idea is that you should
traverse Spain and France, enter Germany, and seize Boney, and
carry him off with you to England."

"I dare not tell you whether you are right or not, O'Grady. Things
of this sort must not even be whispered about. It is a wonderfully
good guess that you have made and, when it is all over, you will be
able to take credit for having divined what was up; but for mercy's
sake don't talk about it. Keep as silent as the grave and, if
anyone should ask you what has become of us, pretend that you know
nothing about it."

"But you are going, O'Connor?" the colonel said, when the laughter
had subsided.

"Yes, colonel. We march tomorrow morning. I daresay you will hear
of us before many days are over; and may, perhaps, be able to make
even a closer guess than O'Grady as to what we are doing. I am
heartily glad that we are off. We are now at our full strength
again. Most of the wounded have rejoined, and I could have filled
up the vacancies a dozen times over. The Portuguese know that I
always manage to get food for my men, somehow; which is more than
can be said for the other Portuguese regiments, though those of
Trant and Pack are better off than Beresford's regulars. Then, too,
I think they like fighting, now that they feel that they are a
match for the French, man for man. They get a fair share of it, at
any rate. The three months that we have been idle have been useful,
as the new recruits know their work as well as the others."

"Then you don't know how much longer we are going to stop in this
bastely hole?" O'Grady asked.

"Well, I will tell you this much, O'Grady: I fancy that, before
this day week, you will all have work to do; and that it is likely
to be hot."

"That is a comfort, Terence. But, my dear boy, have a little pity
on us and don't finish off the business by yourselves. Remember
that we have come a long way, and that it will be mighty hard for
us if you were to clear the French out of Spain, and leave nothing
for us to do but to bury their dead and escort their army, as
prisoners, to the port."

"I will bear it in mind, O'Grady; but don't you forget the past.
You know how desperately you grumbled at Rolica, because the
regiment was not in it; and how you got your wish at Vimiera, and
lost an arm in consequence. So even if I do, as you say, push the
French out of Spain, you will have the consolation of knowing that
you will be able to go back to Ireland, without leaving any more
pieces of you behind."

"There is something in that, Terence," O'Grady said gravely. "I
think that when this is over I shall go on half pay, and there may
as well be as much of me left, as possible, to enjoy it. It's an
ungrateful country I am serving. In spite of all that I have done
for it, and the loss of my arm into the bargain; here am I, still a
captain, though maybe I am near the top of the list. Still, it is
but a captain I am, and here are two gossoons, like yourself and
Dick Ryan, the one of you marching about a field officer, and the
other a captain. It is heart-breaking entirely, and me one of the
most zealous officers in the service. But it is never any luck I
have had, from the day I was born."

"It will come some day, never fear, O'Grady; and perhaps it may not
be so far off as you fear.

"Well, colonel, we will just take a glass with you for luck, and
then say good night; for I have a good many things to see after,
and must be up very early, so as to get our tents packed and handed
over, to draw our rations, eat our breakfast, and be off by seven."

It was close upon that hour when the regiment marched. It was known
that there were no French troops west of the Huebra but, after
fording the Aqueda, the force halted until nightfall; and then
moved forward and reached the Huebra at midnight, lay down to sleep
until daybreak, and then extended along the bank of the Yeltes, as
far as its source among the mountains; thus cutting the roads from
Ciudad to Salamanca and the North. The distance to be watched was
some twenty miles but, as the river was in many places unfordable,
it was necessary only to place patrols here; while strong parties
were posted, not only on the main roads, but at all points where
by-roads or peasants' tracks led down to the bank.

On that day a bridge was thrown across the Aqueda, six miles below
Ciudad, for the passage of artillery but, owing to the difficulties
of carriage, it was five days later before the artillery and
ammunition could be brought over; and this was only done by the aid
of 800 carts, which Wellington had caused to be quietly constructed
during the preceding three months.

On the 8th, the light division and Pack's Portuguese contingent
forded the Aqueda three miles above Ciudad and, making a long
detour, took up their position behind a hill called the Great
Teson. They remained quiet during the day and, the garrison
believing that they had only arrived to enable the force that had
long blockaded the town to render the investment more complete, no
measures of defence were taken; but at night the light division
fell suddenly on the redoubt of San Francisco, on the Great Teson.

The assault was completely successful. The garrison was a small
one, and had not been reinforced. A few of them were killed, and
the remainder taken; with a loss, to the assailants, of only
twenty-four men and officers. A Portuguese regiment, commanded by
Colonel Elder, then set to work; and these--in spite of a heavy
fire, kept up all night by the French forts--completed a parallel,
600 yards in length, before day broke.



Chapter 18: The Sack Of A City.


For the next four days the troops worked night and day, the
operations being carried on under a tremendous fire from the French
batteries. The trenches being carried along the whole line of the
Small Teson, on the night of the 13th the convent of Santa Cruz was
captured and, on the 14th, the batteries opened fire against the
town and, before morning, the 40th regiment carried the convent of
San Francisco; and thus established itself within the suburb, which
was inclosed by an entrenchment that the Spanish had thrown up
there, during the last siege. The French artillery was very
powerful and, at times, overpowered that of the besiegers. Some
gallant sorties were also made but, by the 19th, two breaches were
effected in the ramparts, and preparations were made for an
assault.

That evening Terence received an order to march at once to the
place, and to join Pack's Portuguese. The assault was to be made by
the 3rd and light divisions, aided by Pack's command and Colonel
O'Toole's Portuguese riflemen. The main British army lay along the
Coa, in readiness to advance at once and give battle, should
Marmont come up to the assistance of the besieged town.

On the 19th both the breaches were pronounced practicable and,
during the day, the guns of the besiegers were directed against the
artillery on the ramparts, while the storming parties prepared for
their work. The third division was to attack the great breach. The
light division was to make for the small breach and, upon entering
the inclosure known as the fausse braye, a portion were to turn and
enter the town by the Salamanca gate; while the others were to
penetrate by the breach.

Colonel O'Toole, with his Portuguese, was to cross the river and to
aid the right attack; while Pack's Portuguese were to make a false
attack on the San Jago gate, on the other side of the town, and to
convert this into a real assault if the defence should prove
feeble.

The French scarcely appeared conscious that the critical moment was
at hand, but they had raised breastworks along the tops of both
breaches, and were perfectly prepared for the assault. When the
signal was given, the attack was begun on the right. The 5th, 77th,
and 94th Regiments rushed from the convent of Santa Cruz, leapt
down into the fausse braye, and made their way to the foot of the
great breach; which they reached at the same moment as the rest of
the third division, who had run down from the Small Teson. A
terrible fire was opened upon them but, undismayed by shell, grape,
and musketry from the ramparts and houses, they drove the French
behind their new work.

Here, however, the enemy stood so stoutly that no progress could be
made. Unable to cross the obstacle, the troops nevertheless
maintained their position, although suffering terrible losses from
the French fire.

Equally furious was the attack on the small breach, by the light
division. After a few minutes' fighting, they succeeded in bursting
through the ranks of the defenders; and then, turning to the right,
fought their way along the ramparts until they reached the top of
the great breach. The French there wavered, on finding that their
flank was turned; and the third division, seizing the opportunity,
hurled themselves upon them, and this breach was also won.

O'Toole's attack was successful and, on the other side of the town,
Pack's Portuguese, meeting with no resistance, had blown open the
gate of San Jago, and had also entered the town. Here a terrible
scene took place, and the British troops sullied their victory by
the wildest and most horrible excesses. They had neither forgotten
nor forgiven the treatment they had experienced at the hands of the
Spanish, both before and after the battle of Talavera; when they
were almost starved, while the Spaniards had abundant supplies, and
yet left the British wounded unattended, to die of starvation in
the hospitals, when they evacuated the city. From that time their
animosity against the Spaniards had been vastly greater than their
feeling against the French, who had always behaved as gallant
enemies, and had treated their wounded and prisoners with the
greatest kindness.

Now this long-pent-up feeling burst out, and murder, rapine, and
violence of all sorts raged for some hours, wholly without check.
Officers who endeavoured to protect the hapless inhabitants were
shot down, all commands were unheeded, and abominable atrocities
were perpetrated.

Some share of the blame rests with Wellington and his staff, who
had taken no measures whatever for maintaining order in the town,
when possession should be gained of it--a provision which should
never be omitted, in the case of an assault. The Portuguese, whose
animosity against the Spaniards was equally bitter, imitated the
example of their British comrades. Fires broke out in several
places, which added to the horror of the scene. The castle was
still held by the French, the troops having retreated there as soon
as the breach had been carried. There was not, therefore, even the
excuse of the excitement of street fighting to be made for the
conduct of the victors.

In vain, Terence and his officers endeavoured to keep their men
together. By threes and fours these scattered down the side
streets, to join the searchers for plunder; until at last, he
remained alone with his British and Portuguese officers.

"This is horrible," he said to Ryan, as the shouts, shrieks, and
screams told that the work of murder, as well as plunder, was being
carried on. "It is evident that, single handed, nothing can be
done. I propose that we divide into two parties, and take these two
houses standing together under our protection. We will have two
English officers with each, as there is no chance of the soldiers
listening to a Portuguese officer. How many are there of us?"

There were the twelve captains, and twenty subalterns.

"Bull and Macwitty, do you take half of them; Colonel Herrara,
Ryan, and I will take the other half. When you have once obtained
admission, barricade the door and lower windows with furniture.
When the rioters arrive, show yourselves at the windows, and say
that you have orders to protect the houses from insult and, if any
attack is made, you will carry out your orders at whatever cost.
When they see four British officers at the windows, they will
suppose that special instructions have been given us with respect
to these two houses.

"If they attack we must each defend ourselves to the last, holding
the stairs if they break in. If only our house is attacked, come
with half your force to our assistance; and we will do the same to
you. We can get along by those balconies, without coming down into
the street."

The force was at once divided. Terence knocked at the door of one
house, and his majors at that of the other. No answer was received
but, as they continued to knock with such violence that it seemed
as if they were about to break down the doors, these were presently
opened. Terence entered. A Spanish gentleman, behind whom stood a
number of trembling servants, advanced.

"What would you have, senor?" he asked. "I see that you are an
officer. Surely you cannot menace with violence those who are your
allies?"

"You are right, senor; but unfortunately our troops have shaken off
all discipline, and are pillaging and, I am afraid, murdering. The
men of my own regiment have joined the rest, and I with my
officers, finding ourselves powerless, have resolved at least to
protect your mansion, and the next, from our maddened troops. I can
give you my word of honour that I and these gentlemen, who are all
my officers, have come as friends, and are determined to defend
until the last your mansion, which happened to be the first we came
to. A similar party is taking charge of the next house and, if
necessary, we can join forces."

"I thank you indeed, sir. I am the Count de Montego. I have my wife
and daughters here and, in their name as well as my own, I thank
you most cordially. I have some twenty men, sir. Alone we could do
nothing, but they will aid you in every way, if you will but give
orders."

"In the first place, count, we will move as many articles of heavy
furniture as possible against the doors. I see that your lower
windows are all barred. We had better place mattresses behind them,
to prevent shot from penetrating. I hope, however, that it will not
come to that; and that I shall be able to persuade any that may
come along that these houses are under special protection."

The count at once ordered his servants to carry out the British
officer's instructions, and the whole party were soon engaged in
piling heavy furniture against the door. The count had gone up to
allay the fears of his wife and daughters who, with the female
servants, were gathered in terrible anxiety in the drawing room
above. As soon as the preparations were completed, Terence, Ryan,
and Herrara went upstairs and, after being introduced to the
ladies, who were now to some extent reassured, Terence went out on
to the balcony with Ryan; leaving Herrara in the drawing room, as
he thought it was best that only British officers should show
themselves.

Terrible as the scene had been before, it was even worse now. The
soldiers had everywhere broken into the cellars, and numbers of
them were already drunk. Many discharged their muskets recklessly,
some quarrelled among themselves as to the spoil they had taken,
and fierce fights occurred.

In two or three minutes Bull and Macwitty appeared on the balcony
of the next house.

"I see it is too far to get across," Terence said. "If you cannot
find a plank, set half a dozen men to prise up a couple from the
floor."

Presently a number of soldiers came running along down the street.

"Here are two big houses," one shouted. "There ought to be plenty
of plunder here."

"Halt!" Terence shouted. "These houses are under special protection
and, as you see, I myself and three other British officers are
placed here, to see that no one enters. I have a strong force under
my orders, and anyone attempting to break down the doors will be
shot instantly, and all who aid him will be subsequently tried and
hung."

The men, on seeing the four British officers--three of them in the
dress of field officers, and one, the speaker, in the uniform of
the staff--at once drew back.

"Come on, mates," one said, as they stood indecisive; "we shall
only lose time here, while others are getting as much plunder as
they can carry. Let us go on."

But as the wine took effect, others who came along were less
disposed to listen to orders. Gradually gathering, until they were
in considerable numbers, several shots were fired at the officers;
and one man, advancing up the steps, began to hammer at the door
with the butt end of his musket. Terence leaned over the balcony
and, drawing his pistol and taking a steady aim, fired, and the man
fell with a sharp cry. A number of shots were fired from below, but
the men were too unsteady to take aim, and Terence was uninjured.

[Illustration: The man fell, with a sharp cry.]

Again he stood up.

"Men," he shouted, "you have shown yourselves to be brave soldiers
today. Are you now going to disgrace yourselves, by mutiny against
officers who are doing their duty, thereby running the risk of
being tried and hung? I tell you again that these houses are both
defended by a strong force, and that we shall protect them at all
hazard. Go elsewhere, where booty is to be more easily obtained."

His words, however, were unheeded. Some more shots were fired, and
then there was a general rush at the doors; while another party
attacked that of the next house. The officers were all provided
with pistols, and Terence hurried below with Ryan.

"Do not fire," he said to the others, "until they break down the
door. It will take them some time and, at any moment, fresh troops
may be marched in to restore order."

The door was a strong one and, backed as it was, it resisted for a
considerable time. Those who first attacked it speedily broke the
stocks of their guns, and had to make way for others. Presently the
attack ceased suddenly.

"Run upstairs, Dicky, and see what they are doing, and how things
are going on next door."

Ryan soon returned.

"They are bringing furniture and a lot of straw from houses
opposite. They have broken down the next door, but they have not
got in yet."

"Let the servants at once set to work, to draw pails of water from
the well in the courtyard, and carry them upstairs.

"Ryan, you had better go into the next house and see if they are
pressed. Tell them that they must hold out without my help for a
short time. I am going to send six officers out by the back of the
house, to collect some of our men together. Another will be in
readiness to open the back door, as soon as they return.

"I shall keep them from firing the pile as long as I can. The count
has two double-barrelled guns. I don't want to use them, if I can
help it; but they shall not get in here. Do you stop, and help next
door. There can be no fighting here yet for, if they do burn the
door, it will be a long time before they can get in."

The native officers started at once. They were of opinion that they
would soon be able to bring in a good many of their men; for the
Portuguese are a sober race, and few would have got intoxicated.
Most of the men would soon find that there was not much booty to be
obtained, and that even what they got would probably be snatched
from them by the English soldiers; and would consequently be glad
to return to their duty again.

An officer took his place at the back door, in readiness to remove
the bars; another went up with Terence to the first floor; and the
remainder stopped in the hall, with six of the menservants.

Terence went upstairs and looked down into the street. There was a
lot of furniture, with bundles of faggots and straw, piled there.

"Now," he said to the officer, "empty these pails at once; the
servants will soon bring some more up. I will stand here with these
guns, and fire at any one who interferes with you. Just come out
into the balcony, empty your pails over, and go back at once. You
need scarcely show yourself, and there is not much chance of your
being hit by those drunken rascals."

Yells and shouts of rage were heard below, as the water was thrown
over. As fast as the pails were emptied, the servants carried them
off and refilled them. At last, two soldiers appeared from a house
opposite, with blazing torches.

The guns had been loaded by the count with small shot, as Terence
was anxious not to take life. As soon as the two men appeared, he
raised the fowling piece to his shoulder and fired both barrels, in
quick succession. With a yell of pain, the soldiers dropped their
torches. One fell to the ground, the other clapped his hands to his
face and ran down the street in an agony, as if half mad. Half a
dozen muskets were discharged, but Terence had stepped back the
moment he had fired, and handed the gun to the count, who was
standing behind him, to recharge.

Two other soldiers picked up the torches, but dropped them as
Terence again fired. Another man snatched up one of them, and flung
it across the street. It fell upon some straw that had been
thoroughly soaked by the water, and burned out there harmlessly.

It was not long before the servants began to arrive with the full
buckets and, when these also had been emptied, Terence, glancing
over, had little fear that the pile could now be lighted. The pails
were sent down again, and he waited for the next move.

The fighting had ceased at the other door. The soldiers having
drawn back from the barricade, to see the effect of the fire. Ryan
ran across the plank and rejoined Terence.

"Things are quiet there, for the present," he said. "There has not
been much harm done. When they had partly broken down the door,
they began firing through it. Bull and Macwitty kept the others
back from the line of fire, and not a pistol has been discharged
yet. Bull cut down one fellow who tried to climb over the
barricade, but otherwise no blood has been shed on either side."

Help was coming now. One of the Portuguese officers was admitted,
with twenty-four men that he had picked up. The others came in
rapidly and, within a quarter of an hour, three hundred men were
assembled. All were sober, and looked thoroughly ashamed of
themselves as they were formed up in the courtyard.

Terence went down to them. He said no word of blame.

"Now, men," he said, "you have to retrieve your characters. Half of
you will post yourselves at the windows, from the ground floor to
the top of the house. You are not to show yourselves, till you
receive orders to do so. You are not to load your guns but, as you
appear at the windows, point them down into the street. The
officers will post you, five at each window.

"The rest of you are at once to clear away the furniture in the
hall; and, when you receive the order, throw open the door and pour
out, forming across the street as you do so. Captain Ryan will be
in command of you. You are not to load, but to clear the street
with your bayonets. If any of the soldiers are too drunk to get out
of your way, knock them down with the butt end of your muskets; but
if they rush at you, use your bayonets."

He went round the house, and saw that five men were in readiness at
each window looking into the street. He ordered them to leave the
doors open.
