would never have permitted me this blessed privilege.  I told him that
I would marry anybody if he would only let me see you--alone--for a
moment, even.  What difference, so long as I could not be yours?  I
came to tell you that I loved you, and because of that to beg you to
live, to give up that Eagle.  What is it, a mere casting of metal,
valueless.  Don't look at me with that hard, set face.  Let me kiss the
line of your lips into softness again.  I cannot be your wife, but at
least you will live.  I will know that somewhere you think of me."

"And would death make a difference?  High in the highest heaven, should
I be so fortunate as to achieve it, I would think of you; and, if I
were to be sent to the lowest hell, I could forget it all in thinking
of you."

"Yes, yes, I know how you love, because----"

"Because why?"

"I won't hesitate now.  It may be unmaidenly, but I know, because I,
too----"

"Laure!" cried the man, sweeping her to him again.

"I think I loved you when we were boy and girl together," said the
woman, throwing everything to the winds in making her great confession.
"I know I loved you that night in the chateau, although I would not
admit it, and I treated you so cruelly.  And when they told me you were
dead, then, then, my heart broke.  And when you came here and I saw you
two men together--oh, I had made the contrast in my imagination--but
last night I saw and now I see.  Oh, you will live, live.  What is
honor compared to a woman's heart?  See, I am at your feet.  You will
not break me.  You will live.  Something may happen.  I am not married
yet.  The Emperor may come back."

"The boy, Pierre, said last night that it was rumored----"

"Yes, he gave me a message.  I almost forgot it."  She held out the
violet crushed in her fevered palm.  "He said to tell you that the
violet has bloomed."

"Does he mean----?"

"I know not what he means."

"It is but an assurance begot of hope," said Marteau.

"And if it were so?"

"He comes too late.  Rise, my lady.  It is not meet for you to kneel.
Let me lift you up, up to my heart.  I cannot give up the Eagle.  That
I have won your love is the most wonderful thing in all the world.  It
passes my understanding, the understanding of man, but I should forfeit
it if I should permit myself this shame."

"Then I will do it, I will betray you," said the little Countess
desperately.  "I alone know where that Eagle is.  I will get it.  I
will bargain with my uncle for your life.  Marteau, listen.  Do you
wish to condemn me to death?  I will not, I cannot, survive you.  I
will not be thrust into that other's arms.  I did not know, I did not
realize what it was--before.  But since I have been here, since you
have held me to your heart, since you have kissed me--no, I cannot.  It
would be desecration--horror.  Let me go.  I will tell."

"Dearest Laure," said the man, holding her tighter, "think, be calm,
listen.  It needs not that I assure you of my love.  I have proved it.
I lie here with the stigma of shame, the basest of accusations in the
hearts of those who know of our meeting at night, to save you from
suspicion even."

"Not my uncle, not the Marquis.  He says there is something back of it
all.  He knows you are not a thief."

"It takes a d'Aumenier to understand a Marteau," said the young man
proudly.

"And I am a d'Aumenier, too," said the woman.

"Then strive to comprehend my point of view."

"I can, I will, but----"

"What binds you to that Englishman?"

"My word, my uncle's word."

"Exactly.  And what else binds you to keep my secret?"

The woman stared at him.

"Oh, do not urge that against me," she pleaded.  "I must tell all."

"I have your word.  That Eagle must remain hidden there until the
Emperor comes back.  Then you must give it to him and say that I died
that you might place it in his hand."

"There must be a way, and there shall be a way," said the agonized
woman.  "I love you.  I cannot have you die.  I cannot, I cannot."

Her voice rose almost to a scream in mad and passionate protest.

"Why," said the man soothingly, "I am the more ready to die now that I
know that you love me.  Few men have ever got so much out of life as
that assurance gives me.  That I, peasant-born, beneath you, should
have won your heart, that I should have been permitted to hold you to
my breast, to feel that heart beat against my own, to drink of the
treasures of your lips, to kiss your eyes that shine upon me----  Oh,
my God, what have I done to deserve it all?  And it is better, far
better, having had thus much and being stopped from anything further,
that I should go to my grave in this sweet recollection.  Could I live
to think of you as his wife?"

"If you will only live I will die myself."

"And could I purchase life at that price?  No.  We have duties to
perform--hard, harsh words in a woman's ear, common accustomed phrase
to a soldier.  I have to die for my honor and you have to marry for
yours."

"Monsieur," broke in the sharp, somewhat high, thin voice of the old
Marquis standing by the door, "the court-martial brands you as a
traitor.  Captain Yeovil and those who were with me last night think
you are a thief and worse.  But, by St. Louis," continued the old
noble, fingering his cross, as was his wont in moments in which he was
deeply moved, "I know that you are a soldier and a gentleman."

"A soldier, yes; but a gentleman?--only 'almost,' my lord."

"Not almost but altogether.  There is not another man in France who
could withstand such a plea from such a woman."

"You heard!" exclaimed Marteau.

"Only the last words.  I heard her beg you to live because she loved
you."

"And you did not hear----"

"I heard nothing else," said the Marquis firmly.  "Would I listen?  I
spoke almost as soon as I came in.  Laure, these Marteaux have lived
long enough by the side of the d'Aumeniers to have become ennobled by
the contact," he went on naively.  "I now know the young man as I know
myself.  It is useless for you to plead longer.  I come to take you
away."

"Oh, not yet, not yet."

"Go," said the young officer.  "Indeed, I cannot endure this longer,
and I must summon my fortitude for to-morrow."

"As for that," said the Marquis, "there must be a postponement of the
execution."

"I ask it not, monsieur.  It is no favor to me for you to----"

"Thank God!  Thank God!" cried the woman.  "Every hour means----"

"And I am not postponing it because of you," continued the Marquis
coolly.  "But he who must not be named----"

"The Emperor."

"So you call him--has landed."

"Yes, yes; for God's sake, tell me more."

"I have no objection to telling you all.  He is on the march toward
Grenoble.  He will be here tomorrow night.  Troops have been sent for
and will assemble here.  He will be met in the gap on the road a few
miles below the town.  He will be taken.  If he resists he will be
shot."

"Yes, the violets have bloomed again."

"And they shall draw red nourishment from the soil of France," was the
prophetic answer.

"The Emperor!" cried the young man in an exultant dream, "in France
again!  The Emperor!"

"And so your execution will be deferred until we come back.  The
Emperor may take warning from it when he witnesses it," continued the
imperturbable old royalist.

"I shall see him once more."

"As a prisoner."

Marteau started to speak, checked himself.

"For the last time," said the girl, "I beg----"

"It is useless."

"Let me speak again.  My uncle has a kind heart under that hard
exterior.  He----"

"A kind heart, indeed," said the old man, smiling grimly, as Marteau
shook his head at the girl he loved so well.  "And, to prove it, here."

He extended a sealed paper.  Marteau made no effort to take it.  He
recognized it at once.  For a moment there flashed into the woman's
mind that it was a pardon.  But the old man undeceived her.

"Do you give it to him, Laure," he said.  "It is that patent of
nobility that he gave up.  Acting for my King, who will, I am sure,
approve of what I have done, I return it to him.  As he dies with the
spirit and soul of a gentleman, so also shall he die with the title.
_Monsieur le Comte d'Aumenier_, I, the head of the house, welcome you
into it.  I salute you.  Farewell.  And now," the old man drew out his
snuff box, tendered it to the young man with all the grace of the
ancient regime.  "No?" he said, as Marteau stared in bewilderment.
"The young generation has forgot how, it seems.  Very well."  He took a
pinch himself gracefully, closed the box, tapped it gently with his
long fingers, as was his wont.  "Monsieur will forgive my back," he
said, turning abruptly and calling over his shoulder, "and in a moment
we must go."

Ah, he could be, he was a gentleman of the ancient school, indeed.  It
seemed but a second to youth, although it was a long time to age,
before he tore them apart and led the half-fainting girl away.




CHAPTER XXVI

THEY MEET A LION IN THE WAY

Morning in the springtime, the sixth of March, 1815, bright and sunny,
the air fresh.  The parade-ground was filled with troops.  There were the
veterans of the old Seventh-of-the-Line, under the young Colonel
Labedoyere.  Here were the close-ranked lines of the Fifth regiment,
Major Lestoype astride his big horse at the head of the first battalion.
Grenier, Drehon, Suraif and the other officers with their companies, the
men in heavy marching order, their white cockades shining in the bright
sunlight in their shakos.  The artillery was drawn up on the walls, the
little squadron of household cavalry was in attendance upon the Marquis.
His lean, spare figure looked well upon a horse.  He rode with all the
grace and ease of a boy.

Yes, there were the colors, too, the white flag of France with the golden
lily in the place of the Eagle on the staff, at the head of the column.
With ruffling of drums and presenting of arms the flag had been escorted
to its place, and from the little group of cavalry had come the words not
heard till recently for so many years in France:

"_Vive le Roi_!"

The troops had assembled silently, somewhat sullenly.  They stood
undemonstrative now.  What they would do no one could tell.  The couriers
who had dashed into the town yesterday night had told the story to the
Marquis.  Napoleon had landed five days before.  He was within a day's
march of Grenoble.  His following consisted of eleven hundred French
infantry, eighty Polish horsemen, and a few guns; troops of the line, and
the grenadiers of the Elba guard.  The peasants had been apathetic.  He
had carefully avoided garrisoned towns, choosing the unfrequented and
difficult route over the maritime Alps of Southern France.  He was
marching straight into the heart of the country, to conquer or to die
with this little band.  The messenger's news had been for the Governor's
ears alone, but it had got out.  Indeed, the tidings spread everywhere.
Every wind that swept over the mountains seemed to be laden with the
story.  The whole city knew that the foot of the idol was once more upon
the soil of France.  They saw no feet of clay to that idol, then.

The news had reached Paris via Marseilles almost before it was known in
Grenoble.  The terror-stricken government yet acted promptly.  Troops
were put in motion, fast-riding expresses and couriers warned garrisons
and transmitted orders to capture or kill without mercy.  By a singular
freak of fate most of these orders were perforce given to the old
companions in arms of the Emperor.  Most of these were openly disaffected
toward the King, and eager to welcome Napoleon.  A few were indifferent
or inimical to the prospective appeal of their former Captain.  Still
fewer swore to capture him, and one "to bring him back in an iron cage!"
Only here and there a royalist pure and simple held high command, as the
Marquis at Grenoble.

The old noble acted with great promptitude and decision.  As the Governor
of Dauphine he had an extensive command.  Grenoble was the most important
town in the southeast.  Within its walls was a great arsenal.  It was
strongly fortified, and adequately garrisoned.  No better place to resist
the Emperor, if his initial force had grown sufficiently to make it
formidable, could be found.  Rumor magnified that force immensely.  The
Marquis gave the order for the concentration of all the troops in the
province, to the number of six thousand.  He sent out scouting
detachments, and companies of engineers to break down bridges and block
up roads--none of whom, by the way, obeyed his orders.  In short, he did
everything that experience, skill and devotion could suggest to stop the
Emperor and terminate the great adventure then and there.

The ruffling of the drums in the square ceased.  The old Marquis detached
himself from his staff and the cavalry and rode out between the
regiments.  He lifted his hand.  There was an intensity of silence on
every hand.  Even the people of the town had left their places of
business and were crowded close to the lines to hear and see what was to
be done.

"Bonaparte," said the Marquis, that high, thin, somewhat cracked old
voice carrying with astonishing clearness in every direction, "landed
from Elba in the Gulf of Juan a few days ago.  This usurper, this
bloody-minded tyrant, has broken every oath, disregarded every treaty.
He is coming to Grenoble.  He will be here to-day.  As loyal subjects of
our gracious and most catholic Majesty, King Louis XVIII, whom God
preserve," continued the old man, taking off his hat, "it becomes our
duty to seize, and if he resists, to kill this treacherous monster, who
had plunged Europe into a sea of blood and well-nigh ruined France."  The
old man did not mince words, it appeared!  "You, gentlemen and comrades,
have all sworn oaths before God and man to be faithful to the King whose
bread you eat and whose uniform you wear.  It has been said to me that
there is disaffection among you.  I cannot believe that a soldier of
France can be false to his oaths and to his flag.  The Fifth Regiment of
the Line will march with me to meet the Corsican.  The cavalry and my
personal escort will keep the gates.  If by any chance we should be
beaten, which I cannot think possible with such brave men and gallant
officers, the town must be held.  Colonel Labedoyere, to you I commit the
charge.  Have your men line the walls.  Dispose the troops which will
soon be arriving advantageously.  See that the guns are double-shotted.
If by any chance I do not return, hold the place to the last.  Troops are
marching to your aid from all over France.  Major Lestoype, move your
regiment.  _Vive le Roi_!" ended the old man.

Again the cry was echoed, but not by many; the household cavalry, one or
two of the newer companies of the brigade, some of the citizens.  The
Marquis noticed it; everybody noticed it.  Well, what difference did it
make to the old man?  They might cry or they might not cry.  Fight they
must, and fight they should.  He had something of the old Roman spirit in
him, the Marquis d'Aumenier.  Upon him had devolved the conduct of the
critical issue.  If he could stop Napoleon then and there his venture
would be a mere escapade and a sorry one.  If he could not, then God help
France and the world.

From the window of his prison, which overlooked the parade, Marteau had
seen and heard all.  The Emperor was coming and he would not be there to
extend him a welcome.  He forgot that if Napoleon had been a day later it
would have made no difference to Marteau if he never came.  He would have
given years of his life, if it had been possible, to have marched with
the column.

Orders had been published that morning postponing his execution until the
return of the regiment.  Just what was in the Marquis' mind no one could
absolutely say, but he was shrewd enough to recognize the possibility of
an outbreak or an attempted mutiny among the troops, when the sentence of
execution was being carried out.  He did not want any difficulties of
that kind then.  Not because he feared them or felt unequal to them!  Oh,
no.  But because such an outbreak would make the regiment more difficult
to control in the greater emergency, and he knew he needed all the
influence and moral power and force he could exercise to keep it in line
for the graver duty and more tremendous responsibility it must now face.
And because he did not wish to leave it with Marteau in Grenoble, he took
the regiment with him.  If he could force it to do its duty and arrest
Napoleon, he could deal with Marteau at his leisure.  The Emperor was the
greater issue, and Marteau benefited by that fact.

So, with drums beating and flags flying, the Fifth-of-the-Line marched
