
The stern frown on the Dutchman's brow had now mingled with it a
slightly troubled look.

"Go on.  I'll follow immediately," said Considine as he reined in.

"Don't be foolhardy," cried Hans, with an anxious look as he shot past.

Without replying, Considine dismounted, knelt on a slight eminence on
the plain, and deliberately prepared to fire.

The pursuing savages observed the act, and when within about six or
seven hundred yards began to draw rein.

Charlie Considine knew his rifle well; although not sighted for such a
range, it was capable of carrying the distance when sufficiently
elevated, and practice had accustomed him to long-range shots.  He aimed
a little above the head of the foremost rider, fired, and killed his
horse.  With the second barrel he wounded one of the Kafirs.  At the
same moment he observed that his late home was wrapped in flames, and
that the cattle and sheep of Conrad Marais, which had been left in
charge of Hans, were being driven off by the savages towards the
mountains.

This was enough.  Remounting, Charlie followed his friend, and was
rejoiced to find on looking back that the Kafirs had ceased their
pursuit.

"Strange," he said on overtaking Hans, "that they should have given in
so easily."

"It is not fear that influences them," returned his friend, with deeply
knitted brows; "the reptiles know there is a pass before us, and they
will surely try to cut us off.  They know all the short cuts better than
I do.  Push on!"

Urging their horses to their utmost speed, the fugitives soon approached
a more broken country, and skirted the mountain range, through which the
pass referred to by Hans led into level ground beyond.  It was a narrow
track through jungle, which was dense in some places, open in others.
They were soon in it, riding furiously.  At one of the open spaces they
caught a glimpse of a mounted Kafir making towards a part of the pass in
advance of them.  Hans pulled up at once, and looked eagerly, anxiously
round, while he pressed the light form of Gertie tighter to his breast.

"We must fight here, Charlie," he said, as he made for a little mound
which was crowned with a few bushes.  "If you and I were alone we might
risk forcing a passage, but--come; they observe our intention."

A few bounds placed them on the top of the mound, where they took
shelter among the bushes.  These were scarcely thick enough to cover the
horses, but among them was found a hole or crevice into which Hans told
his wife to creep.  She had barely found refuge in this place, when
several assagais whizzed over their heads.  Sheltering themselves behind
stones, Hans and Considine looked eagerly in the direction whence the
assagais had been thrown, and the former observed the ears of a horse
just appearing over a bush.  He fired at the spot where he conjectured
the rider must be, and a yell told that he had not missed his mark.  At
the same moment his companion observed part of a Kafir's form opposite
to him, and, firing, brought him to the ground.

Seeing this the other savages made a rush at the mound, supposing
probably that both guns were empty.  They had either forgotten about or
were ignorant of double-barrelled weapons.  Two more shots killed the
two leading Kafirs, and the rest turned to fly, but a gigantic fellow
shouted to them fiercely to come on, and at the same moment leaped on
Charlie Considine with such force that, although the latter struck him
heavily with the butt of his rifle, he was borne to the ground.  The
triumph however was momentary.  Next instant Hans Marais seized him,
stabbed him in the throat, and hurled him back among his comrades, a
lifeless corpse.  Charlie, recovering himself, pointed his unloaded gun
at the savages, who recoiled, turned, and fled back to the cover of the
opposite bush.

"Now is our time," said Hans, dragging his wife from the place of
shelter.  "Mount and make a dash before they recover."

While speaking Hans was acting.  In another moment Gertie was in her old
place, Considine in the saddle, and the two men made a bold push for
life.

It turned out as the Dutchman had conjectured.  The Kafirs had left all
parts of the surrounding jungle to join in the assault on the mound, and
when the fugitives made a dash through them, only a few had presence of
mind to throw their assagais, and these missed their mark.  A few bounds
carried Hans and Charlie once more in advance of their enemies, but the
clatter of hoofs immediately afterwards told that they were hotly
pursued.

There is no saying how the chase might have ended, if they had not met
with a piece of good fortune immediately afterwards.  On emerging from
the other end of the pass, they almost ran into a small patrol of Cape
Mounted Rifles, who, attracted by the shots and cries in the pass, were
galloping to the rescue.

They did not halt to ask questions, but, with a hearty cheer and a
friendly wave of the hand from the officer in command, dashed into the
pass and met the pursuing savages in the very teeth.

Of course the latter turned and fled, leaving, however, several of their
comrades dead on the ground.

During this early period of the war the whole defending force of the
frontier consisted of only between seven and eight hundred men, composed
of Cape Mounted Rifles and the 75th regiment, with a few of the
Artillery and Engineers, and these had to be broken up into numerous
small companies, who were sent here and there where succour was most
needed.

With this little patrol, Hans, Gertie, and Considine bivouacked that
night, and, travelling with them, soon afterwards reached Grahamstown.

The sight of the country as they approached was a sad one.  From all
quarters, men, women, children, vehicles, horses, cattle, and sheep,
were crowding into the town as a place of refuge.  At first the settlers
nearest the eastern frontier, taken by surprise, fled to temporary
rallying-points.  These, however, had to be abandoned for stronger
places of refuge.  On entering the town they found that the greatest
confusion and excitement prevailed.  The church had been set apart as an
asylum for the women and children, who had to put up, however, with the
undesirable accompaniments of fire-arms and gunpowder.  Public meetings
were being held; picquets of armed citizens were being despatched to
watch the main roads.  All the houses were thronged to suffocation with
refugees--white, brown, and black.  The streets, squares, yards,
gardens, and other vacant places were crowded by night, and the
surrounding hills by day, with the flocks and herds that had been saved
from the invaders, while the lowing and bleating of these were mingled
with the sobs and wails of the widow and fatherless.

"What misery!" exclaimed Gertie, as she rode slowly through the crowds
by the side of her husband, mounted on a horse lent her by one of the
patrol, "Oh, how I dread to hear the news from home!"

Gertie referred to her father's home, about the condition of which she
knew nothing at the time.

"Where shall we go to seek for news?" she asked anxiously.

"To the barracks," replied Hans.

"You need not be anxious, I think," said Considine; "if anything very
serious had happened, it is likely the patrol who rescued us would have
heard some account of it before leaving Grahamstown.

"Don't you think?" he added, turning to Hans, "that we had better
inquire first at Dobson's place?"

At that moment they were passing a large store, over the door of which
was a blue board with the words "Dobson, Skyd, and Company" emblazoned
in large white letters thereon.

The store itself presented in its windows and interior an assortment of
dry goods, so extensive and miscellaneous as to suggest the idea of one
being able to procure anything in it--from a silk dress to a grindstone.
It was an extremely full, prosperous-looking store, and in the midst of
it were to be seen, sitting on the counters, James and Robert Skyd, both
looking bluffer and stronger than when we last met them, though scarcely
a day older.  James and Robert were the managing partners of this
prosperous firm; Dobson and John Skyd were what the latter styled the
hunting partners.  Robert Skyd had recently married a pretty Grahamstown
girl, and her little boy--then about one year old--was, so said his
father, the sleeping partner of the firm, who had been vaguely hinted at
by the "Company" long before he was born.  Indeed, the "Company" had
been prudently inserted with special reference to what might "turn up"
in after years.  At the time the firm was formed, it had been suggested
that it should be styled Dobson, Skyd, and Sons, but as it was possible
nothing but daughters might fall to the lot of any of them, "Company"
was substituted as being conveniently indefinite.  Dobson took
precedence in the title in virtue of his having brought most capital
into the firm.  He had invested his all in it--amounting to three pounds
four and nine-pence halfpenny.  John Skyd had contributed half-a-crown,
which happened to be a bad one.  James brought nothing at all, and
Robert entered it a little in debt for tobacco.

The great waggon of the hunting partners, loaded with hides, horns, and
ivory, stood at the door of the store, as Gertie and her protectors
passed, having just arrived from a successful trip into Kafirland, and
fortunately escaped the outbreak of the war.

Fastening their bridles to one of its wheels, Hans, Gertie, and
Considine entered.  The first face they saw was that of Edwin Brook,
into whose arms Gertie ran with a wild cry of joy.

"Why, Hans Marais!" cried James Skyd, jumping off the counter and
grasping his big friend by the hand, while Robert seized that of
Considine, "where have you dropped from?--But I need scarcely ask, for
all the world seems to be crowding into the town.  Not hurt, I hope?" he
added, observing the blood which stained his friend's dress.

"Not in person," answered Hans, with a smile, returning his cordial
grasp.

"And what of property!" asked Edwin Brook, looking round.

"All gone," returned Hans sadly.  "I rose this morning a reasonably
wealthy man--now, I am a beggar.  But tell me, what of your family, Mr
Brook?"

"All saved, thank God," was the reply.  "Junkie, dear boy, who is the
most active young fellow in the land, managed to--Ah! here he comes, and
will speak for himself."

As he spoke a tall strapping youth of about fifteen entered, opened wide
his laughing blue eyes on seeing Hans, and, after a hearty greeting,
told with some hesitation that he had chanced to be out hunting on foot
in the jungles of the Great Fish River when the Kafirs crossed the
frontier, and had managed, being a pretty good runner, to give his
father warning, so that the family had time to escape.  He did _not_
tell, however, that he had, in a narrow pass, kept above sixty Kafirs in
check with his own hand and gun until George Dally could run to the
house for his weapons and ammunition, and that then the two held a
hundred of them in play long enough to permit of the whole family
escaping under the care of Scholtz.

"But," said Edwin Brook, who related all this with evident satisfaction,
"I am like yourself, Hans, in regard to property.  Mount Hope is a
blackened ruin, the farm is laid waste, and the cattle are over the
borders."

"And where is Mrs Brook?" asked Considine.

"In this house.  Up-stairs.  Come, Gertie is getting impatient.  Let us
go to see her."

"Now, friends," said Considine to the brothers Skyd, who had by that
time been joined by the hunting partners, "there is a matter on which we
must consult and act without delay."

Here he told of Conrad Marais's departure with the boers across the
frontier, and added that if the party was to be saved at all it must be
gone about instantly.

"You can't go about it to-day, Charlie," said John Skyd, "so don't give
way to impatience.  For such a long trip into the enemy's country we
must go well armed and supplied."

"I will brook no delay," said Considine, with flushing countenance.  "If
it had not been for the necessity of bringing Gertie here in safety,
Hans and I would have set out at once and alone on their spoor.  Is it
not so?"

Hans nodded assent.

"No, friends," he said, turning to the brothers with decision, "we must
be off at once."

"What! without your suppers?" exclaimed Bob Skyd; "but to be serious, it
won't be possible to get things ready before to-morrow.  Surely that
will do, if we start at daybreak.  Besides, the party with your father,
Hans, is a strong one, well able to hold out against a vastly superior
force of savages.  Moreover, if you wait we shall get up a small body of
volunteers."

Hans and Charlie were thus constrained unwillingly to delay.  At grey
dawn, however, they rode out of Grahamstown at the head of a small
party, consisting of the entire firm of Dobson and Skyd, inclusive of
Junkie, whose father granted him permission to go.  His mother silently
acquiesced.  Mrs Scholtz violently protested; and when she found that
her protests were useless, she changed them into pathetic entreaties
that Junkie would on no account whatever go to sleep in camp with wet
feet.

As soon as the invasion took place, an express had been sent to
Capetown, and the able Governor, Sir Benjamin D'Urban, took instant and
energetic measures to undo, as far as possible, the mischief done by his
predecessors.  Colonel (afterwards Sir Harry) Smith was despatched to
the frontier, and rode the distance--six hundred miles--in six days.

Arriving in Grahamstown, he took command with a firm hand, organised the
whole male population into a warlike garrison, built barricades across
the streets, planted cannon in commanding positions, cleared the town of
flocks and herds, which were breeding a nuisance, sent them to the open
country with a cattle guard, and prepared not only to defend the
capital, but to carry war into the enemy's country.  In short, he
breathed into the people much of his own energy, and soon brought order
out of confusion.

The state of affairs in the colony had indeed reached a terrible pass.
From all sides news came in of murder and pillage.  The unfortunate
traders in Kafirland fared ill at that time.  One of these, Rodgers, was
murdered in the presence of his three children.  A man named Cramer was
savagely butchered while driving a few cattle along the road.  Another,
named Mahony, with his wife and son-in-law, were intercepted while
trying to escape to the military post of Kafir Drift, and Mahony was
stretched a corpse at his wife's feet, then the son-in-law was murdered,
but Mrs Mahony escaped into the bush with two of her children and a
Hottentot female servant, and, after many hardships, reached
Grahamstown.  A mounted patrol scouring the country fell in with a
farm-house where three Dutchmen, in a thick clump of bushes, were
defending themselves against three hundred Kafirs.  Of course the latter
were put to flight, and the three heroes--two of them badly wounded--
were rescued.  Nearly everywhere the settlers, outnumbered, had to fly,
and many were slain while defending their homes, but at the little
village of Salem they held their ground gallantly.  The Wesleyan chapel,
mission-house, and schoolhouse, were filled with refugees, and although
the Kafirs swooped down on it at night in large numbers and carried off
the cattle, they failed to overcome the stout defenders.  Theopolis also
held out successfully against them--and so did the Scottish party at
Baviaans River, although attacked and harassed continually.

During an attack near the latter place a Scottish gentleman of the
Pringle race had a narrow escape.  Sandy Black was with him at the time.
Three or four Kafirs suddenly attacked them.  Mr Pringle shot one,
Sandy wounded another.  A third ran forward while Pringle was loading
and threw an assagai at him.  It struck him with great force on the
leathern bullet-pouch which hung at his belt.  Sandy Black took aim at
the savage with a pistol.

"Aim low, Sandy," said Pringle, continuing to load.

Sandy obeyed and shot the Kafir dead, then, turning round, said
anxiously--

"Are 'ee stickit, sir?"

"I'm not sure, Sandy," replied Pringle, putting his hand in at the waist
of his trousers, "there's blood, I see."

On examination it was found that the assagai had been arrested by the
strong pouch and belt, and had only given him a trifling scratch, so
that the gallant and amiable Mr Dods Pringle lived to fight in future
Kafir wars.  [See Note 1.]

In another place, near the Kat River, thirty men were attacked by a
hundred and fifty Kafirs.  The latter came on with fury, but five of the
farmers brought down seven of the enemy at the first discharge, and
thereafter poured into them so rapid and destructive a fire that they
were seized with panic, and fled, leaving seventy-five of their number
dead.

Instances of individual heroism might be endlessly multiplied, but we
think this is enough to show the desperate nature of the struggle which
had begun.

In the course of one fortnight the labours of fourteen years were
annihilated.  Forty-four persons were murdered, 369 dwellings consumed,
261 pillaged, and 172,000 head of live-stock carried off into Kafirland
and irretrievably lost; and what aggravated the wickedness of the
invasion was the fact that during a great part of the year the Governor
had been engaged in special negotiations for a new--and to the Kafirs
most advantageous--system of relations, with which all the chiefs except
one had expressed themselves satisfied.

Writing on the condition of the country Colonel Smith said: "Already are
seven thousand persons dependent on Government for the necessaries of
life.  The land is filled with the lamentations of the widow and the
fatherless.  The indelible impressions already made upon myself by the
horrors of an irruption of savages upon a scattered population, almost
exclusively engaged in the peaceful occupations of husbandry, are such
