AN ESCAPE FROM THE BEAR-SCRAPE.

For hours they sat upon their painful perch--now glancing downward at
the fierce gaoler that watched unweariedly below--now gazing out upon
the plain, where the dusky droves still continued to move.  For hours
the buffaloes kept passing northward, until the setting sun glanced
redly from their brown bodies.  Once or twice again the boys thought
they saw white ones in the herd; but their eyes had grown dim with
watching, and the pain which they endured now rendered them indifferent
to aught else than their own misery.  Despair had conquered hope--for
they were choking with thirst--and death stared them in the face.

After a long while the bear again lay down, and placing his fore-paws
over his head appeared once more to sleep.  Basil could stand it no
longer; and now resolved to make an effort to escape.  At all events he
would try to bring about some change in their painful situation.

Cautioning his brothers to remain silent, he slipped down from his tree;
and, with the stealthy tread of a cat, crept over the ground in search
of his rifle.  He soon laid hands upon it; and then, returning to his
tree, climbed up again.  The shaking of the branches as he did so, awoke
the bear; who sprang to his feet, and rushed towards the tree.  Had he
been a moment sooner, it would have been ill for Basil, for the snout of
the animal, as he reared upward against the trunk, almost touched the
boy's feet.  It was an "inch of a miss as good as a mile," and Basil was
saved.  The next moment he was seated among the branches, and leisurely
loading his rifle!

Strange to say, the bear appeared to comprehend this movement.  As if
aware of his danger, he kept out farther from the trees; and, while
rambling about, now, for the first time, stumbled upon what remained of
the carcasses of the big-horns.  These he proceeded to tear up, and
devour.  He was still within range of the rifle, though not for a sure
shot; but Basil, who knew he could load again, was determined either to
force him farther off, or bring him within reach; and with this intent
he took aim and fired.  The bullet hit the bear in the fore-shoulder,
for he was seen to turn his head and tear at the spot with his teeth,
all the while growling with rage and pain.  Strange to say, he still
continued to devour the meat!

Again Basil loaded and fired as before.  This time the animal received
the shot about the head, which caused him to make fresh demonstrations
of his fury.  He dropped his prey, and galloped back among the trees,
first clutching one and then another, making repeated efforts to drag
them down.  He at length came to Basil's tree, and seized it in his
fierce hug.  This was exactly what the young hunter wanted.  He had
hastily reloaded, and as the bear stood upright under the branches, he
leant downwards until the muzzle of his rifle almost touched the snout
of the animal.  Then came the report--a stream of fire was poured into
the very face of the bear--and a crashing sound followed.  As the smoke
cleared off, the huge body was seen kicking and sprawling upon the
ground.  The leaden messenger had done its work.  It had passed through
the brain; and in a few seconds the shaggy monster lay motionless upon
the earth.

The boys now dropped from the trees.  Francois and Lucien ran for their
guns, and all three having loaded with care, proceeded toward the
ravine.  They stayed not to examine the enemy that had been slain.
Thirst urged them on, and they thought only of getting to the spring
below.  They were full of hope that the she-bear and her cub had been
killed by their first fire, and that they would now find the road clear.

What was their disappointment when, on looking down the ravine, they saw
the cub lying doubled up, near the bottom, and the old one standing
sentry over it!  The cub was evidently dead.  So much the worse--as the
mother would not now leave it for a moment, and both were directly in
the path.  The latter was moving backward and forward upon a ledge of
rock, at intervals approaching the cub and tossing its body with her
snout, and then uttering a low querulous moan, that was painful to
listen to!

The hunters saw at once that their situation was as bad as ever.  Their
retreat was cut off by the infuriated mother, who might remain where she
was for an indefinite time.  Should they fire down upon her, and take
the chances of once more escaping to the trees?  This was an alternative
which they had reason to dread.  Their painful experience decided them
against it.  What then?  Remain until after night-fall, and try to steal
past in the darkness?  Perhaps the bear might retire to her cave, and
give them an opportunity to do so.  But in the meantime they were dying
of thirst!

At this moment a happy idea suggested itself to Lucien.  He saw the
cactus plants growing near.  There were large globes of the
echinocactus.  He remembered having read that these often assuaged the
thirst of the desert traveller.  The plants were soon reached, and their
succulent masses laid open by the knives of the hunters.  The cool
watery fibres were applied to their lips; and in a few minutes their
thirst was alleviated and almost forgotten.  Still the bear occupied the
ravine, and so long as she remained there, there was no possible chance
of their getting back to camp.  They saw, however, that they could do
nothing better than wait for the night, in hopes that the darkness might
bring about something in their favour.

Night soon came on, but not darkness.  It chanced to be a clear
moonlight; and they saw at once that it would then be quite as perilous
to go down the ravine as it had been during the day.  They could hear
the snorting and growling of the monster below; and they knew she still
held the pass.  Should they attempt to descend, she would discover them
long before they could get down.  She could hear them clambering among
the rocks and bushes.  The advantage would be hers, as she could attack
them unawares.  Besides, even had the coast been quite clear, they would
have found it difficult to get down the steep descent in the night.
They dared not attempt it.  After much deliberation, therefore, they
resolved to wait for the morning.

Throughout all the live-long night they kept awake.  They heard their
steeds neighing below--wondering, poor brutes, what had become of their
masters.  The hinny of Jeanette echoed wildly from the cliffs, and was
answered by the bark and howl of the prairie-wolf.  These sounds,
together with the more ominous snort of the bear, kept sleep from the
eyes of our adventurers.  They dared not go to sleep, unless by perching
themselves in the trees; as they knew not the moment the bear might come
up to the summit.  Sleeping upon the slender branch of a mountain pine
is more painful than pleasant; and all three preferred keeping awake.

Morning broke at length.  The first light showed that the shaggy
sentinel was still at her post.  She sat upon the same spot, as though
she was guarding her dead offspring.  The young hunters, but
particularly Basil, began to grow impatient.  They were hungry, though
there were still left some fragments of the wild mutton, which they
could have eaten.  But they were thirsty as well.  The juice of the
cactus allayed, but did not quench, their thirst.  They longed for a
draught of cool water from the spring below.  The buffaloes, too, were
gone northward, "on the run."  They might never overtake them.  They
might never again have such an opportunity of procuring that for which
they had endured all this suffering.  These thoughts influenced all
three, but Basil more than any.  Some attempt must be made to reach the
plain, and escape from their elevated prison.

Basil proposed provoking the bear, by firing upon her.  She would pursue
them, he urged, as the other had done, and meet with a similar fate.
This might have succeeded, but it would have been a dangerous
experiment.  Lucien suggested that two of them should go round the edge
of the precipice and examine it more carefully, while the third kept a
watch upon the bear.  Perhaps there might yet be found some other path
that led to the plain.  This offered but a faint hope; still it would
take only a few minutes to make the examination, and Lucien's proposal
was therefore agreed to.

"If we only had a rope," suggested Francois, "we could let ourselves
over the cliff, and then the old grizzly might stay there for ever, if
she pleased."

"Ha!" shouted Basil, as if some plan had suddenly come into his mind,
"what dunces we have been!  Why did we not think of it before?  Come,
brothers!  I'll get you down in the twinkling of an eye--come!"

As Basil uttered these words, he strode off towards the spot where they
had butchered the big-horns.  On reaching it he drew his hunting-knife;
and having spread out one of the skins, proceeded to cut it into strips.
Lucien, at once guessing his design, assisted him in the operation;
while Francois was sent back to the head of the ravine, in order to
watch the bear.

In a few minutes the brothers had cut up both of the hides, until the
ground was covered with long strips.  These they knotted firmly
together--placing cross-pieces of pine branches in the knots--until they
had made a raw-hide rope over one hundred feet in length!

They now proceeded to a convenient point of the cliff--where a pine-tree
grew near its edge--and tied one end of the new-made rope around the
trunk.  To the other end they fastened Marengo, the three guns--for
Francois had arrived upon the ground--and, along with these, a large
stone--in order to test the strength of the rope before any of
themselves should venture upon it.  All these things were now lowered
down until they could see them resting upon the prairie below.

The rope was next made taut above; and the weight of the stone--which
was too heavy for Marengo to move--kept all fast below.  Francois
slipped down the rope first.  There was but little difficulty in his
doing so; as the pieces of wood formed rests, or steps, that prevented
him from sliding too fast.  Lucien followed next, and then Basil; so
that in less than half an hour, from the time that this plan of escape
had occurred to them, all three found themselves safe upon the level of
the prairie!

They did not waste time when they had got there.  Marengo was released,
and the whole party hurried in the direction of their horses.  These
were soon reached, caught, and saddled; and our hunters, now that they
could mount at any moment they pleased, felt themselves safe.

They resolved, however, to remain no longer by the butte, but to ride
away from it, as soon as they had eaten a morsel.  A small fire was,
therefore, kindled; and a piece of bear-meat, hastily broiled, satisfied
their hunger.  Basil would have gone back on horseback, to attack the
old she-bear in the ravine; but the more prudent Lucien dissuaded him;
and, holding their horses in readiness, they packed their camp
equipments upon Jeanette, and once more took the route.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

THE VULTURES AND THEIR KING.

They turned their horses' heads westward.  It was their intention to
travel in that direction, until they should strike the tracks of the
buffaloes, when they would turn to the north, follow upon the trail of
these animals, and endeavour to come up with the great herd.  This was
clearly the best course they could adopt.

As they were riding past the western extremity of the butte, a flock of
large birds drew their attention.  They were vultures.  The boys now
remembered the cimmaron that had fallen over the cliff; and, looking up,
they beheld its body still swinging from the tree.  It was that which
had attracted the vultures.

There were many of them--over an hundred in the flock.  Some were
sailing about in the air.  Others had alighted on the top of the cliff,
or perched themselves on the branches of the pines, while a few hovered
around the carcass, occasionally settling a moment upon its stiffened
limbs, and endeavouring to penetrate the hide with their beaks.  They
had already torn out the eyes of the animal, but the tough skin of the
body still resisted their attacks.

These birds were larger than ravens, and of a dark colour--nearly black.
At a distance they appeared purely black; but, upon a nearer view, an
admixture of brownish feathers could be perceived, and this was apparent
in some of them more than in others.  To a careless observer they would
all have passed for birds of the same species, although that was not the
case.  There were two distinct species of them, the "turkey-buzzard"
(_Cathartes aura_), and the black vulture (_Cathartes atratus_).  Our
boys knew them well enough--for both kinds are common in Louisiana, and
throughout all the southern part of the United States.

I have said that a careless observer would mistake the one species for
the other.  They are nearly of the same size and colour, though the
carrion-crow is of a deeper black than the buzzard; but there are other
points of difference that would strike the eye of a naturalist at once.
The buzzard is a much more handsomely formed bird, and is more graceful,
both upon the ground and while sailing through the air.  His wings are
longer and more elegantly plumed, and his tail is more tapering.  The
skin of his naked head and neck, as well as that of his legs, is of a
reddish or flesh colour; while the same parts of the black vulture are a
mixture of black and grey--the black being caused by a down that grows
thinly over the skin.  They are easily distinguished in the air.  The
black vulture flies rather heavily--flapping his wings several times
with a quick repetition, and then holding them horizontally for a
hundred yards or so--while his short ill-proportioned tail is spread out
like a fan.  The buzzard, on the contrary, holds his wings at rest--not
in a horizontal position, but bent considerably upward.  In this
attitude he will skim along for a quarter of a mile, without a single
stroke of his wings, and that, too, not downward as may be supposed, but
along a level, or a line often curving upward!  How he executes this
upward movement is not known.  Some suppose that he possesses the power
of inflating himself with heated air, which enables him to soar upward
without using his wings.  This theory is not very clear, and requires
demonstration before it can be accepted as the true one.  Others say
that he is carried up by the impetus he has already obtained, by having
previously descended from an equal or greater height.  This is not true,
however, as the buzzard may be often seen to rise in this way after a
long flight along the level line.  It is just possible that the same
principle by which the New Holland savages direct their boomerangs, or
by which flat stones thrown horizontally often take an upward
direction--a fact known to every boy--I say it is just possible that
this principle, as yet but little understood, may be instructively acted
on by the buzzard, and have something to do with his flight.  Be the
facts as they may, it is an interesting sight to watch one of these
birds, with broad wings outlined against the blue background of the
heavens, now swimming in circles, now shooting off in horizontal lines,
and anon soaring upward or tracing the undulating curves of the ogee.
It is, to say the least of it, a striking and beautiful sight.

The turkey-buzzard is, upon the whole, a nobler bird than the black
vulture.  There is more of the eagle about him.  Both, it is true, are
carrion-feeders, like all vultures; but the buzzard also hunts after
other food, such as snakes, lizards, and small quadrupeds.  He will
attack young lambs or pigs, when a good opportunity offers.  So, too,
will the black vulture, but not so frequently.  Neither of them,
however, do much harm in this respect; and their preying on such animals
is an exception, and not a rule.  They only do so, probably, when driven
to it by hunger.  Both species are gregarious, although they do not
always appear in flocks.  The buzzards, particularly, are often seen
hunting alone, or in twos or threes; but their mode of life brings them
together in large numbers.  They often assemble--both buzzards and black
vultures--to the number of hundreds, over a single carrion.  The
buzzards, however, are not so plenty as the black vultures; and in one
of these flocks more than three-fourths will be found of the latter
species.  The buzzards are the shyer birds; and they are less disposed
to keep together in flocks.  It has even been said that these are not
gregarious, as they are often seen alone in the high regions of the air.
But it is certain that not only do numbers of them roost together at
night, but they even associate with the black vultures at such times.

In most countries the vulture is a privileged bird.  He is looked upon
as a cheap and useful scavenger, clearing away the carcasses of dead
animals, that would otherwise pollute the atmosphere.  This is a matter
of much importance in hot countries; and it is only in such countries
that vultures are commonly found.  What a beautiful illustration of the
completeness of Nature's laws!  As you get into high latitudes and
colder regions--where the air is not so readily tainted by putrid
substances--the necessity for such a scavenger no longer exists, and he
is rarely met with.  There the great vulture gives place to the croaking
raven, and the small carrion-crow.

Vultures, I have said, are privileged birds.  In most countries they are
protected by law.  This is the case with regard to the present species,
both in English and Spanish America, where there is a fine for killing
them.  The consequence is, they are seldom molested; and in many places
are so tame, that they will permit you to come within a few feet of
them.  In the cities and villages of the Southern States they alight in
the streets, and go to sleep upon the house-tops.  They do the same in
the cities of Mexico and South America, where both species are also
found.

As soon as our young hunters had got opposite the cliff where the
vultures were, they reined up, determined to remain awhile, and watch
the manoeuvres of the birds.  They were curious to see how the latter
would conduct themselves with a prey so singularly situated, as was the
carcass of the cimmaron.  They did not dismount, but sat in their
saddles, about an hundred yards from the cliff.  The vultures, of
course, did not regard their presence; but continued to alight, both
upon the escarpment of the precipice and upon the loose rocks at its
foot, as if no one was near.

"How very like the buzzards are to hen turkeys!" remarked Francois.

"Yes," rejoined Lucien, "that is the reason why they are called
`turkey-buzzards.'"

Francois' observation was a very natural one.  There are no two birds,
not absolutely of the same species, that are more like each other than a
turkey-buzzard and a small-sized turkey-hen--that is, the common
domestic turkey of the black variety, which, like the buzzard, is
usually of a brownish colour.  So like are they, that, at the distance
of a hundred yards, I have often taken the one for the other.  This
resemblance, however, extends no farther than to the general
appearance--the shape and colour.  In most other respects they differ,
