intense consideration.  He happened to look at Jacko when he frowned,
and that pugnacious individual, happening at the same instant to look at
the doctor, and supposing that the frown was a distinct challenge to
fight, first raised his eyebrows to the top of his head in amazement,
then pulled them down over his flashing orbs in deep indignation, and
displayed all his teeth, as well as an extent of gums that was really
frightful to behold!

"Oh!  Jacko, bad thing," said Ailie, in a reproachful tone, pulling the
monkey towards her.

Taking no notice of these warlike indications, the doctor, after a few
minutes' thought, looked up and said--

"I have no doubt whatever that we can stand it.  Most of us are in
pretty good condition still, and have some fat to spare.  Fat persons
can endure reduced allowance of food much better and longer than those
who are lean.  There's Gurney, now, for instance, he could afford to
have his share even still further curtailed."

This remark was received with a grin of delighted approval by the men
and with a groan by Gurney, who rubbed his stomach gently, as if that
region were assailed with pains at the bare thought of such injustice.

"Troth, if that's true what ye say, doctor, I hope ye'll see it to be
yer duty to give wot ye cut off Gurney's share to me," remarked Briant,
"for its nothing but a bag o' bones that I am this minute."

"Oh! oh! wot a wopper," cried Jim Scroggles, whose lean and lanky person
seemed ill adapted to exist upon light fare.

"Well," observed the captain, "the doctor and I shall make a careful
calculation and let you know the result by supper-time, when the new
system shall be commenced.  What think you, Ailie, my pet, will you be
able to stand it?"

"Oh yes, papa, I don't care how much you reduce my allowance."

"What! don't you feel hungry?"

"No, not a bit."

"Not ready for supper?"

"Not anxious for it, at any rate."

"Och!  I wish I wos you," murmured Briant, with a deep sigh.  "I think I
could ait the foresail, av it wos only well biled with the laste
possible taste o' pig's fat."

By supper-time the captain announced the future daily allowance, and
served it out.

Each man received a piece of salt junk--that is, salt beef--weighing
exactly one ounce; also two ounces of broken biscuit; a small piece of
tobacco, and a quarter of a pint of water.  Although the supply of the
latter was small, there was every probability of a fresh supply being
obtained when it chanced to rain, so that little anxiety was felt at
first in regard to it; but the other portions of each man's allowance
were weighed with scrupulous exactness, in a pair of scales which were
constructed by Tim Rokens out of a piece of wood--a leaden musket-ball
doing service as a weight.

Ailie received an equal portion with the others, but Jacko was doomed to
drag out his existence on a very minute quantity of biscuit and water.
He utterly refused to eat salt junk, and would not have been permitted
to use tobacco even had he been so inclined, which he was not.

Although they were thus reduced to a small allowance of food--a smaller
quantity than was sufficient to sustain life for any lengthened period--
no one in the slightest degree grudged Jacko his small portion.  All the
men entertained a friendly feeling to the little monkey, partly because
it was Ailie's pet, and partly because it afforded them great amusement
at times by its odd antics.

As for Jacko himself, he seemed to thrive on short allowance, and never
exhibited any unseemly haste or anxiety at meal-times.  It was observed,
however, that he kept an uncommonly sharp eye on all that passed around
him, as if he felt that his circumstances were at that time peculiar and
worthy of being noted.  In particular he knew to a nicety what happened
to each atom of food, from the time of its distribution among the men to
the moment of its disappearance within their hungry jaws, and if any
poor fellow chanced to lay his morsel down and neglect it for the tenth
part of an instant, it vanished like a shot, and immediately thereafter
Jacko was observed to present an unusually serene and innocent aspect,
and to become suddenly afflicted, with a swelling in the pouch under his
cheek.

One day the men received a lesson in carefulness which they did not soon
forget.

Breakfast had been served out, and Phil Briant was about to finish his
last mouthful of biscuit--he had not had many mouthfuls to try his
masticating powers, poor fellow--when he paused suddenly, and gazing at
the cherished morsel addressed it thus--

"Shure, it's a purty bit, ye are!  Av there wos only wan or two more o'
yer family here, it's meself as 'ud like to be made beknown to them.
I'll not ait ye yit.  I'll look at ye for a little."

In pursuance of this luxurious plan, Briant laid the morsel of biscuit
on the thwart of the boat before him, and, taking out his pipe, began to
fill it leisurely, keeping his eye all the time on the last bite.  Just
then Mr Markham, who pulled the bow oar, called out--

"I say, Briant, hand me my tobacco-pouch, it's beside you on the th'ort,
close under the gun'le."

"Is it?" said Briant, stretching out his hand to the place indicated,
but keeping his eye fixed all the time on the piece of biscuit.  "Ah,
here it is; ketch it."

For one instant Briant looked at the second mate in order to throw the
pouch with precision.  That instant was sufficient for the exercise of
Jacko's dishonest propensities.  The pouch was yet in its passage
through the air when a tremendous roar from Tim Rokens apprised the
unhappy Irishman of his misfortune.  He did not require to be told to
"look out!" although more than one voice gave him that piece of advice.
An intuitive perception of irreparable loss flashed across his soul,
and, with the speed of light, his eye was again on the thwart before
him--but not on the morsel of biscuit.  At that same instant Jacko sat
down beside Ailie with his usual serene aspect and swelled cheek!

"Och, ye bottle imp!" yelled the bereaved one, "don't I know ye?" and
seizing a tin pannikin, in his wrath, he threw it at the small monkey's
head with a force that would, had it been well directed, have smashed
that small head effectually.

Jacko made a quick and graceful nod, and the pannikin, just missing
Ailie, went over the side into the sea, where it sank and was lost for
ever, to the regret of all, for they could ill afford to lose it.

"Ye've got it, ye have, but ye shan't ait it," growled Briant through
his teeth, as he sprang over the seat towards the monkey.

Jacko bounded like a piece of indiarubber on to Gurney's head; next
moment he was clinging to the edge of the mainsail, and the next he was
comfortably seated on the top of the mast, where he proceeded calmly and
leisurely to "ait" the biscuit in the face of its exasperated and
rightful owner.

"Oh,--Briant!" exclaimed Ailie, who was half frightened, half amused at
the sudden convulsion caused by her favourite's bad conduct, "don't be
vexed; see, here is a little bit of my biscuit; I don't want it--really
I don't."

Briant, who stood aghast and overwhelmed by his loss and by the
consummate impudence of the small monkey, felt rebuked by this offer.
Bursting into a loud laugh, he said, as he resumed his seat and the
filling of his pipe--

"Sure I'd rather ait me own hat, Miss Ailie, an' it's be no means a good
wan--without sarce, too, not even a blot o' mustard--than take the
morsel out o' yer purty mouth.  I wos more nor half jokin', dear, an' I
ax yer parding for puttin' ye in sich a fright."

"Expensive jokin'," growled Tarquin, "if ye throw a pannikin overboard
every time you take to it."

"Kape your tongue quiet," said Briant, reddening, for he felt somewhat
humbled at having given way to his anger so easily, and was nettled at
the remark, coming as it did, in a sneering spirit, from a man for whom
he had no particular liking.

"Never mind, Briant," interposed the captain quickly, with a
good-humoured laugh; "I feel for you, lad.  Had it been myself I fear I
should have been even more exasperated.  I would not sell a crumb of my
portion just now for a guinea."

"Neither would I," added the doctor, "for a thousand guineas."

"I'll tell ye wot it is, lads," remarked Tim Rokens; "I wish I only had
a crumb to sell."

"Now, Rokens, don't be greedy," cried Gurney.

"Greedy!" echoed Tim.

"Ay, greedy; has any o' you lads got a dickshunairy to lend him?  Come,
Jim Scroggles, you can tell him what it means--you've been to school, I
believe, hain't you?"

Rokens shook his head gravely.

"No, lad, I'm not greedy, but I'm ready for wittles.  I won't go fur to
deny that.  Now, let me ax ye a question.  Wot--supposin' ye had the
chance--would ye give, at this good min'it, for a biled leg o' mutton?"

"With or without capers-sauce?" inquired Gurney.

"W'ichever _you_ please."

"Och! we wouldn't need capers-sarse," interposed Briant; "av we only had
the mutton, I'd cut enough o' capers meself to do for the sarce, I
would."

"It matters little what you'd give," cried Glynn, "for we can't get it
at any price just now.  Don't you think, captain, that we might have our
breakfast to-night?  It would save time in the morning, you know."

There was a general laugh at this proposal, yet there was a strong
feeling in the minds of some that if it were consistent with their rules
to have breakfast served out then and there, they would gladly have
consented to go without it next morning.

Thus, with laugh and jest, and good-natured repartee, did these men bear
the pangs of hunger for many days.  They were often silent during long
intervals, and sometimes they became talkative and sprightly, but it was
observed that, whether they conversed earnestly or jestingly, their
converse ran, for the most part, on eating and drinking, and in their
uneasy slumbers, during the intervals between the hours of work and
watching, they almost invariably dreamed of food.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

PROGRESS OF THE LONG VOYAGE--STORY-TELLING AND JOURNALISING.

Many weeks passed away, but the _Maid of the Isle_ still held on her
course over the boundless ocean.

Day after day came and went, the sun rose in the east morning after
morning, ran its appointed course, and sank, night after night, on the
western horizon, but little else occurred to vary the monotony of that
long, long voyage.  When the sun rose, its bright rays leapt from the
bosom of the ocean; when it set, the same bosom of the great deep
received its descending beams.  No land, no sail appeared to the anxious
gazers in that little boat, which seemed to move across, yet never to
reach the boundaries of that mighty circle of water and sky, in the
midst of which they lay enchained, as if by some wicked enchanter's
spell.

Breezes blew steadily at times and urged them swiftly on towards the
circumference, but it fled as fast as they approached.  Then it fell
calm, and the weary men resumed their oars, and with heavy hearts and
weakened arms tugged at the boat which seemed to have turned into a mass
of lead.  At such times a dead silence was maintained, for the work,
which once would have been to them but child's play, had now become
severe and heavy labour.  Still they did not murmur.  Even the
cross-grained Tarquin became subdued in spirit by the influence of the
calm endurance and good-humour of his comrades.  But the calms seldom
lasted long.  The winds, which happily continued favourable, again
ruffled the surface of the sea, and sometimes blew so briskly as to
oblige them to take in a reef or two in their sails.  The oars were
gladly drawn in, and the spirits of the men rose as the little boat bent
over to the blast, lost her leaden qualities, and danced upon the
broad-backed billows, like a cork.  There was no rain during all this
time; little or no stormy weather; and, but for their constant exposure
to the hot sun by day and the cold chills by night, the time might have
been said to pass even pleasantly, despite the want of a sufficiency of
food.  Thus day after day and night after night flew by, and week after
week came and went, and still the _Maid of the Isle_ held on her course
over the boundless ocean.

During all that time the one and a quarter ounces of salt junk and
biscuit and the eighth of a pint of water were weighed and measured out
to each man, three times a day, with scrupulous care and exactness, lest
a drop or a crumb of the food that was more precious than diamonds
should be lost.  The men had all become accustomed to short allowance
now, and experienced no greater inconvenience than a feeling of
lassitude, which feeling increased daily, but by such imperceptible
degrees that they were scarcely conscious of it, and were only
occasionally made aware of the great reduction of their strength when
they attempted to lift any article which, in the days of their full
vigour, they could have tossed into the air, but which they could
scarcely move now.  When, however, the fair breeze enabled them to glide
along under sail, and they lay enjoying complete rest, they experienced
no unwonted sensations of weakness; their spirits rose, as the spirits
of sailors always will rise when the waves are rippling at the bow and a
white track forming in the wake; and they spent the time--when not
asleep--in cheerful conversation and in the spinning of long yarns.
They did not sing, however, as might have been expected--they were too
weak for that--they called the feeling "lazy," some said they "couldn't
be bothered" to sing.  No one seemed willing to admit that his strength
was in reality abated.

In story-telling the captain, the doctor, and Glynn shone conspicuous.
And when all was going smoothly and well, the anecdotes, histories, and
romances related by these three were listened to with such intense
interest and delight by the whole crew, that one would have thought they
were enjoying a pleasure trip, and had no cause whatever for anxiety.
Gurney, too, and Briant, and Nikel Sling came out frequently in the
story-telling line, and were the means of causing many and many an hour
to pass quickly and pleasantly by, which would otherwise have hung
heavily on the hands of all.

Ailie Dunning was an engrossed and delighted listener at all times.  She
drank in every species of story with an avidity that was quite amusing.
It seemed also to have been infectious, for even Jacko used to sit hour
after hour looking steadily at each successive speaker, with a
countenance so full of bright intelligence, and grave surpassing wisdom,
as to lead one to the belief that he not only understood all that was
said, but turned it over in his mind, and drew from it ideas and
conclusions far more bright and philosophical than could have been drawn
therefrom by any human being, however wise or ingenious.

He grinned, too, did Jacko, with an intensity and frequency that induced
the sailors at first to call him a clever dog, in the belief that his
perception of the ludicrous was very strong indeed; but as his grins
were observed to occur quite as frequently at the pathetic and the grave
as at the comical parts of the stories, they changed their minds, and
said he was a "codger"--in which remark they were undoubtedly safe,
seeing that it committed them to nothing very specific.

Captain Dunning's stories were, more properly speaking, histories, and
were very much relished, for he possessed a natural power of relating
what he knew in an interesting manner and with a peculiarly pleasant
tone of voice.  Every one who has considered the subject at all must
have observed what a powerful influence there lies in the mere manner
and tone of a speaker.  The captain's voice was so rich, so mellow, and
capable of such varied modulation, that the men listened with pleasure
to the words which rolled from his lips, as one would listen to a sweet
song.  He became so deeply interested, too, in the subject about which
he happened to be speaking, that his auditors could not help becoming
interested also.  He had no powers of eloquence, neither was he gifted
with an unusually bright fancy.  But he was fluent in speech, and his
words, though not chosen, were usually appropriate.  The captain had no
powers of invention whatever.  He used to say, when asked to tell a
story, that he "might as well try to play the fiddle with a handspike."
But this was no misfortune, for he had read much, and his memory was
good, and supplied him with an endless flow of small-talk on almost
every subject that usually falls under the observation of sea-captains,
and on many subjects besides, about which most sea-captains, or
land-captains, or any other captains whatsoever, are almost totally
ignorant.

Captain Dunning could tell of adventures in the whale-fishery, gone
through either by himself or by friends, that would have made your two
eyes stare out of their two sockets until they looked like saucers (to
use a common but not very correct simile).  He could tell the exact
latitude and longitude of almost every important and prominent part of
the globe, and give the distance, pretty nearly, of any one place (on a
large scale) from any other place.  He could give the heights of all the
chief mountains in the world to within a few feet, and could calculate,
by merely looking at its current and depth, how many cubic feet of water
any river delivered to the sea per minute.  Length, breadth, and
thickness, height, depth, and density, were subjects in which he
revelled, and with which he played as a juggler does with golden balls;
and so great were his powers of numerical calculation, that the sailors
often declared they believed he could work out any calculation backwards
without the use of logarithms!  He was constantly instituting
comparisons that were by no means what the proverb terms "odious," but
which were often very astonishing, and in all his stories so many
curious and peculiar facts were introduced, that, as we have already
said, they were very much relished indeed.

Not less relished, however, were Glynn Proctor's astounding and purely
imaginative tales.  After the men's minds had been chained intently on
one of the captain's semi-philosophical anecdotes, they turned with
infinite zest to one of Glynn's outrageous flights.  Glynn had not read
much in his short life, and his memory was nothing to boast of, but his
imagination was quite gigantic.  He could invent almost anything; and
the curious part of it was, that he could do it out of nothing, if need
be.  He never took time to consider what he should say.  When called on
for a story he began at once, and it flowed from him like a flood of
sparkling water from a fountain in fairy realms.  Up in the clouds; high
in the blue ether; down in the coral caves; deep in the ocean waves; out
on the mountain heaths; far in the rocky glens, or away in the wild
woods green--it was all one to Glynn; he leaped away in an instant, with
a long train of adventurers at his heels--male and female, little and
big, old and young, pretty and plain, grave and gay.  And didn't they go
through adventures that would have made the hair of mortals not only
stand on end, but fly out by the roots altogether?  Didn't he make them
talk, as mortals never talked before; and sing as mortals never dreamed
of?  And, oh! didn't he just make them stew, and roast, and boil joints
of savoury meat, and bake pies, and tarts, and puddings, such as Soyer
in his wildest culinary dreams never imagined, and such as caused the
mouths of the crew of the _Maid of the Isle_ to water, until they were
constrained, poor fellows, to tell him to "clap a stopper upon that,"
and hold his tongue, for they "couldn't stand it!"
