Hamersley and Wilder at their head, Haynes, Cully, and the best mounted
of the troop close following.  Walt and the Kentuckian well know the
way.  Otherwise, in the buffeting of that terrible storm, they might
fail to find it.

They succeed in keeping it, on to the head of the valley, where the
stream comes in between the cliffs.  A tiny runlet as they last looked
upon it--a mere brook, pellucid and sparkling as the sand on its bed.
Now it is a torrent, deep, red and roaring; only white on its surface,
where the froth sweeps on, clouting the cliffs on each side.  Against
these it has risen quite six feet, and still creeps upward.  It has
filled the channel from side to side, leaving not an inch of roadway
between the river and rock.

To wade it would be impossible; to attempt swimming it destruction.  The
staunchest steed could not stem its surges.  Even the huge river-horse
of Africa would be swept off his feet and tossed to the surface like one
of its froth-flakes.

Arriving on its edge, Hamersley sees this at a glance.  As he checks up
his horse, the exclamation that leaps from his lips more resembles the
anguished cry of a man struggling in the torrent than one seated safely
in a saddle on its bank.

After it, he gives utterance to two words in sad despairing tone, twice
repeated,--

"Too late--too late!"

Again repeated by Walt Wilder, and twenty times again by a score of the
Rangers who have ridden up, and reined their horses crowdingly behind.

There is no response save echo from the rocks, scarce audible through
the hoarse sough of the swollen surging stream, that rolls relentlessly
by, seeming to say, as in scorn, "Ford me! swim across me if you can!"



CHAPTER SIXTY TWO.

A SHORT SHRIFT.

Difficult--indeed, impossible--for pen to describe the scene consequent
upon the arrival of the Rangers by the banks of the swollen stream, and
finding it unfordable.

Imagine a man who has secured passage by a ship bound for some far-off
foreign land, and delayed by some trifling affair, comes upon the pier
to see the hawser cast off, the plank drawn ashore, the sails spread,
himself left hopelessly behind!

His chagrin might be equal to that felt by the Texans, but slight
compared with what harrows the hearts of Hamersley and Walt Wilder.  To
symbolise theirs, it must be a man missing his ship homeward bound, with
sweetheart, wife, child awaiting him at the end of the voyage, and in a
port from which vessels take departure but "few and far between."

These two, better than any of the Texans, understand the obstruction
that has arisen, in the same proportion as they are aggrieved by it.
Too well do they comprehend its fatal import.  Not hours, but whole
days, may elapse before the flood subsides, the stream can be forded,
the ravine ascended, and the pursuit continued.

Hours--days!  A single day--an hour--may seal the fate of those dear to
them.  The hearts of both are sad, their bosoms racked with anguish, as
they sit in their saddles with eyes bent on the turbid stream, which
cruelly forbids fording it.

In different degree and from a different cause the Texans also suffer.
Some only disappointment, but others real chagrin.  These last men,
whose lives have been spent fighting their Mexican foemen, hating them
from the bottom of their hearts.  They are those who knew the
unfortunate Fanning and the lamented Bowie, who gave his name to their
knives; some of themselves having escaped from the red massacre of
Goliad and the savage butchery of the Alamo.

Ever since they have been practising the _lex talionis_--seeking
retaliation, and oft-times finding it.  Perhaps too often wreaking their
vengeance on victims that might be innocent.  Now that guilty ones--real
Mexican soldiers in uniform, such as ruthlessly speared and shot down
their countrymen at Goliad and San Antonio--now that a whole troop of
these have but the hour before been within reach--almost striking
distance--it is afflicting, maddening, to think they may escape.

And the more reflecting on the reason, so slight and accidental--a
shower of rain swelling a tiny stream.  For all this, staying their
pursuit as effectively as if a sea of fire separated them from the foe,
so despised and detested.

The lightning still flashes, the thunder rolls, the wind bellows, and
the rain pours down.

No use staying any longer by the side of the swollen stream, to be
tantalised by its rapid, rushing current, and mocked by its foam-flakes
dancing merrily along.

Rather return to the forsaken ranche, and avail themselves of such
shelter as it may afford.

In short, there seems no alternative; and, yielding to the necessity,
they rein round, and commence the backward march, every eye glancing
gloomily, every brow overcast.

They are all disappointed, most of them surly as bears that had been
shot in the head, and have scratched the place to a sore.  They are just
in the humour to kill anyone, or anything, that should chance in their
way.

But there is no one, and nothing; and, in the absence of an object to
spend their spite upon, some counsel wreaking it on their captives--the
traitor and renegade.

Never during life were these two men nearer their end.  To all
appearance, in ten minutes more both will be dangling at the end of a
rope suspended from a limb of a tree.

They are saved by a circumstance for them at least lucky, if unfortunate
for some others.

Just as a half-score of the Rangers have clumped together under a
spreading pecan-tree, intending to hang them upon one of its branches, a
horse is heard to neigh.  Not one of their own, but an animal some way
off the track, amid the trees.  The hail is at once responded to by the
steeds they are bestriding; and is promptly re-answered, not by one
horse, but three neighing simultaneously.

A strange thing this, that calls for explanation.  What horses can be
there, save their own?  And none of the Rangers have ridden in the
direction whence the "whighering" proceeds.

A dozen of them do so now; before they have gone far, finding three
horses standing under the shadow of a large live oak, with three men
mounted on their backs, who endeavour to keep concealed behind its broad
buttressed trunk.

In vain.  Guided by the repeated neighing and continuous tramp of their
horses, the Rangers ride up, close around, and capture them.

Led out into the light, the Texans see before them three men in soldier
garb--the uniform of Mexican lancers.  It is the corporal squad sent
back by Uraga to bring on the truant traitor.

Of their errand the Rangers know nought, and nothing care.  Enough that
three of their hated foemen are in their hands, their hostility
intensified by the events of the hour.

No more fuel is needed to fire them up.  Their vengeance demands a
victim, and three have offered ready to hand.

As they ride back to the road, they leave behind them a tableau, telling
of a spectacle just passed--one having a frightful finale.  From a large
limb of the live oak, extending horizontally, hang three men, the
Mexican lancers.  They are suspended by the neck, dangling, dead!



CHAPTER SIXTY THREE.

A SPLIT TRAIL.

The Texans ride on to the ranche.  They still chafe at being thwarted of
a vengeance; by every man of them keenly felt, after learning the
criminality of the Lancer Colonel.  Such unheard of atrocity could not
help kindling within their breasts indignation of the deepest kind.

The three soldiers strung up to the trees have been its victims.

But this episode, instead of appeasing the executioners, has only roused
them, as tigers who have tasted blood hindered from banqueting on flesh.

They quite comprehend the position in which the norther has placed them.
On the way Hamersley and Wilder, most discomforted of all, have made
them aware of it.  The swollen stream will prevent egress from the
valley till it subsides.

There is no outlet save above and below, and both these are now
effectually closed, shutting them up as in a strong-walled prison.  On
each side the precipice is unscalable.  Even if men might ascend, horses
could not be taken along; and on such a chase it would be hopeless for
them to set out afoot.

But men could not go up the cliff.

"A cat kedn't climb it," says Walt, who during his sojourn in the valley
has explored every inch of it.  "We've got to stay hyar till the flood
falls.  I reckon no one kin be sorrier to say so than this chile.  But
thar's no help for 't."

"Till the flood falls?  When will that be?"

No one can answer this, not even Wilder himself.  And with clouded
brows, sullen, dispirited, they return to the jacal.

Two days they stay there, chafing with angry impatience.  In their anger
they are ready for the most perilous enterprise.  But, although bitterly
cursing the sinister chance that hinders pursuit, deeming each hour a
day, they can do nought save wait till the swollen stream subsides.

They watch it with eager solicitude, constantly going to the bank to
examine it, as the captain of a ship consults his weather-glass to take
steps for the safety of his vessel.  All the time one or another is
riding to, or returning from, the head of the valley, to bring back
report of how the subsidence progresses.

And long ere the stream has returned to its regular channel, they plunge
their horses into it, breasting a current that almost sweeps them off
their feet.  But the Texan horses are strong, as their riders are
skilful; the obstacle is surmounted, and the Rangers at length escape
from their prolonged and irksome imprisonment.

It is mid-day, as filing up the pass, they reach the higher level of the
Llano.  Not many moments do they remain there; only long enough for the
rear files to get out of the gorge, when those in front move forward
across the plain, guided by the two best trackers in Texas, Nat Cully
and Walt Wilder.

At first there is no following of a trail, since there is none visible.
Wind, rain, and drifted dust have obliterated every mark made by the
returning soldiers.  Not a sign is left to show the pursuers the path
Uraga's troop has taken.

They know it should be westward, and strike out without waiting to look
for tracks.

For the first ten or twelve miles they ride at a rapid rate, often going
in a gallop.  Their horses, rested and fresh, enable them to do so.
They are only stayed in their pace by the necessity of keeping a
straight course--not so easy upon a treeless plain, when the sun is not
visible in the sky.  Unluckily for them, the day is cloudy, which
renders it more difficult.  Still, with the twin buttes behind--so long
as these are in sight they keep their course with certainty; then, as
their summits sink below the level of the plain, another landmark looms
up ahead, well known by Walt Wilder and Hamersley.  It is the black-jack
grove where, two days before, they made their midday meal.

The Rangers ride towards it, with the intention also to make a short
halt there and snatch a scrap from their haversacks.

When upon its edge, before entering among the trees, they see that which
decides them to stay even less time than intended--the hoof-prints of
half a hundred horses!

Going inside the copse, they observe other signs that speak of an
encampment.  Reading these with care, they can tell that it has not long
been broken up.  The ashes of the bivouac fires are scarce cold, while
the hoof-marks of the horses show fresh on the desert dust, for the time
converted into mud.  Wilder and Cully declare that but one day can have
passed since the lancers parted from the spot; for there is no question
as to who have been bivouacking among the black-jacks.

A day--only a day!  It will take full five before the soldiers can cross
the Sierras and enter the valley of the Del Norte.  There may still be a
chance of overtaking them.  All the likelier, since, cumbered with their
captives, and not knowing they are pursued, they may be proceeding at a
leisurely pace.

Cheered by this hope, and freshly stimulated, the Texans do not even
dismount, but, spurring forth upon the plain, again ride rapidly on,
munching a mouthful as they go.

They are no longer delayed by any doubt as to course.  The trail of the
lancer troop is now easily discernible, made since the storm passed
over.  Any one of the Rangers could follow it in a fast gallop.

At this pace they all go, only at intervals drawing in to a walk, to
breathe their blown steeds for a fresh spurt.

Even after night has descended they continue on, a clear moonlight
enabling them to lift the trail.

As next morning's sun breaks over the Llano Estacado they descend its
western slope into the valley of the Rio Pecos.

Traversing its bottom, of no great breadth, they reach the crossing of
the old Spanish trail, from Santa Fe to San Antonio de Bejar.

Fording the stream, on its western bank, they discover signs which cause
them to come to a halt, for some time perplexing them.  Nothing more
than the tracks of the troop they have been all the while pursuing,
which entered the river on its left side.  Now on its right they are
seen the same, up the sloping causeway of the bank.  But on reaching the
bottom, a little aback from the water's edge, the trail splits into two
distinct ramifications, one continuing westward towards the Sierras, the
other turning north along the stream.  The first shows the hoof-marks of
nigh forty horses, the second only ten or twelve.

Unquestionably the Mexican colonel had here divided his troop, the main
body proceeding due west, the detachment striking up stream.

The route taken by this last would be the old Spanish road for Santa Fe,
the first party proceeding on to Albuquerque.

For a time the pursuing Texans are at fault, as foxhounds by a fence,
over which Reynard has doubled back to mislead them.  They have halted
at the bifurcation of the trails, and sit in their saddles, considering
which of the two they should take.

Not all remain mounted.  Cully and Wilder have flung themselves to the
ground, and, in bent attitudes, with eyes close to the surface, are
scanning the hoof-marks of the Mexican horses.

The others debate which of the two troops they ought to take after, or
whether they should themselves separate and pursue both.  This course is
opposed by a majority, and it is at length almost decided to continue on
after the main body, which, naturally enough, they suppose to have Uraga
at its head, with the captives in keeping.

In the midst of their deliberations a shout calls the attention of all,
concentrating it on Walt Wilder.  For it is he who has uttered the cry.
The ex-Ranger is seen upon his knees, his great body bent forward, with
his chin almost touching the ground.  His eyes are upon the hoof-marks
of a horse--one of those that went off with the smaller detachment along
the river's bank.

That he has identified the track is evident from the speech succeeding
his ejaculation.

"Yur hoss, Hamersley!  Hyar's his futprint, sure.  An', as he's rud by
Urager, the scoundrel's goed this way to a sartinty.  Eqwally sartin,
he's tuk the captives along wi' him."

On hearing their old comrade declare his prognosis, the Rangers wheel
their horses and ride towards him.

Before reaching the spot where he is still prospecting, they see him
give a sudden spring forward, like a frog leaping over meadow sward,
then pause again, scrutinising a track.

A second examination, similar to the first, tells of another discovery.
In like manner explained, by his speech close following,--

"An' hyar's the track o' the mare--the yeller mustang as war rid by the
saynorita.  An', durn me, that's the hoof-mark o' the mule as carried my
Concheter.  Capting Haynes!  Kumrades!  No use botherin' 'bout hyar any
longer.  Them we want to kum up wi' are goed north 'long this trail as
leads by the river bank."

Not another word is needed.  The Rangers, keen of apprehension and quick
to arrive at conclusions, at once perceive the justness of those come to
by their old comrade.  They make no opposition to his proposal to
proceed after the smaller party.

Instead, all signify assent; and in ten seconds after they are strung
out into a long line, going at a gallop, their horses' heads turned
northward up the right bank of the Rio Pecos.



CHAPTER SIXTY FOUR.

A SYLVAN SCENE.

Perhaps no river on all the North American continent is marked with
interest more romantic than that which attaches to the Rio Grande of
Mexico.  On its banks has been enacted many a tragic scene--many an
episode of Indian and border war--from the day when the companions of
Cortez first unfurled Spain's _pabellon_ till the Lone Star flag of
Texas, and later still the banner of the Stars and Stripes, became
mirrored on its waves.

Heading in the far-famed "parks" of the Rocky Mountains, under the name
of Rio Bravo del Norte, it runs in a due southerly direction between the
two main ranges of the Mexican "Sierre Madre;" then, breaking through
the Eastern Cordillera, it bends abruptly, continuing on in a
south-easterly course till it espouses ocean in the great Mexican Gulf.

Only its lower portion is known as the "Rio Grande;" above it is the
"Bravo del Norte."

The Pecos is its principal tributary, which, after running through
several degrees of latitude parallel to the main stream, at length
unites with it below the great bend.

In many respects the Pecos is itself a peculiar river.  For many hundred
miles it courses through a wilderness rarely traversed by man, more
rarely by men claiming to be civilised.  Its banks are only trodden by
the savage, and by him but when going to or returning from a raid.  For
this turbid stream is a true river of the desert, having on its left
side the sterile tract of the Llano Estacado, on its right dry table
plains that lead up to the Sierras, forming the "divide" between its
waters and those of the Bravo del Norte.

On the side of the Staked Plain the Pecos receives but few affluents,
and these of insignificant character.  From the Sierras, however,
several streams run into it through channels deeply cut into the plain,
their beds being often hundreds of feet below its level.  While the
plateau above is often arid and treeless, the bottom lands of these
tributaries show a rich luxuriant vegetation, here and there expanding
into park-like meadows, with groves and copses interspersed.

On the edge of one of these affluents, known as the _Arroyo Alamo_
(Anglice "Cottonwood Creek"), two tents are seen standing--one a square
marquee, the other a "single pole," of the ordinary conical shape.

Near by a half score of soldiers are grouped around a bivouac fire, some
broiling bits of meat on sapling spits, others smoking corn-husk
cigarettes, all gaily chatting.  One is some fifty paces apart, under a
spreading tree, keeping guard over two prisoners, who, with legs lashed
and hands pinioned, lie prostrate upon the ground.

As the soldiers are in the uniform of Mexican lancers, it is needless to
say they belong to the troop of Colonel Uraga.  Superfluous to add that
the two prisoners under the tree are Don Valerian Miranda and the
doctor.

Uraga himself is not visible, nor his adjutant, Roblez.  They are inside
the conical hut, the square one being occupied by Adela and her maid.

After crossing the Pecos, Uraga separated his troop into two parties.
For some time he has sent the main body, under command of his alferez,
direct to Albuquerque, himself and the adjutant turning north with the
captives and a few files as escort and guard.  Having kept along the
bank of the Pecos till reaching the Alamo, he turned up the creek, and
is now _en bivouac_ in its bottom, some ten miles above the confluence
of the streams.

A pretty spot has he selected for the site of his encampment.  A verdant
mead, dotted with groves of leafy _alamo_ trees, that reflect their
shadows upon crystal runlets silently coursing beneath, suddenly
flashing into the open light like a band of silver lace as it bisects a
glade green with _gramma_ grass.  A landscape not all woodland or
meadow, but having also a mountain aspect, for the basaltic cliffs that
on both sides bound the valley bottom rise hundreds of feet high,
standing scarce two hundred yards apart, grimly frowning at each other,
like giant warriors about to begin battle, while the tall stems of the
_pitahaya_ projecting above might be likened to poised spears.

It is a scene at once soft and sublime--an Eden of angels beset by a
serried phalanx of fiends; below, sweetly smiling; above, darkly
frowning and weirdly picturesque.  A wilderness, with all its charms,
uninhabited; no house in sight; no domestic hearth or chimney towering
over it; no smoke, save that curling aloft from the fire lately kindled
in the soldiers' camp.  Beasts and birds are its only habitual denizens;
its groves the chosen perching place of sweet songsters; its openings
the range of the prong-horn antelope and black-tailed deer; while
soaring above, or seated on prominent points of the precipice, may be
seen the _caracara_, the buzzard, and bald-headed eagle.

Uraga has pitched his tents in an open glade of about ten acres in
superficial extent, and nearly circular in shape, lying within the
embrace of an umbrageous wood, the trees being mostly cotton woods of
large dimensions.  Through its midst the streamlet meanders above,
issuing out of the timber, and below again entering it.

On one side the bluffs are visible, rising darkly above the tree-tops,
and in the concavity underneath stand the tents, close to the timber
edge, though a hundred paces apart from each other.  The troop horses,
secured by their trail-ropes, are browsing by the bank of the stream;
and above, perched upon the summit of the cliff, a flock of black
vultures sun themselves with out-spread wings, now and then uttering an
ominous croak as they crane their necks to scan what is passing
underneath.

Had Uraga been influenced by a sense of sylvan beauty, he could not have
chosen a spot more suitable for his camping-place.

Scenic effect has nought to do with his halting there.  On the contrary,
he has turned up the Alamo, and is bivouacking on its bank, for a
purpose so atrocious that no one would give credit to it unacquainted
with the military life of Mexico in the days of the Dictator Don Antonio
Lopez de Santa Anna.  This purpose is declared in a dialogue between the
lancer colonel and his lieutenant, occurring inside the conical tent
shortly after its being set up.

But before shadowing the bright scene we have painted by thoughts of the
dark scheme so disclosed, let us seek society of a gentler kind.  We
shall find it in the marquee set apart for Adela Miranda and her maid.

It scarce needs to say that a change is observable in the appearance of
the lady.  Her dress is travel-stained, bedraggled by dust and rain; her
