
Why, indeed? How many of us mourn over our past follies and
cowardices, bitterly regretting the wasted moment or the lost
opportunity? Gwen's fault was indeed being visited heavily upon her
shoulders. She had sown the wind and reaped the whirlwind. She felt
keen resentment against Netta. It was a dastardly trick to have played
upon her. Netta might at least have warned her that the bill was to be
sent on to Miss Roscoe--then she could have been prepared for the
worst. It was surely mere spite on the part of her friend, who, having
quarrelled with her, was anxious to find some means of annoying her.
Netta had been jealous of her new-found appreciation in the Form, and
had taken this opportunity of trying to humble her. The deficit in the
gate fund filled Gwen with surprise. There seemed only one way of
accounting for it, and that was so painful that she shrank from facing
it. Lesbia had taken change out of the satchel, and that same evening
Lesbia had acknowledged the possession of ten shillings, but had
refused to reveal how she came by the money.

Gwen groaned as she remembered her sister's conscious looks and
evasive replies. Could it actually be possible that Lesbia had
abstracted this money? She was rather silly, flighty, and
irresponsible, but she had always been truthful and honourable. No, it
was surely absolutely foreign to her character! Then where had she
obtained half a guinea to buy a new tennis racket? And what was the
reason of her extreme embarrassment? Gwen abandoned the question in
despair.

"If she really did take it, I must shield her at any cost," she
decided. "She'd get into such frightful trouble, and scolding Lesbia
is like breaking a butterfly. I can bear things better than she can.
But--oh, dear! What am I to say to Dad if he asks me? I can stand
Miss Roscoe's wrath, but I can't face making Dad look sorry."

The Principal left Gwen until one o'clock to reflect upon her sins,
then summoned her again to the study, and urged her in strong terms to
confess.

"I will forgive you if you only acknowledge it, but if you persist in
denying it, I shall have to go more deeply into the matter," she said
sternly. "I cannot allow such things to happen at Rodenhurst. It is a
very grave fault, Gwen. Do you wish me to send for your father?"

"No, no!" cried Gwen hastily.

"Then will you confess?"

"I can't! I didn't do it! Oh, I don't understand!" responded Gwen,
torn in two between the desire to defend herself and the fear of
involving Lesbia. She did not dare to tell Miss Roscoe that her sister
had taken change from the satchel, yet by that circumstance only could
she account for the loss.

"Miss Douglas is as distressed as I am," continued the Principal. "I
was obliged to tell her, in order to explain your absence from your
classes. Here she comes now. Perhaps she will be able to persuade you
better than I."

"Oh, Miss Roscoe," exclaimed Miss Douglas, entering the study with a
hurried step and a heightened colour, "I have just made the most
astounding discovery! I happened to look in my purse, and to my
amazement and consternation I found half a sovereign which certainly
ought not to be there. I am sure I know how I came by it. Yesterday,
just before I went into the house to dress the girls who were to sing
the Elizabethan madrigal, I bought a box of sweets from Lesbia
Gascoyne. I gave her a two-shilling piece, and as she had no
sixpences, she ran to Gwen to ask change for my florin. She came
hurrying back, and handed me, as we both imagined, three sixpences. I
put them in my purse without looking at them. Now I am quite sure that
one of these supposed sixpences must in reality have been half a
sovereign, given by mistake. I undoubtedly had no ten-shilling piece
in my purse. The difference of giving half a sovereign in lieu of
sixpence would be exactly the nine-and-six that was missing from
Gwen's satchel. Let us exchange the two coins, and the deficit will be
made up."

It was such a natural, simple, and self-evident explanation of the
situation that its truth could not be doubted. Miss Roscoe heaved a
sigh of intense relief.

"I am grateful to you beyond words, Miss Douglas," she returned.
"Gwen, I am most delighted that your honour is cleared, and regret I
harboured so unjust a suspicion against you. I confess it was the
affair of the broken china that prejudiced me in your disfavour. It
supplied so strong a motive. Why didn't you come and tell me about
that right away when if happened instead of trying to settle it in
such a crooked fashion? It wasn't straight and square, was it? Have I
heard the whole story?"

Gwen, who had not shed a tear before, was crying bitterly now. Miss
Roscoe's present kindly tone hurt more than her former severity.
Almost in spite of herself the girl began to blurt put her version of
how she had accidentally broken the tea service, had intended to pay
for it at once, and how Emma had absconded with the money. The
housemaid's part in the drama was news to Miss Roscoe, and she
hastened to ask for particulars.

"This must be investigated immediately," she declared. "I shall send
for Emma Dalton this afternoon. I happen to know that she has a place
as parlour-maid at a house not far away. If I had heard of this I
could not have given her a character. Indeed she deserves to be
prosecuted for theft. I must write a note to her present mistress."

Miss Roscoe never let the grass grow under her feet. In this case she
acted with her usual promptitude, and by two o'clock Emma, in much
alarm, and weeping like a waterspout, was ushered into the study and
confronted with Gwen and Netta, who were both summoned for the
occasion.

"Now, Emma, this is a serious charge. Have you anything to say for
yourself?" enquired Miss Roscoe, seating herself at her desk with the
air of a magistrate about to try a case.

"I didn't pay the money at Parker's, and I don't deny it," sobbed
Emma. "I meant to, but I saw a coat and skirt I wanted, so I thought
I'd borrow it, and the bill might just wait for a bit. I've intended
to go and settle every month when I got my wages, but it's never
seemed the right time. I didn't know Parker's were pressing for it.
Oh, dear, I've been a bad girl!"

"You have indeed," said Miss Roscoe. "It was wrong of Miss Gascoyne
to ask you to help her to deceive me, but worse for you to defraud
her."

"It wasn't Miss Gascoyne that suggested sending back the broken china
to Parker's and saying nothing about it; it was Miss Goodwin,"
declared Emma, pointing at Netta. "She planned the whole thing! Yes, I
can tell you she did. She's a deeper one than the other. It was half
her fault, I'll be bound!"

Netta's face was a study, especially as Miss Roscoe looked at her
keenly, though she made no remark.

"I've brought the money with me," continued Emma, still sobbing, "if
Miss Gascoyne will please take it and forgive me."

"You don't deserve any consideration, Emma," said Miss Roscoe.

"For the sake of my mother!" pleaded Emma. "Oh, don't prosecute me! It
would brand me for life!"

"Don't send her to prison, please!" interposed Gwen.

"Well, we don't want to be too hard on you and ruin your life. Let it
be a warning to you to be honest in future. I am sure Miss Gascoyne
has no wish to prosecute you. I shall be obliged to let your mistress
know about this, however. I gave you so good a character to her, that
it is not fair she should remain in ignorance of so serious a slip.
She must be the judge whether she keeps you in her service or not."

"I'll go home to my mother and work at dressmaking," snivelled Emma as
she prepared to depart. "Here's the money, Miss Gascoyne; I'm sorry I
took it, and thank you kindly for not prosecuting."

Netta fled from the study the moment Miss Roscoe gave her leave to go.
She was anxious not to have to speak to Gwen, for she knew she had not
behaved well towards her. Emma's unexpected accusation had given
rather an awkward turn to the affair, and she had hardly come out of
it with the credit she expected. Gwen lingered behind. She felt she
could not leave without offering the apology which for seven long
months she had wished to make.

"Please, Miss Roscoe, I'm most dreadfully sorry about all this. I know
I ought to have come and told you at once when I knocked over the box
of china," she blurted out abruptly. "I've been miserable the whole
time about it."

"Well, Gwen, it's a lesson to keep square, isn't it? One little step
from the straight road often sends us farther out of our way than we
have any intention of going. I don't think you will descend to
anything so underhand again, will you?"

"Never in all my life!" protested Gwen with energy.

"Then we'll say no more about it."

The news that Gwen had been suspected of appropriating some of the
gate money had leaked out, as news always leaks out, and was received
with great indignation by the rest of the Fifth.

"Gwen Gascoyne simply isn't capable of doing such an abominable
thing!" declared Elspeth Frazer.

"No. Gwen's gauche and brusque, but she's unimpeachable," agreed Hilda
Browne.

"I'd rather suspect myself!" said Charlotte Perry.

Much satisfaction was expressed in the Form when the report of the
mistake in Miss Douglas's change was circulated, and Gwen's complete
acquittal secured. Everybody congratulated her heartily when she
returned to the classroom.

"You're the heroine of the hour," said Louise Mawson. "It was an
uncommonly disagreeable thing to happen. But in a bag full of change
it's very easy to confuse a half-sovereign and a sixpence. By the by,
has Miss Roscoe added up all the accounts yet? How much have we made?"

"One hundred and fifty-three pounds altogether," replied Gwen. "We got
a hundred and nine pounds by collecting, and the gymkhana has made
forty-four."

"Hooray! Then the cot is an accomplished fact."

"We shall all have to pay a visit to the Convalescent Home and see it,
as soon as the name is painted up over it," said Hilda Browne.

"Won't it look scrumptious to see 'Rodenhurst Cot' in black and
white?" chuckled Charlotte Perry.

"We shall have to publish reports of our special convalescents in
every number of the school magazine," suggested Iris Watson. "It will
be so interesting to read about them."

At four o'clock, by Winnie's express permission, Gwen went to Parker &
Sons and made a final settlement of their account. The relief of being
free from her load of debt was very great, and she came out of the
shop happier than she had been since the day she first entered it. As
Emma had refunded the one pound two and sixpence in full, Gwen had
twelve and sixpence in hand, and, in consequence, felt rich beyond the
dreams of avarice. The vision of a new tennis racket began to dawn on
her horizon. That evening she managed to cajole Father for a short
stroll on the moor. It was seldom she could secure such a
_tete-a-tete_ walk, but she was longing so much to unburden her mind
that she gave him no peace until she had got him all to herself. Once
they were seated on the heather, with the wold behind and the sea in
front, Gwen began to pour out the story in her usual abrupt, jerky
fashion, not omitting the matter of the prize essay which she had sold
to Netta.

"Why didn't you tell me all this before, Gwen?" asked Mr. Gascoyne
when she had finished.

"Because--oh, Dad, I thought it would worry you! Beatrice said you
were so dreadfully hard up."

"It would have worried me far more to feel that you owed money. How
much did Netta Goodwin lend you?"

"A sovereign."

"Then I will make up your twelve and six to twenty shillings, and you
shall pay her back. I don't like that transaction about the essay at
all."

"Netta doesn't deserve it!" exclaimed Gwen.

"I dare say not, but your conscience demands it. Honour forbids you to
expose Netta, but the affair was so discreditable that I want your
part at least to be set straight. That sovereign was ill-gotten gains,
Gwen!"

"Oh, Dad! Are you very angry with me?"

"No, not angry, but I wish you'd trusted me. The whole business,
childie, hasn't been on the square."

"I knew it wasn't, all the time," confessed Gwen, scrubbing her eyes.
"But--oh, Dad, it was so hard! Why do such hard places come into one's
life?"

"To give one the opportunity to get strong. If everything were always
pleasant and smooth and easy, we should be poor sort of creatures in
the end, with no character worth having. I feel that every day myself,
and give thanks for the hard things, and I've had my share of them."

Gwen looked at Father, and a sudden perception of his meaning swept
over her. Young as she was, she knew something of the struggles and
disappointments, the lack of appreciation, the mistrust, the
misconstructions, the slights which had met him in his parish work,
and the burden of poverty which he carried so bravely and
uncomplainingly--somewhat, too, perhaps, she divined of the hopes he
had left behind. Her own little struggles faded into nothingness in
the shadow of his.

"Yes, you've had a hard life, Dad," she repeated slowly.

"Sentry duty. That's all! A hard life is the soldier's post of
honour," said Father.

He looked far out over the sea as he spoke, and it almost seemed to
Gwen as if his face shone.

There was still one point which Gwen was anxious to elucidate, and
that was the reason of Lesbia's peculiar conduct in the orchard on the
evening of the gymkhana, and where she had obtained the ten and
sixpence of which she had spoken. Lesbia seemed very unwilling to
discuss the subject, but when the two girls were in their bedroom that
night, Gwen held her to the point.

"Oh, Gwen, you've got me in a corner!" protested Lesbia. "I didn't
mean to tell a soul about it, except Kitty Macpherson! Well, if you
must know, this is what happened. One day Kitty brought a copy of _The
Gentlewoman's World_ to school. It had a beauty competition in it, and
she urged me to try my luck, so I sent up my photo--that one which
Aunt Violet had taken of me when I was staying at Greylands. It
actually won a prize, and the magazine sent me a postal order for ten
and sixpence. I didn't dare to tell any of you at home, because I knew
you'd all think me so terribly vain and conceited. Beatrice is
fearfully down on me for that kind of thing, and I knew the boys would
tease, and call me 'Proudie' and 'Madam Conceit'."

Gwen laughed long and heartily. She did not tell her little sister of
the unjust suspicion she had for a short time harboured against her.
The whole affair was so exactly like Lesbia, from the competing for a
beauty prize to the careless taking of wrong change.

"How will you explain your new tennis racket?" she enquired. "Beatrice
will ask where you got the money to buy it."

