"No, Maggie; it's true.  The press-gang got him and took him awa', an' I
doot we'll never see him again."

The little girl's expression changed while he spoke, then her lip
trembled, and she burst into tears.

"See there, Janet," said Spink, pointing to Maggie, and looking
earnestly at his wife.

"Weel-a-weel," replied Janet, somewhat softened, yet with much firmness,
"I'll no deny that the man was fond o' the bairn, and it liked him weel
enough; but, my certes! he wad hae made a bad man o' you if he could.
But I'm real sorry for Ruby Brand; and what'll the puir lassie Gray do?
Ye'll hae to gang up an' gie them the message."

"So I will; but that's like somethin' to eat, I think?"

Spink pointed to the soup.

"Ay, it's a' we've got, so let's fa' to; and haste ye, lad.  It's a sair
heart she'll hae this night--wae's me!"

While Spink and his wife were thus employed, Widow Brand, Minnie Gray,
and Captain Ogilvy were seated at tea, round the little table in the
snug kitchen of the widow's cottage.

It might have been observed that there were two teapots on the table, a
large one and a small, and that the captain helped himself out of the
small one, and did not take either milk or sugar.  But the captain's
teapot did not necessarily imply tea.  In fact, since the death of the
captain's mother, that small teapot had been accustomed to strong drink
only.  It never tasted tea.

"I wonder if Ruby will get leave of absence," said the captain, throwing
himself back in his armchair, in order to be able to admire, with
greater ease, the smoke, as it curled towards the ceiling from his mouth
and pipe.

"I do hope so," said Mrs Brand, looking up from her knitting, with a
little sigh.  Mrs Brand usually followed up all her remarks with a
little sigh.  Sometimes the sigh was _very_ little.  It depended a good
deal on the nature of her remark whether the sigh was of the little,
less, or least description; but it never failed, in one or other degree,
to close her every observation.

"I _think_ he will," said Minnie, as she poured a second cup of tea for
the widow.

"Ay, that's right, lass," observed the captain; "there's nothin' like
hope--

  "`The pleasures of hope told a flatterin' tale
  Regardin' the fleet when Lord Nelson set sail.'

"Fill me out another cup of tea, Hebe."

It was a pleasant little fiction with the captain to call his beverage
"tea".  Minnie filled out a small cupful of the contents of the little
teapot, which did, indeed, resemble tea, but which smelt marvellously
like hot rum and water.

"Enough, enough.  Come on, Macduff!  Ah!  Minnie, this is prime Jamaica;
it's got such a--but I forgot; you don't understand nothin' about nectar
of this sort."

The captain smoked in silence for a few minutes, and then said, with a
sudden chuckle--

"Wasn't it odd, sister, that we should have found it all out in such an
easy sort o' way?  If criminals would always tell on themselves as
plainly as Big Swankie did, there would be no use for lawyers."

"Swankie would not have spoken so freely," said Minnie, with a laugh,
"if he had known that we were listening."

"That's true, girl," said the captain, with sudden gravity; "and I don't
feel quite easy in my mind about that same eavesdropping.  It's a dirty
thing to do--especially for an old sailor, who likes everything to be
fair and above-board; but then, you see, the natur' o' the words we
couldn't help hearin' justified us in waitin' to hear more.  Yes, it was
quite right, as it turned out.  A little more tea, Minnie.  Thank'ee,
lass.  Now go, get the case, and let us look over it again."

The girl rose, and, going to a drawer, quickly returned with a small red
leather case in her hand.  It was the identical jewel-case that Swankie
had found on the dead body at the Bell Rock!

"Ah! that's it; now, let us see; let us see."  He laid aside his pipe,
and for some time felt all his pockets, and looked round the room, as if
in search of something.

"What are you looking for, uncle?"

"The specs, lass; these specs'll be the death o' me."

Minnie laughed.  "They're on your brow, uncle!"

"So they are!  Well, well--"

The captain smiled deprecatingly, and, drawing his chair close to the
table, began to examine the box.

Its contents were a strange mixture, and it was evident that the case
had not been made to hold them.

There was a lady's gold watch, of very small size, and beautifully
formed; a set of ornaments, consisting of necklace, bracelets, ring, and
ear-rings of turquoise and pearls set in gold, of the most delicate and
exquisite chasing; also, an antique diamond cross of great beauty,
besides a number of rings and bracelets of considerable value.

As the captain took these out one by one, and commented on them, he made
use of Minnie's pretty hand and arm to try the effect of each, and truly
the ornaments could not have found a more appropriate resting-place
among the fairest ladies of the land.

Minnie submitted to be made use of in this way with a pleased and amused
expression; for, while she greatly admired the costly gems, she could
not help smiling at the awkwardness of the captain in putting them on.

"Read the paper again," said Minnie, after the contents of the box had
been examined.

The captain took up a small parcel covered with oiled cloth, which
contained a letter.  Opening it, he began to read, but was interrupted
by Mrs Brand, who had paid little attention to the jewels.

"Read it out loud, brother," said she, "I don't hear you well.  Read it
out; I love to hear of my darling's gallant deeds."

The captain cleared his throat, raised his voice, and read slowly:--

  "`Lisbon, 10th March, 1808.

  "`Dear Captain Brand,--I am about to quit this place for the East in a
  few days, and shall probably never see you again.  Pray accept the
  accompanying case of jewels as a small token of the love and esteem in
  which you are held by a heart-broken father.  I feel assured that if
  it had been in the power of man to have saved my drowning child your
  gallant efforts would have been successful.  It was ordained
  otherwise; and I now pray that I may be enabled to say "God's will be
  done."  But I cannot bear the sight of these ornaments.  I have no
  relatives--none at least who deserve them half so well as yourself.
  Do not pain me by refusing them.  They may be of use to you if you are
  ever in want of money, being worth, I believe, between three and four
  hundred pounds.  Of course, you cannot misunderstand my motive in
  mentioning this.  No amount of money could in any measure represent
  the gratitude I owe to the man who risked his life to save my child.
  May God bless you, sir.'"

The letter ended thus, without signature; and the captain ceased to read
aloud.  But there was an addition to the letter written in pencil, in
the hand of the late Captain Brand, which neither he nor Minnie had yet
found courage to read to the poor widow.  It ran thus:--

  "Our doom is sealed.  My schooner is on the Bell Rock.  It is blowing
  a gale from the North East, and she is going to pieces fast.  We are
  all standing under the lee of a ledge of rock--six of us.  In half an
  hour the tide will be roaring over the spot.  God in Christ help us!
  It is an awful end.  If this letter and box is ever found, I ask the
  finder to send it, with my blessing, to Mrs Brand, my beloved wife,
  in Arbroath."

The writing was tremulous, and the paper bore the marks of having been
soiled with seaweed.  It was unsigned.  The writer had evidently been
obliged to close it hastily.

After reading this in silence the captain refolded the letter.

"No wonder, Minnie, that Swankie did not dare to offer such things for
sale.  He would certainly have been found out.  Wasn't it lucky that we
heard him tell Spink the spot under his floor where he had hidden them?"

At that moment there came a low knock to the door.  Minnie opened it,
and admitted Davy Spink, who stood in the middle of the room twitching
his cap nervously, and glancing uneasily from one to another of the
party.

"Hallo, Spink!" cried the captain, pushing his spectacles up on his
forehead, and gazing at the fisherman in surprise, "you don't seem to be
quite easy in your mind.  Hope your fortunes have not sprung a leak!"

"Weel, Captain Ogilvy, they just have; gone to the bottom, I might
a'most say.  I've come to tell ye--that--the fact is, that the
press-gang have catched us at last, and ta'en awa' my mate, Jock
Swankie, better kenn'd as Big Swankie."

"Hem--well, my lad, in so far as that does damage to you, I'm sorry for
it; but as regards society at large, I rather think that Swankie havin'
tripped his anchor is a decided advantage.  If you lose by this in one
way, you gain much in another; for your mate's companionship did ye no
good.  Birds of a feather should flock together.  You're better apart,
for I believe you to be an honest man, Spink."

Davy looked at the captain in unfeigned astonishment.

"Weel, ye're the first man that iver said that, an' I thank 'ee, sir,
but you're wrang, though I wush ye was right.  But that's no' what I
cam' to tell ye."

Here the fisherman's indecision of manner returned.

"Come, make a clean breast of it, lad.  There are none here but
friends."

"Weel, sir, Ruby Brand--"

He paused, and Minnie turned deadly pale, for she jumped at once to the
right conclusion.  The widow, on the other hand, listened for more with
deep anxiety, but did not guess the truth.

"The fact is, Ruby's catched too, an' he's awa' to the wars, and he sent
me to--ech, sirs! the auld wuman's fentit."

Poor Widow Brand had indeed fallen back in her chair in a state
bordering on insensibility.  Minnie was able to restrain her feelings so
as to attend to her.  She and the captain raised her gently, and led her
into her own room, from whence the captain returned, and shut the door
behind him.

"Now, Spink," said he, "tell me all about it, an' be partic'lar."

Davy at once complied, and related all that the reader already knows, in
a deep, serious tone of voice, for he felt that in the captain he had a
sympathetic listener.

When he had concluded, Captain Ogilvy heaved a sigh so deep that it
might have been almost considered a groan, then he sat down on his
armchair, and, pointing to the chair from which the widow had recently
risen, said, "Sit down, lad."

As he advanced to comply, Spink's eyes for the first time fell on the
case of jewels.  He started, paused, and looked with a troubled air at
the captain.

"Ha!" exclaimed the latter with a grin; "you seem to know these things;
old acquaintances, eh?"

"It wasna' me that stole them," said Spink hastily.

"I did not say that anyone stole them."

"Weel, I mean that--that--"

He stopped abruptly, for he felt that in whatever way he might attempt
to clear himself, he would unavoidably criminate, by implication, his
absent mate.

"I know what you mean, my lad; sit down."

Spink sat down on the edge of the chair, and looked at the other
uneasily.

"Have a cup of tea?" said the captain abruptly, seizing the small pot
and pouring out a cupful.

"Thank 'ee--I--I niver tak' tea."

"Take it to-night, then.  It will do you good."

Spink put the cup to his lips, and a look of deep surprise overspread
his rugged countenance as he sipped the contents.  The captain nodded.
Spink's look of surprise changed into a confidential smile; he also
nodded, winked, and drained the cup to the bottom.

"Yes," resumed the captain; "you mean that you did not take the case of
jewels from old Brand's pocket on that day when you found his body on
the Bell Rock, though you were present, and saw your comrade pocket the
booty.  You see I know all about it, Davy, an' your only fault lay in
concealing the matter, and in keepin' company with that scoundrel."

The gaze of surprise with which Spink listened to the first part of this
speech changed to a look of sadness towards the end of it.

"Captain Ogilvy," said he, in a tone of solemnity that was a strong
contrast to his usual easy, careless manner of speaking, "you ca'd me an
honest man, an' ye think I'm clear o' guilt in this matter, but ye're
mista'en.  Hoo ye cam' to find oot a' this I canna divine, but I can
tell ye somethin' mair than ye ken.  D'ye see that bag?"

He pulled a small leather purse out of his coat pocket, and laid it with
a little bang on the table.

The captain nodded.

"Weel, sir, that was _my_ share o' the plunder, thretty goolden
sovereigns.  We tossed which o' us was to hae them, an' the siller fell
to me.  But I've niver spent a boddle o't.  Mony a time have I been
tempit, an' mony a time wad I hae gi'en in to the temptation, but for a
certain lass ca'd Janet, that's been an angel, it's my belief, sent doon
frae heeven to keep me frae gawin to the deevil a'thegither.  But be
that as it may, I've brought the siller to them that owns it by right,
an' so my conscience is clear o't at lang last."

The sigh of relief with which Davy Spink pushed the bag of gold towards
his companion, showed that the poor man's mind was in truth released
from a heavy load that had crushed it for years.

The captain, who had lit his pipe, stared at the fisherman through the
smoke for some time in silence; then he began to untie the purse, and
said slowly, "Spink, I said you were an honest man, an' I see no cause
to alter my opinion."

He counted out the thirty gold pieces, put them back into the bag, and
the bag into his pocket.  Then he continued, "Spink, if this gold was
mine I would--but no matter, it's not mine, it belongs to Widow Brand,
to whom I shall deliver it up.  Meantime, I'll bid you good night.  All
these things require reflection.  Call back here to-morrow, my fine
fellow, and I'll have something to say to you.  Another cup of tea?"

"Weel, I'll no objec'."

Davy Spink rose, swallowed the beverage, and left the cottage.  The
captain returned, and stood for some time irresolute with his hand on
the handle of the door of his sister's room.  As he listened, he heard a
sob, and the tones of Minnie's voice as if in prayer.  Changing his
mind, he walked softly across the kitchen into his own room, where,
having trimmed the candle, refilled and lit his pipe, he sat down at the
table, and, resting his arms thereon, began to meditate.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

THE LIGHTHOUSE COMPLETED--RUBY'S ESCAPE FROM TROUBLE BY A DESPERATE
VENTURE.

There came a time at last when the great work of building the Bell Rock
Lighthouse drew to a close.  Four years after its commencement it was
completed, and on the night of the 1st of February, 1811, its bright
beams were shed for the first time far and wide over the sea.

It must not be supposed, however, that this lighthouse required four
years to build it.  On the contrary, the seasons in which work could be
done were very short.  During the whole of the first season of 1807, the
aggregate time of low-water work, caught by snatches of an hour or two
at a tide, did not amount to fourteen days of ten hours! while in 1808
it fell short of four weeks.

A great event is worthy of very special notice.  We should fail in our
duty to our readers if we were to make only passing reference to this
important event in the history of our country.

That 1st of February, 1811, was the birthday of a new era, for the
influence of the Bell Rock Light on the shipping interests of the
kingdom (not merely of Scotland, by any means), was far greater than
people generally suppose.

Here is a _fact_ that may well be weighed with attention; that might be
not inappropriately inscribed in diamond letters over the lintel of the
lighthouse door.  Up to the period of the building of the lighthouse,
the known history of the Bell Rock was a black record of wreck, ruin,
and death.  Its unknown history, in remote ages, who shall conceive,
much less tell?  _Up_ to that period, seamen dreaded the rock and
