remaining.

But two of the minutes were gone before his chance came.  Then there was
a cry, and all eyes turned towards him, for there came the ball flying
straight to where he stood.  In a moment he had it, and started to run.
It was a desperate chance, but Charlie was ready for desperate deeds.
Shout rose on shout, and cheer on cheer, as first one, then another of
the enemy was overturned or dodged.  The more he achieved, the less his
enemies ventured against him, and he dashed through their "forwards" and
between their "quarter-backs."  Next moment, with a mighty swoop, their
"half-back" fell to the earth.

And now there are but two men to pass, and one of these is Jim Halliday.
The avenging host follows in hot haste behind, but the issue of the
fight lies with these two.  See the grin of joy on Jim's face as he
throws away his cap, and watches his dear enemy advance!  It was as if a
trumpet-call had suddenly sounded in the ears of two old chargers, and
to them that moment the world was all contained in the space which
severed them.  Straight as an arrow rushed Charlie, firm as a rock
waited Jim.  Nor had he long to wait.  With a bound and a howl his enemy
leapt at him, and next moment the two were locked in an embrace the
shock of which even I could distinctly hear.  Oh, shades of Randlebury I
did your school every turn out two finer men than this pair of
struggling, straining, rival friends!  The collision occurred close to
the goal-line, and a moment afterwards a cry of "Maul!" proclaimed that
they had in their struggle crossed the line, and that consequently (in
accordance with the law of the game) the contest for the ball must be
decided by these two alone, without aid or hindrance from the breathless
friends and foes who stood round.  A fair field and no favour!  A ring
was formed, and as my heart beat rapidly on towards the critical moment,
these two strained every nerve to get the advantage for his side before
"time" should be called.

"Bravo, our man!" cried one.  "Stick to it, Newcome!" shouted others.
"Now you have it, Halliday!" called out a third.  Never was duel before
the walls of Troy more desperate.  The crowd burst in onto the field and
thronged round, foremost among whom Jim's aunt's voice was heard crying
out shrilly,--

"Well, I never, it's James and Mr Newcome, my love.  How hot they are!"

It was evident the contest in which the two youths were engaged was one
not destined to end before time was up.  I pointed to within half a
minute of the fated hour--and it would take far longer than that for
even so powerful a champion as Jim to wrest the ball from Charlie's
defiant grasp.  The timekeeper turned away from the rivals and held me
up.  On went my hand, and on went the struggle.

"Now, Newcome; one tug more?"

"Bravo, our man!  You'll do it yet!"

"Time's up!  No side!"

Then rose those two from the earth, and immediately the astonished Jim
felt himself embraced before the whole multitude by his aunt.

"Well, James, and how do you feel after it all?"

"Hungry," replied Jim.

So ended the famous match.  After that Jim had no more trouble from his
uncle and aunt on the subject of athletics, which they were fain to
admit were a branch of science beyond their comprehension.

Charlie started that same night for London, with the intention of making
one more effort to help Tom Drift at all hazards.  I, meanwhile, was
restored to the possession of my lawful owner, who returned to his
studies in the "Mouse-trap"; sitting up all night, I am sorry to say, to
make up for the loss of the day.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

HOW GEORGE READER WENT UP FOR HIS FINAL EXAMINATION AND LEFT ME BEHIND
HIM.

"Old man, you're overdoing it!"

These words were uttered by Jim Halliday, one evening two years after
the events related in our last chapter, to his friend George Reader, as
the two sat together in Jim's rooms at Saint George's.

Time had wrought changes with both.  My master had secured the
scholarship for which he had worked so hard during his first year's
residence, and no longer inhabited the "Mouse-trap."  His present
quarters were the rooms immediately above those in which he was at this
moment sitting, and it is hardly necessary to say that the two friends
were constantly in one another's society.  George, though still
retaining much of his shyness, had made many acquaintances at his
college, but Jim was his only friend.  The two had their meals together,
attended lectures together, worked together, and, though a greater
contrast in all respects could hardly have been possible, were fairly
inseparable.

At the present moment they were both working hard for the grand Tripos
examination which was to close their college career.  Every one said
George would stand high in this, and Jim (since he had taken to hard
reading) was expected to pass too, though how, none of his friends cared
to prophesy.

They were working hard on the evening in question, when Jim, suddenly
shutting up his books and pushing back his chair, exclaimed,--

"Old man, you're overdoing it!"

George looked up from his work, surprised at the interruption.  Alas!
his pale face and sunken eyes testified only too forcibly to his
friend's protest.  I, who knew him best, and saw him at all times, had
watched with grief the steady and persistent undermining of his health,
at no times robust, and dreaded to think what might be the result of
this protracted strain on his constitution.

"I tell you, you're overdoing it, old man, and you must pull up!"

"Suppose we talk of that afterwards," said George.

"Not at all," retorted the dogged Jim; "just shut up your books, Reader,
and listen to me."

"I'll listen to you, Jim, but don't make me shut up my books.  What have
you got to say?"

"Just this; you're doing too much.  I can see it.  Everybody can see it.
Do you think I can't see your eyes and your cheeks?  Do you think I
can't hear you blowing like--"

"Really--" began George.

"Listen to me!" went on Jim--"blowing like an old broken-winded horse?
Yes, you may laugh, but I mean it.  Do you think I don't know you've
never been out of doors ten minutes that you could help for six months?
and that you have even given up the organ?"

"That's true," groaned George, leaning back in his chair.

"Of course it's true, and it's equally true that you'll smash up
altogether if this goes on much longer.  Then what will be the use of
all your achievements?  What will be the good of them to your father and
mother, for instance, when you are knocked up?"

"I _must_ work up to the Tripos now," pleaded George, "it's only a
fortnight."

"My dear fellow, how you talk!  As if you weren't certain of a first
class even if you were not to look at another book between now and
then."

"I'm not at all certain," said George, anxiously.

"Yes you are, and if you hadn't worked yourself into an unhealthy,
morbid state you would know it.  No, old fellow, we've never quarrelled
yet, and don't let us begin."

"Certainly not.  Why should we?"

"We shall if I don't get my way.  Now tell me, what time did you go to
bed last night?"

"Three, I believe."

"No, it wasn't, it was four, for I heard you over head; and the night
before it was three; and the night before that, if I mistake not, you
didn't go to bed at all.  Eh?"

George smiled, but said nothing.

"Well," said Jim, putting down his foot, "this must be stopped.  You may
work till ten every night, but then you _must_ go to bed, or you and I
will fall out."

Jim looked so grave as he said this that George was bound to take it in
the earnest way in which it was meant.  A long argument ensued.  George
pleaded, Jim bullied, and at last my master was obliged to promise to
give over work at twelve every night for the next fortnight.  But more
he would not promise.  No persuasions could tempt him out of doors for
more than a hurried five minutes' walk, or induce him to yield to the
fascinations of the organ.  As the days went on, too, he grew more and
more despondent about his own chances, and implored more than once to be
released from his promise.  But Jim was inflexible, and held him grimly
to his engagement.

"You're certain to be among the first three," he said, over and over
again, "and if you'll only give yourself two days' rest you may be
first."

"Yes, of the third class," mournfully replied my master.  "I tell you
what, Jim, it isn't fair to bind me down to a promise I made almost
under compulsion, and for fear of making you angry."

"It's quite fair, and you would make me angry if you didn't stick to it.
Why, my dear fellow, has it ever occurred to you I'm in for the same
Tripos as you, and I'm not behaving as ridiculously as you?"

"You are safe to be in the second class," said George.

"I wish I were as safe of a second as you are of a first; but I wouldn't
kill myself to be senior classic."

"You forget how important it is for me to take a good place."

"It is far more important to retain your health."

"Think what a difference it would make at home if I got a fellowship."

"What a difference it would make if you had to go to a hospital."

"What a pity, when I have the chance, not to use it."

"What a pity, when you have the chance, to throw it away by knocking
yourself up."

"Surely four days can't make any difference."

"Then why not stop work now and take a rest?"

It was plain to see these two would never agree, and so the time went on
until the date of the examination arrived.

The night before the two friends met in George's room.  George was in
low spirits, nervous and fretful.  It was plain to see his friend's
protest had come too late to be of much use, for he had grown more and
more worn every day; and the additional hours spent in bed had only been
a source of worry and vexation.  Jim, on the other hand, was doing his
best to keep up, not his own spirits only, but those of his friend.  His
chances of a second class were as momentous to him (though he would not
admit it) as his friend's of a first, and he too was experiencing,
though in a less degree, that heart-sinking which so often characterises
the eve of an examination.

"You are not going to work to-night?" said he to my master.

"I think I must," said George, wearily, and putting his hand to his
forehead.

"It can't be any earthly good now," said Jim, "so let's forget all about
it for a bit and talk of something else."

Forget all about it!  George smiled in a melancholy way at the words;
but nevertheless he was not well enough to contest the point.  "And by
the way," added Jim, cheerily, "I've got a letter from Newcome (you
remember Newcome, George, the man who played for Sandhurst against us
two years ago) I think you'll like to hear."

There was one in the room, whether George liked it or not, who was dying
to hear it!

"He's just gone out to India, you know, to join his regiment."

"Here's his letter," he said, producing it and nervously glancing at
George to see if he appeared interested.  "Shall I read it?"

"Yes, please," said George, slowly.

"It's not a long one.  `Dear Jim,' he says, `I wish you were out here
with all my heart.  I should at least have one fellow to talk to among
all these strangers.  I had a decent enough passage.  Father Ocean was
on his good behaviour, and the vessel was a snug one.  We came in for
rough weather in the Persian Gulf, but it didn't afflict me much, and I
landed here two days ago, safe and sound.  I reported myself to our
colonel yesterday and was introduced to my fellow-officers.  Some of
them are decent fellows, though perhaps hardly in your and my line.  I
had been told the officers of our regiment were a rackety lot, but I
don't see much sign of that yet.  It's awfully dull here, and I would
give a lot to be up in your rooms at George's, sprawling in your easy-
chair and talking over Randlebury days.  I suppose you will soon be in
for your final.  Good luck be with you, my boy!  Remember me in your
will if you get made a Fellow.  I suppose the man I met in your rooms
once--Read I believe his name was--will be first.  Talking of that day,
have you heard lately of Tom Drift?  I shall always be glad I went up to
town that night and found him out, though I lost him again so soon.  I
inquired everywhere when I was last in town, but nothing was known of
him, except that he was supposed to have been engaged in some--' But
that's all about an old schoolfellow and won't interest you.  `We expect
to be ordered up-country pretty soon now, and meanwhile have liberty to
amuse ourselves pretty much as we like, but, as far as I can see, cards
unfortunately seem the only recreation in which the officers indulge.
However, I shall be kept busy with drill, and being junior officer
expect I shall be for some time fag of the regiment.  Mind you write as
soon as ever you get this, and a regular yarn.  I have had to write this
in a hurry, and in a room where a noise is going on.  By next mail you
shall get a full, true, and particular account of all the doings,
sayings, and adventures of yours as ever, C.N.'

"I'm afraid," said Jim, as he folded up the letter, "it will be rather
dull out there, for--hullo!"

This ejaculation was caused by seeing that George was sitting motionless
with his elbows on the table and his face buried in his hands.

"What's the matter?" he said, getting up and laying his hand on his
friend's arm.

George looked up suddenly with a scared face, which frightened Jim.

"Old man, aren't you well?" said the latter anxiously.

"Eh?--oh, yes!  I'm all right.  Why--why do you ask?  But I say, Jim,
this room is close.  Let's go out and take a turn in the big court."

Jim, in sore perplexity, complied, and for an hour those two paced the
flags round the great quadrangle.  George was himself again, much to
Jim's relief, and suffered himself to be sent uncomplainingly to bed at
ten.  To bed, but not to sleep.  All night long I heard him toss to and
fro, vainly endeavouring to recall Greek and Latin lines or some other
fragment of his studies.  At about six he dozed fitfully for an hour,
and then came the knock at the door which summoned him from his bed to
the first day of his ordeal.

I would rather not dwell on those examination days, for I could tell, if
no one else could, that my master was really ill, and was only prevented
by sheer excitement from succumbing at any moment.  As day by day passed
I could see the effort becoming more and more difficult.  The nights
were worse than the days--sleepless, feverish, distracted.  It was
evident this could not go on for long.

The last day of the examination arrived, and my master was in his usual
place in the Senate House.  His pen flew swiftly all the morning along
the paper, and one by one, a triumphant tick was set against the printed
questions before him.  I could see no one as well employed as he.  Jim,
at a distant desk, was biting the end of his pen and looking up at the
