
"Ay, that I did.  Men that move about the world see strange things.  Far
stranger things than people invent out o' their own brains.  Why, there
was one tribe that I saw in the East who putt fat in the tea, an'
another putt salt, and after they'd swallowed this queer kind of
tea-soup, they divided the leaves among themselves an' chawed 'em up
like baccy."

The evident delight with which these half-breeds and more than
half-Indians swallowed cup after cup of the blackest and bitterest tea,
proved beyond question their appreciation of the article, and afforded
presumptive evidence at least that tea is not in their case as poisonous
as we are taught to believe.

But it was not, as Jenkins remarked, all fair weather, fun, and tea at
the fishery.  After the six visitors had been there for a week, shooting
and assisting in the canoes, and at the nets, there came a night when
the forces of Nature declared war against the half-breeds and those
settlers who had cast in their lot with them at that time.

Jenkins, Okematan, and Archie had been out with their guns that day--the
last having been promoted to the use of the dangerous weapon--and in
their wanderings had about nightfall come upon a family of half-breeds
named Dobelle, a good-natured set, who lived, like La Certe, on the
_laissez faire_ principle; who dwelt in a little log-hut of their own
construction within the margin of the forest, not far from the shore of
the great lake.

This family, though claiming to be Christian and civilised, was little
better than vagrant and savage.  They were to some extent as independent
as the brute creation around them--though of course they betrayed the
inherent weakness of mankind in being unable to exist happily without
tea, sugar, and tobacco.  For the rest, their wants were few and easily
satisfied.  Snares provided willow-grouse and rabbits; traps gave them
furs and the means of purchasing guns and powder.  Their log-hut was
only an occasional residence.  Wherever night overtook them they were at
home.  They camped on the open plains, in the woods, among the rocks,
and on the margins of rivers and lakes.  Healthy, happy, and heedless,
the Dobelle family cared for nothing apparently, but the comfort of the
passing hour; regarded the past as a convenient magazine from which to
draw subjects for gossip and amusement, and left the future to look
after itself.

There were in the hut, when the three visitors entered, old Dobelle, his
wife, a daughter of eighteen, another of four, and two sons of twenty
and twenty-two respectively.

"It looks like dirty weather," said Jenkins on entering; "will you let
us come to an anchor here for a bit?"

"Give us shelter?" explained Archie, who doubted old Dobelle's ability
to understand nautical language.

"You are welcome," said the half-breed, making way politely, and
pointing to places on the floor where the visitors were expected to
squat.  For there was no furniture in that mansion; the fire was kindled
in the middle of its one room; the family sat around it on deer and
buffalo skins, and the smoke alike of pipe and fire found egress at the
crevices in the roof.

With kind hospitality Madame Dobelle poured some black tea into cups of
birch-bark, and, on plates of the same material, spread before them the
remains of a feast of roasted fish.

While eating this, various questions were put as to the success of the
fishery.

"Yes--we have been very successful," said old Dobelle.  "No bad weather
to speak of, and plenty of fish.  Our good fortune is great."

"But it won't last long," said the eldest son, who seemed to be the only
growler in the family.

"_N'importe_--we will enjoy it while it lasts," said the younger son.

"Yes, truly we will," remarked Madame Dobelle.  Whereupon the daughter
of eighteen smiled, and the daughter of four giggled.

"What does Okematan think?" asked the host.

Thus appealed to, the chief gave it as his opinion that something was
going to happen, for the sky in the nor'-west looked uncommonly black.
Having given utterance to this cautious remark he relapsed into silence.

As if to justify his opinion, a tremendous clap of thunder seemed to
rend the heavens at that moment, and, a few minutes later, a heavy
shower of rain fell.

"Well that we got inside before that came on," said Archie.  "I hope it
won't come on to blow, else we shall be storm-stayed here."

The weather seemed to be in a lively mood that night, for as the thunder
had promptly answered to Okematan's observation, so now the wind replied
to Archie's remark, by rushing up the natural avenue which extended from
the hut to the lake and almost bursting in the door.

"See to the ropes, boys," said old Dobelle, glancing uneasily at the
roof.

The young men arose, went out, regardless of weather, and secured with
additional care a couple of stout ropes with which the tendency of the
roof to fly away was restrained.

"Did it ever come off?" asked Archie with some curiosity, as the young
men returned and resumed their pipes.

"Yes--twice, and both times it was night," answered Madame Dobelle, "and
we were flooded out and had to camp under the trees."

"Which was not comfortable," added the old man.  Another clap of thunder
seemed to corroborate what he said, and a blast of wind followed, which
caused the whole fabric of the hut to shudder.  Jenkins looked
inquiringly at the roof.

"No fear of it," said old Dobelle; "the ropes are strong."

Thus assured, the visitors continued their meal with equanimity,
regardless of the storm that soon began to rage with great fury,
insomuch that the door required a prop to keep it up and rain began to
trickle in through crevices in the roof and drop here and there upon the
party.  When one such drop chanced to fall on old Dobelle's nose, his
younger son arose, and, fastening a piece of birch-bark to the rafters,
caught the drop and trained it with its followers to flow towards an
unoccupied place in one corner, which, being accidentally lower than the
rest of the floor, formed a convenient receptacle for superfluous water.

At the same time Madame Dobelle made a shakedown of pine-branches in
another corner for her visitors, for it was obvious that they would have
to spend the night there, even although their own tent was not
far-distant.

By that time the storm was raging with unwonted violence.  Nevertheless
the Dobelle family smoked on in placid contentment.  When the time for
repose arrived, Madame Dobelle and her eldest girl retired to a box-bed
in a corner of the hut which was screened off--not very effectually--by
a curtain of birch-bark.  The two brothers lay down in another corner.
The three visitors disposed themselves in the third, and, as the fourth
was monopolised by the rain-rivulet, old Dobelle lay down on one side of
the fire in the centre of the room, while the four-year-old girl reposed
on the other.

During the night the accumulation of tobacco-smoke with fire-smoke
produced a suffocating effect, but no one was capable of suffocation
apparently, for they all smoked on--except Archie, who, as we have said,
had not acquired the habit.  Even the four-year-old girl, like Baby La
Certe, had a pull now and then at its father's pipe, and, from sundry
white emanations from the crevices in the bark curtains, it was evident
that the ladies behind these were enjoying themselves in the same way
during the intervals of repose.

Next morning was fine, and the three sportsmen returned to the fishery
to find that the storm had made an almost clean sweep of the nets.  It
had carried most of them away; torn others to pieces, and almost ruined
the whole colony of fishermen; the ruin being all the more complete that
most of the nets had been received on credit, and were to be paid for
chiefly by the results of the autumn fishery.

La Certe was one of the chief sufferers; nevertheless, to judge from his
looks, La Certe did not suffer much!  He had brought a considerable
amount of provision with him, as we have said, and, finding that one of
his nets had been washed ashore, he proceeded very leisurely to mend it,
while he smoked and assisted Slowfoot to consume pemmican and tea.

About this time a mysterious message was sent to Dan Davidson from Red
River by an Indian, requiring his immediate return.  The sender of the
message was Elspie McKay; the summons was therefore obeyed at once.

As nothing further could be done at the fishery that autumn, the other
members of the expedition, and most of the fishers, returned with Dan to
the colony.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE TRIAL FOR MURDER.

"Dan," said Elspie, as, seated in the summer-house after the arrival of
the sportsmen, these two held a meeting, "I have called you back to tell
you of a very terrible thing which has been said of my dear brother
Duncan, and which you must contradict at once, and then find out how it
was that the false report arose, and have the matter cleared up."

"Dear Elspie," returned Dan, "I think I know what you are going to tell
me."

"Have you heard the report, then?" said Elspie, turning pale, "and--and
do you believe it?"

"I have suspected--I have--but let me hear first what the report is, and
who it came from."

"I got it from Annette Pierre, and I am sure she would not have told it
me if she did not think it true; but, then, poor Annette is not very
intelligent, and she may be--must be--mistaken.  She says that it was
Duncan who killed poor Henri Perrin, and that some of the half-breeds
are determined to avenge the death of their comrade.  Now, it cannot be
true; and I want you at once to go and ferret out the truth, so as to
prove the report false."

"Have you spoken to Duncan on the subject?" asked Dan.

"No, I cannot bear to let him imagine even for a moment that I could
believe him guilty of murder--that I even suspected him of it.  But you
say you have heard something, Dan--that you suspect something.  What is
it?"

"It is difficult to say, Elspie dear.  I, too, have heard the rumour
that has come to your ears, and I have seen--but it is useless talking
of our mere conjectures.  I will go at once and ferret out all about it
if possible.  My first business will be to see Annette and get from her
all that she knows.  Where is Duncan?"

"In the wheat-field.  They have begun to shear to-day, and, as the crop
is heavy, they will be glad of your help."

Dan went to the field, after visiting Annette Pierre, and lent good
assistance to the shearers, but, like Elspie, he found that he had not
courage to say anything to Duncan that would indicate his suspicion.  He
longed to put the question straight to him, but could not prevail on
himself to do so.

Next morning, however, he and Elspie were both saved the necessity of
doing such violence to their feelings, by the arrival of two men from
Fort Garry.  They were members of a sort of police force that the
Company had enrolled, and had come to arrest Duncan McKay junior, on the
charge of murder!

There was not much of law in the colony at that time, but it was felt
that something had to be done in the way of governing a settlement which
was rapidly increasing, and in which Lynch and mob law would certainly
be applied if regularly constituted authority did not step in.  As the
murder of Perrin had created great indignation among the half-breeds,
and the feeling about it was increasing, the Company resolved to clear
the matter up by having the supposed murderer tried.  Duncan was
accordingly lodged in one of the bastions of Fort Garry, where, when
visited by the Governor, he firmly denied his guilt.

The arrest of his younger son on such a charge fell very heavily on poor
Duncan McKay senior--more heavily than those who knew him would have
expected.  It touched not only his feelings but his pride; for was he
not a lineal descendant of that Fergus McKay who had been a chief in one
of the Western Isles of Scotland--he could not tell which, but no
matter--at that celebrated period of Scottish history when the great
Norse king, Harold Fairhair, had made a descent on the Scottish coast
and received one of the few thorough thrashings that darkened his
otherwise successful career?

"O!  Tuncan, Tuncan, my boy!" cried the old man, shoving his hands
deeper into his breeches pockets, and apostrophising his imprisoned son
as he walked up and down in the privacy of his own bedroom.  "O that wan
o' the name should come to such disgrace!  An' it's denyin' it you will
be, whether you are guilty or innocent.  O Tuncan, Tuncan! you wass ever
notorious for tellin' lies--an' a troublesome boy all round--whatever."

But when the old man went to Fort Garry and visited his son, he stifled
his pathetic feelings, and appeared before him with all the offended
dignity of an injured member of the great clan McKay.

"Are you guilty, Tuncan?" he asked, sternly.

"No, I'm innocent," answered the youthful Highlander, with a brow quite
as stern and a manner as dignified as the old one.

"You will hev to prove that--whatever."

"No--they will hev to prove me guilty," retorted the son.

"I wish I could believe ye, Tuncan."

"It iss not of much consequence whether ye believe me or not, father.
You are not to be my chudge--whatever."

"That is goot luck for you, Tuncan, for if I wass your chudge I would be
bound to condemn you--you wass always so fond o' tellin' lies."

"It iss true what you say, father.  It iss a chip o' the old block that
I am--more's the peety."  At this point the door of the prison opened,
and Elspie was ushered in.

"You here, father!" she exclaimed in evident surprise.  "I had hoped to
see Duncan alone."

"It iss alone with him you'll soon be," replied the Highlander, putting
on his hat.  "Goot tay, Tuncan, my boy, an' see that you'll be tellin'
the truth, if ye can, when ye come to be tried."

To this the youth made no reply.

"O Duncan!" said the girl, when her father had retired, "how came they
to invent such lies about you?"

The tender way in which this was said, and the gentle touch on his arm,
almost overcame the stubborn man, but he steeled himself against such
influences.

"What can I say, Elspie?" he replied.  "How can I tell what iss the
reason that people tell lies?"

"But it _is_ lies, isn't it, Duncan?" asked the poor girl, almost
entreatingly.

"You say that it iss lies--whatever, an' I will not be contradictin'
you.  But when the trial comes on you will see that it cannot be proved
against me, Elspie--so keep your mind easy."

With this rather unsatisfactory assurance, Elspie was fain to rest
content, and she returned home a little, though not much, easier in her
mind.

To make the trial quite fair and regular, a jury of twelve men, chosen
by lot from a large number, was empanelled, and as many witnesses as
possible were examined.  These last were not numerous, and it is
needless to say that Annette Pierre and Marie Blanc were the chief.  But
despite their evidence and the strong feeling that existed against the
prisoner, it was found impossible to convict him, so that in the end he
was acquitted and set free.  But there were men in the colony who
registered a vow that Cloudbrow should not escape.  They believed him to
be guilty, in spite of the trial, and made up their minds patiently to
bide their time.

It now seemed as if at last a measure of prosperity were about to dawn
upon the farmers in that distant land, and, as usual on such occasions
of approaching prosperity, Dan Davidson and Duncan McKay senior began to
talk of the wedding which had been so long delayed.

"I wass thinkin', Tan," remarked the old man one morning, while walking
in the verandah with his after-breakfast pipe, "that I will be getting
in the crops pretty soon this year, an' they're heavy crops too, so that
we may look forward to a comfortable winter--whatever."

"True, and as our crops are also very good, thank God, I begin now to
hope that Elspie may see her way to--"

"See her way!" exclaimed McKay with some asperity: "she will hev to see
her way when I tell her to open her eyes an' look!"

"Nay, but there are two to this bargain," said Dan, good-humouredly.  "I
would not consent to have her on such terms.  She must fix and arrange
everything without constraint from any one--not even from you, Duncan
McKay."

"Oh! fery goot!" retorted the old man with a touch of sarcasm; "you know
fery well what Elspie will be sayin' to that, or you would not be so
ready to let it rest with her.  Yes, yes, she is safe to see her way to
go the way that you want her to go."

It was a strange coincidence that at the very time these two were
conversing on this subject in the verandah of Ben Nevis Hall, Mrs
Davidson and Elspie were discussing the very same subject in an upper
room of Prairie Cottage.  We refrain from giving the details, however,
as it would be unpardonable to reveal such matters.  We will merely
state that the conclusions to which the ladies came were very similar to
those arrived at by the gentlemen.

But delay was still destined to be an element in the cup of this
unfortunate couple.

When the harvest had been gathered in that year, there came what old
McKay called a visitation which, with its consequences, recalls
irresistibly the words of our great Scottish poet--"the best-laid
schemes o' mice and men gang aft a-gley."  This visitation was a plague
of mice.  The whole colony was infested with them.  Like the
grasshoppers, the mice devoured everything.  The grain after being
stacked was almost totally destroyed by them.  The straw, the very
stubble itself, was cut to atoms.  The fields, the woods, the plains,
seemed literally alive with this new visitor, and the result would have
been that most of the settlers would again have been driven to spend
another dreary winter in trapping and hunting with the Indians at
Pembina, if it had not been for the fortunate circumstance that the
buffalo runners had been unusually successful that year.  They returned
from the plains rejoicing,--their carts heavily laden with buffalo-robes
