morning of the 30th a comet was seen in the east, a little above the
horizon.  After this, a heavy sea and strong gales were met with from
the westward, and the ship being wore round, stood to the northward.  On
the weather moderating, the cruise was continued westward during the
whole month of September, and on the 6th of October land was seen from
the masthead bearing West-by-North.

On the evening of the next day the voyagers got near enough to observe
that the country was of great extent, with several ranges of hills
rising one above the other, and beyond them a lofty chain of mountains.
The general notion was that they had found the _Terra Australis
Incognita_.  Night coming on, they were compelled to stand off, but the
following day again sailed for the shore.

They saw some neat small houses, and a large number of people seated on
the beach.  Farther on was discovered a high regular paling, enclosing
the whole top of a hill.  In the afternoon the ship came to an anchor
off the mouth of a river in a bay, the sides of which were composed of
white cliffs of great height.

Such was the first view the English obtained of New Zealand, which has
since become the home of many thousands of our countrymen.  Captain
Cook, Mr Banks, Dr Solander, and a party of men having landed, tried
to open a communication with the natives across a river.  While they
were on the bank, a party of savages with long lances rushed out of a
wood, and were on the point of spearing the men left in charge of the
boat, when the coxswain fired and shot one of them dead.  The natives
then ran away.  On examining the dress of the dead man, it was found to
answer the description given in an account of Tasman's voyage, which
convinced the explorers that that navigator had previously visited the
country.  On the following day the natives again appeared on the
opposite side of the river, inviting the strangers to cross; but Tupia
warned them to be careful, and prepared for hostilities.  Ultimately the
savages swam across, almost all armed.  At first they appeared inclined
to trade, but in a short time made an attempt to seize the weapons of
the English, and one of them carried off the cutlass of a seaman, which
he flourished about his head as he made his escape.  Others in
considerable numbers came down to his assistance.  At first Mr Banks
fired, and merely wounded the man, who was still retreating, when Mr
Monkhouse took a more fatal aim, and he dropped, and another piece being
fired, the savages at length fell back.  Shortly afterwards Captain
Cook, who was anxious to make some prisoners, and by treating them well
to inspire a general confidence, sent the boats to capture some canoes
which were seen coming in from the sea.  The natives, however, assailed
their pursuers so vigorously with stones and other missiles, that the
English were compelled to fire, and four men were killed.  Three boys
were captured.  Cook deeply lamented this proceeding, though it appeared
to be almost unavoidable.  The boys on being taken on board became
reconciled, and at first seemed very unwilling to be sent on shore, but
were ultimately seen to join their companions.

Such was the unhappy commencement of our acquaintance with the natives
of New Zealand.  As nothing could be obtained at the place where Cook
first anchored, it was called "Poverty Bay."  Leaving on the 11th, he
proceeded along the coast for six days, until the bluff headland was
reached, to which he gave the name of "Cape Turnagain," as the ship was
there put about to return along the coast.  She continued her course
until she had sailed completely round the island.  Names were given to
the bays and headlands, which they retain to the present day.  The
intercourse with the natives was mostly of the same lamentable character
as that at the commencement, though they in some instances brought off
fish and willingly traded with the voyagers.  The savages, however,
stole whatever they could lay hands on, though appearing to be amicably
disposed.  One suddenly seized Tayeto, Tupia's boy, and, dragging him
into his canoe, made off.  The marines fired at the canoe farthest from
the boy, when one of the natives fell, on which the other let go his
hold of Tayeto, who leaped overboard and swam to the ship.

At Mercury Bay--so-called in consequence of an observation of the planet
Mercury having been made in the harbour--the natives behaved in a more
peaceable manner, though many of them there tried to cheat their
visitors.  To this conduct there were some exceptions.  One chief, named
Toiava, behaved with great propriety, and expressed his hope that his
countrymen would properly conduct themselves in future.  Some of the
canoes which approached the ship were of great size, one of them having
sixteen paddles on each side and containing sixty men.  She was making
directly for the ship, when a gun loaded with grape-shot was fired in
front of her, and, on a second shot being discharged over the heads of
the crew, they seized their paddles and made for the shore.

A headland, near which this occurrence took place, was consequently
called "Cape Runaway."  Captain Cook having landed near the spot called
by Tasman: "Murderer's Bay," on ascending one of the neighbouring hills,
discovered that the country, which he at first supposed to consist of
one large island, was divided by a strait into two islands.  This strait
has since been called Cook's Strait.  Leaving the inlet, on which he
bestowed the name of Queen Charlotte's Sound, the ship was borne rapidly
through the straits.  Having been exposed, when off the coast, to a
furious gale, which, though it was the height of summer, lasted for five
weeks, he continued his survey of New Zealand, and having run down the
coast of Middle Island, and discovered Banks's Island, he returned to
Cook's Straits.  The _Endeavour_ took her departure from Cape Farewell,
the last land seen of New Zealand, on the 31st of March; and sailing
westward, on he 19th of April land was descried, which proved to be part
of New Holland.  For several days the _Endeavour_ coasted along the
shore to the northward, until at last a bay was discovered, into which
she ran and came to an anchor.  Several black natives were seen on shore
flourishing their spears.  Abreast of the _Endeavour_ was a village of
about eight huts, and not far off four small canoes, with a man fishing
in each.  Presently an old woman with three children came out of the
forest, laden with fire-wood.  She threw down her burden, and kindled a
fire, when the men, landing, began to dress the fish, apparently taking
no notice of the ship.

Captain Cook, with several companions, went on shore, when most of the
people ran away; but two, armed with lances, came down on the rocks to
dispute the landing of the strangers, regardless of the presents which
Captain Cook held out to them, flourishing their lances and shouting in
discordant tones.  Even when a shot was fired, though at first they
retreated, one of them returned and threw a stone at the invaders.  At
last, another musket, loaded with small shot was fired at their legs,
when, one of them throwing a spear, they both took to flight.  The
explorers, now landing, found some little children hidden in a hut; they
were not disturbed, but some presents of beads, ribbons, and pieces of
cloth were left in exchange, for a bundle of spears which was
appropriated.  It was at first supposed that these were poisoned, as a
green substance was observed on their tips; but, on examining them, it
was found to be seaweed, and that they must have been used for spearing
fish.  The next day, when Mr Banks, Dr Solander, and the others,
landed, they found that their presents had not been removed.  While the
English were filling casks at a spring, and drawing the seine, when
large numbers of fish were taken, the natives watched what was going
forward without attempting to molest them.

Several excursions were made by the naturalists on shore, when they also
kept at a distance.  A few animals and numerous gaily coloured birds
were seen, and vast quantities of plants collected, from which
circumstance Captain Cook gave the place the name of Botany Bay, which
for half a century it retained.  On the 6th of May the _Endeavour_ left
Botany Bay, and steered northward.  Shortly afterwards, as she was
passing along the coast, a seaman named Jackson observed what he took to
be the entrance to a harbour, which in consequence was called Port
Jackson; but Cook did not attempt to enter, being doubtful at the time
whether it would prove to be a harbour.  The object was now to lay the
ship ashore, to clean and repair her.  As he sailed along he anxiously
looked out for a suitable spot, landing occasionally to explore the
country.  He had got as far north as 16 degrees 4 minutes, when, one
fine night, as the ship was rapidly running on, a grating sound was
heard.  She had struck upon a reef.  The officers and crew hurried on
deck.  The well was sounded: she was making a great deal of water.  The
boats were hoisted out, and attempts made to heave her off, but she beat
so violently on the rocks that the crew could scarcely keep their feet,
and she could not be moved.  Her sheathing-boards and false keel also
floated up.  As she had struck at high water, though she might not sink,
there appeared every probability of her becoming a wreck.  Cook did not
despair.  At once the guns, ballast, and other heavy articles were
thrown overboard, and preparations made for heaving her off when the
tide again rose.  Happily a dead calm came on, and at daybreak land was
seen about eight leagues off.  All day long the crew laboured without
moving her.  The night tide was likely to be the highest.  At length she
was hove off into deep water.  Now the difficulty was to keep her
afloat, for the crew were wellnigh exhausted by their exertions.  At
length Mr Monkhouse suggested that he had seen a vessel saved by
fothering a sail--that is, covering it thickly with oakum, and then
dragging it under the ship's bottom to the place where the leak existed,
when the oakum, drawn in by the force of the water, would fill up the
openings.

This was done, and succeeded so well that two pumps kept her afloat
until the 17th, when a safe harbour was found, and she was at once
hauled ashore.  It was then discovered that a fragment of the rock had
gone through her bottom, and remained sticking there.  Had this fallen
out, she must have foundered.  Tents and a forge were at once set up on
the shore, and the carpenter, blacksmith, and others to assist, were
speedily busy repairing the damage the ship had received.  The sick were
also landed.  Of these there were many, for notwithstanding all their
care, that scourge of seamen, scurvy, had already made much progress.

Mr Banks and other scientific gentlemen made excursions into the
country.  They saw several animals, but the strangest of all was of
about the size of a greyhound, mouse coloured, and very swift.  It had a
long tail, and leapt like a hare, while the print of its feet resembled
those of a goat.  It was some time before another of the same species
was seen and shot, when it was discovered to be what has since become a
well-known animal, called after the native name, a kangaroo.  Some days
elapsed before any natives were seen.  At last a gang approached, when
Captain Cook ordered his people to take no notice of them.  This had the
desired effect of allaying their fears, and though shy, they became
tolerably friendly.

A few days afterwards a party ventured on board, and took a great fancy
to some turtles which had been caught, though they seemed to regard
nothing else with interest.  They first took hold of one, and then
attempted to carry it off; but, on being prevented, jumped into their
canoes, and paddled away in a rage.  On landing, they seized a brand
from under the pitch-kettle, and with it set fire to the long grass.  It
blazed up so furiously that it was with the greatest difficulty that the
tent in which Tupia was lying sick could be preserved, while the
woodwork of the smith's forge was destroyed; it also caught a sow and
young pigs, one of which was scorched to death.  On a subsequent
occasion the natives played a similar trick.  Providentially, the stores
and powder had been taken on board, or the consequences would have been
serious.

Thanks to the knowledge of the naturalist, many vegetables were found on
shore which contributed greatly to restore the health of the
scurvy-stricken patients.  Although in many respects the ship could not
have remained at a more satisfactory place, a view to the eastward,
obtained from some high ground, caused serious apprehensions.  As far as
the eye could reach were rocks and shoals without number, while it was
evident that there would be great danger in navigating among the winding
channels between them.  The master, who had been engaged in surveying
the mouth of the harbour, brought an equally unsatisfactory report, and
it seemed surprising that the ship on entering the bay could have
escaped the numerous dangers in her way.  As provisions were running
short, it was necessary to put to sea as soon as possible; but heavy
gales kept the ship in harbour until the 4th of August, when at length
she made her way out of Endeavour Harbour.  For many hours, with the
most vigilant care, she was steered among the reefs, until night
approaching, and it coming on to blow, it was necessary to bring up.
The gale increased, and she began to drive.  By striking her yards, and
then her topmasts, she at length rode securely.  Here she remained for
four days, until Captain Cook resolved to try and find a passage inside
the reefs, close to the shore.  At last, by the long rolling swell which
set in from the eastward, he was convinced that he was free of the
reefs; but the movement caused the ship to leak, and serious
apprehensions were entertained that she would be unable to accomplish
the voyage.  His object was to ascertain whether the coast of New
Holland, along which he was sailing, was or was not united to that of
New Guinea.  By standing on he was afraid that, should a passage exist,
he might overshoot it.  The ship was therefore hove to.  The next
morning a reef was seen, over which the surf was breaking with terrific
violence.  The current rapidly carried the ship towards it, the wind
fell to a dead calm, and it was impossible to anchor on account of the
depth of the sea.  The only two boats fit for the service were sent
ahead to tow, and the sweeps were got out; but all their efforts seemed
to be unavailing, and her destruction seemed inevitable, when a light
air sprang up, and she was able to get to some distance.  Twice the
breeze dropping, she was carried back towards the roaring breakers,
until an opening was seen in the reef, through which she safely passed.

Day after day, keeping the land close aboard, Captain Cook sailed
northward, until his perseverance was rewarded by the discovery of Cape
York, the northern extremity of Australia, and the southern side of
Torres Straits, through which he passed.

Having landed, and taken possession of the whole eastern coast in the
right of his Majesty King George the Third, he called it New South
Wales.  Having found his way through the intricate navigation of the
straits, Cook sailed northward along the coast of New Guinea, and at
last came to an anchor in three fathoms of water, though still three or
four miles from the shore.  He then, with Mr Banks, Dr Solander, and
others, landed, well armed.  They made their way round a wood, until
they reached a group of cocoa-nut trees, at about a quarter of a mile
from the beach, when suddenly three blacks rushed out of the wood, the
foremost of whom threw something from his hand which burnt like
gunpowder, while the others darted their lances.

Though some small shots were discharged at the savages, they still came
on, throwing their darts; but some bullets fired put them to flight, and
it was hoped none were injured.  On looking round, they saw the men in
charge of the boat making signs that more natives were approaching, and
presently a hundred appeared, shouting, throwing their darts, and
sending out clouds of smoke from long tubes.  As they were watched from
the ship, it appeared that they were using firearms, though the sound
was wanting.  Some muskets being discharged over their heads, the
savages retreated leisurely.

Besides other discoveries, Captain Cook on this voyage ascertained the
size of New Zealand, also that the coast of New Holland was fit to
become the habitation of civilised man, and that that vast territory was
separated from New Guinea.  The condition of the _Endeavour_ made it now
necessary to carry her to some harbour where she might undergo a
complete refit.  The nearest place was Batavia, belonging to the Dutch.
He was aware of its unhealthiness, but he had no choice, and hoped that
his crew would escape.  Passing Timor, he came off the island of Savu,
not at that time marked in the charts, but which had lately been taken
possession of by the Dutch, though its native Rajah still remained its
nominal ruler.

From this fertile spot abundance of provisions were obtained at fair
prices.  Java Head was reached on the ist of October.  Poor Tupia was
very ill, and Mr Banks at once sent on shore to procure fresh
provisions for him.  The ship proceeded on to Batavia.  Here Cook was
received with all courtesy and kindness by the Dutch Governor, and every
assistance afforded him to repair the _Endeavour_.  She was in a worse
state than had been supposed.  Her frame was much shattered, her pumps
were rotten, and the planking in some places was not half an inch thick.

Tupia at first seemed to revive as he witnessed the wonders of a
civilised community, but he soon experienced a reaction.  Young Tayeto
was also seized with an inflammation of the lungs, and Mr Banks, Dr
Solander, Mr Monkhouse, and others were taken seriously ill.  Tents
were set up on shore for the invalids, but before long the surgeon
succumbed.  A few days afterwards young Tayeto died, and Tupia, who
loved him as a son, was so much affected that he quickly followed him to
the grave.

Mr Banks and Dr Solander rapidly recovered on being removed to a more
healthy spot, but seven persons were buried at Batavia, and others
imbibed the seeds of disease, which in the end proved fatal.  When the
_Endeavour_ sailed from Batavia on the 26th of December, 1770, she had
forty sick on board, and many others in feeble condition; and before she
reached the Cape of Good Hope three-and-twenty persons died, in addition
to those who were buried at Batavia.

On anchoring in Table Bay the sick were sent on shore, where most of
them recovered.  At that time Cape Town consisted of about a thousand
brick houses with thatched roofs, and the inhabitants described the
country as sterile, so as not to tempt the English to take possession of
it.

Shortly after leaving the Cape, the master and first lieutenant, Mr
Hicks, died.  The latter was succeeded by Mr Charles Clerke, who
accompanied Captain Cook in all his subsequent voyages.

Calling off Saint Helena, Captain Cook found there the _Portland_
man-of-war, commanded by Captain Elliot, with whom he deposited his logs
and other valuable papers, for fear that the _Endeavour_ should not
reach home.

The _Portland_ and her convoy of twelve Indiamen were soon out of sight.
Though the sails and rigging of the _Endeavour_ were rotten, and she
leaked considerably, she ultimately reached the Downs on the 12th of
June.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

CAPTAIN COOK'S SECOND VOYAGE--A.D. 1772.

Supposed great southern land--Exploring expedition formed--Captain Cook
appointed commander--Equipment of the _Resolution_ and _Adventure_--Sail
from Plymouth--Reported discovery by the French--Steer south--Land-like
appearance of the ice--Intense cold--Separation of the ships--Icebergs--
Sail from the Antarctic regions for New Zealand--Reach Dusky Bay--Health
of the crew--Intercourse with the natives--Visit the ship--Garden
planted--Live stock left--Sail for Queen Charlotte's Sound--Fall in with
the _Adventure_--Traffic with the natives--Voyage continued--Scurvy on
board Captain Furneaux's ship--Sail for Otaheite--Nearly on a reef--
Natives visit the ship--Propensity to steal--Treatment--Interview with
the King--Sail for Matavia Bay--Sail for Huaheine--Behaviour of the
chief--A native is taken on board--Leave the Society Islands--Steer for
Middleburg and Amsterdam--Reception--Description of the country--Object
of the voyage continued--Quantities of ice--Illness of the commander--
Easter Island--Ancient monuments--Sail for the Marquesas--Anchor at
Nombre de Dios--The Indians come on board--A savage killed--Return to
Otaheite--Native expedition against Eimeo--Voyage continued--Savage
Island--The Tonga group--At Erromongo--Quarrel with the natives--Tamia--
Native cultivation--A new island discovered--Reception by the natives--
New Caledonia--Norfolk Island--News of the _Adventure_--Reach Christmas
Sound--The natives--Sandwich Land--Vain search for Cape Circumcision--
Steer for the Cape of Good Hope--News of an accident which befell the
_Adventure_--Sail for England--Results of the voyage.

Before the return of Captain Cook to England it was supposed that New
Guinea, New Holland, and New Zealand formed one great southern land,
denominated _Terra Australis Incognita_.  Though he had proved that
these were islands, it was still supposed that there existed a great
southern land, which had been seen by a French officer, Captain Bouvet,
in 1739.

To determine whether such a land did exist, it was resolved to send out
another expedition, the command of which was offered to Captain Cook.
He gladly accepted it, and chose two vessels--the _Resolution_, of four
hundred and sixty-two tons, on board of which he sailed, and the
_Adventure_, of three hundred and thirty-six tons, of which Captain
Tobias Furneaux was made commander.  Two astronomers, Messrs. Wales and
Bayley; three naturalists, Mr Foster and his son, a Swede--Dr
Sparrmann; and a landscape painter, accompanied the expedition.

An abundant supply of provisions of an anti-scorbutic nature was placed
on board.  Each ship also carried a vessel in frame of twenty tons, to
serve as tenders.  The _Resolution_ had a complement of one hundred and
twelve officers and men, and the _Adventure_ of eighty-one.
Fishing-nets, hooks, and articles of all sorts to barter with the
savages were put on board; indeed, no exploring expedition had ever left
England so well equipped.

After frequent delays the two ships left Plymouth on the 13th of July,
1772, and shaped a course for Madeira.  Merely touching at Funchal, they
took in a supply of water at the Cape de Verdes.  The two ships then
sailed for the Cape of Good Hope.

Here the Governor informed Captain Cook that a French ship had
discovered land in the meridian of the Mauritius, in latitude 48 degrees
south, and that a French expedition, under Captain Marion, was now
exploring the South Pacific.  On the 22nd of November Captain Cook left
the Cape of Good Hope, and steered a course towards Cape Circumcision,
the name given to the point of land which Captain Bouvet supposed to be
a part of the southern continent.

As the ships got farther south, the weather became so cold that much of
their live stock died.  On the 10th of December an island of ice was
seen, after which thick hazy weather came on.  While the _Resolution_
was leading, an iceberg was discerned from her deck.  It was about fifty
feet high, with perpendicular sides, against which the sea broke
furiously.  Captain Furneaux, mistaking it for land, hauled his wind.
Other navigators probably have been deceived as he was.  Day after day
the ship sailed on among icebergs, exposed to storms of rain and sleet
and constant storms, although it was the middle of summer.

Captain Cook now steered to the west, hoping to get round the ice and
reach the highest position of Cape Circumcision; but he finally came to
the conclusion that Captain Bouvet had mistaken some lofty icebergs
surrounded by field ice for land.

The ships were thus engaged until the 8th of February, when, during
thick weather, the _Adventure_ was separated from the _Resolution_.  For
three days Captain Cook cruised in search of her, and was at last
compelled to proceed.  Here numerous whales were seen, and flocks of
antarctic petrels.  While two of the boats were engaged in collecting
loose ice off an iceberg, to melt for water, it was seen to lean over
until it completely turned bottom up, though it thus lost neither in
height nor size.  The boats providentially escaped.  By the middle of
March, the antarctic summer being over, Captain Cook shaped a course for
New Zealand, where he intended to recruit his crew and refit the ship.
On the 26th he entered Dusky Bay in the middle island, having sailed
over nearly ten thousand miles without having once sighted land.  His
crew had been kept in excellent health by the anti-scorbutic provisions
on which they were fed, and by the frequent airing of the ship by fires.
A snug harbour having been found, the ship was warped into it, and
places forthwith cleared in which the observatories, forge, and the
tents were set up.  By the suggestion of Captain Cook, wholesome beer
was brewed from the leaves of a tree resembling the American black
spruce; indeed, he at all times attended to the most minute points
calculated to maintain the health of his people.

A few families of natives only were met with.  One of these having taken
up their quarters near the watering-place, soon became intimate.  They
looked with perfect indifference on the trinkets offered them, but
evidently set a high value on hatchets and spike nails.

The head of the family and his daughter paid a visit to the ship.
Before stepping on board, however, he presented a couple of talc
hatchets to the captain and Mr Foster, and the girl gave one to Mr
Hodges.  He also waved a green branch, with which he struck the ship,
and made a speech before coming on board.

On a shooting expedition another party of natives was met with, the
chief of whom approached with a plant in his hand, one end of which he
presented to the captain, while he himself held the other.  After making
a speech, he took off his cloak, which he placed on Cook's shoulders.
After this he and his companions attended the English to the boat, and
assisted in launching her, and seemed much inclined to carry off
anything they could lay hands on.

Captain Cook, according to his universal plan, here left five geese in a
retired cove, hoping that by multiplying they might benefit the natives.
He also had a garden dug, and sown with seeds of various sorts.

Leaving this harbour, the _Resolution_ sailed for Queen Charlotte's
Sound, encountering on the way no less than six waterspouts of unusual
size.  A gun was got ready to fire, but they all passed by without
touching her.  On reaching their destination, the _Adventure_, to the
satisfaction of all, was found to have arrived there first.  At Queen
Charlotte's Sound a garden was also planted, and Captain Cook gave the
natives some potatoes, explaining their use, and the mode of cultivating
them.  A boar and two sows, and a pair of goats, were likewise landed.
The natives appeared to be friendly, and some came on board with their
children, for whom they hoped to obtain presents, though at first it was
supposed with the intention of selling them.  To one of the boys, about
ten years old, a white shirt had been given, and he went about showing
it until he encountered an old goat, who knocked him over into some
dirt.  The boy was inconsolable until his shirt had been washed and
dried.  While a party of the natives were on board, a large canoe was
seen coming into the harbour.  Some of the natives hurried on shore to
look after the women and children, but two who remained begged the
captain to fight for them, and fire at the strangers.

The latter, however, came alongside without fear.  Their first question
was for Tupia.  On hearing that he was dead, some of them expressed
their sorrow.  Among those he saw, Captain Cook did not recognise a
single person he knew when there in 1770, and he concluded, therefore,
that the entire population had changed since then.

The _Resolution_ and _Adventure_ once more proceeded on their voyage, on
the 7th of June, 1773, it being Captain Cook's intention to explore the
unknown part of the Southern Ocean between New Zealand and Cape Horn.
After they had been the greater part of the month at sea, Captain
Furneaux sent word that the scurvy had broken out on board his ship,
that the cook had died, and that twenty men were ill.  It appeared that
her people had neglected to eat vegetables while at Queen Charlotte's
Sound, and since they had been at sea, Captain Cook had from the first
insisted on having wild celery, scurvy-grass, and other herbs boiled
with the peas and wheat, both for officers and men.  He consequently had
only three men ill, and one alone of scurvy.  Instead, therefore, of
continuing the cruise to the southward, he determined to put into
Otaheite.  Several low islands, on which cocoa-nut trees grew, were seen
on the way.  Having reached the south-east end of Otaheite, the two
ships being together, at daybreak they found themselves not half a
league from a reef, towards which the send of the sea, the wind having
fallen, was drifting them rapidly.  To anchor was impossible.  A passage
was discovered through the reef, but a boat being sent ahead to sound,
it was found there was not sufficient water for the ships to pass on.
The horrors of shipwreck threatened the explorers.  Closer and closer
they drove to the reef.  At last the anchors were let go.  The
_Resolution_ was brought up in less than three fathoms, striking at
every fall of the sea.  The _Adventure_, however, remained afloat.
Kedge anchors and hawsers were immediately carried out, which would have
availed but little had not the tide turned, and a light breeze coming
off shore, both vessels making sail, got safely to sea.

On anchoring close in shore in the Bay of Oaiti-piha, numbers of natives
came off, bringing numerous fruits and vegetables, which they exchanged
for nails and beads; but the petty chiefs were greatly addicted to
pilfering and cheating in every possible way, and on one occasion the
whole party being found stealing, they were turned out of the ship and
two muskets fired over their heads to frighten them.  They took to
flight, leaving a little boy, who was at first greatly alarmed, but
having been kindly treated and some beads given him, he was sent safely
on shore.  This at once restored the confidence of the natives.

On another occasion a native seized a musket from one of the sentinels
and made off with it.  He was seen, however, by one of the chiefs, and
his prize restored.  On the following day the chief brought a quantity
of cocoa-nuts tied up in bundles, but on opening them it was found that
they were empty.  The chief did not seem disconcerted, but acknowledged,
after opening two or three himself, that the inside had been extracted.
He afterwards, to make amends, sent off a quantity of plantains and
bananas.

After an interview with the King Waheatoua, whom Cook had formerly known
under the name of Tearee, the ships sailed for Matavia Bay.  Before they
anchored, a large number of natives came off.  Among them was the King
Otoo.  Next day Captain Cook and some of his officers set off to visit
him.  He was found seated on the ground under the shade of a tree, with
a large crowd round him, all standing with bare heads and shoulders in
mark of respect.  Captain Cook having given the presents he had brought,
King Otoo inquired for Tupia and for several officers who had been on
board the _Endeavour_.  Afterwards coming on board, when, entering the
cabin, several of the chiefs who had been there before, uncovered their
shoulders, although they showed no other mark of respect.  He took an
especial fancy to the bagpipes.  In return for the civilities he had
received, he entertained the voyagers with a dramatic performance, in
which his sister, elegantly dressed in a robe of feathers, took part.

Leaving this place, the ships anchored in the harbour of Owharre, in the
island of Huaheine.  Abundance of provisions were exchanged, and the
chief Oree, who had on Cook's former voyage exchanged names with him,
was still living, and now seemed greatly rejoiced to see him again.
Friendly intercourse was maintained with the people.  Notwithstanding
this, Mr Sparrmann, one day while wandering in the woods, was robbed of
his clothes and hanger.  Oree, on hearing of it, shed tears, and by his
personal exertions recovered most of the articles.

From this island Captain Furneaux received on board his ship a young man
named Omai, who was anxious to accompany him; but he was not a chief,
and was inferior in figure, complexion, and manners to most of them.

Ulietea was also visited.  Here also a friendly intercourse was kept up
with the natives.  Captain Cook, who had before praised the inhabitants
of these islands greatly, now discovered many of their horrible habits
and customs; among others he found that human sacrifices were offered up
at their Morais, the victims frequently being persons to whom the
priests had taken a dislike, and who, unsuspicious of their intended
fate, were knocked on the head.

After leaving the Society Islands, Cook steered west for Middleburg and
Amsterdam, discovered by Tasman.  At the first island the explorers met
with an enthusiastic reception.  The chief conducted the officers to his
dwelling, which was built near the shore at the head of a fine lawn,
under the shade of some shaddock-trees, in a most delightful situation.
Here they were entertained and invited to join in a kava feast.  Cook
was the only person who ventured to taste the beverage.

Leaving this island, they steered for Amsterdam or Tonga Taboo.  The
natives welcomed them with white flags.  When Cook landed, their chief
Attago conducted him over part of the country; and so fair was its
aspect, that he could fancy himself transported into the most fertile
plains of Europe; not a spot of waste ground was to be seen.  Fences
were often formed of useful plants, and the road occupied as little
space as possible.  In other places the inhabitants resembled those of
the Society Islands.

As it was now time to prosecute his researches in high southern
latitudes, he sailed on the 7th of October, and having sighted Pilstart,
he on the 21st descried the land of New Zealand, though, owing to
contrary winds, he did not reach Queen Charlotte's Sound until the 3rd
of November, having in the meantime lost sight of the _Adventure_.  He
here remained three or four weeks, waiting for her appearance, and then
sailed in the hopes of completing the circle round the pole in a high
latitude.

This was a most dreary part of his voyage.  Immense masses of ice were
seen, and occasionally the antarctic petrels, grey albatrosses, and some
other birds; but there were few other objects of interest to amuse the
minds of the crew.  Often the ship was in great peril from icebergs.  At
one time no less than ninety-seven were seen within a field of ice,
besides a number outside, many of them very large, and looking like a
range of mountains rising one above another until they were lost sight
of in the clouds.  The outer or northern edge of this field was composed
of loose or broken ice, so closely packed together that it was
impossible for the ship to enter it.  Since therefore he could not
proceed farther to the south, he determined to stand back in search of a
more genial clime.  Many of his crew were suffering, and he himself was
seized with so dangerous an illness that his life was despaired of.
Unable to leave his cabin, Mr Cooper, his first officer, took charge of
the ship.  When he began to recover, a favourite dog, belonging to Mr
Forster, was killed to supply him with fresh meat and broth.

The first land made was Easter Island, which had been in vain looked for
