
"Oh, it's well enough; it seems to be a very old place."

"Didn't it strike you that the rooms were musty?"

"Well, yes; now that you mention it, I thought they were decidedly
musty."

"It will be impossible," said Antonia, "for you to turn the Towers into
a proper Moresque or Libertyesque house."

"I thought you liked the place; you seemed so delighted with the
briars."

"The briars are well enough, and so is the china; it's the rooms I
complain of; they never can be reduced to high art--your sort of high
art, I mean, Susy. But now, tell me, did you do much measuring?"

"No, I didn't; a dreadful woman came with me; she quite frightened me,
and spoke a lot about the Lorrimers, and a ghost in the tower."

"Well, of course there'd be a ghost in the tower," continued Antonia;
"an old place like that couldn't exist without its ghost."

"I don't believe a bit in ghosts," said Susy. "No sensible people
believe in them; there are no such things. You know that, of course,
Antonia."

Susy looked uncomfortable while she spoke, and Antonia knew well that
she was an arrant coward.

"You don't believe in ghosts either," continued Susy; "do you now,
Tony?"

"Oh, but I do," answered Antonia; "I believe in them profoundly. I have
Shakespeare for my authority on the subject."

"And you really think that--that the Towers is haunted?"

"No doubt whatever on the subject. If you don't want to be convinced
against your will, you must choose a bedroom in the most modern part of
the house, and avoid the old tower, with its funny, quaint little rooms.
Frankly, I am disappointed in the Towers as a place for _you_--the rooms
are not your sort--you want great, lofty, bright, modern rooms. I don't
like that musty smell either; it points to damp somewhere. Then, it is
scarcely likely that the water supply is perfect; those old wells are
full of danger, and you once had typhoid, don't you remember? Your
father will have to spend a lot on the place before he makes it anything
like what your sort of high art requires; and when all is said and done,
you'd be lonely there. You know I'm perfectly frank; you know that well,
don't you?"

"Yes, Tony," answered poor Susy in a most melancholy voice. "Oh, please
don't throw any more sponges at me; I am quite shivering, and your words
make me feel so melancholy. But why should I be lonely at the Towers;
there are plenty of neighbours all around?"

"That is true, but I don't believe you'll care for them, nor they for
you: they are the Lorrimer sort, and the Miss Macalister sort, and the
Hester Thornton sort. You know you don't care for those sorts of
people, do you?"

"I'm sure I don't. I hate them. I wish father hadn't bought the Towers
without consulting me."

"Can't he back out of it?"

"Back out of his bargain? What do you mean?"

"I mean what I say; can't he get out of it? The Towers isn't a bit the
sort of place for you; it isn't even healthy for a girl like you.
There's a ghost there, and ground damp, and bad water, and the
neighbours aren't sociable, and you'll be moped to death."

"How perfectly miserable you make me, Tony, but I won't be quite
friendless, for you'll be here most of the time now, won't you?"

"Not I; I am going back to my atelier in Paris. Do you think I'd live in
a poky corner of the world like this?"

"What shall I do?" echoed Susy. "I think you're very unkind to make me
so wretched and to depress me in the way you are doing. The Towers is
bought now, and we must make the best of it."

"I only hope you won't suffer the consequences of this piece of folly,"
retorted Antonia with spirit. "The Towers is not the place for you, and
you ought to persuade your father to get out of that bargain. Let him
take a nice cheerful villa at Richmond; that's where you ought to live."

"I wish he would," said Susy; "but it's a great deal too late, a great
deal too late to draw back now. Besides, we did so want to be county
people."

"You'll never be county people, whatever that jargon means--that is,
you'll never be like the Lorrimers and the Thorntons. You don't want to
be, do you?"

"Good gracious, no; they are a depressing set."

"Then that's what county people are, so why should you kill yourself to
be one of them? Aren't you going to write to your father to tell him
what you think of the Towers?"

"Shall I?"

"I would if I were you. You might suggest----"

"Yes; do you think it would be any use?"

"There is no saying--it's your own affair. If you choose to die of
_ennui_, don't tell me that I haven't warned you. Now I see you are wide
awake, so you may dry your hair and get up."

"Oh, dear, oh, dear," sighed Susy after Antonia had swung herself out of
the room, "I'm chilled to the bone and every scrap of spirit taken out
of me. I hate that awful Towers--_why_ did father buy it?"

One of Antonia's great ideas was on all occasions to strike while the
iron is hot. It was her plan to leap over obstacles or to push them
vigorously aside. She had no respect for people's corns. Their
preconceived prejudices were nothing to her. Having succeeded in
disturbing Susy, she now went straight to her mother's room. Mrs.
Bernard Temple was seated in an easy chair by the open window, enjoying
a quiet ten minutes for thought and rest before It was time for her to
dress for dinner. Pinkerton was moving about putting the different
accessories for her mistress's toilet in order. Antonia pushed her
almost rudely aside as she swept across the room.

"Go away, Pinkerton," she said, "I want to speak to mother by herself."

"Oh, really, not at present, Antonia," said Mrs. Bernard Temple, with a
look of alarm spreading over her high-class features. "I have gone
through a great deal to-day and am quite tired, and I shall have to
begin to dress for dinner in a few minutes. Sir John is very particular
about my appearance, and I wish Pinkerton to try the effect of arranging
my hair in a new manner. I thought, Pinkerton, that you might pile it up
high on a sort of cushion--it has a very old-picture effect."

"You ought to wear a cap," said Antonia, standing in front of her
parent; "it would be much more suitable and appropriate, and would save
you a lot of trouble."

"A cap!" almost screamed Mrs. Bernard Temple. "To hear you speak,
Antonia, one would think that I was advanced in years."

"As it's only I who think that, it doesn't matter, mother," said
Antonia. "You shall wear your hair any way you please, only I really
must have a little talk with you first. The sooner I begin my talk the
sooner it will be over, so please go away at once, Pinkerton."

Pinkerton knew Antonia too well to dream of disobeying her. She left the
room, slamming the door behind her, and Mrs. Bernard Temple looked up at
her resolute daughter with a frown between her brows.

"Now, out with it, whatever it is," she said. "You have got something at
the back of your head, and you can say it in ten words as well as
twenty. What do you want me to do?"

"You have great influence with Sir John Thornton, haven't you, mother?"
asked Antonia, kneeling down as she spoke by the open window, and
leaning one pointed elbow on the sill. Mrs. Bernard Temple permitted
herself to smile agreeably.

"A man's _fiancee_ has generally influence over him," she said in a
sentimental voice.

"That's what I thought," said Antonia. "I'll never be anybody's
_fiancee_--the mere thought would make me ill--but that's neither here
nor there. Granted that you have influence over Sir John, I want you to
use it in my way--now, do you understand?"

"Really, Antonia, really,"--Mrs. Bernard Temple looked quite
alarmed--"Sir John cannot bear erratic people, he tells me so from
morning to night. I am afraid you have managed to displease him very
seriously, my dear. When you spilt your tea in the garden this evening,
he acknowledged, when I pressed him on the subject, that it gave him
quite a sense of nausea. You see, Antonia, how careful you ought to be.
The comforts of the home I have provided for you may be jeopardised if
you are too erratic. You know I did not wish you to come to the Grange
until after my wedding. The fact is, Sir John is very much annoyed about
you. He has spoken to me most seriously on the subject of your
extraordinary manners, and has asked me why I permit you to do the
things you do. When I tell him that I have not the smallest scrap of
influence over you, he simply does not believe me; and then he has such
an aggravating way of drawing comparisons between you and that
icy-mannered girl, Hester."

"Oh, I'm not a patch upon Hester," said Antonia; "she is a very nice,
well-bred, English young lady. I'm Bohemian of the Bohemians. I'm
nobody--nobody at all. I extinguish myself at the shrine of great Art.
I love to extinguish myself. I adore being a shadow."

"I think, Antonia, you are quite mad."

"Think it away, my dearest mother, only grant my request; influence Sir
John in my way."

"Oh, you terrible, terrible child! Well, what do you want me to do?"

"Now you're becoming reasonable," said Antonia, "and I really won't keep
you from your hair a moment longer than I can help. I went to the Towers
this morning, mother; it's really a heavenly old place; quite steeped in
the best sort of mediaeval art. In the house, old china and low ceilings;
out of doors, nature untrammelled. Think of a place like the Towers in
the possession of Susy Drummond and her father, the ex-coal-merchant.
Mother, it is not to be."

"My dear Antonia, I can't listen to you another moment." Mrs. Bernard
Temple rose as she spoke. "Pinkerton, come at once," she called.

Pinkerton turned the handle of the door.

"Go away, Pinkerton!" shouted Antonia. "Now, mother, sit down; there's
oceans of time."

"Really, really, my dear! Oh, what a trial one's children sometimes are.
The Drummonds have bought the Towers. The whole thing is an accomplished
fact."

"It is not too late," pursued Antonia. "I have been giving a spice of my
mind to Susy, and she hates and detests the place, and will do what she
can to get her father to back out of his bargain. Well, the Lorrimers
are almost dying at the thought of going. The ugly duckling told me the
whole story to-day, and I never listened to anything more piteous; and
Squire Lorrimer is hiding in London because of his poor feelings. In
short, the moment for strong measures has arrived; and if you won't
speak to Sir John, I will."

Mrs. Bernard Temple turned white.

"If _you_ speak to him, Antonia," she said, "he will break off the
match, and we shall be ruined--ruined."

"Very well, mother; you must have a conversation with him. One or other
of us must have it, that is certain."

"Oh, you most terrible child! What am I to say to him?"

"Say this, and say it firmly. Say that you won't marry him unless he
goes to see Squire Lorrimer, and makes an arrangement to lend him
sufficient money to stay on at the Towers. The Drummonds will be
delighted to get out of their bargain, and the Lorrimers will be saved.
That's the plan of campaign. Either I undertake to see it through,
mother, or you do. Now, which is it to be?"

"You must give me until to-morrow morning to think over your wild words.
Really, my poor head is splitting."

Antonia went up and kissed her mother.

"You can come now, Pinkerton," she called out.




CHAPTER XXV.

MOLLY'S SORROW.


Hester was a good deal astonished that same day, when, just before
dinner, Annie Forest came up to her with a request.

"I don't want to dine here to-night," she said. "I want to go to the
Towers to have a good long talk with Molly."

"But, really, Annie," replied Hester, "is it necessary for you to go
to-night? I did not know--I mean I did not think that--that you and
Molly----"

"That we were special friends?" interrupted Annie. "Oh, yes, we are
quite friendly enough for the little talk I mean to have. You'll spare
me, won't you, Hetty, and if Molly offers me a bed, I'll sleep there and
be back quite early in the morning."

"I can't refuse you, of course," said Hester, "but that won't prevent my
missing you. It will be rather a dreadful dinner party, with only Mrs.
Bernard Temple and Antonia and that dreadful, sleepy Susy. You are so
full of tact and so bright, Annie, that you generally make matters go
off fairly well. But to-night there won't be anyone to stem the current.
Oh, dear, I do trust that Antonia won't talk _too_ much high art."

As Hester spoke, she looked at her friend with an expression of great
anxiety on her face. Under ordinary circumstances this look would have
completely overmastered Annie, who would immediately have yielded up
her own wishes to please Hester, but now she remained quite obdurate.

"I am sure you will manage very well," she said, in an almost hard voice
for her. "You know, Hetty, you won't always have me, and you will have
Mrs. Bernard Temple and Antonia."

"It is too dreadful," sighed Hester. "When my father thought of marrying
again, why did he not think of someone more congenial?"

"I suppose Mrs. Bernard Temple is congenial to him," replied Annie, "and
that he doubtless considers of the first importance. After all, Hetty,
I'm sure she will let you have your own way in everything, and I don't
really think that Antonia is half bad. If I were you I would try and
make friends with her."

"It is not in my nature to make friends easily," replied Hester.

She was standing in her pretty bedroom as she spoke, and Annie was
leaning by the open window, swinging her garden hat in her hand.

"Hester," she said, suddenly, "forgive me if I ask you rather a rude
question. Is your father a very rich man?"

Hester looked surprised.

"I suppose so," she answered; "to tell the truth, I have never thought
about it. Oh, yes, I conclude that he is quite well off."

"But I want him to be more than well off. Is he rich--very rich? so rich
that he would not miss a lot of money if he had suddenly to--to lose
it?"

"What a very queer question to ask me, Annie," replied Hester. "I am
really afraid I cannot reply to it. I think my father must be rich, but
I don't know if he is rich enough to be able to afford to lose a lot of
money--I don't think anyone is rich enough for that."

"Oh, yes, some people are," answered Annie. "Well, good-bye, Hetty, keep
up your heart. I'll be back early to-morrow morning."

"I must get that question of Sir John Thornton's wealth clearly answered
somehow or other," thought Annie, "for there is no manner of use in
Antonia stirring up a lot of mischief if there is no money to be found.
I wonder if nursey could help me. I think I'll just have a word with her
