"She was a very good nurse, nevertheless," Cuthbert said, quietly. "She
worked in the American ambulance, under an American doctor, the other
nurses and assistants being all American or English."

"How do you know she was a good nurse, Mr. Hartington?" Clara asked.

"Simply because I was one of her patients, Miss Brander. I joined one of
the corps of Franc-tireurs, in which most of my student-friends enrolled
themselves, and had the bad luck to get shot through the body in the
sortie at Champigny, and as your sister was one of the nurses in the
tent where I lay, I think that I am a pretty fair judge as to her powers
of nursing. She was often there during the heaviest time for twenty-four
hours at a stretch, and completely knocked herself up by he continued
labors. At any rate I consider I owe my life in no small degree to her
care."

"I don't think we ever understood Mary," Mr. Brander said, in a more
peremptory tone than the girls had heard him use since his seizure.
"There is no doubt that it was as much our fault as it was hers. I feel
proud to hear that she has done such noble work. Mr. Hartington tells
me," he said, abruptly changing the conversation, "that he has been
working hard with the intention of making art his profession as it has
long been his amusement. He seems to think that although he will, of
course, be no longer obliged to look upon it as a necessary career, he
intends at any rate to pursue it for a time."

"That will be very interesting," Mrs. Brander said, "and it is quite the
fashion in our days."

"It is very nice when you haven't to live by it," Cuthbert said. "When
you are obliged to do that, and instead of painting what you like, have
to paint things that will sell, it is up-hill work, and none but men of
real talent can push their way up out of the crowd. I shall be more
happily situated, and shall therefore be able to devote an amount of
care and time to a picture that would be impossible to a man who had his
daily bread and cheese to earn by his brush. And now, Mr. Brander, we
will have a few more words together and then I must be off. I shall most
likely return to town this evening."

"It must be for you to decide, Mr. Brander," he went on, when they were
alone in the study, "how this news shall be broken to the public. I am
quite ready to be guided entirely by your wishes in the matter."

"The sooner the better. I would suggest that you should see Dr. Edwardes
before you go up to town. If you will tell him what I told them in the
next room, that it has been discovered that there is a flaw in the sale
of Fairclose, and that as you are engaged to marry Mary, we have arrived
at an amicable agreement under which you will return at once to
Fairclose, while I intend to seek an entirely new scene and to retire
altogether from business, there will be very little more needful. The
news will spread like wildfire over the town and county. After that I
shall have very few questions asked me. None that I shall not be able to
answer without difficulty. The state of my health will form an excuse
for my cutting my farewells short. There will, no doubt, be some gossip
and wonder as to how it has come about, but the county will be so
pleased at your coming back again to your father's place, that they will
not be very curious as to how it occurred. I shall go off as quickly and
as quietly as I can, after calling to say good-bye to those with whom I
have been so long associated in the municipal business.

"It matters not where we go. I can take a furnished house at some
seaside watering-place. The doctor will advise which is most likely to
suit me, and we can then look round and settle on our future plans at
our leisure. If I gain strength I think it likely enough we may travel
on the Continent for a time. The girls have never been abroad and the
prospect would go a long way towards reconciling them entirely to the
change."

"I think that a very good plan," Cuthbert said. "I was intending to call
upon the doctor on my way down and he will at once set the ball
rolling."

Mr. Brander went to the door where the fly had been waiting for two
hours.

"God bless you!" he said. "I cannot tell you how deeply grateful I am to
you for your forbearance and generosity."

"Don't worry any more about it, Mr. Brander," Cuthbert said, as he shook
his hand, "it has been a temporary change, and good rather than bad has
come of it. Believe me, I shall put the matter out of my mind
altogether."

"Back again, Cuthbert," the doctor said, when he was shown into the
consulting-room. "I was down just now at the station to see a man off,
and the station-master said you had arrived by the 11.30 train, and that
he had seen you drive off in a fly. I could hardly believe it, but as
you are here in person I suppose that there can be no mistake about it.
Of course you have been up to Brander's again?"

"I have, Doctor, and for the last time. That is, the next time I shall
go up it will be to take possession of Fairclose."

"My dear lad, I am delighted," the doctor said, shaking him heartily by
the hand, "how has this miracle come about?"

"I cannot give you all the details, Doctor. I will simply give you the
facts, which, by the way, I shall be glad if you will retail to your
patients for public consumption," and he then repeated the statement
that he had arranged with Mr. Brander that he should make.

"And that is the tale you wish me to disseminate?" the doctor said, with
a twinkle of his eye, when Cuthbert concluded.

"That is the statement, Doctor, and it has the merit of being, as far as
it goes, true. What the nature of the illegality of this sale was, I am
not at liberty to disclose, not even to you, but I have discovered that
beyond all question it was irregular and invalid, and Brander and I have
come to a perfectly amicable understanding. I may tell you that to
prevent the trouble inseparable even from a friendly lawsuit he assigns
the property to me as Mary's dowry, and as a sort of recognition of the
fact that he acted without sufficient care in advising my father to take
those shares in the bank. Thus all necessity for the reopening of bygone
events will be obviated."

"A very sensible way, lad. You will understand, of course, that I know
enough of Jeremiah to be quite sure that he would not relinquish a fine
property if he had a leg to stand upon. However, that is no business of
mine, and I have no doubt that the fact that he is going to be your
father-in-law, has had no small influence in bringing about this very
admirable arrangement. Of course the matter will make a good deal of
talk, but these things soon die out, and the county will welcome you
back too heartily to care how your return has been brought about. You
can rely upon my action in the part of town-crier, and I am sure to some
of my patients the flutter of excitement the news will occasion will do
a great deal more good than any medicine I could give them. Of course
you are going to stay here?"

"Only to dinner, Doctor. I shall run up to town again this evening."




CHAPTER XXI.


It was on the last day of March that Cuthbert Hartington reached Paris.
During the six weeks that had elapsed since he had left it many events
had taken place. He himself had gone away a comparatively poor man, and
returned in the possession of the estates inherited from his father,
unimpaired save by the mortgage given upon them by Mr. Brander. He had
succeeded beyond his hopes; and having obtained unlooked-for proofs of
the fraud that had been practised, had been able to obtain
restitution--which was to him the most important point--and all had been
done without the slightest publicity. In Paris, the danger he had
foreseen had culminated in the Commune. The battalions of National
Guards from Montmartre and Belleville had risen against the Provisional
Government; the troops had fraternized with them and their generals had
been murdered in cold blood.

The National Guards of the business quarters had for a time held aloof,
but, in the absence of support from without and being enormously
outnumbered, they were powerless, and the extreme party were now in
absolute possession of the city. M. Thiers and the Assembly at
Versailles had so far been unable to take any steps to reduce the
revolted capital. Such troops as had been hastily collected could not be
relied upon to act and it seemed probable that the National Guards and
Paris would, in a short time, take the offensive and obtain possession
of Versailles, in which case the flame of insurrection would spread at
once to all the great towns of France, and the horrors of the Terror
might be repeated.

The line of railway to Paris was still open, for upon the Communists
preparing to cut off all communications, the Germans, still in great
force near the town, pending the carrying out of the terms of the treaty
of peace, threatened to enter Paris were such a step taken. A vast
emigration had taken place among the middle classes, and over fifty
thousand persons had left Paris. So far the Communists had abstained
from excesses, and from outrage upon peaceable citizens; had it been
otherwise, Cuthbert would have returned to fetch Mary away at once. Her
letters to him, however, had assured him that there was no cause
whatever for uneasiness about her, and that everything was going on
precisely as it had done, during the siege by the Germans. He had been
anxious that she should, if possible, remain for the present in Paris,
for he did not wish her to return to her family, and had made up his
mind that if it became absolutely necessary for her to leave Paris she
should arrange to go straight down to Newquay and stay there with her
friends.

As he alighted from the carriage at the Northern Railway Station he
found the place occupied by National Guards. There was no semblance of
discipline among them; they smoked, lounged about, scowled at the few
passengers who arrived, or slept upon the benches, wrapt in their
blankets. There were none of the usual hotel omnibuses outside and but
one or two fiacres; hailing one of these he was driven to his lodgings.
He was greeted by the concierge with surprise and pleasure.

"So monsieur has come back. We did not expect you, though Monsieur
Caillard, who comes here every day, told us that you would be sure to be
back again in spite of the Reds. Ah, monsieur, what horror to think that
after all Paris has gone through, these monsters should have become
masters of the city! It would have been a thousand times better to have
had the Prussians here, they would have kept order, and those wild
beasts of Montmartre would not have dared even to have murmured. You
have heard how they shot down peaceful citizens in the Rue de la Paix?
Have you come to stay, monsieur?"

"For a time, anyhow;" and taking the key of his rooms Cuthbert carried
up his pormanteau, and then at once came down and drove to Madame
Michaud's.

Mary was half expecting him, for in his last letter to her he had told
her he hoped to arrive in Paris that evening.

"I have been horribly anxious about you, Mary," he said, after the first
greeting.

"There was no occasion for your being so," she replied, "everything is
pefectly quiet here, though from what they say there may be fighting any
day, but if there is it will be outside the walls and will not affect us
here."

"I don't think there will be much fighting," he said; "if the troops
fraternize with the Communists there's an end of the business, all
France will join them, and we shall have the Reign of Terror over again,
though they will not venture upon any excesses here in Paris, for,
fortunately, the Germans are still within gunshot, and they would have
the hearty approval of all Europe in marching in here, and stamping the
whole thing out. If the troops, on the other hand, prove faithful, I
feel sure, from what I saw of the Belleville battalions, that there will
be very little fighting outside the walls. They may defend Paris for a
time, and perhaps bravely, for they will know they are fighting with
ropes round their necks, and the veriest cur will fight when cornered.
Your people here are not thinking of leaving, I hope?"

"No, and they could not now if they wanted; the Commune has put a stop
to emigration, and though the trains still run once or twice a day, they
go out as empty as they come in. Have you got through your business?"
she asked, with a shade of anxiety.

"Yes, dear, and most satisfactorily; everything has been arranged in the
happiest way. I unexpectedly obtained proofs that the sale of Fairclose
was altogether irregular, and indeed, invalid. I have seen your father,
who at once, upon my laying the proofs before him, recognized the
position. Our arrangement has been a perfectly amicable one. He is going
to retire altogether from business, and will probably take up his
residence at some seaside place where there is a bracing climate. The
doctor recommends Scarborough, for I may tell you that he has had a
slight stroke of apoplexy, and is eager himself for rest and quiet.
Fairclose and the estate comes back to me, nominally as your dowry, and
with the exception that there is a mortgage on it for L20,000, I shall
be exactly in the same position that I was on the day my father died. I
may say that your mother and the girls are delighted with the
arrangement, for, somehow, they have not been received as cordially as
they had expected in the county--owing of course to a foolish prejudice
arising from your father's connection with the bank, whose failure hit
everyone heavily--and they are, in consequence, very pleased indeed at
the prospect of moving away altogether."

Mary's forehead was puckered up in little wrinkles of perplexity as she
listened. "I am glad of course, very glad, that you have got Fairclose
back," she said, "though it all seems very strange to me--is that all
that I am to know, Cuthbert?"

"That is all it is necessary that you should know, Mary, and no one else
will know any more. Your father's illness and the doctor's injunctions
that he should retire from business altogether and settle in some place
with a mild climate, is an ample reason for his leaving Fairclose, and
your engagement to me, and my past connection with the place are equally
valid reasons why I should be his successor there. I do not say, Mary,
that there may not have been other causes which have operated to bring
about this result, but into these there is no need, whatever, for us to
enter. Be contented, dear, to know that all has turned out in the best
possible way, that I have recovered Fairclose, that your family are all
very pleased at the prospect of leaving it, and in that fact the matter
ends happily for everyone."

"I lunched at the old place only yesterday," he went on lightly, "and
the girls were in full discussion as to where they should go. Your
father is picking up his strength fast, and with rest and quiet, will, I
hope, soon be himself again. I expect, between ourselves, that he will
be all the better for getting away from that work in the town, with its
lunches and dinners. The Doctor told me that he had warned him that he
was too fond of good living, specially as he took no exercise. Now that
he will be free from the office, and from all that corporation business,
he will no doubt walk a good deal more than he has done for many years
and live more simply, and as the doctor told me yesterday, the chances
are that he will have no recurrence of his attack. I may tell you that
from a conversation I had with him I learned that your father will still
draw a very comfortable income from the business, and will have amply
sufficient to live in very good style at Scarborough."

The fact that Cuthbert had lunched at Fairclose did more to soothe
Mary's anxiety than anything else he had said. It seemed a proof that
however this strange change had come about, an amicable feeling existed
between Cuthbert and her father, and when he wound up with "Are you
contented, dear?" she looked up at him with tears in her eyes.

"More than contented, Cuthbert. I have been worrying myself greatly
while you have been away, and I never thought that it would end as
happily as this. I know, dear, that you have concealed a great deal from
me, but I am contented to know no more than that. I am as sure as if you
had told me that you have brought all these things about in this
friendly way for my sake. And now," she said after a pause, "what are
your plans for yourself?"

"You mean for us, Mary. Well, dear, my plan is that we shall wait on
here and see how things turn out. I don't want to go back to England
till all these arrangements are carried out. I don't intend to have to
go to Scarborough to marry you, and I think it will be vastly better for
us to be married quietly here as soon as the chaplain at the embassy
returns, which, of course, he will do directly these troubles are over.
My present idea is, that I shall let the house at Fairclose, or shut it
up if I cannot let it, and let the rents of the property go to paying
off this mortgage, and I intend to take a modest little place near
London, to live on our joint income, and to work hard until Fairclose is
clear of this incumbrance."

"That is right, Cuthbert. I have been wondering ever since you told me
you were to have Fairclose again, if you would give up painting, and
hoping that you would still go on with it. I should so like you to win a
name for yourself as a great painter."

Cuthbert laughed. "My dear child, you are jumping a great deal too fast
at conclusions. I am not yet out from school. I have painted my two
first pictures, which you like, principally because your face is in one
of them, but that is a short step towards becoming a great artist. You
are like a young lady in love with a curate, and therefore convinced
that some day he will be Archbishop of Canterbury, and with almost
equally good foundation; however, I shall do my best, and as I shall
still have a strong motive for work, and shall have you to spur me on I
hope I may make a modest success."

"I am sure you will, and more than that," she said, warmly; "if not,"
she added, with a saucy laugh, "I think you might as well give it up
altogether; a modest success means mediocrity, and that is hateful, and
I am sure you yourself would be no more satisfied with it than I
should."

"Well, I will go on for a bit and see. I agree with you, that a thing is
not worth doing unless it is done well, but I won't come to any final
decision for another year or two. Now it is past ten o'clock, and I must
be going."

"When will you come? To-morrow?"

"I will come at three o'clock. Have your things on by that time, and we
will go for a ramble."

Rene Caillard came into Cuthbert's room at nine o'clock the next
morning.

"I came round yesterday evening, Cuthbert, and heard from the concierge
that you had arrived and had gone out again. As she said you had driven
off in a fiacre, it was evidently of no use waiting. I thought I would
come down and catch you the first thing this morning. You look well and
strong again, your native air evidently suits you."

"I feel quite well again, though not quite so strong. So things have
turned out just as I anticipated, and the Reds are the masters of
Paris."

Rene shrugged his shoulders. "It is disgusting," he said. "It does not
trouble us much, we have nothing to lose but our heads, and as these
scoundrels would gain nothing by cutting them off, I suppose we shall be
allowed to go our own way."

"Is the studio open again?"

"Oh, yes, and we are all hard at work, that is to say, the few that
remain of us. Goude has been fidgeting for you to come back. He has
asked several times whether I have news of you, and if I was sure you
had not left Paris forever. I know he will be delighted when I tell him
that you have returned; still more so if you take the news yourself."

"I suppose Minette has resumed her duties as model?"

"Not she," Rene said scornfully, "she is one of the priestesses of the
Commune. She rides about on horseback with a red flag and sash.
Sometimes she goes at the head of a battalion, sometimes she rides about
with the leaders. She is in earnest but she is in earnest theatrically,
and that fool, Dampierre, is as bad as she is."

"What! Has he joined the Commune?".

"Joined, do you say? Why, he is one of its leaders. He plays the part of
La Fayette, in the drama, harangues the National Guards, assures them of
the sympathy of America, calls upon them to defend the freedom they have
won by their lives and to crush back their oppressors, as his countrymen
crushed their British tyrants. Of course it is all Minette's doing; he
is as mad as she is. I can assure you that he is quite a popular hero
among the Reds, and they would have appointed him a general if he had
chosen to accept it, but he said that he considered himself as the
representative of the great Republic across the sea, that he would
accept no office, but would fight as a simple volunteer. He, too, goes
about on horseback, with a red scarf, and when you see Minette you may
be sure that he is not far off."

"Without absolutely considering Dampierre to be a fool, I have always
regarded him as being, well, not mad, but different to other people. His
alternate fits of idleness and hard work, his infatuation for Minette,
his irritation at the most trifling jokes, and the moody state into
which he often fell, all seem to show as the Scots say, 'a bee in his
bonnet,' and I can quite fancy the excitement of the times, and his
infatuation for that woman may have worked him up to a point much more
nearly approaching madness than before. I am very sorry, Rene, for there
was a good deal to like about him, he was a gentleman and a chivalrous
one. In Minette he saw not a clever model, but a peerless woman, and was
carried away by enthusiasm, which is, I think, perfectly real: she is in
her true element now, and is, I should say, for once not acting. Well,
it is a bad business. If the Commune triumphs, as I own that it seems
likely enough, it will do, he will in time become disgusted with the
adventurers and ambitious scoundrels by whom he is surrounded, and will,
like the Girondists, be among the first victims of the wild beasts he
has helped to bring into existence. If the troops prove faithful, the
Commune will be crushed, and all those who have made themselves
conspicuous are likely to have but a short shrift of it when martial law
is established. Well, Rene, as there is nothing that can be done in the
matter, it is of no use troubling about it. None of the others have gone
that way, I suppose."

"Of course not," Rene exclaimed indignantly. "You don't suppose that
after the murder of the generals any decent Frenchman would join such a
cause, even if he were favorable to its theories. Morbleu! Although I
hate tyrants I should be tempted to take up a rifle and go out and
defend them were they menaced by such scum as this. It is not even as it
was before; then it was the middle class who made the Revolution, and
there was at least much that was noble in their aims, but these
creatures who creep out from their slums like a host of obnoxious beasts
animated sorely by hatred for all around them, and by a lust for plunder
and blood, they fill one with loathing and disgust. There is not among
them, save Dampierre, a single man of birth and education, if only
perhaps you except Rochefort. There are plenty of Marats, but certainly
no Mirabeau.

"No, no, Cuthbert, we of the studio may be wild and thoughtless. We live
gayly and do not trouble for the morrow, but we are not altogether
fools; and even were there nothing else to unite us against the Commune,
the squalor and wretchedness, the ugliness and vice, the brutal
coarseness, and the foul language of these ruffians would band us
together as artists against them. Now, enough of Paris, what have you
been doing in England, besides recovering your health?"

"I have been recovering a fortune, too, Rene. A complicated question
concerning some property that would, in the ordinary course of things,
have come to me has now been decided in my favor."

"I congratulate you," Rene said, "but you will not give up art, I hope?"

"No, I intend to stick to that, Rene. You see I was not altogether
dependent on it before, so that circumstances are not much changed."

"You finished your pictures before you went away, did you not? The
temptation to have a peep at them has been very strong, but I have
resisted--nobly it was heroic, was it not?"

"It must have been. Yes, I put the finishing touches to them before I
went away, and now I will show them to you Rene; it is the least I can
do after all your kindness. Now go and look out of the window until I
fix the easels in a good light, I want your first impressions to be
favorable. There," after a pause, "the curtain is drawn up and the show
has begun." He spoke lightly, but there was an undertone of anxiety in
his voice. Hitherto no one but Mary had seen them, and her opinion upon
