Lake Constance, she felt justified in extending unusual attentions to
him. Sir William was jealous, as well he may have been; for his
lady-love hardly condescended to notice him, while all her smiles were
bestowed upon the gallant young seaman.

There was nothing especial to be seen in Darmstadt, and after the party
had walked through the principal street, and glanced at the Grand Ducal
Palace, they were ready to continue their journey to Frankfurt, where
they arrived in less than an hour, and repaired to the _Hotel de
Russie_ for dinner. Mr. Drexel, one of the landlords, was especially
devoted to the party, and afforded them every facility for seeing the
city in the shortest possible time. The dinner was capital, and when it
had been disposed of by the hungry students, they were in condition to
hear Professor Mapps.

"Darmstadt, where we spent an hour this forenoon," said the professor,
"is the capital of Hesse Darmstadt, which consists of two divisions of
territory, separated by a strip of land belonging to Hesse Cassel and
Frankfurt. It has an area of thirty-two hundred square miles,--being
about two thirds of the size of Connecticut--and a population of about
eight hundred and fifty thousand. It is a constitutional monarchy in
its government, the Grand Duke Ludwig III. being the sovereign. The
word _Hesse_, applied to several of the German states, indicates
that they are parts of the original territory which bore that name. One
of its rulers divided his country into four unequal parts, and gave
them to his sons. Two of the descendants of these sons dying without
children, there remained only Hesse Cassel and Hesse Darmstadt. Hesse
Homburg formerly belonged to Darmstadt, but was ceded to another branch
of the reigning family in 1622. It is composed of two parts; the
smaller, containing forty-three square miles, and eleven thousand five
hundred inhabitants, is about ten miles north of Frankfurt; the other
portion, having eighty-five square miles, and fourteen thousand five
hundred inhabitants, is on the other side of the Rhine.[4]

      [4] Hanover, Hesse Cassel, Hesse Homburg, Nassau, the part of
      Hesse Darmstadt north of the Maine, Hohenzollern, and Frankfurt
      were annexed to Prussia in 1866.

"Frankfurt-on-the-Maine, so called to distinguish it from
Frankfurt-on-the-Oder, is a free city, and the capital of the Germanic
Confederation. It is a little nationality by itself, having the right
to make its own local laws, levy duties, and other powers belonging to
a state. It is represented in the Federal Diet. This territory includes
nine villages, besides the city proper, with a population of about
seventy-five thousand. It is a very old city, and is mentioned in
history in the time of Charlemagne, who had a palace here. This city is
the original home of the Rothschilds, the great bankers, upon whom even
princes wait--when they are short of money. The family are Jews, who
form a considerable part of the population of Frankfurt. The house in
which several, if not all, the prominent sons were born, is shown in
the Judengasse, or Jews Street. The laws were formerly very severe upon
the Israelites. They were compelled to reside in their own quarter,
where the gates were closed upon them at an early hour. A regulation
forbade the celebration of more than thirteen marriages among the race
in the city within a year. All these stringent laws have been
rescinded.

"Goethe, the German poet, was born in Frankfurt; and you will see his
house, which contains some relics of him. Luther, the Reformer, also
resided here for a time. The city is noted for the wealth of its
merchants, and there are many magnificent private residences within its
limits."

The professor finished his lecture, and the party started to see the
sights to which he had alluded. The old cathedral, with its unfinished
tower, was very much like many others they had seen. Within its chapel
all the elected emperors were crowned in front of the high altar. The
Town Hall was the scene of the festivities which followed the election
of an emperor. He was feasted in the banquet hall, where the kings and
princes of his empire waited upon him at table, in token of their
subservience. A whole ox was roasted in the market-place,--into which
the students looked from the windows,--and the emperor ate a slice,
while from a fountain flowing with wine the cup-bearer filled his
flagon. The room is hung with portraits of the emperors, under most of
which are placed the mottoes adopted at their coronation.

Passing across to the Hirschgraben, the tourists visited the house
where Goethe was born. Over the front door is the coat of arms of the
poet's father, which consists of three lyres, as if to prefigure the
destiny of the genius who first saw the light within its walls. Goethe's
room is a garret, wherein his portrait, his autograph, and his
washstand are exhibited. His statue stands near the theatre, and one of
Schiller in front of the guard-house. From the house of the poet, the
party went to the Staedel Museum, filled with fine pictures, mostly by
Dutch and German artists, which is named for its founder, a liberal
banker, who gave four hundred thousand dollars to the institution,
besides a collection of artistic works. From the museum, the students,
after a walk of over a mile, reached the Jewish quarter, glanced at the
Rothschild House, the synagogue, and other buildings, returning to the
_Hotel de Russie_ at dark.

On the following morning the party went to Homburg, nine miles distant,
where they spent the rest of the day. The town is another watering-place,
and has increased in popularity till it outrivals Baden-Baden,
Wiesbaden, or any other fashionable resort in Germany. It has its
medicinal springs, which are beneficial in a variety of diseases. The
_Kurhaus_ is the most magnificent in Europe, containing lofty halls,
elegantly frescoed, for dancing, gambling, for restaurants and
reading-rooms. As in Baden-Baden, the gambling monopoly is in the hands
of French speculators, and the lavish expenditure upon the gardens,
buildings, and other appointments is an instructive commentary on the
chances which favor the visitor disposed to try his fortune.

"Commodore," said Ben Duncan, who was now the second master of the
Josephine, as they met at the _Hotel Quatre Saisons_ in the evening, "I
have lost two hundred florins."

"What!" exclaimed Paul.

"Certainly, Mr. Duncan, you have not been gambling," added Grace
Arbuckle, looking as sad as though she had lost a dear friend.

"I lost two hundred florins out in that dog-house," replied Ben, who
was the wag of the party, and a general favorite.

"What dog-house?" inquired Paul.

"Why, the big one--_auf dem Platz_."

"Do you mean the Kursaal?" asked Paul.

"Mr. Fetridge calls it a dog-house, in Harper's Hand Book."

"No."

"The cur-house--what's the difference?"

"U in German is pronounced like double o. But you don't mean to say you
have been gambling, Ben?" added Paul.

"I said I had lost two hundred florins," replied Ben, with a most
lugubrious expression.

"Impossible!"

"I was standing near the table, in the grand gambling _hell_,--I
beg pardon, hall,--watching the play, when I saw a Russian czar, king,
grand dook, poly-wog, or something of that sort, win two hundred
florins at one fell swoop. Now, thinks I to myself, if I should put
down two hundred florins, and win, I should make two hundred florins by
the operation. I didn't do it--so I'm two hundred florins out."

Ben dropped his chin, and looked very sad, while Grace and Paul laughed
heartily, perhaps more at the "face" the wag made, than at the joke he
had perpetrated.

"I hope your losses will always be of this description, Ben," added
Paul.

"Probably they will be while each student is allowed only a florin a
day for pocket-money," replied Ben. "There is to be a grand concert in
the dog-house this evening. Of course we shall go!"

"Certainly."

"Suppose we walk down now."

"If you please; but don't call it a dog-house."

"Well, it is a gambling-hole, and I don't know but it is a libel on the
dog to call it so," answered Ben, as they walked towards the Kursaal.

Most of the excursionists were headed in that direction. Shuffles was
with the earl's party, though, strangely enough, Sir William was not at
the side of Lady Feodora. They seated themselves in the grand
apartment, and gazed with interest at the brilliant scene before them.

"Where can Sir William be?" said Lady Blankville.

"I do not know, mother," replied Feodora, languidly, as though she did
not care where he was.

"I haven't seen him these two hours."

"Nor I," added Feodora, in a tone which indicated that she did not wish
to see him for two hours more.

"I will look for him, if you desire," suggested Shuffles.

"O, no! Do not trouble yourself," replied Feodora. "Perhaps he is
looking at the play."

"Pray, do, if you please, Captain Shuffles," interposed the countess.

Lady Feodora was too dutiful a girl to object, and the commander went
to the gambling-rooms. At the roulette table he found the baronet,
playing with a zeal which indicated that this was not the first time he
had indulged in the baneful game. He was not staking large sums, but he
was losing about three out of four times that he put down his money.

"I beg your pardon, Sir William, but Lady Blankville is anxious to see
you," whispered Shuffles in his ear.

"Lady Blankville!" exclaimed the baronet, turning from the table as he
lost his last stake, and walking towards the concert-room.

"Lady Blankville," repeated the captain.

"Lady Feodora is not anxious to see me--is she?" said Sir William,
bitterly.

"She did not say that she was," replied Shuffles.

"No; she did not!" added the baronet, stopping suddenly, and looking
his companion in the face. "Will you do me the favor to walk in the
garden with me?"

"While the ladies are waiting for us, it is hardly proper to be absent
from them," replied Shuffles, troubled by the manner of the young
gentleman.

"Perhaps you are right," mused Sir William. "Will you meet me alone at
the hotel, after the ladies have retired?"

"For what purpose?" inquired Shuffles, nervously.

"I have not time to explain now. Will you meet me?" continued the
baronet, earnestly.

"If possible, I will."

They joined the party in the concert-room. Sir William was cool, and
inclined to be morose. Shuffles was rather disturbed by his manner,
and could not help wondering for what purpose the baronet wished to
meet him alone. He had not failed to see that Lady Feodora regarded her
travelling companion, whose relations to her he could only infer, with
a feeling bordering upon aversion, and that her demeanor towards him
was in marked contrast with her bearing towards himself. He was afraid
the proposed meeting related to this subject. While the party were
listening to the enchanting music of the band, he tried to ascertain
whether he had said or done anything to give offence to the baronet. It
was not his fault that the lady did not like Sir William, and rebelled
against the relation which appeared to exist in form between them. But
the captain was willing to give the baronet any explanation he might
demand, and hoped that all unpleasant feelings would be removed by the
interview.

After the tourists had returned to the hotel, and the ladies had gone
to their rooms, Shuffles walked up and down the hall till the baronet
joined him. Taking his arm, Sir William led him to an unfrequented part
of the garden, and there halted.

"Captain Shuffles, I believe you are a gentleman, and have the
instincts of a gentleman," the young Englishman began.

"I trust I have," replied Shuffles, not a little agitated, for the
manner of his companion was very earnest and serious.

"You have placed me under very great obligations to you. I cheerfully
acknowledge them. I am willing to believe that both Lady Feodora and
myself would have been drowned but for your plucky conduct and generous
efforts in our behalf on Lake Constance."

"I am very glad to have served you, and I assure you I hold you to no
obligations of any kind," replied Shuffles. "I simply did what I
regarded as my duty, which my sea life fitted me to perform."

"Having acknowledged my obligations, you will permit me to add, that I
think you are making a very unfair and ungenerous use of your position.
After your noble conduct on the lake, I expected something like
magnanimity from you. I am sorry to say I have been disappointed,"
continued Sir William, bitterly.

"Really, I do not understand you," replied the captain, amazed at the
sudden turn in the style of his companion.

"Is it possible that you do not comprehend my relations with Lady
Feodora?" demanded the baronet. "Let me explain, then, that we have
been affianced from our childhood."

"Indeed!"

"You could not help seeing that our relations were of this kind."

"I did suppose there was something of this description."

"Then allow me to say again that you have made a very ungenerous use of
your position."

"In what respect?"

"You have extended to Lady Feodora many attentions," said the baronet,
becoming more and more excited.

"Only ordinary courtesies."

"But such courtesies as belong to me rather than to you. I am devotedly
attached to her."

"If any of my attentions were not agreeable to the lady, she had only
to decline them."

"There you presume upon the position which circumstances have given
you."

"If Lady Feodora is attached to you----"

"She is not attached to me."

"Then you make a very ungenerous use of your position," retorted
Shuffles, rather warmly.

"What do you mean, sir?" demanded Sir William.

"If your parents and hers made a bargain for her which she repudiates,
I say it is ungenerous in you to use such an advantage as that bargain
gives you."

"Do you mean to insult me?"

"Certainly not; only to speak as plainly as you have spoken. If my
presence is disagreeable to the lady, I will avoid her."

"Your presence is not disagreeable to her," added Sir William, unable
to conceal his vexation.

"Then you will excuse me if I decline to treat her with the rudeness
you suggest."

"I find I am mistaken in you, and I regret that you compel me to ignore
the obligations under which you have placed me."

"I cheerfully absolve you from any obligations which may weigh heavily
upon you. But I assure you, I have no ill-will towards you, and I shall
continue to treat you with courtesy and kindness. In about a week, our
ship's company will return to Brest, and sail for the United States. It
is not probable that I shall ever see Lady Feodora or you again."

"Will you pledge yourself never to see her again after this week?"
demanded Sir William.

"I will not--certainly not," replied Shuffles. "I do not purpose to
interfere in any way with your relations to her. If she desires to see
me, and it is possible for me to see her, I shall not deny myself that
pleasure."

The baronet suddenly turned upon his heel, and walked rapidly towards
the hotel. Shuffles was amazed. He could not conceal from himself the
truth that he was deeply interested in Lady Feodora, though no thought
of anything beyond friendship occurred to either of them. They might or
might not continue in company for another week, and then part, in all
human probability, forever in this world. Still, the situation was
novel enough to be exciting, and he lay awake, thinking of it, for
several hours that night. But in the morning Sir William appeared as
usual, and probably, on reflection, had decided not to do any desperate
deed.

At seven o'clock the excursionists returned by train to Frankfurt. It
was decided then that, as Wiesbaden, one of the celebrated German
watering-places, was only a repetition of Baden-Baden and Homburg, the
company should proceed direct to Mayence, where they arrived by nine
o'clock.




CHAPTER XVIII.

CASTLES, VINEYARDS, AND MOUNTAINS.


As the students were crossing the bridge to Mayence, they obtained a
full view of one of the great rafts of timber which float down the
Rhine, and of which Professor Mapps had spoken to them at Dort, in
Holland. However, it was much smaller than those of which they had
heard, and they hoped to see another. The students were not disposed to
"do" Mayence, being too impatient to witness the glories of the Rhine.
But most of them, from a sense of duty rather than from an interest in
the place, visited the principal attractions of the city.

"Mayence is the French name of the town," said the professor of
geography and history, as the students collected in the railroad
station, previous to the tramp. "The German name is Mainz, which is
pronounced Mynts--y like long i. If you pronounce it in any other way,
a German will not know what you mean. It was an old Roman town. A
fortress was established here to keep back the barbarians. It was
formerly a larger and more important city than at present, having now a
population of only forty thousand.

"This place has done two grand things for civilization and for Europe.
It was the cradle of the art of printing, and furnished the man who
suppressed the robber knights. As you go down the Rhine, you will see
the ruins of many old castles on the hills by the banks of the river.
The nobles, who occupied them as strongholds, carried on a system of
robbery, levying duties upon all who travelled on its waters or passed
