
Jasper, startled, wished that he might sink into the ground. His anguish
of embarrassment made her smile a little. He could not speak, so she
went on gently.

"It has been so good of you. They have given me so much pleasure--I wish
you could know how much."

"It was nothing--nothing," stammered Jasper. His book had fallen on the
ground at her feet, and she picked it up and held it out to him.

"So you like Ruskin," she said. "I do, too. But I haven't read this."

"If you--would care--to read it--you may have it," Jasper contrived to
say.

She carried the book away with her. He did not again hide when she
passed, and when she brought the book back they talked a little about
it over the fence. He lent her others, and got some from her in return;
they fell into the habit of discussing them. Jasper did not find it hard
to talk to her now; it seemed as if he were talking to his dream Alice,
and it came strangely natural to him. He did not talk volubly, but
Alice thought what he did say was worth while. His words lingered in her
memory and made music. She always found his flowers under the pine, and
she always wore some of them, but she did not know if he noticed this or
not.

One evening Jasper walked shyly with her from his gate up the pine hill.
After that he always walked that far with her. She would have missed him
much if he had failed to do so; yet it did not occur to her that she was
learning to love him. She would have laughed with girlish scorn at the
idea. She liked him very much; she thought his nature beautiful in
its simplicity and purity; in spite of his shyness she felt more
delightfully at home in his society than in that of any other person she
had ever met. He was one of those rare souls whose friendship is at once
a pleasure and a benediction, showering light from their own crystal
clearness into all the dark corners in the souls of others, until, for
the time being at least, they reflected his own nobility. But she never
thought of love. Like other girls she had her dreams of a possible
Prince Charming, young and handsome and debonair. It never occurred
to her that he might be found in the shy, dreamy recluse of Golden
Milestone.

In August came a day of gold and blue. Alice Reade, coming through the
trees, with the wind blowing her little dark love-locks tricksily about
under her wide blue hat, found a fragrant heap of mignonette under
the pine. She lifted it and buried her face in it, drinking in the
wholesome, modest perfume.

She had hoped Jasper would be in his garden, since she wished to ask him
for a book she greatly desired to read. But she saw him sitting on the
rustic seat at the further side. His back was towards her, and he was
partially screened by a copse of lilacs.

Alice, blushing slightly, unlatched the garden gate, and went down the
path. She had never been in the garden before, and she found her heart
beating in a strange fashion.

He did not hear her footsteps, and she was close behind him when she
heard his voice, and realized that he was talking to himself, in a low,
dreamy tone. As the meaning of his words dawned on her consciousness she
started and grew crimson. She could not move or speak; as one in a
dream she stood and listened to the shy man's reverie, guiltless of any
thought of eavesdropping.

"How much I love you, Alice," Jasper Dale was saying, unafraid, with no
shyness in voice or manner. "I wonder what you would say if you knew.
You would laugh at me--sweet as you are, you would laugh in mockery. I
can never tell you. I can only dream of telling you. In my dream you are
standing here by me, dear. I can see you very plainly, my sweet lady, so
tall and gracious, with your dark hair and your maiden eyes. I can dream
that I tell you my love; that--maddest, sweetest dream of all--that you
love me in return. Everything is possible in dreams, you know, dear. My
dreams are all I have, so I go far in them, even to dreaming that you
are my wife. I dream how I shall fix up my dull old house for you. One
room will need nothing more--it is your room, dear, and has been ready
for you a long time--long before that day I saw you under the pine. Your
books and your chair and your picture are there, dear--only the picture
is not half lovely enough. But the other rooms of the house must be made
to bloom out freshly for you. What a delight it is thus to dream of
what I would do for you! Then I would bring you home, dear, and lead
you through my garden and into my house as its mistress. I would see you
standing beside me in the old mirror at the end of the hall--a bride,
in your pale blue dress, with a blush on your face. I would lead you
through all the rooms made ready for your coming, and then to your own.
I would see you sitting in your own chair and all my dreams would
find rich fulfilment in that royal moment. Oh, Alice, we would have a
beautiful life together! It's sweet to make believe about it. You will
sing to me in the twilight, and we will gather early flowers together
in the spring days. When I come home from work, tired, you will put
your arms about me and lay your head on my shoulder. I will stroke
it--so--that bonny, glossy head of yours. Alice, my Alice--all mine in
my dream--never to be mine in real life--how I love you!"

The Alice behind him could bear no more. She gave a little choking cry
that betrayed her presence. Jasper Dale sprang up and gazed upon her. He
saw her standing there, amid the languorous shadows of August, pale with
feeling, wide-eyed, trembling.

For a moment shyness wrung him. Then every trace of it was banished by a
sudden, strange, fierce anger that swept over him. He felt outraged and
hurt to the death; he felt as if he had been cheated out of something
incalculably precious--as if sacrilege had been done to his most holy
sanctuary of emotion. White, tense with his anger, he looked at her and
spoke, his lips as pale as if his fiery words scathed them.

"How dare you? You have spied on me--you have crept in and listened! How
dare you? Do you know what you have done, girl? You have destroyed all
that made life worth while to me. My dream is dead. It could not live
when it was betrayed. And it was all I had. Oh, laugh at me--mock me! I
know that I am ridiculous! What of it? It never could have hurt you! Why
must you creep in like this to hear me and put me to shame? Oh, I love
you--I will say it, laugh as you will. Is it such a strange thing that I
should have a heart like other men? This will make sport for you! I, who
love you better than my life, better than any other man in the world
can love you, will be a jest to you all your life. I love you--and yet
I think I could hate you--you have destroyed my dream--you have done me
deadly wrong."

"Jasper! Jasper!" cried Alice, finding her voice. His anger hurt her
with a pain she could not endure. It was unbearable that Jasper should
be angry with her. In that moment she realized that she loved him--that
the words he had spoken when unconscious of her presence were the
sweetest she had ever heard, or ever could hear. Nothing mattered at
all, save that he loved her and was angry with her.

"Don't say such dreadful things to me," she stammered, "I did not
mean to listen. I could not help it. I shall never laugh at you. Oh,
Jasper"--she looked bravely at him and the fine soul of her shone
through the flesh like an illuminating lamp--"I am glad that you love
me! and I am glad I chanced to overhear you, since you would never have
had the courage to tell me otherwise. Glad--glad! Do you understand,
Jasper?"

Jasper looked at her with the eyes of one who, looking through pain,
sees rapture beyond.

"Is it possible?" he said, wonderingly. "Alice--I am so much older
than you--and they call me the Awkward Man--they say I am unlike other
people"--

"You ARE unlike other people," she said softly, "and that is why I love
you. I know now that I must have loved you ever since I saw you."

"I loved you long before I saw you," said Jasper.

He came close to her and drew her into his arms, tenderly and
reverently, all his shyness and awkwardness swallowed up in the grace
of his great happiness. In the old garden he kissed her lips and Alice
entered into her own.




CHAPTER XXVI. UNCLE BLAIR COMES HOME


It happened that the Story Girl and I both got up very early on the
morning of the Awkward Man's wedding day. Uncle Alec was going to
Charlottetown that day, and I, awakened at daybreak by the sounds in the
kitchen beneath us, remembered that I had forgotten to ask him to bring
me a certain school-book I wanted. So I hurriedly dressed and hastened
down to tell him before he went. I was joined on the stairs by the Story
Girl, who said she had wakened and, not feeling like going to sleep
again, thought she might as well get up.

"I had such a funny dream last night," she said. "I dreamed that I heard
a voice calling me from away down in Uncle Stephen's Walk--'Sara, Sara,
Sara,' it kept calling. I didn't know whose it was, and yet it seemed
like a voice I knew. I wakened up while it was calling, and it seemed so
real I could hardly believe it was a dream. It was bright moonlight,
and I felt just like getting up and going out to the orchard. But I knew
that would be silly and of course I didn't go. But I kept on wanting to
and I couldn't sleep any more. Wasn't it queer?"

When Uncle Alec had gone I proposed a saunter to the farther end of the
orchard, where I had left a book the preceding evening. A young mom was
walking rosily on the hills as we passed down Uncle Stephen's Walk,
with Paddy trotting before us. High overhead was the spirit-like blue of
paling skies; the east was a great arc of crystal, smitten through with
auroral crimsonings; just above it was one milk-white star of morning,
like a pearl on a silver sea. A light wind of dawn was weaving an orient
spell.

"It's lovely to be up as early as this, isn't it?" said the Story Girl.
"The world seems so different just at sunrise, doesn't it? It makes me
feel just like getting up to see the sun rise every morning of my
life after this. But I know I won't. I'll likely sleep later than ever
tomorrow morning. But I wish I could."

"The Awkward Man and Miss Reade are going to have a lovely day for their
wedding," I said.

"Yes, and I'm so glad. Beautiful Alice deserves everything good. Why,
Bev--why, Bev! Who is that in the hammock?"

I looked. The hammock was swung under the two end trees of the Walk. In
it a man was lying, asleep, his head pillowed on his overcoat. He was
sleeping easily, lightly, and wholesomely. He had a pointed brown beard
and thick wavy brown hair. His cheeks were a dusky red and the lashes of
his closed eyes were as long and dark and silken as a girl's. He wore a
light gray suit, and on the slender white hand that hung down over the
hammock's edge was a spark of diamond fire.

It seemed to me that I knew his face, although assuredly I had never
seen him before. While I groped among vague speculations the Story Girl
gave a queer, choked little cry. The next moment she had sprung over the
intervening space, dropped on her knees by the hammock, and flung her
arms about the man's neck.

"Father! Father!" she cried, while I stood, rooted to the ground in my
amazement.

The sleeper stirred and opened two large, exceedingly brilliant hazel
eyes. For a moment he gazed rather blankly at the brown-curled young
lady who was embracing him. Then a most delightful smile broke over his
face; he sprang up and caught her to his heart.

"Sara--Sara--my little Sara! To think didn't know you at first glance!
But you are almost a woman. And when I saw you last you were just a
little girl of eight. My own little Sara!"

"Father--father--sometimes I've wondered if you were ever coming back to
me," I heard the Story Girl say, as I turned and scuttled up the Walk,
realizing that I was not wanted there just then and would be little
missed. Various emotions and speculations possessed my mind in my
retreat; but chiefly did I feel a sense of triumph in being the bearer
of exciting news.

"Aunt Janet, Uncle Blair is here," I announced breathlessly at the
kitchen door.

Aunt Janet, who was kneading her bread, turned round and lifted floury
hands. Felicity and Cecily, who were just entering the kitchen, rosy
from slumber, stopped still and stared at me.

"Uncle who?" exclaimed Aunt Janet.

"Uncle Blair--the Story Girl's father, you know. He's here."

"WHERE?"

"Down in the orchard. He was asleep in the hammock. We found him there."

"Dear me!" said Aunt Janet, sitting down helplessly. "If that isn't
like Blair! Of course he couldn't come like anybody else. I wonder," she
added in a tone unheard by anyone else save myself, "I wonder if he has
come to take the child away."

My elation went out like a snuffed candle. I had never thought of this.
If Uncle Blair took the Story Girl away would not life become rather
savourless on the hill farm? I turned and followed Felicity and Cecily
out in a very subdued mood.

Uncle Blair and the Story Girl were just coming out of the orchard. His
arm was about her and hers was on his shoulder. Laughter and tears were
contending in her eyes. Only once before--when Peter had come back from
the Valley of the Shadow--had I seen the Story Girl cry. Emotion had to
go very deep with her ere it touched the source of tears. I had always
known that she loved her father passionately, though she rarely talked
of him, understanding that her uncles and aunts were not whole-heartedly
his friends.

But Aunt Janet's welcome was cordial enough, though a trifle flustered.
Whatever thrifty, hard-working farmer folk might think of gay, Bohemian
Blair Stanley in his absence, in his presence even they liked him, by
the grace of some winsome, lovable quality in the soul of him. He had
"a way with him"--revealed even in the manner with which he caught staid
Aunt Janet in his arms, swung her matronly form around as though she had
been a slim schoolgirl, and kissed her rosy cheek.

"Sister o' mine, are you never going to grow old?" he said. "Here you
are at forty-five with the roses of sixteen--and not a gray hair, I'll
wager."

"Blair, Blair, it is you who are always young," laughed Aunt Janet, not
ill pleased. "Where in the world did you come from? And what is this I
hear of your sleeping all night in the hammock?"

"I've been painting in the Lake District all summer, as you know,"
answered Uncle Blair, "and one day I just got homesick to see my little
girl. So I sailed for Montreal without further delay. I got here at
eleven last night--the station-master's son drove me down. Nice boy. The
old house was in darkness and I thought it would be a shame to rouse you
all out of bed after a hard day's work. So I decided that I would spend
the night in the orchard. It was moonlight, you know, and moonlight in
an old orchard is one of the few things left over from the Golden Age."

"It was very foolish of you," said practical Aunt Janet. "These
September nights are real chilly. You might have caught your death of
cold--or a bad dose of rheumatism."

"So I might. No doubt it was foolish of me," agreed Uncle Blair gaily.
"It must have been the fault, of the moonlight. Moonlight, you know,
Sister Janet, has an intoxicating quality. It is a fine, airy, silver
wine, such as fairies may drink at their revels, unharmed of it; but
when a mere mortal sips of it, it mounts straightway to his brain, to
the undoing of his daylight common sense. However, I have got neither
cold nor rheumatism, as a sensible person would have done had he ever
been lured into doing such a non-sensible thing; there is a special
Providence for us foolish folk. I enjoyed my night in the orchard; for
a time I was companioned by sweet old memories; and then I fell asleep
listening to the murmurs of the wind in those old trees yonder. And I
had a beautiful dream, Janet. I dreamed that the old orchard blossomed
again, as it did that spring eighteen years ago. I dreamed that its
sunshine was the sunshine of spring, not autumn. There was newness of
life in my dream, Janet, and the sweetness of forgotten words."

"Wasn't it strange about MY dream?" whispered the Story Girl to me.

"Well, you'd better come in and have some breakfast," said Aunt Janet.
"These are my little girls--Felicity and Cecily."
