s'posed people had to keep on being married once they'd begun, but Milty
says no, there's ways of stopping if you can't agree. Milty says one way
is just to start off and leave your wife, and that's what Mr. Harrison
did. Milty says Mr. Harrison left his wife because she throwed things at
him . . . HARD things . . . and Arty Sloane says it was because she
wouldn't let him smoke, and Ned Clay says it was 'cause she never let up
scolding him. I wouldn't leave MY wife for anything like that. I'd just
put my foot down and say, 'Mrs. Davy, you've just got to do what'll
please ME 'cause I'm a MAN.' THAT'D settle her pretty quick I guess. But
Annetta Clay says SHE left HIM because he wouldn't scrape his boots at
the door and she doesn't blame her. I'm going right over to Mr.
Harrison's this minute to see what she's like."

Davy soon returned, somewhat cast down.

"Mrs. Harrison was away . . . she's gone to Carmody with Mrs. Rachel Lynde
to get new paper for the parlor. And Mr. Harrison said to tell Anne to
go over and see him 'cause he wants to have a talk with her. And say,
the floor is scrubbed, and Mr. Harrison is shaved, though there wasn't
any preaching yesterday."

The Harrison kitchen wore a very unfamiliar look to Anne. The floor was
indeed scrubbed to a wonderful pitch of purity and so was every article
of furniture in the room; the stove was polished until she could see her
face in it; the walls were whitewashed and the window panes sparkled
in the sunlight. By the table sat Mr. Harrison in his working clothes,
which on Friday had been noted for sundry rents and tatters but which
were now neatly patched and brushed. He was sprucely shaved and what
little hair he had was carefully trimmed.

"Sit down, Anne, sit down," said Mr. Harrison in a tone but two degrees
removed from that which Avonlea people used at funerals. "Emily's
gone over to Carmody with Rachel Lynde . . . she's struck up a lifelong
friendship already with Rachel Lynde. Beats all how contrary women
are. Well, Anne, my easy times are over . . . all over. It's neatness and
tidiness for me for the rest of my natural life, I suppose."

Mr. Harrison did his best to speak dolefully, but an irrepressible
twinkle in his eye betrayed him.

"Mr. Harrison, you are glad your wife is come back," cried Anne, shaking
her finger at him. "You needn't pretend you're not, because I can see it
plainly."

Mr. Harrison relaxed into a sheepish smile.

"Well . . . well . . . I'm getting used to it," he conceded. "I can't say
I was sorry to see Emily. A man really needs some protection in a
community like this, where he can't play a game of checkers with a
neighbor without being accused of wanting to marry that neighbor's
sister and having it put in the paper."

"Nobody would have supposed you went to see Isabella Andrews if you
hadn't pretended to be unmarried," said Anne severely.

"I didn't pretend I was. If anybody'd have asked me if I was married I'd
have said I was. But they just took it for granted. I wasn't anxious to
talk about the matter . . . I was feeling too sore over it. It would have
been nuts for Mrs. Rachel Lynde if she had known my wife had left me,
wouldn't it now?"

"But some people say that you left her."

"She started it, Anne, she started it. I'm going to tell you the whole
story, for I don't want you to think worse of me than I deserve . . . nor
of Emily neither. But let's go out on the veranda. Everything is so
fearful neat in here that it kind of makes me homesick. I suppose I'll
get used to it after awhile but it eases me up to look at the yard.
Emily hasn't had time to tidy it up yet."

As soon as they were comfortably seated on the veranda Mr. Harrison
began his tale of woe.

"I lived in Scottsford, New Brunswick, before I came here, Anne. My
sister kept house for me and she suited me fine; she was just reasonably
tidy and she let me alone and spoiled me . . . so Emily says. But three
years ago she died. Before she died she worried a lot about what was
to become of me and finally she got me to promise I'd get married. She
advised me to take Emily Scott because Emily had money of her own and
was a pattern housekeeper. I said, says I, 'Emily Scott wouldn't look at
me.' 'You ask her and see,' says my sister; and just to ease her mind I
promised her I would . . . and I did. And Emily said she'd have me. Never
was so surprised in my life, Anne . . . a smart pretty little woman like
her and an old fellow like me. I tell you I thought at first I was in
luck. Well, we were married and took a little wedding trip to St. John
for a fortnight and then we went home. We got home at ten o'clock at
night, and I give you my word, Anne, that in half an hour that woman was
at work housecleaning. Oh, I know you're thinking my house needed it . . .
you've got a very expressive face, Anne; your thoughts just come out
on it like print . . . but it didn't, not that bad. It had got pretty
mixed up while I was keeping bachelor's hall, I admit, but I'd got a
woman to come in and clean it up before I was married and there'd been
considerable painting and fixing done. I tell you if you took Emily into
a brand new white marble palace she'd be into the scrubbing as soon as
she could get an old dress on. Well, she cleaned house till one o'clock
that night and at four she was up and at it again. And she kept on that
way . . . far's I could see she never stopped. It was scour and sweep and
dust everlasting, except on Sundays, and then she was just longing for
Monday to begin again. But it was her way of amusing herself and I
could have reconciled myself to it if she'd left me alone. But that
she wouldn't do. She'd set out to make me over but she hadn't caught me
young enough. I wasn't allowed to come into the house unless I changed
my boots for slippers at the door. I darsn't smoke a pipe for my life
unless I went to the barn. And I didn't use good enough grammar. Emily'd
been a schoolteacher in her early life and she'd never got over it. Then
she hated to see me eating with my knife. Well, there it was, pick and
nag everlasting. But I s'pose, Anne, to be fair, _I_ was cantankerous
too. I didn't try to improve as I might have done . . . I just got cranky
and disagreeable when she found fault. I told her one day she hadn't
complained of my grammar when I proposed to her. It wasn't an overly
tactful thing to say. A woman would forgive a man for beating her sooner
than for hinting she was too much pleased to get him. Well, we bickered
along like that and it wasn't exactly pleasant, but we might have got
used to each other after a spell if it hadn't been for Ginger. Ginger
was the rock we split on at last. Emily didn't like parrots and she
couldn't stand Ginger's profane habits of speech. I was attached to the
bird for my brother the sailor's sake. My brother the sailor was a pet
of mine when we were little tads and he'd sent Ginger to me when he was
dying. I didn't see any sense in getting worked up over his swearing.
There's nothing I hate worse'n profanity in a human being, but in a
parrot, that's just repeating what it's heard with no more understanding
of it than I'd have of Chinese, allowances might be made. But Emily
couldn't see it that way. Women ain't logical. She tried to break Ginger
of swearing but she hadn't any better success than she had in trying to
make me stop saying 'I seen' and 'them things.' Seemed as if the more
she tried the worse Ginger got, same as me.

"Well, things went on like this, both of us getting raspier, till the
CLIMAX came. Emily invited our minister and his wife to tea, and another
minister and HIS wife that was visiting them. I'd promised to put Ginger
away in some safe place where nobody would hear him . . . Emily wouldn't
touch his cage with a ten-foot pole  . . .  and I meant to do it, for I
didn't want the ministers to hear anything unpleasant in my house. But
it slipped my mind . . . Emily was worrying me so much about clean collars
and grammar that it wasn't any wonder . . . and I never thought of that
poor parrot till we sat down to tea. Just as minister number one was in
the very middle of saying grace, Ginger, who was on the veranda outside
the dining room window, lifted up HIS voice. The gobbler had come into
view in the yard and the sight of a gobbler always had an unwholesome
effect on Ginger. He surpassed himself that time. You can smile, Anne,
and I don't deny I've chuckled some over it since myself, but at the
time I felt almost as much mortified as Emily. I went out and carried
Ginger to the barn. I can't say I enjoyed the meal. I knew by the look
of Emily that there was trouble brewing for Ginger and James A. When the
folks went away I started for the cow pasture and on the way I did some
thinking. I felt sorry for Emily and kind of fancied I hadn't been so
thoughtful of her as I might; and besides, I wondered if the ministers
would think that Ginger had learned his vocabulary from me. The long
and short of it was, I decided that Ginger would have to be mercifully
disposed of and when I'd druv the cows home I went in to tell Emily
so. But there was no Emily and there was a letter on the table . . . just
according to the rule in story books. Emily writ that I'd have to choose
between her and Ginger; she'd gone back to her own house and there she
would stay till I went and told her I'd got rid of that parrot.

"I was all riled up, Anne, and I said she might stay till doomsday if
she waited for that; and I stuck to it. I packed up her belongings and
sent them after her. It made an awful lot of talk  . . . Scottsford was
pretty near as bad as Avonlea for gossip . . . and everybody sympathized
with Emily. It kept me all cross and cantankerous and I saw I'd have to
get out or I'd never have any peace. I concluded I'd come to the Island.
I'd been here when I was a boy and I liked it; but Emily had always said
she wouldn't live in a place where folks were scared to walk out after
dark for fear they'd fall off the edge. So, just to be contrary, I moved
over here. And that's all there is to it. I hadn't ever heard a word
from or about Emily till I come home from the back field Saturday and
found her scrubbing the floor but with the first decent dinner I'd had
since she left me all ready on the table. She told me to eat it first
and then we'd talk . . . by which I concluded that Emily had learned some
lessons about getting along with a man. So she's here and she's going to
stay . . . seeing that Ginger's dead and the Island's some bigger than she
thought. There's Mrs. Lynde and her now. No, don't go, Anne. Stay and
get acquainted with Emily. She took quite a notion to you Saturday . . .
wanted to know who that handsome redhaired girl was at the next house."

Mrs. Harrison welcomed Anne radiantly and insisted on her staying to
tea.

"James A. has been telling me all about you and how kind you've been,
making cakes and things for him," she said. "I want to get acquainted
with all my new neighbors just as soon as possible. Mrs. Lynde is a
lovely woman, isn't she? So friendly."

When Anne went home in the sweet June dusk, Mrs. Harrison went with her
across the fields where the fireflies were lighting their starry lamps.

"I suppose," said Mrs. Harrison confidentially, "that James A. has told
you our story?"

"Yes."

"Then I needn't tell it, for James A. is a just man and he would tell
the truth. The blame was far from being all on his side. I can see that
now. I wasn't back in my own house an hour before I wished I hadn't been
so hasty but I wouldn't give in. I see now that I expected too much of
a man. And I was real foolish to mind his bad grammar. It doesn't matter
if a man does use bad grammar so long as he is a good provider and
doesn't go poking round the pantry to see how much sugar you've used
in a week. I feel that James A. and I are going to be real happy now.
I wish I knew who 'Observer' is, so that I could thank him. I owe him a
real debt of gratitude."

Anne kept her own counsel and Mrs. Harrison never knew that her
gratitude found its way to its object. Anne felt rather bewildered
over the far-reaching consequences of those foolish "notes." They had
reconciled a man to his wife and made the reputation of a prophet.

Mrs. Lynde was in the Green Gables kitchen. She had been telling the
whole story to Marilla.

"Well, and how do you like Mrs. Harrison?" she asked Anne.

"Very much. I think she's a real nice little woman."

"That's exactly what she is," said Mrs. Rachel with emphasis, "and as
I've just been sayin' to Marilla, I think we ought all to overlook Mr.
Harrison's peculiarities for her sake and try to make her feel at home
here, that's what. Well, I must get back. Thomas'll be wearying for me.
I get out a little since Eliza came and he's seemed a lot better these
past few days, but I never like to be long away from him. I hear Gilbert
Blythe has resigned from White Sands. He'll be off to college in the
fall, I suppose."

Mrs. Rachel looked sharply at Anne, but Anne was bending over a sleepy
Davy nodding on the sofa and nothing was to be read in her face. She
carried Davy away, her oval girlish cheek pressed against his curly
yellow head. As they went up the stairs Davy flung a tired arm about
Anne's neck and gave her a warm hug and a sticky kiss.

"You're awful nice, Anne. Milty Boulter wrote on his slate today and
showed it to Jennie Sloane,

     "'Roses red and vi'lets blue,
     Sugar's sweet, and so are you"

and that 'spresses my feelings for you ezackly, Anne."




XXVI

Around the Bend


Thomas Lynde faded out of life as quietly and unobtrusively as he had
lived it. His wife was a tender, patient, unwearied nurse. Sometimes
Rachel had been a little hard on her Thomas in health, when his slowness
or meekness had provoked her; but when he became ill no voice could be
lower, no hand more gently skillful, no vigil more uncomplaining.

"You've been a good wife to me, Rachel," he once said simply, when she
was sitting by him in the dusk, holding his thin, blanched old hand
in her work-hardened one. "A good wife. I'm sorry I ain't leaving you
better off; but the children will look after you. They're all smart,
capable children, just like their mother. A good mother . . . a good
woman . . .  ."

He had fallen asleep then, and the next morning, just as the white dawn
was creeping up over the pointed firs in the hollow, Marilla went softly
into the east gable and wakened Anne.

"Anne, Thomas Lynde is gone . . . their hired boy just brought the word.
I'm going right down to Rachel."

On the day after Thomas Lynde's funeral Marilla went about Green Gables
with a strangely preoccupied air. Occasionally she looked at Anne,
seemed on the point of saying something, then shook her head and
buttoned up her mouth. After tea she went down to see Mrs. Rachel; and
when she returned she went to the east gable, where Anne was correcting
school exercises.

"How is Mrs. Lynde tonight?" asked the latter.

"She's feeling calmer and more composed," answered Marilla, sitting
down on Anne's bed . . . a proceeding which betokened some unusual mental
excitement, for in Marilla's code of household ethics to sit on a
bed after it was made up was an unpardonable offense. "But she's very
lonely. Eliza had to go home today . . . her son isn't well and she felt
she couldn't stay any longer."

"When I've finished these exercises I'll run down and chat awhile with
Mrs. Lynde," said Anne. "I had intended to study some Latin composition
tonight but it can wait."

"I suppose Gilbert Blythe is going to college in the fall," said Marilla
jerkily. "How would you like to go too, Anne?"

Anne looked up in astonishment.

"I would like it, of course, Marilla. But it isn't possible."

"I guess it can be made possible. I've always felt that you should go.
I've never felt easy to think you were giving it all up on my account."

"But Marilla, I've never been sorry for a moment that I stayed
home. I've been so happy . . . Oh, these past two years have just been
delightful."

"Oh, yes, I know you've been contented enough. But that isn't the
question exactly. You ought to go on with your education. You've saved
enough to put you through one year at Redmond and the money the stock
brought in will do for another year . . . and there's scholarships and
things you might win."

"Yes, but I can't go, Marilla. Your eyes are better, of course; but I
can't leave you alone with the twins. They need so much looking after."

"I won't be alone with them. That's what I meant to discuss with you.
I had a long talk with Rachel tonight. Anne, she's feeling dreadful bad
over a good many things. She's not left very well off. It seems they
mortgaged the farm eight years ago to give the youngest boy a start
when he went west; and they've never been able to pay much more than the
interest since. And then of course Thomas' illness has cost a good deal,
one way or another. The farm will have to be sold and Rachel thinks
there'll be hardly anything left after the bills are settled. She says
she'll have to go and live with Eliza and it's breaking her heart to
think of leaving Avonlea. A woman of her age doesn't make new friends
and interests easy. And, Anne, as she talked about it the thought came
to me that I would ask her to come and live with me, but I thought I
ought to talk it over with you first before I said anything to her. If I
had Rachel living with me you could go to college. How do you feel about
it?"

"I feel . . . as if . . . somebody . . . had handed me . . . the moon
. . . and I didn't know . . . exactly . . . what to do . . . with it,"
said Anne dazedly. "But as for asking Mrs. Lynde to come here, that is
for you to decide, Marilla. Do you think . . . are you sure . . . you
would like it? Mrs. Lynde is a good woman and a kind neighbor, but . . .
but . . ."

"But she's got her faults, you mean to say? Well, she has, of course;
but I think I'd rather put up with far worse faults than see Rachel go
away from Avonlea. I'd miss her terrible. She's the only close friend
I've got here and I'd be lost without her. We've been neighbors for
