
"And Miss Oliphant does not think of you as a thief," continued
Hammond.

"I don't know-- I can't say."

"You have no right to be so unjust to her," he replied with fervor.

"I don't care so much for the opinion of the others now," said
Prissie; "you believe in me." She walked erect again; her footsteps
were light as if she trod on air. "You are a very good man," she said.
"I would do anything for you-- anything."

Hammond smiled. Her innocence, her enthusiasm, her childishness were
too apparent for him to take her words for more than they were worth.

"Do you know," he said after a pause, "that I am in a certain measure
entitled to help you? In the first place, Miss Oliphant takes a great
interest in you."

"You are mistaken, she does not-- not now."

"I am not mistaken; she takes a great interest in you. Priscilla, you
must have guessed-- you have guessed-- what Maggie Oliphant is to me;
I should like, therefore, to help her friend. That is one tie between
us, but there is another-- Mr. Hayes, your parish clergyman----"

"Oh!" said Prissie, "do you know Mr. Hayes?"

"I not only know him," replied Hammond, smiling, "but he is my uncle.
I am going to see him this evening."

"Oh!"

"Of course, I shall tell him nothing of this, but I shall probably
talk of you. Have you a message for him?"

"I can send him no message to-day."

They had now reached the college gates. Hammond took Priscilla's hand.
"Good-by," he said; "I believe in you and so does Miss Oliphant. If
her money was stolen, the thief was certainly not the most upright,
the most sincere girl in the college. My advice to you, Miss Peel, is
to hold your head up bravely, to confront this charge by that sense of
absolute innocence which you possess. In the meanwhile I have not the
least doubt that the real thief will be found. Don't make a fuss;
don't go about in wild despair-- have faith in God." He pressed her
hand and turned away.

Priscilla took her usual place that day at the luncheon table. The
girls who had witnessed her wild behavior in the morning watched her
in perplexity and astonishment. She ate her food with appetite; her
face looked serene-- all the passion and agony had left it.

Rosalind Merton ventured on a sly allusion to the scene of the
morning. Priscilla did not make the smallest comment. Her face
remained pale, her eyes untroubled. There was a new dignity about her.

"What's up now?" said Rosalind to her friend, Miss Day. "Is the little
Puritan going to defy us all?"

"Oh, don't worry any more about her," said Annie, who, for some
reason, was in a particularly bad humor. "I only wish, for my part,
Miss Peel had never come to St. Benet's; I don't like anything about
her, Her heroics are as unpleasant to me as her stoicisms. But I may
as well say frankly, Rosalind, before I drop this detestable subject,
that I am quite sure she never stole that five-pound note: she was as
little likely to do it as you, so there!"

There came a knock at the door. Rosalind flew to open it. By so doing
she hoped that Miss Day would not notice the sudden color which filled
her cheeks.

  CHAPTER XXVII

 BEAUTIFUL ANNABEL LEE

CIRCUMSTANCES seem to combine to spoil some people. Maggie Oliphant
was one of the victims of fortune, which, while appearing to favor
her, gave her in reality the worst training which was possible for a
nature such as hers. She was impulsive, generous, affectionate, but
she was also perverse, and, so to speak, uncertain. She was a creature
of moods and she was almost absolutely without self-control; and yet
nature had been kind to Maggie, giving her great beauty of form and
face and a character which a right training would have rendered noble.

Up to the present, however, this training had scarcely come to Miss
Oliphant. She was almost without relations and she was possessed of
more money than she knew what to do with. She had great abilities and
loved learning for the sake of learning, but till she came to St.
Benet's, her education had been as desultory as her life. She had
never been to school; her governess only taught her what she chose to
learn. As a child she was very fickle in this respect, working hard
from morning till night one day but idling the whole of the next. When
she was fifteen her guardian took her to Rome. The next two years were
spent in traveling, and Maggie, who knew nothing properly, picked up
that kind of superficial miscellaneous knowledge which made her
conversation brilliant and added to her many charms.

"You shall be brought out early," her guardian had said to her. "You
are not educated in the stereotyped fashion, but you know enough.
After you are seventeen I will get you a suitable chaperon and you
shall live in London."

This scheme, however, was not carried out. For, shortly after her
seventeenth birthday, Maggie Oliphant met a girl whose beauty and
brilliance were equal to her own, whose nature was stronger and who
had been carefully trained in heart and mind while Maggie had been
neglected. Miss Lee was going through a course of training at St.
Benet's College for Women at Kingsdene. She was an uncommon girl in
every sense of the word. The expression of her lovely face was as
piquant as its features were beautiful; her eyes were dark as night;
they also possessed the depth of the tenderest, sweetest summer night,
subjugating all those who came in contact with her. Annabel Lee won
Maggie's warmest affections at once; she determined to join her friend
at St. Benet's. She spoke with ineffable scorn of her London season
and resolved, with that enthusiasm which was the strongest part of her
nature, to become a student in reality. Under Annabel's guidance she
took up the course of study which was necessary to enable her to pass
her entrance examination. She acquitted herself well, for her
abilities were of the highest order, and entered the college with
eclat. Miss Lee was a student in Heath Hall, and Maggie thought
herself supremely happy when she was given a room next to her friend.

Those were brilliant days at the hall. Some girls resided there at
this time whose names were destined to be known in the world by and
by. The workers were earnest; the tone which pervaded the life at
Heath Hall was distinctly high. Shallow girls there must always be
where any number are to be found together, but, during Maggie
Oliphant's first year, these girls had little chance of coming to the
front. Maggie, who was as easily influenced as a wave is tossed by the
wind, rose quickly to the heights with her companions. Her splendid
intellect developed each day. She was merry with the merry, glad with
the glad, studious with the studious. She was also generous, kind and
unselfish in company with those girls who observed the precepts of the
higher life. Next to Miss Lee, Maggie was one of the most popular
girls in the college. Annabel Lee had the kindest of hearts, as well
as the most fascinating of ways. She was an extraordinary girl; there
was a great deal of the exotic about her; in many ways she was old for
her years. No one ever thought or spoke of her as a prig, but all her
influence was brought to bear in the right direction. The girl who
could do or think meanly avoided the expression of Annabel's beautiful
eyes. It was impossible for her to think badly of her
fellow-creatures, but meanness and sin made her sorrowful. There was
not a girl in Heath Hall who would willingly give Annabel Lee sorrow.

In the days that followed people knew that she was one of those rare
and brilliant creatures who, like a lovely but too ethereal flower,
must quickly bloom into perfection and then pass away. Annabel was
destined to a short life, and after her death the high tone of Heath
Hall deteriorated considerably.

This girl was a born leader. When she died no other girl in the
college could take her place, and for many a long day those who had
loved her were conscious of a sense which meant a loss of headship. In
short, they were without their leader.

If Annabel in her gaiety and brightness could influence girls who were
scarcely more than acquaintances, the effect of her strong personality
on Maggie was supreme. Maggie often said that she never knew what love
meant until she met Annabel. The two girls were inseparable; their
love for each other was compared to that of Jonathan and David of
Bible story and of Orestes and Pylades of Greek legend. The society of
each gave the other the warmest pleasure.

Annabel and Maggie were both so beautiful in appearance, so far above
the average girl in their pose, their walk, their manner that people
noticed these friends wherever they went. A young and rising artist,
who saw them once at St. Hilda's, begged permission to make a picture
of the pair. It was done during the summer recess before Annabel died
and made a sensation in the next year's Academy. Many of the visitors
who went there stopped and looked at the two faces, both in the
perfection of their youthful bloom and beauty. Few guessed that one
even now had gone to the Home best fitted for so ardent and high a
spirit.

Annabel Lee died a year before Priscilla came to the college. Whatever
Maggie inwardly felt, she had got over her first grief; her smile was
again as brilliant as when Annabel Lee was by her side, her laugh was
as merry; but the very few who could look a little way into Maggie's
perverse and passionate heart knew well that something had died in her
which could never live again, that her laugh was often hollow and her
brilliant smile had only a foundation in bitterness.

Maggie did not only grieve for her friend when she mourned for
Annabel. She had loved her most deeply, and love alone would have
caused her agony in such a loss; but Maggie's keenest and most
terrible feelings were caused by an unavailing regret.

This regret was connected with Geoffrey Hammond.

He had known Annabel from her childhood. He was an old friend of some
of her friends, and during those last, long summer holidays, which the
two girls spent together under the roof of Maggie's guardian, Hammond,
who was staying with relations not far away, came to see them almost
daily. He was the kind of man who could win both respect and
admiration; he was grave in his nature and his aspirations, aims and
ambitions were high. In their conversations during this lovely summer
weather these young people dreamt happy dreams together and planned a
future which meant good to all mankind. Maggie, to all appearance, was
heart and soul with Annabel and Geoffrey in what they thought and
said.

Nothing could have been simpler or more unconventional than the
intercourse between these young people. Miss Lee had known Hammond all
her life; Maggie always spoke and thought of herself as second to
Annabel in Geoffrey Hammond's regard. One brilliant autumn day,
however, he surprised Maggie by asking her to take a long walk alone
with him. No words were said during this ramble to open Maggie
Oliphant's eyes to the true state of Hammond's feelings for her, but
when she returned from her walk she could not help noticing Annabel
Lee's unaccountable depression. It was not until later, however, that
Maggie attributed a certain pathetic, almost heart-broken, look in her
friend's lovely eyes to its true cause.

Hammond was a graduate of St. Hilda's College at Kingsdene, and the
three friends often talked of the happy meetings they would have
during the coming winter. He was a man of large property, and the
favorite amusement of these young people was in talking over the
brilliant life which lay before Hammond when he took possession of his
estates. He would be the ideal landlord of his age; the people who
lived on his property would, when he attained his majority, enter into
a millennium of bliss.

Maggie returned to St. Benet's, imagining herself quite heart-whole,
but happiness shone out of her eyes, and there was a new, tender ring
in her voice for which she could not account to herself and which
added a new fascination to her beauty.

Shortly after the commencement of the term Hammond met Miss Oliphant
by accident just outside Kingsdene.

"I was going to post a letter to you," he said. His face was unusually
pale, his eyes full of joy and yet of solicitude.

"You can tell me what you have written," replied Maggie in her gayest
voice.

"No, I would rather you read my letter."

He thrust it into her hand and immediately, to her astonishment, left
her.

As she walked home through the frosty air she opened Hammond's letter
and read its contents. It contained an earnest appeal for her love and
an assurance that all the happiness of the writer's future life
depended on her consenting to marry him. Would she be his wife when
her three years' term at St. Benet's came to an end?

No letter could be more manly, more simple. Its contents went straight
to the depths of a heart easily swayed and full of strong affection.

"Yes, I love him," whispered the girl; "I did not know it until I read
this letter, but I am sure of myself now. Yes, I love him better than
any one else in the world."

A joyous light filled Maggie's brown eyes; her heart was gay. She
rushed to Annabel's room to tell her news and to claim the sympathy
which had never hitherto been denied her and which was essential to
the completion of her happiness.

When Maggie entered her friend's room she saw, to her surprise, that
Annabel was lying on her bed with flushed cheeks. Two hours before she
had been, to all appearance, in brilliant health; now her face burned
with fever and her beautiful dark eyes were glazed with pain.

Maggie rushed up and kissed her. "What is it; darling," she asked;
"what is wrong? You look ill; your eyes have a strange expression."

Annabel's reply was scarcely audible. The pain and torpor of her last
short illness were already overmastering her. Maggie was alarmed at
the burning touch of her hand, but she had no experience to guide her
and her own great joy to make her selfish.

"Annabel, look at me for a moment. I have wonderful news to give you."

Annabel's eyes were closed, She opened them wide at this appeal for
sympathy, stretched out her hand and pushed back a tangle of bright
hair from Maggie's brow.

"I love you, Maggie," she said in that voice which had always power to
thrill its listeners.

Maggie kissed her friend's hand and pressed it to her own beating
heart. "I met Geoffrey Hammond today," she said. "He gave me a letter;
I have read it. Oh, Annabel, Annabel! I can be good now. No more bad
half-hours, no more struggles with myself. I can be very good now."

With some slight difficulty Annabel Lee drew her hot hand away from
Maggie's fervent clasp; her eyes, slightly distended, were fixed on
her friend's face; the flush of fever left her cheeks; a hot flood of
emotion seemed to press against her beating heart; she looked at
Maggie with passionate longing.

"What is it?" she asked in a husky whisper. "Why are you so glad,
Maggie? Why can you be good now?"

"Because I love Geoffrey Hammond," answered Maggie; "I love him with
all my heart, all my life, all my strength, and he loves me. He has
asked me to be his wife."

Maggie paused. She expected to feel Annabel's arms round her neck; she
waited impatiently for this last crowning moment of bliss. Her own
happiness caused her to lower her eyes; her joy was so dazzling that
for a moment she felt she must shade their brilliance even from
Annabel's gaze.

Instead of the pressure of loving arms, however, and the warm kiss of
sympathy, there came a low cry from the lips of the sick girl. She
made an effort to say something, but words failed her: the next moment
she was unconscious. Maggie rushed to the bell and gave an alarm,
which brought Miss Heath and one or two servants to the room.

