sons, who throve and grew, and were a constant joy to her. One day when
the Queen was at church, and the two children sat and played with their
father, he gazed again full of grief on the stone statue, and sighing,
wailed: "Oh, if I could only restore you to life, my most trusty John!"
Suddenly the stone began to speak, and said: "Yes, you can restore me
to life again if you are prepared to sacrifice what you hold most dear."
And the King cried out: "All I have in the world will I give up for your
sake." The stone continued: "If you cut off with your own hand the heads
of your two children, and smear me with their blood, I shall come back
to life." The King was aghast when he heard that he had himself to put
his children to death; but when he thought of Trusty John's fidelity,
and how he had even died for him, he drew his sword, and with his own
hand cut the heads off his children. And when he had smeared the stone
with their blood, life came back, and Trusty John stood once more safe
and sound before him. He spake to the King: "Your loyalty shall be
rewarded," and taking up the heads of the children, he placed them on
their bodies, smeared the wounds with their blood, and in a minute they
were all right again and jumping about as if nothing had happened.
Then the King was full of joy, and when he saw the Queen coming, he hid
Trusty John and the two children in a big cupboard. As she entered he
said to her: "Did you pray in church?" "Yes," she answered, "but my
thoughts dwelt constantly on Trusty John, and of what he has suffered
for us." Then he spake: "Dear wife, we can restore him to life, but the
price asked is our two little sons; we must sacrifice them." The Queen
grew white and her heart sank, but she replied: "We owe it to him on
account of his great fidelity." Then he rejoiced that she was of the
same mind as he had been, and going forward he opened the cupboard, and
fetched the two children and Trusty John out, saying: "God be praised!
Trusty John is free once more, and we have our two small sons again."
Then he related to her all that had passed, and they lived together
happily ever afterward.(1)


(1) Grimm.




THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR


One summer's day a little tailor sat on his table by the window in
the best of spirits, and sewed for dear life. As he was sitting thus a
peasant woman came down the street, calling out: "Good jam to sell,
good jam to sell." This sounded sweetly in the tailor's ears; he put
his frail little head out of the window, and shouted: "up here, my good
woman, and you'll find a willing customer." The woman climbed up the
three flights of stairs with her heavy basket to the tailor's room, and
he made her spread out all the pots in a row before him. He examined
them all, lifted them up and smelled them, and said at last: "This jam
seems good, weigh me four ounces of it, my good woman; and even if it's
a quarter of a pound I won't stick at it." The woman, who had hoped to
find a good market, gave him what he wanted, but went away grumbling
wrathfully. "Now heaven shall bless this jam for my use," cried the
little tailor, "and it shall sustain and strengthen me." He fetched some
bread out of a cupboard, cut a round off the loaf, and spread the jam on
it. "That won't taste amiss," he said; "but I'll finish that waistcoat
first before I take a bite." He placed the bread beside him, went
on sewing, and out of the lightness of his heart kept on making his
stitches bigger and bigger. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to the ceiling, where heaps of flies were sitting, and attracted
them to such an extent that they swarmed on to it in masses. "Ha! who
invited you?" said the tailor, and chased the unwelcome guests away. But
the flies, who didn't understand English, refused to let themselves
be warned off, and returned again in even greater numbers. At last the
little tailor, losing all patience, reached out of his chimney corner
for a duster, and exclaiming: "Wait, and I'll give it to you," he beat
them mercilessly with it. When he left off he counted the slain, and
no fewer than seven lay dead before him with outstretched legs. "What a
desperate fellow I am!" said he, and was filled with admiration at his
own courage. "The whole town must know about this"; and in great haste
the little tailor cut out a girdle, hemmed it, and embroidered on it in
big letters, "Seven at a blow." "What did I say, the town? no, the whole
world shall hear of it," he said; and his heart beat for joy as a lamb
wags his tail.

The tailor strapped the girdle round his waist and set out into the wide
world, for he considered his workroom too small a field for his prowess.
Before he set forth he looked round about him, to see if there was
anything in the house he could take with him on his journey; but he
found nothing except an old cheese, which he took possession of. In
front of the house he observed a bird that had been caught in some
bushes, and this he put into his wallet beside the cheese. Then he went
on his way merrily, and being light and agile he never felt tired. His
way led up a hill, on the top of which sat a powerful giant, who was
calmly surveying the landscape. The little tailor went up to him, and
greeting him cheerfully said: "Good-day, friend; there you sit at your
ease viewing the whole wide world. I'm just on my way there. What do you
say to accompanying me?" The giant looked contemptuously at the tailor,
and said: "What a poor wretched little creature you are!" "That's a good
joke," answered the little tailor, and unbuttoning his coat he showed
the giant the girdle. "There now, you can read what sort of a fellow
I am." The giant read: "Seven at a blow"; and thinking they were human
beings the tailor had slain, he conceived a certain respect for the
little man. But first he thought he'd test him, so taking up a stone in
his hand, he squeezed it till some drops of water ran out. "Now you do
the same," said the giant, "if you really wish to be thought strong."
"Is that all?" said the little tailor; "that's child's play to me," so
he dived into his wallet, brought out the cheese, and pressed it till
the whey ran out. "My squeeze was in sooth better than yours," said he.
The giant didn't know what to say, for he couldn't have believed it
of the little fellow. To prove him again, the giant lifted a stone and
threw it so high that the eye could hardly follow it. "Now, my little
pigmy, let me see you do that." "Well thrown," said the tailor; "but,
after all, your stone fell to the ground; I'll throw one that won't come
down at all." He dived into his wallet again, and grasping the bird in
his hand, he threw it up into the air. The bird, enchanted to be free,
soared up into the sky, and flew away never to return. "Well, what do
you think of that little piece of business, friend?" asked the tailor.
"You can certainly throw," said the giant; "but now let's see if you can
carry a proper weight." With these words he led the tailor to a huge oak
tree which had been felled to the ground, and said: "If you are strong
enough, help me to carry the tree out of the wood." "Most certainly,"
said the little tailor: "just you take the trunk on your shoulder; I'll
bear the top and branches, which is certainly the heaviest part." The
giant laid the trunk on his shoulder, but the tailor sat at his ease
among the branches; and the giant, who couldn't see what was going on
behind him, had to carry the whole tree, and the little tailor into the
bargain. There he sat behind in the best of spirits, lustily whistling a
tune, as if carrying the tree were mere sport. The giant, after dragging
the heavy weight for some time, could get on no further, and shouted
out: "Hi! I must let the tree fall." The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both hands as if he had carried it the whole way
and said to the giant: "Fancy a big lout like you not being able to
carry a tree!"

They continued to go on their way together, and as they passed by a
cherry tree the giant grasped the top of it, where the ripest fruit
hung, gave the branches into the tailor's hand, and bade him eat. But
the little tailor was far too weak to hold the tree down, and when the
giant let go the tree swung back into the air, bearing the little tailor
with it. When he had fallen to the ground again without hurting himself,
the giant said: "What! do you mean to tell me you haven't the strength
to hold down a feeble twig?" "It wasn't strength that was wanting,"
replied the tailor; "do you think that would have been anything for a
man who has killed seven at a blow? I jumped over the tree because the
huntsmen are shooting among the branches near us. Do you do the like if
you dare." The giant made an attempt, but couldn't get over the tree,
and stuck fast in the branches, so that here too the little tailor had
the better of him.

"Well, you're a fine fellow, after all," said the giant; "come and spend
the night with us in our cave." The little tailor willingly consented to
do this, and following his friend they went on till they reached a cave
where several other giants were sitting round a fire, each holding
a roast sheep in his hand, of which he was eating. The little tailor
looked about him, and thought: "Yes, there's certainly more room to turn
round in here than in my workshop." The giant showed him a bed and bade
him lie down and have a good sleep. But the bed was too big for the
little tailor, so he didn't get into it, but crept away into the corner.
At midnight, when the giant thought the little tailor was fast asleep,
he rose up, and taking his big iron walking-stick, he broke the bed
in two with a blow, and thought he had made an end of the little
grasshopper. At early dawn the giants went off to the wood, and quite
forgot about the little tailor, till all of a sudden they met him
trudging along in the most cheerful manner. The giants were terrified at
the apparition, and, fearful lest he should slay them, they all took to
their heels as fast as they could.

The little tailor continued to follow his nose, and after he had
wandered about for a long time he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and feeling tired he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
While he lay there the people came, and looking him all over read on his
girdle: "Seven at a blow." "Oh!" they said, "what can this great hero of
a hundred fights want in our peaceful land? He must indeed be a mighty
man of valor." They went and told the King about him, and said what a
weighty and useful man he'd be in time of war, and that it would be well
to secure him at any price. This counsel pleased the King, and he sent
one of his courtiers down to the little tailor, to offer him, when he
awoke, a commission in their army. The messenger remained standing by
the sleeper, and waited till he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
when he tendered his proposal. "That's the very thing I came here for,"
he answered; "I am quite ready to enter the King's service." So he was
received with all honor, and given a special house of his own to live
in.

But the other officers resented the success of the little tailor, and
wished him a thousand miles away. "What's to come of it all?" they asked
each other; "if we quarrel with him, he'll let out at us, and at every
blow seven will fall. There'll soon be an end of us." So they resolved
to go in a body to the King, and all to send in their papers. "We are
not made," they said, "to hold out against a man who kills seven at a
blow." The King was grieved at the thought of losing all his faithful
servants for the sake of one man, and he wished heartily that he had
never set eyes on him, or that he could get rid of him. But he didn't
dare to send him away, for he feared he might kill him along with his
people, and place himself on the throne. He pondered long and deeply
over the matter, and finally came to a conclusion. He sent to the tailor
and told him that, seeing what a great and warlike hero he was, he
was about to make him an offer. In a certain wood of his kingdom there
dwelled two giants who did much harm; by the way they robbed, murdered,
burned, and plundered everything about them; "no one could approach them
without endangering his life. But if he could overcome and kill these
two giants he should have his only daughter for a wife, and half his
kingdom into the bargain; he might have a hundred horsemen, too, to back
him up." "That's the very thing for a man like me," thought the little
tailor; "one doesn't get the offer of a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day." "Done with you," he answered; "I'll soon put an end
to the giants. But I haven't the smallest need of your hundred horsemen;
a fellow who can slay seven men at a blow need not be afraid of two."

The little tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed him. When
he came to the outskirts of the wood he said to his followers: "You wait
here, I'll manage the giants by myself"; and he went on into the wood,
casting his sharp little eyes right and left about him. After a while
he spied the two giants lying asleep under a tree, and snoring till
the very boughs bent with the breeze. The little tailor lost no time in
filling his wallet with stones, and then climbed up the tree under
which they lay. When he got to about the middle of it he slipped along a
branch till he sat just above the sleepers, when he threw down one stone
after the other on the nearest giant. The giant felt nothing for a long
time, but at last he woke up, and pinching his companion said: "What did
you strike me for?" "I didn't strike you," said the other, "you must be
dreaming." They both lay down to sleep again, and the tailor threw down
a stone on the second giant, who sprang up and cried: "What's that for?
Why did you throw something at me?" "I didn't throw anything," growled
the first one. They wrangled on for a time, till, as both were tired,
they made up the matter and fell asleep again. The little tailor began
his game once more, and flung the largest stone he could find in his
wallet with all his force, and hit the first giant on the chest. "This
is too much of a good thing!" he yelled, and springing up like a madman,
he knocked his companion against the tree till he trembled. He gave,
however, as good as he got, and they became so enraged that they tore up
trees and beat each other with them, till they both fell dead at once on
the ground. Then the little tailor jumped down. "It's a mercy," he said,
"that they didn't root up the tree on which I was perched, or I should
have had to jump like a squirrel on to another, which, nimble though I
am, would have been no easy job." He drew his sword and gave each of
the giants a very fine thrust or two on the breast, and then went to
the horsemen and said: "The deed is done, I've put an end to the two of
them; but I assure you it has been no easy matter, for they even tore up
trees in their struggle to defend themselves; but all that's of no use
against one who slays seven men at a blow." "Weren't you wounded?" asked
the horsemen.

"No fear," answered the tailor; "they haven't touched a hair of my
head." But the horsemen wouldn't believe him till they rode into the
wood and found the giants weltering in their blood, and the trees lying
around, torn up by the roots.

The little tailor now demanded the promised reward from the King, but he
repented his promise, and pondered once more how he could rid himself
of the hero. "Before you obtain the hand of my daughter and half my
kingdom," he said to him, "you must do another deed of valor. A unicorn
is running about loose in the wood, and doing much mischief; you must
first catch it." "I'm even less afraid of one unicorn than of two
giants; seven at a blow, that's my motto." He took a piece of cord and
an axe with him, went out to the wood, and again told the men who had
been sent with him to remain outside. He hadn't to search long, for the
unicorn soon passed by, and, on perceiving the tailor, dashed straight
at him as though it were going to spike him on the spot. "Gently,
gently," said he, "not so fast, my friend"; and standing still he waited
till the beast was quite near, when he sprang lightly behind a tree; the
unicorn ran with all its force against the tree, and rammed its horn so
firmly into the trunk that it had no strength left to pull it out again,
and was thus successfully captured. "Now I've caught my bird," said the
tailor, and he came out from behind the tree, placed the cord round its
neck first, then struck the horn out of the tree with his axe, and when
everything was in order led the beast before the King.

Still the King didn't want to give him the promised reward and made a
third demand. The tailor was to catch a wild boar for him that did a
great deal of harm in the wood; and he might have the huntsmen to help
him. "Willingly," said the tailor; "that's mere child's play." But he
didn't take the huntsmen into the wood with him, and they were well
enough pleased to remain behind, for the wild boar had often
received them in a manner which did not make them desire its further
acquaintance. As soon as the boar perceived the tailor it ran at him
with foaming mouth and gleaming teeth, and tried to knock him down; but
our alert little friend ran into a chapel that stood near, and got out
of the window again with a jump. The boar pursued him into the church,
but the tailor skipped round to the door, and closed it securely. So the
raging beast was caught, for it was far too heavy and unwieldy to spring
out of the window. The little tailor summoned the huntsmen together,
that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes. Then the hero
betook himself to the King, who was obliged now, whether he liked it or
not, to keep his promise, and hand him over his daughter and half his
kingdom. Had he known that no hero-warrior, but only a little tailor
stood before him, it would have gone even more to his heart. So the
wedding was celebrated with much splendor and little joy, and the tailor
became a king.

After a time the Queen heard her husband saying one night in his sleep:
"My lad, make that waistcoat and patch these trousers, or I'll box your
ears." Thus she learned in what rank the young gentleman had been born,
and next day she poured forth her woes to her father, and begged him to
help her to get rid of a husband who was nothing more nor less than a
tailor. The King comforted her, and said: "Leave your bedroom door open
to-night, my servants shall stand outside, and when your husband is
fast asleep they shall enter, bind him fast, and carry him on to a
ship, which shall sail away out into the wide ocean." The Queen was
well satisfied with the idea, but the armor-bearer, who had overheard
everything, being much attached to his young master, went straight to
him and revealed the whole plot. "I'll soon put a stop to the business,"
said the tailor. That night he and his wife went to bed at the usual
time; and when she thought he had fallen asleep she got up, opened the
door, and then lay down again. The little tailor, who had only pretended
to be asleep, began to call out in a clear voice: "My lad, make that
waistcoat and patch those trousers, or I'll box your ears. I have killed
seven at a blow, slain two giants, led a unicorn captive, and caught a
wild boar, then why should I be afraid of those men standing outside my
door?" The men, when they heard the tailor saying these words, were so
terrified that they fled as if pursued by a wild army, and didn't dare
go near him again. So the little tailor was and remained a king all the
days of his life.




A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT


CHAPTER I


My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire, and I was the third
of four sons. He sent me to Cambridge at fourteen years old, and after
studying there three years I was bound apprentice to Mr. Bates, a famous
surgeon in London. There, as my father now and then sent me small sums
of money, I spent them in learning navigation, and other arts useful to
those who travel, as I always believed it would be some time or other my
fortune to do.

Three years after my leaving him my good master, Mr. Bates, recommended
me as ship's surgeon to the "Swallow," on which I voyaged three years.
When I came back I settled in London, and, having taken part of a
small house, I married Miss Mary Burton, daughter of Mr. Edmund Burton,
hosier.

But my good master Bates died two years after; and as I had few friends
my business began to fail, and I determined to go again to sea. After
several voyages, I accepted an offer from Captain W. Pritchard, master
of the "Antelope," who was making a voyage to the South Sea. We set sail
from Bristol, May 4, 1699; and our voyage at first was very prosperous.

But in our passage to the East Indies we were driven by a violent storm
to the north-west of Van Diemen's Land. Twelve of our crew died from
hard labor and bad food, and the rest were in a very weak condition.
On the 5th of November, the weather being very hazy, the seamen spied
a rock within 120 yards of the ship; but the wind was so strong that we
were driven straight upon it, and immediately split. Six of the crew,
of whom I was one, letting down the boat, got clear of the ship, and we
rowed about three leagues, till we could work no longer. We therefore
trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves; and in about half an hour
the boat was upset by a sudden squall. What became of my companions in
the boat, or those who escaped on the rock or were left in the vessel,
I cannot tell; but I conclude they were all lost. For my part, I swam as
fortune directed me, and was pushed forward by wind and tide; but when
I was able to struggle no longer I found myself within my depth. By this
time the storm was much abated. I reached the shore at last, about eight
o'clock in the evening, and advanced nearly half a mile inland, but
could not discover any sign of inhabitants. I was extremely tired, and
with the heat of the weather I found myself much inclined to sleep. I
lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft, and slept sounder
than ever I did in my life for about nine hours. When I woke, it was
just daylight. I attempted to rise, but could not; for as I happened to
be lying on my back, I found my arms and legs were fastened on each side
to the ground; and my hair, which was long and thick, tied down in the
same manner. I could only look upward. The sun began to grow hot, and
the light hurt my eyes. I heard a confused noise about me, but could
see nothing except the sky. In a little time I felt something alive
and moving on my left leg, which, advancing gently over my breast, came
almost up to my chin, when, bending my eyes downward, I perceived it to
be a human creature, not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his
hands, and a quiver at his back. In the meantime I felt at least forty
more following the first. I was in the utmost astonishment, and roared
so loud that they all ran back in a fright; and some of them were
hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground.
However, they soon returned, and one of them, who ventured so far as to
get a full sight of my face, lifted up his hands in admiration. I lay
all this while in great uneasiness; but at length, struggling to get
loose, I succeeded in breaking the strings that fastened my left arm
to the ground; and at the same time, with a violent pull that gave me
extreme pain, I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair, so
that I was just able to turn my head about two inches. But the creatures
ran off a second time before I could seize them, whereupon there was a
great shout, and in an instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged
on my left hand, which pricked me like so many needles. Moreover, they
shot another flight into the air, of which some fell on my face, which
I immediately covered with my left hand. When this shower of arrows
was over I groaned with grief and pain, and then, striving again to get
loose, they discharged another flight of arrows larger than the first,
and some of them tried to stab me with their spears; but by good luck
I had on a leather jacket, which they could not pierce. By this time
I thought it most prudent to lie still till night, when, my left
hand being already loose, I could easily free myself; and as for the
inhabitants, I thought I might be a match for the greatest army they
could bring against me if they were all of the same size as him I
saw. When the people observed that I was quiet they discharged no more
arrows, but by the noise I heard I knew that their number was increased;
and about four yards from me, for more than an hour, there was a
knocking, like people at work. Then, turning my head that way as well
as the pegs and strings would let me, I saw a stage set up, about a foot
and a half from the ground, with two or three ladders to mount it. From
this, one of them, who seemed to be a person of quality, made me a long
speech, of which I could not understand a word, though I could tell from
his manner that he sometimes threatened me, and sometimes spoke with
pity and kindness. I answered in few words, but in the most submissive
manner; and, being almost famished with hunger, I could not help showing
my impatience by putting my finger frequently to my mouth, to signify
that I wanted food. He understood me very well, and, descending from the
stage, commanded that several ladders should be set against my sides, on
which more than a hundred of the inhabitants mounted, and walked toward
my mouth with baskets full of food, which had been sent by the King's
orders when he first received tidings of me. There were legs and
shoulders like mutton but smaller than the wings of a lark. I ate
them two or three at a mouthful, and took three loaves at a time. They
supplied me as fast as they could, with a thousand marks of wonder at
my appetite. I then made a sign that I wanted something to drink. They
guessed that a small quantity would not suffice me, and, being a most
ingenious people, they slung up one of their largest hogsheads, then
rolled it toward my hand, and beat out the top. I drank it off at a
draught, which I might well do, for it did not hold half a pint. They
brought me a second hogshead, which I drank, and made signs for more;
but they had none to give me. However, I could not wonder enough at the
daring of these tiny mortals, who ventured to mount and walk upon my
body, while one of my hands was free, without trembling at the very
sight of so huge a creature as I must have seemed to them. After some
time there appeared before me a person of high rank from his Imperial
Majesty. His Excellency, having mounted my right leg, advanced to my
face, with about a dozen of his retinue, and spoke about ten minutes,
often pointing forward, which, as I afterward found, was toward the
capital city, about half a mile distant, whither it was commanded by his
Majesty that I should be conveyed. I made a sign with my hand that was
loose, putting it to the other (but over his Excellency's head, for
fear of hurting him or his train), to show that I desired my liberty.
He seemed to understand me well enough, for he shook his head, though
he made other signs to let me know that I should have meat and drink
enough, and very good treatment. Then I once more thought of attempting
to escape; but when I felt the smart of their arrows on my face and
hands, which were all in blisters and observed likewise that the number
of my enemies increased, I gave tokens to let them know that they might
do with me what they pleased. Then they daubed my face and hands with a
sweet-smelling ointment, which in a few minutes removed all the smarts
of the arrows. The relief from pain and hunger made me drowsy, and
presently I fell asleep. I slept about eight hours, as I was told
afterward; and it was no wonder, for the physicians, by the Emperor's
orders, had mingled a sleeping draught in the hogsheads of wine.

It seems that, when I was discovered sleeping on the ground after my
landing, the Emperor had early notice of it, and determined that I
should be tied in the manner I have related (which was done in the
night, while I slept), that plenty of meat and drink should be sent me,
and a machine prepared to carry me to the capital city. Five hundred
carpenters and engineers were immediately set to work to prepare the
engine. It was a frame of wood, raised three inches from the ground,
about seven feet long and four wide, moving upon twenty-two wheels. But
the difficulty was to place me on it. Eighty poles were erected for this
purpose, and very strong cords fastened to bandages which the workmen
had tied round my neck, hands, body, and legs. Nine hundred of the
strongest men were employed to draw up these cords by pulleys fastened
on the poles, and in less than three hours I was raised and slung
into the engine, and there tied fast. Fifteen hundred of the Emperor's
largest horses, each about four inches and a half high, were then
employed to draw me toward the capital. But while all this was done I
still lay in a deep sleep, and I did not wake till four hours after we
began our journey.

The Emperor and all his Court came out to meet us when we reached the
capital; but his great officials would not suffer his Majesty to risk
his person by mounting on my body. Where the carriage stopped there
stood an ancient temple, supposed to be the largest in the whole
kingdom, and here it was determined that I should lodge. Near the great
gate, through which I could easily creep, they fixed ninety-one chains,
