The Spaniards and Gauls occupied the centre of the line of infantry. The
Africans formed the two wings. On his left flank between the Africans
and the river he placed his heavy African and Gaulish horse, eight
thousand strong, while the two thousand Numidians were posted between
the infantry and the river on the right flank. Hannibal commanded the
centre of the army in person, Hanno the right wing, Hasdrubal the left
wing; Maharbal commanded the cavalry.

Varro placed his infantry in close and heavy order, so as to reduce
their front to that of the Carthaginians. The Roman cavalry, numbering
two thousand four hundred men, was on his right wing, and was thus
opposed to Hannibal's heavy cavalry, eight thousand strong. The cavalry
of the Italian allies, four thousand eight hundred strong, was on the
left wing facing the Numidians.

Emilius commanded the Roman right, Varro the left. The Carthaginians
faced north, so that the wind, which was blowing strongly from the
south, swept clouds of dust over their heads full into the faces of the
enemy. The battle was commenced by the light troops on both sides,
who fought for some time obstinately and courageously, but without any
advantage to either. While this contest was going on, Hannibal advanced
his centre so as to form a salient angle projecting in front of his
line. The whole of the Gauls and Spaniards took part in this movement,
while the Africans remained stationary; at the same time he launched his
heavy cavalry against the Roman horse.

The latter were instantly overthrown, and were driven from the field
with great slaughter. Emilius himself was wounded, but managed to join
the infantry. While the Carthaginian heavy horse were thus defeating
the Roman cavalry, the Numidians maneuvered near the greatly superior
cavalry of the Italian allies, and kept them occupied until the heavy
horse, after destroying the Roman cavalry, swept round behind their
infantry and fell upon the rear of the Italian horse, while the
Numidians charged them fiercely in front.

Thus caught in a trap the Italian horse were completely annihilated, and
so, before the heavy infantry of the two armies met each other, not a
Roman cavalry soldier remained alive and unwounded on the field.

The Roman infantry now advanced to the charge, and from the nature of
Hannibal's formation their centre first came in contact with the head of
the salient angle formed by the Gauls and Spaniards. These resisted with
great obstinacy. The principes, who formed the second line of the Roman
infantry, came forward and joined the spearmen, and even the triarii
pressed forward and joined in the fight. Fighting with extreme obstinacy
the Carthaginian centre was forced gradually back until they were again
in a line with the Africans on their flanks.

The Romans had insensibly pressed in from both flanks upon the point
where they had met with resistance, and now occupied a face scarcely
more than half that with which they had begun the battle. Still further
the Gauls and Spaniards were driven back until they now formed an angle
in rear of the original line, and in this angle the whole of the Roman
infantry in a confused mass pressed upon them. This was the moment for
which Hannibal had waited. He wheeled round both his flanks, and the
Africans, who had hitherto not struck a blow, now fell in perfect order
upon the flanks of the Roman mass, while Hasdrubal with his victorious
cavalry charged down like a torrent upon their rear. Then followed a
slaughter unequalled in the records of history. Unable to open out, to
fight, or to fly, with no quarter asked or given, the Romans and their
Latin allies fell before the swords of their enemies, till, of the
seventy thousand infantry which had advanced to the fight, forty
thousand had fallen on the field. Three thousand were taken prisoners,
seven thousand escaped to the small camp, and ten thousand made their
way across the river to the large camp, where they joined the force
which had been left there, and which had, in obedience to Varro's
orders, attacked the Carthaginian camp, but had been repulsed with a
loss of two thousand men. All the troops in both camps were forced
to surrender on the following morning, and thus only fifteen thousand
scattered fugitives escaped of the eighty-seven thousand two hundred
infantry and cavalry under the command of the Roman consuls.

Hannibal's loss in the battle of Cannae amounted to about six thousand
men.



CHAPTER XIX: IN THE MINES


The exultation of the Carthaginians at the total destruction of their
enemies was immense, and Maharbal and some of the other leaders urged
Hannibal at once to march upon Rome; but Hannibal knew the spirit of
the Roman people, and felt that the capture of Rome, even after
the annihilation of its army, would be a greater task than he could
undertake. History has shown how desperate a defence may be made by
a population willing to die rather than surrender, and the Romans, an
essentially martial people, would defend their city until the last gasp.
They had an abundance of arms, and there were the two city legions,
which formed the regular garrison of the capital.

The instant the news of the defeat reached Rome, a levy of all males
over seventeen years of age was ordered, and this produced another ten
thousand men and a thousand cavalry. Eight thousand slaves who were
willing to serve were enlisted and armed, and four thousand criminals
and debtors were released from prison and pardoned, on the condition of
their taking up arms. The praetor Marcellus was at Ostia with the ten
thousand men with which he was about to embark for Sicily.

Thus Rome would be defended by forty-three thousand men, while Hannibal
had but thirty-three thousand infantry, and his cavalry, the strongest
arm of his force, would be useless. From Cannae to Rome was twelve days'
march with an army encumbered with booty. He could not, therefore, hope
for a surprise. The walls of Rome were exceedingly strong, and he had
with him none of the great machines which would have been necessary for
a siege. He must have carried with him the supplies he had accumulated
for the subsistence of his force, and when these were consumed he would
be destitute. Fresh Roman levies would gather on his rear, and before
long his whole army would be besieged.

In such an undertaking he would have wasted time, and lost the prestige
which he had acquired by his astonishing victory. Varro, who had escaped
from the battle, had rallied ten thousand of the fugitives at the strong
place of Canusium, and these would be a nucleus round which the rest of
those who had escaped would rally, and would be joined by fresh levies
of the Italian allies of Rome.

The Romans showed their confidence in their power to resist a siege by
at once despatching Marcellus with his ten thousand men to Canusium.
Thus, with a strongly defended city in front, an army of twenty thousand
Roman soldiers, which would speedily increase to double that number, in
his rear, Hannibal perceived that were he to undertake the siege of
Rome he would risk all the advantages he had gained. He determined,
therefore, to continue the policy which he had laid down for himself,
namely, to move his army to and fro among the provinces of Italy until
the allies of Rome one by one fell away from her, and joined him, or
until such reinforcements arrived from Carthage as would justify him in
undertaking the siege of Rome.

Rome herself was never grander than in this hour of defeat; not for
a moment was the courage and confidence of her citizens shaken. The
promptness with which she prepared for defence, and still more the
confidence which she showed by despatching Marcellus with his legion to
Canusium instead of retaining him for the defence of the city, show a
national spirit and manliness worthy of the highest admiration. Varro
was ordered to hand over his command to Marcellus, and to return to Rome
to answer before the senate for his conduct.

Varro doubted not that his sentence would be death, for the Romans,
like the Carthaginians, had but little mercy for a defeated general. His
colleague and his army had undoubtedly been sacrificed by his rashness.
Moreover, the senate was composed of his bitter political enemies, and
he could not hope that a lenient view would be taken of his conduct.
Nevertheless Varro returned to Rome and appeared before the senate. That
body nobly responded to the confidence manifested in it; party feeling
was suspended, the political adversary, the defeated general, were alike
forgotten, it was only remembered how Varro had rallied his troops, how
he had allayed the panic which prevailed among them, and had at once
restored order and discipline. His courage, too, in thus appearing,
after so great a disaster, to submit himself to the judgment of the
country, counted in his favour. His faults were condoned, and the senate
publicly thanked him, because he had not despaired of the commonwealth.

Hannibal, in pursuance of his policy to detach the allies of Italy from
Rome, dismissed all the Italian prisoners without ransom. The Roman
prisoners he offered to admit to ransom, and a deputation of them
accompanied an ambassador to offer terms of peace. The senate, however,
not only refused to discuss any terms of peace, but absolutely forbade
the families and friends of the prisoners to ransom them, thinking it
politic neither to enrich their adversary nor to show indulgence to
soldiers who had surrendered to the enemy.

The victory of Cannae and Hannibal's clemency began to bear the effects
which he hoped for. Apulia declared for him at once, and the towns
of Arpi and Celapia opened their gates to him; Bruttium, Lucania, and
Samnium were ready to follow. Mago with one division of the army was
sent into Bruttium to take possession of such towns as might submit.
Hanno was sent with another division to do the same in Lucania. Hannibal
himself marched into Samnium, and making an alliance with the tribes,
there stored his plunder, and proceeded into Campania, and entered
Capua, the second city of Italy, which concluded an alliance with him.
Mago embarked at one of the ports of Bruttium to carry the news of
Hannibal's success to Carthage, and to demand reinforcements.

Neither Rome nor Carthage had the complete mastery of the sea, and as
the disaster which had befallen Rome by land would greatly lessen
her power to maintain a large fleet, Carthage could now have poured
reinforcements in by the ports of Bruttium without difficulty. But
unfortunately Hannibal's bitterest enemies were to be found not in Italy
but in the senate of Carthage, where, in spite of the appeals of Mago
and the efforts of the patriotic party, the intrigues of Hanno and
his faction and the demands made by the war in Spain, prevented the
reinforcements from being forwarded which would have enabled him to
terminate the struggle by the conquest of Rome.

Hannibal, after receiving the submission of several other towns and
capturing Casilinum, went into winter quarters at Capua. During the
winter Rome made gigantic efforts to place her army upon a war footing,
and with such success that, excluding the army of Scipio in Spain,
she had, when the spring began, twelve legions or a hundred and twenty
thousand men again under arms; and as no reinforcements, save some
elephants and a small body of cavalry, ever reached Hannibal from
Carthage, he was, during the remaining thirteen years of the war,
reduced to stand wholly on the defensive, protecting his allies,
harassing his enemy, and feeding his own army at their expense; and yet
so great was the dread which his genius had excited that, in spite of
their superior numbers, the Romans after Cannae never ventured again to
engage him in a pitched battle.

Soon after the winter set in Hannibal ordered Malchus to take a number
of officers and a hundred picked men, and to cross from Capua to
Sardinia, where the inhabitants had revolted against Rome, and were
harassing the praetor, Quintus Mucius, who commanded the legion which
formed the garrison of the island. Malchus and the officers under him
were charged with the duty of organizing the wild peasantry of the
island, and of drilling them in regular tactics; for unless acting
as bodies of regular troops, however much they might harass the Roman
legion, they could not hope to expel them from their country. Nessus of
course accompanied Malchus.

The party embarked in two of the Capuan galleys. They had not been many
hours at sea when the weather, which had when they started been fine,
changed suddenly, and ere long one of the fierce gales which are so
frequent in the Mediterranean burst upon them. The wind was behind them,
and there was nothing to do but to let the galleys run before it. The
sea got up with great rapidity, and nothing but the high poops at their
stern prevented the two galleys being sunk by the great waves which
followed them. The oars were laid in, for it was impossible to use them
in such a sea.

As night came on the gale increased rather than diminished. The
Carthaginian officers and soldiers remained calm and quiet in the storm,
but the Capuan sailors gave themselves up to despair, and the men at the
helm were only kept at their post by Malchus threatening to have them
thrown overboard instantly if they abandoned it. After nightfall he
assembled the officers in the cabin in the poop.

"The prospects are bad," he said. "The pilot tells me that unless the
gale abates or the wind changes we shall, before morning, be thrown upon
the coast of Sardinia, and that will be total destruction; for upon the
side facing Italy the cliffs, for the most part, rise straight up from
the water, the only port on that side being that at which the Romans
have their chief castle and garrison. He tells me there is nothing to be
done, and I see nought myself. Were we to try to bring the galley round
to the wind she would be swamped in a moment, while even if we could
carry out the operation, it would be impossible to row in the teeth of
this sea. Therefore, my friends, there is nothing for us to do save
to keep up the courage of the men, and to bid them hold themselves in
readiness to seize upon any chance of getting to shore should the vessel
strike."

All night the galley swept on before the storm. The light on the other
boat had disappeared soon after darkness had set in. Half the soldiers
and crew by turns were kept at work baling out the water which found its
way over the sides, and several times so heavily did the seas break into
her that all thought that she was lost. However, when morning broke she
was still afloat. The wind had hardly shifted a point since it had begun
to blow, and the pilot told Malchus that they must be very near to the
coast of Sardinia. As the light brightened every eye was fixed ahead
over the waste of angry foaming water. Presently the pilot, who was
standing next to Malchus, grasped his arm.

"There is the land," he cried, "dead before us."

Not until a few minutes later could Malchus make out the faint outline
through the driving mist. It was a lofty pile of rock standing by
itself.

"It is an island!" he exclaimed.

"It is Caralis," the pilot replied; "I know its outline well; we are
already in the bay. Look to the right, you can make out the outline of
the cliffs at its mouth, we have passed it already. You do not see the
shore ahead because the rock on which Caralis stands rises from a level
plain, and to the left a lagoon extends for a long way in; it is there
that the Roman galleys ride. The gods have brought us to the only spot
along the coast where we could approach it with a hope of safety."

"There is not much to rejoice at," Malchus said; "we may escape the sea,
but only to be made prisoners by the Romans."

"Nay, Malchus, the alternative is not so bad," a young officer who was
standing next to him said. "Hannibal has thousands of Roman prisoners in
his hands, and we may well hope to be exchanged. After the last twelve
hours any place on shore, even a Roman prison, is an elysium compared to
the sea."

The outline of the coast was now clearly visible. The great rock of
Caralis, now known as Cagliari, rose dark and threatening, the low
shores of the bay on either side were marked by a band of white foam,
while to the left of the rock was the broad lagoon, dotted with the
black hulls of a number of ships and galleys rolling and tossing
heavily, for as the wind blew straight into the bay the lagoon was
covered with short, angry waves.

The pilot now ordered the oars to be got out. The entrance to the lagoon
was wide, but it was only in the middle that the channel was deep, and
on either side of this long breakwaters of stone were run out from the
shore, to afford a shelter to the shipping within. The sea was so rough
that it was found impossible to use the oars, and they were again
laid in and a small sail was hoisted. This enabled the head to be laid
towards the entrance of the lagoon. For a time it was doubtful whether
the galley could make it, but she succeeded in doing so, and then ran
straight on towards the upper end of the harbour.

"That is far enough," the pilot said presently; "the water shoals fast
beyond. We must anchor here."

The sail was lowered, the oars got out on one side, and the head of the
galley brought to the wind. The anchor was then dropped. As the storm
beaten galley ran right up the lagoon she had been viewed with curiosity
and interest by those who were on board the ships at anchor. That she
was an Italian galley was clear, and also that she was crowded with men,
but no suspicion was entertained that these were Carthaginians.

The anchor once cast Malchus held a council with the other officers.
They were in the midst of foes, and escape seemed altogether impossible.
Long before the gale abated sufficiently to permit them to put to sea
again, they would be visited by boats from the other vessels to ask who
they were and whence they came. As to fighting their way out it was out
of the question, for there were a score of triremes in the bay, any
one of which could crush the Capuan galley, and whose far greater speed
rendered the idea of flight as hopeless as that of resistance. The
council therefore agreed unanimously that the only thing to be done was
to surrender without resistance.

The storm continued for another twenty-four hours, then the wind died
out almost as suddenly as it began.

As soon as the sea began to abate two galleys were seen putting out from
the town, and these rowed directly towards the ship. The fact that she
had shown no flag had no doubt excited suspicion in the minds of the
garrison. Each galley contained fifty soldiers. As they rowed alongside
a Roman officer on the poop of one of the galleys hailed the ship, and
demanded whence it came.

"We are from Capua," the pilot answered. "The gale has blown us across
thence. I have on board fifty Carthaginian officers and soldiers, who
now surrender to you."

As in those days, when vessels could with difficulty keep the sea in a
storm, and in the event of a gale springing up were forced to run before
it, it was by no means unusual for galleys to be blown into hostile
ports, the announcement excited no great surprise.

"Who commands the party?" the Roman officer asked.

"I do," Malchus replied. "I am Malchus, the son of Hamilcar, who was
killed at the Trebia, a cousin of Hannibal and captain of his guard. I
surrender with my followers, seeing that resistance is hopeless."

"It is hopeless," the Roman replied, "and you are right not to throw
away the lives of your men when there is no possibility of resistance."

As he spoke he stepped on board, ordered the anchor to be weighed, and
the galley, accompanied by the two Roman boats, was rowed to the landing
place. A messenger was at once sent up to Mucius to tell him what had
happened, and the praetor himself soon appeared upon the spot. The
officer acquainted him with the name and rank of the leader of the
Carthaginian party, and said that there were with him two officers of
noble families of the Carthaginians.

"That is well," the praetor said, "it is a piece of good fortune. The
Carthaginians have so many of our officers in their hands, that it is
well to have some whom we may exchange for them. Let them be landed."

As they left the ship the Carthaginians laid down their arms and armour.
By this time a large number of the Roman garrison, among whom the
news had rapidly spread, were assembled at the port. Many of the
young soldiers had never yet seen a Carthaginian, and they looked
with curiosity and interest at the men who had inflicted such terrible
defeats upon the armies of the Romans. They were fine specimens of
Hannibal's force, for the general had allowed Malchus to choose his own
officers and men, and, knowing that strength, agility, and endurance
would be needed for a campaign in so mountainous a country as Sardinia,
he had picked both officers and men with great care.

His second in command was his friend Trebon, who had long since obtained
a separate command, but who, on hearing from Malchus of the expedition
on which he was bound, had volunteered to accompany him. The men were
all Africans accustomed to desert fighting and trained in warfare in
Spain. The Romans, good judges of physical strength, could not repress
a murmur of admiration at the sight of these sinewy figures. Less
heavy than themselves, there was about them a spring and an elasticity
resembling that of the tiger. Long use had hardened their muscles until
they stood up like cords through their tawny skin, most of them bore
numerous scars of wounds received in battle, and the Romans, as they
viewed them, acknowledged to themselves what formidable opponents these
men would be.

A strong guard formed up on either side of the captives, and they were
marched through the town to the citadel on the upper part of the rock.
Here a large chamber, opening on to the courtyard, was assigned to the
officers, while the men, who were viewed in the light of slaves, were at
once set to work to carry stores up to the citadel from a ship which had
arrived just as the storm broke.

A fortnight later a vessel arrived from Rome with a message from
the senate that they would not exchange prisoners, and that the
Carthaginians were at once to be employed as slaves in the mines. The
governor acquainted Malchus with the decision.

"I am sorry," he said, "indeed, that it is so; but the senate are
determined that they will exchange no prisoners. Of course their view
of the matter is, that when a Roman lays down his arms he disgraces
himself, and the refusal to ransom him or allow him to be exchanged is
intended to act as a deterrent to others. This may be fair enough in
cases where large numbers surrender to a few, or where they lay down
their arms when with courage and determination they might have cut their
way through the enemy; but in cases where further resistance would be
