
"I think it's a mean shame," cried Joel, on a high vindictive key.
"You've had burglars here twice, and I haven't been home."

"You speak as if we appointed the meeting, Joe," said Ben with a laugh.

"Well, it's mean, anyway," cried Joel, with a flash of his black eyes.
"Now there won't any come again in an age."

"Goodness, I hope not," ejaculated Mr. King, lowering his newspaper to
peer over its top.

"I'd have floored him," declared Joel, striking out splendidly from the
shoulder, "if I'd only have been here."

"All very well," said Percy negligently, "but you weren't here," and he
laughed softly.

"Do you mean to say that I couldn't have handled the burglar?" demanded
Joel belligerently, and advancing on Percy, "say? Because if you do,
why, I'll try a bout with you."

"I didn't say anything what you could or couldn't do. I said you
weren't here, and you weren't. That's enough," and Percy turned his
back on him, thrust his hands in the pockets of his morning jacket and
stalked to the window.

Van opened his mouth to speak, then thought better of it, and gave a
low whistle. Joel, finding no enthusiasm for tales of his fighting
prowess, ran off to interview Dick on the old topic of the burglary and
to obtain another close account of its details.

"To think Phronsie saw the other burglar five years ago, and now Dick
was on hand for this one--those two babies," he fumed, "and none of us
men around."

"Percy," said Van, "come out in the hall, will you?"

"What do you want?" asked Percy lazily.

"Oh! you come along," cried Van, laying hold of his jacket. "See here,"
dropping his voice cautiously, as he towed him successfully out, "let's
give Joe a chance to see a burglar; he wants to so terribly."

"What do you mean?" asked Percy, with astonished eyes, his hands still
in his pockets.

Van burst into a loud laugh, then stopped short. "It'll take two of
us," he whispered.

"Oh, Van!" exclaimed Percy, and pulling his hands from their resting
places, he clapped them smartly together.

"But we ought not, I really suppose," he said at last, letting them
fall to his sides. "Mamma mightn't like it, you know."

"She wouldn't mind," said Van, yet he looked uneasy. "It would be a
great comfort to every one, to take Joe down. He does yarn so."

"It's an old grudge with you," said Percy pleasantly. "You know he beat
you when you were a little fellow, and he'd just come."

"As if I cared for that," cried Van in a dudgeon, "that was nothing. I
didn't half try; and he went at me like a country sledge-hammer."

"Yes, I remember," Percy nodded placidly, "and you got all worsted and
knocked into a heap. Everybody knew it."

"Do you suppose I'd pound a visitor?" cried Van wrathfully, his cheeks
aflame. "Say, Percy Whitney?"

"No, I don't," said Percy, "not when 'twas Joe."

"That's just it. He was Polly's brother."

At mention of Polly, Percy's color rose, and he put out his hand. "Beg
pardon, Van," he said. "Here, shake, and make up. I forgot all about
our promise," he added penitently.

"I forgot it, too," declared Van, quieting down, and thrusting out his
brown palm to meet his brother's. "Well, I don't care what you say if
you'll only go halves in this lark," he finished, brightening up.

"Well, I will," said Percy, to make atonement.

"Come up to our room, then, and think it out," cried Van gleefully,
flying over the stairs three at a bound. "Sh--sh! and hurry up!"

Just then the door-bell gave a loud peal, and Jencks the butler opened
it to receive a box about two feet long and one broad.

"For Miss Phronsie Pepper," said the footman on the steps, holding it
out, "but it's not to be given to her till to-morrow."

"All right," said Jencks, taking it. "That's the sixth box for Miss
Phronsie that I've took in this morning," he soliloquized, going down
the hall and reading the address carefully. "And all the same size."

"Ding-a-ling," Jencks laid the parcel quickly on one of the oaken
chairs in the hall, and hurried to the door, to be met by another
parcel for "Miss Phronsie Pepper: not to be given to her till
to-morrow."

"And the i-dentical size," he ejaculated, squinting at it as he went
back to pick up the first parcel, "as like as two peas, they are."

Upstairs Polly was at work with happy fingers, Alexia across the room,
asking every third minute, "Polly, how does it go? O dear! I can't do
anything unless you look and see if it's right."

And Polly would turn her back on a certain cloud of white muslin and
floating lace, and flying off to Alexia to give the necessary
criticism, with a pull here and a pat there, would set matters
straight, presently running back to her own work again.

"You see," she said, "everything must be just right, for next to
Mamsie's wedding, this is to be the most important occasion, Alexia
Rhys, that we've ever known. We can't have anything too nice for
Phronsie's getting-well party."

"That's so," said Alexia, twitching a pink satin bow on the handle of a
flower-basket. "O dear me! this bow looks like everything! I've tried
six different times to make it hang down quite careless and refined.
And just to provoke me, it pokes up like a stiff old thing in my face.
Do come and tie it, Polly."

So Polly jumped up again, and laying determined fingers on the
refractory bow, sent it into a shape that Alexia protested was "too
lovely for anything."

"Are you going to have a good-by party?" asked Alexia after a minute.

"I suppose so," said Polly. "Grandpapa said I would better, but O dear
me, I don't believe I can ever get through with it in all this world,"
and Polly hid her face behind a cloud of muslin that was slowly coming
into shape as a dress for one of Phronsie's biggest dolls.

"It will be dreadful," said Alexia, with a pathetic little sniff, and
beginning on a second pink bow, "but then, you know, it's your duty to
go off nicely, and I'm sure you can't do it, Polly, without a farewell
party."

"Yes," said Polly slowly, "but then I'd really rather write little
notes to all the girls. But I suppose they'll all enjoy the party," she
added.

"Indeed they will," declared Alexia quickly. "O dear me, I wish I was
going with you. You'll have a perfectly royal time.

"I'm going to work hard at my music, you know," declared Polly, raising
her head suddenly, a glow on her round cheek.

"Oh! well, you'll only peg away at it when you've a mind," said Alexia
carelessly, and setting lazy stitches. "Most of the time you'll be
jaunting around, seeing things, and having fun generally. Oh! don't I
wish I was going with you."

"Alexia Rhys!" cried Polly in astonishment, and casting her needle from
her, she deserted the muslin cloud summarily. "Only peg away when I
have the mind?" she repeated indignantly. "Well, I shall have the mind
most of the time, I can tell you. Why, that's what I am going abroad
for, to study music. How can I ever teach it, if I don't go, pray
tell?" she demanded, and now her eyes flashed, and her hands worked
nervously.

"Oh! nonsense," cried Alexia, not looking at the face before her, and
going on recklessly, "as if that meant anything, all that talk about
your being a music-teacher, Polly," and she gave a little incredulous
laugh.

Polly got out of her chair somehow, and stood very close to the fussing
fingers over the pink satin bow. "Do you never dare say that to me
again," she commanded; "it's the whole of my life to be a
music-teacher--the very whole."

"Oh, Polly!" down went the satin bow dragging with it Alexia's spool of
silk and the dainty scissors. "Don't--don't--I didn't mean anything;
but you really know that Mr. King will never let you be a music-teacher
in all this world. Never; you know it, Polly. Oh! don't look like that;
please don't."

"He will," said Polly, in a low but perfectly distinct voice, "for he
has promised me."

"Well, he'll get out of it somehow," said Alexia, her evil genius
urging her on, "for you know, Polly, it would be too queer for any of
his family, and--and a girl of our set, to turn out a music-teacher.
You know, Polly, that it would."

And Alexia smiled in the most convincing way and jumped up to throw her
arms around her friend.

"If any of the girls in our set," said Polly grandly, and stepping off
from Alexia, "wish to draw away from me, they can do so now. I am to be
a music-teacher; I'm perfectly happy to be one, I want you all to
understand. Just as happy as I can possibly be in all this world. Why,
it's what I've been studying and working for, and how else do you
suppose I can ever repay dear Grandpapa for helping me?" Her voice
broke, and she stopped a minute, clasping her hands tightly to keep
back the rush of words.

"Oh, Polly!" cried Alexia in dismay, and beginning to whimper, she
tried again to put her arm around her.

"Don't touch me," said Polly, waving her off with an imperative hand.

"Oh, Polly! Polly!"

"And the rest of our set may feel as you do; then I don't want them to
keep on liking me," said Polly, with her most superb air, and drawing
off further yet.

"Polly, if you don't stop, you'll--you'll kill me," gasped Alexia. "Oh,
Polly! I don't care what you are. You may teach all day if you want to,
and I'll help get you scholars. I'll do anything, and so will all the
girls; I know they will. Polly, do let me be your friend just as I was.
O, dear, dear! I wish I hadn't said anything--I wish I had bitten my
tongue off; I didn't think you'd mind it so much," and now Alexia broke
down, and sobbed outright.

"You've got to say it's glorious to teach," said Polly, unmoved, and
with her highest air on, "and that you're glad I'm going to do it."

"It's glo--glorious to teach," mumbled poor Alexia behind her wet
handkerchief.

"And I'm glad you're going to do it," dictated Polly inflexibly.

"I'm glad you're going to do it," echoed Alexia in a dismal tone.

"Then I'll be your friend once more," consented Polly with a slow step
toward Alexia, "that is, if you never in all this world say such a
dreadful thing again, Alexia Rhys."

"Don't ask me. You know I won't," promised Alexia, her spirits rising.
So Polly went over to her and set a kiss on her wet cheek, comforting
her as only Polly could, and before long the pink satin bow, with the
spool of silk hanging to it, and the scissors were found under the
table, and Polly attacked the muslin cloud with redoubled vigor, and
the girls' voices carried merry laughter and scraps of happy talk, and
Mrs. Chatterton stole out of the little reading-room next to them and
shut herself up in her own apartment.

"Dear me, how fine that doll's gown is to be, Polly," exclaimed Alexia
after a bit. "Is the lace going on all around the bottom?"

"Yes," said Polly, biting off her thread, and giving the muslin
breadths a little shake; "Felicie is tucking the flounce; then I shall
have to sew on the lace."

"How many dolls are there to refurbish before to-morrow?" asked Alexia
suddenly.

"Four--no, five," said Polly, rapidly counting; "for the one that
Grandpapa gave her Christmas before last, Celestine, you know, does
need a new waist. I forgot her. But that doesn't count the new sashes,
and the hair ribbons and the lace ruffles around the necks; I guess
there are almost fifty of them. Dear me, I must hurry," and she began
to sew faster yet.

"What a nuisance all those dolls are," said Alexia, "they take up every
bit of your spare time."

"That isn't the worst of it," said Polly. "Alexia, I don't know what we
shall do, for Phronsie works over them till she's quite tired out. You
ought to see her this morning."

"She's up in the play-house at it now, I suppose," said Alexia,
"dressing every one of them for the party to-morrow."

"Yes," said Polly, "she is."

"Well, I hope no one will give her a doll to-morrow," said Alexia, "at
least no one but Mr. King. Of course he will."

"Oh! no one else will," declared Polly cheerfully. "Of course not,
Alexia."

And then Jencks walked in with his seven boxes exactly alike as to
size, and deposited them solemnly in a row on the blue and white
lounge. "For Miss Phronsie Pepper, and not to be opened till to-morrow,
Miss Mary."

"Polly," said Alexia in a stage whisper, and jumping up as Jencks
disappeared, to run over to the row, "do you suppose they are dolls?"

"I shall die if they are," declared Polly desperately, and sitting
quite still.

"They surely look like dolls on the very covers," said Alexia,
fingering the cords. "Would it be so very wrong to open one box, and
just relieve our suspense? Just one, Polly?"

"No, no, don't," cried Polly sharply. "They belong to Phronsie. But O
dear me!"

"And just think," said Alexia, like a Job's comforter, and looking over
at the clock, "it's only half-past eleven. Polly Pepper, there's time
for oceans more to come in yet."

"It's perfectly horrid to get such a scrap of an outing," said Joel
that night, sprawling on the rug before the library fire, "only four
days! Why couldn't Mr. Marks be sick longer than that, if he was going
to be sick at all, pray?"

"These four days will give you strength for your 'exams,' won't they,
Joe?" asked Van.

Joel turned his black eyes on him and coolly said "Yes," then made a
wry face, doubled up a bit of paper, and aimed it at Van.

Davie sighed, and looked up anxiously. "I hope Mr. Marks will come out
all right so that we can go back Monday."

"I only hope he'll stay ill," said Joel affectionately. "'Tisn't safe
anyway for us to go back Monday. It may be typhoid fever, you know,
Mamsie," looking over at her.

