The attendants all ran forward to thrust such impudent youngsters
outside the palace, but the boys slipped through their fingers like
quicksilver, and entered a large hall, where the emperor was dining,
surrounded by his whole court.

'We desire to enter,' said one of the princes sharply to a servant who
stood near the door.

'That is quite impossible,' replied the servant.

'Is it? let us see!' said the second prince, pushing the servants to
right and left.

But the servants were many, and the princes only two. There was the
noise of a struggle, which reached the emperor's ears.

'What is the matter?' asked he angrily.

The princes stopped at the sound of their father's voice.

'Two boys who want to force their way in,' replied one of the servants,
approaching the emperor.

'To FORCE their way in? Who dares to use force in my palace? What boys
are they?' said the emperor all in one breath.

'We know not, O mighty emperor,' answered the servant, 'but they must
surely be akin to you, for they have the strength of lions, and have
scattered the guards at the gate. And they are as proud as they are
strong, for they will not take their caps from their heads.'

The emperor, as he listened, grew red with anger.

'Thrust them out,' cried he. 'Set the dogs after them.'

'Leave us alone, and we will go quietly,' said the princes, and stepped
backwards, weeping silently at the harsh words. They had almost reached
the gates when a servant ran up to them.

'The emperor commands you to return,' panted he: 'the empress wishes to
see you.'

The princes thought a moment: then they went back the way they had come,
and walked straight up to the emperor, their caps still on their heads.

He sat at the top of a long table covered with flowers and filled with
guests. And beside him sat the empress, supported by twelve cushions.
When the princes entered one of the cushions fell down, and there
remained only eleven.

'Take off your caps,' said one of the courtiers.

'A covered head is among men a sign of honour. We wish to seem what we
are.'

'Never mind,' said the emperor, whose anger had dropped before the
silvery tones of the boy's voice. 'Stay as you are, but tell me WHO you
are! Where do you come from, and what do you want?'

'We are twins, two shoots from one stem, which has been broken, and
half lies in the ground and half sits at the head of this table. We have
travelled a long way, we have spoken in the rustle of the wind, have
whispered in the wood, we have sung in the waters, but now we wish to
tell you a story which you know without knowing it, in the speech of
men.'

And a second cushion fell down.

'Let them take their silliness home,' said the empress.

'Oh, no, let them go on,' said the emperor. 'You wished to see them, but
I wish to hear them. Go on, boys, sing me the story.'

The empress was silent, but the princes began to sing the story of their
lives.

'There was once an emperor,' began they, and the third cushion fell
down.

When they reached the warlike expedition of the emperor three of the
cushions fell down at once.

And when the tale was finished there were no more cushions under the
empress, but the moment that they lifted their caps, and showed their
golden hair and the golden stars, the eyes of the emperor and of all
his guests were bent on them, and they could hardly bear the power of so
many glances.

And there happened in the end what should have happened in the
beginning. Laptitza sat next her husband at the top of the table. The
stepmother's daughter became the meanest sewing maid in the palace, the
stepmother was tied to a wild horse, and every one knew and has never
forgotten that whoever has a mind turned to wickedness is sure to end
badly.

(Rumanische Marchen.)




THE FROG

Once upon a time there was a woman who had three sons. Though they
were peasants they were well off, for the soil on which they lived was
fruitful, and yielded rich crops. One day they all three told their
mother they meant to get married. To which their mother replied: 'Do
as you like, but see that you choose good housewives, who will look
carefully after your affairs; and, to make certain of this, take with
you these three skeins of flax, and give it to them to spin. Whoever
spins the best will be my favourite daughter-in-law.'

Now the two eldest sons had already chosen their wives; so they took the
flax from their mother, and carried it off with them, to have it spun
as she had said. But the youngest son was puzzled what to do with his
skein, as he knew no girl (never having spoken to any) to whom he could
give it to be spun. He wandered hither and thither, asking the girls
that he met if they would undertake the task for him, but at the sight
of the flax they laughed in his face and mocked at him. Then in despair
he left their villages, and went out into the country, and, seating
himself on the bank of a pond began to cry bitterly.

Suddenly there was a noise close beside him, and a frog jumped out of
the water on to the bank and asked him why he was crying. The youth told
her of his trouble, and how his brothers would bring home linen spun for
them by their promised wives, but that no one would spin his thread.

Then the frog answered: 'Do not weep on that account; give me the
thread, and I will spin it for you.' And, having said this, she took
it out of his hand, and flopped back into the water, and the youth went
back, not knowing what would happen next.

In a short time the two elder brothers came home, and their mother asked
to see the linen which had been woven out of the skeins of flax she had
given them. They all three left the room; and in a few minutes the two
eldest returned, bringing with them the linen that had been spun by
their chosen wives. But the youngest brother was greatly troubled, for
he had nothing to show for the skein of flax that had been given to him.
Sadly he betook himself to the pond, and sitting down on the bank, began
to weep.

Flop! and the frog appeared out of the water close beside him.

'Take this,' she said; 'here is the linen that I have spun for you.'

You may imagine how delighted the youth was. She put the linen into his
hands, and he took it straight back to his mother, who was so pleased
with it that she declared she had never seen linen so beautifully spun,
and that it was far finer and whiter than the webs that the two elder
brothers had brought home.

Then she turned to her sons and said: 'But this is not enough, my sons,
I must have another proof as to what sort of wives you have chosen. In
the house there are three puppies. Each of you take one, and give it to
the woman whom you mean to bring home as your wife. She must train it
and bring it up. Whichever dog turns out the best, its mistress will be
my favourite daughter-in-law.'

So the young men set out on their different ways, each taking a puppy
with him. The youngest, not knowing where to go, returned to the pond,
sat down once more on the bank, and began to weep.

Flop! and close beside him, he saw the frog. 'Why are you weeping?' she
said. Then he told her his difficulty, and that he did not know to whom
he should take the puppy.

'Give it to me,' she said, 'and I will bring it up for you.' And, seeing
that the youth hesitated, she took the little creature out of his arms,
and disappeared with it into the pond.

The weeks and months passed, till one day the mother said she would like
to see how the dogs had been trained by her future daughters-in-law. The
two eldest sons departed, and returned shortly, leading with them two
great mastiffs, who growled so fiercely, and looked so savage, that the
mere sight of them made the mother tremble with fear.

The youngest son, as was his custom, went to the pond, and called on the
frog to come to his rescue.

In a minute she was at his side, bringing with her the most lovely
little dog, which she put into his arms. It sat up and begged with its
paws, and went through the prettiest tricks, and was almost human in the
way it understood and did what it was told.

In high spirits the youth carried it off to his mother. As soon as she
saw it, she exclaimed: 'This is the most beautiful little dog I have
ever seen. You are indeed fortunate, my son; you have won a pearl of a
wife.'

Then, turning to the others, she said: 'Here are three shirts; take
them to your chosen wives. Whoever sews the best will be my favourite
daughter-in-law.'

So the young men set out once more; and again, this time, the work of
the frog was much the best and the neatest.

This time the mother said: 'Now that I am content with the tests I gave,
I want you to go and fetch home your brides, and I will prepare the
wedding-feast.'

You may imagine what the youngest brother felt on hearing these words.
Whence was he to fetch a bride? Would the frog be able to help him in
this new difficulty? With bowed head, and feeling very sad, he sat down
on the edge of the pond.

Flop! and once more the faithful frog was beside him.

'What is troubling you so much?' she asked him, and then the youth told
her everything.

'Will you take me for a wife?' she asked.

'What should I do with you as a wife,' he replied, wondering at her
strange proposal.

'Once more, will you have me or will you not?' she said.

'I will neither have you, nor will I refuse you,' said he.

At this the frog disappeared; and the next minute the youth beheld a
lovely little chariot, drawn by two tiny ponies, standing on the road.
The frog was holding the carriage door open for him to step in.

'Come with me,' she said. And he got up and followed her into the
chariot.

As they drove along the road they met three witches; the first of them
was blind, the second was hunchbacked, and the third had a large thorn
in her throat. When the three witches beheld the chariot, with the
frog seated pompously among the cushions, they broke into such fits of
laughter that the eyelids of the blind one burst open, and she recovered
her sight; the hunchback rolled about on the ground in merriment till
her back became straight, and in a roar of laughter the thorn fell out
of the throat of the third witch. Their first thought was to reward
the frog, who had unconsciously been the means of curing them of their
misfortunes.

The first witch waved her magic wand over the frog, and changed her into
the loveliest girl that had ever been seen. The second witch waved
the wand over the tiny chariot and ponies, and they were turned into
a beautiful large carriage with prancing horses, and a coachman on the
seat. The third witch gave the girl a magic purse, filled with money.
Having done this, the witches disappeared, and the youth with his lovely
bride drove to his mother's home. Great was the delight of the mother at
her youngest son's good fortune. A beautiful house was built for them;
she was the favourite daughter-in-law; everything went well with them,
and they lived happily ever after.

(From the Italian.)




THE PRINCESS WHO WAS HIDDEN UNDERGROUND

Once there was a king who had great riches, which, when he died, he
divided among his three sons. The two eldest of these lived in rioting
and feasting, and thus wasted and squandered their father's wealth till
nothing remained, and they found themselves in want and misery. The
youngest of the three sons, on the contrary, made good use of his
portion. He married a wife and soon they had a most beautiful daughter,
for whom, when she was grown up, he caused a great palace to be built
underground, and then killed the architect who had built it. Next he
shut up his daughter inside, and then sent heralds all over the world to
make known that he who should find the king's daughter should have her
to wife. If he were not capable of finding her then he must die.

Many young men sought to discover her, but all perished in the attempt.

After many had met their death thus, there came a young man, beautiful
to behold, and as clever as he was beautiful, who had a great desire to
attempt the enterprise. First he went to a herdsman, and begged him to
hide him in a sheepskin, which had a golden fleece, and in this disguise
to take him to the king. The shepherd let himself be persuaded so to do,
took a skin having a golden fleece, sewed the young man in it, putting
in also food and drink, and so brought him before the king.

When the latter saw the golden lamb, he asked the herd: 'Will you sell
me this lamb?'

But the herd answered: 'No, oh king; I will not sell it; but if you find
pleasure therein, I will be willing to oblige you, and I will lend it to
you, free of charge, for three days, after that you must give it back to
me.'

This the king agreed to do, and he arose and took the lamb to his
daughter. When he had led it into her palace, and through many rooms,
he came to a shut door. Then he called 'Open, Sartara Martara of the
earth!' and the door opened of itself. After that they went through many
more rooms, and came to another closed door. Again the king called out:
'Open, Sartara Martara of the earth!' and this door opened like the
other, and they came into the apartment where the princess dwelt, the
floor, walls, and roof of which were all of silver.

When the king had embraced the princess, he gave her the lamb, to her
great joy. She stroked it, caressed it, and played with it.

After a while the lamb got loose, which, when the princess saw, she
said: 'See, father, the lamb is free.'

But the king answered: 'It is only a lamb, why should it not be free?'

Then he left the lamb with the princess, and went his way.

In the night, however, the young man threw off the skin. When the
princess saw how beautiful he was, she fell in love with him, and asked
him: 'Why did you come here disguised in a sheepskin like that?'

Then he answered: 'When I saw how many people sought you, and could not
find you, and lost their lives in so doing, I invented this trick, and
so I am come safely to you.'

The princess exclaimed: 'You have done well so to do; but you must know
that your wager is not yet won, for my father will change me and my
maidens into ducks, and will ask you, "Which of these ducks is the
princess?" Then I will turn my head back, and with my bill will clean my
wings, so that you may know me.'

When they had spent three days together, chatting and caressing one
another, the herd came back to the king, and demanded his lamb. Then the
king went to his daughter to bring it away, which troubled the princess
very much, for she said they had played so nicely together.

But the king said: 'I cannot leave it with you, my daughter, for it is
only lent to me.' So he took it away with him, and gave it back to the
shepherd.

Then the young man threw the skin from off him, and went to the king,
saying: 'Sire, I am persuaded I can find your daughter.'

When the king saw how handsome he was, he said: 'My lad, I have pity on
your youth. This enterprise has already cost the lives of many, and will
certainly be your death as well.'

But the young man answered, 'I accept your conditions, oh king; I will
either find her or lose my head.'

Thereupon he went before the king, who followed after him, till they
came to the great door. Then the young man said to the king: 'Speak the
words that it may open.'

And the king answered: 'What are the words? Shall I say something like
this: "Shut; shut; shut"?'

'No,' said he; 'say "Open, Sartara Martara of the earth."'

When the king had so said, the door opened of itself, and they went
in, while the king gnawed his moustache in anger. Then they came to the
second door, where the same thing happened as at the first, and they
went in and found the princess.

Then spoke the king and said: 'Yes, truly, you have found the princess.
Now I will turn her as well as all her maidens into ducks, and if you
can guess which of these ducks is my daughter, then you shall have her
to wife.'

And immediately the king changed all the maidens into ducks, and he
drove them before the young man, and said: 'Now show me which is my
daughter.'

Then the princess, according to their understanding, began to clean her
wings with her bill, and the lad said: 'She who cleans her wings is the
princess.'

Now the king could do nothing more but give her to the young man to
wife, and they lived together in great joy and happiness.

(From the German.)




THE GIRL WHO PRETENDED TO BE A BOY

Once upon a time there lived an emperor who was a great conqueror, and
reigned over more countries than anyone in the world. And whenever he
subdued a fresh kingdom, he only granted peace on condition that the
king should deliver him one of his sons for ten years' service.

Now on the borders of his kingdom lay a country whose emperor was as
brave as his neighbour, and as long as he was young he was the victor in
every war. But as years passed away, his head grew weary of making
plans of campaign, and his people wanted to stay at home and till their
fields, and at last he too felt that he must do homage to the other
