not to be broken into at all till Paris was a completed story, the
jubilation was such as to satisfy even Tom. And as this particular
party had the car entirely to themselves, it wasn't so very dreadful as
it seems, and the elder members allowed indulgent smiles at it all.

That night in the market-place at Martigny, Jasper, who was ahead with
his father, ran back to Polly, and the others lingering behind. "Oh, do
hurry," he begged, "it's the prettiest sight!"

"Oh, what is it?" cried Polly, as they scampered off.

There, in the centre of the market-place, was a ring of little girls,
hand-in-hand, singing a little French song, and going round and round
in a circle. They were of all ages and sizes, the littlest one in a
blue pinafore, being about three years of age, and so chubby she had to
be helped along continually by a big girl, evidently her sister. This
big sister stopped the ring game, every now and then, to kiss the round
face by the side of her gown; an example that was followed by so many
of the other girls, that the game seemed to be never quite finished.
And once in a while, big sister would pick up the chubby, little,
blue-pinafored maiden and carry her through a considerable portion of
the game, then down she would put her on her two chubby feet, and away
they all circled without any break in the proceedings at all.

"Oh! isn't it 'Oats, Peas, Beans, and Barley grow'?" cried Polly, as
they watched them intently.

"Ever so much like it," said Tom. "See those boys; now they are going
to make trouble."

"Oh, they sha'n't!" declared Polly. "O dear me!" as one boy drew near,
on the side next to the travellers, and watching his chance, picked at
a flying apron or two. But the ring of girls paid no more attention to
him, than they had to any other outside matters, being wholly absorbed
in the game. So Polly and the others breathed freely again.

But up came another boy. "O dear me!" cried Polly, aghast. When number
three put in an appearance, she gave up all hope at once.

"They're jealous chaps," cried Tom, "and are vexed because they can't
get into the game! Hear them jeer!" And his long arm went out and
picked a jacket-end of an urchin, who, incautiously regarding such
quiet travellers as not worth minding, had hovered too near, while
trying to tease the girls.

"Here, you, sir," cried Tom, with a bit of a shake, and a torrent of
remarkably good French not to be disregarded; then he burst into a
laugh. And the urchin laughed too, thinking this much better fun to
tussle with the tall lad, than to hang around a parcel of girls. And
presently a woman came and took little blue pinafore off, and then the
rest of the girls unclasped their hands, and the ring melted away, and
the game was over.

"I'm glad the girls over here have fun," said Polly, as Grandpapa and
his party moved off. "Isn't it nice to think they do?"

"It isn't much matter where you live, there's a good deal to be gotten
out of life; if you only know how," said the parson, thinking busily of
the little brown house.

Two or three days of rest at Martigny put everybody in good shape, and
gave them all a bit of time to pick up on many little things that were
behindhand. Tom looked over all his floral treasures, with their last
additions made at the Riffelalp, and discarded such as hadn't pressed
well. And Jasper and Polly rushed up to date with their journals, and
wrote letters home; and Adela worked up her studies and sketches.

Tom looked on silently when Polly and Jasper were scraping their pens
in a lively fashion in the little writing room of the hotel. "That's my
third letter, Polly," announced Jasper, on the other side of the table.
"Now, I am going to begin on Joel's."

"One, two," said Polly, counting, "why, I thought I'd written three;
well, this one is most finished, Jasper."

"Yes," said Jasper, glancing over at her, "is that your last page,
Polly?"

"Yes," said Polly, hurrying away. Then she thought of what Mamsie had
said, and slackened her speed.

Tom cleared his throat, and tried to speak, but the words wouldn't come
nicely, so he burst out, "I say, I wish you'd write to my granddaddy,
both of you," and then he stood quite still, and very red in the face.

Polly looked up quickly, her pen dropping from her fingers, and Jasper
deserted his fourth letter and stared.

"Why," said Polly, finding her tongue, "we wouldn't dare, Tom Selwyn."

"Dare!" said Tom, delighted to think that no terrible result had really
ensued from his words, that after they were out, had scared him
mightily. "Oh, if you knew granddaddy!" And he sank into a chair by the
table, and played with the heap of picture postal cards that Polly was
going to address next.

"We might," said Polly, slowly, "write a letter, all of us. A kind of a
Round Robin thing, you know, and send that."

"So we could," cried Jasper; "how would that do, Tom?"

"The very thing!" exclaimed Tom, striking his hand so heavily on the
table, that for a minute it looked as if the ink-bottle hopped.

"Take care, there's no reason you should knock things over because you
are overjoyed," cried Jasper, gaily. "Well, let's leave our letters
to-day, Polly, and set to on the Round Robin."

"All right," said Polly, glad to think there was anything she could
really do to please the little old earl, "but would your mother like
it, Tom?" She stopped slowly in putting her unfinished letter into the
little writing-case, and looked at him.

"If you think there's a shadow of doubt on that score, I'd best run and
ask her now." Tom got himself out of the chair, and himself from the
room, and in an incredibly short space of time, back there he was. "My
mother says, 'Thank Polly for thinking of it; it will do father more
good than anything else could possibly do.'"

"I don't suppose you want any more answer," said Tom, quite radiant,
and looking down at Polly.

"No, only I didn't think first of it," said Polly, in a distressed
little tone.

"Why, Polly Pepper!" exclaimed Tom, "I certainly heard you say 'Round
Robin,' when I'll venture to say not a soul of us had even thought of
it; we certainly hadn't said so."

"Well, you spoke of the letter first," said Polly, unwilling to take
the credit for all the comfort going to the little old earl, "and I
shall tell your mother so, Tom."

"But I didn't say 'Round Robin,'" persisted Tom, "wasn't smart enough
to think of it."

"And let's get to work," cried Jasper, huddling up his three letters.
"I'll post yours, too, Polly; give them here."

"O dear, my stamps are all gone," said Polly, peering into the little
box in one corner of her writing-case.

"I've plenty," said Jasper, hurrying off; "I'll stick on two for you."

"Oh, no, Jasper," cried Polly, after him, "you know Mamsie would not
allow me to borrow."

"It isn't borrowing," said Jasper, turning back slowly. "I'll give them
to you, Polly."

"But Mamsie said when we started I should get my stamps when I needed
them," said Polly. "You know she did, Jasper."

"Yes, she did," said Jasper, uncomfortably. Then his face brightened,
and he said, "And she's right, Polly," while Polly fished a franc out
of Joel's little money-bag that hung at her belt. "Do get the stamps,
please, Jasper, and put them on," as he took up her two letters. And
she gave the bag a little pat for Joel's sake, wishing it was his
stubby black hair that her fingers could touch.

"Dear me, you are dreadfully particular about taking two postage
stamps, seems to me," said Adela, who had taken that time, as she
hadn't any letters to write, to work up one of her studies from memory
of the Visp.

Tom's blue eyes flashed dangerously, then he cleared his throat,
whistled, and walked to the window.

"I don't know where we are going to get nice white paper for our 'Round
Robin,'" said Polly, leaning her elbows on the table, and her chin in
her hands.

"I know!" ejaculated Tom, whirling on his heel, and dashing out. In he
came, swinging three or four goodly sheets. "Filched 'em out of the old
woman's room," he said.

"Oh, Tom!" began Polly.

"I mean, the housekeeper--matron--conciergerie--whatever you call the
gentle lady who runs this house--was fortunately at our desk where she
has the pleasure of making up our bills, and I worked on her feelings
till she parted with 'em," explained Tom.

"Oh!" said Polly; "well, I'm glad she gave them."

"Never you fear but what they'll be in our bills, Polly," said Tom, who
couldn't believe by this time that he hadn't always known Polly Pepper.

"It's dreadfully thin paper," said Adela, critically, getting off from
the sofa to pick at one corner of the sheet Polly was beginning to
divide.

"I'm glad we have any," hummed Polly, happily.

"Thank your stars you have," said Tom, as gaily. And Jasper running in,
the table was soon surrounded by the makers of the Round Robin, Adela
deserting her sketch-book and pulling up a chair.

"And Phronsie must come," said Polly, snipping away to get the paper
the right width. "O dear me, I can't cut it straight. Do you please
finish it, Jasper."

"That's all right," said Jasper, squinting at it critically,
"only--just this edge wants a little bit of trimming, Polly." And he
snipped off the offending points.

"I'll fetch Phronsie," cried Tom, springing off.

"And hurry," cried Polly and Jasper, together, after him.

"Polly," said Phronsie, as Tom came careering in with her on his
shoulder. "I want to write, too, I do," she cried, very much excited.

"Of course, you shall, Pet. That's just what we want you for," cried
Polly, clearing a place on the table; "there, do pull up a chair,
Jasper."

"Now, Phronsie, I think you would better begin, for you are the
littlest," and she flapped the long strip down in front of her.

"Oh, Polly, you begin," begged Tom.

"No, I think Phronsie ought to," said Polly, shaking her head.

"I want Polly to," said Phronsie, wriggling away from the pen that
Polly held out alluringly.

"But Polly wants you to," said Jasper. "I really would, Phronsie dear,
to please her."

To please Polly, being what Phronsie longed for next to pleasing
Mamsie, she gave a small sigh and took the pen in unsteady fingers.

"Wait a minute, Phronsie!" exclaimed Polly, in dismay, "I believe we've
made a mistake, Jasper, and got the wrong sheet." And Polly turned off
with him to examine the rest of the paper.

Phronsie, who hadn't heard what Polly said, her small head being full
of the responsibility of beginning the important letter, and
considering, since it was to be done, it was best to have it over with
as soon as possible, fell to scribbling the letters as fast as she
could, all of them running down hill.

"Well, I'm glad to see that we haven't made any mistake," cried Polly,
turning back in relief. "Oh, Phronsie, you haven't begun!"

She spoke so sharply that Phronsie started, and a little drop of ink
trembling on the point of her pen concluded to hop off. So it did and
jumped down on the clean white paper to stare up at them all like a
very bad black eye.

"Oh, see what she's written!" cried Polly, quite aghast, and tumbling
into her chair, she pointed at the top.

"Deer Mister Erl," scrawled clear across the top.

"I didn't--mean--oh, you said do it, Polly." Phronsie threw herself out
of her chair, and over into Polly's lap, burrowing and wailing
piteously.

"O dear me, how could I say anything?" cried Polly, overcome with
remorse and patting Phronsie's yellow hair; "but it is so very
dreadful. O dear me! Phronsie, there, there, don't cry. O dear me!"

Tom's mouth trembled. "It's all right. Granddaddy'll like it," he said.

"Oh, Tom Selwyn," gasped Polly, looking up over Phronsie's head, "you
don't suppose we'd let that letter go."

"I would," said Tom, coolly, running his hands in his pockets. "I tell
you, you don't know my granddaddy. He's got lots of fun in him," he
added.

"Phronsie," said Jasper, rushing around the table, "you are making
Polly sick. Just look at her face."

Phronsie lifted her head where she had burrowed it under Polly's arm.
When she saw that Polly's round cheeks were really quite pale, she
stopped crying at once. "Are you sick, Polly?" she asked, in great
concern.

"I sha'n't be," said Polly, "if you won't cry any more, Phronsie."

"I won't cry any more," declared Phronsie, wiping off the last tear
trailing down her nose. "Then you will be all well, Polly?"

"Then I shall be all as well as ever," said Polly, kissing the wet
little face.

When they got ready to begin on the letter again, it was nowhere to be
found, and Tom had disappeared as well.

"He took it out," said Adela, for the first time finding her tongue. "I
saw him while you were all talking."

While they were wondering over this and were plunged further yet in
dismay, Tom came dancing in, waving the unlucky sheet of the Round
Robin over his head. "My mother says," he announced in triumph, "that
father will get no end of fun over that if you let it go. It will cheer
him up."

So that ended the matter, although Polly, who dearly loved to be
elegant, had many a twinge whenever her eye fell on the letter at which
Phronsie was now labouring afresh.

"We must put in little pictures," said Polly, trying to make herself
cheery as the work went busily on.

"Polly, you always do think of the best things!" exclaimed Jasper,
beaming at her, which made her try harder than ever to smile. "I
wouldn't feel so badly, Polly," he managed to whisper, when Phronsie
was absorbed with her work; "he'll like it probably just as father did
the gingerbread boy."

"But that was different," groaned Polly.

"Pictures!" Tom Selwyn was saying, "oh, there's where I can come in
fine with assistance. I'm no good in a letter." And again he rushed
from the room.

"That's three times that boy has gone out," announced Adela, "and he
joggles the table awfully when he starts. And he made me cut clear into
that edge. See, Polly." She was trimming the third strip of paper, for
the Round Robin was to be pasted together and rolled up when it was all
done.

"He seems to accomplish something every time he goes," observed Jasper,
drily. "Halloo, just look at him now!"

In came Tom with a rush, and turned a small box he held in his hand
upside down on the table.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Adela, as her scissors slipped, "now you've
joggled the table again!" Then she caught Polly's eye. "Aren't those
pictures pretty?" she burst out awkwardly.

"Aren't they so!" cried Tom, in satisfaction, while Polly oh-ed and
ah-ed, and Phronsie dropped her pen suddenly making a second blot; only
as good fortune would have it, it was so near the edge that they all on
anxious examination decided to trim the paper down, and thus get rid of
it.

"I don't see how you got so many," said Jasper, in admiration, his
fingers busy with the heap.

"Oh, I've picked 'em up here and there," said Tom. "I began because I
thought the kids at home might like 'em. And then it struck me I'd make
a book like yours."

"Well, do save them now," said Jasper, "and we'll give some of our
pictures, though the prettiest ones are in our books," he added
