walked through the ante-room without even casting a glance at the
spinning-wheels.

Then the King said once more to the Lion: 'You have deceived me again;
they _are_ men, for they never once looked at the spinning-wheels.'

The Lion replied: 'They knew they were being tried, and they did
violence to their feelings.' But the King declined to believe in the
Lion any longer.

So the twelve huntsmen continued to follow the King, and he grew daily
fonder of them. One day whilst they were all out hunting it so happened
that news was brought that the King's intended bride was on her way and
might soon be expected. When the true bride heard of this she felt
as though a knife had pierced her heart, and she fell fainting to the
ground. The King, fearing something had happened to his dear huntsman,
ran up to help, and began drawing off his gloves. Then he saw the ring
which he had given to his first love, and as he gazed into her face he
knew her again, and his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
as she opened her eyes, he cried: 'I am thine and thou art mine, and no
power on earth can alter that.'

To the other Princess he despatched a messenger to beg her to return to
her own kingdom with all speed. 'For,' said he, 'I have got a wife, and
he who finds an old key again does not require a new one.'

Thereupon the wedding was celebrated with great pomp, and the Lion was
restored to the royal favour, for after all he had told the truth.

Grimm.





SPINDLE, SHUTTLE, AND NEEDLE



Once upon a time there lived a girl who lost her father and mother when
she was quite a tiny child. Her godmother lived all alone in a little
cottage at the far end of the village, and there she earned her living
by spinning, weaving, and sewing. The old woman took the little orphan
home with her and brought her up in good, pious, industrious habits.

When the girl was fifteen years old, her godmother fell ill, and,
calling the child to her bedside, she said: 'My dear daughter, I feel
that my end is near. I leave you my cottage, which will, at least,
shelter you, and also my spindle, my weaver's shuttle, and my needle,
with which to earn your bread.'

Then she laid her hands on the girl's head, blessed her, and added:
'Mind and be good, and then all will go well with you.' With that she
closed her eyes for the last time, and when she was carried to her grave
the girl walked behind her coffin weeping bitterly, and paid her all the
last honours.

After this the girl lived all alone in the little cottage. She worked
hard, spinning, weaving, and sewing, and her old godmother's blessing
seemed to prosper all she did. The flax seemed to spread and increase;
and when she wove a carpet or a piece of linen, or made a shirt, she was
sure to find a customer who paid her well, so that not only did she feel
no want herself, but she was able to help those who did.

Now, it happened that about this time the King's son was making a tour
through the entire country to look out for a bride. He could not marry a
poor woman, and he did not wish for a rich one.

'She shall be my wife,' said he, 'who is at once the poorest and the
richest.'

When he reached the village where the girl lived, he inquired who was
the richest and who the poorest woman in it. The richest was named
first; the poorest, he was told, was a young girl who lived alone in a
little cottage at the far end of the village.

The rich girl sat at her door dressed out in all her best clothes, and
when the King's son came near she got up, went to meet him, and made him
a low curtsey. He looked well at her, said nothing, but rode on further.

When he reached the poor girl's house he did not find her at her door,
for she was at work in her room. The Prince reined in his horse, looked
in at the window through which the sun was shining brightly, and saw the
girl sitting at her wheel busily spinning away.

She looked up, and when she saw the King's son gazing in at her, she
blushed red all over, cast down her eyes and span on. Whether the thread
was quite as even as usual I really cannot say, but she went on spinning
till the King's son had ridden off. Then she stepped to the window and
opened the lattice, saying, 'The room is so hot,' but she looked after
him as long as she could see the white plumes in his hat.

Then she sat down to her work once more and span on, and as she did so
an old saying which, she had often heard her godmother repeat whilst at
work, came into her head, and she began to sing:

'Spindle, spindle, go and see, If my love will come to me.'

Lo, and behold! the spindle leapt from her hand and rushed out of the
room, and when she had sufficiently recovered from her surprise to look
after it she saw it dancing merrily through the fields, dragging a long
golden thread after it, and soon it was lost to sight.

The girl, having lost her spindle, took up the shuttle and, seating
herself at her loom, began to weave. Meantime the spindle danced on and
on, and just as it had come to the end of the golden thread, it reached
the King's son.

'What do I see?' he cried; 'this spindle seems to wish to point out the
way to me.' So he turned his horses head and rode back beside the golden
thread.

Meantime the girl sat weaving, and sang:

'Shuttle, weave both web and woof, Bring my love beneath my roof.'

The shuttle instantly escaped from her hand, and with one bound was out
at the door. On the threshold it began weaving the loveliest carpet that
was ever seen. Roses and lilies bloomed on both sides, and in the centre
a thicket seemed to grow with rabbits and hares running through it,
stags and fawns peeping through the branches, whilst on the topmost
boughs sat birds of brilliant plumage and so life-like one almost
expected to hear them sing. The shuttle flew from side to side and the
carpet seemed almost to grow of itself.

As the shuttle had run away the girl sat down to sew. She took her
needle and sang:

'Needle, needle, stitch away, Make my chamber bright and gay,'

and the needle promptly slipped from her fingers and flew about the room
like lightning. You would have thought invisible spirits were at work,
for in next to no time the table and benches were covered with green
cloth, the chairs with velvet, and elegant silk curtains hung before
the windows. The needle had barely put in its last stitch when the girl,
glancing at the window, spied the white plumed hat of the King's son who
was being led back by the spindle with the golden thread.

He dismounted and walked over the carpet into the house, and when he
entered the room there stood the girl blushing like any rose. 'You are
the poorest and yet the richest,' said he: 'come with me, you shall be
my bride.'

She said nothing, but she held out her hand. Then he kissed her, and led
her out, lifted her on his horse and took her to his royal palace, where
the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicings.

The spindle, the shuttle, and the needle were carefully placed in the
treasury, and were always held in the very highest honour.

Grimm.





THE CRYSTAL COFFIN



Now let no one say that a poor tailor can't get on in the world, and,
indeed, even attain to very high honour. Nothing is required but to set
the right way to work, but of course the really important thing is to
succeed.

A very bright active young tailor once set off on his travels, which led
him into a wood, and as he did not know the way he soon lost himself.
Night came on, and there seemed to be nothing for it but to seek out
the best resting-place he could find. He could have made himself
quite comfortable with a bed of soft moss, but the fear of wild beasts
disturbed his mind, and at last he determined to spend the night in a
tree.

He sought out a tall oak tree, climbed up to the top, and felt devoutly
thankful that his big smoothing-iron was in his pocket, for the wind
in the tree-tops was so high that he might easily have been blown away
altogether.

After passing some hours of the night, not without considerable fear and
trembling, he noticed a light shining at a little distance, and hoping
it might proceed from some house where he could find a better shelter
than in the top of the tree, he cautiously descended and went towards
the light. It led him to a little hut all woven together of reeds and
rushes. He knocked bravely at the door, which opened, and by the light
which shone from within he saw an old gray-haired man dressed in a coat
made of bright-coloured patches. 'Who are you, and what do you want?'
asked the old man roughly.

'I am a poor tailor,' replied the youth. 'I have been benighted in
the forest, and I entreat you to let me take shelter in your hut till
morning.'

'Go your way,' said the old man in a sulky tone, 'I'll have nothing to
do with tramps. You must just go elsewhere.'

With these words he tried to slip back into his house, but the tailor
laid hold of his coat-tails, and begged so hard to be allowed to stay
that the old fellow, who was by no means as cross as he appeared, was at
length touched by his entreaties, let him come in, and after giving him
some food, showed him quite a nice bed in one corner of the room. The
weary tailor required no rocking to rest, but slept sound till early
morning, when he was roused from his slumbers by a tremendous noise.
Loud screams and shouts pierced the thin walls of the little hut. The
tailor, with new-born courage, sprang up, threw on his clothes with
all speed and hurried out. There he saw a huge black bull engaged in a
terrible fight with a fine large stag. They rushed at each other with
such fury that the ground seemed to tremble under them and the whole air
to be filled with their cries. For some time it appeared quite uncertain
which would be the victor, but at length the stag drove his antlers with
such force into his opponent's body that the bull fell to the ground
with a terrific roar, and a few more strokes finished him.

The tailor, who had been watching the fight with amazement, was still
standing motionless when the stag bounded up to him, and before he had
time to escape forked him up with its great antlers, and set off at full
gallop over hedges and ditches, hill and dale, through wood and water.
The tailor could do nothing but hold on tight with both hands to the
stag's horns and resign himself to his fate. He felt as if he were
flying along. At length the stag paused before a steep rock and gently
let the tailor down to the ground.

Feeling more dead than alive, he paused for a while to collect his
scattered senses, but when he seemed somewhat restored the stag struck
such a blow on a door in the rock that it flew open. Flames of fire
rushed forth, and such clouds of steam followed that the stag had to
avert its eyes. The tailor could not think what to do or which way to
turn to get away from this awful wilderness, and to find his way back
amongst human beings once more.

As he stood hesitating, a voice from the rock cried to him: 'Step in
without fear, no harm shall befall you.'

He still lingered, but some mysterious power seemed to impel him, and
passing through the door he found himself in a spacious hall, whose
ceiling, walls, and floor were covered with polished tiles carved all
over with unknown figures. He gazed about, full of wonder, and was just
preparing to walk out again when the same voice bade him: 'Tread on the
stone in the middle of the hall, and good luck will attend you.'

By this time he had grown so courageous that he did not hesitate to obey
the order, and hardly had he stepped on the stone than it began to sink
gently with him into the depths below. On reaching firm ground he found
himself in a hall of much the same size as the upper one, but with much
more in it to wonder at and admire. Round the walls were several niches,
in each of which stood glass vessels filled with some bright-coloured
spirit or bluish smoke. On the floor stood two large crystal boxes
opposite each other, and these attracted his curiosity at once.

Stepping up to one of them, he saw within it what looked like a model
in miniature of a fine castle surrounded by farms, barns, stables, and a
number of other buildings. Everything was quite tiny, but so beautifully
and carefully finished that it might have been the work of an
accomplished artist. He would have continued gazing much longer at this
remarkable curiosity had not the voice desired him to turn round and
look at the crystal coffin which stood opposite.

What was his amazement at seeing a girl of surpassing loveliness lying
in it! She lay as though sleeping, and her long, fair hair seemed to
wrap her round like some costly mantle. Her eyes were closed, but the
bright colour in her face, and the movement of a ribbon, which rose and
fell with her breath, left no doubt as to her being alive.

As the tailor stood gazing at her with a beating heart, the maiden
suddenly opened her eyes, and started with delighted surprise.

'Great heavens!' she cried, 'my deliverance approaches! Quick, quick,
help me out of my prison; only push back the bolt of this coffin and I
am free.'

The tailor promptly obeyed, when she quickly pushed back the crystal
lid, stepped out of the coffin and hurried to a corner of the hall, when
she proceeded to wrap herself in a large cloak. Then she sat down on
a stone, desired the young man to come near, and, giving him an
affectionate kiss, she said, 'My long-hoped-for deliverer, kind heaven
has led you to me, and has at length put an end to all my sufferings.
You are my destined husband, and, beloved by me, and endowed with every
kind of riches and power, you shall spend the remainder of your life in
peace and happiness. Now sit down and hear my story. I am the daughter
of a wealthy nobleman. My parents died when I was very young, and
they left me to the care of my eldest brother, by whom I was carefully
educated. We loved each other so tenderly, and our tastes and interests
were so much alike that we determined never to marry, but to spend our
entire lives together. There was no lack of society at our home. Friends
and neighbours paid us frequent visits, and we kept open house for all.
Thus it happened that one evening a stranger rode up to the castle
and asked for hospitality, as he could not reach the nearest town that
night. We granted his request with ready courtesy, and during supper he
entertained us with most agreeable conversation, mingled with amusing
anecdotes. My brother took such a fancy to him that he pressed him to
spend a couple of days with us, which, after a little hesitation, the
stranger consented to do. We rose late from table, and whilst my brother
was showing our guest to his room I hurried to mine, for I was very
tired and longed to get to bed. I had hardly dropped off to sleep when
I was roused by the sound of some soft and charming music. Wondering
whence it could come, I was about to call to my maid who slept in the
room next mine, when, to my surprise, I felt as if some heavy weight on
my chest had taken all power from me, and I lay there unable to utter
the slightest sound. Meantime, by the light of the night lamp, I saw
the stranger enter my room, though the double doors had been securely
locked. He drew near and told me that through the power of his magic
arts he had caused the soft music to waken me, and had made his way
through bolts and bars to offer me his hand and heart. My repugnance to
his magic was so great that I would not condescend to give any answer.
He waited motionless for some time, hoping no doubt for a favourable
reply, but as I continued silent he angrily declared that he would find
means to punish my pride, and therewith he left the room in a rage.

'I spent the night in the greatest agitation, and only fell into a doze
towards morning. As soon as I awoke I jumped up, and hurried to tell my
brother all that had happened, but he had left his room, and his servant
told me that he had gone out at daybreak to hunt with the stranger.

'My mind misgave me. I dressed in all haste, had my palfrey saddled, and
rode of at full gallop towards the forest, attended by one servant only.
I pushed on without pausing, and ere long I saw the stranger coming
towards me, and leading a fine stag. I asked him where he had left my
brother, and how he had got the stag, whose great eyes were overflowing
with tears. Instead of answering he began to laugh, and I flew into such
a rage that I drew a pistol and fired at him; but the bullet rebounded
from his breast and struck my horse in the forehead. I fell to the
ground, and the stranger muttered some words, which robbed me of my
senses.

'When I came to myself I was lying in a crystal coffin in this
subterranean vault. The Magician appeared again, and told me that he had
transformed my brother into a stag, had reduced our castle and all
its defences to miniature and locked them up in a glass box, and after
turning all our household into different vapours had banished them into
glass phials. If I would only yield to his wishes he could easily open
these vessels, and all would then resume their former shapes.

'I would not say a word more than I had done previously, and he
vanished, leaving me in my prison, where a deep sleep soon fell on me.
Amongst the many dreams which floated through my brain was a cheering
one of a young man who was to come and release me, and to-day, when I
opened my eyes, I recognised you and saw that my dream was fulfilled.
Now help me to carry out the rest of my vision. The first thing is to
place the glass box which contains my castle on this large stone.'

As soon as this was done the stone gently rose through the air and
transported them into the upper hall, whence they easily carried the box
into the outer air. The lady then removed the lid, and it was marvellous
to watch the castle, houses, and farmyards begin to grow and spread
themselves till they had regained their proper size. Then the young
couple returned by means of the movable stone, and brought up all the
glass vessels filled with smoke. No sooner were they uncorked than the
blue vapours poured out and became transformed to living people, in whom
the lady joyfully recognised her many servants and attendants.

Her delight was complete when her brother (who had killed the Magician
under the form of a bull) was seen coming from the forest in his proper
shape, and that very day, according to her promise, she gave her hand in
marriage to the happy young tailor.

Grimm.





THE THREE SNAKE-LEAVES



There was once a poor man who could no longer afford to keep his only
son at home. So the son said to him, 'Dear father, you are so poor that
I am only a burden to you; I would rather go out into the world and see
if I can earn my own living.' The father gave him his blessing and
took leave of him with much sorrow. About this time the King of a very
powerful kingdom was carrying on a war; the youth therefore took service
under him and went on the campaign. When they came before the enemy, a
battle took place, there was some hot fighting, and it rained bullets so
thickly that his comrades fell around him on all sides. And when their
leader fell too the rest wished to take to flight; but the youth stepped
forward and encouraged them and called out, 'We must not let our country
be ruined!' Then others followed him, and he pressed on and defeated
the enemy. When the King heard that he had to thank him alone for the
victory, he raised him higher than anyone else in rank, gave him great
treasures and made him the first in the kingdom.

The King had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she was also very
capricious. She had made a vow to marry no one who would not promise her
that if she died first, he would allow himself to be buried alive with
her. 'If he loves me truly,' she used to say, 'what use would life be
to him then?' At the same time she was willing to do the same, and if he
died first to be buried with him. This curious vow had up to this time
frightened away all suitors, but the young man was so captivated by her
beauty, that he hesitated at nothing and asked her hand of her father.
'Do you know,' asked the King, 'what you have to promise?' 'I shall have
to go into her grave with her,' he answered, 'if I outlive her, but
my love is so great that I do not think of the risk.' So the King
consented, and the wedding was celebrated with great splendour.

Now, they lived for a long time very happily with one another, but then
it came to pass that the young Queen fell seriously ill, and no doctor
could save her. And when she lay dead, the young King remembered what
he had promised, and it made him shudder to think of lying in her grave
alive, but there was no escape. The King had set guards before all the
gates, and it was not possible to avoid his fate.

When the day arrived on which the corpse was to be laid in the royal
vault, he was led thither, then the entrance was bolted and closed up.

Near the coffin stood a table on which were placed four candles, four
loaves of bread, and four bottles of wine. As soon as this provision
came to an end he would have to die. So he sat there full of grief and
misery, eating every day only a tiny bit of bread, and drinking only a
mouthful of ovine, and he watched death creeping nearer and nearer to
him. One day as he was sitting staring moodily in front of him, he saw a
snake creep out of the corner towards the corpse. Thinking it was going
to touch it, he drew his sword and saying, 'As long as I am alive you
shall not harm her,' he cut it in three pieces. After a little time
a second snake crept out of the corner, but when it saw the first one
lying dead and in pieces it went back and came again soon, holding three
green leaves in its mouth. Then it took the three bits of the snake and
laid them in order, and put one of the leaves on each wound. Immediately
the pieces joined together, the snake moved itself and became alive and
