the pink flush of happiness on her cheeks, she restrained herself.

"It makes you happy, mummy," she said, "and----"

"But what do you think of it, my darling?"

"It is a very beautiful room."

"Ah! that is right. I thought my little wildflower would appreciate
all these things when she came back again. Ah, Nora! you have been a
naughty, wild imp; but your father was delighted when he heard what you
had done. Of course I am terribly angry."

"No, you are not, mummy; you are pleased to see me again."

"I am glad to have you back, Nora; but as to being pleased, how could I
be? However, you can stay here for a fortnight or so now that you have
come; and then, when your dear uncle leaves us, you and Molly can go
back with him."

Nora did not say anything; but a stubborn look came into her face which
her mother knew of old.

From the drawing room they went to the library, which had also undergone
complete rejuvenation. The walls were laden with standard works of
different kinds; but some of the shelves were still empty.

"The old books, your uncle says, were of great value," said Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan, "and he sent them all to Dublin to be rebound. They have
not come back yet. They are to be bound in old calf, and will suit the
rest of the room. Is it not a magnificent apartment?"

Nora said "Yes" in a somewhat dreamy voice.

They then went to her mother's morning-room, and then on to the Squire's
smoking-room.

"They might at least have left this alone," thought the girl. "They
might at least have left this one room, where he could retire when he
felt quite choked by all the furniture in the rest of the place."

But even the Squire's smoking-room was changed into the smoking-room of
an English gentleman. There were deep easy-chairs covered with leather;
there were racks for pipes, and great brass dogs before the fireplace;
on the floor was a thick carpet. Nora felt as if she longed to give it a
savage kick.

At last the terrible ordeal of going through the--to her, utterly
ruined--house was over, and she and Molly found themselves alone.

"I will go up to your father for a few minutes," said Mrs. O'Shanaghgan,
nodding to Nora. "You and your cousin will like to have a chat; and
then, my dears, I should recommend you both to go to bed as early as
possible."

When they were back again in the big drawing room Nora gave Molly a wild
look.

"Come out," she said; "at least out of doors the air is the same as of
old."

Molly caught up a shawl and wrapped it round her head; but Nora went out
just as she was.

"You'll catch cold," said English Molly.

"I catch cold in my native land!" replied Irish Nora. "How little you
know me! Oh, come, Molly, I am going to be wild; I am going to give
way."

They both stepped outside on the broad gravel sweep. The moon was up,
and it was shining over everything. In the moonlight Castle O'Shanaghgan
looked very much as it had done before. The moon had always glorified
the old place, and it glorified it still. Nora stood and gazed around
her; up to the tops of the mountains, with their dark summits clearly
defined against the evening sky; across the wide breadth of the
Atlantic; over the thick plantations, the fields, and the huge trees in
the background.

"It's all the same," she said, with a glad laugh; "thank God it is all
the same. Even your father, Molly, cannot destroy the place outside, at
least."

"Oh Nora, it is such a lovely, lovely place!" said Molly. "Cannot you be
happy in it with its modern dress?"

"Happy," said Nora, suddenly brought back to her sense of misery by the
word. "I am thankful that my father is not so ill; but--but you must
help, Molly. Promise that you will."

"I am sure I'd do anything in the world," said Molly. "I think I have
been very good to-day. I have kept in my naughty words, Jehoshaphat and
Moses and Elephants, and all the rest. What do you want me to do, Nora?"

"We must get him out of that room," said Nora.

"Him? You mean your father?"

"Yes; he will never recover there. I have been thinking and thinking,
and I'll have my plan ready by the morning; only you must help me. I'll
get Hannah Croneen to come in, and we'll do it between us if you can
help me."

"But what is it?" said Molly.

"I'll tell you in the morning; you wait and see."




CHAPTER XXX.


THE LION IN HIS CAGE.

The Squire was better, and not better. He had received a very nasty
flesh-wound in the thigh; but the bullet had been extracted. There was
not the slightest clew to the identity of his would-be murderer. The
Squire himself had said nothing. He had been found almost bleeding
to death by the roadside; the alarm had been given, and in terror and
consternation his own tenants had brought him home.

The Squire could have said a good deal, but he said nothing. The police
came and asked him questions, but he kept his lips closed.

"I didn't see the man," he said after a pause. "Somebody fired, of
course; but I can't tell who, for I saw no one; it was from behind the
hedge. Why the scoundrel who wanted to do for me didn't shoot a little
higher up puzzles me. But there, let it rest--let it rest."

And the neighbors and the country had to let it rest, for there was no
evidence against anyone. Amongst those who came to inquire after the
Squire was Andy Neil. He came often, and was full of commiseration, and
loudly cursed the brute who had very nearly done for his old landlord.
But the neighbors had suspicions with regard to Andy, for he had been
turned out of his cot in the mountains, and was living in the village
now. They scowled at him when he passed, and turned aside; and his own
face looked more miserable than ever. Still, he came daily up to the big
kitchen to inquire for the Squire.

The doctor said there was no reason whatever why Mr. O'Shanaghgan should
not get quite well. He was by no means old--not more than fifty;
there was not the slightest occasion for a break-down, and yet, to all
appearance, a break-down there was. The Squire got morose; he hardly
ever smiled; even Nora's presence scarcely drew a hearty guffaw from his
lips. The doctors were puzzled.

"What can be wrong?" they said. But Nora herself knew very well what was
wrong. She and her father were the only ones who did know. She knew that
the old lion was dying in captivity; that he was absolutely succumbing
to the close and smothered life which he was now leading. He wanted the
free air of his native mountains; he wanted the old life, now gone for
ever, back again.

"It is true the place is saved, Norrie," he said once to his daughter,
"and I haven't a word to say. I would be the most ungrateful dog in
existence if I breathed a single word of complaint. The place is saved;
and though it nominally belongs now to your Uncle George, to all intents
and purposes it is my place, and he gives me to understand that at my
death it goes to my boy. Yes, he has done a noble deed, and of course I
admire him immensely."

"And so do I, father," said Nora; but she looked thoughtful and
troubled; and one day, after she had been in her father's room for some
time, when she met her uncle in the avenue she spoke to him.

"Well, my dear girl," he said, "what about coming back with me to
England when I go next week?"

"It is not to be thought of, Uncle George. How can I leave my father
while he is ill?"

"That is true. I have been thinking about him. The doctors are a little
distressed at his growing weakness. They cannot quite understand it.
Tonics have been given to him and every imaginable thing has been done.
He wants for nothing; his nourishment is of the best; still he makes no
way. It is puzzling."

"I don't think so," said Nora.

"What do you mean, my dear girl?"

"You might do all that sort of thing for an eagle, you know," said Nora,
raising her clear eyes and fixing them on her uncle's face. "You might
give him everything in his prison, much more than he had when he was
free; but, all the same, he would pine and--and he would die." Tears
rose to the girl's eyes; she dashed them away.

"My dear little Nora, I don't in the least see the resemblance," said
Mr. Hartrick, who felt, and perhaps justly, rather nettled. "You seem
to imply by your words that I have done your father an injury when I
secured the home of his ancestors for him."

"Oh, forgive me, Uncle George," said Nora. "I don't really mean to say
anything against you, for you are just splendid."

Mr. Hartrick did not reply; he looked puzzled and thoughtful. Nora,
after a moment's silence, spoke again.

"I am most grateful to you. I believe you have done what is best--at
least what you think best. You have made my mother very happy, and
Terence will be so pleased; and the tenants--oh! they will get their
rights now, their cabins will be repaired, the roofs mended, the windows
put in fresh, the little gardens stocked for them. Oh, yes, you are
behaving most generously. Anyone would suppose the place belonged to
you."

"Which it does," muttered Mr. Hartrick under his breath.

"You have made a great many people happy, only somehow--somehow it is
not quite the way to make my father happy, and it is not the way to make
me happy. But I have nothing more to say, except that I cannot leave my
father now."

"You must come to us after Christmas, then," said Mr. Hartrick. "I must
go back next week, and I shall probably take Molly with me."

"Oh! leave her with me here," said Nora suddenly. "I do wish you would;
the air here is so healthy. Do let her stay, and then perhaps after
Christmas, when things are different, we might both go back."

"Of course things will be different," said Mr. Hartrick. "A new doctor
is coming to see your father next week, and he will probably change the
_regime_; he may order him fresh air, and before long we shall have
him strong and well amongst us again. He has absolutely nothing wrong
except----"

"Except that he has everything wrong," said Nora.

"Well, well, my dear child, I will think over your suggestion that
Molly should stay with you; and in the meantime remember that we are all
coming to O'Shanaghgan for Christmas."

"All of you!" said Nora in dismay.

"Yes, all of us. Your aunt has never spent a real old-fashioned
Christmas in her life, and I mean her to have it this year. I shall
bring over some of our English habits to this place. We will roast an ox
whole, and have huge bonfires, and all kinds of things, and the tenantry
shall have a right good time. There, Nora, you smile; that pleases you."

"You are so kind," she said. She clasped his hands in both of hers, and
then turned away.

"There never was anyone kinder," thought the girl to herself; "but all
the same he does not understand." She re-entered the house and went up
to her father's room.

The Squire was lying on his back. The days were now getting short, for
November had begun. There was a big fire in the grate; the Squire panted
in the hot room.

"Just come in here," he said to Nora. "Don't make much noise; lock the
door--will you, pet?"

Nora obeyed.

"Now fling the window wide open; let me get a breath of air."

Nora did open the window, but the air was moist and damp from the
Atlantic, and even she, fearless as she was, hesitated when she heard
her father's cough.

"There, child, there," he said; "it's the lungs beginning to work
properly again. Now then, you can shut it up; I hear a step. For
Heaven's sake, Nora, be quick, or your mother may come in, and won't she
be making a fuss! There, unlock the door."

"But you are worse, father; you are worse."

"What else can you expect? They don't chain up wild animals and expect
them to get well. I never lived through anything of this sort before,
and it's just smothering me."

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan entered the room.

"Patrick," she said, "would you like some sweetbread and a bit of
pheasant for your dinner?"

"Do you know what I'd like?" roared the Squire. "A great big mealy
potato, with a pinch of salt."

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan uttered a sigh, and the color rushed into her pale
cheeks.

"Upon my word," she said, "you are downright vulgar."

The Squire gave a feeble guffaw. Nora's heart beat as she noticed how
feeble it was. She left the room, because she could not stay there
another moment. The time had come to act. She had hesitated long, but
she would hesitate no longer. She ran downstairs. The first person she
saw was Molly.

"Well," said Molly, "how is he?"

"Very bad indeed," said Nora; "there's not a moment to lose. Something
must be done, and quickly."

"What can be done?"

"Come out with me; I have a thought in my head."

Nora and Molly went outside. They crossed the avenue, went along the
plantation at the back, and soon found themselves in the huge yard which
flanked the back of the house. In a distant part of the yard was a barn,
and this barn Nora now entered. It was untidy; the doors fitted badly;
the floor was of clay. It was quite empty.

Nora gave a sigh of relief.

"I dreamed of this barn last night," she said. "I think it is the very
place."

"For what, Nora; for what?"

"I am going to have father moved here to-day."

"Nora, what nonsense you are talking! You will kill him."

"Save his life, you mean," said Nora. "I am going to get a bedstead, a
straw paillasse, and an old hard mattress, and I am going to have them
put here; and we'll get a bit of tarpaulin to put on the floor, to
prevent the damp coming up; and I'll put a curtain across this window so
that he needn't have too much draught, the darling; and there shall
be nothing else in the room except a wooden table. He shall have his
potatoes and salt, and his bit of salt bacon, if he wishes, and he shall
have his great big bare room. I tell you what it is, Molly, he'll never
get well unless he is brought here."

"What a girl you are! But how will you do it?"

"Leave it to me. Do you mind driving with me on the outside car as far
as Cronane?"

"The outside car? I have never been on it yet."

"Oh, come along; I'll introduce you to the sweetest conveyance in the
world."

Nora's spirits rose at the thought of immediate action.

"Won't it surprise and delight him?" she said. She went up to one of
the grooms. He was an English groom, and was somewhat surprised at the
appearance of the young lady in the yard.

"What can I do for you, miss?" he said.

"I want Angus," answered Nora. "Where is he?"

Angus was one of the few old Irish servants who were still left at
Castle O'Shanaghgan. He now came forward in a sheepish kind of way; but
when he saw Nora his face lit up.

"Put one of the horses to the outside car at once--Black Bess if you
can," said Nora.

"Yes, miss," said the man, "with all the pleasure in life."

"Don't take it round to the front door. Miss Molly and I want to drive
to Cronane. You needn't come with us, Angus; just put the horse to, and
I'll drive myself."

Accordingly, in less than ten minutes' time the two girls were
driving in the direction of Cronane. Molly, brave as she was, had some
difficulty in keeping on. She clung to the sides of the car and panted.

"Nora, as sure as Jehoshaphat and Elephants, I'll be flung out on to the
