ready, Chris?"

"Half an hour, sir. I left them all rubbing down their horses when I
came in here a quarter of an hour ago, and it will take but a very
short time to pack up and start."

"Very well; I dare say that Mr. Searle will be ready by that time.
Breakfast shall be ready for you in ten minutes, Searle, and while you
are eating it I will tell you enough of these gentlemen's doings to
reassure you, for I see that you do not feel very confident that they
will be able to tackle the Boers."

"After what you have said, Captain Brookfield, I can have no doubt that
they will do all they can, but it seems to me that twenty men--or
twenty boys--are no match for fifty or sixty Boers. While they were
speaking, Chris had returned to his camp. The lads were all engaged in
rubbing up their saddlery.

"You can knock off at once," Chris said; "I have need for you. You no
longer belong to the Maritzburg Scouts."

There was a general exclamation of astonishment.

"What do you mean, Chris?"

"I mean that I have resigned in my own name and yours, and Captain
Brookfield has accepted the resignation."

"Are you really in earnest, Chris?"

"Very much so; but I will not keep you in suspense. A small party of
Greytown men are besieged near Botha's Castle; one of them has just
ridden in for help. But you know well enough that Buller will not hear
of detached parties going out all over the country; and Captain
Brookfield told the farmer that it was of no use his going to the
general, and that none of the Colonial troops could leave the camp
without orders. As it was evident that there was nothing more to be
done, and we could not leave the man's friends to be massacred, the
only thing to do was to give in our resignation at once; and of course,
now that it is done and accepted, we are at liberty to mount and ride
off where we please. When we have done our work we will come back and
reenlist, and no one will be any the wiser. We shall start in half an
hour. We need not take the tent poles, or anything but a blanket and a
waterproof sheet."

There was lively satisfaction at the news that they were again going to
be employed in what they considered their proper work.

"What shall we do about the men and stores?" Willesden asked; "you know
that those two big boxes of the things we ordered at Maritzburg arrived
yesterday."

"I think, Willesden, we will take Jack and the two Zulus, and leave
Japhet and the Swazis here in charge of the stores, and blankets, and
other things we leave behind us. Captain Brookfield will keep an eye on
them for us. The farmer is going to ride back with us on one of the
spare horses, and the three natives can ride the others. There is a
hundredweight of biscuits in the sack that came with the boxes; each of
us can take five pounds in his saddle-bag, a tin of cocoa and milk, and
a pound or two of bacon. Jack can take a kettle and frying-pan, and the
natives their blankets and twenty pounds of mealie flour for themselves
and five times as much mealies for the horses. We can get them at the
stores that were opened a few days ago."

Some of the men from the other tents walked over on seeing the tents
pulled down and the waterproof sheets and blankets rolled up, and
asked: "Where are you fellows off to?"

"We have resigned; we are sick of doing nothing."

As it was known that they drew neither pay nor rations, the news did
not create much surprise.

"You are lucky fellows," one said. "We get no share of the fighting and
a full share of the hardships; still, I wonder you do not stop till we
are in Ladysmith."

"When is that going to be?" Field asked innocently. "We have been told
that we shall be in Ladysmith in a week many times since we first came
up here in the middle of December, and we are no nearer now than when
we arrived here. Do you think that you could guarantee that we should
be there in another week? because, if so, we might put off going."

The trooper shook his head with a laugh. "That is a question no man in
camp can answer," he said. "Perhaps in a week, perhaps in a fortnight,
perhaps," he added more gravely, "never. We know by the messages they
flash out that they are nearly at the end of their food, and if we
don't get there in a fortnight or thereabout, our motive for going on
may be at an end. In that case I suppose we shall wait here till
Roberts has relieved Kimberley and marches on Bloemfontein. That will
send all the Free Staters scurrying back in a hurry, and even the
Transvaalers will begin to think that it is time to go. Then I suppose
we shall advance and clear Natal out."

"Well, perhaps we may be back again to help you by that time," Field
answered; "but we are heartily tired of this place, and of watching the
Boers making their positions stronger and stronger every day."

"It is about the same with us all," the trooper grumbled, "and I for
one wish that I could go down with you to Maritzburg and have a week
off. It would be such a comfort to sleep in a dry bed and to dress in
dry clothes, that I doubt whether I should ever have the strength of
mind to come back again. I wish that the general would issue an order
dismounting us all and filling up the gaps in the line regiments with
us. Then at least we should have a chance of fighting, which does not
seem likely ever to come to us here. You are not going to leave those
big boxes behind you, are you?"

"Yes, we are going to leave them in the care of the captain, with a
note saying that if we do not turn up again before Ladysmith is
relieved, they are to be handed over to the poor beggars there."

"There is one thing I cannot say, and that is that we have been short
of food, for the Army Service Corps has done splendidly, and no one has
ever been hungry for an hour, except when on a long march or engaged in
a battle. If everything had been worked as well, we should certainly
have no reason whatever to complain. If I were my own master, and could
afford it, I would go down to Durban and take a passage for myself and
my horse for Port Elizabeth, and then go up and enlist in one of the
yeomanry corps with Roberts. When he once starts there will be plenty
of movement on that side; while here, even if we get to Ladysmith, we
may be fixed there for no one can say how long. You see what it is
here, and if the Boers don't lose heart, and defend the Biggarsberg and
the Drakensberg, we shall find at least as much difficulty there as we
shall here. It is quite certain that the Ladysmith men will take a long
time to recover from what they have gone through; and as for the
cavalry, I fancy their horses have been eaten. If they had been out
here with us, instead of being cooped up in there, we should have been
able to make it hot for the Boers when they retire, and to keep them on
the run, but with so small a force as we have we should hardly be able
to do so. Besides, they have so many lines of retreat. The Free Staters
can go over to the left to Van Reenen and the other passes; another
commando can go east; there are plenty of fords on the Buffalo; and
they would retire on Vryheid, while the main body could make a stand at
the Biggarsberg; and as they always seem able to carry their cannon off
with them, our cavalry would do nothing without artillery and infantry."

There had been no pause in the work of preparation while they were
talking, and the horses were now saddled, the food divided, the
saddle-bags packed, and the blankets and waterproofs strapped on. Chris
went across to Captain Brookfield's tent. "We are all ready for a
start, sir."

The officer looked at his watch. "It is three minutes under the
half-hour, Chris. How much ammunition are you taking with you?"

"A hundred and fifty rounds each, sir, of which I don't suppose we
shall use above ten at the outside. Still, there is never any saying;
and if we should get besieged we shall want it all. Your horse is ready
for you, Mr. Searle."

"And I am ready too," the farmer said, getting up from the table and
stretching himself. "I ought not to have sat down. I could ride as far
as most at twenty, but I have not done so much for the last fifteen
years, and I feel stiff in every limb. However, I shall be all right
when I have gone a few miles, and that wash I had before breakfast has
done me a world of good. Now, sir, I am ready, and whether we shall
succeed or not, I thank you with all my heart for coming with me."
"Good-bye, Chris!" Captain Brookfield said. "I expect you will all turn
up again, like bad pennies, before many days have gone."

"I hope so, sir," Chris said. "I should be sorry to miss the end here
after having seen it so far."




CHAPTER XVII

A RESCUE.


When Chris went out with Captain Brookfield and the farmer, the lads
had shaken hands with all their friends, and were standing by the side
of their horses ready to mount. Jack and the two Zulus were standing a
few yards behind them. Japhet had brought up the other spare horse.

"It is a nice piece of horse-flesh," the farmer said as he looked at it
critically.

"Yes, it was bred by Duncan. We purchased pretty well the pick of those
he brought down the country."

"That accounts for it. They are in good condition, too."

"Yes; our horses all get two feeds of mealies a day, or, when it is
wet, one feed of mealies and a hot mash made of mealie flour, besides
what they can pick up, for we don't draw horse rations. Now, sir, we
will be off;" and he gave the word "Mount!"

The lads all in a second swung into their saddles.

"Good-bye, lads, and good luck!" Captain Brookfield said; and the men
standing by broke into a hearty cheer.

There was a strong suspicion that the party were not going down to
Maritzburg. It was felt that they were not the sort to throw it up
before Ladysmith was relieved. And their suspicions were heightened
when they saw the farmer mount and ride by the side of Chris.

"It is all gammon about their resigning, is it not, Brookfield?" one of
the officers said, as they stood looking after them. "Why should they
have left two of their men here with some of their traps and stores if
they had not been coming back? They would naturally give them all away.
Besides, I noticed that farmer come in on foot half an hour ago; there
was no talk of their leaving before he arrived, and he has gone off
with them on one of their horses."

Captain Brookfield smiled.

"All I know about it officially is that this morning Mr. King resigned
in the name of himself and his party; and as you know, I told you when
they first joined us, they did so on the explicit understanding that
they should be allowed to resign when they chose, and that provision
was inserted when they were sworn in."

"That is all you know officially?"

"Yes. If they are missed, and the question is asked me what has become
of them, that is the answer I shall give. What else I know I must for
the present keep to myself."

"I suppose we shall see them back soon?"

"Well, I consider that that is within the limits of possibility."

"I suppose that you have formed no plan yet, Mr. King?" the farmer
said, when they had left the camp.

"No; my present idea is to follow the line half-way down to Frere. If
we were to strike off towards the country at once, we should, of
course, be noticed; so I would rather get three miles on. You say it is
about seventy miles?"

"About that."

"Well, allowing for a halt, we can do it in twelve hours; that would be
just as it is getting dark. Of course we shall not show ourselves till
they begin to attack the house. I hope we shall find your friends still
holding out."

"I hope so indeed. You see, the Boers were quiet when I started, and I
should hardly think that they would make an attack again after I left.
They seemed to have settled down to starve us out; but it is quite
possible that now I have got away they will grow nervous lest I should
bring help up, and are very likely to make another attempt this
evening. They would be pretty sure to succeed this time, for there are
only seven of us left there; and though they could make a good fight in
daylight, they would have no real chance if the Boers went at them in
earnest, which they are sure to do next time. We agreed before I
started that it would not do to try to defend the yard. After I left
they were going to pile everything movable against the doors and
windows and fight hard to keep the Boers out, and would then go
upstairs and sell their lives dearly."

"How far are the Boer horses out?"

"About five hundred yards away, in a dip. We know they always keep
three or four men on guard there, for we have seen them come out of the
hollow sometimes."

"And the cattle, have they driven them off yet?"

"Yes; four of the Boers and twenty or thirty natives went straight on
with them as soon as they had driven us into the farmhouse. I am afraid
there is no use thinking of getting them back."

"It depends upon how far they have gone," Chris said. "The rains have
brought the grass up, and as likely as not they may halt when they get
to some good pastures and wait till the others join them. It is not
likely that all that gang came from one place."

"I expect that they have been gathered up from lonely farmhouses where
they have escaped the commandos, and they will want to divide their
plunder between them; they don't trust each other a bit, and each would
cheat his fellows of his share if he could. So I should think that what
you suggest is likely enough, and that it has been arranged to wait
when they come to a good place till the others arrive. But you are not
thinking of rescuing them, are you?"

"If we thrash the Boers at the farm I shall certainly have a try. We
did carry off two or three thousand head about two months ago from the
hands of at least as large a party as this, and I don't see why we
should not do it again. It was near Mount Umhlumba."

"Was it your party that did that?" the farmer exclaimed. "Why, it was
the talk of the whole district, and some of the cattle belonged to a
friend of mine. He told me how he had been saved from ruin. Well, sir,
after that I shall feel more confident than I acknowledge I have been
up to now. Captain Brookfield told me about your going into the Boer
camp in disguise, and to Komati-poort, and how you surprised a party of
Boers looting a farm near Dundee; but he did not mention that. In fact,
he had only just finished telling me the other affairs when you came in
saying that you were ready to start. Well, well, it is wonderful that a
party of young gentlemen like yours should have done such things!"

They did not hurry their horses, but for the most part went at the
steady canter to which the animals were most accustomed; occasionally
they would walk for a bit.

At Weenan, where they crossed the Bushman river, they halted for half
an hour, and for double that time after crossing the Mooi at Intembeni;
then as the sun began to lose its power they went fast, until, when
they reached one of the farthest spurs of Botha's Castle, the farmer
said:

"When we get over the next rise we shall see the house."

Chris gave the order to dismount, and, going forward on foot, they
threw themselves down when close to the crest, and crawled forward
until they obtained a fair view. Sankey and Chris were again provided
with glasses, having bought them on the day before starting at the sale
of the effects of several officers who had fallen in a fight at Vaal
Krantz, and all gazed intently for some time at the house. "Thank God
they are all right so far!" Chris said to the farmer. "I can see the
Boers lying all round the house, and that dark clump is their horses;
so our ride has not been in vain. I suppose it is about a mile and a
half from here. I don't see the gate into the yard. Which side is it?"

"That corner of the house hides it. It is on the eastern side."

"It will be quite dark in an hour; when it is so, we will move down a
bit farther, then we will halt till we hear them attacking. We must not
go nearer, for the moon will be up by that time. If I had known that we
should have got here before dark, we need not have troubled to bring
the Zulus. I intended to send them forward to see how matters stood,
then they could have guided us right up to the gate. However, as they
have all got guns, and can shoot, it will add to the panic our attack
will create, and they will all be pleased at the chance of at last
getting a shot at the Boers. They were complaining to me the other day
that they were very happy in all other respects, but they were very
much disappointed at not having had a fight."

The natives were indeed delighted when, on Chris rejoining them, he
told them that they should take their share in the attack on the Boers.
Chris and his friends all threw themselves on the ground, after sending
up Jack to the crest to keep watch. But the farmer said, "I dare not
lie down; if I did, I should never get up again."

He had, indeed, to be lifted off his horse when they dismounted.

"I can quite understand that," Chris said. "I feel stiff and tired
myself, and you must be almost made of iron to have ridden one hundred
and forty miles almost without halting."

"If anyone had told me that I could do it, I should not have believed
him. Of course one is on horseback a good many hours a day. Often,
after going round the farm, I start at two or three o'clock and ride
into Greytown and back; but that is only a matter of some fifteen miles
each way. Still, when one has got seven men's lives depending upon one,
one makes a big effort."

"I tell you what, Mr. Searle. The best thing you can do is to strip and
lie down. I will set the two Zulus to knead you. You will find yourself
quite a new man after it."

"That is a good idea, King, and I will adopt it."

For half an hour the two men rubbed and kneaded the farmer's muscles
from head to foot, exerting themselves until the perspiration streamed
from them. Then one of them brought up one of the water-skins and
poured the contents over him.

"That has certainly done me a world of good," the farmer said when he
had dressed himself. "I don't say the stiffness has all gone, but I
certainly don't feel any worse than I did when I got to your camp. I
should never have thought of it myself."

"It is what is done after a Turkish bath," Chris said. "I have had them
often at Johannesburg. The natives do something of the same sort. They
make a little hut of boughs, and fill a hole in the middle with hot
stones and pour water over them, and steam themselves, and I believe
get rubbed too."

As soon as they considered it dark enough to be perfectly safe, they
led their horses down until they judged that they were within half a
mile of the house, then dismounted and waited. Chris had already made
all arrangements. Carmichael, who was the leader for the time being of
one of the sections of five, was with his party to ride straight for
the Boers' horses directly the attack began. The firing at the house
would act as a guide to the spot where they were placed, and he was, if
possible, to attack them from behind. He was to shoot down the guards,
but not to pursue them if the horses bolted on hearing the attack on
the house.

"What you have to do is to stampede them," Chris said. "As soon as you
have got them on the run, keep them going, and if they scatter, do you
scatter too. The Boers without their horses will be at our mercy. Don't
stop till you have driven them five miles away. Then you can halt till
morning. As you come back, you are likely enough to hear firing, and
can then ride towards it and join us. But don't get within rifle-shot
of the Boers. I don't want any lives thrown away. If you hear three
shots at regular intervals during the night ride towards the sound. I
