clothes were delivered. The following morning a carriage with the
arms of the marquis emblazoned upon it came up to the door, and
they started. The horses were fat and lazy; and Harry, who had no
idea how far they were going, thought that the journey was likely
to be a long one if this was the pace at which they were to travel.

Twelve miles out they changed horses at a post-station, their own
returning to Paris, and after this had relays at each station, and
travelled at a pace which seemed to Harry to be extraordinarily
rapid.  They slept twice upon the road.

The third day the appearance of the country altogether changed, and,
instead of the flat plains which Harry had begun to think extended
all over France, they were now among hills higher than anything he
had ever seen before. Towards the afternoon they crossed the range
and began to descend, and as evening approached M. du Tillet pointed
to a building standing on rising ground some miles away and said:

"That is the chateau."




CHAPTER II

A Mad Dog


It was dark before the carriage drove up to the chateau. Their
approach had been seen, for two lackeys appeared with torches at
the head of the broad steps. M. du Tillet put his hand encouragingly
on Harry's shoulder and led him up the steps. A servant preceded
them across a great hall, when a door opened and a gentleman came
forward.

"Monsieur le Marquis," M. du Tillet said, bowing, "this is the
young gentleman you charged me to bring to you.

"I am glad to see you," the marquis said; "and I hope you will make
yourself happy and comfortable here."

Harry did not understand the words, but he felt the tone of kindness
and courtesy with which they were spoken. He could, however, only
bow; for although in the eight days he had spent with M. du Tillet
he had picked up a great many nouns and a few phrases, his stock
of words was of no use to him at present.

"And you, M. du Tillet," the marquis said. "You have made a good
journey, I hope? I thank you much for the trouble you have taken.
I like the boy's looks; what do you think of him?"

"I like him very much," M. du Tillet said; "he is a new type to
me, and a pleasant one. I think he will make a good companion for
the young count."

The marquis now turned and led the way into a great drawing-room,
and taking Harry's hand led him up to  a lady seated on a couch.

"This is our young English friend, Julie. Of course he is strange
at present, but M. du Tillet reports well of him, and I already
like his face."

The lady held out her hand, which Harry, instead of bending over
and kissing, as she had expected, shook heartily. For an instant
only a look of intense surprise passed across her face; then she
said courteously:

"We are glad to see you. It is very good of you to come so far to
us. I trust that you will be happy here."

"These are my sons Ernest and Jules, who will, I am sure, do all
in their power to make you comfortable," the marquis said.

The last words were spoken sharply and significantly, and their
tone was not lost upon the two boys; they had a moment before been
struggling to prevent themselves bursting into a laugh at Harry's
reception of their mother's greeting, but they now instantly composed
their faces and advanced.

"Shake hands with him," the marquis said sharply; "it is the custom
of his country."

Each in turn held out his hand to Harry, who, as he shook hands
with them, took a mental stock of his future companions.

"Good looking," he said to himself, "but more like girls than boys.
A year in the fifth form would do them a world of good. I could
polish the two off together with one hand."

"My daughters," the marquis said, "Mesdemoiselles Marie, Jeanne,
and Virginie."

Three young ladies had risen from their seats as their father
entered, each made a deep curtsy as her name was mentioned, and
Harry bowed deeply in return. Mademoiselle Marie was two years at
least older than himself, and was already a young lady of fashion.
Jeanne struck him as being about the same age as his sister Fanny,
who was between fourteen and fifteen. Virginie was a child of ten.
Ernest was about his own age, while Jules came between the two
younger girls.

"Take M. Sandwith to the abbe," the marquis said to Ernest, "and do
all in your power to set him at his ease. Remember what you would
feel if you were placed, as he is, among strange people in a strange
country."

The lad motioned to Harry to accompany him, and the three boys left
the room together.

"You can go to your gouvernante," the marquise said to the two
younger girls; and with a profound curtsy to her and another to the
marquis, they left the room. Unrestrained now by their presence,
the marquise turned to her husband with a merry laugh.

"But it is a bear you have brought home, Edouard, a veritable
bear--my fingers ache still--and he is to teach manners to my sons!
I always protested against the plan, but I did not think it would
be as bad as this. These islanders are savages."

The marquis smiled.

"He is a little gauche, but that will soon rub off. I like him,
Julie. Remember it was a difficult position for a boy. We did not
have him here to give polish to our sons. It may be that they have
even a little too much of this at present. The English are not
polished, everyone knows that, but they are manly and independent.
That boy bore himself well. He probably had never been in a room
like this in his life, he was ignorant of our language, alone among
strangers, but he was calm and self-possessed. I like the honest
straightforward look in his face. And look at the width of the
shoulders and the strength of his arms; why, he would break Ernest
across his knee, and the two boys must be about the same age."

"Oh, he has brute strength, I grant," the marquise said; "so have
the sons of our peasants; however, I do not want to find fault with
him, it is your hobby, or rather that of Auguste, who is, I think,
mad about these English; I will say nothing to prevent its having
a fair trial, only I hope it will not be necessary for me to give
him my hand again."

"I do not suppose it will until he leaves, Julie, and by that time,
no doubt, he will know what to do with it; but here is M. du Tillet
waiting all this time for you to speak to him."

"Pardon me, my good M. du Tillet," the marquise said. "In truth
that squeeze of my hand has driven all other matters from my mind.
How have you fared? This long journey with this English bear must
have been very tedious for you."

"Indeed, Madame la Marquise," M. du Tillet replied, "it has been no
hardship, the boy has amused me greatly; nay, more, he has pleased
me. We have been able to say little to each other, though, indeed,
he is quick and eager to learn, and will soon speak our language;
but his face has been a study. When he is pleased you can see that
he is pleased, and that is a  pleasure, for few people are pleased
in our days. Again, when he does not like a thing you can also
see it.  I can see that he says to himself, I can expect nothing
better, these poor people are only French. When the gamins in Paris
jeered him as to his dress, he closed his hands and would have flown
at them with his fists after the manner of his countrymen had he
not put strong restraint on himself. From the look of his honest
eyes I shall, when he can speak our language, believe implicitly
what he says.  That boy would not tell a lie whatever were the
consequences.  Altogether I like him much. I think that in a very
little while he will adapt himself to what goes on around him, and
that you will have no reason ere long to complain of his gaucheries."

"And you really think, M. du Tillet, that he will be a useful
companion for my boys?"

"If you will pardon me for saying so, madam, I think that he will--at
any rate I am sure he can be trusted to teach them no wrong."

"You are all against me," the marquise laughed. "And you, Marie?"

"I did not think of him one way or the other," the girl said coldly.
"He is very awkward; but as he is not to be my companion that does
not concern me. It is like one of papa's dogs, one more or less
makes no difference in the house so long as they do not tread upon
one's skirt."

"That is the true spirit of the French nobility, Marie," her father
said sarcastically. "Outside our own circle the whole human race is
nothing to us; they are animals who supply our wants, voila tour.
I tell you, my dear, that the time is coming when this will not
suffice.  The nation is stirring; that France which we have so long
ignored is lifting its head and muttering; the news from Paris is
more and more grave. The Assembly has assumed the supreme authority,
and the king is a puppet in its power. The air is dark as with a
thunder-cloud, and there may be such a storm sweep over France as
there has not been since the days of the Jacquerie."

"But the people should be contented," M. du Tillet said; "they have
had all the privileges they ever possessed given back to them."

"Yes," the marquis assented, "and there lies the danger. It is one
thing or the other. If as soon as the temper of the third estate
had been seen the king's guards had entered and cleared the place
and closed the door, as Cromwell did  when the parliament was
troublesome to him in England, that would have been one way. Paris
would have been troublesome, we might have had again the days of
the Fronde, but in the end the king's party would have won.

"However, that was not the way tried. They began by concessions,
they go on with concessions, and each concession is made the ground
for more. It is like sliding down a hill; when you have once begun
you cannot stop yourself, and you go on until there is a crash;
then it may be you pick yourself up sorely wounded and bruised,
and begin to reclimb the hill slowly and painfully; it may be that
you are dashed to pieces. I am not a politician. I do not care much
for the life of Paris, and am well content to live quietly here on
our estates; but even I can see that a storm is gathering; and as
for my brother Auguste, he goes about shaking his head and wringing
his hands, his anticipations are of the darkest. What can one
expect when fellows like Voltaire and Rousseau were permitted by
their poisonous preaching to corrupt and inflame the imagination
of the people? Both those men's heads should have been cut off the
instant they began to write.

"The scribblers are at the root of all the trouble with their
pestilent doctrines; but it is too late now, the mischief is done.
If we had a king strong and determined all might yet be well; but
Louis is weak in decision, he listens one moment to Mirabeau and the
next to the queen, who is more firm and courageous. And so things
drift on from bad to worse, and the Assembly, backed by the turbulent
scum of Paris, are masters of the situation."

For some time Harry lived a quiet life at the chateau. He found
his position a very pleasant one. The orders of the marquis that
he should be treated as one of the family were obeyed, and there
was no distinction made between himself and Ernest. In the morning
the two boys and himself worked with the abbe, a quiet and gentle
old man; in the afternoon they rode and fenced, under the instructions
of M. du Tillet or one or other of the gentlemen of the marquis
establishment; and on holidays shot or fished as they chose on
the preserves or streams of the estate. For an hour each morning
the two younger girls shared in their studies, learning Latin and
history with their brothers. Harry got on very well with Ernest,
but there was no real cordiality between them. The  hauteur and
insolence with which the young count treated his inferiors were a
constant source of exasperation to Harry.

"He thinks himself a little god," he would often mutter to himself.
"I would give a good deal to have him for three months at Westminster.
Wouldn't he get his conceit and nonsense knocked out of him!"

At the same time he was always scrupulously polite and courteous to
his English companion--much too polite, indeed, to please Harry.
He had good qualities too: he was generous with his money, and
if during their rides a woman came up with a tale of distress he
was always ready to assist her. He was clever, and Harry, to his
surprise, found that his knowledge of Latin was far beyond his own,
and that Ernest could construct passages with the greatest ease
which altogether puzzled him. He was a splendid rider, and could
keep his seat with ease and grace on the most fiery animals in his
father's stables.

When they went out with their guns Harry felt his inferiority
keenly.  Not only was Ernest an excellent shot, but at the end of
a long day's sport he would come in apparently fresh and untired,
while Harry, although bodily far the most powerful, would be
completely done up; and at gymnastic exercises he could do with
ease feats which Harry could at first not even attempt. In this
respect, however, the English lad in three months' time was able
to rival him. His disgust at finding himself so easily beaten by a
French boy nerved him to the greatest exertions, and his muscles,
practised in all sorts of games, soon adapted themselves to the
new exercises.

Harry picked up French very rapidly. The absolute necessity there was
to express himself in that language caused him to make a progress
which surprised himself, and at the end of three months he was able
to converse with little difficulty, and having learned it entirely
by ear he spoke with a fair accent and pronunciation. M. du Tillet,
who was the principal instructor of the boys in their outdoor
exercises, took much pains to assist him in his French, and helped
him on in every way in his power.

In the evening there were dancing lessons, and although very far
from exhibiting the stately grace with which Ernest could perform
the minuet or other courtly dances  then in fashion, Harry came
in time to perform his part fairly. Two hours were spent in the
evening in the salon. This part of the day Harry at first found the
most tedious; but as soon as he began to speak fluently the marquis
addressed most of his conversation to him, asking him questions
about the life of English boys at school and about English manners
and customs, and Harry soon found himself chatting at his ease.

"The distinction of classes is clearly very much less with you in
England than it is here," the marquis said one day when Harry had
been describing a great fight which had taken place between a party
of Westminster boys and those of the neighbourhood. "It seems
extraordinary to me that sons of gentlemen should engage in a
personal fight with boys of the lowest class. Such a thing could
not happen here. If you were insulted by such a boy, what would
you do, Ernest?"

"I should run him through the body," Ernest said quietly.

"Just so," his father replied, "and I don't say you would be wrong
according to our notions; but I do not say that the English plan is
not the best. The English gentleman--for  Monsieur Sandwith says
that even among grown-up people the same habits prevail--does not
disdain to show the canaille that even with their own rough weapons
he is their superior, and he thus holds their respect. It is a
coarse way and altogether at variance with our notions, but there
is much to be said for it."

"But it altogether does away with the reverence that the lower
class should feel for the upper," Ernest objected.

"That is true, Ernest. So long as that feeling generally exists, so
long as there is, as it were, a wide chasm between the two classes,
as there has always existed in France, it would be unwise perhaps
for one of the upper to admit that in any respect there could be
any equality between them; but this is not so in England, where a
certain equality has always been allowed to exist. The Englishman
of all ranks has a certain feeling of self-respect and independence,
and the result is shown in the history of the wars which have been
fought between the two nations.

"France in early days always relied upon her chivalry. The horde of
footmen she placed in the field counted for little. England, upon
the other hand, relied principally upon her archers and her pikemen,
and it must be admitted that they beat us handsomely. Then again in
the wars in Flanders, under the English general Marlborough their
infantry always proved themselves  superior to ours. It is galling
to admit it, but there is no blinking the facts of history. It seems
to me that the feeling of independence and self-respect which this
English system gives rise to, even among the lowest class, must
render them man for man better soldiers than those drawn from a
peasantry whose very lives are at the mercy of their lords."

"I think, du Tillet," the marquis said later on on the same evening,
when the young people had retired, "I have done very well in taking
my brother Auguste's advice as to having an English companion
for Ernest. If things were as they were under the Grand Monarque,
I do not say that it would have been wise to allow a young French
nobleman to get these English ideas into his head, but it is
different now.

"We are on the eve of great changes. What will come of it no one
can say; but there will certainly be changes, and it is a good thing
that my children should get broader ideas than those in which we
were brought up. This lad is quiet and modest, but he ventures to
