interesting business, if it is a queer one."

"You know Philip Cotter?"

"Of course, Mark; why, I have met him with you several times."

"I will give you a note to ask him to allow you to open the case, and
to take from it the bracelet; I don't know whether it is a regular
gold mounted bracelet, or simply some diamonds that have been fastened
together as a necklace; however, I suppose you are sure to recognize
them; they are altogether exceptional stones, and will certainly be done
up in a packet by themselves, whatever the others may be. Say that you
will call in and take them away some other time, of which I will give
him notice by letter. I will write the note now, and if you can spare
time to go there today, all the better, for I shall be glad to get the
business over; then I will come again tomorrow morning, and we will
arrange the details of the plan. I will look in the shipping list, and
see what vessels are sailing for Amsterdam. When we have fixed on one,
it will be best for you to take our passages under any names you like,
so that they are not our own. The detectives will take their passages
separately, and so will Gibbons and whoever else goes with us."

"I will go at once, Mark."

"Don't go straight there, Dick; if these fellows are dogging my
footsteps everywhere, and saw me coming here, they might take it into
their heads to follow you."

"Oh, they can never be doing all that sort of thing; that's too much to
believe. However, to please you, I will go into my club for a quarter of
an hour. Shall I come round to your rooms this evening, or will you come
here?"

"I think I will put off our meeting altogether until tomorrow morning. I
have an engagement this evening that I cannot very well get out of."

"All right, Mark, just as you please. What time will you come round in
the morning?"

"About the time you have finished breakfast. I will go now, and have a
look at the shipping list."

They parted at the door, and Mark went to the coffee house where
shipping matters were specially attended to, and where master mariners
might often be met, conversing together, or with ship owners or
merchants. On going through the list, he found that the fast sailing
brig, Essex, of 204 tons, and mounting eight guns, would sail for
Amsterdam in three days' time, and would take in goods for that place,
and, should sufficient freight be obtained, for any other Dutch port.
It was also announced that she had good accommodation for passengers.
Information as to cargo could be obtained from her owners, on Tower
Hill, or from the captain on board, between the hours of ten and twelve.
Then, in small type, it was stated that the Essex was at present lying
in the outside tier nearly opposite Anderson's wharf.

Mark made a note of all these particulars in his pocketbook, and then
went to Ingleston's public house.

"Morning, Mr. Thorndyke," the man said; "haven't seen yer for the last
month or so."

"No; I have been out of town. Do you expect Gibbons in here this
morning?"

"It is about his time, sir, when he has nothing in particular to see
about. Like a turn with the mauleys this morning?"

"Not this morning, Ingleston. I have got some engagements for the next
day or two where I could not very well show myself with a black eye or a
swelled nose; you have given me a good many of both."

"Well, Mr. Thorndyke, when one stands up against a man who is as strong
as one's self, and a mighty quick and hard hitter, you have got to hit
sharp and quick too. You know my opinion, that there aint half a dozen
men in the country could lick you if you had a proper training."

"I suppose you couldn't get away for a week, or maybe two?" he said.

"Lor' bless you, no, sir. Who would there be to keep order here at
night? When I first came here I had not given up the ring, and I fought
once or twice afterwards. But, Lor' bless you, I soon found that I had
got either to give up the pub or the ring, and as I was doing a tidy
business here, I thought it best to retire; since then business has
grown. You see, boxing is more fashionable than it used to be, and
there are very few nights when one don't have a dozen Corinthians in
here--sometimes there are twice as many--either to see some of the new
hands put on the mauleys, and judge for themselves how they are going to
turn out, or maybe to arrange for a bout between some novice they fancy
and one of the west countrymen. No, sir, I could not do it anyhow; I
should not like to be away even for one night, though I know Gibbons
would look after things for me; as for being away for a week, I could
not do it for any money. No, sir, my fight with Jackson last year was
the last time I shall ever go into the ring. I was a fool to go in for
that, but I got taunted into it. I never thought that I should lick him,
though, as you know, sir, I have licked a good many good men in my time,
but Jackson is an out and out man, and he has got a lot more science
than I ever had; my only chance was that I could knock him out of time
or wear him down; but he was too quick on his pins for me to do the
former. Ah, Gibbons, here is Mr. Thorndyke. He wants to see you; you had
best go into my room behind the bar."

"Want to get hold of a fresh hand, Mr. Thorndyke?" Gibbons asked when
they had sat down by the fire.

"No, Gibbons, it is another business altogether. Have you got anything
particular to keep you in town for the next fortnight? It may not be
over a week, but it may be over a fortnight."

"No, sir," the man said, after taking three or four draws at his long
pipe. "No, sir; they won't want the ropes and stakes for another three
weeks, so I am your man if you want me. What, is it for, sir?"

"Well, it is rather a curious affair, Gibbons. I have to take a very
valuable bracelet over to Amsterdam, to sell there, and I have very
strong reasons for believing that if some fellows get an inkling of it
they will try to put me out of the way, and get hold of the diamonds. I
want a couple of good men to go with me."

"Well sir, I should say you and me could lick a dozen ordinary chaps,
without thinking anything of it."

"I dare say we could, Gibbons, in a stand up fight without weapons, but
I fancy these fellows will not try that. They are foreigners, and the
first thing they would try would be to put a dagger between my shoulders
as I walked up and down on deck at night, or, more likely still, creep
into my cabin and stab me while I was asleep. If the voyage were only to
last one night I might sit up, pistol in hand, but if the wind is foul
we might be a week. We are a pretty strong party. Mr. Chetwynd--you know
him--is going with me; there will also be two runners from Bow Street,
and I want you to take another good man with you. Of course, on board
we shall separate. The Bow Street men will watch the passengers, and you
and your mate will smoke your pipes and keep yourselves ready to join
in if you see there is going to be a row. But I rather think that the
passage will be a quiet one. At Amsterdam, until I have got rid of the
diamonds I certainly should not care about going out into the street
after nightfall without having you close behind me."

"All right, sir. I should say Tom Tring would be as good a man as one
could get at the job. What is the money to be, Mr. Thorndyke?"

"Well, what do you think yourself, Gibbons?"

"I take it you pay all expenses, sir?"

"Yes, everything."

"Would five and twenty guineas a head be too much?"

"No; I will do better than that. I will give you five and twenty guineas
each when we get to Amsterdam, and I will give you another twenty-five
each if I come back here safe and sound."

"Well, I call that handsome. One could not want more, and you can rely
on it that Tring will jump at the offer. He has not been able to get a
fight on lately, and he is rather in low water."

"Well, you will both get up as quiet traders. I don't know what other
passengers there may be, but I don't want them to know that you belong
to the fancy."

"I twig, sir. We will get up quiet like."

"Then I want you tomorrow morning, Gibbons, to go down to Holmes
& Moore, No. 67 Tower Street, and take two first class tickets to
Amsterdam on board the Essex, which sails on Saturday. I don't know what
the passage money will be, but this is sure to be enough; and we can
settle accounts afterwards. You will find out what time of day she will
start."

"All right, governor. I suppose you will be here again before that?"

"No, I don't suppose I shall, unless there is some change in the
arrangements. If for any reasons Tring cannot go with you, you will
get somebody else instead. You are sure that you quite understand
your instructions? Here is the name and address of the people in Tower
Street."

"All right, sir. You may make sure that when you go down to the ship you
will see the two of us on board."

It needed but a few minutes at Bow Street to inform the chief of the
arrangements that had been made.

"I have told off Chester and Malcolm; one of them shall go down and
take their tickets. Of course, they will take their passages in the fore
cabin, as the danger, if there is danger, may come from there, and you
will have your other two men with you aft. I fancy myself that there is
hardly any chance of your being in any way troubled while on board.
It will be considered that there will be a vastly greater chance of
carrying out any plan they may have formed at Amsterdam than there would
be on board a ship; you see, if there were any struggle whatever on
board there would be no escape for them.

"For myself, of course I cannot give any opinion worth having in a
matter so different from anything we have to do with here, and I should
have unhesitatingly scoffed at the idea of anyone watching the movements
of people for a long number of years in order to obtain the possession
of jewels, however valuable. However, your uncle was well acquainted
with the habits of Hindoos, and was not a man to be lightly alarmed;
you yourself, after your year with us, should not be deceived in such
a matter as being yourself followed; under these circumstances you
are quite right to take every precaution, and as you pay well for
the services of our two men, even if I had no belief whatever in the
existence of danger to you, I should not feel justified in refusing to
let you have them."

Having arranged these matters, Mark spent the rest of his time that day
and the next at Islington.

"I am going across to Amsterdam on Saturday with a diamond bracelet to
sell there."

Millicent looked at him in reproachful surprise.

"Why, surely, Mark, there can be no hurry about that. I think you might
have stayed a little longer before running away."

"I should do so, you may be quite sure, Millicent, if I consulted my own
inclinations, but I am bearing out your father's wishes. This bracelet
is the most valuable of all the things he had, and I believe that it has
some sort of history attached to it. He told my father that he had
sent all the gems home principally to get these diamonds out of his
possession; he said that as soon as my father got hold of the things, he
was to take the diamonds straight over to Amsterdam and sell them there,
for he considered that they were much too valuable to be kept in the
house, and that it was possible that some of the Hindoos might endeavor
to get possession of them. At the time he spoke he believed that my
father would, at his death, go to the bank and get the jewels, as of
course he would have done if he had known where to find them. My
father promised him that they should be taken to Amsterdam at once; and
although so many years have passed since his death, I think I am bound
to carry out that promise."

"I have never been able to understand, Mark, how it was that my father,
when he gave all these instructions about me and these jewels and so on,
did not at the same time tell uncle where to find them."

"It was a fancy of his; he was in very bad health, and he thought so
much over these diamonds that it had become almost a sort of mania with
him that not only was there danger in their possession, but that he
was watched night and day wherever he went. He thought, even, if he
whispered where the hiding place was to be discovered it might be heard;
therefore he deferred telling it until too late. Of course all this
was but a fancy on his part, although it is probable enough that the
possession of the diamonds was a source of danger in India, and might
have been a source of danger here had any thieves known that such
valuable gems were kept in a private house or carried about. At any
rate, I shall be glad to be free of the responsibility; and although,
naturally, I don't like leaving you at the present time, I think it best
to carry out your father's instructions at once, and to get them off
my mind altogether. Dick Chetwynd is going with me, so it will be a
pleasant little trip."

"Well, I am glad he is going with you, Mark; for although I know well
enough that they could never be watching for those diamonds to turn
up all these years, I feel sure I should fidget and worry if you were
alone. You are not going to take the others with you?"

"No, only this particular bracelet. None of the others are exceptionally
valuable, so far as I know. At any rate, your father did not specially
allude to them. I have no doubt that there are some really valuable
jewels among them, for my uncle prided himself on being a judge of
precious stones, and as he invested a large amount of money in them,
they are, no doubt, worth a great deal. Still, I don't suppose there
will be any difficulty in selling them here, and, at any rate, I don't
want to be delayed at Amsterdam by having to sell perhaps fifty or a
hundred pieces of jewelry; any time will do for that. I fancy that I
ought to be able to dispose of the bracelet in three or four days at the
outside. I have got from Bow Street a list of all the principal diamond
merchants in Amsterdam. That is a matter of great interest to the force,
as almost all precious stones stolen in this country are sent across
there, and if there is any special jewel robbery we send over a list of
all the articles taken to the merchants there. As a rule, that would
not prevent their dealing in them, but there are some who will not touch
things that have been dishonestly come by, and we occasionally get hints
that enable us to lay hands upon thieves over there."

"I hate to hear you say 'the force,' Mark, just as if you were still a
detective; it is bad enough that you should have belonged to it, even
for the purpose you did; but you have done with it now."

"Yes; but, you see, it is rather difficult to get out of the habit when
one has been for over a year constantly at work at a thing. This will be
my last absence on business, Millicent; henceforward I shall be able to
be always with you."

"Well, now that I know what you have been doing all this time, Mark, I
must admit that you have been very good to have been with us as much as
you have. I often used to wonder how you passed your time. Of course I
knew that you were trying to find that man out, but it did not seem to
me that you could be always at that, and I never dreamt that you had
become a regular detective. I am very glad I did not know it till a
short time before you gave it up. In the first place, I should have
been horrified, and, in the second place, I should have been constantly
uneasy about you. However, as this is to be the last time, I will let
you go without grumbling."

"By the way, Millicent, what do you wish me to say about our engagement?
I don't see that there is the slightest occasion for us to keep up the
farce of your being Miss Conyers any longer. You cannot be married under
a false name, you know, and now that you have escaped what your father
was so afraid of, and are going to be married for love and not for
money, I don't see why there should be any more mystery about it."

"But how would you account for my having been called Conyers all this
time?"

"I should simply tell the truth; that your father, having a great fear
that you might be married for money, left the estate to my father, to
be held by him until you came of age, and that it was at his particular
request that you were brought up simply as his ward, and dropped the
family name and passed by your two Christian names. I should say that
we have all been aware for a long time of the facts of the case, and
I should also say that your father had left a very large fortune in
addition to the estate between us, and had expressed a hope that we
should, when the time came, marry each other."

"Then people will think that we have only married to keep the fortune
together, Mark."

"Well, my dear, I don't suppose there are a great many people who will
be interested in the matter, and those who get to know you will see at
once that as far as I am concerned, there was no great difficulty in
falling in with your father's ideas, while, on the other hand, they may
consider that you made a noble sacrifice of yourself in agreeing to the
plan."

"Nonsense, sir. I am not going to flatter you, as no doubt you expect;
but, at any rate, I am perfectly content with my share of the bargain."

"Well, there is one thing, Millicent; all who knew us down at Reigate
will say that it is a very sensible arrangement, and will be glad to
know that I shall retain the estate they have hitherto considered to be
mine. Well, then, you agree to my mentioning to my intimate friends that
you are my cousin, and that we are engaged?"

"Yes, I suppose it is the best thing, Mark, and, as you say, I must
marry under my proper name, and it is just as well to get the talk
over down at Reigate now, as for it all to come as a wonder when we are
married."

"When is that going to be, Millicent?"

"Oh, I don't know; of course it will be a long time before we even think
of that."

"I beg your pardon, I am thinking of it now, and I can see no reason
whatever why it should be delayed. We know each other well enough, I
should think, and there is no probability of our changing our minds on
discovering all sorts of faults, that we never dreamt, in each other.
I may be away for a fortnight, and I would suggest that you had better
make your preparations at once, so that we can be married a fortnight
after I come back."

"You say that there is no fear of our discovering faults in each other.
I can assure you that I have just discovered a very serious fault,
namely, that you are altogether too masterful, too bent upon having your
own way. I know you always were so when you were a boy, but I hoped
you had grown out of it; now I see that I was altogether mistaken.
Seriously, Mark, your proposal is absurd."

"Where does the absurdity come in, Millicent?"

"Well, everywhere," she said gravely.

"Which in the present case means nowhere," he said. "Do you mean to tell
me, Millicent, that in this town there are not a hundred dressmakers,
each of whom could turn you out a wedding dress and as many other
garments as you can possibly require in the course of a month, or even
if that effort were too stupendous, that you could not divide the work
among a dozen of them?"

"Well, I don't say that could not be done," Millicent admitted
reluctantly.

"Well, what other objection is there?"

"Well, you see, one does not, like to be bustled in such a matter as
this, Mark. One likes to think it all over and to realize it to one's
self."

"Well, dear, you will have a fortnight while I am away to think and to
realize as much as you like. I can see no advantage myself in waiting
a single day longer than there is a necessity for; I have been for the
last year coming here merely as a visitor, and I want to take possession
of you and have you all to myself. I suppose Mrs. Cunningham will be
coming in presently, and I will put the matter to her. If she says you
cannot be ready in a month I must give you another week, but I don't
think that she will say so. By the way, how about her?"

"I was thinking of that last night, Mark. It would be very lonely for
her to live by herself now, and you see she has always been as a mother
to me."

"Quite so, dear; and I am sure that I should have no objection to her
coming back to Crowswood, and living there as a friend, and helping you
in the housekeeping."

"Thank you very much, Mark; I should like that in every way. You see, I
know nothing whatever about housekeeping; and besides, when you are
out, it would be a great thing to have her with me, for it would be very
lonely by myself in that big house."

"Well, we will have her there, by all means, dear, if she likes to come;
you had better talk it over with her. Ah! here she is.

"We were just talking over the time it will take Millicent to get
ready," he said, "and I shall be glad of your opinion. I have been
telling her that I am going away for a fortnight, and have proposed that
the marriage should come off a fortnight later. I cannot see any use in
delay, and she does not either; at least, I suppose not, for the only
objection she has advanced is that there will be but a short time in
which to get her things ready. That strikes me as being all nonsense.
I could get things ready for ten weddings in that time. What do you
think?"

"I see no reason for delay," Mrs. Cunningham said; "and assuredly a
month ought to be sufficient to get everything made."

"Thank you, Mrs. Cunningham; then we can consider that settled,
Millicent!"

"I call this tyranny, Mrs. Cunningham," Millicent protested. "He says
he proposes that we shall be married in a month; it is not a proposal at
all, it is an order. If he had wanted me in such a hurry he might have
said so a year ago, and now that he has made up his mind at last, he
wants everything done in a hurry."

"It is the nature of men, my dear; they are all alike in that respect.
I think you had better make up your mind to it, especially as I have no
doubt in this case the order is not a very unpleasant one."

"You are too bad, Mrs. Cunningham," Millicent said. "I made sure that I
should find you on my side, and it seems you have gone over altogether
to the enemy."

"Where are you going to?" asked Mrs. Cunningham of Mark.

"I am going across to Amsterdam to sell that bracelet. My uncle
expressed a particular wish to my father that he should do so
immediately it came into his possession. Dick Chetwynd is going over
with me, and if the weather is fair it will be a pleasant trip."

"Where are you thinking of going after the marriage?"
