
"It's kind of sudden, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"What makes you go?"

"Bad news, Joel."

"Be any of your folks dead?"

"It is not death. I haven't any 'folks.' I'm alone in the world.
It's because I've lost my property and am too poor to remain in school."

"That's too bad," said the driver in a tone of sympathy. "Where are you
goin'?"

"To the city."

"Are you goin' to work?"

"Yes, I shall have to."

"If you was a little older you might get a chance to drive a street car,
but I s'pose you're too young."

"Yes, I don't think they would take me."

"I've thought sometimes I should like such a chance myself," said Joel.
"I've got tired of the country. I should like to live in the city where
there's theaters, and shows, and such like. Do you know what the drivers
on street cars get?"

"No, I never heard."

"I wish you'd find out and let me know. You can send the letter to Joel
Phipps, Groveton. Then find out if it's easy to get such a chance."

"I will. I shall be glad to oblige you."

"You always was obligin', Rodney. I've asked Jack Bundy to do it--you
know his folks live in the city--but he never would. He's a mighty
disagreeable boy. He never liked you."

"Didn't he?"

"No, I surmise he was jealous of you. He used to say you put on so many
airs it made him sick."

"I don't think any of the other boys would say that."

"No, but they could say it of him. Do you think his father is rich?"

"I have always heard that he was."

"I hope he's better about paying his debt than Jack. I lent him twenty
five cents a year ago and I never could get it back."

The distance from the school to the station was a mile. Joel fetched the
carriage round with a sweep and then jumped off, opened the door, and
then helped the passengers to disembark, if that word is allowable.

"How soon does the train start, Joel?" asked Rodney.

"In about five minutes."

"Then I had better purchase my ticket without delay."

"Don't forget to ask about horse car drivers!"

"No, I won't. I should like to have you come to New York. I know no one
there, and I should feel glad to see a familiar face."

The train came up in time, and Rodney was one of half a dozen passengers
who entered the cars.

He obtained a place next to a stout man dressed in a pepper and salt
suit.

"Is this seat engaged?" asked Rodney.

"Yes--to you," and his fellow passenger laughed.

Rodney laughed too, for he saw that the remark was meant to be jocose.

He put his gripsack on the floor at his feet, but held the casket in his
lap. He did not like to run any risk with that.

"Are you a drummer?" asked the stout man, with a glance at the casket.

"No, sir."

"I thought you might be, and that THAT might contain your samples."

"No, sir. That is private property."

He had thought of telling what it contained, but checked himself. He
knew nothing of his companion, and was not sure how far it might be safe
to trust a stranger.

"I used to be a drummer myself--in the jewelry line--" continued his
companion, "and I carried a box just like that."

"Ah, indeed! Then you are not in that business now?"

"No, I got tired of it. I deal in quite a different article now."

"Indeed?"

"Suburban lot."

"You don't happen to have any of them with you?"

The stout man roared with laughter, giving Rodney the impression that he
had said a very witty thing.

"That's a good one," he remarked, "the best I've heard for a long time.
No, I haven't any of the lots with me, but I've got a circular. Just
cast your eye over that," and he drew a large and showy prospectus from
his pocket.

"If you should be looking for a good investment," he continued, "you
can't do any better than buy a lot at Morton Park. It is only eighteen
miles from the city and is rapidly building up. You can buy lot on easy
installments, and I will myself pick one out for you that is almost sure
to double in value in a year or two."

"Thank you," said Rodney, "but I shall have to invest my money, if I get
any, in a different way."

"As what for instance?"

"In board and lodging."

"Good. That is even more necessary than real estate."

"How long have you been in the business, sir?"

"About six months."

"And how does it pay?"

"Very well, if you know how to talk."

"I should think you might do well, then."

"Thank you. I appreciate the compliment. What business are you going
into, that is, if you are going to the city?"

"I am going to the city, but I have no idea yet what I shall do."

"Perhaps you may like to become an agent for our lots. I shall be ready
to employ you as sub agent if you feel disposed."

"Thank you, sir. If you will give me your card, I may call upon you."

The short man drew from his card case a business card. It bore the name


ADIN WOODS. ROYAL BUILDING. NASSAU ST. Morton Park Lots.


"Come to see me at any time," he said, "and we will talk the matter
over."

Here the train boy came along and Rodney bought a copy of Puck, while
the agent resumed the perusal of a copy of a magazine. For an hour
the cars ran smoothly. Then there was a sudden shock causing all the
passengers to start to their feet.

"We're off the track!" shouted an excitable person in front of Rodney.

The instinct of self preservation is perhaps stronger than any other.
Rodney and his seat mate both jumped to their feet and hurried to the
door of the car, not knowing what was in store for them.

But fortunately the train had not been going rapidly. It was approaching
a station and was "slowing up." So, though it had really run off the
track, there was not likely to be any injury to the passengers.

"We are safe," said Adin Woods. "The only harm done is the delay. I hope
that won't be long. Suppose we go back to our seat." They returned to
the seat which they had jointly occupied.

Then Rodney made an alarming discovery. "My casket!" he exclaimed.
"Where is it?"

"What did you do with it?"

"Left it on the seat."

"It may have fallen to the floor."

Rodney searched for it in feverish excitement, but his search was vain.
THE CASKET HAD DISAPPEARED!



CHAPTER IV.


IN PURSUIT OF A THIEF.


"Were the contents of the casket valuable?" asked the land agent.

"Yes; it contained my mother's jewels, all the more valuable because she
is dead," replied Rodney.

"Were they of much intrinsic worth?"

"They must be worth several hundred dollars at least."

"Then they must be found," said Adin Woods energetically. "They have
evidently been taken by some passenger during the five minutes we were
away from our seat."

"Were you inquiring about the casket?" asked a lady sitting opposite.

"Yes, madam. Can you give any information about it?"

"Just after you left your seat the man that sat behind you rose and
reaching over for it went to the rear end of the car and got out."

"I wish you had stopped him, madam."

"He was so cool about it that I thought he might be a friend of the
young gentleman."

"I didn't know him. He must have been a thief."

"What was his appearance, madam?" asked the lot agent.

"He was a thin, dark complexioned man, with side whiskers coming half
way down his cheeks."

"And you say he got out of the rear end of the car?"

"Yes, sir."

"He won't get on the train again," said the agent turning to Rodney. "He
thinks the casket valuable enough to pay him for the interruption of his
journey."

"What shall I do then?" asked Rodney, feeling helpless and at a loss
which way to turn.

"Follow him," said the agent briefly. "He will probably stop over in the
village a day and resume his journey tomorrow."

"Even if I found him I am afraid I shouldn't know how to deal with him."

"Then I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll stop over with you and help you
make it hot for him. I've had a spite against thieves ever since I had a
valuable overcoat stolen in one of my journeys."

"I shall feel very much obliged to you, Mr. Woods, but won't it
interfere with your business?"

"Not materially. If we succeed in overhauling the rascal I shall feel
sufficiently repaid for the small interruption. But come on, we can't
afford to linger here while he is carrying off the plunder."

"I don't know how I can repay you, Mr. Woods," said Rodney gratefully.

"You can buy a lot of me when you get rich enough."

"I will certainly do so, though I am afraid it will be a long time
first."

"You don't know what good fortune may be in store for you. Did you
notice, madam, in which direction the thief went?"

"Yes, I was looking out of the window. He went over the road to the
left."

"That leads to the village. You will see, Mr. Ropes, that I was right
about his plans."

"Don't call me Mr. Ropes. Call me Rodney."

"I will. It don't seem natural to dub a boy Mr. Now, Rodney, follow me."

The two passengers set out on the road that led to the village. They
could see the latter easily, for it was not more than a mile away.

"He will be surprised to think we have 'struck his trail' so quick,"
said the agent.

"Where shall we go first?"

"To the hotel if there is one."

"The village seems small."

"Yes, there are only a few hundred inhabitant probably. It is not a
place where a traveler would be likely to interrupt his journey unless
he had a special object in doing so, like our dishonest friend. However,
I think we shall be able to balk his little game."

Ten minutes' walk brought them to the village. Looking about they saw a
small hotel just across the way from a neat white chapel.

"Follow me," said the agent.

They went into the public room in which there was a small office.

The book of arrivals was open, and Adin Woods went forward and examined
it. Silently he pointed to a name evidently just written, for the ink
was scarcely dry. This was the name: Louis Wheeler, Philadelphia.

"This may or may not be his real name," said Mr. Woods in a low voice.

"Do you wish to register, gentlemen?" asked the clerk.

"We will take dinner, and if we decide to stay will register later. By
the way, I recognize this name, but it may not be the man I suppose."

"Yes, the gentleman just registered."

"Would you mind describing him?"

"He was a tall, dark man as near as I can remember."

"And he carried a small casket in his hand?"
